<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="i2e.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="adam01.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><br>
 About Some Conditions of The Father of Human Beings "Adam" (PUH) and The Beginning of This Creation</p>
 <p>Said God in his Holy Book: And when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am about to place a viceroy in the earth, they said: Wilt thou place therein one who will do harm therein and will shed blood, while we, we hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee ? He said: Surely I know that which ye know not. <br>
 Since "Viceroy" by language and tradition points out to what takes the place of what was before in time, then there must have been another Responsible agent before him (Adam), and that is pointed out by the opposition of the Angels, and this opposition is not done except by them for they bear the knowledge of the ex-mischiefers because they said "Wilt thou place therein one who will do harm therein and will shed blood, while we, we hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee?" and it was pointed out by news, tidings and traces that the existence of pre-Adam creatures did take place and they are the Djinns and others and earth was full of them. And also pointed out of the existence of lions, beasts and all of the other animals, and also the existence of rulers and vicegerents for God, command by His commandment and prohibit by His prohibition, so they were ordering for Goodness and prohibiting the Mischiefts, but the Djinn got wicked and rebelled, and they refused the commandment<font face="Times New Roman">s of God and changed lot of His orders and laws. <br>
 From 'Ali ben Ibrâhim from Albâqir (PUH) from the Prince of Believers, 'Ali ben Abi Tâlib (PUH) that he said: When God wanted to create a creation by His hand and that was after Djinn and Nesnas spent seve</font>n thousands years on earth, He removed the layers of heavens and Said to the Angels: Look to the inhabitants of earth from my creation of Djinn and Nesnas, and when they saw what was done by them (Djinn and Nesnas) of mischiefs and evils, that grew hard upon them (Angels), and said: our Lord you are the Almighty, and this is Your weak worthless creation, live by Your grace and refuse to take your orders and You don't take a revenge of them? And when He heard that from the Angels He said "Lo! I am about to place a viceroy in the earth" and he will be a ruler on earth. The Angels said: Are You going to place someone that will make mischiefs and evils as the Djinn did? May you make the viceroy one of us, and we don't refuse Your commandments and "we hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee", so the God said: I know what you know not, I want to make a creation by my Hand and make out of his descendants prophets and faithful slaves of mine and guiders. I will make them rulers on my creations in my earth and purify my earth from the Nesnas and move the rebellious Djinns those who refused my commandments away from my creation and make them live in the air and shattered across the lands and make a veil between Djinns and my creation. Angels then said: Our Lord You command and<font face="Times New Roman"> prohibit, praise to You, no other god than You, and You have the knowledge of everything. Then they got farthest (Angels) from the Holy Throne a distant of five hundreds years of travelling. Until the Imam ('Ali ben Abi Tâlib PUH) said in a long speech: </font>then God held the clay of Adam (PUH) and worked on it the four natures of air, mucus, bitterness, and blood. And connected with the air the love of women, length of hope and caution. And connected with the mucus the love of food, drinks, goodness, gentleness and easiness. And connected with bitterness the anger, stupidity, evil, pride, and haste. And connected with the blood the love of women, pleasure, and doing sins. <br>
 And the summary of some of the tidings is that God created Angels from light, and created Djinn from fire, and created Adam from clay, then He ran the light, the fire, the air and water, so with light he saw and understood and by fire he ate and drank, and if it wasn't the fire in the stomache (the heat of the stomache) food won't be cooked (digested), and if it wasn't the air in the body of people to flame the fire, fire wouldn't be existed, and if it wasn't the water existence to cool it down and extinguish it, the stomache would have been burnt and the body would be burnt in return. <br>
 And it has been said that it was meant by the black wind of stomache -or soul- that it might be the stomache's movements with breathing that leads to the foundation of cells with the heat of the core (?) <br>
 And the most probable that Adam (PUH) was created from all types of clays and if he was created with one type only people wouldn't know each other and all would be with one shape, but instead he was created from the easiness of the earth and its sadness, bitterness, sweetness, and saltness, and from all its shapes and colors, from its whiteness, redness, yellowness, blackness and (blondeness)..etc and that's why you see human beings differ in their colors and types. <br>
 From the Prince of Muslim (PUH) that God sent Gabriel and ordered him to bring from the skin of earth (Arabic: Adeem) four clays: white, red, yellowish and black and that would be from its (earth) easiness and sadness. Then He ordered him (Gabriel) to bring four types of waters: sweet, saline, bitter, and stinking. Then He ordered him (Gabriel) to pour<font face="Times New Roman"> all the waters in the clay so He made the sweet in his throat, the saline in his eyes, the bitter in his ears and the stinking in his nose. <br>
 And in "Tawheed Al-Mofadhal ben Omar" (??) from Al-Sâdiq (PUH): The sweet water was placed in the throat to make </font>him (Adam or the human) able to eat and taste the food, and the saline water was placed in the eyes to protect the flesh of the eyes since the flesh will remain when salt or saline water is placed on it. And for the bitter water in the ears it is to protect the brain from the attacks of insects and organisms since they die when they reach the bitter water in the ear. Maybe they can get pass over the bitter water and reach the brain for their power and the small quantity of bitter water in the ears and that might be because of the weak body for it might be a sick man, old man, or a child. And they brought many cases, tidings and witnesses for the truthfulness of such analysis and some of those cases were during the time of Plato and other perfect doctors that found an animal (organism) that grew up in the brain and didn't find any other way than the ears to let it reach there. </p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="adam01.htm">Next: Subjects from different sources with agreement in contents</a></center>
 </body>