<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="jj03.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="jj05.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <div style="text-align: center;">
 <center><font face="Times New Roman,Times"><font size="+3">Gifts Are in Troubles</font></font></center>
 
 <div style="text-align: left;"><font face="Times New Roman,Times">God's
 gift to Joseph was in his beauty which was a source of trouble for him,
 and his first trouble was a source for the greatest gift for him and for
 his household, and some said: maybe gifts are in troubles, and his troubles
 started by the wife of the noble by looking at him and at his manners with
 his unusual beauty and so then he owned herself and she became a prisoner
 of his love and that increased by each time she used to see him until love
 took off her shyness and she started to flirt with Joseph but he was refusing
 for two things, his faith in God and God's protection for him and his sincerity
 to God and God's purification for him as well as for his fathers Abraham,
 Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob (PUT), and the second thing is that her husband
 was his master that was generous towards him and gave him a full control
 over the house and trusted him like no one else, and how come someone like
 him to face such gifts with such a great awful deed, and if some man does
 not have a religion and does not believe in the after-life, he would not
 face such gifts with such an awful deed.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Joseph was so careful for her tricks
 and kept of saving his dignity ad honour and his high place until she got
 excited by love and went on to satisfy her desires and said it frankly
 to him and called him to her as a master would command his servant to do
 something without refusing, and she prepared everything, and so she lifted
 up her veil and she appeared to him with her full ornaments and she was
 pretty, and was one of the prettiest women at her time, and then she closed
 the doors and said to him: come to me, but he denied and said: I seek refuge
 in God! Lo! he is my lord, who hath treated me honourably. Lo! wrong-doers
 never prosper. Look to this trouble and critical situation that shows the
 strong faith and honour. A young man is called by his beautiful lady but
 he refuses for the sake of his faith and religion and for the sake of his
 master as well, and then he faces the door to escape from the devil of
 her evil act while she was pulling his shirt until it was torn from behind,
 and he gets away from her and they both race toward the door, he wants
 to open it and she want to keep him away from that, and then shows up her
 master and her husband, this is a weird scene and a strange matter, so
 meditate and read the holy phrases that are related to this matter from
 the chapter of Yousof: And she, in whose house he was, asked of him an
 evil act. She bolted the doors and said: Come! He said: I seek refuge in
 Allah! Lo! he is my lord, who hath treated me honourably. Lo! wrong-doers
 never prosper. She verily desired him, and he would have desired her if
 it had not been that he saw the argument of his Lord. Thus it was, that
 We might ward off from him evil and lewdness. Lo! he was of Our chosen
 slaves(Yousof:23-24).</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Maybe what is meant by "he is my
 lord, who hath treated me honourably" is the noble of Egypt, and he is
 Al-Rayyân ben Al-Waleed, the giant and the husband of Zalikhâ,
 and in Torah he is Qatfeer (Potiphar) as it had been told, and we've pointed
 out that before that he took care of him and educated him to be for him
 as a son, and for this his reward should not be dishonesty, and also for
 that God, his Creator, gifted him and made the heart of His servants so
 kind to him, so how should he do wrong against Him.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Many sayings had been told about
 the interpretation of God's saying "and he would have desired her if it
 had not been that he saw the argument of his Lord", for that everyone knows
 that he is infallible, and the best of interpretations is that he refused
 for he saw the argument of his Lord and it is understood from "would."
 What is attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) is that the argument was the
 prophecy that prevents wrong-doings, and as attributed to Al-Ridhâ
 (PUH) in his answer to Al-Ma'mun's [an Abbasid ruler] question about the
 infallibility of the prophets and God's saying "and he would have desired
 her...etc" is that if he did not see the argument of his Lord he would
 desired her as she desired him but he was infallible and the infallible
 man would not desire a guilt and never do a wrong-doing.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">It is said that he desired not to
 do while she desired to do [notice that the English translation for the
 holy phrase from quran differ a bit from that in Arabic], and in another
 saying: she desired the wrong-doing but Joseph desired her to kill her
 if she forced him, so God avoided him the killing and adultery, and it
 is God's saying: Thus it was, that We might ward off from him evil and
 lewdness(Yousof:24), which means killing and adultery. We've mentioned
 that when she desired him she went to an idol and covered him with a cloth,
 so then Joseph said to her: are you shy of what hears not, sees not, understand
 not, eats not and drinks not and I do not be shy of who created the man
 and taught him? And that is God's saying:  if it had not been that
 he saw the argument of his Lord(Yousof:24) as it is attributed to Al-Sajjâd
 (PUH). They attributed some things to Joseph and some tales that could
 not be mentioned by a muslim or believe in, most of them attributed to
 the interpretation of God's saying: She verily desired him, and he would
 have desired her..etc. Some of them said that the wife of the noble desired
 Joseph and he desired her and sat beside her and just before the doing
 Gabriel came down and told him that he will be a prophet and this is the
 argument of his Lord, and some said that the argument was that he saw the
 face of his father rebuking him for doing so, and another said that when
 Joseph was in that condition God called him and said to him: O Joseph you
 are destined to be with the prophets, and you are doing the deeds of wrong-doers?
 The saying that such a deed was done by him before he becomes a prophet
 and such a deed is not avoided by prophets before their prophecy and such
 cold sayings are all might be issued by foolish people or people that are
 not ashamed by themselves. Some scholars said: some of them who have relations
 to this story, and they are Joseph, the noble's wife and her husband, the
 women, and the witnesses, the devil and God, they all emphasized the innocence
 of Joseph so no muslim should discuss this matter. Joseph said: She it
 was who asked of me an evil act(Yousof:26), and also he said: O my Lord!
 Prison is more dear than that unto which they urge me(Yousof:33), and the
 woman (wife of the noble) said: I asked of him an evil act, but he proved
 continent(Yousof:32), and also she said: Now the truth is out. I asked
 of him an evil act(Yousof:51), and her husband said: Lo! this is of the
 guile of you women. Lo! the guile of you is very great(Yousof:28). The
 women said: The ruler's wife is asking of her slave-boy an ill-deed. Indeed
 he has smitten her to the heart with love. We behold her in plain aberration(Yousof:30),
 and also they said: Allah Blameless! We know no evil of him(Yousof:51),
 and the witnesses said: And a witness of her own folk testifie..etc(Yousof:26).
 God said: Thus it was, that We might ward off from him evil and lewdness.
 Lo! he was of Our chosen slaves(Yousof:24), and the Satan confirmed this
 by saying: Then, by Thy might, I surely will beguile them every one, Save
 Thy single-minded slaves among them(Sad:82-83), and so he admitted that
 he will not be able to beguile Joseph because he is one of His single-minded
 slaves (chosen slaves), as God said about Joseph before. We say that those
 silly people that attributed to Joseph such evil act or deed, if they were
 muslims and follow the religion of God, they must accept God's describion
 for Joseph for his purification and infallibility, and if they were followers
 for Satan they must also accept the confession of the Satan about the infallibility
 of Joseph as well.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">About this matter, said Abdul-Wahâb
 Al-Najjâr: the people that said such things did not understand God's
 saying: Thus it was, that We might ward off from him evil and lewdness.
 Lo! he was of Our chosen slaves(Yousof:24), so how come He wards off from
 him evil while he was ready to do the evil-act and listened already to
 the devil and how come he did not stop as they said except after he saw
 things that made him keep away and then he is described as one of the chosen
 slaves? Then he continued: the one who said such sayings (about Joseph)
 is ignorant about God's saying:  Allah knoweth best with whom to place
 His message(Al-An`âm:124), so God's message is chosen for those who
 have the good deeds, and God does not choose for His message those people
 of evil-acts, and He choose them to carry on His message and prevents them
 from anything that can be a source of mocking at them, and what is greater
 in shame more than someone going to do an evil-act and never back until
 he sees something that makes him keep away, thus he (`Abdul-Wahâb
 Al-Najjâr) did say good, and he did good by pointing out that God's
 desire to guide people and teach them does not coincide with someone that
 did something bad or evil-act.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Zalikhâ, the wife of the noble,
 loved Joseph or his beauty but he did not care about it and did not change
 his position towards God who gave him the greatest of virtues, and she
 was defamed for the first time by her love and she lied to get rid of the
 shame and to take revenge of him for not obeying her commands, and so her
 excuse was worse than her guilt inspite of her love to him that reached
 the core of her heart, but she was not good in getting rid blame by doing
 this, and she had the chance to get to the right path again but love took
 over her again and she promised him to be imprisoned if he did not obey
 her wishes, and all of that got into the public and women started to talk
 about her and blame her for doing such a thing and then she started to
 plot against them, and she invited some of them who blamed her and prepared
 the fruit and knives and then she ordered him to show up for them and when
 they saw him they started cutting their hands and shared his love with
 her and to ask for the evil act, because his beauty is not something that
 human beings used to see, for his beauty is above the beauty of human beings,
 and then she said to them: She said: This is he on whose account ye blamed
 me. I asked of him an evil act, but he proved continent, but if he do not
 my behest he verily shall be imprisoned, and verily shall be of those brought
 low(Yousof:32).</font>
 <p><font face="Times New Roman,Times"><hr>
 </font></p><center>
 <a href="jj05.htm">Next: Getting Joseph Into The Jail</a></center>
 </div></div></body>