<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="kt91.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="kt93.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h1 align="CENTER">50. Additions to the Myth of the Mink. <a name="fr_50"></a><a href="#fn_50"><font size="1">2</font></a></h1>
 <p>Mink goes to war with his friend Land-Otter, against the ghosts Lâ'laênox<sup>u</sup>. When they are travelling, Mink says that he has lost his k*ê'sbê. [The story-teller did not know what this was. In other versions it is a nose-ornament.]</p>
 <p>
 </p>
 <p><a name="page_495"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 495</font></a></p>
 <p>Mink's pretense for refusing to give sea-eggs to otter is that warriors do not share their food.</p>
 <p>The incident of the musk-bag is omitted.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">___________</p>
 <p>The story of Mink, Eagle, and Sawbill-Duck-Woman <a name="fr_51"></a><a href="#fn_51"><font size="1">1</font></a> is repeated here. This story is given as the reason why at present people cannot put away parts of their body.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">___________</p>
 <p>A young woman had a child, and nobody knew who the child's father was. The people assembled and discussed who its father might be. Born-to-be-the-Sun said, "Let the woman's father invite all the people, and then we shall find out who the child's father is." The woman's father did as he was told. The people assembled; and when they were all in, Born-to-be-the-Sun said, "Let the woman and her child come here. Now ask the child who its father is." They did so, and the child replied, "I am Born-to-be-the-Sun's child."</p>
 <p>
 </p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_50"></a><a href="kt92.htm#fr_50">494:2</a> See Publications of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. XI pp. 127 et seq.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_51"></a><a href="kt92.htm#fr_51">495:1</a> See Publications of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, vol. X, pp. 124 et seq.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="kt93.htm">Next: 51. Addition to the Myth of Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup></a></center>
 </body>