<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Pacific</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="chant.htm">Chant Index</a> 
 <a href="ku12.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ku14.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">CHAPTER ELEVEN</h1>
 <h4 align="CENTER">The World of Infancy</h4>
 <p>THE chant of the second section celebrates the appearance of fish in the sea and forest growth on land under control of the generating agents Pouliuli and Powehiwehi. The word <i>uliuli</i> is applied to the color of deep ocean in comparison to the lighter shade of shallower waters near shore, <i>wehiwehi</i> to the shade under thick leafage where some light filters in; hence "Deep-profound-darkness" and "Darkness streaked-with-glimmers-of-light" as this next stage in the development of life on earth advances toward the light, or, as Pokini would put it, as the newborn infant begins to show consciousness of the world about him.</p>
 <p>The Prologue introduces the birth of a wonder child in the shape of a "<i>hilu</i> fish" as the theme for the listing of sea life to follow. Two species of this fish, <i>Anampses cuvier</i> and <i>Juli eydouxii</i>, are among the most brilliant in coloring found in Hawaiian waters, hence the name <i>hilu</i>, "elegant." The lines make sense only when applied to a human child in babyhood. In old days the first solid food given a child was thought to influence its afterlife. The red-eyed <i>kole</i> fish would give the child a rosy tinge, the "sticking" gobey fish would cause good luck to "stick" to him, the hilu fish would insure good looks. A discreet form of compliment in praising a pretty infant, since open admiration was not only in bad taste but might bring bad luck, was to call him a hilu fish. "Aren't you a <i>hilu</i> fish! " (<i>He hilu no paha oe!</i>) or "What a pretty fish the <i>hilu</i> is! " (<i>Ke hilu he i'a a no'i-no'i!</i>) was the proper phrase. Similarly, the difficult second line may be</p>
 <p>{p. 62}</p>
 <p>referred to a lullaby that Kawena Pukui remembers her grandmother singing,</p>
 <table cellspacing="0" border="0" cellpadding="9" width="798">
 <tr><td width="50%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Toss, toss, hush</p></td>
 <td width="50%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Ho'ole'ile'i, ho'onana</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="50%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Hush my child.</p></td>
 <td width="50%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Ho'onana ana i ku'u kama.</p></td>
 </tr>
 </table>
 
 <p><br>
 The early movements of an active youngster are, furthermore, exactly conveyed in the words "wrestler" and "pusher" also suggested by Kawena for the enigmatic line that follows. There comes next a passage explained by Pokini Robin son as applied to the freedom of a child in obeying the calls of nature. "Ta! Poho-mi-lua-mea! " cries an elder when the odor proclaims that a child has messed himself. The makeup of the word, from <i>poholua</i> for the hollow of the anus and <i>mi</i> for passing urine, is sufficient to indicate the relevance of the expression, and the lines that follow complete the incident.</p>
 <p>The epilogue similarly plays between the underwater world, where swims the brilliantly colored fish, and the secluded valley, home of the gods in ancient times, where a chief's son was taken to be reared as a sacred child in order to preserve his high taboo rank as he grew to adolescence. In the sea world bright-colored <i>opule</i> fish play, "the sea is thick with them." Their persistent gulping and swallowing (<i>monimoni</i>) when at the surface links with the words <i>kolomio</i> and <i>miomio</i> for their disappearance under sea in a swift dive. From the "coral ridges" among which the little ones play, they "seek the dark currents" and slip away from land to the darkness that covers them.</p>
 <p>To the symbolic sea world in which the child plays in infancy, allusion to the mythical Pimoe, Polikua, and Paliuli lend a playful note of mystery as well as of learning. They satisfy an imperative law of poetic composition common to Hawaiian as to early Greek song masters, where witness the reproach leveled at Pindar by his lady critic for omitting such allusions from his first eulogistic verses and her later sharp warning, upon his attempting to correct this fault, "to</p>
 <p>{p. 63}</p>
 <p>sow with the hand, not with the bag." Pimoe is a shape-shifting being of uncertain sex, for whom in her feminine form legendary heroes go fishing. Some call her "caretaker" of Kane's-hidden-island, a land "beyond the horizon." Polikua, from <i>poli</i>, "concave," and <i>kua</i>, "back," is the dip at the horizon beyond which the eye cannot reach, also personified in the playful saying of one who has been in the land of dreams that he has been "flirting with Polikua.</p>
 <p>Paliuli names an ever verdant land of the gods where abundant food grows without labor.[1] The name is given to fertile spots in deep mountain valleys where in old days children of high chiefs were taken to be reared. These spots seem to be recognized as former homes of the gods by the abundance of wild growth, perhaps of wild fruits such as banana and breadfruit. Kupihea named one such spot in the mountains back of the Kamehameha girls' school on Oahu, another near Nahiku on Maui in the Keanae region, one above Halawa on Molokai where Kamehameha is said to have been brought up, and one on Lanai at Kumoku. Some say that each district had its Paliuli. Perhaps the name was given to whatever secluded spot was chosen in the district for the rearing of taboo chiefs from infancy without any form of labor on their own part. The poet here seems to compare the coral ridges of the sea where fishes play with the green heights where the little human "<i>hilu</i> fish" passes his childhood. Since the material world is linked so closely in Hawaiian thought with the psychical, it may be that the underwater world where the <i>hilu</i> fish moves is to be under stood as symbol of the infant's first contact with the world of fluctuating realities into which he is so early plunged.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER"><a name="chant02">CHANT TWO</a></h3>
 <p>Born is a child to Po-wehiwehi<br>
 Cradled in the arms of Po-uliuli[?]</p>
 <font size="2"><p>[1. Beckwith, <i>Hawaiian Mythology</i>, chap. vi.]</p>
 </font><p>{p. 64}</p>
 <p>125. A wrestler, a pusher, [?]<br>
 Dweller in the land of Poho-mi-luamea<br>
 The sacred scent from the gourd stem proclaims [itself]<br>
 The stench breaks forth in the time of infancy<br>
 He is doubtful and stands swelling<br>
 130. He crooks himself and straddles<br>
 The seven waters just float<br>
 Born is the child of the <i>hilu</i> fish and swims<br>
 The hilu fish rests with spreading tail-fin<br>
 A child of renown for Po-uliuli<br>
 135. A little one for Po-wehiwehi<br>
 Po-uliuli the male<br>
 Po-wehiwehi the female<br>
 Born is the l'a [fish], born the Nai'a [porpoise] in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Mano [shark], born the Moano [goatfish] in the sea there swimming<br>
 140. Born is the Mau, born the Maumau in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Nana, born the Mana fish in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Nake, born the Make in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Napa, born the Nala in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Pala, born the Kala [sturgeon ?] in the sea there swimming<br>
 145. Born is the Paka eel, born is the Papa [crab] in die sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Kalakala, born the Huluhulu [sea slug] in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Halahala, born the Palapala in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Pe'a [octopus], born is the Lupe [sting ray] in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Ao, born is the 'Awa [milkfish] in the sea there swimming<br>
 150. Born is the Aku [bonito], born the Ahi [albacore] in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Opelu [mackerel], born the Akule fish in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the 'Ama'ama [mullet], born the 'Anae [adult mullet] in the sea there swimming</p>
 <p>{p. 65}</p>
 <p>Born is the Ehu, born the Nehu fish. in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the 'Ino, born the 'Ao'ao in the sea there swimming<br>
 155. Born is the 'Ono fish, born the Omo in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Pahau, born is the Lauhau in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Moi [threadfin], born the Lo'ilo'i in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Mao, born is the Maomao in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Kaku, born the A'ua'u in the sea there swimming<br>
 160. Born is the Kupou, born the Kupouposu in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Weke [mackerel ? ], born the Lele in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Palani [sturgeon], born the Nukumoni [cavalla] in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the Ulua fish, born the Hahalua [devilfish] in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the 'Ao'aonui born the Paku'iku'i fish in the sea there swimming<br>
 165. Born is the Ma'i'i'i fish, born the Ala'ihi fish in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is the 'O'o, born the 'Akilolo fish in the sea there swimming<br>
 Born is man for the narrow stream, the woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Nenue [pickerel] living im the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Lauhue [gourd plant] living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>172. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Pahaha [young mullet] living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Puhala [pandanus] living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>178. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Pahau living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Hau tree [hibiscus] living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>{p. 66}</p>
 <p>184. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the He'e [squid] living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Walahe'e [shrub] living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>190. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the 'O'opu [gobey fish] living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the 'O'opu [fish] living in fresh water</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>196. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Kauila eel living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Kauila tree living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>202. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Umaumalei eel living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the 'Ulei tree living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>208. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Paku'iku'i fish living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Kukui tree [candlenut] living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>214. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Laumilo eel living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Milo tree living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>220. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Kupoupou fish living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Kou tree living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>226. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Hauliuli [snake mackerel] living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Uhi yam living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>232. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Weke [mackerel] living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Wauke plant living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>{p. 67}</p>
 <p>238. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the 'A'awa. fish living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the 'Awa plant living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>244. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Ulae [lizard fish] living in the sea<br>
 Guarded by the Mokae rush living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>250. Man for the narrow stream, woman for the broad stream<br>
 Born is the Palaoa [walrus] living in the sea [?]<br>
 Guarded by the Aoa [sandalwood] living on land</p>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Refrain</p>
 <p>256. The train of walruses passing by [?]<br>
 Milling about in the depths of the sea<br>
 The long lines of opule fish<br>
 The sea is thick with them<br>
 260. Crabs and hardshelled creatures<br>
 [They] go swallowing on the way<br>
 Rising and diving under swiftly and silently<br>
 Pimoe lurks behind the horizon<br>
 On the long waves, the crested waves<br>
 265. Innumerable the coral ridges<br>
 Low, heaped-up, jagged<br>
 The little ones seek the dark places<br>
 Very dark is the ocean and obscure<br>
 A sea of coral like the green heights of Paliuli<br>
 270. The land disappears into them<br>
 Covered by the darkness of night<br>
 Still it is night</p>
 <p>{p. 68}</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ku14.htm">Next: Winged Life</a></center>
 </body>