<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Tagore</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="cm05.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="cm07.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">BABY'S WAY</h3>
 <p>If baby only wanted to, he could fly up to heaven this moment.</p>
 <p>It is not for nothing that he does not leave us.</p>
 <p>He loves to rest his head on mother's bosom, and cannot ever bear to lose sight of her.</p>
 <p>Baby knows all manner of wise words, though few on earth can understand their meaning.</p>
 <p>It is not for nothing that he never wants to speak.</p>
 <p>The one thing he wants is to learn mother's words from mother's lips. That is why he looks so innocent.</p>
 <p>Baby had a heap of gold and pearls, yet he came like a beggar on to this earth.</p>
 <p>It is not for nothing he came in such a disguise.</p>
 <p>This dear little naked mendicant pretends to be utterly helpless, so that he may beg for mother's wealth of love.</p>
 <p>Baby was so free from every tie in the land of the tiny crescent moon.</p>
 <p>It was not for nothing he gave up his freedom.</p>
 <p>He knows that there is room for endless joy in mother's little corner of a heart, and it is sweeter far than liberty to be caught and pressed in her dear arms.</p>
 <p>Baby never knew how to cry. He dwelt in the land of perfect bliss.</p>
 <p>It is not for nothing he has chosen to shed tears.</p>
 <p>Though with the smile of his dear face he draws mother's yearning heart to him, yet his little cries over tiny troubles weave the double bond of pity and love.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="cm07.htm">Next: The Unheeded Pageant</a></center>
 </body>