<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Tagore</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="cm30.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="cm32.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">AUTHORSHIP</h3>
 <p>You say that father writes a lot of books, but what he writes I don't understand.</p>
 <p>He was reading to you all the evening, but could you really make out what he meant?</p>
 <p>What nice stories, mother, you can tell us! Why can't father write like that, I wonder?</p>
 <p>Did he never hear from his own mother stories of giants and fairies and princesses?</p>
 <p>Has he forgotten them all?</p>
 <p>Often when he gets late for his bath you have to go and call him an hundred times.</p>
 <p>You wait and keep his dishes warm for him, but he goes on writing and forgets.</p>
 <p>Father always plays at making books.</p>
 <p>If ever I go to play in father's room, you come and call me, "what a naughty child!"</p>
 <p>If I make the slightest noise, you say, "Don't you see that father's at his work?"</p>
 <p>What's the fun of always writing and writing?</p>
 <p>When I take up father's pen or pencil and write upon his book just as he does,--a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i,--why do you get cross with me, then, mother?</p>
 <p>You never say a word when father writes.</p>
 <p>When my father wastes such heaps of paper, mother, you don't seem to mind at all.</p>
 <p>But if I take only one sheet to make a boat with, you say, "Child, how troublesome you are!"</p>
 <p>What do you think of father's spoiling sheets and sheets of paper with black marks all over on both sides?</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="cm32.htm">Next: The Wicked Postman</a></center>
 </body>