<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classical Paganism</a> 
 <a href="../../sex/index.htm">Sacred Sexuality</a> 
 <a href="1stline.htm">1st Lines</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="prp108.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="prp110.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Depilation by Catamites</h1>
 <p>Martial derides catamites for depilating their privy parts and buttocks. The following version of Martial's epigram against a beau (<i>bellus homo</i>) is given by Dr James Cranstoun in the illustrative notes to his translation of Catullus:</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Cotilus, you are a beau; yes, Cotilus, many declare it.<br>
   Such is the story I hear: tell me, then, what is a beau?<br>
 Why, sir, a beau is a man who arranges his tresses in order:<br>
   Smelling for ever of balm, smelling of cinnamon spice:<br>
 Singing the songs of the Nile or a-humming the ditties of Cadiz:<br>
   Never at rest with his arms, moving them this way or that:<br>
 Lounging on sofas from morning to night with a bevy of ladies:<br>
   Aye in the ears of some girl whispering some silly tale:<br>
 Reading a letter from Rhode or Chloe, or writing to Phyllis:<br>
   Shunning the sleeve of his friend lest he should ruffle his dress:<br>
 Everyone's sweetheart he'll tell you, he swaggers the lion at parties:<br>
   Bets on the favourite horse, tells you his sire and his dam.<br>
 Cotilus, what are you telling me?--this thing! is this thing a beau?<br>
   Cotilus, then I must say he's a contemptible thing.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>Juvenal devotes his finest Satire (the second) to a forcible denunciation of the infamous practices of these sodomites. In it he says:</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>One man with a needle slanted, lengthens his eyebrows, touched with moistened soot, and, lifting up his eyelids, paints his quivering eyes. Another drinks from a Priapus-shaped glass, and confines his flowing locks in a golden net, clothing himself in cerulean checks or greenish-yellow vestments, whilst his valet swears by the Juno of his master. A third holds a mirror, the accoutrement of pathic Otho, 'the spoil of Auruncan Actor', in which he viewed himself, armed for battle, when he commanded the standards to be raised.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>Tertullian speaks of ustricles (from <i>urere</i>--to bum), female delipators who made use of boiling dropax to bum the hairs on the legs and other parts of the body of these voluptuaries. Other references to these effeminate practices--particularly that of depilating the body-pile with dropax or psilothrum (melted rosin in oil) or with tweezers--are made by Persius, Ausonius, Juvenal, Martial, Suetonius, Quintilian, Julius Capitolinus, Pliny, Aeitus, &amp;c., &amp;c.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="prp110.htm">Next: Braccae</a></center>
 </body>