<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="kt50.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="kt52.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> marries the Daughter of the Killer-Whale</h3>
 <p>Then he considered what to do [looked at his heart]. Then he made up his mind. He was going to make love to the wife of Killing-at-North-End-of-World. He paddled in his folding canoe. All his younger brothers were in the canoe. They paddled, and hid near the house of</p>
 <p><a name="page_219"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 219</font></a></p>
 <p><font size="-2" color="GREEN">[paragraph continues]</font> Master-of-Salmon. (He thought,) "Come to get fire-wood, come to get fire-wood, come to get fire-wood, slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World!" He came paddling along, looking for fire-wood. Then he discovered fire-wood. "Where do you look for it?" (said) the slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World, speaking to nobody. He went ashore and took his wedges and split the wood. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> was inside of that tree. The slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World split the wood. Then the wedge jumped out. The wedge was spoiled. He looked at his wedge. Behold! the point was bitten off by Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. "Take it out, take it out, take it out!" he said.</p>
 <p>(The slave) took another wedge and split wood. Then his wedge was spoiled again. Then that slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World began to cry, "Haai'! I am in for it! This wedge of Killing-at-North-End-of-World, that has never been blunted since first daylight appeared in our world, is spoiled. Surely I am in for it. I am going to be struck by Killing-at-North-End-of-World on account of his wedge here." Now all his four wedges were spoiled. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> came out and spoke. "O slave!" said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>, "why are you crying," Thus he said to him. "I am crying on account of this wedge of Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Surely I am in for it. I am going to be struck by him on account of this wedge."--"Why do you cry? Come, and let me put my tongue at its end!" Then he gave it to Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>, who put the point, on to the wedge, and it was whole. "Why don't you look at the heart of the wood [eye]?" said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> to the slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Then he wedged the heart [eye] of the fire-wood. Then it fell. It just fell to pieces. Then he loaded his canoe. "O slave!" said he to the slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World, "does not the wife of Killing-at-North-End-of-World</p>
 <p><a name="page_221"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 221</font></a></p>
 <p>sometimes meet you?"--"She meets me sometimes," said the slave of Killing-at-North-End-of-World. They paddled. Then he went into the piece of fire-wood that was lying crosswise on top of the wood. (The slave) paddled. He landed, and the wife of Killing-at-North-End-of-World came and took the fire-wood. She was not yet out of the sea when Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> embraced the woman. Then she threw down (the wood) and stared at it. "Take it up, take it up, take it up!" (thought Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>.) Then she took the wood up in her arms, and Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> embraced her; but she did not throw it down, although he had embraced her. She entered the house. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> came out and lay down with the woman, the wife of Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Then he caught sight of Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Behold! he was coming around the point, (his canoe) filled with seals. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> said, "Get ready. Go on, and see where you go." Then he arose and went into the post of the house. Then Killing-at-North-End-of-World entered. There were four of them. They were stout. Then Killing-at-North-End-of-World caught sight of Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. "Why are you in this way here in the house?" said Killing-at-North-End-of-World to Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. "Come, come out!" Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> came out of the post and sat clown on the floor. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> spoke, and said, "Why are you this way?" Thus said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> to Killing-at-North-End-of-World. "You are too stout."--"We are that way."--"Don't be that way! Go to my younger brothers." Thus said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>.</p>
 <p>Then his younger brothers were called, and they came. They jumped into the house. "How pretty they are!" said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. "All my younger brothers are this way." Thus said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. Then Buffle-Head-Duck came into the house. He did not walk rightly. He was stout. "Wa, wa, wa; wa, wa, wa!" said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. "He is the only one</p>
 <p><a name="page_223"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 223</font></a></p>
 <p>who has not been cut open." Thus said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. Come, brother!" said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. Buffle-Head-Duck came and lay down on his back. Then he was cut open, and his stomach was thrown away. They covered him when he was dead. Harlequin-Duck was in hiding, and he jumped out. Then Buffle-Head-Duck was really dead, but Harlequin-Duck pretended to be he. Harlequin-Duck lifted the cover and jumped out. That took a short time. It was not long.</p>
 <p>"Go on, take pity on us!" said Killing-at-North-End-of-World. Then he lay down on his back, and he was cut open with a knife. He was dead, and also another one, and again another one, and still another one. Then (Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>) took up his past wife, the daughter of Master-of-Salmon, and took her aboard his canoe and paddled away. Thus he obtained the wife of Killing-at-North-End-of-World, and Killing-at-North-End-of-World was dead. Then Master-of-Salmon and his tribe launched their canoes and paddled after Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>.</p>
 <p>Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> nearly reached the shore. "Go on, paddle!" Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> was told. Then he paddled with his one-day paddle. Then they went far away over the water. Then he sat down again with the past wife of Killing-at-North-End-of-World, the daughter of Master-of-Salmon. Then the salmon and Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> caught sight of these mountains. Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> arose and pointed about. Then he turned to the water and let the salmon go (to the rivers).</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="kt52.htm">Next: Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> gets the Soil</a></center>
 </body>