<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="kt56.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="kt58.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> obtains Daylight.</h3>
 <p>Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> tried to get our daylight. He quickly became the child of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman (the gull). Then Daylight-Receptacle-Woman gave birth to her child, and the child of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman quickly began to speak. Then he said that he wanted to play with a toy canoe. Therefore his mother, Daylight-Receptacle-Woman, made a toy canoe for him. Then the child of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman spoke again, and said that he wanted to paddle on the water. His mother, Daylight-Receptacle-Woman, tried to forbid him, but he just cried, therefore she launched the canoe. Then he spoke again,</p>
 <p><a name="page_235"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 235</font></a></p>
 <p>and desired to have the daylight-receptacle of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman in the bow of the canoe. She tried to deny, him the daylight-receptacle. Then that child, the son of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman, cried very much, and after that the daylight-receptacle was taken. He desired to have the daylight-receptacle in the bow of the canoe. Then it was put into the bow of the canoe, and he paddled. "Don't go too far," said Daylight-Receptacle-Woman to her child. Then he paddled by, in front of the house of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman. "Forget, forget, forget!" said the child of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman. Behold! it was he, Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. Then Daylight-Receptacle-Woman forgot her child. Then he paddled and stole the daylight-receptacle of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman. Therefore we have the daylight of our world. (Before) it never used to get daylight. It was always night in our world.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="kt58.htm">Next: Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> gambles with Gull</a></center>
 </body>