<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="kt58.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="kt60.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> imitates his Hosts.</h3>
 <p>Then Thrush-Woman invited (the myth people to a feast). (Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>'s) tribe entered. Then she pushed (a feather) into her anus, and excrements came out. They were salmon-berries. Then she put them into a dish and placed them before her guests Then they went out. Then it was Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>'s (turn). "Invite, invite, invite, invite for this Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>!" said Canoe-Calking (Raven). The tribe of Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> came in. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> put (a feather) in his backside. Then he made a mess with what was really excrements. He was just trampled upon by his tribe, and they went out.</p>
 <p>Then Young-Seal (Sleeping-Eye-Woman) invited (the myth people to a feast). Young-Seal washed her hands,</p>
 <p><a name="page_239"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 239</font></a></p>
 <p>and she warmed her hands. Then fat dripped out of them into a dish, and that dish was filled. Then she placed it before her guests, and her tribe ate. They went out. Then it was Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>'s (turn). "Invite, invite, invite, invite for this Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>!" said Canoe-Calking. The myth people entered. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> washed his hands, and warmed them by the fire. Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>'s hands just shrivelled up. Then he was trampled upon, and his tribe went out.</p>
 <p>Then "Invite, invite, invite for this Kingfisher-made-to-go-up." The myth people entered, and she speared spring-salmon. Then she steamed the spring-salmon on stones. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> arose, and he sent for his bird-head mask and his dancing-apron to be brought. "Go on, sing for me, that I may dance!" said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. "Go into the floor, go into the floor, Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>! Go into the floor, Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>!" Then his feet sank into the ground. Go into the floor, go into the floor, Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>! Go into the floor, Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>!" Then his body sank, and only his head was on the floor. "Go into the floor, go into the floor, Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>! Go into the floor, Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>!" Then his head sank, and only his bird-head mask stood on the floor. "Go into the floor, go into the floor, Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>!" Then his bird-head mask sank, and he staid for a long time below. Then he made (the myth people) impatient. "Our elder brother has fooled us many times with what he cooks," said his tribe. Then they looked into the steaming-hole. What should there be! Behold! the bird-headdress was there. He had gone to what had been cooking. Then he was trampled upon by his tribe, and they went out. Invite, invite, invite for this Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>!" They entered. Then he speared a salmon. He fell into the water, and he was just pulled ashore by his younger brothers when he was drifting down the river on his back.</p>
 <p>"Invite, invite, invite for this Squirrel-made-to-go-up!"</p>
 <p><a name="page_241"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 241</font></a></p>
 <p><font size="-2" color="GREEN">[paragraph continues]</font> They entered. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> was lazy. They tried to call him again. "What is the matter with him?" said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. "Maybe you who called us have only gum eyes." Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> was told, "Squirrel-made-to-go-up invites to a great feast." Thus Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> was told. "What is it?" said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. "It is (?)." Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> sent for Canoe-Calking. "Lead this Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>!" Thus said Canoe-Calking. Nobody answered him. "I don't receive an answer," said Canoe-Calking. Then he said, "Ts!E'nts!EnqaLaxs." He stood up at the end of the fireplace, and Ts!E'nts!EnqaLaxs said, "Lead Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>!" Thus said Ts!E'nts!EnqaLaxs. Nobody answered him. Then Squirrel- made-to-go-up spoke. "Let this ugly one come and put his mouth to this knot-hole." Thus said Squirrel-made-to-go-up. Then Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> started, and went to put his mouth to the knot-hole. Then red-hot stones were taken up with tongs. They were wrapped around with (?) and put into Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>'s mouth. "Qwâ, qwâ, qwâ, qwâx!" said Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike>. His mouth was burned.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="kt60.htm">Next: Ô'?mâ<strike>l</strike> kills the Thunder-Birds</a></center>
 </body>