<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Tagore</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="hw25.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="hw27.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h2 align="CENTER">Chapter Six</h2>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Nikhil's Story</h3>
 <h4 align="CENTER">VIII</h4>
 <p>A few days later, my master brought Panchu round to me. His <i>zamindar</i>, it appeared, had fined him a hundred rupees, and was threatening him with ejectment.</p>
 <p>"For what fault?" I enquired.</p>
 <p>"Because," I was told, "he has been found selling foreign cloths. He begged and prayed Harish Kundu, his <i>zamindar</i>, to let him sell off his stock, bought with borrowed money, promising faithfully never to do it again; but the <i>zamindar</i> would not hear of it, and insisted on his burning the foreign stuff there and then, if he wanted to be let off. Panchu in his desperation blurted out defiantly: "I can't afford it! You are rich; why not buy it up and burn it?" This only made Harish Kundu red in the face as he shouted: "The scoundrel must be taught manners, give him a shoe-beating!" So poor Panchu got insulted as well as fined."</p>
 <p>"What happened to the cloth?"</p>
 <p>"The whole bale was burnt."</p>
 <p>"Who else was there?"</p>
 <p>"Any number of people, who all kept shouting <i>Bande Mataram</i>. Sandip was also there. He took up some of the ashes, crying: 'Brothers! This is the first funeral pyre lighted by your village in celebration of the last rites of foreign commerce. These are sacred ashes. Smear yourselves with them in token of your <i>Swadeshi</i> vow.'"</p>
 <p>"Panchu," said I, turning to him, "you must lodge a complaint."</p>
 <p>"No one will bear me witness," he replied.</p>
 <p>"None bear witness?--Sandip! Sandip!"</p>
 <p>Sandip came out of his room at my call. "What is the matter?" he asked.</p>
 <p>"Won't you bear witness to the burning of this man's cloth?"</p>
 <p>Sandip smiled. "Of course I shall be a witness in the case," he said. "But I shall be on the opposite side."</p>
 <p>"What do you mean," I exclaimed, "by being a witness on this or that side? Will you not bear witness to the truth?"</p>
 <p>"Is the thing which happens the only truth?"</p>
 <p>"What other truths can there be?"</p>
 <p>"The things that ought to happen! The truth we must build up will require a great deal of untruth in the process. Those who have made their way in the world have created truth, not blindly followed it."</p>
 <p>"And so--"</p>
 <p>"And so I will bear what you people are pleased to call false witness, as they have done who have created empires, built up social systems, founded religious organizations. Those who would rule do not dread untruths; the shackles of truth are reserved for those who will fall under their sway. Have you not read history? Do you not know that in the immense cauldrons, where vast political developments are simmering, untruths are the main ingredients?"</p>
 <p>"Political cookery on a large scale is doubtless going on, but--"</p>
 <p>"Oh, I know! You, of course, will never do any of the cooking. You prefer to be one of those down whose throats the hotchpotch which is being cooked will be crammed. They will partition Bengal and say it is for your benefit. They will seal the doors of education and call it raising the standard. But you will always remain good boys, snivelling in your corners. We bad men, however, must see whether we cannot erect a defensive fortification of untruth."</p>
 <p>"It is no use arguing about these things, Nikhil," my master interposed. "How can they who do not feel the truth within them, realize that to bring it out from its obscurity into the light is man's highest aim--not to keep on heaping material outside?"</p>
 <p>Sandip laughed. "Right, sir!" said he. "Quite a correct speech for a schoolmaster. That is the kind of stuff I have read in books; but in the real world I have seen that man's chief business is the accumulation of outside material. Those who are masters in the art, advertise the biggest lies in their business, enter false accounts in their political ledgers with their broadest-pointed pens, launch their newspapers daily laden with untruths, and send preachers abroad to disseminate falsehood like flies carrying pestilential germs. I am a humble follower of these great ones. When I was attached to the Congress party I never hesitated to dilute ten per cent of truth with ninety per cent of untruth. And now, merely because I have ceased to belong to that party, I have not forgotten the basic fact that man's goal is not truth but success."</p>
 <p>"True success," corrected my master.</p>
 <p>"Maybe," replied Sandip, "but the fruit of true success ripens only by cultivating the field of untruth, after tearing up the soil and pounding it into dust. Truth grows up by itself like weeds and thorns, and only worms can expect to get fruit from it!" With this he flung out of the room.</p>
 <p>My master smiled as he looked towards me. "Do you know, Nikhil," he said, "I believe Sandip is not irreligious--his religion is of the obverse side of truth, like the dark moon, which is still a moon, for all that its light has gone over to the wrong side."</p>
 <p>"That is why," I assented, "I have always had an affection for him, though we have never been able to agree. I cannot contemn him, even now; though he has hurt me sorely, and may yet hurt me more."</p>
 <p>"I have begun to realize that," said my master. "I have long wondered how you could go on putting up with him. I have, at times, even suspected you of weakness. I now see that though you two do not rhyme, your rhythm is the same."</p>
 <p>"Fate seems bent on writing <i>Paradise Lost</i> in blank verse, in my case, and so has no use for a rhyming friend!" I remarked, pursuing his conceit.</p>
 <p>"But what of Panchu?" resumed my master.</p>
 <p>"You say Harish Kundu wants to eject him from his ancestral holding. Supposing I buy it up and then keep him on as my tenant?"</p>
 <p>"And his fine?"</p>
 <p>"How can the <i>zamindar</i> realize that if he becomes my tenant?"</p>
 <p>"His burnt bale of cloth?"</p>
 <p>"I will procure him another. I should like to see anyone interfering with a tenant of mine, for trading as he pleases!"</p>
 <p>"I am afraid, sir," interposed Panchu despondently, "while you big folk are doing the fighting, the police and the law vultures will merrily gather round, and the crowd will enjoy the fun, but when it comes to getting killed, it will be the turn of only poor me!"</p>
 <p>"Why, what harm can come to you?"</p>
 <p>"They will burn down my house, sir, children and all!"</p>
 <p>"Very well, I will take charge of your children," said my master. "You may go on with any trade you like. They shan't touch you."</p>
 <p>That very day I bought up Panchu's holding and entered into formal possession. Then the trouble began.</p>
 <p>Panchu had inherited the holding of his grandfather as his sole surviving heir. Everybody knew this. But at this juncture an aunt turned up from somewhere, with her boxes and bundles, her rosary, and a widowed niece. She ensconced herself in Panchu's home and laid claim to a life interest in all he had.</p>
 <p>Panchu was dumbfounded. "My aunt died long ago," he protested.</p>
 <p>In reply he was told that he was thinking of his uncle's first wife, but that the former had lost no time in taking to himself a second.</p>
 <p>"But my uncle died before my aunt," exclaimed Panchu, still more mystified. "Where was the time for him to marry again?"</p>
 <p>This was not denied. But Panchu was reminded that it had never been asserted that the second wife had come after the death of the first, but the former had been married by his uncle during the latter's lifetime. Not relishing the idea of living with a co-wife she had remained in her father's house till her husband's death, after which she had got religion and retired to holy Brindaban, whence she was now coming. These facts were well known to the officers of Harish Kundu, as well as to some of his tenants. And if the <i>zamindar's</i> summons should be peremptory enough, even some of those who had partaken of the marriage feast would be forthcoming!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="hw27.htm">Next: IX</a></center>
 </body>