<body bgcolor="#000000" text="#00ff00" link="#ffffff" alink="#ffffff" vlink="#ffffff">
 <font face="Arial">
 <font size="-2">
 </font></font><center>
 <a href="../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../eso/index.htm">Esoteric &amp; Occult</a>
  
 <a href="../myst.htm">Mysteries</a><br>
 <a href="../cdshop/index.htm">Buy CD-ROM</a>
  
 <a href="../books/ufo.htm">Buy Books about UFOs</a>
 <br>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="cni0188.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="cni0192.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CNI News 18.9</h3>
 <hr>
 <font face="Courier">
 <pre>
 CNI News - Volume 18.9
 May 30, 1996
 Published by the ISCNI News Center
 Editor: Michael Lindemann
 
 The stories in this edition of CNI News are:
    1) WHERE ARE THOSE IMPLANT TEST RESULTS, ANYWAY?
        Objects Removed Last August Will Get 2nd Round of Tests
    2) NAVAJO DEITIES REPORTEDLY SEEN - THOUSANDS VISIT SITE
        Bring Warnings of Danger Ahead, Say Witnesses
    3) CONTROVERSY DOGS NBC'S "MYSTERIOUS ORIGINS OF MAN"
        Academics Want TV Special Banned From Airwaves
    4) HOUSE VOTES TO KEEP INTELLIGENCE BUDGET SECRET
    5) BEFORE YOU GET ALL EXCITED... "EON 4" IS MAKE-BELIEVE!
 
 ISCNI encourages you to respond to stories in CNI News.
    * Public responses can be posted on the Forum message board in "News
 Center Feedback"
    * Private responses can be emailed to ISCNI, subj: CNI News Editor
 
 The subject matter of CNI News is inherently controversial, and the views and
 opinions reported in the news are not necessarily those of ISCNI or its
 staff.
 
 The next edition of CNI News will appear on Monday, June 3.
 
 ========================================================
 
 1) WHERE ARE THOSE IMPLANT TEST RESULTS, ANYWAY?
     Objects Removed Last August Will Get 2nd Round of Tests
 
 As reported previously in CNI News, the investigative team headed by
 Houston-based hypnotherapist Derrel Sims and Southern California physician
 Dr. Roger Leir removed unusual objects, possibly "alien implants," from two
 people last August. So far, nine months later, almost nothing has been said
 about the tests that were to have been run on these objects, giving rise to
 speculation that nothing noteworthy was found.
 
 CNI News asked Dale Musser, a close associate of Derrel Sims in Houston, to
 clarify the status of the testing.
 
 "The first round of tests have been completed at a cost of over $16,000 by a
 number of scientists," Musser wrote back.  "We are witholding the results
 until they can be confirmed by a second set of scientists and tests."
 
 CNI News pointed out that public impatience and suspicion was mounting.
 
 Musser replied: "At this point we don't particulary care what the impatient
 public thinks or says. We get blasted if we don't release information
 prematurely, and then get fried when we do release information without all
 the tests being run.  We decided that from now on we're going to wait until
 all tests have been completed and confirmed. That way only the impatient will
 be frustrated, and no one can say we didn't follow ALL the scientific
 protocols.
 
 "As you can see by the cost of the first round of tests, this is not cheap,
 and finding qualified scientists to do the tests and then arranging for it
 takes time. It doesn't happen over night," he said.
 
 CNI News asked for any details of the test results that could be divulged at
 this time. Musser replied: "I will say that what the test results show will
 raise more than a few eyebrows (if the test results are confirmed).  Even I
 was surprised, and I was the one who first suspected that we'd find nerve
 fibers around implants."
 
 Dr. Roger Leir had previously announced that organic material around the
 removed objects contained unexpected amounts of nerve tissue. Musser would
 not elaborate on those findings, but added: "As it appears now, the August 95
 objects are definitely NOT common everyday objects."
 
 Derrel Sims has repeatedly promised CNI News access to further information as
 soon as test results can be released. At the moment it is not clear how soon
 that will be.
 
 Meanwhile, a second set of objects, removed from three people by the
 Sims/Leir team on May 18, are also undergoing testing, but no results have
 yet been announced.
 
 CNI News editor Michael Lindemann spoke by phone on May 29 with one of the
 women from whom an object was removed on May 18. Lindemann asked her if she
 felt any different following the removal of the object from her leg. She said
 she had not noticed any change at all in her physical or mental condition.
 The surgery had been very simple and had not caused any complications or
 after-effects.
 
 This woman believes herself to be an abductee, but said she was not aware of
 any abduction episodes since the surgery. Nor had she had any unusual dreams
 or any other occurrence that might be related to the removal of the object,
 she said.
 
 CNI News will continue to follow this developing story.
 
 ========================================================
 
 2) NAVAJO DEITIES REPORTEDLY SEEN - THOUSANDS VISIT SITE
     Bring Warnings of Danger Ahead, Say Witnesses
 
 [This article ran May 28 in the Arizona Republic newspaper, written by Bill
 Donovan.]
 
 WINDOW ROCK - Thousands of Navajo pilgrims have traveled to the small outpost
 of Rocky Ridge in the past few weeks, drawn by what a 96-year-old woman and
 her daughter saw outside their hogan.
 
 On the morning of May 3, Irene Yazzie, who had not spoken for several months
 because of a stroke, turned to her daughter and said someone was coming to
 their home near Big Mountain, north of Flagstaff. About noon, the two heard a
 loud noise outside, followed by a knocking. They opened the door to see two
 tall, elderly Navajo men.
 
 One told them not to be afraid, that they were two of the more than 100
 Navajo deities, who assist in all aspects of Navajo life. They had appeared
 before Yazzie and her daughter, Sarah Begay, to ask why the deities no longer
 are receiving prayers from the people.
 
 They warned that if the Navajos continue to forsake tribal traditions, they
 face grave danger in the future, and Navajo deities would not be able to
 help. The men vanished seconds later, leaving only footprints and a
 sprinkling of corn pollen, which traditional Navajos scatter during prayer.
 
 Since the story began circulating, the wind has swept away the pollen and
 nearly obliterated the footprints.
 
 But thousands of Navajos have visited the Begay home each day, leaving corn
 pollen, saying prayers and wanting to see what traditionalists say is the
 third visit by Navajo deities to their people this century.
 
 A former historian for the tribe said his research revealed that deities
 appeared in the 1930s and 1950s. In each case, the deity appeared to elderly
 Navajo women during a time of drought.
 
 "We heard stories for several days about the visit," said Irene Atcitty, who
 was with a group of 20 Shiprock, N.M.-area residents who recently traveled
 the more than 200 miles to visit the site. "I felt my family needed to see
 firsthand what this was all about."
 
 When her group arrived at the Begay family's cluster of hogans, Atcitty said,
 about 30 other Navajos were already there. Some had traveled from as far away
 as San Diego to bring sacred objects as tribute to the deities.
 
 Begay could not be reached for comment. Yazzie has not spoken since the
 deities appeared.
 
 "We were told that Sarah has told the story of the visits so many times that
 she lost her voice," Atcitty said.
 
 Leaders of the community of Hard Rocks, which is the closest settlement of
 any notable size, have gotten so many inquiries about how to find the site
 that they have printed a map for Navajos.
 
 Lorenzo Yazzie, vice president of the community and not related to Irene
 Yazzie, said that at the request of the family, some restrictions have been
 set, including a ban on cameras and video recorders. The family also has
 requested that non-Indians not be allowed at the site, he said.
 
 A number of Navajo tribal leaders have visited the place, including President
 Albert Hale. In a memo, he urged the government's 5,000 Navajo employees to
 visit the site and gave them four hours off anytime last week to do so.
 
 "This is a significant event to Navajo people everywhere," his memo said.
 Annette Brown, public-information officer for the Navajo Nation, said her
 office has received calls from off-reservation television stations and
 newspapers asking for more information. But at the request of the Begays,
 Hale will release nothing further.
 
 The "Navajo Times," the tribe's weekly newspaper, is holding off printing a
 story about the visit of the deities until the Begay family approves its
 release and ceremonies are conducted at the home.
 
 "That's where native publications differ from those in the mainstream,"
 editor Tom Arviso said. "We are not going to print the story just because we
 want to sell a lot of newspapers."
 
 Navajo officials said the Begay family and neighbors have expressed concern
 about security because of all the traffic into the area at all hours.
 
 It is hard for the Navajos to provide security, however, because the Begay
 hogans are within lands partitioned to the Hopi Tribe in 1974 as part of an
 effort to resolve a century-old land dispute.
 
 
 Ferrell Secakuku, chairman of the Hopis, visited the site and heard the story
 from members of Begay's family.
 
 A tribal spokesman said Secakuku discussed providing security at the site,
 but family members indicated they wanted to wait until the ceremonies are
 conducted.
 
 Ruth Roessel, who teaches Navajo culture on the reservation, said the story
 of the deities' visit may inspire more Navajos to observe traditions, which
 many Navajos have abandoned over the past 20 years.
 
 "This may wake some people up," Roessel said.
 
 ========================================================
 
 3) CONTROVERSY DOGS NBC'S "MYSTERIOUS ORIGINS OF MAN"
     Academics Want TV Special Banned From Airwaves
 
 [NBC issued the following press release on May 29 concerning their
 controversial special, which will be rebroadcast on June 8.]
 
 NBC's "The Mysterious Origins of Man" sparked heated controversy within the
 academic community when originally broadcast February 25, 1996, and will be
 rebroadcast on Saturday, June 8 (8-9 p.m. ET).  Professors of science and
 anthropology from some of the nation's most prestigious colleges and
 universities voiced strong opinions about some of the theories in the
 special, which challenged long-accepted beliefs about man's beginnings.
 
 The program presented startling evidence suggesting man may have made the
 climb from Stone Age to civilization more than once; that present-day man is
 just the latest in this cycle, and that Darwin's Theory of Evolution has
 serious flaws.
 
 "Our goal was simply to present the public with evidence which suggests an
 alternative view to some of our most accepted theories," said producer Bill
 Cote.  "We questioned fundamental issues that they (some scientists) felt
 should not be questioned.  The bottom line is, the world is bigger than
 scientists can explain, and some of them want us to believe they can explain
 everything.
 
 "We expected some controversy when we produced this show," Cote continued,
 "but no one was prepared for the enormous cry of outrage from members of the
 scientific community."
 
 Hundreds of messages jammed Cote's special online website
 (http:www.bcvideo.com/bcvideo) following the program, and activity continues
 on several sites dedicated to the program.  "While many viewers, including
 some scientists, praised the production as 'a great accomplishment and
 contributing to public education,'" says Cote, "many scientists expressed
 outrage and criticism."
 
 [CNI News editor Michael Lindemann comments: I saw the program the first time
 it aired. It is excellent and should be seen. The information presented in
 this program does not add up to a clear picture of "what really happened,"
 but does impressively challenge conventional wisdom. The academic reaction is
 sadly predictable and bears an almost absurd similarity to the orginal
 vehement reaction against Darwin -- whose theory is now considered sacrosanct
 by those most opposed to NBC's program. But the best paleontologists in the
 business, including the telegenic Steven J. Gould, have openly admitted to
 glaring problems with Darwin's theory. Only small minds (alas, how many there
 are!) are unwilling to give these new ideas a fair hearing. And when the
 evidence is presented, it is remarkable -- and yes, it may upset the status
 quo. So be it.]
 
 ========================================================
 
 4) HOUSE VOTES TO KEEP INTELLIGENCE BUDGET SECRET
 
 [This story was published in ACLU News on May 23.]
 
 In a blow to open government, the House of Representatives has rejected a
 move by the Clinton Administration to -- for the first time -- make public
 the overall national intelligence budget, The Washington Post reported on May
 23.
 
 The rejection came on a vote of 248 to 176 on an amendment to a bill that
 would fund the CIA and 11 other, mostly Pentagon-based, intelligence
 agencies.
 
 The ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] had supported the amendment, saying
 that "taxpayers have a right to know what their tax dollars support."
 
 But the Post said that House Intelligence Chairman Larry Combest, R-TX,
 opposed disclosure in committee and led the opposition on the floor
 yesterday. He said making the overall figure public inevitably would lead to
 disclosure of individual intelligence accounts, which, he said, could harm
 clandestine sources and methods.
 
 ACLU Legislative Counsel Gregory T. Nojeim disagreed. "Disclosure of the
 bottom-line figure is the absolute minimum that Congress should do to make
 the intelligence agencies accountable to the American public," he said. "All
 of these intelligence agencies have acknowledged that any Cold War
 justification for keeping the total budget secret has passed."
 
 [CNI News comments: The Clinton Administration is to be commended for trying
 to bring this information into the open, even if unsuccessfully. However, it
 is deplorable that the House voted to maintain blanket secrecy over the
 entire intelligence budget. In the recent past, massive abuse of secret funds
 by several agencies, including the NSA and NRO, have been disclosed, and
 these abuses are likely to be just the tip of the iceberg. Until public
 accountability is brought back into balance with the demands of national
 security, democracy in America is in serious jeopardy.]
 
 ========================================================
 
 5) BEFORE YOU GET ALL EXCITED... "EON 4" IS MAKE-BELIEVE!
 
 It seems like everyone is talking about the new hi-tech web site called EON
 4. Part of the discussion centers on whether or not the depicted stories of
 human-alien contact have any truth to them.
 
 According to an article dated May 13 in Advertising Age magazine: "'EON-4,'
 created by the producers of such TV shows as 'Alien Nation' and 'Sea Quest
 DSV,' has a cast of more than 20 and a yearly budget of $1 million.  The
 daily series... chronicles the experiences of three astronauts who travel to
 a distant galaxy at the invitation of an advanced alien culture."
 
 But it's all make-believe, folks.
 
 ISCNI's message board coordinator Michelle LaVigne, who also edits the
 journal "Contact Forum," sent us the following:
 
 "I did a section on EON 4 for the NET CONNECTION section of Contact Forum
 Magazine.  I ended up, after some time, connecting with the people at APPLE
 who are responsible for the site.
 
 "The truth is (and believe me, I looked way down into it) IT IS A HOAX!
 
 "Apple is using the site for publicity, to show the versatility of their site
 creation department. The premise is that this site will generate a lot of
 talk, get a lot of hits.... and repete hits... and get people talking about
 it all over the news groups etc. ... and then APPLE will be able to show this
 to their clients to support the effectiveness of their sites."
 
 CNI News notes that, so far, Apple's strategy seems to be working.
 
 #     #     #
 </pre>
 </font>
 
 <font face="Arial" size="-2">
 <hr>
 </font><center>
 <a href="cni0192.htm">Next: CNI News 19.2</a></center>
 
 </body>