<body bgcolor="#000000" text="#00ff00" link="#ffffff" alink="#ffffff" vlink="#ffffff">
 <font face="Arial">
 <font size="-2">
 </font></font><center>
 <a href="../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../eso/index.htm">Esoteric &amp; Occult</a>
  
 <a href="../myst.htm">Mysteries</a><br>
 <a href="../cdshop/index.htm">Buy CD-ROM</a>
  
 <a href="../books/ufo.htm">Buy Books about UFOs</a>
 <br>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="cni0193.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="cni0195.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CNI News 19.4</h3>
 <hr>
 <font face="Courier">
 <pre>
 CNI News - Volume 19.4
 June 13, 1996
 Published by the ISCNI News Center
 Editor: Michael Lindemann
 
 The stories in this edition of CNI News are:
    1) RESEARCHER JOHN CARPENTER GOES TO BRAZIL, SAYS CLAIM
        OF CAPTURED ALIEN IS WELL SUPPORTED BY EVIDENCE
    2) NEW-FOUND SOLAR SYSTEM HAS FEATURES LIKE EARTH'S
        Could Help Confirm Theory That Planets Are Common
    3) NBC'S NEW "DARK SKIES" EXPLORES GOVERNMENT-UFO SECRECY
        Yet Another Vision of Impending Alien Invasion
 
 ISCNI encourages you to respond to stories in CNI News.
    * Public responses can be posted on the Forum message board in "News
 Center Feedback"
    * Private responses can be emailed to ISCNI, subj: CNI News Editor
 
 The subject matter of CNI News is inherently controversial, and the views and
 opinions reported in the news are not necessarily those of ISCNI or its
 staff.
 
 The next edition of CNI News will appear on Thursday, June 13.
 
 ========================================================
 
 1) RESEARCHER JOHN CARPENTER GOES TO BRAZIL, SAYS CLAIM OF CAPTURED ALIEN IS
 WELL SUPPORTED BY EVIDENCE
 
 by Michael Lindemann
 
 Information keeps coming in to CNI News on the rumored capture of two or more
 "alien beings" by military authorities in Brazil. The latest article received
 through internet sources (see below) said that well-known American abduction
 researcher John Carpenter had recently been in Brazil to examine the case.
 Carpenter is also a founding member of the ISCNI faculty. I reached him at
 his office by phone this morning (June 13) and asked what he had learned.
 
 "In short, it's a damn good case. I'd say it's equal to Roswell," Carpenter
 said. He was in Brazil just last week for a conference, returning to his home
 in Springfield, Missouri, on June 11. He told me he was going into a meeting
 when I called and could give only brief answers to my questions, but promised
 to write a detailed report for CNI News soon.
 
 I told Carpenter I had just received an email report on the case from
 well-known Brazilian UFO researcher A.J. Gevaerd. "Oh yes, he'll know all
 about it," Carpenter said.
 
 Carpenter, along with Stanton Friedman and British researcher Graham
 Birdsall, attended the Brazilian UFO conference together and were seeking any
 information they could get on the alleged capture of aliens. They learned
 that one of the leading investigators of the case, Vitorio Pacaccini, was at
 the conference and speaks perfect English.
 
 Carpenter, Friedman and Birdsall invited Pacaccini to a private room where
 they interviewed him on videotape for more than an hour. On the strength of
 this interview and the evidence that Paccaccini has amassed, Carpenter says
 he and the other researchers were highly impressed.
 
 Carpenter confirmed that famed abduction researcher Dr. John Mack had been in
 Brazil the previous week. Mack interviewed the three young girls who reported
 seeing one of the "alien beings" later captured by the military.
 
 "Mack told me he would stake his career and his license on those three girls
 being truthful," Carpenter said.
 
 Carpenter dropped some tantalizing hints of bigger elements of the case that
 have not yet been divulged. He says there is strong suspicion that a UFO
 crash-recovery is involved. He also said, "There are [or were] five or six
 beings on the loose."
 
 All published reports so far have mentioned only two beings.
 
 The following text is edited from a press release sent out on June 9 by
 Brazilian researcher A. J. Gevaerd. CNI News thanks James Sutton for
 forwarding this information.
 
 PRESS RELEASE - URGENT
 
 On January 20, military forces captured two extraterrestrial creatures still
 alive in Brazil. The capture occurred in neighboring areas of the city of
 Varginha, State of Minas Gerais, Central Brazil. The fact is to be considered
 one of the most significant ever registered in this country and in the entire
 world. Military authorities are keeping secret all details of the operation,
 but some information has already leaked to the UFO community due to the
 investigative job of Dr. Ubiraja Franco Rodrigues and Vitorio Pacaccini, who
 live nearby and are recognized as serious and dedicated researchers.
 
 On the afternoon of January 20, about 3.30 PM local time, three young girls
 named Liliane, Valquiria and Katia observed a strange creature in a field of
 small bushes a few blocks from where they live. It was Saturday and they were
 coming back from their jobs when, crossing an empty area, their attention was
 attracted by a strange being a few meters away. The [being] was kneeling and
 looked like it was hurt, suffering some sort of pain. No UFO was ever seen.
 The girls observed it for a few minutes and ran away,  afraid that they had
 just encountered the devil....
 
 The three girls were extensively interrogated by above mentioned researchers,
 leaving no doubt whatsoever about what happened. Very simple kids, they
 described the [creature] as being dark brown, with a  small body of 4 to 5
 feet in height, no hair at all, big brown head, small neck. It also seemed to
 have some greasy, dark oil on its skin. A strange odor was noticed by the
 mother of the girls, when she went to the site. The head of the creature had
 two big red eyes, no pupils, very small mouth and nose and three
 protuberances in the head. The girls described such protuberances as horns.
 
 Following the leads, researchers Rodrigues and Paccaccini started making
 inquiries everywhere in the town of Varginha, in order to know if anybody
 else had seen the same creature. They found several other people who  also
 observed the [beings] in the same location and maybe other [beings] in
 different locations. While conducting their own investigations, both
 discovered that different witnesses had seen army trucks and other military
 vehicles and personnel that very morning, a few blocks from the place the
 girls saw the [being].
 
 In trying to find out what the military were doing, Rodrigues and  Pacaccini
 came to meet a few soldiers and sergeants. One of them decided to talk
 secretly about their mission, in a confidential taped interview. This
 Sergeant confirmed that, about 9:00 AM, January 20, the Fire Department of
 Varginha was required to capture a strange animal in the area. When four
 firemen arrived in a truck in the place, they noticed that it was not a
 strange animal at all, and reported the fact to the Army Sergeant School
 Commander in the neighboring city of Tres Coracoes (about 10 miles east of
 Varginha).
 
 An army truck was sent to the place and both forces captured the creature
 using nets and equipment regularly used to capture wild animals. The
 [creature] was placed still alive in a box that was then covered by resistant
 fabric.  The box was placed on top of the truck, the vehicle headed to the
 Army Sergeant School and all personnel involved were ordered not to talk
 about it with anyone else. "It was a secret operation," [they were told by]
 Lieutenant Colonel Wanderley, who commanded the operation.
 
 After [this] unusual confidential report, a few other military decided to
 come forward and speak about the captures as long as their identities were
 totally kept secret. They all confirmed, on taped interviews, that a second
 creature (possibly the same one seen by the girls that afternoon) was
 captured on the night of January 20, by personnel from the Army and the Fire
 Department.
 
 Details of [this] operation are fully known. This creature, identical to the
 first one, was taken to the Regional General Hospital of Varginha that same
 night, stayed there for a few hours and then was transferred to a better
 equipped facility, the Humanitas Hospital.
 
 A few nurses and personnel from Regional General Hospital had confirmed some
 facts and they were all suppressed. Individuals who had contacts with the
 second creature were advised to avoid press and UFO researchers and not to
 talk about it with anyone, not even their families or relations. At the
 Humanities Hospital, the second creature was kept at least for 2 days, and on
 the second night, January 22nd, a huge military operation took place to
 remove the creature, [then] already dead.
 
 Interviews with some of the military who participated in this new operation,
 removing the creature from the Humanitas Hospital, declared that three Army
 trucks were used, each one driven by two different soldiers. It is believed
 that three trucks were used to remove only one body in order to [prevent] the
 soldiers from knowing in which truck it would be transported. The drivers and
 their [escorts] couldn't see the details of the operations, as they  were
 kept outside the hospital area. Military personnel from the Army Internal
 Intelligence (called "S-2" in Brazil and extremely violent and repressive)
 were responsible for getting the corpse from the interior of the  hospital,
 placing it in a box and then in one of the trucks.
 
 All three trucks then were taken to a military facility in Campinas, State of
 Sao Paulo, about 200 miles from Varginha, in the middle of the night. There,
 the corpse was removed to the University of Campinas, one of the best
 institutions in the country. It is believed -- and we already have detailed
 information to be soon released -- that the body was autopsied by Dr. Badan
 Palhares, world-acclaimed as one of the best professionals in that area alive
 (he was the one who autopsied German Nazi Mengele, about ten years ago).
 Palhares, as well as any other authority involved, denied he was involved in
 any such operations.
 
 UFO researchers from all over the country have been helping Rodrigues and
 Pacaccini, in order to discover each and every detail of the capture of the
 two [beings]. Media in Brazil has never been so active, and a great majority
 of the population believes that the case is real and that the military and
 civil authorities involved are keeping the facts secret. Many strange facts
 are happening simultaneously, such as [imprisonment] of soldiers, Sergeants
 being transferred at short notice etc. The phones of many UFO  researchers
 involved in the case are confirmed to be tapped and a few threats have been
 made anonymously.
 
 Every day new pieces of this fantastic puzzle are being received by
 researchers in many cities, and more and more military personnel have agreed
 to talk. In a matter of weeks, all information will be fully disclosed by the
 UFO researchers involved.
 
 Meanwhile, the region where Varginha is located, in the South of State of
 Minas Gerais, is subject to one of the biggest UFO waves ever registered, the
 huge UFO's in close range observations, landings and contact.
 
 A.J. GEVAERD, Editor &amp; Director
 BRAZILIAN UFO MAGAZINE &amp; BRAZILIAN CENTER for FLYING SAUCER
 RESEARCH.
 
 ========================================================
 
 2) NEW-FOUND SOLAR SYSTEM HAS FEATURES LIKE EARTH'S
     Could Help Confirm Theory That Planets Are Common
 
 [CNI News thanks Paul Anderson for sending this article, which appeared on
 June 12 in the Vancouver Sun.]
 
 MADISON, Wis. -- Astronomers report they have discovered a solar system far
 closer to our sun than any of the previous half-dozen planet discoveries.
 
 Moreover, the new planetary system has features strikingly similar to our
 own.
 
 Evidence presented Tuesday (June 11) at the American Astronomical Society
 meeting in Madison suggests that the fourth nearest star to our sun has a
 Jupiter-sized companion orbiting at about the distance of Saturn -- and
 possibly a second, smaller companion at the distance of the asteroid belt.
 
 If confirmed, the new planet -- just more than eight light-years from Earth
 -- adds another piece of evidence confirming centuries of speculation that
 planets are common and that astronomers don't have to look much beyond their
 own back yards to find them.
 
 Some of these, astronomers hope, might harbor the potential for life.
 
 "It's the beginning of a whole new field," said George Gatewood of the
 Allegheny Observatory in Pittsburgh, who discovered the planet orbiting a
 fast-moving star called Lelande 21185. "We've just lifted up the corners of
 the first page of the book."
 
 After decades of false hopes and dashed promises, astronomers have discovered
 a string of oddball planetary systems since the fall of 1995.
 
 However, up until now, all have had bizarre features. One planet orbited its
 parent star in just four days; others were much larger than Jupiter -- the
 giant of our solar system -- and orbited much faster (and therefore much
 closer) to their suns. The closest of the previously discovered planets is at
 least 40 light-years away.
 
 Gatewood's planetary system, in contrast, looks much more like our own. The
 planet weighs in with Jupiter's mass and appears to circle its star at a
 similar distance.
 
 Both possible planets also orbit in the same pancake-flat plane favored by
 Earth's planetary companions.
 
 Prospects for life are dim, however, because all large planets previously
 discovered are mostly gas, lacking any terra firma. In addition, the star
 Lelande 21185 is too faint to generate enough heat to support life.
 
 The Pittsburgh observatory had been keeping track of Lelande 21185 for more
 than six decades with a telescope that is small by modern standards. By
 plotting the star's course through the heavens, they were able to discern a
 small wobble in its motion.
 
 Only recently, however, did the telescope get new optics that allowed
 Gatewood to see the star with ten times the previous precision. "That's what
 gave us the nerve to announce this," he said.
 
 Gatewood has a reputation for careful observing. Charles Beichman, an
 astronomer at the California Institute of Technology, vouched for Gatewood's
 caution. "He's a very careful worker."
 
 Others were more cautious. "It's an interesting report that requires
 confirmation," said Stephen Maran of the American Astronomical Society. "This
 is one where many astronomers are being particularly careful."
 
 ========================================================
 
 3) NBC'S NEW "DARK SKIES" EXPLORES GOVERNMENT-UFO SECRECY
     Yet Another Vision of Impending Alien Invasion
 
 "Dark Skies," premiering this fall on the NBC network in Saturday evening
 prime time (8-9 p.m. ET), is the latest entry in a growing field of programs
 that paint a picture of alien invasion. Unlike such programs as "Babylon 5"
 or "Space: Above and Beyond," where the action is far from earth and clearly
 imaginary, the scenario of "Dark Skies" stays very close to home and mirrors
 the bleakest images of the UFO conspiracy mind-set.
 
 NBC clearly has high ambitions for this show -- they're already hinting at
 episodes all the way out to the turn of the century.
 
 NBC promo describes the show as follows:
 
 In 1961, two idealistic college graduates, John Loengard and girlfriend
 Kimberly Sayers, went to Washington to be part of John F. Kennedy's New
 Frontier. They set off to change the world. They never imagined they would
 lead the battle to save it.
 
 The adventure begins when Loengard studies the Air Force investigation into
 UFOs. He soon stumbles into Project Majestic, the government's ultrasecret
 program to fight a covert invasion of the planet by a mysterious
 extraterrestrial intelligence. Loengard finds himself both a victim and a
 warrior at the front-lines of a secret war that will shape the course of
 human history.
 
 Hunted by both Project Majestic and the aliens, John and Kimberly go
 underground in a desperate struggle to warn humanity, a fight that will
 ultimately involve them, their children and millions more in a resistance
 movement known as "Dark Skies." It's a battle that involves them with many of
 the historical events of the late 20th century, including John F. Kennedy's
 assassination, the New York blackout of 1965 and the destruction of the Space
 Shuttle Challenger.
 
 "Dark Skies" is an epic science fiction-adventure series, combining 40 years
 of history and a world of speculative fiction into its first five seasons.
 John and Kimberly will lead humanity to victories, large and small, on the
 way to a final showdown between humans and aliens on the eve of the
 millennium, a struggle the likes of which television audiences have never
 seen.
 
 "Dark Skies" stars Eric Close, Megan Ward, J. T. Walsh. Executive Producer
 and writer Bryce Zabel's previous credits include M.A.N.T.I.S, Lois &amp; Clark,
 Life Goes On, and L.A. Law.
 
 #     #     #
 </pre>
 </font>
 
 <font face="Arial" size="-2">
 <hr>
 </font><center>
 <a href="cni0195.htm">Next: CNI News 19.5</a></center>
 
 </body>