<body bgcolor="#000000" text="#00ff00" link="#ffffff" alink="#ffffff" vlink="#ffffff">
 <font face="Arial">
 <font size="-2">
 </font></font><center>
 <a href="../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../eso/index.htm">Esoteric &amp; Occult</a>
  
 <a href="../myst.htm">Mysteries</a><br>
 <a href="../cdshop/index.htm">Buy CD-ROM</a>
  
 <a href="../books/ufo.htm">Buy Books about UFOs</a>
 <br>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="cni0189.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="cni0193.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CNI News 19.2</h3>
 <hr>
 <font face="Courier">
 <pre>
  
 CNI News - Volume 19.2
 June 6, 1996
 Published by the ISCNI News Center
 Editor: Michael Lindemann
 
 The stories in this edition of CNI News are:
    1) HUGE UFO FLAP REPORTED IN AUSTRALIA
    2) ANTIQUITIES EXPERTS HANCOCK, BAUVAL REPORT STRANGE POLITICAL
       INTRIGUES IN EGYPT AS SPHINX DEBATE HEATS UP
    3) NATIVE AMERICANS CALL FOR WORLD PEACE AND PRAYER DAY
    4) CHINA OPENS MUSEUM DEDICATED TO CHINESE "BIGFOOT"
    5) WASHINGTON STATE IS JUST WILD ABOUT BIGFOOT
 
 ISCNI encourages you to respond to stories in CNI News.
    * Public responses can be posted on the Forum message board in "News
 Center Feedback"
    * Private responses can be emailed to ISCNI, subj: CNI News Editor
 
 The subject matter of CNI News is inherently controversial, and the views and
 opinions reported in the news are not necessarily those of ISCNI or its
 staff.
 
 The next edition of CNI News will appear on Monday, June 10.
 
 ========================================================
 
 1) HUGE UFO FLAP REPORTED IN AUSTRALIA
 
 CNI News has received a preliminary report of a huge UFO flap now underway in
 Australia. Details are very sketchy and we are awaiting further information,
 but bring you this report as sent to us by Leslie Anne Mannering
 (breeders@powerup.com.au). Leslie writes:
 
 "It has been incredible. International officials are coming from everywhere
 to look at the evidence (radar tracks) and interview witnesses which include
 our RAAF, police force and thousands of Australian citizens nationwide. My
 girlfriend saw one the other morning in broad daylight and she is a skeptic
 in every respect. I sense a feeling of urgency, that something is about to
 happen.
 
 "These UFO's have been seen flying squadron style perfect distances apart.
 There are so many witnesses to these events that the government officials
 simply can't pass it off as rubbish. It's been on our television, on our
 radios, and in the newspaper."
 
 CNI News has requested further information and will continue to follow this
 developing story.
 
 ========================================================
 
 2) ANTIQUITIES EXPERTS HANCOCK, BAUVAL REPORT STRANGE POLITICAL INTRIGUES IN
 EGYPT AS SPHINX DEBATE HEATS UP
 
 [CNI News thanks John J. Mercieca of Malta UFO Research for sending this
 report, based on notes taken during a conference at Imperial College, London,
 on May 25.]
 
 Graham Hancock [author of "Fingerprints of the Gods"] and Robert Bauval
 [author of "The Orion Mystery"] had some disturbing news from Egypt. John
 Anthony West, who has previously demonstrated that the Sphinx and pyramids at
 Giza are much older than previously thought, and also discovered a secret
 chamber under the Sphinx's left paw, was then booted out of Egypt by Dr. Zahi
 Hawass (Director of Egyptian Antiquities) on the grounds that West was
 attributing the Sphinx &amp; pyramids to an ancient lost civilization and not to
 the Egyptians. This was total rubbish, according to Hawass. He actually said
 that West was part of a "Zionist plot against Egyptians."
 
 Rudolf Gantenbrink, the German robotics engineer who discovered a secret door
 at the end of a supposed "air shaft" in the Queen's chamber of the Great
 Pyramid using the Upuat robot, was also declared persona non grata.
 
 Now Zahi Hawass has been sponsored by a multi-millionaire [name not given]
 who happens to be a member of the Edgar Cayce society (Association for
 Research and Enlightenment) to open the secret chamber below the sphinx. A
 Canadian engineer who has been chosen by Hawass to use another robot to open
 the "air shaft" door in September also happens to be a member of the Edgar
 Cayce society and is also connected to the multi-millionaire.
 
 Edgar Cayce, the famed American psychic, predicted in 1933 that a secret
 chamber would be discovered under the Sphinx that contained a repository of
 Atlantean knowledge.
 
 Zahi Hawass has participated in a 7 minute promo film to try to get someone
 to produce a direct "live" opening of the secret chamber.
 
 Hancock and Bauval were contacted to participate in this live opening, but
 one of the conditions was that they had to publicly denounce John Anthony
 West as a fraud.  They refused.  Meanwhile, the multi-millionaire has
 allegedly threatened to sue Bauval and Hancock for libel for associating him
 with the Edgar Cayce society and the Sphinx chamber opening.
 
 Not long ago, Zahi Hawass said that the "secret chamber" under the Sphinx was
 just a natural cavity in the rock; but he now admits that there may be
 something in it after all.
 
 Meanwhile, Bauval may have discovered the position of another secret
 underground chamber below the RUMP of the Sphinx, different from the known
 position of the secret chamber discovered by John Anthony West in 1991 under
 the paws of the sphinx. This new chamber is being called by Bauval and
 Hancock the Genesis chamber.
 
 ========================================================
 
 3) NATIVE AMERICANS CALL FOR WORLD PEACE AND PRAYER DAY
 
 [CNI News thanks Robert Rouse for sending this item. As previously reported
 in CNI News, two "deities" appeared recently on the Navajo Indian reservation
 to warn the people of difficult times ahead. Now a spokesman for the Lakota
 (Sioux) Nation makes an appeal based upon the same concern.]
 
 I, Arvol Looking Horse, 19th Generation Keeper of the Sacred White Buffalo
 Calf Pipe for the Lakota, Dakota, Nakota Nation ask that all Nations upon
 Mother Earth declare June 21st, 1996 World Peace and Prayer Day. According to
 spiritual leaders and Elders who gathered at the United Nations to present
 their prophesies -- and again at Six Nations, Canada -- the "signs" of
 Indigenous people's prophesies have shown themselves. The prophesies tell us
 it is time to begin mending the Sacred Hoop and begin global healing by
 working towards world peace and harmony.
 
 The Birth of the White Buffalo Calf lets us know we're at a crossroads --
 either return to balance or face global disaster. It is our duty to return
 back to sacred places and pray for world peace -- if we do not do this, our
 children will suffer.
 
 At Grey Horn Butte, before the White Buffalo Woman brought the Sacred Pipe to
 our ancestors, a Seer was traveling in the Sacred Black Hills -- PaHa Sapa,
 "heart of everything that is." The Seer came upon a large tipi. When he went
 into the tipi, he saw the Sacred Pipe in the North and the Sacred Bundle of
 Bows and Arrows in the South. According to the Star Knowledge there are six
 stars which designate six sacred sites within the Black Hills. These places
 are sacred places to pray. We are told there is a sacred site every hundred
 miles around Mother Earth. We ask all people to return to these places and
 pray from their hearts with us. The ceremony begins at 10 a.m. South Dakota
 (Mountain) time.
 
 It has been decided, according to the Star Knowledge, that June 21st is the
 time to pray. Indigenous people of Turtle Island will begin their spiritual
 journey on horseback from Wahpeton, Saskatchewan, Canada to Grey Horn Butte
 (known as Devil's Tower) in the Black Hills of Wyoming. There, Indigenous
 peoples will pray with the Sacred Bundle Keepers to begin the restoration of
 peace and balance. We ask all Peoples to begin organizing their ceremonies at
 their sacred sites or in the manner which they pray so that they will be
 praying at the same time as we are from their sacred center.
 
 So far, we have spoken to leaders around the world and each has committed to
 work towards supporting June 21st, 1996. We ask all people of all faiths to
 respond and support our efforts towards world peace and harmony -- our circle
 of life where there is no ending and no beginning. May Peace be with you All.
 
 Arvol Looking Horse
 
 ========================================================
 
 4) CHINA OPENS MUSEUM DEDICATED TO CHINESE "BIGFOOT"
 
 [CNI News thanks James Sutton for forwarding this story.]
 
 BEIJING (Reuter) -- China has opened a museum dedicated to the elusive "Big
 Foot" ape-man said to roam the Shennongjia Nature Reserve in central Hubei
 province, the Xinhua news agency said Sunday (June 2).
 
 The museum displays samples of reddish hair and plaster models of huge
 footprints collected over the years that are said to prove the existence of
 the creature, which local residents call the "Wild Man," Xinhua said.
 
 Opened last month, the museum also features documents and pictures of various
 scientific and exploratory operations mounted over the years to track down
 the creature.
 
 "All the materials in the museum are genuine," the agency quoted Chen Renlin,
 Chairman of the Shennongjia Cultural Research Society and self-proclaimed
 "Big Foot" expert, as saying.
 
 Since the 1950s, both scientists and amateurs have searched in vain for the
 creature in the Shennongjia valley, as well as for its cousin the Yeti in the
 Himalaya mountains.
 
 ========================================================
 
 5) WASHINGTON STATE IS JUST WILD ABOUT BIGFOOT
 
 [CNI News thanks our occasional columnist of the weird, Bufo Calvin, for the
 following.]
 
 by Bufo Calvin
 
 Readers may be aware of the ordinance in Skamania County, Washington, which
 serves to protect Bigfoot by making it a felony to commit "...premeditated,
 wilful (sic) and wanton slaying of any such creature..."  Well, a
 correspondent sent me a brief note about a county which went even further and
 protected bigfoot habitat. It took me months to track it all down (I didn't
 want to run with the story until I had the document in my hand), but I've got
 it!
 
 King County, Washington, lists "Bipedus giganticus (Sasquatch)" on the list
 of mammals "...observed during wetland field visits."
 
 You see, if your land is declared a wetland, it cannot be farmed because of
 the destruction of habitat. The chief of King County's Agriculture and
 Resource Land Section explained that the list included "...citizen
 observations and there's no judgment made about whether or not the
 observations were real or imagined." In essence, they don't call people liars
 who say they see a short-tailed weasel, so why should they call them liars if
 they say they see a Sasquatch?
 
 Interestingly, one can deduce that the list originally said "Bigfoot" [rather
 than Sasquatch]. It is located alphabetically between beaver and bobcat and
 is the only one out of alphabetical order.  Also, the symbol is BF, the only
 one composed of letters not appearing in the common name. I would guess they
 changed it to reduce the controversy.
 
 This is Bufo saying, "If =everything= seemed normal, that =would= be weird!
 
 #     #     #
 </pre>
 </font>
 
 <font face="Arial" size="-2">
 <hr>
 </font><center>
 <a href="cni0193.htm">Next: CNI News 19.3</a></center>
 
 </body>