<body>
 <p><a name="P2111_621192"></a>
 <sup>3 </sup>Lit. "from," i.e., which, <i>urged</i> by a heart which is that of a saint, even though on this occasion it failed, the prophet dared.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2114_621439"></a>
 <sup>4 </sup>Libratur.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2118_621550"></a>
 <sup>5 </sup>"Tarshish," Eng. ver.; perhaps Tartessus in Spain. For this question, and the "trustiness" of Joppa (now Jaffa) as a port, see Pusey on Jonah i. 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2120_621749"></a>
 <sup>6 </sup>Ejusdem per signa Dei.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2125_621957"></a>
 <sup>7 </sup>i.e., the cloud. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2148_622907"></a>
 <sup>8 </sup>Ge<i>nit</i>us (Oehler); <i>gemin</i>us (Migne) = "twin clamour," which is not inapt.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2151_623080"></a>
 <sup>9 </sup>M<i>a</i>ndare (Oehler). If this be the true reading, the rendering in the text seems to represent the meaning; for "mandare" with <i>an accusative</i>, in the sense of "to <i>bid</i> the tardy coils tighten the girth's noose," seems almost too gross a solecism for even so lax a Latinist as our present writer. Migne, however, reads m<i>u</i>ndare-<i>to "clear" the tardy coils,</i> i.e., probably from the wash and weed with which the gale was cloying them.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2193_625295"></a>
 <sup>10 </sup>Tunc Domini vates ingesta Spiritus infit. Of course it is a gross offence against quantity to make a genitive in "us" short, as the rendering in the text does. But a writer who makes the first syllable in "clamor" and the last syllable of gerunds in <i>do</i> short, would scarcely be likely to hesitate about taking similar liberties with a genitive of the so-called fourth declension. It is possible, it is true, to take "vates" and "Spiritus" as in apposition, and render, "Then the seer-Spirit of the Lord begins to utter words inspired," or "Then the seer-Spirit begins to utter the promptings of the Lord." But these renderings seem to accord less well with the ensuing words.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2196_626030"></a>
 <sup>11 </sup>Mundi.</p>
 
 </body>