<body>
 <p><a name="P2400_636766"></a>
 <sup>16 </sup><font face="SPIonic">Shgwr</font> in the LXX., "Zoar" in Eng. ver.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2402_636851"></a>
 <sup>17 </sup>"<i>Simul exoritur sol.</i>" But both the LXX. and the Eng. ver. say the sun <i>was risen</i> when Lot entered the city.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2410_637294"></a>
 <sup>18 </sup>So Oehler and Migne. But perhaps we may alter the pointing slightly, and read: -</p>
 
     <ul><ul><p>"Down pours a novel shower, sulphur mixt</p>
 
     <p>With blazing flames: the ether seethes: the air</p>
 
 </ul></ul><p>Crackles with liquid exust."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2422_637949"></a>
 <sup>19 </sup>The story of Phaëthon and his fate is told in Ov., <i>Met</i>., ii. 1-399, which may be compared with the present piece. His two sisters were transformed into white poplars, according to some; alders, according to others. See Virg., <i>Aen</i>., x. 190 sqq., <i>Ec</i>., vi. 62 sqq. His hal-brother (Cycnus or Cygnus) was turned into a swan: and the scene of these transformations is laid by Ovid on the banks of the Eridanus (the Po). But the fable is variously told; and it has been suggested that the groundwork of it is to be found rather in the still-standing of the sun recorded in Joshua.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2427_638656"></a>
 <sup>20 </sup>i.e., as she had been before in the case of Eve. See Gen. iii. 1 sqq.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2449_639615"></a>
 <sup>21 </sup>I have hazarded the bold conjecture - which I see others (Pamelius at all events) had hazarded before me - that "feritas" is used by our author as - "fertilitas." The word, of course, is very incorrectly formed etymologically; but etymology is not our author's <i>forte</i> apparently. It will also be seen that there is seemingly a gap at this point, or else some enormous mistake, in the mss. An attempt has been made (see Migne) to correct it, but not a very satisfactory one. For the common reading, which gives two lines,</p>
 
     <ul><ul><p>"Occidit illa prior feritas, quam prospiciens Loth</p>
 
     <p>Nullus arat frustra piceas fuligine glebas,"which are evidently entirely unconnected with one another, it is proposed to read,</p>
 
     <p>"Occidit illa prior feritas, quam prospiciens Loth,</p>
 
     <p><i>Deseruisse pii fertur commercia fratris.</i></p>
 
 </ul></ul><p>Nullas arat," etc.This use of "fratris" in a wide sense may be justified from Gen. xiii. 8 (to which passage, with its immediate context, there seems to be a reference, whether we adopt the proposed correction or no), and similar passages in Holy Writ. But the transition is still abrupt to the "nullus arat," etc.; and I prefer to leave the passage as it is, without attempting to supply the hiatus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2456_641065"></a>
 <sup>22 </sup>This use of "easely" as a dissyllable is justifiable from Spenser.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2465_641419"></a>
 <sup>23 </sup>This seems to be the sense, but the Latin is somewhat strange: "morsest maris illa quieti," i.e., illa (quies) maris quieti mors est. The opening lines of "Jonah" (above) should be compared with this passage and its context. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2478_642167"></a>
 <sup>24 </sup>Inque picem dat terrae haerere marinam.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2489_642623"></a>
 <sup>25 </sup>"Pressum" (Oehler); "pretium" (Migne): "it will yield a prize, namely, that," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2497_642996"></a>
 <sup>26 </sup>Luciferam.</p>
 
 </body>