<body>
 <p><a name="P3822_710090"></a>
 <sup>63 </sup>I have followed Oehler's "face" for the common "phase;" but what the meaning is I will not venture to decide. It may probably mean one of two things: (<i>a</i>) that Paul wrote <i>by torchlight</i>; (<i>b</i>) that the <i>light</i> which Paul holds forth in his life and writings, is a <i>torch</i> to show the Corinthians and others Christ.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3828_710549"></a>
 <sup>64 </sup>i.e., the legal passover, "image" or type of "the true Passover," Christ. See 1 Cor. v. 6-9.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3832_710785"></a>
 <sup>65 </sup>Abraham. See Gen. xxii. 1-19.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3834_710847"></a>
 <sup>66 </sup>Isaac, a pledge to Abraham of all God's other promises.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3835_710937"></a>
 <sup>67 </sup>Forte. I suppose this means out of the ordinary course of nature; but it is a strange word to use.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3842_711253"></a>
 <sup>68 </sup>Israel, wasted by the severities of their Egyptian captivity.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3845_711416"></a>
 <sup>69 </sup>"Mu<i>lta</i>;" but "mut<i>a</i>" = "mute" has been suggested, and is not inapt.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3857_711935"></a>
 <sup>70 </sup>I have given what appears to be a possible sense for these almost unintelligible lines. They run as follows in Oehler: -</p>
 
     <ul><ul><p>"Et reliqui magni reges sanctique prophetae,</p>
 
     <p>Non ignorantes certae promissa salutis,</p>
 
     <p>Ingentemque metu pleni transcendere legem,</p>
 
     <p>Venturam summae virtutis imagine molem,</p>
 
     <p>Inspectam e speculo celebrarunt ordine pascham."</p>
 
 </ul></ul><p>I rather incline to alter them somehow thus : -</p>
 
     <ul><ul><p>"Ingentemque metu plenis transcendere legem,</p>
 
     <p>Venturum in summae virtutis imagine, - solem</p>
 
     <p>Inspectum e speculo, - celebrarunt ordine pascham;"</p>
 
 </ul></ul><p>connecting these three lines with "non ignorantes," and rendering: -</p>
 
     <ul><ul><p>"Not ignorant of the good promises</p>
 
     <p>Of sure salvation; and that One would come,</p>
 
     <p>For such as filled are with godly fear</p>
 
     <p>The law to overstep, a mighty One,</p>
 
     <p>In Highest Virtue's image, - the Sun seen</p>
 
     <p>In mirror: - did in order celebrate</p>
 
     <p>The passover."</p>
 
 </ul></ul><p>That is, in brief, they all, in celebrating the type, looked forward to the Antitype to come. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3874_713552"></a>
 <sup>71 </sup>Immensus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3883_713891"></a>
 <sup>72 </sup>This, again, seems to be the meaning, unless the passage (which is not probable) be corrupt. The flesh, "foul" now with sin, is called the "stained image of the Lord," as having been originally in His image, but being now stained by guilt.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3886_714212"></a>
 <sup>73 </sup>Faith is called so, as being the reflection of divine reason.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3894_714615"></a>
 <sup>74 </sup>i.e., the praise of Christ Himself. See Matt. xi. 7-15, with the parallel passage, Luke vii. 24-30; comp. also John v. 33-35.</p>
 
 </body>