<body>
 <p><a name="P4409_740849"></a>
 <sup>164 </sup>"Ar<i>a</i>s" should probably be "ar<i>am</i>."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4411_740945"></a>
 <sup>165 </sup>See 2 Kings (in LXX. 4 Kings) i. 9-12.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4413_741042"></a>
 <sup>166 </sup>For "transgressas <i>et</i> avia fecit," I read "transgress<i>us</i> avia fecit," taking "transgressus" as a subst.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4417_741259"></a>
 <sup>167 </sup>Sortis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4419_741313"></a>
 <sup>168 </sup>Sortem.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4422_741400"></a>
 <sup>169 </sup>Our author has somewhat mistaken Elisha's mission apparently; for as there is a significant difference in the meaning of their respective names, so there is in their works: Elijah's miracles being rather miracles of judgment, it has been remarked; Elisha's, of mercy.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4429_741939"></a>
 <sup>170 </sup>The reference is to a famine in Elisha's days, which - 2 Kings (in LXX. 4 Kings) viii. i. - was to last <i>seven years</i>; whereas that for which Elijah prayed, as we learn in Jas. v. 17., lasted <i>three</i> and <i>six months</i>. But it is not said that Elisha <i>prayed for</i> that famine.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4430_742244"></a>
 <sup>171 </sup>We only read of <i>one</i> leprosy which Elisha cleansed - Naaman's. He <i>inflicted</i> leprosy on Gehazi, which was "to cleave to him and to his seed for ever."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4442_742815"></a>
 <sup>172 </sup>Praestata vi<i>am</i> vitae atque probata per ipsam est. I suspect we should read "vi<i>a</i>," quantity being of no importance with our author, and take "praetestata" as passive: "The way of life was testified before, and proved, through him."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4454_743478"></a>
 <sup>173 </sup>This seems to be the meaning, and the reference will then be to Jer. xxxiv. 8-22 (in LXX. xli. 8-22); but the punctuation both in Oehler and Migne makes nonsense, and I have therefore altered it.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4484_744819"></a>
 <sup>174 </sup>See the apocryphal "Susanna." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P4489_745046"></a>
 <sup>175 </sup>For "servat<i>is</i>que palam cunctis in pace quievit," which the edd. give, I suggest "servat<i>us</i>que," etc., and take "palam" for governing "cunctis."</p>
 
 </body>