<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Pacific</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="chant.htm">Chant Index</a> 
 <a href="ku20.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ku22.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">CHAPTER NINETEEN</h1>
 <h4 align="CENTER">The Flood</h4>
 <p>IN THE eleventh section a poetical prologue repeats the theme of the last three chants. The marriage union most approved in Hawaiian taboo chief families was that between brother and sister, called a <i>pi'o</i> or "arching over." The child of such a union had the highest possible rank, that of a "god," <i>akua</i>. The opening lines of the eleventh chant show La'ila'i "living among chiefs and married to her brother" (<i>noho lani a Pi'olani no</i>). From her high position she comes "bending down over Ki'i," that is, she takes a mere man as a husband, and from this union mankind is born, "the earth swarms with her offspring." The enumeration of some eight hundred pairs, man and wife, descended from Kamaha'ina, "first-born" son of La'ila'i and Ki'i, and Hali'a, La'ila'i's daughter by Kane, sufficiently testifies to the fertility of the match.</p>
 <p>At the close of the genealogical listing comes an eloquent passage depicting, on the face of it, a flood of waters rising silently over the land to the inhabited places. These lines offer an excellent and thoroughly characteristic example of poetic symbolism. "The whole means that Ki'i slept with her," summarized Ho'olapa, thus bringing the entire declamatory effusion down to a most explicit conclusion. Expressions such as <i>Kaui-ka-wa</i>, explained as the position of the legs in a bow as in swimming, <i>Lele ka ihe</i> and <i>Kaui-ka-hoe</i>, whose exact meaning Ho'olapa passed over, are recognized terms for positions taken in the act of mating, hence are capitalized in the text.</p>
 <p>There follows a reference to "the cock born on the back</p>
 <p>{p. 108}</p>
 <p>of Wakea," an event which spells the end of the genealogy of the long-lived man of the eighth chant. His genealogy becomes extinct with the name of Po-la'a, "Sacred-night." The allusion to the "cock," to be met more than once in the course of the Kumulipo chant, is to a great chief born into the family from an alien source, whose branch becomes itself the main stock from which subsequent ruling chiefs on the family line count descent. Further trace of the old stock who count descent from the "first chief dwelling in cold uplands" is lost, "vanished into the passing night."</p>
 <p>The translation of the poetic passages in this section must necessarily be idiomatic. <i>Noho lani</i> means "living among chiefs," as <i>noho kanaka</i> implies "living as a woman" among the people. Legend is full of such romantic situations enjoyed by both chiefs and chiefesses when the restrictions of court life became irksome. The closing lines are particularly difficult; some must go untranslated as I was unable to keep the flood motive, where double meanings were involved, consistent with the text. Bastian (p. 154) struggled with the same difficulty, although probably unaware of the inner meaning. The <i>kua</i> is the woman's house of a family setup. <i>Naneue</i> may imply "withdrawing to a private place." Both <i>konikoni</i> and <i>hi'a</i> refer to "ardent desire" as applied to the emotions, and <i>hi'a</i> to the art of fire-making, a well known sex symbol.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER"><a name="chant11">CHANT ELEVEN</a></h3>
 <p>She was a woman living among chiefs and married to her brother<br>
 She was a restless woman living among chiefs<br>
 710. She lived above and came bending down over Ki'i<br>
 The earth swarmed with her offspring<br>
 Born was Kamaha'ina [First-born], a male<br>
 Born was Kamamule, her younger born<br>
 Born was Kamamainau, her middle one<br>
 715. Born was Kamakulua her little one, a girl<br>
 Kamaha'ina lived as husband to Hali['a]<br>
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . </p>
 <p>{p. 109}</p>
 <p>[There follow some four hundred pairs, man and wife, to lines 1332-33, where a pair of brothers are named, Ali'ihonupu'u the elder, Opu'upu'u the younger. They seem to have a common wife named Ka-ea-honu, a name connecting her with the species of turtle from which the precious tortoise shell for ornament is obtained. From this point four hundred more pairs carry the genealogy of the elder line to Po-la'a. That of the younger appears in the next section.]</p>
 <p>1530. Born was Pola'a<br>
 Born was rough weather, born the current<br>
 Born the booming of the sea, the breaking of foam<br>
 Born the roaring, advancing, and receding of waves, the<br>
 rumbling sound, the earthquake<br>
 The sea rages, rises over the beach<br>
 1534. Rises silently to the inhabited places<br>
 Rises gradually up over the land . . .<br>
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>
 Born is Po-elua [Second-night] on the lineage of Wakea<br>
 1540. Born is the stormy night<br>
 Born the night of plenty<br>
 Born is the cock on the back of Wakea<br>
 Ended is [the line of] the first chief of the dim past dwelling in cold uplands<br>
 Dead is the current sweeping in from the navel of the earth: that was a warrior wave<br>
 1545. Many who came vanished, lost in the passing night</p>
 <p>{p. 110}</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ku22.htm">Next: The Woman Who Bore Children through the Brain</a></center>
 </body>