<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Pacific</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="chant.htm">Chant Index</a> 
 <a href="ku32.htm">Previous</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">APPENDIX III</h1>
 <h3 align="CENTER">References</h3>
 <p align="CENTER">a) KUMULIPO BIBLIOGRAPHY</p>
 <p align="CENTER">PRINTED SOURCES</p>
 <p>1. BASTIAN, ADOLF. Die heilige Sage der Polynesier: <i>Cosmogonie und Theogonie</i>. Leipzig, 1881.</p>
 <p>2. <i>He pule ho'ola'a ali'i. He Kumulipo no Ka-I-amamao a ia Alapai-wahine</i> ("A Prayer for the Consecration of a Chief, a Kumulipo for Ka-I-amamao and [Passed on] to the Woman Alapai").</p>
 <p>3. <i>An Account of the Creation of the World According to Hawaiian Tradition. Translated from original manuscripts preserved exclusively in her majesty's family, by Liliuokalani of Hawaii. Prayer of Dedication. The Creation for Ka I i mamao, from him to his daughter Alapai wahine, Liliuokalani's great grandmother. Composed by Keaulumoku in 1700 and translated by Liliuokalani during her imprisonment in 1895 at Iolani Palace and afterward at Washington Place, Honolulu; was completed in Washington, D.C., May 20, 1897</i>. Boston, 1897.</p>
 <p>4. KUKAHI, JOSEPH L. <i>He kumulipo, he moolelo Hawaii</i>, pp. 1-98. Honolulu, 1902. (In two parts, pamphlet.)</p>
 <p>5. "The Kumulipo: Legendary Story of Creation" [originally written in the Hawaiian language by JOSEPH KUKAHI] [<i>Ke Kumulipo: Moolelo o ka hanaia ana o Hawaii Nei</i>], <i>Aloha: An English and Hawaiian Magazine</i>, Vol. I (June 15-September I). Honolulu, 1928.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">MANUSCRIPT SOURCES PRESERVED IN HAWAIIAN MANUSCRIPT COLLECTION OF BISHOP MUSEUM, HONOLULU</p>
 <p>6. He Pule Heiau. He Kumu Lipo no Alapai Wahine ("A Temple Prayer. A Beginning in Deep Darkness for the Woman Alapai"). Haw. MS Col. LI<sup>2</sup>.</p>
 <p>{p. 254}</p>
 <p>7. No Kumulipo no ("Concerning the Kumulipo"). Haw. MS Col. LI.</p>
 <p>8. POEPOE, J. M. He mele kuauhau Kumulipo ("A Genealogical Chant of Kumulipo"). (To line 442 with comments upon "Kamokuiki's Genealogy of Kumulipo.") Haw. MS Col. LI<sup>3</sup>.</p>
 <p>9. ROCK, DR. JOSEPH. English translation of Bastian's translation and notes. Haw. MS Col.</p>
 <p>10. Helps in Studying the Kumulipo Chant. Haw. MS Col. LI<sup>4</sup>.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">DISCUSSION</p>
 <p>11. ACHELIS, TH. <i>Über Mythologie und Cultus von Hawaii: Sonder-Ausdruck aus dem "Ausland."</i> Braunschweig, 1895. (Pamphlet of 82 pp.)</p>
 <p>12. TREGEAR, EDWARD. "The 'Creation Song' of Hawaii," <i>Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, IX (Wellington, N.Z., 1900), 38-46.</p>
 <p>13. CURTIS, MATTOON M. "Ancient Hawaiian Theories as to the Nature and Origin of Things," <i>Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1919</i> (Honolulu, 1918), pp. 79-93.</p>
 <p>14. STOKES, JOHN F. G. "An Evaluation of Early Genealogies Used for Polynesian History," <i>Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, XXXIX (Wellington, 1930), 7-13.</p>
 <p>15. BUCK, PETER (TE RANGI HIROA). <i>Vikings of the Pacific</i>, pp. 242-48. New York, 1938.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">b) LIST OF REFERENCES</p>
 <p>ALEXANDER, MARY C. William Patterson Alexander. New Haven, 1881.</p>
 <p>ANDREWS, LORRIN. <i>A Dictionary of the Hawaiian Language</i>. Honolulu, 1865.</p>
 <p>BECKWITH, MARTHA W. <i>Hawaiian Mythology</i>. New Haven, 1940.</p>
 <p>---. "Hawaiian Shark Aumakua," <i>American Anthropologist</i>, XIX (Lancaster, Pa., 1917), 503-17.</p>
 <p>---. "Polynesian Story Composition," <i>Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, LIII (Wellington, 1944), 177-203.</p>
 <p>---. <i>The Hawaiian Romance of Laieikawai, by S. N. Haleole</i>. Original publication, Honolulu, 1863. Translation, Bureau of American Ethnology Report 33. Washington, 1919.</p>
 <p>---. See KEPELINO.</p>
 <p>BUCK, SIR PETER (TE RANGI HIROA) <i>Ethnology of Mangareva</i> (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 157). Honolulu, 1938.</p>
 <p>{p. 255}</p>
 <p>---. <i>Mangaian Society</i> (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 122.) Honolulu, 1934.</p>
 <p>---. <i>Vikings of the Sunrise</i>. New York, 1934.</p>
 <p>ELLIS, WILLIAM. <i>Polynesian Researches during a Residence of Nearly Eight Years in the Society and Sandwich Islands</i>. 2d ed. 4 vols. London, 1831-39.</p>
 <p>EMERSON, JOSEPH S. <i>The Lesser Hawaiian Gods</i>. ("Papers of the Hawaiian Historical Society," No. 2.) Honolulu, 1892.</p>
 <p>EMERSON, DR. N. B. <i>Unwritten Literature of Hawaii: Sacred Songs of the Hula</i> (Bureau of American Ethnology Bull, 38.) Washington, 1909.</p>
 <p>---. <i>See</i> MALO.</p>
 <p>EMORY, KENNETH F. "The Tahitian Account of Creation, by Mare," <i>Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, XLVII (Wellington, 1938), 45-60.</p>
 <p>---. "The Tuamotuan Creation Chant," <i>ibid.</i>, XLVIII (Wellington, 1939), 1-29.</p>
 <p>---. "Tuamotuan Concepts of Creation," <i>ibid.</i>, XLIX (Wellington , 1940), 69-136.</p>
 <p>---. "Additional Illustrations of Tuamotuan Creation." <i>ibid.</i>, LII (Wellington, 1943), 19-21.</p>
 <p>FIRTH, RAYMOND. "Marriage and the Classificatory System of Relationships," <i>Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain</i>, LX (London, 1930), 235-68.</p>
 <p>---. <i>We the Tikopia</i>: A Sociological Study of Kinship in Primitive Polynesia. London, 1936.</p>
 <p>---. <i>The Work of the Gods in Tikopia</i>. ("Monographs On Social Anthropology published for the London School of Economics and Political Science.") London, 1940.</p>
 <p>FORNANDER, ABRAHAM. <i>An Account of the Polynesian Race</i>. 3 Vols. London, 1878-85.</p>
 <p>---. <i>Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folklore</i>. Translated by JOHN WISE; edited by THOMAS G. THRUM. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum, "Memoirs," Nos. 4, 5, 6.) Honolulu, 1916-19.</p>
 <p>GILL, REV. WILLIAM WYATT. <i>Myths and Songs from the South Pacific</i>. London, 1876.</p>
 <p>GREEN, LAURA. <i>Folk-Tales from Hawaii</i>. Honolulu, 1928.</p>
 <p>GREEN, LAURA, and PUKUI <i>Legend of Kawelo and Other Hawaiian Folk Tales</i>. Honolulu, 1930.</p>
 <p>GREY, SIR GEORGE. <i>Polynesian Mythology and Ancient Traditional</i></p>
 <p>History of the New Zealand Race, as Furnished by Their Chiefs and ... (Priests). 2d ed. Auckland, 1885.</p>
 <p>{p. 256}</p>
 <p>HANDY, EDWARD S. C. <i>Marquesan Native Culture</i>. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 9.) Honolulu, 1923.</p>
 <p>HANDY, EDWARD S. C., and PUKUI. <i>The Hawaiian Planter</i>, Vol. I. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 161.) Honolulu, 1940.</p>
 <p>HENRY, TEUIRA. <i>Ancient Tahiti, Based on Material Recorded by J. M. Orsmond</i>. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 48.) Honolulu, 1928.</p>
 <p>HOBBS, JEAN. <i>Hawaii: A Pageant of the Soil</i>. Palo Alto, Calif., 1935.</p>
 <i></i><p>Ka Moolelo Hawaii ("Hawaiian Traditions"). Written by Hawaiian students and corrected by one of the instructors, adding dates and occasionally sentences and paragraphs. Lahainaluna, 1838.</p>
 <p>KAMAKAU, SAMUEL M. "Moolelo Hawaii" ("Hawaiian Traditions"), <i>Ke Au Okoa</i> (newspaper). Honolulu, 1869-71. Translation in manuscript, Bishop Museum collection.</p>
 <p>KEPELINO. <i>Traditions of Hawaii</i>. Edited by MARTHA WARREN BECKWITH. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 95). Honolulu, 1932.</p>
 <p>KING, CAPTAIN JAMES. <i>A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean under the Direction of Captains Cook, Clerk, and Gore, in his Majesty's Ships the Resolution and Discovery ... in the Years 1776, 1777, 1778, 1779</i>, Vol. III. 3 vols. London, 1784.</p>
 <p>KRÄMER, DR. AUGUSTIN. <i>Die Samoan-Inseln</i>, Vol. I. 2 Vols. Stuttgart, 1902.</p>
 <p>LUOMALA, KATHERINE. <i>Maui-of-a-Thousand-Tricks: His Oceanic and European Biographers</i>. (Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum Bull. 198.) Honolulu, 1949.</p>
 <p>LYONS, CURTIS. "The Song of Kualii, of Hawaii, Sandwich Islands," Journal of the Polynesian Society, II (Wellington, 1893), 163-78.</p>
 <p>MAKEMSON, MAUD. <i>The Morning Star Rises</i>. New Haven, 1941.</p>
 <p>MALO, DAVID. <i>Hawaiian Antiquities (Moolelo Hawaii)</i>. Translated from the Hawaiian by DR. N. B. EMERSON; edited by W. D. ALEXANDER. Honolulu, 1903.</p>
 <p>MÜHLMANN, WILHELM E. "Die Geheime Gesellschaft der Arioi...," <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, Vol. XXXII, Suppl. Leyden, 1932.</p>
 <p>PARKER, REV. HENRY. <i>A Dictionary of the Hawaiian Language by Lorrin Andrews</i>. Revised. Honolulu, 1922.</p>
 <p>PUKUI, MARY KAWENA. "Games of My Hawaiian Childhood," <i>California Folklore Quarterly</i>, II (Berkeley, 1943), 205-20.</p>
 <p>---. <i>Ke Awa Lau o Pu'uloa</i> ("The Many-harbored Sea of</p>
 <p>{p. 257}</p>
 <p>Pu'uloa"), pp. 56-62. (Hawaiian Historical Society Reports, No. 52.) Honolulu, 1943.</p>
 <p>---. "Songs of Old Kau," <i>Journal of American Folklore</i>, LXII (1949), 247-58.</p>
 <p>---. See GREEN AND HANDY.</p>
 <p>RIVERS, W. H. R. <i>The History of Melanesian Society</i>. 2 vols. Cambridge, England, 1914.</p>
 <p>SMITH, S. PERCY. <i>The Lore of the Whare-wananga: Teaching of the Maori College on Religion, Cosmogony, and History, Part I: Te Kauwae-runga or "Things Celestial."</i> ("Memoirs of the Polynesian Society," Vol. III) New Plymouth, N.Z., 1913.</p>
 <p>---."Some Paumotu Chants," <i>Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, XII (Wellington, 1913), 221-42.</p>
 <p>STOKES, JOHN F. G. "An Evaluation of Genealogies Used for Early Hawaiian History," <i>Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, XXXIX (Wellington, 1930), 1-42.</p>
 <p>---. <i>Index to "The Polynesian Race" by Abraham Fornander</i>. Honolulu, 1909.</p>
 <p>THRUM, THOMAS G. <i>More Hawaiian Folk Tales: A Collection of Native Legends and Traditions</i>. Chicago, 1923.</p>
 <p>---. See FORNANDER</p>
 <p>TITCOMB, MARGARET. "Kava in Hawaii," <i>Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, LVII (Wellington, 1948), 105-71.</p>
 <p>TREGEAR, EDWARD. <i>A Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary</i>. Wellington, 1887.</p>
 <p>WHITE, JOHN. <i>The Ancient History of the Maori: His Mythology and Traditions</i>. 6 vols. Wellington, 1887.</p></body>