<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry004.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry006.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO III.: THE ARGUMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 The hermit thus with watchful heed<br>
 Received the poem's pregnant seed,<br>
 And looked with eager thought around<br>
 If fuller knowledge might be found.<br>
       <br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_9"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 9</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 His lips with water first bedewed,  <a name="fr_50"></a><a href="#fn_50"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 He sate, in reverent attitude<br>
 On holy grass,  <a name="fr_51"></a><a href="#fn_51"><font size="1">2</font></a> the points all bent<br>
 Together toward the orient;  <a name="fr_52"></a><a href="#fn_52"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 And thus in meditation he<br>
 Entered the path of poesy.<br>
 Then clearly, through his virtue's might,<br>
 All lay discovered to his sight,<br>
 Whate'er befell, through all their life,<br>
 Ráma, his brother, and his wife:<br>
 And Das'aratha and each queen<br>
 At every time, in every scene:<br>
 His people too, of every sort;<br>
 The nobles of his princely court:<br>
 Whate'er was said, whate'er decreed,<br>
 Each time they sate each plan and deed:<br>
 For holy thought and fervent rite<br>
 Had so refined his keener sight<br>
 That by his sanctity his view<br>
 The present, past, and future knew,<br>
 And he with mental eye could grasp,<br>
 Like fruit within his fingers clasp,<br>
 The life of Ráma, great and good,<br>
 Roaming with Sitá in the wood.<br>
 He told, with secret piercing eyes,<br>
 The tale of Ráma's high emprise.<br>
 Each listening ear that shall entice,<br>
 A sea of pearls of highest price.<br>
 Thus good Válmíki, sage divine,<br>
 Rehearsed the tale of Raghu's line,<br>
 As Nárad, heavenly saint, before<br>
 Had traced the story's outline o'er.<br>
 He sang of Ráma's princely birth,<br>
 His kindness and heroic worth;<br>
 His love for all, his patient youth,<br>
 His gentleness and constant truth,<br>
 And many a tale and legend old<br>
 By holy Vis'vámitra told.<br>
 How Janak's child he wooed and won,<br>
 Aud broke the bow that bent to none.<br>
 How he with every virtue fraught<br>
 His namesake Ráma  <a name="fr_53"></a><a href="#fn_53"><font size="1">4</font></a> met and fought.<br>
 The choice of Ráma for the throne;<br>
 The malice by Kalseyí shown,<br>
 Whose evil counsel marred the plan<br>
 And drove him forth a banisht man.<br>
 How the king grieved and groaned,and cried,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And swooned away and pining died.<br>
 The subjects' woe when thus bereft;<br>
 And how the following crowds he left:<br>
 With Guha talked, and firmly stern<br>
 Ordered his driver to return.<br>
 How Gangá's farther shore he gained;<br>
 By Bharadvája entertained,<br>
 By whose advice be journeyed still<br>
 And came to Chitrakúta's hill.<br>
 How there he dwelt and built a cot;<br>
 How Bharat journeyed to the spot;<br>
 His earnest supplication made;<br>
 Drink-offerings to their father paid;<br>
 The sandals given by Ráma's hand,<br>
 As emblems of his right to stand:<br>
 How from his presence Bharat went<br>
 And years in Nandigráma spent.<br>
 How Ráma entered Dandak wood<br>
 And in Sutíkhna's presence stood.<br>
 The favour Anasúyá showed,<br>
 The wondrous balsam she bestowed.<br>
 How Sárabhangá's dwelling place<br>
 They sought; saw Indra face to face;<br>
 The meeting with Agastya gained;<br>
 The heavenly bow from him obtained.<br>
 How Ráma with Virádha met;<br>
 Their home in Panchavata set.<br>
 How S'úrpanakhá underwent<br>
 The mockery and disfigurement.<br>
 Of Trígirá's and Khara's fall,<br>
 Of Rávan roused at vengeance call,<br>
 Máricha doomed, without escape;<br>
 The fair Videhan  <a name="fr_54"></a><a href="#fn_54"><font size="1">1b</font></a> lady's rape.<br>
 How Ráma wept and raved in vain,<br>
 And how the Vulture-king was slain.<br>
 How Ráma fierce Kabandha slew;<br>
 Then to the side of Pampá drew.<br>
 Met Hanumán, and her whose vows<br>
 Were kept beneath the greenwood boughs.<br>
 How Raghu's son the lofty-souled,<br>
 On Pampá's bank wept uncontrolled,<br>
 Then journeyed, Rishyamúk to reach,<br>
 And of Sugríva then had speech.<br>
 The friendship made, which both had sought:<br>
 How Báli and Sugríva fought.<br>
 How Báli in the strife was slain,<br>
 And how Sugríva came to reign.<br>
 The treaty, Tára's wild lament;<br>
 The rainy nights in watching spent.<br>
 The wrath of Raghu's lion son;<br>
 The gathering of the hosts in one.<br>
 The sending of the spies about,<br>
 And all the regions pointed out.<br>
 The ring by Ráma's hand bestowed;<br>
 The cave wherein the bear abode.<br>
 The fast proposed, their lives to end;<br>
 Sampati gained to be their friend.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_10"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 10</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The scaling of the hill, the leap<br>
 Of Hanumán across the deep.<br>
 Ocean's command that bade them seek<br>
 Maináka of the lofty peak.<br>
 The death of Sinhiká, the sight<br>
 Of Lanká with her palace bright<br>
 How Hanuman stole in at eve;<br>
 His plan the giants to deceive.<br>
 How through the square he made his way<br>
 To chambers where the women lay,<br>
 Within the As'oka garden came<br>
 And there found Ráma's captive dame,<br>
 His colloquy with her he sought,<br>
 And giving of the ring he brought.<br>
 How Sítá gave a gem o'erjoyed;<br>
 How Hanumán the grove destroyed,<br>
 How giantesses trembling fled,<br>
 And servant fiends were smitten dead.<br>
 How Hanumán was seized; their ire<br>
 When Lanká blazed with hostile fire.<br>
 His leap across the sea once more;<br>
 The eating of the honey store,<br>
 How Ráma he consoled, and how<br>
 He showed the gem from Sítá's brow,<br>
 With Ocean, Ráma's interview;<br>
 The bridge that Nala o'er it threw.<br>
 The crossing, and the sitting down<br>
 At night round Lanká's royal town.<br>
 The treaty with Vibhíshan made:<br>
 The plan for Rávan's slaughter laid.<br>
 How Kumbhakarna in his pride<br>
 And Meghanáda fought and died.<br>
 How Rávan in the fight was slain,<br>
 And captive Sítá brought again.<br>
 Vibhíshan set upon the throne;<br>
 The flying chariot Pushpak shown.<br>
 How Brahmá and the Gods appeared,<br>
 And Sítá's doubted honour cleared.<br>
 How In the flying car they rode<br>
 To Bháradvája's cabin abode,<br>
 The Wind-God's son sent on afar;<br>
 How Bharat met the flying car.<br>
 How Ráma then was king ordained;<br>
 The legions their discharge obtained.<br>
 How Ráma cast his queen away;<br>
 How grew the people's love each day.<br>
 Thus did the saint Válmíki tell<br>
 Whate'er in Ráma's life befell,<br>
 And in the closing verse all<br>
 That yet to come will once befall<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_48"></a><a href="ry004.htm#fr_48">8:1b</a>  Sitá, daughter of Janak king of Mithilá.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_49"></a><a href="ry004.htm#fr_49">8:2b</a>  'I congratulate myself,' says Schlegel
 in the preface to his, alas, unfinished edition
 of the Rámáyan, 'that, by the favour
 of the Supreme Deity, I have been allowed
 to begin so great a work; I glory and
 make my boast that I too after so many
 ages have helped to confirm that ancient
 oracle declared to Válmíki by the Father
 of Gods and men:
 
 </p><p>
 Dum stabunt montes, campis dum flumina current,
 Usque tuum toto carmen, celebrabitur orbe.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_50"></a><a href="ry005.htm#fr_50">9:1</a>  'The sipping of water is a requisite
 introduction of all rites: without it, says
 the Sámha Purana, all acts of religion
 are vain.' COLEBROOKE.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_51"></a><a href="ry005.htm#fr_51">9:2</a>  The <i>darhha</i> or <i>kus'a</i> (Pea cynosuroides),
 a kind of grass used in sacrifice by the
 Hindus as <i>cerbena</i> was by the Romans.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_52"></a><a href="ry005.htm#fr_52">9:3</a>  The direction in which the grass
 hould be placed upon the ground as a
 seat for the Gods, on occasion of offerings
 made to them.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_53"></a><a href="ry005.htm#fr_53">9:4</a>  Parasúráma or Ráma with the Axe.
 See Canto LXXIV.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_54"></a><a href="ry005.htm#fr_54">9:1b</a>  Sitá. Videha was the country of which
 Mithilá was the capital.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry006.htm">Next: Canto IV.: The Rhapsodists.</a></center>
 </body>