<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry006.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry008.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO V.: AYODHYÁ</h3>
 <p>
     'Ikshváku's sons from days of old<br>
 Were ever brave and mighty-souled.<br>
 The land their arms had made their own<br>
 Was bounded by the sea alone.<br>
 Their holy works have won them praise,<br>
 Through countless years, from Manu's days.<br>
 Their ancient sire was Sagar, he<br>
 Whose high command dug out the sea:  <a name="fr_60"></a><a href="#fn_60"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 With sixty thousand sons to throng<br>
 Around him as he marched along.<br>
 From them this glorious tale proceeds;<br>
 The great Rámáyan tells their deeds.<br>
 This noble song whose lines contain,<br>
 Lessons of duty, love, and gain,<br>
 We two will now at length recite,<br>
 While good men listen with delight.<br>
     On Sarjú's  <a name="fr_61"></a><a href="#fn_61"><font size="1">2b</font></a> bank, of ample size,<br>
 The happy realm of Kos'al lies,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_12"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 12</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With fertile length of fair champaign<br>
 And flocks and herds and wealth of grain.<br>
 There, famous in her old renown,<br>
 Ayodhyá <a name="fr_62"></a><a href="#fn_62"><font size="1">1</font></a> stands, the royal town,<br>
 In bygone ages built and planned<br>
 By sainted Manu's <a name="fr_63"></a><a href="#fn_63"><font size="1">2</font></a> princely hand.<br>
 Imperial seat! her walls extend<br>
 Twelve measured leagues from end to end,<br>
 And three in width from side to side,<br>
 With square and palace beautified.<br>
 Her gates at even distance stand;<br>
 Her ample roads are wisely planned.<br>
 Right glorious is her royal street<br>
 Where streams allay the dust and heat.<br>
 On level ground in even row<br>
 Her houses rise in goodly show:<br>
 Terrace and palace, arch and gate<br>
 The queenly city decorate.<br>
 High are her ramparts, strong and vast,<br>
 By ways at even distance passed,<br>
 With circling moat, both deep and wide,<br>
 And store of weapons fortified.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 King Das'aratha, lofty-souled,<br>
 That city guarded and controlled,<br>
 With towering Sál trees belted round, <a name="fr_64"></a><a href="#fn_64"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 And many a grove and pleasure ground,<br>
 As royal Indra, throned on high,<br>
 Rules his fair city in the sky. <a name="fr_65"></a><a href="#fn_65"><font size="1">4</font></a><br>
 She seems a painted city, fair<br>
 With chess-board line and even square. <a name="fr_66"></a><a href="#fn_66"><font size="1">5</font></a><br>
 And cool boughs shade the lovely lake<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Where weary men their thirst may slake.<br>
 There gilded chariots gleam and shine,<br>
 And stately piles the Gods enshrine.<br>
 There gay sleek people ever throng<br>
 To festival and dance and song.<br>
 A mine is she of gems and sheen,<br>
 The darling home of Fortune's Queen.<br>
 With noblest sort of drink and meat,<br>
 The fairest rice and golden wheat,<br>
 And fragrant with the chaplet's scent<br>
 With holy oil and incense blent.<br>
 With many an elephant and steed,<br>
 And wains for draught and cars for speed.<br>
 With envoys sent by distant kings,<br>
 And merchants with their precious things,<br>
 With banners o'er her roofs that play,<br>
 And weapons that a hundred slay; <a name="fr_67"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fn_67"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 All warlike engines framed by man,<br>
 And every class of artisan.<br>
 A city rich beyond compare<br>
 With bards and minstrels gathered there,<br>
 And men and damsels who entrance<br>
 The soul with play and song and dance.<br>
 In every street is heard the lute,<br>
 The drum, the tabret, and the flute,<br>
 The Veda chanted soft and low,<br>
 The ringing of the archer's bow;<br>
 With bands of godlike heroes skilled<br>
 In every warlike weapon, filled,<br>
 And kept by warriors from the foe,<br>
 As Nágas guard their home below. <a name="fr_68"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fn_68"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 There wisest Bráhmans evermore<br>
     The flame of worship feed,<br>
 And versed in all the Vedas' lore,<br>
     Their lives of virtue lead.<br>
 Truthful and pure, they freely give;<br>
     They keep each sense controlled,<br>
 And in their holy fervour live<br>
     Like the great saints of old.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_60"></a><a href="ry007.htm#fr_60">11:1b</a>  This exploit is related in Canto XI.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_61"></a><a href="ry007.htm#fr_61">11:2b</a>  The Sarjú or Ghaghra, anciently called Sarayú, rises in the Himalayas, and
 after flowing through the province of
 Oudb, falls into the Gauges.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_62"></a><a href="ry007.htm#fr_62">12:1</a>  The ruins of the ancient capital of
 Rama and the Children of the Sun may
 still be traced in the present Ajudhyá near
 Fyzabad. Ajudhyá is the Jerusalem or
 Mecca of the Hindus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_63"></a><a href="ry007.htm#fr_63">12:2</a>  A legislator and saint, the son of
 Brahmá or a personification of Brahmá
 himself, the creator of the world, and
 progenitor of mankind. Derived from
 the root <i>man</i> to think, the word means
 originally <i>man</i>, the thinker, and is found
 in this sense in the Rig-veda.
 
 </p><p>
 Manu as a legislator is identified with
 the Cretan Minos, as progenitor of mankind
 with the German Mannus: 'Celebrant
 carminibus antiquis, quod unum
 apud illos memoriae et annalium genus
 est, Tuisconem deum terra editum, et
 fllium Mannum, originem gentis conditoresque.'
 TACITUS, <i>Germania</i>, Cap. II.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_64"></a><a href="ry007.htm#fr_64">12:3</a>  The Sál (Shorea Robusta) is a valuable
 timber tree of considerable height.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_65"></a><a href="ry007.htm#fr_65">12:4</a>  The city of Indra is called Amarávati
 or Home of the Immortals.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_66"></a><a href="ry007.htm#fr_66">12:5</a>  Schlegel thinks that this refers to the
 marble of different colours with which
 the houses were adorned. It seems more
 natural to understand it as implying the
 regularity of the streets and houses.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry008.htm">Next: Canto VI.: The King.</a></center>
 </body>