<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry015.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry017.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIV.: RÁVAN DOOMED.</h3>
 <p>
 The saint, well read in holy lore,<br>
 Pondered awhile his answer o'er.<br>
 And thus again addressed the king,<br>
 His wandering thoughts regathering:<br>
 'Another rite will I begin<br>
 Which shall the sons thou cravest win,<br>
 Where all things shall be duly sped<br>
 And first Atharva texts be read.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then by Vibhándak's gentle son<br>
 Was that high sacrifice begun,<br>
 The king's advantage seeking still<br>
 And zealous to perform his will.<br>
 Now all the Gods had gathered there,<br>
 Each one for his allotted share:<br>
 Brahmá, the ruler of the sky,<br>
 Sthanu, Náráyan, Lord most high<br>
 And holy Indra men might view<br>
 With Maruts  <a name="fr_104"></a><a href="#fn_104"><font size="1">1</font></a> for his retinue;<br>
 The heavenly chorister, and saint,<br>
 And spirit pure from earthly taint,<br>
 With one accord had sought the place<br>
 The high-souled monarch's rite to grace.<br>
 Then to the Gods who came to take<br>
 Their proper share the hermit spake:<br>
 'For you has Das'aratha slain<br>
 The votive steed, a son to gain;<br>
 Stern penance-rites the king has tried,<br>
 And in firm faith on you relied,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 And now with undiminished care<br>
 A second rite would fain prepare.<br>
 But, O ye Gods, consent to grant<br>
 The longing of your supplicant.<br>
 For him beseeching hands I lift,<br>
 And pray you all to grant the gift,<br>
 That four fair sons of high renown<br>
 The offerings of the king may crown.'<br>
 They to the hermit's son replied:<br>
 'His longing shall be gratified.<br>
 For, Bráhman, in most high degree<br>
 We love the king and honour thee.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 These words the Gods in answer said,<br>
 And vanished thence by Indra led.<br>
 Thus to the Lord, the worlds who made,<br>
 The Immortals all assembled prayed:<br>
 'O Brahmá, mighty by thy grace,<br>
 Rávan, who rules the giant race,<br>
 Torments us in his senseless pride,<br>
 And penance-loving saints beside.<br>
 For thou well pleased in days of old<br>
 Gavest the boon that makes him bold,<br>
 That God nor demon e'er should kill<br>
 His charmed life, for so thy will.<br>
 We, honouring that high behest,<br>
 Bear all his rage though sore distressed.<br>
 That lord of giants fierce and fell<br>
 Scourges the earth and heaven and hell.<br>
 Mad with thy boon, his impious rage<br>
 Smites saint and bard and God and sage.<br>
 The sun himself withholds his glow.<br>
 The wind in fear forbears to blow;<br>
 The fire restrains his wonted heat<br>
 Where stand the dreaded Rávan's feet,<br>
 And, necklaced with the wandering ware,<br>
 The sea before him fears to rave.<br>
 Kuvera's self in sad defeat<br>
 Is driven from his blissful seat.<br>
 We see, we feel the giant's might.<br>
 And woe comes o'er us and affright.<br>
 Tc thee, O Lord, thy suppliants pray<br>
 To find some cure this plague to stay.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus by the gathered Gods addressed<br>
 He pondered in his secret breast,<br>
 And said: 'One only way I find<br>
 To slay this fiend of evil mind.<br>
 He prayed me once his life to guard<br>
 From demon, God, and heavenly bard,<br>
 And spirits of the earth and air,<br>
 And I consenting heard his prayer.<br>
 But the proud giant in Inn scorn<br>
 Recked not of man of woman born.<br>
 None else may take his life away,<br>
 But only man the fiend may slay.'<br>
 The Gods, with Indra at their head,<br>
 Rejoiced to hear the words he said.<br>
 Then crowned with glory like a flame,<br>
 Lord Vishnu to the council came;<br>
 His hands shell, mace, and discus bore,<br>
 Aud saffron were the robes he wore.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_26"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 26</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Riding his eagle through the crowd,<br>
 As the sun rides upon a cloud,<br>
 With bracelets of fine gold, he came<br>
 Loud welcomed by the Gods' acclaim.<br>
 His praise they sang with one consent,<br>
 And cried, in lowly reverence bent:<br>
 'O Lord whose hand fierce Madhu <a name="fr_105"></a><a href="#fn_105"><font size="1">1</font></a> slew,<br>
 Be thou our refuge, firm and true;<br>
 Friend of the suffering worlds art thou,<br>
 We pray thee help thy suppliants now.'<br>
 Then Vishnu spake: 'Ye Gods, declare,<br>
 What may I do to grant your prayer?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'King Das'aratha,' thus cried they,<br>
 'Fervent in penance many a day,<br>
 The sacrificial steed has slain,<br>
 Longing for sons, but all in vain.<br>
 Now, at the cry of us forlorn,<br>
 Incarnate as his seed be born.<br>
 Three queens has he: each lovely dame<br>
 Like Beauty, Modesty, or Fame.<br>
 Divide thyself in four, and be<br>
 His offspring by these noble three.<br>
 Man's nature take, and slay in fight<br>
 Rávan who laughs at heavenly might:<br>
 This common scourge, this rankling thorn<br>
 Whom the three worlds too long have borne.<br>
 For Rávan in the senseless pride<br>
 Of might unequalled has defied<br>
 The host of heaven, and plagues with woe<br>
 Angel and bard and saint below,<br>
 Crushing each spirit and each maid<br>
 Who plays in Nandan's <a name="fr_106"></a><a href="#fn_106"><font size="1">2</font></a> heavenly shade.<br>
 O conquering Lord, to thee we bow;<br>
 Our surest hope and trust art thou.<br>
 Regard the world of men below,<br>
 And slay the Gods' tremendous foe.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When thus the suppliant Gods had prayed,<br>
 His wise reply Nárayan <a name="fr_107"></a><a href="#fn_107"><font size="1">3</font></a> made:<br>
 'What task demands my presence there,<br>
 And whence this dread, ye Gods declare.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The Gods replied: 'We fear, O Lord,<br>
 Fierce Rávan, ravener abhorred.<br>
 Be thine the glorious task, we pray,<br>
 In human form this fiend to slay.<br>
 By thee of all the Blest alone<br>
 This sinner may be overthrown.<br>
 He gained by penance long and dire<br>
 The favour of the mighty Sire.<br>
 Then He who every gift bestows<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Guarded the fiend from heavenly foes,<br>
 And gave a pledge his life that kept<br>
 From all things living, man except.<br>
 On him thus armed no other foe<br>
 Than man may deal the deadly blow.<br>
 Assume, O King, a mortal birth,<br>
 And strike the demon to the earth.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Vishnu, God of Gods, the Lord<br>
 Supreme by all the worlds adored,<br>
 To Brahmá and the suppliants spake:<br>
 'Dismiss your fear: for your dear sake<br>
 In battle will I smite him dead,<br>
 The cruel fiend, the Immortal's dread,<br>
 And lords and ministers and all<br>
 His kith and kin with him shall fall.<br>
 Then, in the world of mortal men,<br>
 Ten thousand years and hundreds ten<br>
 I as a human king will reign,<br>
 And guard the earth as my domain.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 God, saint, aud nymph, and ministrel throng<br>
 With heavenly voices raised their song<br>
 In hymns of triumph to the God<br>
 Whose conquering feet on Madhu trod:<br>
     'Champion of Gods, as man appear,<br>
         This cruel Rávan slay,<br>
     The thorn that saints and hermits fear,<br>
         The plague that none can stay.<br>
     In savage fury uncontrolled<br>
         His pride for ever grows:<br>
     He dares the Lord of Gods to hold<br>
         Among his deadly foes.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_104"></a><a href="ry016.htm#fr_104">25:1</a>  The Maruts are the winds, deified in
 we religion of the Veda like other mighty
 Powers and phenomena of nature.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_105"></a><a href="ry016.htm#fr_105">26:1</a>  A Titan or fiend whose destruction
 has given Vishnu one of his well-known
 titles, Mádhava.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_106"></a><a href="ry016.htm#fr_106">26:2</a>  The garden of Indra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_107"></a><a href="ry016.htm#fr_107">26:3</a>  One of the most ancient and popular
 of the numerous names of Vishnu. The
 word has been derived in several ways,
 and may mean <i>he who moved on the
 (primordial) waters</i>, or <i>he who pervades or
 influences men or their thoughts</i>.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry017.htm">Next: Canto XV.: The Nectar.</a></center>
 </body>