<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry018.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry020.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVII.: RISHYAS'RING'S RETURN.</h3>
 <p>
 Now when the high-souled monarch's rite,<br>
 The As'vamedh, was finished quite,<br>
 Their sacrificial dues obtained,<br>
 The Gods their heavenly homes regained.<br>
 The lofty-minded saints withdrew,<br>
 Each to his place, with honour due,<br>
 And kings and chieftains, one and all,<br>
 Who came to grace the festival.<br>
 And Das'aratha, ere they went,<br>
 Addressed them thus benevolent:<br>
 'Now may you, each with joyful heart,<br>
 To your own realms, O Kings, depart.<br>
 Peace and good luck attend you there,<br>
 And blessing, is my friendly prayer;<br>
 Let cares of state each mind engage<br>
 To guard his royal heritage.<br>
 A monarch from his throne expelled<br>
 No better than the dead is held.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 So he who cares for power and might<br>
 Must guard his realm and royal right.<br>
 Such care a meed in heaven will bring<br>
 Better than rites and offering.<br>
 Such care a king his country owes<br>
 As man upon himself bestows,<br>
 When for his body he provides<br>
 Raiment and every need besides.<br>
 For future days should kings foresee,<br>
 And keep the present error-free.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus did the king the kings exhort:<br>
 They heard, and turned them from the court<br>
 And, each to each in friendship bound,<br>
 Went forth to all the realms around.<br>
 The rites were o'er, the guests were sped:<br>
 The train the best of Bráhmans led,<br>
 In which the king with joyful soul,<br>
 With his dear wives, and with the whole<br>
 Of his imperial host and train<br>
 Of cars and servants turned again,<br>
 And, as a monarch dear to fame,<br>
 Within his royal city came.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Next, Rishyas'ring, well-honoured sage,<br>
 And S'ántá, sought their hermitage.<br>
 The king himself, of prudent mind,<br>
 Attended him, with troops behind.<br>
 And all her men the town outpoured<br>
 With Saint Vas'ishtha and their lord.<br>
 High mounted on a car of state,<br>
 O'ercanopied fair S'ántá sate,<br>
 Drawn by white oxen, while a band<br>
 Of servants marched on either hand.<br>
 Great gifts of countless price she bore,<br>
 With sheep and goats and gems in shore.<br>
 Like Beauty's self the lady shone<br>
 With all the jewels she had on,<br>
 As, happy in her sweet content.<br>
 Peerless amid the fair she went.<br>
 Not Queen Paulomí's  <a name="fr_124"></a><a href="#fn_124"><font size="1">1b</font></a> self could be<br>
 More loving to her lord than she.<br>
 She who had lived in happy ease,<br>
 Honoured with all her heart could please,<br>
 While dames and kinsfolk ever vied<br>
 To see her wishes gratified,<br>
 Soon as she knew her husband's will<br>
 Again to seek the forest, still<br>
 Was ready for the hermit's cot,<br>
 Nor murmured at her altered lot.<br>
 The king attended to the wild<br>
 That hermit and his own dear child,<br>
 And in the centre of a throng<br>
 Of noble courtiers rode along.<br>
 The sage's son had let prepare<br>
 A lodge within the wood, and there<br>
 While they lingered blithe and gay.<br>
 Then, duly honoured, went their way.<br>
 The glorious hermit Rishyas'ring<br>
 Drew near and thus besought the king:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_30"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 30</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Return, my honoured lord, I pray,<br>
 Return, upon thy homeward way.'<br>
 The monarch, with the waiting crowd,<br>
 Lifted his voice and wept aloud,<br>
 And with eyes dripping still to each<br>
 Of his good queens he spake this speech:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá dear,<br>
 And thou, my sweet Kaikeyí, hear.<br>
 All upon S'ántá feast your gaze,<br>
 The last time for a length of days.'<br>
 To S'ántá's arms the ladies leapt,<br>
 And hung about her neck and wept,<br>
 And cried, '0, happy be the life<br>
 Of this great Bráhman and his wife.<br>
 The Wind, the Fire, the Moon on high.<br>
 The Earth, the Streams, the circling sky,<br>
 Preserve thee in the wood, true spouse,<br>
 Devoted to thy husband's vows.<br>
 And O dear S'ántá, ne'er neglect<br>
 To pay the dues of meek respect<br>
 To the great saint, thy husband's sire,<br>
 With all observance and with fire.<br>
 And, sweet one, pure of spot and blame,<br>
 Forget not thou thy husband's claim;<br>
 In every change, in good and ill,<br>
 Let thy sweet words delight him still,<br>
 And let thy worship constant be:<br>
 Her lord is woman's deity.<br>
 To learn thy welfare, dearest friend,<br>
 The king will many a Bráhman send.<br>
 Let happy thoughts thy spirit cheer.<br>
 And be not troubled, daughter dear.'<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 These soothing words the ladies said.<br>
 And pressed their lips upon her head.<br>
 Each gave with sighs her last adieu,<br>
 Then at the king's command withdrew.<br>
 The king around the hermit went<br>
 With circling footsteps reverent,<br>
 And placed at Rishyas'ring's command<br>
 Some soldiers of his royal band.<br>
 The Bráhman bowed in turn and cried,<br>
 'May fortune never leave thy side.<br>
 O mighty King, with justice reign,<br>
 And still thy people's love retain.'<br>
 He spoke, and turned away his face,<br>
     And, as the hermit went,<br>
 The monarch, rooted to the place,<br>
     Pursued with eyes intent.<br>
 But when the sage had past from view<br>
 King Das'aratha turned him too,<br>
 Still fixing on his friend each thought.<br>
 With such deep love his breast was fraught.<br>
 Amid his people's loud acclaim<br>
 Home to his royal seat he came,<br>
     And lived delighted there,<br>
 Expecting when each queenly dame,<br>
 Upholder of his ancient fame,<br>
     Her promised son should bear.<br>
 The glorious sage his way pursued<br>
 Till close before his eyes he viewed<br>
 Sweet Champá, Lomapád's fair town,<br>
 Wreathed with her Champacs' <a name="fr_125"></a><a href="ry020.htm#fn_125"><font size="1">1</font></a> leafy crown.<br>
 Soon as the saint's approach he knew,<br>
 The king, to yield him honour due,<br>
 Went forth to meet him with a band<br>
 Of priests and nobles of the land:<br>
 'Hail, Sage,' he cried, 'O joy to me!<br>
 What bliss it is, my lord, to see<br>
 Thee with thy wife and all thy train<br>
 Returning to my town again.<br>
 Thy father, honoured Sage, is well,<br>
 Who hither from his woodland cell<br>
 Has sent full many a messenger<br>
 For tidings both of thee and her.'<br>
 Then joyfully, for due respect,<br>
 The monarch bade the town be decked.<br>
 The king and Rishyas'ring elate<br>
 Entered the royal city's gate:<br>
     In front the chaplain rode.<br>
 Then, loved and honoured with all care<br>
 By monarch and by courtier, there<br>
     The glorious saint abode.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_123"></a><a href="ry018.htm#fr_123">29:1</a>  This Canto will appear ridiculous to
 the European reader. But it should be
 remembered that the monkeys of an
 Indian forest, the 'bough-deer' as the
 poets call them, are very different animals
 from the 'turpissima bestia' that accompanies
 the itinerant organ-grinder or grins
 in the Zoological Gardens of London.
 Milton has made his hero, Satan, assume
 the forms of a cormorant, a toad, and a
 serpent, and I cannot see that this creation
 of semi-divine Vánars, or monkeys, is
 more ridiculous or undignified.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_124"></a><a href="ry019.htm#fr_124">29:1b</a>  The consort of Ladra, called also
 S'achí and Indrání.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry020.htm">Next: Canto XVIII.: Rishyas'ring's Departure.</a></center>
 </body>