<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry020.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry022.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIX.: THE BIRTH OF THE PRINCES.</h3>
 <p>
 The seasons six in rapid flight<br>
 Had circled since that glorious rite.<br>
 Eleven months had passed away:<br>
 'Twas Chaitra's ninth returning day.  <a name="fr_129"></a><a href="#fn_129"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 The moon within that mansion shone<br>
 Which Aditi looks kindly on.<br>
 Raised to their apex in the sky<br>
 Five brilliant planets beamed on high.<br>
 Shone with the moon, in Cancer's sign.<br>
 Vrihaspati  <a name="fr_130"></a><a href="#fn_130"><font size="1">2b</font></a> with light divine.<br>
 Kaus'alyá bore an infant blest<br>
 With heavenly marks of grace impressed;<br>
 Ráma, the universe's lord,<br>
 A prince by all the worlds adored.<br>
 New glory Queen Kaus'alyá won<br>
 Reflected from her splendid son.<br>
 So Aditi shone more and more,<br>
 The Mother of the Gods, when she<br>
 The King of the Immortals  <a name="fr_131"></a><a href="#fn_131"><font size="1">3b</font></a> bore,<br>
 The thunder-wielding deity.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_32"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 32</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The lotus-eyed, the beauteous boy,<br>
 He came fierce Rávan to destroy;<br>
 From half of Vishnu's vigour born,<br>
 He came to help the worlds forlorn.<br>
 And Queen Kaikeyí bore a child<br>
 Of truest valour, Bharat styled,<br>
 With every princely virtue blest,<br>
 One fourth of Vishnu manifest.<br>
 Sumitrá too a noble pair,<br>
 Called Lakshman and S'atrughna, bare,<br>
 Of high emprise, devoted, true,<br>
 Sharers in Vishnu's essence too.<br>
 'Neath Pushya's  <a name="fr_132"></a><a href="#fn_132"><font size="1">1</font></a> mansion, Mína's  <a name="fr_133"></a><a href="#fn_133"><font size="1">2</font></a> sign,<br>
 Was Bharat born, of soul benign.<br>
 The sun had reached the Crab at morn<br>
 When Queen Sumitrá's babes were born,<br>
 What time the moon had gone to make<br>
 His nightly dwelling with the Snake.<br>
 The high-souled monarch's consorts bore<br>
 At different times those glorious four,<br>
 Like to himself and virtuous, bright<br>
 As Proshthapadá's  <a name="fr_134"></a><a href="#fn_134"><font size="1">3</font></a> four-fold light.<br>
 Then danced the nymphs' celestial throng,<br>
   The minstrels raised their strain;<br>
 The drums of heaven pealed loud and long,<br>
 And dowers came down in rain.<br>
 Within Ayodhyá, blithe and gay,<br>
 All kept the joyous holiday.<br>
 The spacious square, the ample road<br>
 With mimes and dancers overflowed,<br>
 And with the voice of music rang<br>
 Where minstrels played and singers sang,<br>
 And shone, a wonder to behold,<br>
 With dazzling show of gems and gold,<br>
 Nor did the king his largess spare,<br>
 For minstrel, driver, bard, to share;<br>
 Much wealth the Bráhmans bore away,<br>
 And many thousand dine that day.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Soon as each babe was twelve days old<br>
 'Twas time the naming rite to hold.<br>
 When Saint Vas'ishtha, rapt with joy,<br>
 Assigned a name to every boy.<br>
 Ráma, to him the high-souled heir,<br>
 Bharat, to him Kaikeyí bare:<br>
 Of Queen Sumitrá one fair son<br>
 Was Lakshman, and S'atrughna  <a name="fr_135"></a><a href="#fn_135"><font size="1">4</font></a> one.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Ráma,his sire's supreme delight,<br>
 Like some proud banner cheered his sight,<br>
 And to all creatures seemed to be<br>
 The self-existent deity.<br>
 All heroes, versed in holy lore,<br>
 To all mankind great love they bore.<br>
 Fair stores of wisdom all possessed,<br>
 With princely graces all were blest.<br>
 But mid those youths of high descent,<br>
 With lordly light preeminent.<br>
 Like the full moon unclouded, shone<br>
 Ráma, the world's dear paragon.<br>
 He best the elephant could guide.  <a name="fr_136"></a><a href="ry022.htm#fn_136"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Urge the fleet car, the charger ride;<br>
 A master he of bowman's skill,<br>
 Joying to do his father's will.<br>
 The world's delight and darling, he<br>
 Loved Lakshman best from infancy;<br>
 And Lakshman, lord of lofty fate,<br>
 Upon his elder joyed to wait,<br>
 Striving his second self to please<br>
 With friendship's sweet observances.<br>
 His limbs the hero ne'er would rest<br>
 Unless the couch his brother pressed;<br>
 Except beloved Ráma shared<br>
 He could not taste the meal prepared.<br>
 When Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,<br>
 Sprang on his steed to urge the chase,<br>
 Behind him Lakshman loved to go<br>
 And guard him with his trusty bow.<br>
 As Ráma was to Lakshman dear<br>
 More than his life and ever near,<br>
 So fond S'atrughna prized above<br>
 His very life his Bharat's love.<br>
 Illustrious heroes, nobly kind<br>
 In mutual love they all combined,<br>
 And gave their royal sire delight<br>
 With modest grace and warrior might:<br>
 Supported by the glorious four<br>
 Shone Das'aratha more and more,<br>
 As though, with every guardian,*God<br>
 Who keeps the land and skies,<br>
 The Father of all creatures trod<br>
 The earth before men's eyes.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_129"></a><a href="ry021.htm#fr_129">31:1b</a>  'The poet no doubt intended to indicate
 the vernal equinox as the birthday of
 Ráma. For the month <i>Chaitra</i> is the
 first of the two months assigned to the
 spring; it corresponds with the latter
 half of March and the former half of
 April in our division of the year. <i>Aditi</i>,
 the mother of the Gods, is lady of the
 seventh lunar mansion which is called
 <i>Punarvasu</i>. The five planets and their
 positions in the Zodiac are thus enumerated
 by both commentators: the Sun
 in Aries, Mars in Capricorn, Saturn in
 Libra, Jupiter in Cancer, Venus in Pisces....
 I leave to astronomers to examine
 whether the parts of the description agree
 with one another, and, if this be the case,
 thence to deduce the date. The Indians
 place the nativity of Ráma in the confines
 of the second age (tretá) and the third
 (dwápara): but it seems that this should
 be taken in an allegorical sense....
 We may consider that the poet had an
 eye to the time in which, immediately
 before his own age, the aspects of the
 heavenly bodies were such as he has
 described.' SCHLEGEL.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_130"></a><a href="ry021.htm#fr_130">31:2b</a>  The regent of the planet Jupiter.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_131"></a><a href="ry021.htm#fr_131">31:3b</a>  Indra=Jupiter Tonans.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_132"></a><a href="ry021.htm#fr_132">32:1</a>  '<i>Pushya</i> is the name of a month;
 but here it means the eighth mansion.
 The ninth is called <i>Aslesh</i>, or the snake.
 It is evident from this that Bharat, though
 his birth is mentioned before that of the
 twins, was the youngest of the four
 brothers and Rama's junior by eleven
 months' SCHLEGEL.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_133"></a><a href="ry021.htm#fr_133">32:2</a>  A fish, the Zodiacal sign <i>Pisces</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_134"></a><a href="ry021.htm#fr_134">32:3</a>   One of the constellations, containing
 stars in the wing of Pegasus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_135"></a><a href="ry021.htm#fr_135">32:4</a>  Ráma means the Delight (of the World);
 Bharat, the Supporter: Lakshman, the
 Auspicious; S'atrughna,  Slayer of' Foes.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry022.htm">Next: Canto XX.: Vis'vámitra's Visit.</a></center>
 </body>