<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry033.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry035.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXII.: VIS'VÁMITRA'S SACRIFICE.</h3>
 <p>
 That conquering pair, of royal race,<br>
 Skilled to observe due time and place,<br>
 To Kús'ik's hermit son addressed,<br>
 In timely words, their meet request:<br>
 'When must we, lord, we pray thee tell,<br>
 Those Rovers of the Night repel?<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Speak, lest we let the moment fly,<br>
 And pass the due occasion by.'<br>
 Thus longing for the strife, they prayed,<br>
 And thus the hermits answer made:<br>
 'Till the fifth day be come and past,<br>
 O Raghu's sons, your watch must last,<br>
 The saint his Dikshá  <a name="fr_169"></a><a href="#fn_169"><font size="1">1</font></a> has begun,<br>
 And all that time will speak to none.'<br>
 Soon as the steadfast devotees<br>
 Had made reply in words like these,<br>
 The youths began, disdaining sleep,<br>
 Six days and nights their watch to keep.<br>
 The warrior pair who tamed the foe,<br>
 Unrivalled benders of the bow,<br>
 Kept watch and ward unwearied still<br>
 To guard the saint from scathe and ill.<br>
 'Twas now the sixth returning day,<br>
 The hour foretold had past away.<br>
 Then Ráma cried: 'O Lakshman, now<br>
 Firm, watchful, resolute be thou.<br>
 The fiends as yet have kept afar<br>
 From the pure grove in which we are;<br>
 Yet waits us, ere the day shall close,<br>
 Dire battle with the demon foes.'<br>
     While thus spoke Ráma borne away<br>
 By longing for the deadly fray,<br>
 See! bursting from the altar came<br>
 The sudden glory of the flame.<br>
 Round priest and deacon, and upon<br>
 Grass, ladles, flowers, the splendour shone,<br>
 And the high rite, in order due,<br>
 With sacred texts began anew.<br>
 But then a loud and fearful roar<br>
     Re-echoed through the sky;<br>
 And like vast clouds that shadow o'er<br>
     The heavens in dark July,<br>
 Involved in gloom of magic might<br>
     Two fiends rushed on amain,<br>
 Máricha, Rover of the Night,<br>
     Suváhu, and their train.<br>
 As on they came in wild career<br>
     Thick blood in rain they shed;<br>
 And Ráma saw those things of fear<br>
     Impending overhead.<br>
 Then soon as those accursed two<br>
     Who showered down blood be spied,<br>
 Thus to his brother brave and true<br>
     Spoke Ráma lotus-eyed:<br>
 'Now, Lakshman, thou these fiends shalt see,<br>
     Man-eaters, foul of mind,<br>
 Before my mortal weapon flee<br>
     Like clouds before the wind.'<br>
 He spoke. An arrow, swift as thought,<br>
     Upon his bow he pressed,<br>
 And smote, to utmost fury wrought,<br>
     Máricha on the breast.<br>
 Deep in his flesh the weapon lay<br>
     Winged by the mystic spell,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_45"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 45</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And, hurled a hundred leagues away,<br>
     In ocean's flood he fell.<br>
 Then Ráma, when he saw the foe<br>
     Convulsed and mad with pain<br>
 'Neath the chill-pointed weapon's blow,<br>
     To Lakshman spoke again:<br>
 'See, Lakshman, see! this mortal dart<br>
     That strikes a numbing chill,<br>
 Hath struck him senseless with the smart,<br>
     But left him breathing still.<br>
 But these who love the evil way,<br>
     And drink the blood they spill,<br>
 Rejoicing holy rites to stay,<br>
     Fierce plagues, my hand shall kill.'<br>
 He seized another shaft, the best,<br>
     Aglow with living flame;<br>
 It struck Suváhu on the chest,<br>
     And dead to earth he came.<br>
 Again a dart, the Wind-God's own,<br>
     Upon his string he laid,<br>
 And all the demons were o'erthrown,<br>
     The saints no more afraid.<br>
 When thus the fiends were slain in fight,<br>
 Disturbers of each holy rite,<br>
 Due honour by the saints was paid<br>
 To Ráma for his wondrous aid:<br>
 So Indra is adored when he<br>
 Has won some glorious victory.<br>
 Success at last the rite had crowned,<br>
 And Visvámitra gazed around,<br>
 And seeing every side at rest,<br>
 The son of Raghu thus addressed:<br>
 'My joy, O Prince, is now complete:<br>
     Thou hast obeyed my will:<br>
 Perfect before, this calm retreat<br>
     Is now more perfect still.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_169"></a><a href="ry034.htm#fr_169">44:1</a>  Certain ceremonies preliminary to
 sacrifice.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry035.htm">Next: Canto XXXIII.: The Sone.</a></center>
 </body>