<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry031.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry033.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXX.: THE MYSTERIOUS POWERS. <a name="fr_165"></a><a href="#fn_165"><font size="1">1</font></a></h3>
 <p>
 Pure, with glad cheer and joyful breast,<br>
 Of those mysterious arms possessed,<br>
 Ráma, now passing on his way,<br>
 Thus to the saint began to say:<br>
 'Lord of these mighty weapons, I<br>
 Can scarce be harmed by Gods on high;<br>
 Now, best of saints, I long to gain<br>
 The powers that can these arms restrain.'<br>
 Thus spoke the prince. The sage austere,<br>
 True to his vows, from evil clear,<br>
 Called forth the names of those great charms<br>
 Whose powers restrain the deadly arms,<br>
 Receive thou True and Truly famed,<br>
 And Bold and Fleet: the weapons named<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_43"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 43</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Warder and Progress, swift of pace,<br>
 Averted-head and Drooping-face;<br>
 The Seen, and that which Secret flies;<br>
 The weapon of the thousand eyes;<br>
 Ten-headed, and the Hundred-faced,<br>
 Star-gazer and the Layer-waste:<br>
 The Omen-bird, the Pure-from-spot,<br>
 The pair that wake and slumber not:<br>
 The Fiendish, that which shakes amain,<br>
 The Strong-of-Hand, the Rich-in-Gain:<br>
 The Guardian, and the Close-allied,<br>
 The Gaper, Love, and Golden-side;<br>
 O Raghu's son receive all these,<br>
 Bright ones that wear what forms they please;<br>
 Kris'ásva's mystic sons are they,<br>
 And worthy thou their might to sway.'<br>
 With joy the pride of Raghu's race<br>
 Received the hermit's proffered grace,<br>
 Mysterious arms, to check and stay,<br>
 Or smite the foeman in the fray.<br>
 Then, all with heavenly forms endued,<br>
 Nigh came the wondrous multitude.<br>
 Celestial in their bright attire<br>
 Some shone like coals of burning fire;<br>
 Some were like clouds of dusky smoke;<br>
 And suppliant thus they sweetly spoke:<br>
 'Thy thralls, O Ráma, here we stand:<br>
 Command, we pray, thy faithful band'<br>
 'Depart,' he cried, 'where each may list,<br>
 But when I call you to assist,<br>
 Be present to my mind with speed,<br>
 And aid me in the hour of need.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To Ráma then they lowly bent,<br>
 And round him in due reverence went.<br>
 To his command, they answered, Yea,<br>
 And as they came so went away.<br>
 When thus the arms had homeward flown,<br>
 With pleasant words and modest tone,<br>
 E'en as he walked, the prince began<br>
 To question thus the holy man:<br>
 'What cloudlike wood is that which near<br>
 The mountain's side I see appear?<br>
 O tell me, for I long to know;<br>
 Its pleasant aspect charms me so.<br>
 Its glades are full of deer at play,<br>
 And sweet birds sing on every spray,<br>
 Past is the hideous wild; I feel<br>
 So sweet a tremor o'er me steal,<br>
 And hail with transport fresh and new<br>
 A land that is so fair to view.<br>
 Then tell me all, thou holy Sage,<br>
 And whose this pleasant hermitage<br>
 In which those wicked ones delight<br>
 To mar and kill each holy rite.<br>
 And with foul heart and evil deed<br>
 Thy sacrifice, great Saint, impede.<br>
 To whom, O Sage, belongs this land<br>
 In which thine altars ready stand!<br>
 'Tis mine to guard them, and to slay<br>
 The giants who the rites would stay.<br>
 All this, O best of saints, I burn<br>
 From thine own lips, my lord, to learn.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_165"></a><a href="ry032.htm#fr_165">42:1</a>  In Sanskrit <i>Sankára</i>, a word which
 has various significations but the primary
 meaning of which is <i>the act of seizing</i>. A
 magical power seems to be implied of employing
 the weapons when and where
 required. The remarks I have made on
 the preceding Canto apply with still
 greater force to this. The MSS. greatly
 vary in the enumeration of these <i>Sankáras</i>,
 and it is not surprising that copyists have
 incorrectly written the names which they
 did not well understand. The commentators
 throw no light upon the subject.'
 SCHLEGEL. I have taken the liberty of
 omitting four of these which Schlegel
 translates 'Sclerom* balum, Euomphalium,
 Cantiventrem, and Chrysomphalum.'</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry033.htm">Next: Canto XXXI: The Perfect Hermitage.</a></center>
 </body>