<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry040.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry042.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLI.: KAPIL.</h3>
 <p>
 The father lent a gracious ear<br>
 And listened to their tale of fear,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And kindly to the Gods replied<br>
 Whom woe and death had terrified;<br>
 'The wisest Vasudeva, <a name="fr_185"></a><a href="#fn_185"><font size="1">1b</font></a> who<br>
 The Immortals' foe, fierce Madhu, slew,<br>
 Regards broad Earth with love and pride<br>
 And guards, in Kapil's form, his bride. <a name="fr_186"></a><a href="#fn_186"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 His kindled wrath will quickly fall<br>
 On the king's sons and burn them all.<br>
 This cleaving of the earth his eye<br>
 Foresaw in ages long gone by:<br>
 He knew with prescient soul the fate<br>
 That Sagar's children should await.'<br>
     The Three-and-thirty, <a name="fr_187"></a><a href="#fn_187"><font size="1">3b</font></a> freed from fear.<br>
 Sought their bright homes with hopeful cheer.<br>
 Still rose the great tempestuous sound<br>
 As Sagar's children pierced the ground.<br>
 When thus the whole broad earth was cleft,<br>
 And not a spot unsearched was left,<br>
 Back to their home the princes sped,<br>
 And thus unto their father said:<br>
 'We searched the earth from side to side,<br>
 While countless hosts of creatures died.<br>
 Our conquering feet in triumph trod<br>
 On snake and demon, fiend and God;<br>
 But yet we failed, with all our toil,<br>
 To find the robber and the spoil.<br>
 What can we more? If more we can,<br>
 Devise, O King, and tell thy plan.'<br>
     His chidren's speech King Sagar heard,<br>
 And answered thus, to anger stirred:<br>
 'Dig on, and ne'er your labour stay<br>
 Till through earth's depths you force your way.<br>
 Then smite the robber dead, and bring<br>
 The charger back with triumphing.'<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_52"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 52</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     The sixty thousand chiefs obeyed:<br>
 Deep through the earth their way they made.<br>
 Deep as they dug and deeper yet<br>
 The immortal elephant they met,<br>
 Famed Virúpáksha  <a name="fr_188"></a><a href="#fn_188"><font size="1">1</font></a> vast of size,<br>
 Upon whose head the broad earth lies:<br>
 The mighty beast who earth sustains<br>
 With shaggy hills and wooded plains.<br>
 When, with the changing moon, distressed,<br>
 And longing for a moment's rest,<br>
 His mighty head the monster shakes,<br>
 Earth to the bottom reels and quakes.<br>
 Around that warder strong and vast<br>
 With reverential steps they passed.<br>
 Nor, when the honour due was paid,<br>
 Their downward search through earth delayed.<br>
 But turning from the east aside<br>
 Southward again their task they plied.<br>
 There Mahápadma held his place,<br>
 The best of all his mighty race,<br>
 Like some huge hill, of monstrous girth,<br>
 Upholding on his head the earth.<br>
 When the vast beast the princes saw,<br>
 They marvelled and were tilled with awe.<br>
 The sons of high-souled Sagar round<br>
 That elephant in reverence wound.<br>
 Then in the western region they<br>
 With might unwearied cleft their way.<br>
 There saw they with astonisht eyes<br>
 Saumanas, beast of mountain size.<br>
 Round him with circling steps they went<br>
 With greetings kind and reverent.<br>
     On, on--no thought of rest or stay--<br>
 They reached the seat of Soma's sway.<br>
 There saw they Bhadra, white as snow,<br>
 With lucky marks that fortune show,<br>
 Bearing the earth upon his head.<br>
 Round him they paced with solemn tread,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And honoured him with greetings kind,<br>
 Then downward yet their way they mined.<br>
 They gained the tract 'twixt east and north<br>
 Whose fame is ever blazoned forth, <a name="fr_189"></a><a href="ry042.htm#fn_189"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 And by a storm of rage impelled,<br>
 Digging through earth their course they held.<br>
     Then all the princes, lofty-souled,<br>
 Of wondrous vigour, strong and bold,<br>
 Saw Vásudeva  <a name="fr_190"></a><a href="ry042.htm#fn_190"><font size="1">2b</font></a> standing there<br>
 In Kapil's form he loved to wear,<br>
 And near the everlasting God<br>
 The victim charger cropped the sod.<br>
 They saw with joy and eager eyes<br>
 The fancied robber and the prize,<br>
 And on him rushed the furious band<br>
 Crying aloud, Stand, villain! stand!<br>
 'Avaunt! avaunt!' great Kapil cried,<br>
 His bosom flusht with passion's tide;<br>
 Then by his might that proud array<br>
 All scorcht to heaps of ashes lay. <a name="fr_191"></a><a href="ry042.htm#fn_191"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_184"></a><a href="ry040.htm#fr_184">51:1</a>  Said to be so called from the Jambu,
 or Rose Apple, abounding in it, and signifying
 according to the Purána, the central
 division of the world, the known world.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_185"></a><a href="ry041.htm#fr_185">51:1b</a>  Here used as a name of Vishnu.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_186"></a><a href="ry041.htm#fr_186">51:2b</a>  Kings are called the husbands of their
 kingdoms or of the earth; 'She and his
 kingdom were his only brides.' <i>Raghuvans'a</i>.
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
   'Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate<br>
     A double marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,<br>
     And then between me and my married wife.'<br>
                                                 King Richard II. Act V. Sc. I.<br>
 </dir>
 
 <p><a name="fn_187"></a><a href="ry041.htm#fr_187">51:3b</a>  The thirty-three Gods are said in the
 <i>Aitareya. Bráhmana</i>.Book 1. ch. II. 10. to
 be the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the
 twelve Àdityas, Prajápati, either Brahmá
 or Daksha, and Vashatkára or deitied
 oblation. This must have been the actual
 number at the beginning of the Vedic
 religion gradually increased by successive
 mythical and religious creations till the
 Indian Pantheon was crowded with abstractions
 of every kind. Through the reverence
 with which the words of the Veda
 were regarded, the immense host of multiplied
 divinities, in later times, still bore
 the name of the Thirty-three Gods.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_188"></a><a href="ry041.htm#fr_188">52:1</a>  'One of the elephants which, according
 to an ancient belief popular in India,
 supported the earth with their enormous
 backs; when one of these elephants shook
 his wearied head the earth trembled with
 its woods and hills. An idea, or rather a
 mythical fancy, similar to this, but reduced
 to proportions less grand, is found
 in Virgil when he speaks of Enceladus
 buried under Ætna:
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
   'Fama est Enceladi semiustum fulmine corpus<br>
     Urgeri molo haec, ingentemque insuper Ætnam<br>
     Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis;<br>
     Et fessum quoties mutat latus, intremere omnem<br>
     Murmure Trinacriam, et coelum subtexere fumo.'<br>
 </dir>
                                                                 Æneid. Lib, III. GORRESIO.
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry042.htm">Next: Canto XLII.: Sagar's Sacrifice.</a></center>
 </body>