<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry039.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry041.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XL.: THE CLEAVING OF THE EARTH.</h3>
 <p>
 The hermit ceased: the tale was done:<br>
 Then in a transport Raghu's son<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Again addressed the ancient sire<br>
 Resplendent as a burning fire:<br>
 'O holy man, I fain would hear<br>
 The tale repeated full and clear<br>
 How he from whom my sires descend<br>
 Brought the great rite to happy end.'<br>
 The hermit answered with a smile:<br>
 'Then listen, son of Raghu, while<br>
 My legendary tale proceeds<br>
 To tell of high-souled Sagar's deeds.<br>
 Within the spacious plain that lies<br>
 From where Himálaya's heights arise<br>
 To where proud Vindhya's rival chain<br>
 Looks down upon the subject plain--<br>
 A land the best for rites declared-- <a name="fr_183"></a><a href="#fn_183"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 His sacrifice the king prepared.<br>
 And Ans'umán the prince--for so<br>
 Sagar advised--with ready bow<br>
 Was borne upon a mighty car<br>
 To watch the steed who roamed afar.<br>
 But Indra, monarch of the skies,<br>
 Veiling his form in demon guise,<br>
 Came down upon the appointed day<br>
 And drove the victim horde away.<br>
 Reft of the steed the priests, distressed,<br>
 The master of the rite addressed;<br>
 'Upon the sacred day by force<br>
 A robber takes the victim horse.<br>
 Haste, King! now let the thief be slain;<br>
 Bring thou the charger back again:<br>
 The sacred rite prevented thus<br>
 Brings scathe and woe to all of us.<br>
 Rise, monarch, and provide with speed.<br>
 That naught its happy course impede.'<br>
     King Sagar in his crowded court<br>
 Gave ear unto the priests' report.<br>
 He summoned straightway to his side<br>
 His sixty thousand sons, and cried:<br>
 'Brave sons of mine, I knew not how<br>
 These demons are so mighty now:<br>
 The priests began the rite so well<br>
 All sanctified with prayer and spell.<br>
 If in the depths of earth he hide,<br>
 Or lurk beneath the ocean's tide,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_51"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 51</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Pursue, dear sons, the robber's track;<br>
 Slay him and bring the charger back.<br>
 The whole of this broad earth explore,<br>
 Sea-garlanded, from shore to shore:<br>
 Yea, dig her up with might and main<br>
 Until you see the horse again.<br>
 Deep let your searching labour reach,<br>
 A league in depth dug out by each.<br>
 The robber of our horse pursue,<br>
 And please your sire who orders you.<br>
 My grandson, I, this priestly train,<br>
 Till the steed comes, will here remain.'<br>
     Their eager hearts with transport burned<br>
 As to their task the heroes turned.<br>
 Obedient to their father, they<br>
 Through earth's recesses forced their way.<br>
 With iron arms' unflinching toil<br>
 Each dug a league beneath the soil.<br>
 Earth, cleft asunder, groaned in pain,<br>
 As emulous they plied amain<br>
 Sharp-pointed coulter, pick, and bar,<br>
 Hard as the bolts of Indra are.<br>
 Then loud the horrid clamour rose<br>
 Of monsters dying 'neath their blows,<br>
 Giant and demon, fiend and snake,<br>
 That in earth's core their dwelling make.<br>
 They dug, in ire that naught could stay,<br>
 Through sixty thousand leagues their way,<br>
 Cleaving the earth with matchless strength<br>
 Till hell itself they reached at length.<br>
 Thus digging searched they Jambudvip  <a name="fr_184"></a><a href="ry041.htm#fn_184"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 With all its hills and mountains steep.<br>
 Then a great fear began to shake<br>
 The heart of God, bard, fiend, and snake,<br>
 And all distressed in spirit went<br>
 Before the Sire Omnipotent.<br>
 With signs of woe in every face<br>
 They sought the mighty Father's grace,<br>
 And trembling still and ill at ease<br>
 Addressed their Lord in words like these:<br>
 'The sons of Sagar, Sire benign,<br>
 Pierce the whole earth with mine on mine,<br>
 And as their ruthless work they ply<br>
 Innumerable creatures die,<br>
 'This is the thief,' the princes say,<br>
 'Who stole our victim steed away.<br>
 This marred the rite, and caused us ill.<br>
 And so their guiltless blood they spill.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_181"></a><a href="ry039.htm#fr_181">50:1</a>  Garuda.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_182"></a><a href="ry039.htm#fr_182">50:2</a>   Ikshváku, the name of a king of Ayodhyá
 who is regarded as the founder of the
 Solar race, means also a <i>gourd</i>. Hence,
 perhaps, the myth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_183"></a><a href="ry040.htm#fr_183">50:1b</a>  The region here spoken of is called
 in the Laws of Manu <i>Madhyades'a</i> or the
 middle region. 'The region situated between
 the Himálaya and the Vindhya
 Mountains ... is called <i>Madhyades'a</i>,
 or the middle region; the space
 comprised between these two mountains
 from the eastern to the western sea is called
 by sages Áryávartta, <i>the seat of honourable
 men</i>.' (MANU, II, 21, 22.) The Sanskrit
 Indians called themselves Áryans,
 which means <i>honourable, noble</i>, to distinguish
 themselves from the surrounding
 nations of different origin.' GORRESIO.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry041.htm">Next: Canto XLI.: Kapil.</a></center>
 </body>