<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry067.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry069.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVIII.: THE ENVOYS' SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Three nights upon the road they passed<br>
 To rest the steeds that bore them fast,<br>
 And reached Ayodhyá's town at last.<br>
 Then straight at Das'aratha's call<br>
 They stood within the royal hall,<br>
 Where, like a God, inspiring awe,<br>
 The venerable king they saw.<br>
 With suppliant palm to palm applied,<br>
 And all their terror laid aside,<br>
 They spoke to him upon the throne<br>
 With modest words, in gentle tone:<br>
 'Janak, Videha's king, O Sire,<br>
 Has sent us hither to inquire<br>
 The health of thee his friend most dear,<br>
 Of all thy priests and every peer.<br>
 Next Kus'ik's son consenting, thus<br>
 King Janak speaks, dread liege, by us:<br>
 'I made a promise and decree<br>
 That valour's prize my child should be.<br>
 Kings, worthless found in worth's assay,<br>
 With mien dejected turned away.<br>
 Thy sons, by Vis'vámitra led,<br>
 Unurged, my city visited,<br>
 And peerless in their might have gained<br>
 My daughter, as my vow ordained.<br>
 Full in a vast assembly's view<br>
 Thy hero Ráma broke in two<br>
 The gem of bows, of monstrous size,<br>
 That came a treasure from the skies.<br>
 Ordained the prize of hero's might,<br>
 Sitá my child is his by right.<br>
 Fain would I keep my promise made,<br>
 If thou, O King, approve and aid.<br>
 Come to my town thy son to see:<br>
 Bring holy guide and priest with thee.<br>
 O lord of kings, my suit allow,<br>
 And let me keep my promised vow.<br>
 So joying for thy children's sake<br>
 Their triumph too shalt thou partake,<br>
 With Vis'vámitra's high consent.'<br>
 'Such words with friendship eloquent<br>
 Spoke Janak, fair Videha's king,<br>
 By S'atánanda's counselling.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The envoys thus the king addressed,<br>
 And mighty joy his heart possessed.<br>
 To Vámadeva quick he cried,<br>
 Vas'ishtha, and his lords beside:<br>
 'Lakshman, and he, my princely hoy<br>
 Who fills Kaus'alyá's soul with joy,<br>
 By Vis'vámitra guarded well<br>
 Among the good Videhans dwell.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_80"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 80</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Their ruler Janak, prompt to own<br>
 The peerless might my child has shown,<br>
 To him would knit in holy ties<br>
 His daughter, valour's lovely prize.<br>
 If Janak's plan seem good to you,<br>
 Come, speed we to his city too,<br>
 Nor let occasion idly by.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased. There came a glad reply<br>
 From priest and mighty saint and all<br>
 The councillors who thronged the hall.<br>
 Then cried the king with joyous heart:<br>
 'To-morrow let us all depart.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 That night the envoys entertained<br>
 With honour and all care remained.<br>
 
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry069.htm">Next: Canto LXIX.: Das'aratha's Visit.</a></center>
 </body>