<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry066.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry068.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVII.: THE BREAKING OF THE BOW.</h3>
 <p>
 Then spoke again the great recluse:<br>
 'This mighty bow, O King, produce.'<br>
 King Janak, at the saint's request,<br>
 This order to his train addressed:<br>
 'Let the great bow be hither borne,<br>
 Which flowery wreaths and scents adorn.'<br>
 Soon as the monarch's words were said,<br>
 His servants to the city sped,<br>
 Five thousand youths in number, all<br>
 Of manly strength and stature tall,<br>
 The ponderous eight-wheeled chest that held<br>
 The heavenly bow, with toil propelled.<br>
 At length they brought that iron chest,<br>
 And thus the godlike king addressed:<br>
 'This best of bows, O lord, we bring,<br>
 Respected by each chief and king,<br>
 And place it for these youths to see,<br>
 If, Sovereign, such thy pleasure be.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With suppliant palm to palm applied<br>
 King Janak to the strangers cried:<br>
 'This gem of bows, O Bráhman Sage,<br>
 Our race has prized from age to age.<br>
 Too strong for those who yet have reigned,<br>
 Though great in might each nerve they strained.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_79"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 79</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Titan and fiend its strength defies,<br>
 God, spirit, minstrel of the skies.<br>
 And bard above and snake below<br>
 Are baffled by this glorious bow.<br>
 Then how may human prowess hope<br>
 With such a bow as this to cope?<br>
 What man with valour's choicest gift<br>
 This bow can draw, or string, or lift?<br>
 Yet let the princes, holy Seer,<br>
 Behold it: it is present here.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then spoke the hermit pious-souled:<br>
 'Ráma, dear son, the bow behold.'<br>
 Then Ráma at his word unclosed<br>
 The chest wherein its might reposed,<br>
 Thus crying, as he viewed it: 'Lo!<br>
 I lay mine hand upon the bow:<br>
 May happy luck my hope attend<br>
 Its heavenly strength to lift or bend.'<br>
 'Good luck be thine,' the hermit cried:<br>
 'Assay the task!' the king replied.<br>
 Then Raghu's son, as if in sport,<br>
 Before the thousands of the court,<br>
 The weapon by the middle raised<br>
 That all the crowd in wonder gazed.<br>
 With steady arm the string he drew<br>
 Till burst the mighty bow in two.<br>
 As snapped the bow, an awful clang,<br>
 Loud as the shriek of tempests, rang.<br>
 The earth, affrighted, shook amain<br>
 As when a hill is rent in twain.<br>
 Then, senseless at the fearful sound,<br>
 The people fell upon the ground:<br>
 None save the king, the princely pair,<br>
 And the great saint, the shock could bear,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When woke to sense the stricken train,<br>
 And Janak's soul was calm again,<br>
 With suppliant hands and reverent head,<br>
 These words, most eloquent, he said:<br>
 'O Saint, Prince Ráma stands alone:<br>
 His peerless might he well has shown.<br>
 A marvel has the hero wrought<br>
 Beyond belief, surpassing thought.<br>
 My child, to royal Ráma wed,<br>
 New glory on our line will shed:<br>
 And true my promise will remain<br>
 That hero's worth the bride should gain.<br>
 Dearer to me than light and life,<br>
 My Sitá shall be Ráma's wife.<br>
 If thou, O Bráhman, leave concede,<br>
 My counsellors, with eager speed,<br>
 Borne in their flying cars, to fair<br>
 Ayodhyá's town the news shall bear,<br>
 With courteous message to entreat<br>
 The king to grace my royal seat.<br>
 This to the monarch shall they tell,<br>
 The bride is his who won her well:<br>
 And his two sons are resting here<br>
 Protected by the holy seer.<br>
 So, at his pleasure, let them lead<br>
 The sovereign to my town with speed.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The hermit to his prayer inclined<br>
 And Janak, lord of virtuous mind,<br>
 With charges, to Ayodhyá sent<br>
 His ministers: and forth they went.<br>
 
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry068.htm">Next: Canto LXVIII.: The Envoys' Speech.</a></center>
 </body>