<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry069.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry071.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXX.: THE MAIDENS SOUGHT.</h3>
 <p>
 Then with the morn's returning sun.<br>
 King Janak, when his rites were done,<br>
 Skilled all the charms of speech to know,<br>
 Spoke to wise S'atánanda so:<br>
 'My brother, lord of glorious fame,<br>
 My younger, Kus'adhwaj by name,<br>
 Whose virtuous life has won renown,<br>
 Has settled in a lovely town,<br>
 Sánkásyá, decked with grace divine,<br>
 Whose glories bright as Pushpak's shine,<br>
 While Ikshumatí rolls her wave<br>
 Her lofty rampart's foot to lave.<br>
 Him, holy priest, I long to see:<br>
 The guardian of my rite is he:<br>
 That my dear brother may not miss<br>
 A share of mine expected bliss.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus in the presence of the priest<br>
 The royal Janak spoke, and ceased.<br>
 Then came his henchmen, prompt and brave,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_81"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 81</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To whom his charge the monarch gave.<br>
 Soon as they heard his will, in haste<br>
 With fleetest steeds away they raced,<br>
 To lead with them that lord of kings,<br>
 As Indra's call Lord Vishnu brings.<br>
 Sánkás'yá's walls they duly gained,<br>
 And audience of the king obtained.<br>
 To him they told the news they brought<br>
 Of marvels past and Janak's thought.<br>
 Soon as the king the story knew<br>
 From those good envoys swift and true,<br>
 To Janak's wish he gave assent,<br>
 And swift to Mithilá he went.<br>
 He paid to Janak reverence due,<br>
 And holy S'atánanda too,<br>
 Then sate him on a glorious seat<br>
 For kings or Gods celestial meet.<br>
 Soon as the brothers, noble pair<br>
 Peerless in might, were seated there,<br>
 They gave the wise Sudáman, best<br>
 Of councillors, their high behest:<br>
 'Go, noble councillor,' they cried,<br>
 'And hither to our presence guide<br>
 Ikshváku's son, Ayodhyá's lord,<br>
 Invincible by foeman's sword,<br>
 With both his sons, each holy seer,<br>
 And every minister and peer.'<br>
 Sudáman to the palace flew,<br>
 And saw the mighty king who threw<br>
 Splendour on Raghu's splendid race,<br>
 Then bowed his head with seemly grace:<br>
 'O King, whose hand Ayodhyá sways,<br>
 My lord, whom Mithilá obeys,<br>
 Yearns with desire, if thou agree,<br>
 Thee with thy guide and priest to see.'<br>
 Soon as the councillor had ceased,<br>
 The king, with saint and peer and priest,<br>
 Sought, speeding through the palace gate,<br>
 The hall where Janak held his state.<br>
 There, with his nobles round him spread,<br>
 Thus to Videha's lord be said:<br>
 'Thou knowest, King, whose aid divine<br>
 Protects Ikshváku's royal line.<br>
 In every need, whate'er befall,<br>
 The saint Vas'ishtha speaks for all.<br>
 If Vis'vámitra so allow,<br>
 And all the saints around me now,<br>
 The sage will speak, at my desire,<br>
 As order and the truth require.'<br>
     Soon as the king his lips had stilled.<br>
 Up rose Vas'ishtha, speaker skilled.<br>
 And to Videha's lord began<br>
 In flowing words that holy man:<br>
 'From viewless Nature Brahmá rose,<br>
 No change, no end, no waste he knows.<br>
 A son had he Maríchi styled,<br>
 And Kas'yap was Maríchi's child.<br>
 From him Vivasvat sprang: from him<br>
 Manu whose fame shall ne'er be dim.<br>
 Manu, who life to mortals gave,<br>
 Begot Ikshváku good and brave.<br>
 First of Ayodhyá's kings was he,<br>
 Pride of her famous dynasty.<br>
 From him the glorious Kukshi sprang,<br>
 Whose fame through all the regions rang.<br>
 Rival of Kukshi's ancient fame,<br>
 His heir, the great Vikukshi, came,<br>
 His son was Vána, lord of might;<br>
 His Anaranya, strong to fight.<br>
 His son was Prithu, glorious name;<br>
 From him the good Tris'anku came.<br>
 He left a son renowned afar,<br>
 Known by the name of Dhundhumár.<br>
 His son, who drove the mighty car,<br>
 Was Yuvanás'va, feared in war.<br>
 He passed away. Him followed then<br>
 His son Mándhátá, king of men.<br>
 His son was blest in high emprise,<br>
 Susandhi, fortunate and wise.<br>
 Two noble sons had he, to wit<br>
 Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit.<br>
 Bharat was Dhruvasandhi's son,<br>
 And glorious fame that monarch won.<br>
 The warrior Asit he begot.<br>
 Asit had warfare, fierce and hot,<br>
 With rival kings in many a spot,<br>
 Haihayas, Tálajanghas styled,<br>
 And S'as'ivindus, strong and wild.<br>
 Long time he strove, but forced to yield<br>
 Fled from his kingdom and the field.<br>
 With his two wives away he fled<br>
 Where high Himálaya lifts his head,<br>
 And, all his wealth and glory past,<br>
 He paid the dues of Fate at last.<br>
 The wives he left had both conceived--<br>
 So is the ancient tale believed--<br>
 One, of her rival's hopes afraid<br>
 Fell poison in her viands laid.<br>
 It chanced that Chyavan, Bhrigu's child,<br>
 Had wandered to that pathless wild,<br>
 And there Himálaya's lovely height<br>
 Detained him with a strange delight.<br>
 There came the other widowed queen,<br>
 With lotus eyes and beauteous mien,<br>
 Longing a noble son to bear,<br>
 And wooed the saint with earnest prayer.<br>
 When thus Kálindi,  <a name="fr_248"></a><a href="#fn_248"><font size="1">1</font></a> fairest dame,<br>
 With reverent supplication came,<br>
 To her the holy sage replied:<br>
 'Born with the poison from thy side,<br>
 O happy Queen, shall spring ere long<br>
 An infant fortunate and strong.<br>
 Then weep no more, and check thy sighs,<br>
 Sweet lady of the lotus eyes.'<br>
 The queen, who loved her perished lord,<br>
 For meet reply, the saint adored,<br>
 And, of her husband long bereaved,<br>
 She bore a son by him conceived.<br>
 Because her rival mixed the bane<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_82"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 82</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To render her conception vain,<br>
 And fruit unripened to destroy,<br>
 Sagar  <a name="fr_249"></a><a href="ry071.htm#fn_249"><font size="1">1</font></a> she called her darling boy.<br>
 To Sagar Asamanj was heir:<br>
 Bright Ans'umán his consort bare.<br>
 Ans'umán's son, Dilipa famed,<br>
 Begot a son Bhagírath named.<br>
 From him the great Kakutstha rose:<br>
 From him came Raghu, feared by foes,<br>
 Of him sprang Purushádak bold,<br>
 Fierce hero of gigantic mould:<br>
 Kalmáshapáda's name he bore,<br>
 Because his feet were spotted o'er.  <a name="fr_250"></a><a href="ry071.htm#fn_250"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 From him came S'ankan, and from him<br>
 Sudars'an, fair in face and limb.<br>
 From beautiful Sudars'an came<br>
 Prince Agnivarna, bright as flame.<br>
 His son was S'íghraga, for speed<br>
 Unmatched; and Maru was his seed.<br>
 Pras'uœs'ruka was Maru's child;<br>
 His son was Ambarísha styled.<br>
 Nahush was Ambarísha's heir,<br>
 The mighty lord of regions fair:<br>
 Nahush begot Yayáti: he,<br>
 Nábhág of happy destiny.<br>
 Son of Nábhág was Aja: his,<br>
 The glorious Das'aratha is,<br>
 Whose noble children boast to be<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman, whom we see.<br>
 Thus do those kings of purest race<br>
 Their lineage from Ikshváku trace;<br>
 Their hero lives the right maintained,<br>
 Their lips with falsehood ne'er were stained.<br>
 In Ráma's and in Lakshman's name<br>
 Thy daughters as their wives I claim,<br>
 So shall in equal bands be tied<br>
 Each peerless youth with peerless bride.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_248"></a><a href="ry070.htm#fr_248">81:1</a>  A different lady from the Goddess of
 the Jumna who bears the same name.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry071.htm">Next: Canto LXXI.: Janak's Pedigree.</a></center>
 </body>