<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry072.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry074.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXIII.: THE NUPTIALS.</h3>
 <p>
 On that same day that saw the king<br>
 His gift of kine distributing,<br>
 The lord of Kekaya's son, by name<br>
 Yudhájit, Bharat's uncle, came,<br>
 Asked of the monarch's health, and then<br>
 Addressed the reverend king of men:<br>
 'The lord of Kekaya's realm by me<br>
 Sends greeting, noble King, to thee:<br>
 Asks if the friends thy prayers would bless<br>
 Uninterrupted health possess.<br>
 Right anxious, mighty King, is he<br>
 My sister's princely boy to see.<br>
 For this I sought Ayodhyá fair<br>
 The message of my sire to bear.<br>
 There learning, O my liege, that thou<br>
 With sons and noble kinsmen now<br>
 Wast resting here, I sought the place<br>
 Longing to see my nephew's face.'<br>
 The king with kind observance cheered<br>
 His friend by tender ties endeared,<br>
 And every choicest honour pressed<br>
 Upon his honourable guest.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 That night with all his children spent,<br>
 At morn King Das'aratha went,<br>
 Behind Vas'ishtha and the rest,<br>
 To the fair ground for rites addressed.<br>
 Then when the lucky hour was nigh<br>
 Called Victory, of omen high,<br>
 Came Ráma, after vow and prayer<br>
 For nuptial bliss and fortune fair,<br>
 With the three youths in bright attire,<br>
 And stood beside his royal sire.<br>
 To Janak then Vas'ishtha sped,<br>
 And to Videha's monarch said:<br>
 'O King, Ayodhyá's ruler now<br>
 Has breathed the prayer and vowed the vow,<br>
 And with his sons expecting stands<br>
 The giver of the maidens' hands.<br>
 The giver and the taker both<br>
 Must ratify a mutual oath.<br>
 Perform the part for which we wait,<br>
 And rites of marriage celebrate.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Skilled in the laws which Scriptures teach,<br>
 He answered thus Vas'ishtha's speech:<br>
 'O Saint, what warder bars the gate?<br>
 Whose bidding can the king await?<br>
 In one's own house what doubt is shown?<br>
 This kingdom, Sage, is all thine own.<br>
 E'en now the maidens may he found<br>
 Within the sacrificial ground:<br>
 Each vow is vowed and prayed each prayer,<br>
 And they, like fire, are shining there.<br>
 Here by the shrine my place I took<br>
 Expecting thee with eager look.<br>
 No bar the nuptial rites should stay:<br>
 What cause have we for more delay?'<br>
 When Janak's speech the monarch heard<br>
 To sons and saints he gave the word,<br>
 And set them in the holy ring.<br>
 Then to Vas'ishtha spoke the king<br>
 Of Mithilá: 'O mighty Sage,<br>
 Now let this task thy care engage,<br>
 And lend thine aid and counsel wise<br>
 The nuptial rites to solemnize.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The saint Vas'ishtha gave assent,<br>
 And quickly to the task he went.<br>
 With Vis'vámitra, nothing both,<br>
 And S'atánanda aiding both.<br>
 Then, as the rules prescribe, they made<br>
 An altar in the midst, and laid<br>
 Fresh wreaths of fragrant flowers thereon.<br>
 The golden ladles round it shone;<br>
 And many a vase, which branches hid<br>
 Fixed in the perforated lid,<br>
 And sprays, and cups, and censers there<br>
 Stood filled with incense rich and rare;<br>
 Shell-bowls,and spoons, and salvers dressed<br>
 With gifts that greet the honoured guest;<br>
 Piles of parched rice some dishes bore,<br>
 Others with corn prepared ran o'er;<br>
 And holy grass was duly spread<br>
 In equal lengths, while prayers were said.<br>
 Next chief of saints, Vas'ishtha came<br>
 And laid the offering in the flame.<br>
 Then by the hand King Janak drew<br>
 His Sítá, beautiful to view,<br>
 And placed her, bright in rich attire,<br>
 Ráma to face, before the fire,<br>
 Thus speaking to the royal boy<br>
 Who filled Kaus'alyá's heart with joy:<br>
 'Here Sítá stands, my daughter fair,<br>
 The duties of thy life to share.<br>
 Take from her father, take thy bride,<br>
 Join hand to hand, and bliss betide!<br>
 A faithful wife, most blest is she,<br>
 And as thy shade will follow thee.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus as he spoke the monarch threw<br>
 O'er her young limbs the holy dew,<br>
 While Gods and saints were heard to swell<br>
 The joyous cry, 'Tis well! 'Tis well!<br>
 His daughter Sítá thus bestowed,<br>
 O'er whom the sacred drops had flowed.<br>
 King Janak's heart with rapture glowed.<br>
 Then to Prince Lakshman thus he cried'.<br>
 'Take Urmilá thine offered bride,<br>
 And clasp her hand within thine own<br>
 Ere yet the lucky hour be flown.'<br>
 Then to Prince Bharat thus cried he;<br>
 'Come, take the hand of Mándavi.'<br>
 Then to S'atrughna: 'In thy grasp<br>
 The hand of S'rutakirti clasp.<br>
 Now, Raghu's sons, may all of you<br>
 Be gentle to your wives and true;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_85"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 85</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Keep well the vows you make to-day,<br>
 Nor let occasion slip away.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 King Janak's word the youths obeyed;<br>
 The maidens' hands in theirs they laid.<br>
 Then with their brides the princes went<br>
 With ordered steps and reverent<br>
 Bound both the tire and Janak, round<br>
 The sages and the sacred ground.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 A flowery flood of lucid dyes<br>
 In rain descended from the skies,<br>
 While with celestial voices blent<br>
 Sweet strains from many an instrument,<br>
 And the nymphs danced in joyous throng<br>
 Responsive to the minstrel's song.<br>
 Such signs of exultation they<br>
 Saw on the princes' wedding day.<br>
 Still rang the heavenly music's sound<br>
 When Raghu's sons thrice circled round<br>
 The fire, each one with reverent head,<br>
 And homeward then their brides they led.<br>
 They to the sumptuous palace hied<br>
 That Janak's care had seen supplied.<br>
 The monarch girt with saint and peer<br>
 Still fondly gazing followed near.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry074.htm">Next: Canto LXXIV.: Ráma With The Axe.</a></center>
 </body>