<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry078.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry080.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO I.: THE HEIR APPARENT.</h3>
 <p>
 So Bharat to his grandsire went<br>
 Obedient to the message sent,<br>
 And for his fond companion chose<br>
 S'atrughna slayer of his foes.  <a name="fr_258"></a><a href="#fn_258"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 There Bharat for a time remained<br>
 With love and honour entertained,<br>
 King As'vapati's constant care,<br>
 Belovèd as a son and heir.<br>
 Yet ever, as they lived at ease,<br>
 While all around combined to please<br>
 The agèd sire they left behind<br>
 Was present to each hero's mind.<br>
 Nor could the king's fond memory stray<br>
 From his brave children far away,<br>
 Dear Bharat and S'atrughna dear,<br>
 Each Varun's match or Indra's peer.<br>
     To all the princes, young and brave,<br>
 His soul with fond affection clave;<br>
 Around his loving heart they clung<br>
 Like arms from his own body sprung. <a name="fr_259"></a><a href="#fn_259"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 But best and noblest of the four,<br>
 Good as the God whom all adore,<br>
 Lord of all virtues, undefiled,<br>
 His darling was his eldest child.<br>
 For he was beautiful and strong,<br>
 From envy free, the foe of wrong,<br>
 With all his father's virtues blest,<br>
 And peerless in the world confessed.<br>
 With placid soul he softly spoke:<br>
 No harsh reply could taunts provoke.<br>
 He ever loved the good and sage<br>
 Revered for virtue and for age,<br>
 And when his martial tasks were o'er<br>
 Sate listening to their peaceful lore.<br>
 Wise, modest, pure, he honoured eld,<br>
 His lips from lying tales withheld;<br>
 Due reference to the Bráhnmans gave,<br>
 And ruled each passion like a slave.<br>
 Most tender, prompt at duty's call,<br>
 Loved by all men he loved them all.<br>
 Proud of the duties of his race,<br>
 With spirit meet for Warrior's  place,<br>
 He strove to win by glorious deed,<br>
 Throned with the Gods, a priceless meed.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 With him in speech and quick reply<br>
 Vrihaspati might hardly vie,<br>
 But never would his accents flow<br>
 For evil or for empty show.<br>
 In art and science duly trained,<br>
 His student vow he well maintained;<br>
 He learnt the lore for princes fit,<br>
 The Vedas and their Holy Writ,<br>
 And with his well-drawn bow at last<br>
 His mighty father's fame surpassed.<br>
 Of birth exalted, truthful, just,<br>
 With vigorous hand, with noble trust,<br>
 Well taught by aged twice-born men<br>
 Who gain and right could clearly ken,<br>
 Full well the claims and bounds he knew<br>
 Of duty, gain, and pleasure too:<br>
 Of memory keen, of ready tact,<br>
 In civil business prompt to act.<br>
 Reserved, his features ne'er disclosed<br>
 What counsel in his heart reposed.<br>
 All idle rage and mirth controlled,<br>
 He knew the times to give and hold,<br>
 Firm in his faith, of steadfast will,<br>
 He sought no wrong, he spoke no ill:<br>
 Not rashly swift, not idly slow,<br>
 His faults and others' keen to know.<br>
 Each merit, by his subtle sense,<br>
 He matched with proper recompense.<br>
 He knew the means that wealth provide,<br>
 And with keen eye expense could guide.<br>
 Wild elephants could he reclaim,<br>
 And mettled steeds could mount and tame.<br>
 No arm like his the bow could wield,<br>
 Or drive the chariot to the field.<br>
 Skilled to attack, to deal the blow,<br>
 Or lead a host against the foe:<br>
 Yea, e'en infuriate Gods would fear<br>
 To meet his arm in full career.<br>
 As the great sun in noontide blaze<br>
 Is glorious with his world of rays.<br>
 So Ráma with these virtues shone<br>
 Which all men loved to gaze upon.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The agèd monarch fain would rest,<br>
 And said within his weary breast,<br>
 'Oh that I might, while living yet,<br>
 My Ráma o'er the kingdom set.<br>
 And see, before my course be run,<br>
 The hallowed drops anoint my son;<br>
 See all this spacious land obey,<br>
 From side to side, my first-born's sway,<br>
 And then, my life and joy complete,<br>
 Obtain in heaven a blissful seat!'<br>
 In him the monarch saw combined<br>
 The fairest form, the noblest mind,<br>
 And counselled how his son might share,<br>
 The throne with him as Regent Heir.<br>
 For fearful signs in earth and sky,<br>
 And weakness warned him death was nigh:<br>
 But Ráma to the world endeared<br>
 By every grace his bosom cheered,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_90"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 90</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The moon of every eye, whose ray<br>
 Drove all his grief and fear away.<br>
 So duty urged that hour to seize,<br>
 Himself, his realm, to bless and please.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 From town and country, far and near,<br>
 He summoned people, prince, and peer.<br>
 To each he gave a meet abode,<br>
 And honoured all and gifts bestowed.<br>
 Then, splendid in his king's attire,<br>
 He viewed them, as the general Sire,<br>
 In glory of a God arrayed,<br>
 Looks on the creatures he has made.<br>
 But Kekaya's king he called not then<br>
 For haste, nor Janak, lord of men;<br>
 For after to each royal friend<br>
 The joyful tidings he would send.<br>
 Mid crowds from distant countries met<br>
 The king upon his throne was set;<br>
 Then honoured by the people, all<br>
 The rulers thronged into the hall.<br>
 On thrones assigned, each king in place<br>
 Looked silent on the monarch's face.<br>
     Then girt by lords of high renown<br>
     And throngs from hamlet and from town<br>
         He showed in regal pride,<br>
 As, honoured by the radiant band<br>
 Of blessed Gods that round him stand,<br>
 Lord Indra, Thousand-eyed.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_258"></a><a href="ry079.htm#fr_258">89:1</a>  S'atrughna means slayer of foes, and the
 word is repeated as an intensive epithet.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_259"></a><a href="ry079.htm#fr_259">89:2</a>   Alluding to the images of Vishnu,
 which have four arms, the four princes
 being portions of the substance of that God.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry080.htm">Next: Canto II.: The People's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>