<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry082.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry084.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO V.: RÁMA'S FAST.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Saint Vas'ishtha to the king<br>
 Came ready at his summoning.<br>
 'Now go,' exclaimed the monarch, 'thou<br>
 Enriched by fervent rite and vow,<br>
 For Ráma and his wife ordain<br>
 The fast, that joy may bless his reign.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The best of those who Scripture know<br>
 Said to the king, 'My lord, I go.'<br>
 To Ráma's house Vas'ishtha hied,<br>
 The hero's fast by rule to guide,<br>
 And skilled in sacred texts to tell<br>
 Each step to him instructed well.<br>
 Straight to Prince Ráma's high abode,<br>
 That like a cloud pale-tinted showed,<br>
 Borne in his priestly car he rode.<br>
 Two courts he passed, and in the third<br>
 He stayed his car. Then Ráma heard<br>
 The holy sage was come, and flew<br>
 To honour him with honour due.<br>
 He hastened to the car and lent<br>
 His hand to aid the priest's descent.<br>
 Then spoke Vas'ishtha words like these,<br>
 Pleased with his reverent courtesies,<br>
 With pleasant things his heart to cheer<br>
 Who best deserved glad news to hear:<br>
 'Prince, thou hast won thy father's grace,<br>
 And thine will be the Regent's place:<br>
 Now with thy Sítá, as is right,<br>
 In strictest fasting spend the night,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_95"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 95</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 For when the morrow's dawn is fair<br>
 The king will consecrate his heir:<br>
 So Nahush, <a name="fr_269"></a><a href="#fn_269"><font size="1">1</font></a>  as the wise relate,<br>
 Yayáti joyed to consecrate.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus having said, Vas'ishtha next<br>
 Ordained the fast by rule and text,<br>
 For Ráma faithful to his vows<br>
 And the Videhan dame his spouse.<br>
 Then from the prince's house he hied<br>
 With courteous honours gratified.<br>
 Round Ráma gathered every friend<br>
 In pleasant talk a while to spend.<br>
 He bade good night to all at last,<br>
 And to his inner chamber passed.<br>
 Then Ráma's house shone bright and gay<br>
 With men and maids in glad array,<br>
 As in the morning some fair lake<br>
 When all her lotuses awake,<br>
 And every bird that loves the flood<br>
 Flits joyous round each opening bud.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Forth from the house Vas'ishtha drove,<br>
 That with the king's in splendour strove,<br>
 And all the royal street he viewed<br>
 Filled with a mighty multitude<br>
 The eager concourse blocked each square,<br>
 Each road and lane and thoroughfare,<br>
 And joyous shouts on every side<br>
 Rose like the roar of Ocean's tide,<br>
 As streams of men together came<br>
 With loud huzza and glad acclaim.<br>
 The ways were watered, swept and clean,<br>
 And decked with flowers and garlands green<br>
 And all Ayodhyá shone arrayed<br>
 With banners on the roofs that played.<br>
 Men, women, boys with eager eyes,<br>
 Expecting when the sun should rise,<br>
 Stood longing for the herald ray<br>
 Of Ráma's consecration day,<br>
 To see, a source of joy to all,<br>
 The people-*honoured festival.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The priest advancing slowly through<br>
 The mighty crowd he cleft in two,<br>
 Near to the monarch's palace drew.<br>
 He sought the terrace, by the stair,<br>
 Like a white cloud peak high in air,<br>
 The reverend king of men to meet<br>
 Who sate upon his splendid seat:<br>
 Thus will Vrihaspati arise<br>
 To meet the monarch of the skies.<br>
 But when the king his coming knew,<br>
 He left his throne and near him drew<br>
 Questioned by him Vas'ishtha said<br>
 That all his task was duly sped.<br>
 Then all who sate there, honouring<br>
 Vas'ishtha, rose as rose the king,<br>
 Vas'ishtha bade his lord adieu,<br>
 And all the peers, dismissed, withdrew.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Then as a royal lion seeks<br>
 His cave beneath the rocky peaks,<br>
 So to the chambers where abode<br>
 His consorts Das'aratha strode.<br>
     Full-thronged were those delightful bowers<br>
         With women richly dressed,<br>
     And splendid as the radiant towers<br>
         Where Indra loves to rest.<br>
     Then brighter flashed a thousand eyes<br>
         With the light his presence lent,<br>
     As, when the moon begins to rise<br>
         The star thronged firmament.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_268"></a><a href="ry082.htm#fr_268">94:1</a>  Kaus'alyá aud Sumitrá.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_269"></a><a href="ry083.htm#fr_269">95:1</a>  A king of the Lunar race, and father of Yayáti.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry084.htm">Next: Canto VI.: The City Decorated.</a></center>
 </body>