<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry080.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry082.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO III.: DAS'ARATHA'S PRECEPTS.</h3>
 <p>
 The monarch with the prayer complied<br>
 Of suppliant hands, on every side<br>
 Uplifted like a lotus-bed:<br>
 And then these gracious words he said:<br>
 'Great joy and mighty fame are mine<br>
 Because your loving hearts incline,<br>
 In full assembly clearly shown<br>
 To place my Ráma on the throne.'<br>
 Then to Vas'ishtha, standing near,<br>
 And Vámadeva loud and clear<br>
 The monarch spoke that all might hear:<br>
 ''Tis pure and lovely Chaitra now<br>
 When flowers are sweet on every bough;<br>
 All needful things with haste prepare<br>
 That Ráma be appointed heir.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then burst the people's rapture out<br>
 In loud acclaim and joyful shout;<br>
 And when the tumult slowly ceased<br>
 The king addressed the holy priest:<br>
 'Give order, Saint, with watchful heed<br>
 For what the coming rite will need.<br>
 This day let all things ready wait<br>
 Mine eldest son to consecrate.'<br>
 Best of all men of second birth<br>
 Vas'ishtha heard the lord of earth,<br>
 And gave commandment to the bands<br>
 Of servitors with lifted hands<br>
 Who waited on their master's eye:<br>
 'Now by to-morrow's dawn supply<br>
 Rich gold and herbs and gems of price<br>
 And offerings for the sacrifice,<br>
 Wreaths of white flowers and roasted rice.<br>
 And oil and honey, separate;<br>
 New garments and a car of state,<br>
 An elephant with lucky signs,<br>
 A fourfold host in ordered lines,<br>
 The white umbrella, and a pair<br>
 Of chowries,  <a name="fr_261"></a><a href="#fn_261"><font size="1">1</font></a> and a banner fair;<br>
 A hundred vases, row on row,<br>
 To shine like fire in splendid glow,<br>
 A tiger's mighty skin, a bull<br>
 With gilded horns most beautiful.<br>
 All these, at dawn of coming day,<br>
 Around the royal shrine array,<br>
 Where burns the fire's undying ray.<br>
 Each palace door, each city gate<br>
 With wreaths of sandal decorate.<br>
 And with the garlands' fragrant scent<br>
 Let clouds of incense-smoke be blent.<br>
 Let food of noble kind and taste<br>
 Be for a hundred thousand placed;<br>
 Fresh curds with streams of milk bedewed<br>
 To feed the Bráhman multitude.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_92"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 92</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With care be all their wants supplied.<br>
 And mid the twice-born chiefs divide<br>
 Rich largess, with the early morn,<br>
 And oil and curds and roasted corn.<br>
 Soon as the sun has shown his light<br>
 Pronounce the prayer to bless the rite,<br>
 And then be all the Bráhmans called<br>
 And in their ordered seats installed.<br>
 Let all musicians skilled to play,<br>
 And dancing-girls in bright array<br>
 Stand ready in the second ring<br>
 Within the palace of the king.<br>
 Each honoured tree, each holy shrine<br>
 With leaves and flowery wreaths entwine,<br>
 And here and there beneath the shade<br>
 Be food prepared and presents laid.<br>
 Then brightly clad, in warlike guise,<br>
 With long swords girt upon their thighs,<br>
 Let soldiers of the nobler sort<br>
 March to the monarch's splendid court.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus gave command the twice-born pair<br>
 To active servants stationed there.<br>
 Then hastened to the king and said<br>
 That all their task was duly sped,<br>
 The king to wise Sumantra spake:<br>
 'Now quick, my lord, thy chariot take,<br>
 And hither with thy swiftest speed<br>
 My son, my noble Ráma lead.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sumantra, ere the word was given,<br>
 His chariot from the court had driven,<br>
 And Ráma, best of all who ride<br>
 In cars, came sitting by his side.<br>
 The lords of men had hastened forth<br>
 From east and west and south and north,<br>
 Áryan and stranger, those who dwell<br>
 In the wild wood and on the fell,<br>
 And as the Gods to Indra, they<br>
 Showed honour to the king that day.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Like Vásav, when his glorious form<br>
 Is circled by the Gods of storm,<br>
 Girt in his hall by kings he saw<br>
 His car-borne Ráma near him draw,<br>
 Like him who rules the minstrel band<br>
 Of heaven;  <a name="fr_262"></a><a href="#fn_262"><font size="1">1</font></a> whose valour tilled the land,<br>
 Of mighty arm and stately pride<br>
 Like a wild elephant in stride,<br>
 As fair in face as that fair stone<br>
 Dear to the moon, of moonbeams grown,  <a name="fr_263"></a><a href="#fn_263"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 With noble gifts and grace that took<br>
 The hearts of all, and chained each look,<br>
 World-cheering as the Lord of Rain<br>
 When floods relieve the parching plain.<br>
 The father, as the son came nigh,<br>
 Gazed with an ever-thirstier eye.<br>
 Sumantra helped the prince alight<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 From the good chariot passing bright,<br>
 And as to meet his sire he went<br>
 Followed behind him reverent.<br>
 Then Ráma clomb, the king to seek<br>
 That terrace like Kailása's peak,<br>
 And reached the presence of the king,<br>
 Sumantra closely following.<br>
 Before his father's face he came,<br>
 Raised suppliant hands and named his name,  <a name="fr_264"></a><a href="#fn_264"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 And bowing lowly as is meet<br>
 Paid reverence to the monarch's feet.<br>
 But soon as Das'aratha viewed<br>
 The prince in humble attitude,<br>
 He raised him by the hand in haste<br>
 And his beloved son embraced,<br>
 Then signed him to a glorious throne,<br>
 Gem-decked and golden, near his own.<br>
 Then Ráma, best of Raghu's line,<br>
 Made the fair seat with lustre shine<br>
 As when the orient sun upsprings<br>
 And his pure beam on Meru flings.<br>
 The glory flashed on roof and wall,<br>
 And with strange sheen suffused the hall,<br>
 As when the moon's pure rays are sent<br>
 Through autumn's star-lit firmament.<br>
 Then swelled his breast with joy and pride<br>
 As his dear son the father eyed,<br>
 E'en as himeself more fair arrayed<br>
 In some clear mirror's face displayed.<br>
 The aged monarch gazed awhile,<br>
 Then thus addressed him with a smile,<br>
 As Kas'yap, whom the worlds revere,<br>
 Speaks for the Lord of Gods to hear:<br>
 'O thou of all my sons most dear,<br>
 In virtue best, thy father's peer,<br>
 Child of my consort first in place,<br>
 Mine equal in her pride of race,<br>
 Because the people's hearts are bound<br>
 To thee by graces in thee found,<br>
 Be thou in Pushya's favouring hour<br>
 Made partner of my royal power.<br>
 I know that thou by nature's bent<br>
 Both modest art and excellent,<br>
 But though thy gifts no counsel need<br>
 My love suggests the friendly rede.<br>
 Mine own dear son, be modest still,<br>
 And rule each sense with earnest will.<br>
 Keep thou the evils far away<br>
 That spring from love and anger's sway.<br>
 Thy noble course alike pursue<br>
 In secret as in open view,<br>
 And every nerve, the love to gain<br>
 Of ministers and subjects, strain.<br>
 The happy prince who sees with pride<br>
 His thriving people satisfied;<br>
 Whose arsenals with arms are stored,<br>
 And treasury with golden hoard,--<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_93"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 93</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 His friends rejoice as joyed the Blest<br>
 When Amrit crowned their eager quest.<br>
 So well, my child, thy course maintain,<br>
 And from all ill thy soul refrain.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The friends of Ráma, gathered nigh,<br>
 Longing their lord to gratify,<br>
 Ran to Kaus'alyá's bower to tell<br>
 The tidings that would please her well.<br>
 She, host of dames, with many a gem,<br>
 And gold, and kine rewarded them.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma paid the reverence due,<br>
 Mounted the chariot, and withdrew,<br>
 And to his splendid dwelling drove<br>
 While crowds to show him honour strove.<br>
     The people, when the monarch's speech<br>
         Their willing ears had heard,<br>
     Were wild with joy as though on each<br>
         Great gifts had been conferred.<br>
     With meek and low salute each man<br>
         Turned to his home away,<br>
     And there with happy heart began<br>
         To all the Gods to pray.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_261"></a><a href="ry081.htm#fr_261">91:1</a>  Whisks, usually made of the long tails
 of the Yak.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_262"></a><a href="ry081.htm#fr_262">92:1</a>  Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_263"></a><a href="ry081.htm#fr_263">92:2</a>  The Chandrakánta or Moonstone, a
 sort of crystal supposed to be composed
 of congealed moonbeams.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_264"></a><a href="ry081.htm#fr_264">92:1b</a>  A customary mark of respect to a
 superior.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry082.htm">Next: Canto IV.: Ráma Summoned.</a></center>
 </body>