<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry084.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry086.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VII.: MANTHARÁ'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 It chanced a slave-born handmaid, bred<br>
 With Queen Kaikeyí, fancy-fed,<br>
 Mounted the stair and stood upon<br>
 The terrace like the moon that shone.<br>
 Thence Manthará at ease surveyed<br>
 Ayodhyá to her eyes displayed,<br>
 Where water cooled the royal street,<br>
 Where heaps of flowers were fresh and sweet,<br>
 And costly flags and pennons hung<br>
 On roof and tower their shadow flung;<br>
 With covered ways prepared in haste,<br>
 And many an awning newly placed;<br>
 With sandal-scented streams bedewed,<br>
 Thronged by a new bathed multitude:<br>
 Whose streets were full of Bráhman bands<br>
 With wreaths and sweetmeats in their hands.<br>
 Loud instruments their music raised,<br>
 And through the town, where'er she gazed,<br>
 The doors of temples glittered white,<br>
 And the maid marvelled at the sight.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Of Ráma's nurse who, standing by,<br>
 Gazed with a joy-expanded eye,<br>
 In robes of purest white attired,<br>
 The wondering damsel thus inquired:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Does Ráma's mother give away<br>
 Rich largess to the crowds to-day,<br>
 On some dear object fondly bent,<br>
 Or blest with measureless content?<br>
 What mean these signs of rare delight<br>
 On every side that meet my sight?<br>
 Say, will the king with joy elate<br>
 Some happy triumph celebrate?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The nurse, with transport uncontrolled,<br>
 Her glad tale to the hump-back told:<br>
 'Our lord the king to-morrow morn<br>
 Will consecrate his eldest-born,<br>
 And raise, in Pushya's favouring hour,<br>
 Prince Ráma to the royal power.'<br>
 As thus the nurse her tidings spoke,<br>
 Rage in the hump-back's breast awoke.<br>
 Down from the terrace, like the head<br>
 Of high Kailása's hill, she sped.<br>
 Sin in her thoughts, her soul aflame,<br>
 Where Queen Kaikeyí slept, she came:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_97"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 97</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Why sleepest thou?' she cried, 'arise,<br>
 Peril is near, unclose thine eyes.<br>
 Ah, heedless Queen, too blind to know<br>
 Wnat floods of sin above thee flow!<br>
 Thy boasts of love and grace are o'er:<br>
 Thine is the show and nothing more.<br>
 His favour is an empty cheat,<br>
 A torrent dried by summer's heat.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus by the artful maid addressed<br>
 In cruel words from raging breast,<br>
 The queen, sore troubled, spoke in turn;<br>
 'What evil news have I to learn?<br>
 That mournful eye, that altered cheek<br>
 Of sudden woe or danger speak.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such were the words Kaikeyí said:<br>
 Then Manthará, her eyeballs red<br>
 With fury, skilled with treacherous art<br>
 To grieve yet more her lady's heart,<br>
 From Ráma, in her wicked hate,<br>
 Kaikeyí's love to alienate,<br>
 Upon her evil purpose bent<br>
 Began again most eloquent:<br>
 'Peril awaits thee swift and sure,<br>
 And utter woe defying cure;<br>
 King Das'aratha will create<br>
 Prince Ráma Heir Associate.<br>
 Plunged in the depths of wild despair,<br>
 My soul a prey to pain and care,<br>
 As though the flames consumed me, zeal<br>
 Has brought me for my lady's weal,<br>
 Thy grief, my Queen, is grief to me:<br>
 Thy gain my greatest gain would be.<br>
 Proud daughter of a princely line,<br>
 The rights of consort queen are thine.<br>
 How art thou, born of royal race,<br>
 Blind to the crimes that kings debase!<br>
 Thy lord is gracious, to deceive,<br>
 And flatters, but thy soul to grieve,<br>
 While thy pure heart that thinks no sin<br>
 Knows not the snares that hem thee in.<br>
 Thy husband's lips on thee bestow<br>
 Soft soothing word, an empty show:<br>
 The wealth, the substance, and the power<br>
 This day will be Kaus'alyá's dower.<br>
 With crafty soul thy child he sends<br>
 To dwell among thy distant friends,<br>
 And, every rival far from sight,<br>
 To Ráma gives the power and might.<br>
 Ah me! for thou, unhappy dame,<br>
 Deluded by a husband's name,<br>
 With more than mother's love hast pressed<br>
 A serpent to thy heedless breast,<br>
 And cherished him who works thee woe,<br>
 No husband but a deadly foe.<br>
 For like a snake, unconscious Queen,<br>
 Or enemy who stabs unseen,<br>
 King Das'aratha all untrue<br>
 Has dealt with thee and Bharat too.<br>
 Ah, simple lady, long beguiled<br>
 By his soft words who falsely smiled!<br>
 Poor victim of the guileless breast,<br>
 A happier fate thou meritest.<br>
 For thee and thine destruction waits<br>
 When he Prince Ráma consecrates.<br>
 Up, lady, while there yet is time;<br>
 Preserve thyself, prevent the crime.<br>
 Up, from thy careless ease, and free<br>
 Thyself, O Queen, thy son, and me!'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Delighted at the words she said,<br>
 Kaikeyí lifted from the bed,<br>
 Like autumn's moon, her radiant head,<br>
 And joyous at the tidings gave<br>
 A jewel to the hump-back slave;<br>
 And as she gave the precious toy<br>
 She cried in her exceeding joy:<br>
 'Take this, dear maiden, for thy news<br>
 Most grateful to mine ear, and choose<br>
 What grace beside most fitly may<br>
 The welcome messenger repay.<br>
 I joy that Ráma gains the throne:<br>
 Kaus'alyá's son is as mine own.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry086.htm">Next: Canto VIII: Manthará's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>