<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry092.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry094.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XV.: THE PREPARATIONS.</h3>
 <p>
     There slept the Bráhmans, deeply read<br>
 In Scripture, till the night had fled;<br>
 Then, with the royal chaplains, they<br>
 Took each his place in long array.<br>
 There gathered fast the chiefs of trade,<br>
 Nor peer nor captain long delayed,<br>
 Assembling all in order due<br>
 The consecrating rite to view.<br>
     The morning dawned with cloudless ray<br>
 On Pushya's high auspicious day,<br>
 And Cancer with benignant power<br>
 Looked down on Ráma's natal hour.<br>
 The twice-born chiefs, with zealous heed,<br>
 Made ready what the rite would need.<br>
 The well-wrought throne of holy wood<br>
 And goldon urns in order stood.<br>
 There was the royal chair whereon<br>
 A tiger's skin resplendent shone;<br>
 There water, brought for sprinkling thence<br>
 When, in their sacred confluence,<br>
 Blend. Jumná's waves with Gangá's tide,<br>
 From many a holy flood beside,<br>
 From brook and fountain far and near,<br>
 From pool and river, sea and mere.<br>
 And there were honey, curd, and oil,<br>
 Parched rice and grass, the garden's spoil,<br>
 Fresh milk, eight girls in bright attire,<br>
 An elephant with eyes of tire;<br>
 And urns of gold and silver made,<br>
 With milky branches overlaid,<br>
 All brimming from each sacred flood,<br>
 And decked with many a lotus bud<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_110"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 110</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And dancing-women fair and free,<br>
 Gay with their gems, were there to see,<br>
 Who stood in bright apparel by<br>
 With lovely brow and witching eye.<br>
 White flashed the jewelled chouri there,<br>
 And shone like moonbeams through the air;<br>
 The white umbrella overhead<br>
 A pale and moonlike lustre shed,<br>
 Wont in pure splendour to precede,<br>
 And in such rites the pomp to lead.<br>
 There stood the charger by the side<br>
 Of the great bull of snow-white hide;<br>
 There was all music soft and loud,<br>
 And bards and minstrels swelled the crowd.<br>
 For now the monarch bade combine<br>
 Each custom of his ancient line<br>
 With every rite Ayodhyá's state<br>
 Observed, her kings to consecrate.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then, summoned by the king's behest,<br>
 The multitudes together pressed,<br>
 And, missing still the royal sire,<br>
 Began, impatient, to inquire:<br>
 'Who to our lord will tidings bear<br>
 That all his people throng the square?<br>
 Where is the king? the sun is bright,<br>
 And all is ready for the rite.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As thus they spoke, Sumantra, tried<br>
 In counsel, to the chiefs replied,<br>
 Gathered from lands on every side:<br>
 'To Ráma's house I swiftly drave,<br>
 For so the king his mandate gave.<br>
 Our aged lord and Ráma too<br>
 In honour high hold all of you:<br>
 I in your words (be long your days!)<br>
 Will ask him why he thus delays.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spoke the peer in Scripture read,<br>
 And to the ladies' bower he sped.<br>
 Quick through the gates Sumantra hied,<br>
 Which access ne'er to him denied.<br>
 Behind the curtained screen he drew,<br>
 Which veiled the chamber from the view.<br>
 In benediction loud he raised<br>
 His voice, and thus the monarch praised:<br>
 'Sun, Moon, Kuvera, S'iva bless<br>
 Kakutstha's son with high success!<br>
 The Lords of air, flood, fire decree<br>
 The victory, my King, to thee!<br>
 The holy night has past away,<br>
 Auspicious shines the morning's ray.<br>
 Rise, Lord of men, thy part to take<br>
 In the great rite. Awake! awake!<br>
 Bráhmans and captains, chiefs of trade,<br>
 All wait in festive garb arrayed;<br>
 For thee they look with eager eyes:<br>
 O Raghu's son, awake! arise.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To him in holy Scripture read,<br>
 Who hailed him thus, the monarch said,<br>
 Upraising from his sleep his head:<br>
 'Go. Ráma hither lead as thou<br>
 W (<i>illegible</i>) but now.<br>
 Come, tell me why my mandate laid<br>
 Upon thee thus is disobeyed.<br>
 Away! and Ráma hither bring;<br>
 I sleep not: make no tarrying.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus gave the king command anew:<br>
 Sumantra from his lord withdrew;<br>
 With head in lowly reverence bent,<br>
 And filled with thoughts of joy, he went,<br>
 The royal street he traversed, where<br>
 Waved flag and pennon to the air,<br>
 And, as with joy the car he drove,<br>
 He let his eyes delighted rove.<br>
 On every side, where'er he came,<br>
 He heard glad words, their theme the same,<br>
 As in their joy the gathered folk<br>
 Of Ráma and the throning spoke.<br>
 Then saw he Ráma's palace bright<br>
 And vast as Mount Kailása's height,<br>
 That glorious in its beauty showed<br>
 As Indra's own supreme abode:<br>
 With folding doors both high and wide;<br>
 With hundred porches beautified:<br>
 Where golden statues towering rose<br>
 O'er gemmed and coralled porticoes<br>
 Bright like a cave in Meru's side,<br>
 Or clouds through Autumn's sky that ride:<br>
 Festooned with length of bloomy twine,<br>
 Flashing with pearls and jewels' shine,<br>
 While sandal-wood and aloe lent<br>
 The mingled riches of their scent;<br>
 With all the odorous sweets that fill<br>
 The breezy heights of Dardar's hill.<br>
 There by the gate the Sáras screamed,<br>
 And shrill-toned peacocks' plumage gleamed.<br>
 Its floors with deftest art inlaid,<br>
 Its sculptured wolves in gold arrayed,<br>
 With its bright sheen the palace took<br>
 The mind of man and chained the look,<br>
 For like the sun and moon it glowed,<br>
 And mocked Kuvera's loved abode.<br>
 Circling the walls a crowd he viewed<br>
 Who stood in reverent attitude,<br>
 With throngs of countrymen who sought<br>
 Acceptance of the gifts they brought.<br>
 The elephant was stationed there,<br>
 Appointed Ráma's self to bear;<br>
 Adorned with pearls, his brow and cheek<br>
 Were sandal-dyed in many a streak,<br>
 While he, in stature, bulk, and pride,<br>
 With Indra's own Airávat  <a name="fr_280"></a><a href="#fn_280"><font size="1">1</font></a> vied.<br>
 Sumantra, borne by coursers fleet,<br>
 Flashing a radiance o'er the street,<br>
     To Ráma's palace flew,<br>
 And all who lined the royal road,<br>
 Or thronged the prince's rich abode,<br>
     Rejoiced as near he drew.<br>
 And with delight his bosom swelled<br>
 As onward still his course he held<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_111"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 111</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     Through many a sumptuous court<br>
 Like Indra's palace nobly made,<br>
 Where peacocks revelled in the shade,<br>
     And beasts of silvan sort.<br>
 Through many a hall and chamber wide,<br>
 That with Kailása's splendour vied.<br>
     Or mansions of the Blest,<br>
 While Ráma's friends, beloved and tried,<br>
 Before his coming stepped aside,<br>
     Still on Sumantra pressed.<br>
 He reached the chamber door, where stood<br>
 Around his followers young and good,<br>
 Bard, minstrel, charioteer,<br>
 Well skilled the tuneful chords to sweep,<br>
 With soothing strain to lull to sleep,<br>
     Or laud their master dear.<br>
 Then, like a dolphin darting through<br>
 Unfathomed depths of ocean's blue<br>
     With store of jewels decked,<br>
 Through crowded halls that rock-like rose,<br>
 Or as proud hills where clouds repose,<br>
     Sumantra sped unchecked--<br>
 Halls like the glittering domes on high<br>
 Reared for the dwellers of the sky<br>
     By heavenly architect.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_280"></a><a href="ry093.htm#fr_280">110:1</a>  The elephant of Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry094.htm">Next: Canto XVI.: Ráma Summoned.</a></center>
 </body>