<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry096.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry098.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIX.: RÁMA'S PROMISE.</h3>
 <p>
 Calm and unmoved by threatened woe<br>
 The noble conqueror of the foe<br>
 Answered the cruel words she spoke,<br>
 Nor quailed beneath the murderous stroke:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Yea, for my father's promise sake<br>
 I to the wood my way will take,<br>
 And dwell a lonely exile there<br>
 In hermit dress with matted hair.<br>
 One thing alone I fain would learn,<br>
 Why is the king this day so stern?<br>
 Why is the scourge of foes so cold,<br>
 Nor gives me greeting as of old?<br>
 Now let not anger flush thy cheek:<br>
 Before thy face the truth I speak,<br>
 In hermit's coat with matted hair<br>
 To the wild wood will I repair.<br>
 How can I fail his will to do,<br>
 Friend, master, grateful sovereign too?<br>
 One only pang consumes my breast.<br>
 That his own lips have not expressed<br>
 His will, nor made his longing known<br>
 That Bharat should ascend the throne.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_115"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 115</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To Bharat I would yield my wife,<br>
 My realm and wealth, mine own dear life,<br>
 Unasked I fain would yield them all:<br>
 More gladly at my father's call,<br>
 More gladly when the gift may free<br>
 His honour and bring joy to thee.<br>
 Thus, lady, his sad heart release<br>
 From the sore shame, and give him peace.<br>
 But tell me, O, I pray thee, why<br>
 The lord of men, with downcast eye,<br>
 Lies prostrate thus, and one by one<br>
 Down his pale cheek the tear-drops run.<br>
 Let couriers to thy father speed<br>
 On horses of the swiftest breed,<br>
 And, by the mandate of the king,<br>
 Thy Bharat to his presence bring.<br>
 My father's words I will not stay<br>
 To question, but this very day<br>
 To Dandak's pathless wild will fare,<br>
 For twice seven years an exile there.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When Ráma thus had made reply<br>
 Kaikeyí's heart with joy beat high.<br>
 She, trusting to the pledge she held,<br>
 The youth's departure thus impelled:<br>
 ''Tis well. Be messengers despatched<br>
 On coursers ne'er for fleetness matched,<br>
 To seek my father's home and lead<br>
 My Bharat back with all their speed.<br>
 And, Ráma, as I ween that thou<br>
 Wilt scarce endure to linger now,<br>
 So surely it were wise and good<br>
 This hour to journey to the wood.<br>
 And if, with shame cast down and weak,<br>
 No word to thee the king can speak,<br>
 Forgive, and from thy mind dismiss<br>
 A trifle in an hour like this.<br>
 But till thy feet in rapid haste<br>
 Have left the city for the waste,<br>
 And to the distant forest fled,<br>
 He will not bathe nor call for bread.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Woe! woe!' from the sad monarch burst,<br>
 In surging floods of grief immersed;<br>
 Then swooning, with his wits astray,<br>
 Upon the gold-wrought couch he lay,<br>
 And Ráma raised the aged king:<br>
 But the stern queen, unpitying,<br>
 Checked not her needless words, nor spared<br>
 The hero for all speed prepared,<br>
 But urged him with her bitter tongue,<br>
 Like a good horse with lashes stung.<br>
 She spoke her shameful speech. Serene<br>
 He heard the fury of the queen,<br>
 And to her words so vile and dread<br>
 Gently, unmoved in mind, he said:<br>
 'I would not in this world remain<br>
 A grovelling thrall to paltry gain,<br>
 But duty's path would fain pursue,<br>
 True as the saints themselves are true.<br>
 From death itself I would not fly<br>
 My father's wish to gratify.<br>
 What deed soe'er his loving son<br>
 May do to please him, think it done.<br>
 Amid all duties, Queen, I count<br>
 This duty first and paramount,<br>
 That sons, obedient, aye fulfil<br>
 Their honoured fathers' word and will.<br>
 Without his word, if thou decree,<br>
 Forth to the forest will I flee,<br>
 And there shall fourteen years be spent<br>
 Mid lonely wilds in banishment.<br>
 Methinks thou couldst not hope to find<br>
 One spark of virtue in my mind,<br>
 If thou, whose wish is still my lord,<br>
 Hast for this grace the king implored.<br>
 This day I go, but, ere we part,<br>
 Must cheer my Sítá's tender heart.<br>
 To my dear mother bid farewell;<br>
 Then to the woods, a while to dwell.<br>
 With thee, O Queen, the care must rest<br>
 That Bharat hear his sire's behest,<br>
 And guard the land with righteous sway,<br>
 For such the law that lives for aye.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 In speechless woe the father heard,<br>
 Wept with loud cries, but spoke no word.<br>
 Then Ráma touched his senseless feet,<br>
 And hers, for honour most unmeet;<br>
 Round both his circling steps he bent,<br>
 Then from the bower the hero went.<br>
 Soon as he reached the gate he found<br>
 His dear companions gathered round.<br>
 Behind him came Sumitrás child<br>
 With weeping eyes so sad and wild.<br>
 Then saw he all that rich array<br>
 Of vases for the glorious day.<br>
 Round them with reverent stops he paced,<br>
 Nor veiled his eye, nor moved in haste.<br>
 The loss of empire could not dim<br>
 The glory that encompassed him.<br>
 So will the Lord of Cooling Rays  <a name="fr_286"></a><a href="#fn_286"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 On whom the world delights to gaze,<br>
 Through the great love of all retain<br>
 Sweet splendour in the time of wane.<br>
 Now to the exile's lot resigned<br>
 He left the rule of earth behind:<br>
 As though all worldly cares he spurned<br>
 No trouble was in him discerned.<br>
 The chouries that for kings are used,<br>
 And white umbrella, he refused,<br>
 Dismissed his chariot and his men,<br>
 And every friend and citizen.<br>
 He ruled his senses, nor betrayed<br>
 The grief that on his bosom weighed,<br>
 And thus his mother's mansion sought<br>
 To tell the mournful news he brought.<br>
 Nor could the gay-clad people there<br>
 Who flocked round Ráma true and fair,<br>
 One sign of altered fortune trace<br>
 Upon the splendid hero's face.<br>
 Nor had the chieftain, mighty-armed.<br>
 Lost the bright look all hearts that charmed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_116"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 116</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 As e'en from autumn moons is thrown<br>
 A splendour which is all their own.<br>
 With his sweet voice the hero spoke<br>
 Saluting all the gathered folk,<br>
 Then righteous-souled and great in fame<br>
 Close to his mother's house he came.<br>
 Lakshman the brave, his brother's peer<br>
 In princely virtues, followed near,<br>
 Sore troubled, but resolved to show<br>
 No token of his secret woe.<br>
 Thus to the palace Ráma went<br>
     Where all were gay with hope and joy;<br>
 But well he knew the dire event<br>
     That hope would mar, that bliss destroy.<br>
 So to his grief he would not yield<br>
     Lest the sad change their hearts might rend,<br>
 And, the dread tiding unrevealed,<br>
     Spared from the blow each faithful friend.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_286"></a><a href="ry097.htm#fr_286">115:1</a>  The Moon.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry098.htm">Next: Canto XX.: Kaus'alyá's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>