<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry090.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry092.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIII.: DAS'ARATHA'S DISTRESS.</h3>
 <p>
 Unworthy of his mournful fate,<br>
 The mighty king, unfortunate,<br>
 Lay prostrate in unseemly guise,<br>
 As, banished from the blissful skies,<br>
 Yayáti, in his evil day.<br>
 His merit all exhausted, lay.  <a name="fr_276"></a><a href="#fn_276"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The queen, triumphant in the power<br>
 Won by her beauty's fatal dower,<br>
 Still terrible and unsubdued,<br>
 Her dire demand again renewed:<br>
 'Great Monarch,'twas thy boast till now<br>
 To love the truth and keep the vow;<br>
 Then wherefore would thy lips refuse<br>
 The promised boon 'tis mine to choose?'<br>
     King Das'aratha, thus addressed,<br>
 With anger raging in his breast,<br>
 Sank for a while beneath the pain,<br>
 Then to Kaikeyí spoke again:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_107"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 107</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Childless so long, at length I won,<br>
 With mighty toil, from Heaven a son,<br>
 Ráma, the mighty-armed; and how<br>
 Shall I desert my darling now?<br>
 A scholar wise, a hero bold,<br>
 Of patient mood, with wrath controlled,<br>
 How can I bid my Ráma fly,<br>
 My darling of the lotus eye?<br>
 In heaven itself I scarce could bear,<br>
 When asking of my Ráma there,<br>
 To hear the Gods his griefs declare,<br>
 And O, that death would take me hence<br>
 Before I wrong his innocence!'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As thus the monarch wept and wailed,<br>
 And maddening grief his heart assailed,<br>
 The sun had sought his resting-place,<br>
 And night was closing round apace.<br>
 But yet the moon-crowned night could bring<br>
 No comfort to the wretched king.<br>
 As still he mourned with burning sighs<br>
 And fixed his gaze upon the skies:<br>
 'O Night whom starry fires adorn,<br>
 I long not for the coming morn.<br>
 Be kind and show some mercy: see,<br>
 My suppliant hands are raised to thee.<br>
 Nay, rather fly with swifter pace;<br>
 No longer would I see the face<br>
 Of Queen Kaikeyí, cruel, dread,<br>
 Who brings this woe upon mine head.'<br>
 Again with suppliant hands he tried<br>
 To move the queen, and wept and sighed:<br>
 'To me, unhappy me, inclined<br>
 To good, sweet dame, thou shouldst be kind;<br>
 Whose life is well-nigh fled, who cling<br>
 To thee for succour, me thy king.<br>
 This, only this, is all my claim:<br>
 Have mercy, O my lovely dame.<br>
 None else have I to take my part.<br>
 Have mercy: thou art good at heart.<br>
 Hear, lady of the soft black eye.<br>
 And win a name that ne'er shall die:<br>
 Let Ráma rule this glorious land,<br>
 The gift of thine imperial hand.<br>
 O lady of the dainty waist,<br>
 With eyes and lips of beauty graced,<br>
 Please Ráma, me, each saintly priest,<br>
 Bharat, and all from chief to least.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     She heard his wild and mournful cry,<br>
         She saw the tears his speech that broke,<br>
     Saw her good husband's reddened eye,<br>
             But, cruel still, no word she spoke.<br>
     His eyes upon her face he bent,<br>
         And sought for mercy, but in vain:<br>
     She claimed his darling's banishment,<br>
         He swooned upon the ground again.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_276"></a><a href="ry091.htm#fr_276">106:1</a>  Only the highest merit obtains a home
 in heaven for ever. Minor degrees of
 merit procure only leases of heavenly
 mansions terminable after periods proportioned
 to the fund which buys them. King
 Yayáti went to heaven and when his term
 expired was unceremoniously ejected, and
 thrown down to earth.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry092.htm">Next: Canto XIV.: Ráma Summoned.</a></center>
 </body>