<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry089.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry091.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XII.: DASARATHA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 The monarch, as Kaikeyi pressed<br>
 With cruel words her dire request,<br>
 Stood for a time absorbed in thought<br>
 While anguish in his bosom wrought.<br>
 Does some wild dream my heart assail!<br>
 Or do my troubled senses fail!<br>
 Does some dire portent scare my view?<br>
 Or frenzy's stroke my soul subdue?'<br>
 Thus as he thought, his troubled mind<br>
 In doubt and dread no rest could find,<br>
 Distressed and trembling like a deer<br>
 Who sees the dreaded tigress near.<br>
 On the bare ground his limbs he thres,<br>
 And many a long sigh he drew,<br>
 Like a wild snake, with fury blind,<br>
 By charms within a ring confined.<br>
 Once as the monarch's fury woke,<br>
 'Shame on thee!' from his bosom broke,<br>
 And then in sense-bewildering pain<br>
 He fainted on the ground again.<br>
 At length, when slowly strength returned,<br>
 He answered as his eyeballs burned<br>
 With the wild fury of his ire<br>
 Consuming her, as 'twere, with fire:<br>
 'Fell traitress, thou whose thought design<br>
 The utter ruin of my line,<br>
 What wrong have I or Ráma done?<br>
 Speak murderess, speak thou wicked one,<br>
 Seeks he not evermore to please<br>
 Thee with all sonlike courtesies?<br>
 By what persuasion art thou led<br>
 To bring this ruin on his head?<br>
 Ah me, that fondly unaware<br>
 I brought thee home my life to snare,<br>
 Called daughter of a king, in truth<br>
 A serpent with a venomed tooth!<br>
 What fault can I pretend to find<br>
 In Ráma praised by all mankind,<br>
 That I my darling should forsake?<br>
 No, take my life, my glory take:<br>
 Let either queen be from me torn,<br>
 But not my well-loved eldest-born,<br>
 Him but to see is highest bliss,<br>
 And death itself his face to miss.<br>
 The world may sunless stand, the grain<br>
 May thrive without the genial rain,<br>
 But if my Ráma be no nigh<br>
 My spirit from its frame will fly.<br>
 Enough, thine impious plan forgo,<br>
 O thou who plottest sin and woe.<br>
 My head before my feet, I kneel,<br>
 And pray thee some compassion feel,<br>
 O wicked dame, what can have led<br>
 Thy heart to dare a plot so dread?<br>
 Perchance thy purpose is to sound<br>
 The grace thy son with me has found;<br>
 Perchance the words that, all these days,<br>
 Thou hast said in Ráma's praise,<br>
 Were only feigned; designed to cheer<br>
 With flatteries a father's ear.<br>
 Soon as thy grief, my Queen, I knew,<br>
 My bosom felt the anguish too.<br>
 In empty halls art thou posessed,<br>
 And subject to anothers' hest?<br>
 Now on Ikshváku's ancient race<br>
 Falls foul disorder and disgrace,<br>
 If thou, O Queen, whose heart so long<br>
 Has loved the good should choose the wrong<br>
 Not once, O large-eyed dame, hast thou<br>
 Been guilty of offence till now,<br>
 Nor said a word to make me grieve,<br>
 Nor will I now thy sin believe.<br>
 With thee my Ráma used to hold<br>
 Like place with Bharat lofty-souled.<br>
 As thou so ofthe, when the pair<br>
 Were children yet, wouldst fain declare.<br>
 And can thy righteous soul endure<br>
 That Ráma glorious, pious, pure,<br>
 Should to the distant wilds be sent<br>
 For fourteen years of banishment?<br>
 Yea, Ráma Bharat's self exceeds<br>
 In love to thee and sonlike deeds,<br>
 And, for deserving love of thee,<br>
 As Bharat, even so is he.<br>
 Who better than that chieftain may<br>
 Obedience, love, and honour pay,<br>
 They dignity with care protect,<br>
 Thy slightest word and wish respect?<br>
 Of all his countless followers none<br>
 Can breathe a word against my son;<br>
 Of many thousands not a dame<br>
 Can hint reproach or whisper blame.<br>
 All creatures feel the sweet control<br>
 Of Ráma's pure and gentle soul.<br>
 The pride of Manu's race he binds<br>
 To him the people's grateful minds.<br>
 He wins the subjects with his truth,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_104"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 104</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The poor with gifts and gentle ruth,<br>
 His teachers with his docile will,<br>
 The foemen with his archer skill.<br>
 Truth, purity, religious zeal,<br>
 The hand to give, the heart to feel.<br>
 The love that ne'er betrays a friend,<br>
 The rectitude that naught can bend,<br>
 Knowledge, and meek obedience grace<br>
 My Ráma pride of Raghu's race.<br>
 Canst thou thine impious plot design<br>
 'Gainst him in whom these virtues shine,<br>
 Whose glory with the sages vies,<br>
 Peer of the Gods who rule the skies!<br>
 From him no harsh or bitter word<br>
 To pain one creature have I heard,<br>
 And how can I my sin address,<br>
 For thee, with words of bitterness?<br>
 Have mercy, Queen: some pity show<br>
 To see my tears of anguish now,<br>
 And listen to my mournful cry,<br>
 A poor old man who soon must die.<br>
 Whate'er this sea-girt land can boast<br>
 Of rich and rare from coast to coast,<br>
 To thee, my Queen, I give it all:<br>
 But O, thy deadly words recall:<br>
 O see, my suppliant hands entreat,<br>
 Again my lips are on thy feet:<br>
 Save Ráma, save my darling child,<br>
 Nor kill me with this sin defiled.'<br>
 He grovelled on the ground, and lay<br>
 To burning grief a senseless prey,<br>
 And ever and anon, assailed<br>
 By floods of woe he wept and wailed,<br>
 Striving with eager speed to gain<br>
 The margent of his sea of pain.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With fiercer words she fiercer yet<br>
 The hapless father's pleading met:<br>
 'O Monarch, if thy soul repent<br>
 The promise and thy free consent,<br>
 How wilt thou in the world maintain<br>
 Thy fame for truth unsmirched with stain?<br>
 When gathered kings with thee converse,<br>
 And bid thee all the tale rehearse.<br>
 What wilt thou say, O truthful King,<br>
 In answer to their questioning?<br>
 'She to whose love my life I owe,<br>
 Who saved me smitten by the foe,<br>
 Kaikeyí, for her tender care,<br>
 Was cheated of the oath I sware. <a name="fr_275"></a><a href="#fn_275"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Thus wilt thou answer, and forsworn<br>
 Wilt draw on thee the princes' scorn.<br>
 Learn from that tale, the 'Hawk and Dove,'<br>
 How strong for truth was Saivya's love.<br>
 Pledged by his word the monarch gave<br>
 His flesh the suppliant bird to save.<br>
 So King Alarka gave his eyes,<br>
 And gained a mansion in the skies.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 The Sea himself his promise keeps,<br>
 And ne'er beyond his limit sweeps.<br>
 My deeds of old again recall,<br>
 Nor let thy bond dishonoured fall.<br>
 The rights of truth thou wouldst forget<br>
 Thy Ráma on the throne to set,<br>
 And let thy days in pleasure glide,<br>
 Fond King, Kaus'alyá by thy side.<br>
 Now call it by what name thou wilt,<br>
 Justice, injustice, virtue, guilt,<br>
 Thy word and oath remain the same,<br>
 And thou must yield what thus I claim.<br>
 If Ráma be anointed, I<br>
 This very day will surely die,<br>
 Before thy face will poison drink,<br>
 And lifeless at thy feet will sink.<br>
 Yea, better far to die than stay<br>
 Alive to see one single day<br>
 The crowds before Kaus'alyá stand<br>
 And hail her queen with reverent hand.<br>
 Now by my son, myself, I swear,<br>
 No gift, no promise whatsoe'er<br>
 My steadfast soul shall now content,<br>
 But only Ráma's banishment.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 So far she spake by rage impelled,<br>
 And then the queen deep silence held.<br>
 He heard her speech full fraught with ill,<br>
 But spoke no word bewildered still,<br>
 Gazed on his love once held so dear<br>
 Who spoke unlovely rede to hear;<br>
 Then as he slowly pondered o'er<br>
 The queen's resolve and oath she swore.<br>
 Once sighing forth, Ah Ráma! he<br>
 Fell prone as falls a smitten tree.<br>
 His senses lost like one insane,<br>
 Faint as a sick man weak with pain,<br>
 Or like a wounded snake dismayed,<br>
 So lay the king whom earth obeyed.<br>
 Long burning sighs he slowly heaved,<br>
 As, conquered by his woe, he grieved,<br>
 And thus with tears and sobs between<br>
 His sad faint words addressed the queen:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'By whom, Kaikeyí, wast thou taught<br>
 This flattering hope with ruin fraught?<br>
 Have goblins seized thy soul, O dame,<br>
 Who thus canst speak and feel no shame?<br>
 Thy mind with sin is sicklied o'er,<br>
 From thy first youth ne'er seen before.<br>
 A good and loving wife wast thou,<br>
 But all, alas! is altered now.<br>
 What terror can have seized thy breast<br>
 To make thee frame this dire request,<br>
 That Bharat o'er the land may reign,<br>
 And Ráma in the woods remain?<br>
 Turn from thine evil ways, O turn,<br>
 And thy perfidious counsel spurn,<br>
 If thou would fain a favour do<br>
 To people, lord, and Bharat too.<br>
 O wicked traitress, fierce and vile,<br>
 Who lovest deeds of sin and guile,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_105"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 105</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 What crime or grievance dost thou see,<br>
 What fault in Ráma or in me?<br>
 Thy son will ne'er the throne accept<br>
 If Ráma from his rights be kept,<br>
 For Bharat's heart more firmly yet<br>
 Than Ráma's is on justice set.<br>
 How shall I say, Go forth, and brook<br>
 Upon my Ráma's face to look,<br>
 See his pale cheek and ashy lips<br>
 Dimmed like the moon in sad eclipse?<br>
 How see the plan so well prepared<br>
 When prudent friends my counsels shared,<br>
 All ruined, like a host laid low<br>
 Beneath some foeman's murderous blow?<br>
 What will these gathered princes say,<br>
 From regions near and far away?<br>
 'O'erlong endures the monarch's reign,<br>
 For now he is a child again.'<br>
 When many a good and holy sage<br>
 In Scripture versed, revered for age,<br>
 Shall ask for Ráma, what shall I<br>
 Unhappy, what shall I reply?<br>
 'By Queen Kaikeyí long distressed<br>
 I drove him forth and dispossessed.'<br>
 Although herein the truth I speak,<br>
 They all will hold me false and weak.<br>
 What will Kaus'alyá say when she<br>
 Demands her son exiled by me?<br>
 Alas! what answer shall I frame,<br>
 Or how console the injured dame?<br>
 She like a slave on me attends,<br>
 And with a sister's care she blends<br>
 A mother's love, a wife's, a friend's.<br>
 In spite of all her tender care,<br>
 Her noble son, her face most fair,<br>
 Another queen I could prefer<br>
 And for thy sake neglected her,<br>
 But now, O Queen, my heart is grieved<br>
 For love and care by thee received,<br>
 E'en as the sickening wretch repents<br>
 His dainty meal and condiments.<br>
 And how will Queen Sumitrá trust<br>
 The husband whom she finds unjust,<br>
 Seeing my Ráma driven hence<br>
 Dishonoured, and for no offence?<br>
 Ah! the, Videhan bride will hear<br>
 A double woe, a double fear,<br>
 Two whelming sorrows at one breath,<br>
 Her lord's disgrace, his father's death.<br>
 Mine aged bosom she will wring<br>
 And kill me with her sorrowing,<br>
 Sad as a fair nymph left to weep<br>
 Deserted on Himálaya's steep.<br>
 For short will be my days, I ween,<br>
 When I with mournful eyes have seen<br>
 My Ráma wandering forth alone<br>
 And heard dear Sítá sob and moan.<br>
 Ah me! my fond belief I rue.<br>
 Vile traitress, loved as good and true,<br>
 As one who in his thirst has quaffed,<br>
 Deceived by looks, a deadly draught.<br>
 Ah! thou hast slain me, murderess, while<br>
 Soothing my soul with words of guile,<br>
 As the wild hunter kills the deer<br>
 Lured from the brake his song to hear.<br>
 Soon every honest tongue will fling<br>
 Reproach on the dishonest king;<br>
 The people's scorn in every street<br>
 The seller of his child will meet,<br>
 And such dishonour will be mine<br>
 As whelms a Bráhman drunk with wine.<br>
 Ah me, for my unhappy fate,<br>
 Compelled thy words to tolerate!<br>
 Such woe is sent to scourge a crime<br>
 Committed in some distant time.<br>
 For many a day with sinful care<br>
 I cherished thee, thou sin and snare,<br>
 Kept thee, unwitting, like a cord<br>
 Destined to bind its hapless lord.<br>
 Mine hours of ease I spent with thee,<br>
 Nor deemed my love my death would be,<br>
 While like a heedless child I played,<br>
 On a black snake my hand I laid.<br>
 A cry from every mouth will burst<br>
 And all the world will hold me curst,<br>
 Because I saw my high-souled son<br>
 Unkinged, unfathered, and undone;<br>
 'The king by power of love beguiled<br>
 Is weaker than a foolish child,<br>
 His own beloved son to make<br>
 An exile for a woman's sake.<br>
 By chaste and holy vows restrained,<br>
 By reverend teachers duly trained.<br>
 When he his virtue's fruit should taste<br>
 He falls by sin and woe disgraced.'<br>
 Two words will all his answer be<br>
 When I pronounce the stern decree,<br>
 'Hence, Ráma, to the woods away,'<br>
 All he will say is, I obey.<br>
 O, if he would my will withstand<br>
 When banished from his home and land.<br>
 This were a comfort in my woe;<br>
 But he will ne'er do this, I know.<br>
 My Ráma to the forest fled,<br>
 And curses thick upon my head,<br>
 Grim Death will bear me hence away,<br>
 His world-abominated prey.<br>
 When I am gone and Ráma too.<br>
 How wilt thou those I love pursue?<br>
 What vengeful sin will be designed<br>
 Against the queens I leave behind?<br>
 When thou hast slain her son and me<br>
 Kaus'alyá soon will follow: she<br>
 Will sink beneath her sorrows' weight,<br>
 And die like me disconsolate,<br>
 Exist, Kaikeyí, in thy pride,<br>
 And let thy heart be gratified,<br>
 When thou my queens and me hast hurled,<br>
 And children, to the under world.<br>
 Soon wilt thou rule as empress o'er<br>
 My noble house unvext before.<br>
 But then to wild confusion left,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_106"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 106</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Of Ráma and of me bereft.<br>
 If Bharat to thy plan consent<br>
 And long for Ráma's banishment,<br>
 Ne'er let his hands presume to pay<br>
 The funeral honours to my clay<br>
 Vile foe, thou cause of all mine ill,<br>
 Obtain at last thy cursed will.<br>
 A widow soon shalt thou enjoy<br>
 The sweets of empire with thy boy.<br>
 O Princess, sure some evil fate<br>
 First brought thee here to devastate,<br>
 In whom the night of ruin lies<br>
 Veiled in a consort's fair disguise.<br>
 The scorn of all and deepest shame<br>
 Will long pursue my hated name,<br>
 And dire disgrace on me will press,<br>
 Misled by thee to wickedness.<br>
 How shall my Ráma, whom, before,<br>
 His elephant or chariot bore,<br>
 Now with his feet, a wanderer, tread<br>
 The forest wilds around him spread?<br>
 How shall my son, to please whose taste,<br>
 The deftest cooks, with earrings graced,<br>
 With rivalry and jealous care<br>
 The dainty meal and cates prepare--<br>
 How shall he now his life sustain<br>
 With acid fruit and woodland grain?<br>
 He spends his time unvext by cares,<br>
 And robes of precious texture wears:<br>
 How shall he, with one garment round<br>
 His limbs recline upon the ground?<br>
 Whose was this plan, this cruel thought<br>
 Unheard till now, with ruin fraught,<br>
 To make thy son Ayodhyá's king,<br>
 And send my Ráma wandering?<br>
 Shame, shame on women! Vile, untrue,<br>
 Their selfish ends they still pursue.<br>
 Not all of womankind I mean.<br>
 But more than all this wicked queen.<br>
     O worthless, cruel, selfish dame,<br>
         I brought thee home, my plague and woe.<br>
     What fault in me hast thou to blame,<br>
         Or in my son who loves thee so?<br>
     Fond wives may from their husbands flee,<br>
         And fathers may their sons desert,<br>
     But all the world would rave to see<br>
         My Ráma touched with deadly hurt.<br>
     I joy his very step to hear,<br>
         As though his godlike form I viewed;<br>
     And when I see my Ráma near<br>
         I feel my youth again renewed.<br>
     There might be life without the sun,<br>
         Yea, e'en if Indra sent no rain,<br>
     But, were my Ráma banished, none<br>
         Would, so I think, alive remain.<br>
     A foe that longs my life to take,<br>
         I brought thee here my death to be,<br>
     Caressed thee long, a venomed snake,<br>
         And through my folly die, Ah me!<br>
     Ráma and me and Lakshman slay,<br>
         And then with Bharat rule the state;<br>
     So bring the kingdom to decay,<br>
         And fawn on those thy lord who hate,<br>
     Plotter of woe, for evil bred,<br>
         For such a speech why do not all<br>
     Thy teeth from out thy wicked head<br>
         Split in a thousand pieces fall?<br>
     My Ráma's words are ever kind,<br>
         He knows not how to speak in ire:<br>
     Then how canst thou presume to find<br>
         A fault in him whom all admire?<br>
     Yield to despair, go mad, or die,<br>
         Or sink within the rifted earth;<br>
     Thy fell request will I deny,<br>
         Thou shamer of thy royal birth.<br>
     Thy longer life I scarce can bear,<br>
         Thou ruin of my home and race,<br>
     Who wouldst my heart and heartstrings tear,<br>
         Keen as a razor, false and base.<br>
     My life is gone, why speak of joy?<br>
         For what, without my son, were sweet?<br>
     Spare, lady, him thou canst destroy;<br>
         I pray thee as I touch thy feet.'<br>
     He fell and wept with wild complaint.<br>
         Heart-struck by her presumptuous speech,<br>
     But could not touch, so weak and faint,<br>
         The cruel feet he strove to reach.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_275"></a><a href="ry090.htm#fr_275">104:1</a>  This story is told in the Mahábhárat.
 A free version of it may be found in <i>Scenes
 from the Rámáyan, etc.</i></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry091.htm">Next: Canto XIII.: Das'aratha's Distress.</a></center>
 </body>