<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry103.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry105.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVI.: ALONE WITH SITÁ</h3>
 <p>
 So Ráma, to his purpose true,<br>
 To Queen Kaus'alyá bade adieu,<br>
 Received the benison she gave,<br>
 And to the path of duty clave.<br>
 As through the crowded street he passed,<br>
 A radiance on the way he cast,<br>
 And each fair grace, by all approved,<br>
 The bosoms of the people moved.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Now of the woeful change no word<br>
 The fair Videhan bride had heard;<br>
 The thought of that imperial rite<br>
 Still filled her bosom with delight.<br>
 With grateful heart and joyful thought<br>
 The Gods in worship she had sought,<br>
 And, well in royal duties learned,<br>
 Sat longing till her lord returned,<br>
 Not all unmarked by grief and shame<br>
 Within his sumptuous home he came,<br>
 And hurried through the happy crowd<br>
 With eye dejected, gloomy-browed.<br>
 Up Sitá sprang, and every limb<br>
 Trembled with fear at sight of him.<br>
 She marked that cheek where anguish fed,<br>
 Those senses care-disquieted.<br>
 For, when he looked on her, no more<br>
 Could his heart hide the load it bore,<br>
 Nor could the pious chief control<br>
 The paleness o'er his cheek that stole.<br>
 His altered cheer, his brow bedewed<br>
 With clammy drops, his grief she viewed,<br>
 And cried, consumed with fires of woe.<br>
 'What, O my lord, has changed thee so?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_126"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 126</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Vrihaspati looks down benign,<br>
 And the moon rests in Pushya's sign,<br>
 As Bráhmans sage this day declare:<br>
 Then whence, my lord, this grief and care?<br>
 Why does no canopy, like foam<br>
 For its white beauty, shade thee home,<br>
 Its hundred ribs spread wide to throw<br>
 Splendour on thy fair head below?<br>
 Where are the royal fans, to grace<br>
 The lotus beauty of thy face,<br>
 Fair as the moon or wild-swan's wing,<br>
 And waving round the new-made king?<br>
 Why do no sweet-toned bards rejoice<br>
 To hail thee with triumphant voice?<br>
 No tuneful heralds love to raise<br>
 Loud music in their monarch's praise?<br>
 Why do no Bráhmans, Scripture-read,<br>
 Pour curds and honey on thy head,<br>
 Anointed, as the laws ordain,<br>
 With holy rites, supreme to reign?<br>
 Where are the chiefs of every guild?<br>
 Where are the myriads should have filled<br>
 The streets, and followed home their king<br>
 With merry noise and triumphing?<br>
 Why does no gold-wrought chariot lead<br>
 With four brave horses, best for speed?<br>
 No elephant precede the crowd<br>
 Like a huge hill or thunder cloud,<br>
 Marked from his birth for happy fate,<br>
 Whom signs auspicious decorate?<br>
 Why does no henchman, young and fair,<br>
 Precede thee, and delight to bear<br>
 Entrusted to his reverent hold<br>
 The burthen of thy throne of gold?<br>
 Why, if the consecrating rite<br>
 Be ready, why this mournful plight?<br>
 Why do I see this sudden change,<br>
 This altered mien so sad and strange?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To her, as thus she weeping cried,<br>
 Raghu's illustrious son replied:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Sítá, my honoured sire's decree<br>
 Commands me to the woods to flee.<br>
 O high-born lady, nobly bred<br>
 In the good paths thy footsteps tread,<br>
 Hear, Janak's daughter, while I tell<br>
 The story as it all befell.<br>
 Of old my father true and brave<br>
 Two boons to Queen Kaikeyí gave.<br>
 Through these the preparations made<br>
 For me today by her are stayed,<br>
 For he is bound to disallow<br>
 This promise by that earlier vow.<br>
 In Dandak forest wild and vast<br>
 Must fourteen years by me be passed.<br>
 My father's will makes Bharat heir,<br>
 The kingdom and the throne to share.<br>
 Now, ere the lonely wild I seek,<br>
 I come once more with thee to speak.<br>
 In Bharat's presence, O my dame,<br>
 Ne'er speak with pride of Ráma's name:<br>
 Another's eulogy to hear<br>
 Is hateful to a monarch's ear.<br>
 Thou must with love his rule obey<br>
 To whom my father yields the sway.<br>
 With love and sweet observance learn<br>
 His grace, and more the king's, to earn.<br>
 Now, that my father may not break<br>
 The words of promise that he spake,<br>
 To the drear wood my steps are bent:<br>
 Be firm, good Sítá, and content.<br>
 Through all that time, my blameless spouse,<br>
 Keep well thy fasts and holy vows,<br>
 Rise from thy bed at break of day,<br>
 And to the Gods due worship pay.<br>
 With meek and lowly love revere<br>
 The lord of men, my father dear,<br>
 And reverence to Kaus'alyá show,<br>
 My mother, worn with eld and woe:<br>
 By duty's law, O best of dames,<br>
 High worship from thy love she claims,<br>
 Nor to the other queens refuse<br>
 Observance, rendering each her dues:<br>
 By love and fond attention shown<br>
 They are my mothers like mine own.<br>
 Let Bharat and S'atrughna bear<br>
 In thy sweet love a special share:<br>
 Dear as my life, O let them be<br>
 Like brother and like son to thee.<br>
 In every word and deed refrain<br>
 From aught that Bharat's soul may pain:<br>
 He is Ayodhyá's king and mine,<br>
 The head and lord of all our line.<br>
 For those who serve and love them much<br>
 With weariless endeavour, touch<br>
 And win the gracious hearts of kings.<br>
 While wrath from disobedience springs.<br>
 Great monarchs from their presence send<br>
 Their lawful sons who still offend,<br>
 And welcome to the vacant place<br>
 Good children of an alien race.<br>
 Then, best of women, rest thou here,<br>
 And Bharat's will with love revere.<br>
 Obedient to thy king remain,<br>
 And still thy vows of truth maintain.<br>
     To the wide wood my steps I bend:<br>
           Make thou thy dwelling here;<br>
     See that thy conduct ne'er offend,<br>
           And keep my words, my dear.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry105.htm">Next: Canto XXVII.: Sítá's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>