<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry106.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry108.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIX.: SÍTÁ'S APPEAL.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Ráma spake. Her lord's address<br>
 The lady heard with deep distress.<br>
 And, as the tear bedimmed her eye,<br>
 In soft low accents made reply:<br>
 'The perils of the wood, and all<br>
 The woes thou countest to appal,<br>
 Led by my love I deem not pain;<br>
 Each woe a charm, each loss a gain,<br>
 Tiger, and elephant, and deer,<br>
 Bull, lion, buffalo, in fear,<br>
 Soon as thy matchless form they see,<br>
 With every silvan beast will flee.<br>
 With thee, O Ráma, I must go:<br>
 My sire's command ordains it so.<br>
 Bereft of thee, my lonely heart<br>
 Must break, and life and I must part.<br>
 While thou, O mighty lord, art nigh,<br>
 Not even He who rules the sky,<br>
 Though He is strongest of the strong,<br>
 With all his might can do me wrong.<br>
 Nor can a lonely woman left<br>
 By her dear husband live bereft.<br>
 In my great love, my lord, I ween,<br>
 The truth of this thou mayst have seen.<br>
 In my sire's palace long ago<br>
 I heard the chief of those who know,<br>
 The truth-declaring Bráhmans, tell<br>
 My fortune, in the wood to dwell.<br>
 I heard their promise who divine<br>
 The future by each mark and sign,<br>
 And from that hour have longed to lead<br>
 The forest life their lips decreed.<br>
 Now, mighty Ráma, I must share<br>
 Thy father's doom which sends thee there;<br>
 In this I will not be denied,<br>
 But follow, love, where thou shalt guide.<br>
 O husband, I will go with thee,<br>
 Obedient to that high decree,<br>
 Now let the Bráhmans' words be true,<br>
 For this the time they had in view.<br>
 I know full well the wood has woes;<br>
 But they disturb the lives of those<br>
 Who in the forest dwell, nor hold<br>
 Their rebel senses well controlled.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_129"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 129</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 In my sire's halls, ere I was wed,<br>
 I heard a dame who begged her bread<br>
 Before my mother's face relate<br>
 What griefs a forest life await.<br>
 And many a time in sport I prayed<br>
 To seek with thee the greenwood shade,<br>
 For O, my heart on this is set,<br>
 To follow thee, dear anchoret.<br>
 May blessings on thy life attend:<br>
 I long with thee my steps to bend,<br>
 For with such hero as thou art<br>
 This pilgrimage enchants my heart.<br>
 Still close, my lord, to thy dear side<br>
 My spirit will be purified:<br>
 Love from all sin my soul will free:<br>
 My husband is a God to me.<br>
 So, love, with thee shall I have bliss<br>
 And share the life that follows this.<br>
 I heard a Brahman, dear to fame,<br>
 This ancient Scripture text proclaim:<br>
 'The woman whom on earth below<br>
 Her parents on a man bestow,<br>
 And lawfully their hands unite<br>
 With water and each holy rite,<br>
 She in this world shall be his wife,<br>
 His also in the after life.'<br>
 Then tell me, O beloved, why<br>
 Thou wilt this earnest prayer deny,<br>
 Nor take me with thee to the wood,<br>
 Thine own dear wife so true and good.<br>
 But if thou wilt not take me there<br>
 Thus grieving in my wild despair,<br>
 To fire or water I will fly,<br>
 Or to the poisoned draught, and die.'<br>
 So thus to share his exile, she<br>
 Besought him with each earnest plea,<br>
 Nor could she yet her lord persuade<br>
 To take her to the lonely shade.<br>
 The answer of the strong-armed chief<br>
 Smote the Videhan's soul with grief,<br>
 And from her eyes the torrents came<br>
 bathing the bosom of the dame.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry108.htm">Next: Canto XXX.: The Triumph of Love.</a></center>
 </body>