<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry105.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry107.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVIII.: THE DANGERS OF THE WOOD.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Sitá spake, and he who knew<br>
 His duty, to its orders true,<br>
 Was still reluctant as the woes<br>
 Of forest life before him rose.<br>
 He sought to soothe her grief, to dry<br>
 The torrent from each brimming eye,<br>
 And then, her firm resolve to shake,<br>
 These words to pious hero spake:<br>
     'O daughter of a noble line,<br>
 Whose steps from virtue ne'er decline,<br>
 Remain, thy duties here pursue,<br>
 As my fond heart would have thee do.<br>
 Now hear me, Sitá, fair and weak,<br>
 And do the words that I shall speak.<br>
 Attend and hear while I explain<br>
 Each danger in the wood, each pain.<br>
 Thy lips have spoken: I condemn<br>
 The foolish words that fell from them.<br>
 This senseless plan, this wish of thine<br>
 To live a forest life, resign.<br>
 The names of trouble and distress<br>
 Suit well the tangled wilderness.<br>
 In the wild wood no joy I know,<br>
 A forest life is nought but woe.<br>
 The lion in his moutain cave<br>
 Answers the torrents as they rave,<br>
 And forth his voice of terror throws:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_128"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 128</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 There mighty monsters fearless play,<br>
 And in their maddened onset slay<br>
 The hapless wretch who near them goes:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 'Tis hard to ford each treacherous flood,<br>
 So thick with crocodiles and mud,<br>
 Where the wild elephants repose:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 Or far from streams the wanderer strays<br>
 Through thorns and creeper-tangled ways,<br>
 While round him many a wild-cock crows:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 On 'the cold ground upon a heap<br>
 On gathered leaves condemned to sleep,<br>
 Toil-wearied, will his eyelids close:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 Long days and nights must he content<br>
 His soul with scanty aliment,<br>
 What fruit the wind from branches blows:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 O Sitá, while his strength may last,<br>
 The ascetic in the wood must fast,<br>
 Coil on his head his matted hair,<br>
 And bark must be his only wear.<br>
 To Gods and spirits day by day<br>
 The ordered worship he must pay,<br>
 And honour with respectful care<br>
 Each wandering guest who meets him there.<br>
 The bathing rites he ne'er must shun<br>
 At dawn, at noon, at set of sun,<br>
 Obedient to the law he knows:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 To grace the altar must be brought<br>
 The gift of flowers his hands have sought--<br>
 The debt each pious hermit owes:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 The devotee must be content<br>
 To live, severely abstinent,<br>
 On what the chance of fortune shows:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 Hunger afflicts him evermore:<br>
 The nights are black, the wild winds roar;<br>
 And there are dangers worse than those:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 There creeping things in every form<br>
 Infest the earth, the serpents swarm,<br>
 And each proud eye with fury glows:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 The snakes that by the river hide<br>
 In sinuous course like rivers glide,<br>
 And line the path with deadly foes:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 Scorpions, and grasshoppers, and flies<br>
 Disturb the wanderer as he lies,<br>
 And wake him from his troubled doze:<br>
 The wood, my love, is full of woes.<br>
 Trees, thorny bushes, intertwined,<br>
 Their branched ends together bind,<br>
 And dense with grass the thicket grows:<br>
 The wood, my dear, is full of woes,<br>
 With many ills the flesh is tried,<br>
 When these and countless fears beside<br>
 Vex those who in the wood remain:<br>
 The wilds are naught but grief and pain.<br>
 Hope, anger must be cast aside,<br>
 To penance every thought applied:<br>
 No fear must be of things to fear:<br>
 Hence is the wood for ever drear.<br>
 Enough, my love: thy purpose quit:<br>
 For forest life thou art not fit.<br>
 As thus I think on all, I see<br>
 The wild wood is no place for thee.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry107.htm">Next: Canto XXIX.: Sítá's Appeal.</a></center>
 </body>