<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry110.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry112.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIII.: THE PEOPLE'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Sitá and the princes brave<br>
 Much wealth to all the Bráhmans gave<br>
 Then to the monarch's house the three<br>
 Went forth the aged king to see.<br>
 The princes from two servants took<br>
 Those heavenly arms of glorious look,<br>
 Adorned with garland and with band<br>
 By Sitá's beautifying hand.<br>
 On each high house a mournful throng<br>
 Had gathered ere they passed along,<br>
 Who gzed in pure unselfish woe<br>
 From turret, root, and portico.<br>
 So dense the crowd that blocked the ways,<br>
 The rest, unable there to gaze,<br>
 Were fain each terrace to ascend.<br>
 And thence their eyes on Ráma bend.<br>
 Then as the gathered multitude<br>
 On foot their well-loved Ráma viewed.<br>
 No royal shade to screen his head.<br>
 Such words, disturbed in grief they said:<br>
 'O look, our hero, wont to ride<br>
 Leading a host in perfect pride--<br>
 Now Lakshman, sole of all his friends,<br>
 With Sitá on his steps attends.<br>
 Though he has known the sweets of power,<br>
 And poured his gifts in liberal shower,<br>
 From duty's path he will not swerve,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_134"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 134</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 But, still his father's truth preserve.<br>
 And she whose form so soft and fair<br>
 Was veiled from spirits of the air,<br>
 Now walks unsheltered from the day,<br>
 Seen by the crowds who throng the way.<br>
 Ah, for that gently-nurtured form!<br>
 How will it fade with sun and storm!<br>
 How will the rain, the cold, the heat<br>
 Mar fragrant breast and tinted feet!<br>
 Surely some demon has possessed<br>
 His sire, and speaks within his breast,<br>
 Or how could one that is a king<br>
 Thus send his dear son wandering?<br>
 It were a deed unkindly done<br>
 To banish e'en a worthless son:<br>
 But what, when his pure life has gained<br>
 The hearts of all, by love enchained?<br>
 Six sovereign virtues join to grace<br>
 Ráma the foremost of his race:<br>
 Tender and kind and pure is he,<br>
 Docile, religious, passion-free.<br>
 Hence misery strikes not him alone:<br>
 In bitterest grief the people moan,<br>
 Like creatures of the stream, when dry<br>
 In the great heat the channels lie.<br>
 The world is mournful with the grief<br>
 That falls on its beloved chief,<br>
 As, when the root is hewn away,<br>
 Tree, fruit, and flower, and bud decay.<br>
 The soul of duty, bright to see,<br>
 He is the root of you and me;<br>
 And all of us, who share his grief,<br>
 His branches, blossom, fruit, and leaf.<br>
 Now like the faithful Lakshman, we<br>
 Will follow and be true as he;<br>
 Our wives and kinsmen call with speed,<br>
 And hasten where our lord shall lead.<br>
 Yes, we will leave each well-loved spot,<br>
 The field, the garden, and the cot,<br>
 And, sharers of his weal and woe,<br>
 Behind the pious Ráma go.<br>
 Our houses, empty of their stores,<br>
 With ruined courts and broken doors,<br>
 With all their treasures borne away.<br>
 And gear that made them bright and gay:<br>
 O'errun by rats, with dust o'erspread,<br>
 Shrines, whence the deities have fled,<br>
 Where not a hand the water pours,<br>
 Or sweeps the long-neglected floors,<br>
 No incense loads the evening air,<br>
 No Bráhmans chant the text and prayer,<br>
 No fire of sacrifice is bright,<br>
 No gift is known, no sacred rite;<br>
 With floors which broken vessels strew,<br>
 As if our woes had crushed them too--<br>
 Of these be stern Kaikeyí queen,<br>
 And rule o'er homes where we have been.<br>
 The wood where Ráma's feet may roam<br>
 Shall be our city and our home,<br>
 And this fair city we forsake,<br>
 Our flight a wilderness shall make.<br>
 Each serpent from his hole shall hie,<br>
 The birds and beasts from mountain fly,<br>
 Lions and elephants in fear<br>
 Shall quit the woods when we come near,<br>
 Yield the broad wilds for us to range,<br>
 And take our city in exchange.<br>
 With Ráma will we hence, content<br>
 If, where he is, our days be spent.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such were the varied words the crowd<br>
 Of all conditions spoke aloud.<br>
 And Ráma heard their speeches, yet<br>
 Changed not his purpose firmly set.<br>
 His father's palace soon he neared,<br>
 That like Kailása's hill appeared.<br>
 Like a wild elephant he strode<br>
 Right onward to the bright abode.<br>
 Within the palace court he stepped,<br>
 Where ordered bands their station kept,<br>
 And saw Sumantra standing near<br>
 With down-cast eye and gloomy cheer.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry112.htm">Next: Canto XXXIV.: Ráma In The Palace.</a></center>
 </body>