<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry114.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry116.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVII.: THE COATS OF BARK.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus spake the virtuous sage: and then<br>
 Ráma addressed the king of men.<br>
 In laws of meek behaviour bred,<br>
 Thus to his sire he meekly said:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'King, I renounce all earthly care,<br>
 And live in woods on woodland fare.<br>
 What, dead to joys, have I to do<br>
 With lordly train and retinue!<br>
 Who gives his elephant and yet<br>
 Upon the girths his heart will set?<br>
 How can a cord attract his eyes<br>
 Who gives away the nobler prize?<br>
 Best of the good, with me he led<br>
 No host, my King with banners spread.<br>
 All wealth, all lordship I resign:<br>
 The hermit's dress alone be mine.<br>
 Before I go, have here conveyed<br>
 A little basket and a spade.<br>
 With these alone I go, content,<br>
 For fourteen years of banishment.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With her own hands Kaikeyí took<br>
 The hermit coats of bark, and, 'Look,'<br>
 She cried with bold unblushing brow<br>
 Before the concourse, 'Dress thee now.'<br>
 That lion leader of the brave<br>
 Took from her hand the dress she gave,<br>
 Cast his fine raiment on the ground,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_139"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 139</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And round his waist the vesture bound.<br>
 Then quick the hero Lakshman too<br>
 His garment from his shoulders threw,<br>
 And, in the presence of his sire,<br>
 Indued the ascetic's rough attire.<br>
 But Sítá, in her silks arrayed,<br>
 Threw glances, trembling and afraid,<br>
 On the bark coat she had to wear,<br>
 Like a shy doe that eyes the snare.<br>
 Ashamed and weeping for distress<br>
 From the queen's hand she took the dress.<br>
 The fair one, by her husband's side<br>
 Who matched heaven's minstrel monarch,  <a name="fr_312"></a><a href="#fn_312"><font size="1">1</font></a> cried:<br>
 'How bind they on their woodland dress,<br>
 Those hermits of the wilderness?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 There stood the pride of Janak's race<br>
 Perplexed, with sad appealing face.<br>
 One coat the lady's fingers grasped,<br>
 One round her neck she feebly clasped,<br>
 But failed again, again, confused<br>
 By the wild garb she ne'er had used.<br>
 Then quickly hastening Ráma, pride<br>
 Of all who cherish virtue, tied<br>
 The rough bark mantle on her, o'er<br>
 The silken raiment that she wore.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then the sad women when they saw<br>
 Ráma the choice bark round her draw,<br>
 Rained water from each tender eye,<br>
 And cried aloud with bitter cry:<br>
 'O, not on her, beloved, not<br>
 On Sítá falls thy mournful lot.<br>
 If, faithful to thy father's will,<br>
 Thou must go forth, leave Sítá still.<br>
 Let Sítá still remaining here<br>
 Our hearts with her loved presence cheer.<br>
 With Lakshman by thy side to aid<br>
 Seek thou, dear son, the lonely shade.<br>
 Unmeet, one good and fair as she<br>
 Should dwell in woods a devotee.<br>
 Let not our prayers be prayed in vain:<br>
 Let beauteous Sítá yet remain;<br>
 For by thy love of duty tied<br>
 Thou wilt not here thyself abide.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then the king's venerable guide<br>
 Vas'ishtha, when he saw each coat<br>
 Enclose the lady's waist and throat,<br>
 Her zeal with gentle words repressed,<br>
 And Queen Kaikeyí thus addressed:<br>
 'O evil-hearted sinner, shame<br>
 Of royal Kekaya's race and name;<br>
 Who matchless in thy sin couldst cheat<br>
 Thy lord the king with vile deceit;<br>
 Lost to all sense of duty, know<br>
 Sítá to exile shall not go.<br>
 Sítá shall guard, as 'twere her own,<br>
 The precious trust of Ráma's throne.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Those joined by wedlock's sweet control<br>
 Have but one self and common soul.<br>
 Thus Sítá shall our empress be,<br>
 For Ráma's self and soul is she.<br>
 Or if she still to Ráma cleave<br>
 And for the woods the kingdom leave:<br>
 If naught her loving heart deter,<br>
 We and this town will follow her.<br>
 The warders of the queen shall take<br>
 Their wives and go for Ráma's sake,<br>
 The nation with its stores of grain,<br>
 The city's wealth shall swell his train.<br>
 Bharat, S'atrughna both will wear<br>
 Bark mantles, and his lodging share,<br>
 Still with their elder brother dwell<br>
 In the wild wood, and serve him well.<br>
 Rest here alone, and rule thy state<br>
 Unpeopled, barren, desolate;<br>
 Be empress of the land and trees,<br>
 Thou sinner whom our sorrows please.<br>
 The land which Ráma reigns not o'er<br>
 Shall bear the kingdom's name no more:<br>
 The woods which Ráma wanders through<br>
 Shall be our home and kingdom too.<br>
 Bharat, be sure, will never deign<br>
 O'er realms his father yields, to reign.<br>
 Nay, if the king's true son he be,<br>
 He will not, sonlike, dwell with thee.<br>
 Nay, shouldst thou from the earth arise,<br>
 And send thy message from the skies,<br>
 To his forefathers' custom true<br>
 No erring course would he pursue.<br>
 So hast thou, by thy grievous fault,<br>
 Offended him thou wouldst exalt.<br>
 In all the world none draws his breath<br>
 Who loves not Ráma, true to death.<br>
 This day, O Queen, shalt thou behold<br>
 Birds, deer, and beasts from lea and fold<br>
 Turn to the woods in Ráma's train.<br>
 And naught save longing trees remain.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_312"></a><a href="ry115.htm#fr_312">139:1</a>  Chitraratha, King of the celestial
 choristers.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry116.htm">Next: Canto XXXVIII.: Care For Kaus'alyá</a></center>
 </body>