<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry126.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry128.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIX.: THE CROSSING OF THE RIVERS.</h3>
 <p>
 Now Ráma, ere the night was fled,<br>
 O'er many a league of road had sped,<br>
 Till, as his course he onward held,<br>
 The morn the shades of night dispelled.<br>
 The rites of holy dawn he paid,<br>
 And all the country round surveyed.<br>
 He saw, as still he hurried through<br>
 Wth steeds which swift as arrows flew,<br>
 Hamlets and groves with blossoms fair,<br>
 And fields which showed the tillers' care,<br>
 While from the clusteied dwellings near<br>
 The words of peasants reached his ear:<br>
 'Fie on our lord the king, whose soul<br>
 Is yielded up to love's control!<br>
 Fie on the vile Kaikevi! Shame<br>
 On that malicious sinful dame,<br>
 Who, keenly bent on cruel deeds,<br>
 No hounds of righht and virtue heeds,<br>
 But with her wicked art has sent<br>
 So good a prince to banishment,<br>
 Wi-o, tender-hearted, ruling well<br>
 His senses in the woods to dwell.<br>
 Ah cruel king! his heart of steel<br>
 For his own son no love could feel,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Who with the sinless Ráma parts,<br>
 The darling of the people's hearts.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     These words he heard the peasants say,<br>
 Who dwelt in hamlets by the way,<br>
 And, lord of all the realm by right,<br>
 Through Kosala pursued his flight.<br>
 Through the auspicious flood, at last,<br>
 Of Vesasruti's stream he passed,<br>
 Aud onward to the place he sped<br>
 By Saint Agastya tenanted.<br>
 Still on for many an hour he hied,<br>
 And crossed the stream whose fooling tide<br>
 Rolls onward till she meets the sea,<br>
 The herd-frequented Gomatil<br>
 Borne by his rapid horses o'er,<br>
 He reached that river's further shore.<br>
 And Syandiká's,whose svan-loved stream,<br>
 Resounded with the peacock's scream.<br>
 Then as he journeyed on his road<br>
 To hvs Videhan bride he showed<br>
 The populous land which Manu old<br>
 To King IKshvaku gave to hold.<br>
 The glorious prince, the lord of men<br>
 Looked on the charioteer, and then<br>
 Voiced like a wild swan, loud and clear.<br>
 He spake these words and bade him hear:<br>
 'When shall I, with returning feet<br>
 My father and my mother meet?<br>
 When shall I lead the hunt once more<br>
 In bloomy woods on Sarju's shore?<br>
 Most eagerly I long to ride<br>
 Urging the chase on Sarju's side.<br>
 For royal saints have seen no blame<br>
 In this, the monarch's matchless game.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus speeding on,--no reft or stay,--<br>
 Ikshvaku's son pursued his way.<br>
 Oft his sweet voice the silence broke,<br>
 And thus on varied themes he spoke.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry128.htm">Next: Canto L.: The Halt Under The Ingudí.</a></center>
 </body>