<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry128.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry130.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LI.: LAKSHMAN'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 As Lakshman still his vigil held<br>
 By unaffected love impelled,<br>
 Guha, whose heart the sight distressed,<br>
 With words like these the prince addressed:<br>
 'Beloved youth, this pleasant bed<br>
 Was brought for thee, for thee is spread;<br>
 On this, my Prince, thine eyelids close,<br>
 And heal fatigue with sweet repose.<br>
 My men are all to labour trained,<br>
 But hardship thou hast ne'er sustained.<br>
 All we this night our watch will keep<br>
 And guard Kakutstha's son asleep,<br>
 In all the world there breathes not one<br>
 More dear to me than Raghu's son.<br>
 The words I speak, heroic youth.<br>
 Are true: I swear it by my truth.<br>
 Through his dear grace supreme renown<br>
 Will, so I trust, my wishes crown.<br>
 So shall my life rich store obtain<br>
 Of merit, blest with joy and gain.<br>
 While Raghu's son and Sítá lie<br>
 Entranced in happy slumber, I<br>
 Will, with my trusty bow in hand,<br>
 Guard my dear friend with all my band.<br>
 To me, who oft these forests range,<br>
 ls naught therein or new or strange.<br>
 We could with equal might oppose<br>
 A four-fold army led by foes.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then royal Lakshman made reply:<br>
 'With thee to stand as guardian nigh,<br>
 Whose faithful soul regards the right,<br>
 Fearless we well might rest to-night.<br>
 But how, when Ráma lays his head<br>
 With Sítá on his lowly bed,--<br>
 How can I sleep? how can I care<br>
 For life, or aught that's bright and fair?<br>
 Behold the conquering chief, whose might<br>
 Is match for Gods and fiends in fight;<br>
 With Sítá now he rests his bead<br>
 Asleep on grass beneath him spread.<br>
 Won by devotion, text, and prayer.<br>
 And many a rite performed with care.<br>
 Chief of our father's sons he shines<br>
 Well marked, like him, with favouring signs.<br>
 Brief, brief the monarch's life will be<br>
 Now his dear son is forced to flee;<br>
 And quickly will the widowed state<br>
 Mourn for her lord disconsolate.<br>
 Each mourner there has wept her fill;<br>
 The cries of anguish now are still:<br>
 In the king's hall each dame, o'ercome<br>
 With wearines of woe is dumb.<br>
 This first sad night of grief, I ween,<br>
 Will do to death each sorrowing queen:<br>
 Scarce is Kaus'alyá left alive;<br>
 My mother, too, can scarce survive.<br>
 If when her heart is fain to break,<br>
 She lingers for S'atrughna's sake,<br>
 Kaus'alyá mother of the chief,<br>
 Must sink beneath the chilling grief,<br>
 That town which countless thousands fill,<br>
 Whose hearts with love of Ráma thrill,--<br>
 The world's delight, so rich and fair,--<br>
 Grieved for the king, his death will share.<br>
 The hopes he fondly cherished, crossed.<br>
 Ayodhyá's throne to Rama lost,--<br>
 With mournful cries. Too late, too late!<br>
 The king my sire will meet his fate.<br>
 And when my sire has passed away,<br>
 Most happy in their lot are they,<br>
 Allowed, with every pious care,<br>
 Part in his funeral rites to bear.<br>
 And O, may we with joy at last,--<br>
 These years of forest exile past,--<br>
 Turn to Ayodhyá's town to dwell<br>
 With him who keeps his promise well.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 While thus the hero mighty-souled,<br>
 In wild lament his sorrow told,<br>
 Faint with the load that on him lay,<br>
 The hours of darkness passed away.<br>
 As thus the prince, impelled by zeal<br>
 For his loved brother, prompt to feel<br>
 Strong yearnings for the people's weal,<br>
     His words of truth outspake,<br>
 King Guha grieved to see his woe.<br>
 Heart-stricken, gave his tears to flow,<br>
 Tormented by the common blow,<br>
     Sad, as a wounded snake.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry130.htm">Next: Canto LII.: The Crossing of Gangá.</a></center>
 </body>