<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry136.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry138.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIX: DAS'ARATHA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 As thus Sumantra, best of peers,<br>
 Told his sad tale with many tears,<br>
 The monarch cried, 'I pray thee, tell<br>
 At length again what there befell.'<br>
 Sumantra, at the king's behest,<br>
 Striving with sobs he scarce repressed,<br>
 His trembling voice at last controlled,<br>
 And thus his further tidings told:<br>
 'Their locks in votive coils they wound,<br>
 Their coats of bark upon them bound,<br>
 To Gangá's farther shore they went,<br>
 Thence to Prayág their steps were bent.<br>
 I saw that Lakshman walked ahead<br>
 To guard the path the two should tread.<br>
 So far I saw, no more could learn,<br>
 Forced by the hero to return.<br>
 Retracing slow my homeward course,<br>
 Scarce could I move each stubborn horse:<br>
 Shedding hot tears of grief he stood<br>
 When Ráma turned him to the wood. <a name="fr_333"></a><a href="#fn_333"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 As the two princes parted thence<br>
 I raised my hands in reverence,<br>
 Mounted my ready car, and bore<br>
 The grief that stung me to the core.<br>
 With Guha all that day I stayed,<br>
 Still by the earnest hope delayed<br>
 That Ráma, ere the time should end,<br>
 Some message from the wood might send.<br>
 Thy realms, great Monarch, mourn the blow,<br>
 And sympathize with Ráma's woe.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_165"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 165</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Each withering tree hangs low his head,<br>
 And shoot, and bud, and flower are dead.<br>
 Dried are the floods that wont to fill<br>
 The lake, the river, and the rill.<br>
 Drear is each grove and garden now,<br>
 Dry every blossom on the bough.<br>
 Each beast is still, no serpents crawl:<br>
 A lethargy of woe on all.<br>
 The very wood is silent: crushed<br>
 With grief for Ráma, all is hushed.<br>
 Fair blossoms from the water born,<br>
 Gay garlands that the earth adorn,<br>
 And every fruit that gleams like gold,<br>
 Have lost the scent that charmed of old.<br>
 Empty is every grove I see,<br>
 Or birds sit pensive on the tree.<br>
 Where'er I look, its beauty o'er,<br>
 The pleasance charms not as before.<br>
 I drove through fair Ayodhyá's street:<br>
 None flew with joy the car to meet.<br>
 They saw that Ráma was not there,<br>
 And turned them sighing in despair.<br>
 The people in the royal way<br>
 Wept tears of bitter grief, when they<br>
 Beheld me coming, from afar,<br>
 No Ráma with me in the car.<br>
 From palace roof and turret high<br>
 Each woman bent her eager eye;<br>
 She looked for Ráma, but in vain;<br>
 Gazed on the car and shrieked for pain.<br>
 Their long clear eyes with sorrow drowned<br>
 They, when this common grief was found,<br>
 Looked each on other, friend and foe,<br>
 In sympathy of levelling woe:<br>
 No shade of difference between<br>
 Foe, friend, or neutral, there was seen.<br>
 Without a joy, her bosom rent<br>
 With grief for Ráma's banishment,<br>
 Ayodhyá like the queen appears<br>
 Who mourns her son with many tears.'<br>
     He ended: and the king, distressed.<br>
 With sobbing voice that lord addressed:<br>
 'Ah me, by false Kaikeyí led,<br>
 Of evil race, to evil bred,<br>
 I took no counsel of the sage,<br>
 Nor sought advice from skill and age,<br>
 I asked no lord his aid to lend,<br>
 I called no citizen or friend.<br>
 Rash was my deed, bereft of sense<br>
 Slave to a woman's influence.<br>
 Surely, my lord, a woe so great<br>
 Palls on us by the will of Fate;<br>
 It lays the house of Raghu low,<br>
 For Destiny will have it so.<br>
 I pray thee, if I e'er have done<br>
 An act to please thee, yea, but one,<br>
 Fly, fly, and Ráma homeward lead:<br>
 My life, departing, counsels speed.<br>
 Fly, ere the power to bid I lack,<br>
 Fly to the wood: bring Ráma back.<br>
 I cannot live for even one<br>
 Short hour bereaved of my son.<br>
 But ah, the prince, whose arms are strong,<br>
 Has journeyed far: the way is long:<br>
 Me, me upon the chariot place,<br>
 And let me look on Ráma's face.<br>
 Ah me, my son, mine eldest-born,<br>
 Where roams he in the wood forlorn,<br>
 The wielder of the mighty bow,<br>
 Whose shoulders like the lion's show?<br>
 O, ere the light of life be dim,<br>
 Take me to Sítá and to him.<br>
 O Ráma, Lakshman, and O thou<br>
 Dear Sítá, constant to thy vow,<br>
 Beloved ones, you cannot know<br>
 That I am dying of my woe.'<br>
   The king to bitter grief a prey,<br>
 That drove each wandering sense away,<br>
 Sunk in affliction's sea. too wide<br>
 To traverse, in his anguish cried:<br>
 'Hard, hard to pass, my Queen, this sea<br>
 Of sorrow raging over me:<br>
 No Ráma near to soothe mine eye,<br>
 Plunged in its lowest deeps I lie.<br>
 Sorrow for Ráma swells the tide,<br>
 And Sítá's absence makes it wide:<br>
 My tears its foamy flood distain,<br>
 Made billowy by my sighs of pain:<br>
 My cries its roar, the arms I throw<br>
 About me are the fish below,<br>
 Kaikeyí is the fire that feeds<br>
 Beneath: my hair the tangled weeds:<br>
 Its source the tears for Ráma shed:<br>
 The hump-back's words its monsters dread:<br>
 The boon I gave the wretch its shore,<br>
 Till Ráma's banishment be o'er.  <a name="fr_334"></a><a href="ry138.htm#fn_334"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
     Ah me, that I should long to set<br>
         My eager eyes to-day<br>
     On Raghu's son, and he be yet<br>
         With Lakshman far away!'<br>
     Thus he of lofty glory wailed,<br>
         And sank upon the bed.<br>
     Beneath the woe his spirit failed,<br>
         And all his senses fled.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_333"></a><a href="ry137.htm#fr_333">164:1</a>  'So in Homer the horses of Achilles
 lamented with many bitter tears the death
 of Patroclus slain by Hector:
 </p><dir><br>
 "Ἵπποι δ᾽ Αἰακίδαο, μάχης ἀπάνευθεν ἐόντες,<br>
 Κλᾶιον, ἐπειδὴ πρῶτα πυθέσθην ἡνιόχοιο<br>
 Ἐν κονίῃσι πεσόντος ὑφ᾽ Ἕκτορος ἀνδροφόνοιο."<br>
 </dir>
                                                                                       ILIAD. XVII. 426.
 
 <p>
 Ancient poesy frequently associated
 nature with the joys and sorrows of man.'
 GORRESIO.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry138.htm">Next: Canto LX.: Kaus'alyá Consoled.</a></center>
 </body>