<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry135.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry137.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVIII.: RÁMA'S MESSAGE.</h3>
 <p>
 The king a while had senseless lain,<br>
 When care brought memory back again.<br>
 Then straight he called, the news to hear<br>
 Of Ráma, for the charioteer,<br>
 With reverent hand to hand applied<br>
 He waited by the old man's side,<br>
 Whose mind with anguish was distraught<br>
 Like a great elephant newly caught.<br>
 The king with bitter pain distressed<br>
 The faithful charioteer addressed,<br>
 Who, sad of mien, with flooded eye,<br>
 And dust upon his limbs, stood by:<br>
 'Where will be Ráma's dwelling now,<br>
 At some tree's foot, beneath the bough;<br>
 Ah, what will be the exile's food.<br>
 Bred up with kind solicitude?<br>
 Can he, long lapped in pleasant rest,<br>
 Unmeet for pain, by pain oppressed,<br>
 Son of earth's king, his sad night spend<br>
 Earth-couched, as one that has no friend?<br>
 Behind him, when abroad he sped,<br>
 Cars, elephant, and foot were led:<br>
 Then how shall Ráma dwell afar<br>
 In the wild woods where no men are?<br>
 How, tell me, did the princes there,<br>
 With Sítá good and soft and fair,<br>
 Alighting from the chariot, tread<br>
 The forest wilds around them spread?<br>
 A happy lot is thine, I ween,<br>
 Whose eyes my two dear sons have seen<br>
 Seeking on foot the forest shade,<br>
 Like the bright Twins to view displayed,<br>
 The heavenly As'vins, when they seek<br>
 The woods that hang 'neath Mandar's peak,<br>
 What words, Sumantra, quickly tell,<br>
 From Ráma, Lakshman. Sítá fell?<br>
 How in the wood did Ráma eat?<br>
 What was his bed, and what his seat?<br>
 Full answer to my questions give,<br>
 For I on thy replies shall live,<br>
 As with the saints Yayáti held<br>
 Sweet converse, from the skies expelled.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Urged by the lord of men to speak,<br>
 Whose sobbing voice came faint and weak,<br>
 Thus he, while tears his utterance broke,<br>
 In answer to the monarch spoke;<br>
 'Hear then the words that Ráma said,<br>
 Resolved in duty's path to tread.<br>
 Joining his hands, his head he bent,<br>
 And gave this message, reverent:<br>
 'Sumantra, to my father go,<br>
 Whose lofty mind all people know:<br>
 Bow down before him, as is meet,<br>
 And in my stead salute his feet.<br>
 Then to the queen my mother bend,<br>
 And give the greeting that I send:<br>
 Ne'er may her steps from duty err,<br>
 And may it still be well with her.<br>
 And add this word: 'O Queen, pursue<br>
 Thy vows with faithful heart and true;<br>
 And ever at due season turn<br>
 Where holy fires of worship burn.<br>
 And, lady, on our lord bestow<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_164"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 164</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such honour as to Gods we owe.<br>
 Be kind to every queen: let pride<br>
 And thought of self be cast aside.<br>
 In the king's fond opinion raise<br>
 Kaikeyí, by respect and praise.<br>
 Let the young Bharat ever be<br>
 Loved, honoured as the king by thee:<br>
 Thy king-ward duty ne'er forget:<br>
 High over all are monarchs set.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And Bharat, too, for me address:<br>
 Pray that all health his life may bless.<br>
 Let every royal lady share,<br>
 As justice bids, his love and care.<br>
 Say to the strong-armed chief who brings<br>
 Joy to Iksváku's line of kings:<br>
 'As ruling prince thy care be shown<br>
 Of him, our sire, who holds the throne.<br>
 Stricken in years he feels their weight;<br>
 But leave him in his royal state.<br>
 As regent heir content thee still,<br>
 Submissive to thy father's will.'<br>
 Ráma again his charge renewed,<br>
 As the hot flood his cheek bedewed:<br>
 'Hold as thine own my mother dear<br>
 Who drops for me the longing tear.'<br>
 Then Lakshman, with his soul on fire,<br>
 Spake breathing fast these words of ire:<br>
 'Say, for what sin, for what offence<br>
 Was royal Ráma banished thence?<br>
 He is the cause, the king: poor slave<br>
 To the light charge Kaikeyí gave.<br>
 Let right or wrong the motive be,<br>
 The author of our woe is he.<br>
 Whether the exile were decreed<br>
 Through foolish faith or guilty greed,<br>
 For promises or empire, still<br>
 The king has wrought a grievous ill.<br>
 Grant that the Lord of all saw fit<br>
 To prompt the deed and sanction it,<br>
 In Ráma's life no cause I see<br>
 For which the king should bid him flee.<br>
 His blinded eye refused to scan<br>
 The guilt and folly of the plan,<br>
 And from the weakness of the king<br>
 Here and hereafter woe shall spring.<br>
 No more my sire: the ties that used<br>
 To bind me to the king are loosed.<br>
 My brother Ráma, Raghu's son.<br>
 To me is lord, friend, sire in one.<br>
 The love of men how can he win,<br>
 Deserting, by the cruel sin,<br>
 Their joy, whose heart is swift to feel<br>
 A pleasure in the people's weal?<br>
 Shall he whose mandate could expel<br>
 The virtuous Ráma, loved so well,<br>
 To whom his subjects' fond hearts cling--<br>
 Shall he in spite of them be king?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 But Janak's child, my lord, stood by,<br>
 And oft the votaress heaved a sigh.<br>
 She seemed with dull and wandering sense,<br>
 Beneath a spirit's influence.<br>
 The noble princess, pained with woe<br>
 Which till that hour she ne'er could know,<br>
 Tears in her heavy trouble shed,<br>
 But not a word to me she said.<br>
 She raised her face which grief had dried<br>
 And tenderly her husband eyed,<br>
 Gazed on him as he turned to go<br>
 While tear chased tear in rapid flow.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry137.htm">Next: Canto LIX: Das'aratha's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>