<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry133.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry135.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVI.: CHITRAKUTA.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma, when the morning rose,<br>
 Called Lakshman gently from repose:<br>
 'Awake, the pleasant voices hear<br>
 Of forest birds that warble near.<br>
 Scourge of thy foes, no longer stay;<br>
 The hour is come to speed away.'<br>
     The slumbering prince unclosed his eyes<br>
 When thus his brother bade him rise,<br>
 Compelling, at the timely cry,<br>
 Fatigue, and sleep, and rest to fly.<br>
 The brothers rose and Sítá too;<br>
 Pure water from the stream they drew,<br>
 Paid morning rites, then followed still<br>
 The road to Chitrakúta's hill.<br>
 Then Ráma as he took the road<br>
 With Lakshman, while the morning, glowed,<br>
 To the Videhan lady cried,<br>
 Sítá the fair, the lotus-eyed:<br>
 'Look round thee, dear; each flowery tree<br>
 Touched with the fire of morning see:<br>
 The Kins'uk, now the Frosts are fled,--<br>
 How glorious with his wreaths of red!<br>
 The Bel-trees see, so loved of men,<br>
 Hanging their boughs in every glen.<br>
 O'erburthened with their fruit and flowers:<br>
 A plenteous store of food is ours.<br>
     See, Lakshman, in the leafy trees,<br>
         Where'er they make their home.<br>
     Down hangs, the work of labouring bees<br>
         The ponderous honeycomb.<br>
     In the fair wood before us spread<br>
         The startled wild-cock cries:<br>
     Hark, where the flowers are soft to tread,<br>
         The peacock's voice replies.<br>
     Where elephants are roaming free,<br>
         And sweet birds' songs are loud,<br>
     The glorious Chitrakúta see:<br>
         His peaks are in the cloud.<br>
     On fair smooth ground he stands displayed,<br>
         Begirt by many a tree:<br>
     O brother, in that holy shade<br>
         How happy shall we be!' <a name="fr_331"></a><a href="#fn_331"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma, Lakshman, Sitá, each<br>
 Spoke raising suppliant hands this speech<br>
 To him, in woodland dwelling met,<br>
 Válmiki, ancient anchoret:<br>
 'O Saint, this mountain takes the mind,<br>
 With creepers, trees of every kind,<br>
 Vith fruit and roots abounding thus,<br>
 A pleasant life it offers us:<br>
 Here for a while we fain would stay,<br>
 And pass a season blithe and gay.'<br>
     Then the great saint, in duty trained,<br>
 With honour gladly entertained:<br>
 He gave his guests a welcome fair,<br>
 And bade them sit and rest them there,<br>
 Ráma of mighty arm and chest<br>
 His faithful Lakshman then addressed:<br>
 'Brother, bring hither from the wood<br>
 Selected timber strong and good,<br>
 And build therewith a little cot;<br>
 My heart rejoices in the spot<br>
 That lies beneath the mountain's side,<br>
 Remote, with water well supplied.'<br>
 Sumitrá's son his words obeyed,<br>
 Brought many a tree, and deftly made,<br>
 With branches in the forest cut,<br>
 As Ráma bade, a leafy hut.<br>
 Then Ráma, when the cottage stood<br>
 Fair, firmly built, and walled with wood,<br>
 To Lakshman spake, whose eager mind<br>
 To do his brother's will inclined:<br>
 'Now, Lakshman as our cot is made,<br>
 Must sacrifice be duly paid<br>
 By us, for lengthened life who hope,<br>
 With venison of the antelope.<br>
 Away, O bright-eyed Lakshman, speed:<br>
 Struck by thy bow a deer must bleed:<br>
 As Scripture bids, we must not slight<br>
 The duty that commands the rite.'<br>
     Lakshman, the chief whose arrows laid<br>
 His foemen low, his word obeyed;<br>
 And Ráma thus again addressed<br>
 The swift performer of his hest:<br>
 'Prepare the venison thou hast shot,<br>
 To sacrifice for this our cot.<br>
 Haste, brother dear, for this the hour,<br>
 And this the day of certain power.'<br>
 Then glorious Lakshman took the buck<br>
 His arrow in the wood had struck;<br>
 Bearing his mighty load he came,<br>
 And laid it in the kindled flame.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_162"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 162</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Soon as he saw the meat was done,<br>
 And that the juices ceased to run<br>
 From the broiled carcass, Lakshman then<br>
 Spoke thus to Ráma best of men:<br>
 'The carcass of the buck, entire,<br>
 Is ready dressed upon the fire.<br>
 Now be the sacred rites begun<br>
 To please the God, thou godlike one.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ráma the good, in ritual trained,<br>
 Pure from the bath, with thoughts restrained,<br>
 Hasted those verses to repeat<br>
 Which make the sacrifice complete.<br>
 The hosts celestial came in view,<br>
 And Ráma to the cot withdrew,<br>
 While a sweet sense of rapture stole<br>
 Through the unequalled hero's soul.<br>
 He paid the Vis'vedevas  <a name="fr_332"></a><a href="ry135.htm#fn_332"><font size="1">1</font></a> due.<br>
 And Rudra's right, and Vishnu's too,<br>
 Nor wonted blessings, to protect<br>
 Their new-built home, did he neglect.<br>
 With voice repressed he breathed the prayer,<br>
 Bathed duly in the river fair,<br>
 And gave good offerings that remove<br>
 The stain of sin, as texts approve.<br>
 And many an altar there he made,<br>
 And shrines, to suit the holy shade,<br>
 All decked with woodland chaplets sweet,<br>
 And fruit and roots and roasted meat,<br>
 With muttered prayer, as texts require,<br>
 Water, and grass and wood and fire.<br>
 So Ráma, Lakshman, Sítá paid<br>
 Their offerings to each God and shade,<br>
 And entered then their pleasant cot<br>
 That bore fair signs of happy lot.<br>
 They entered, the illustrious three,<br>
 The well-set cottage, fair to see,<br>
 Roofed with the leaves of many a tree,<br>
     And fenced from wind and rain;<br>
 So, at their Father Brahmá's call,<br>
 The Gods of heaven, assembling all,<br>
 To their own glorious council hall<br>
     Advance in shining train.<br>
 So, resting on that lovely hill,<br>
 Near the fair lily-covered rill,<br>
     The happy prince forgot,<br>
 Surrounded by the birds and deer,<br>
 The woe, the longing, and the fear<br>
     That gloom the exile's lot.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_331"></a><a href="ry134.htm#fr_331">161:1</a>  'We have often looked on that green
 hill: it is the holiest spot of that sect of
 the Hindu faith who devote themselves to
 this incarnation, of Vishnu. The whole
 neighbourhood is Ráma's country. Every
 headland has some legend, every cavern
 is connected with his name; some of the
 wild fruits are still called <i>Stáphal</i>, being
 the reputed food of the exile. Thousands
 and thousands annually visit the spot, and
 round the hill is a raised foot-path, on
 which the devotee, with naked feet, treads
 full of pious awe.' <i>Calcutta Review</i>,
 Vol. XXIII.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry135.htm">Next: Canto LVII.: Sumantra's Return.</a></center>
 </body>