<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry147.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry149.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXX.: BHARAT'S DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 While thus he spoke, the envoys borne<br>
 On horses faint and travel-worn<br>
 Had gained the city fenced around<br>
 With a deep moat's protecting bound.<br>
 An audience of the king they gained,<br>
 And honours from the prince obtained;<br>
 The monarch's feet they humbly pressed,<br>
 To Bharat next these words addressed:<br>
 'The household priest and peers by us<br>
 Send health to thee and greet thee thus:<br>
   Come to thy father's house with haste:<br>
 Thine absent time no longer waste.<br>
 Receive these vestures rich and rare,<br>
 These costly gems and jewels fair,<br>
 And to thy uncle here present<br>
 Each precious robe and ornament.<br>
 These for the king and him suffice--<br>
 Two hundred millions is their price--<br>
 These, worth a hundred millions, be<br>
 Reserved, O large-eyed Prince, for thee.'<br>
     Loving his frieuds with heart and soul,<br>
 The joyful prince received thie whole,<br>
 Due honour to the envoys paid,<br>
 And thus in turn his answer made:<br>
 'Of Das'aratha tidings tell:<br>
 Is the old king my father well?<br>
 Is Ráma, and is Lakshman, he<br>
 Of the high-soul, from sickness free?<br>
 And she who walks where duty leads,<br>
 Kaus'alyá known for gracious deeds,<br>
 Mother of Ráma, loving spouse,<br>
 Bound to her lord by well kept vows?<br>
 And Lakshman's mother too, the dame<br>
 Sumitrá skilled in duty's claim,<br>
 Who brave S'atrughna also bore,<br>
 Second in age,--her health declare.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_178"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 178</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And she, in self-conceit most sage,<br>
 With selfish heart most prone to rage,<br>
 My mother, fares she well? has she<br>
 Sent message or command to me?'<br>
     Thus Bharat spake, the mighty-souled,<br>
 And they in brief their tidings told:<br>
 'All they of whom thou askest dwell,<br>
 O lion lord, secure and well:<br>
 Thine all the smiles of fortune are:<br>
 Make ready; let them yoke the car.'<br>
     Thus by the royal envoys pressed,<br>
 Bharat again the band addressed:<br>
 'I go with you: no long delay,<br>
 A single hour I bid you stay.'<br>
 Thus Bharat, son of him who swayed<br>
 Ayodhyás realm, his answer made,<br>
 And then bespoke, his heart to please,<br>
 His mother's sire in words like these:<br>
 'I go to see my father, King,<br>
 Urged by the envoys' summoning;<br>
 And when thy soul desires to see<br>
 Thy grandson, will return to thee.'<br>
     The king his grandsire kissed his head,<br>
 And in reply to Bharat said:<br>
 'Go forth, dear child: how blest is she,<br>
 The mother of a son like thee!<br>
 Greet well thy sire, thy mother greet,<br>
 O thou whose arms the foe defeat;<br>
 The household priest, and all the rest<br>
 Amid the Twice-born chief and best;<br>
 And Ráma and brave Lakschman, who<br>
 Shoot the long shaft with aim so true.'<br>
     To him the king high honour showed,<br>
 And store of wealth and gifts bestowed,<br>
 The choicest elephants to ride,<br>
 And skins and blankets deftly dyed,<br>
 A thousand strings of golden beads,<br>
 And sixteen hundred mettled steeds:<br>
 And boundless wealth before him piled<br>
 Gave Kekaya to Kaikeyás child.<br>
 And men of counsel, good and tried,<br>
 On whose firm truth he aye relied,<br>
 King As'vapati gave with speed<br>
 Prince Bharat on his way to lead.<br>
 And noble elephants, strong and young,<br>
 From sires of Indras'ira sprung,<br>
 And others tall and fair to view<br>
 Of great Airávat's lineage true:<br>
 And well yoked asses fleet of limb<br>
 The prince his uncle gave to him.<br>
 And dogs within the palace bred,<br>
 Of body vast and massive head,<br>
 With mighty fangs for battle, brave,<br>
 The tiger's match in strength, he gave.<br>
 Yet Bharat's bosom hardly glowed<br>
 To see the wealth the king bestowed;<br>
 For he would speed that hour away,<br>
 Such care upon his bosom lay:<br>
 Those eager envoys urged him thence,<br>
 And that sad vision's influence.<br>
 He left hia court-yard, crowded then<br>
 With elephants and steeds and men,<br>
 And, peerless in immortal fame,<br>
 To the great royal street he came.<br>
 He saw, as farther still he went,<br>
 The inner rooms most excellent,<br>
 And passed the doors, to him unclosed,<br>
 Where check nor bar his way oppossd.<br>
 There Bharat stayed to bid adieu<br>
 To grandsire and to uncle too,<br>
 Then, with S'atrughna by his side,<br>
 Mounting his car, away he hied.<br>
 The strong-wheeled cars were yoked, and<br>
       they<br>
 More than a hundred, rolled away:<br>
 Servants, with horses, asses, kine,<br>
 Followed their lord in endless line.<br>
 So, guarded by his own right hand,<br>
     Forth high-souled Bharat hied,<br>
 Surrounded by a lordly band<br>
 On whom the king relied.<br>
 Beside him sat S'atrughna dear,<br>
 The scourge of trembling foes:<br>
 Thus from the light of Indra's sphere<br>
 A saint made perfect goes.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry149.htm">Next: Canto LXXI.: Bharat's Return.</a></center>
 </body>