<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry145.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry147.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVIII.: THE ENVOYS.</h3>
 <p>
 Vas'ishtha heard their speech and prayer,<br>
 And thus addressed the concourse there.<br>
 Friends, Brámans, counsellors, and all<br>
 Assembled in the palace hall:<br>
 'Ye know that Bharat, free from care,<br>
 Still lives in Rámagriha  <a name="fr_339"></a><a href="#fn_339"><font size="1">1</font></a> where<br>
 The father of his mother reigns:<br>
 S'atrughna by his side remains.<br>
 Let active envoys, good at need,<br>
 Thither on fleetest horses speed,<br>
 To bring the hero youths away:<br>
 Why waste the time in dull delay?'<br>
     Quick came from all the glad reply:<br>
 'Vas'ishtha, let the envoys fly'<br>
 He heard their speech, and thus renewed<br>
 His charge before the multitude:<br>
 'Nandan, As'ok, Siddhárth, attend,<br>
 Your ears, Jayanta, Vijay, lend:<br>
 Be yours, what need requires, to do:<br>
 I speak these words to all of you.<br>
 With coursers of the fleetest breed<br>
 To Rájagriha's city speed.<br>
 Then rid your bosoms of distress,<br>
 And Bharat thus from me address:<br>
 'The household priest and peers by us<br>
 Send health to thee and greet thee thus:<br>
 Come to thy father's home with haste:<br>
 Thine absent time no longer waste.'<br>
 But speak no word of Ráma fled,<br>
 Tell not the prince his sire is dead,<br>
 Nor to the royal youth the fate<br>
 That ruins Raghu's race relate.<br>
 Go quickly hence, and with you bear<br>
 Fine silken vestures rich and rare.<br>
 And gems and many a precious thing<br>
 As gifts to Bharat and the king.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     With ample stores of food supplied,<br>
 Bach to his home the envoys hied,<br>
 Prepared, with steeds of swiftest race,<br>
 lo Kekaya's land  <a name="fr_340"></a><a href="#fn_340"><font size="1">2</font></a> their way to trace.<br>
 They made all due provision there,<br>
 And every need arranged with care,<br>
 Then ordered by Vas'ishtha. they<br>
 Went forth with speed upon their way.<br>
 Then northward of Pralamba, west<br>
 Of Apartála, on they pressed,<br>
 Crossing the M'aliní that flowed<br>
 With gentle stream athwart the road.<br>
 They traversed Gangás holy waves<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_176"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 176</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Where she Hastinapura  <a name="fr_341"></a><a href="#fn_341"><font size="1">1</font></a> lives,<br>
 Thence to Panchala  <a name="fr_342"></a><a href="#fn_342"><font size="1">2</font></a> westward fast<br>
 Through Kurujangal's land  <a name="fr_343"></a><a href="#fn_343"><font size="1">3</font></a> they passed.<br>
 On, on their course the envoys held<br>
 By urgency of task impelled.<br>
 Quick glancing at each lucid flood<br>
 And sweet lake gay with flower and bud.<br>
 Beyond, they passed unwearied o'er,<br>
 Where glad birds fill the flood and shore<br>
 Of Saradanda racing fleet<br>
 With heavenly water clear and sweet.<br>
 Thereby a tree celestial grows<br>
 Which every boon on prayer bestows:<br>
 To its blest shade they humbly bent,<br>
 Then to Kulinga's town they went.<br>
 Then, having passed the Warrior's Wood,<br>
 In Abhikala next they stood,<br>
 O'er sacred Ikshumati  <a name="fr_344"></a><a href="#fn_344"><font size="1">4</font></a> came,<br>
 Their ancient kings' ancestral claim.<br>
 They saw the learned Brahmans stand,<br>
 Each drinking from his hollowed hand,<br>
 And through Bahika  <a name="fr_345"></a><a href="#fn_345"><font size="1">5</font></a> journeying still<br>
 They reached at length Sudaman's hill:<br>
 There Vishnu's footstep turned to see,<br>
 Vipasa  <a name="fr_346"></a><a href="#fn_346"><font size="1">6</font></a> viewed, and Salmali,<br>
 And many a lake and river met,<br>
 Tank, pool, and pond, and rivulet.<br>
 And lions saw, and tigers near,<br>
 And elephants and herds of deer,<br>
 And still, by prompt obedience led,<br>
 Along the ample road they sped.<br>
 Then when their course so swift and long,<br>
 Had worn their steeds though fleet and strong,<br>
 To Girivraja's splendid town<br>
 They came by night, and lighted down.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 To please their master, and to guard<br>
         The royal race, the lineal right,<br>
     The envoys, spent with riding hard,<br>
 To that fair city came by night.  <a name="fr_347"></a><a href="ry147.htm#fn_347"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_339"></a><a href="ry146.htm#fr_339">175:1</a>  Rámagriha, or Girivraja was the capital
 of As'vapati, Bharat's maternal grand father.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_340"></a><a href="ry146.htm#fr_340">175:2</a>  The Kekayas or Kaikayas in the
 Punjab appear amongst the chief nations
 in the war of the Mahábhárata; their king
 being a kinsman of Krishna.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_341"></a><a href="ry146.htm#fr_341">176:1</a>  Hástinapura was the capital of the
 kingdom of Kuru, near the modern Delhi.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_342"></a><a href="ry146.htm#fr_342">176:2</a>  "The Panchálas occupied the upper part
 of the Doab.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_343"></a><a href="ry146.htm#fr_343">176:3</a>  'Kurujángala and its inhabitants are
 frequently mentioned in the <i>Mahábhárata</i>,
 as in the <i>Ádi-parv</i>. 3789, 4337, <i>et al.</i>'
 WILSON'S Vishnu Purána. Vol. II. p. 176.
 DR. HALL'S Note.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_344"></a><a href="ry146.htm#fr_344">176:4</a>  'The Ὀξύματις of Arrian. See <i>As.
 Res.</i> Vol XV. p. 420, 421, also <i>Indische
 Alterthumskunde</i>, Vol. I. p. 602, first footnote.'
 WILSON'S <i>Vishnu Purána</i>, Vol. I,
 p 421. DR. HALL'S Edition. The Ikshumatí
 was a river in Kurukshetra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_345"></a><a href="ry146.htm#fr_345">176:5</a>  'The Bahíkas are described in the
 Mahábhárata, Kama Parvan, with some
 detail, and comprehend the different nations
 of the Punjab from the Sutlej to the Indus.'
 WILSON S Vishnu Purana. Vol.l, p. 167.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_346"></a><a href="ry146.htm#fr_346">176:6</a>  The Beas, Hyphsis, or Bibasis.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry147.htm">Next: Canto LXIX.: Bharat's Dream.</a></center>
 </body>