<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry158.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry160.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXXI.: THE ASSEMBLY.</h3>
 <p>
 Ere yet the dawn had ushered in<br>
 The day should see the march begin,<br>
 Herald and bard who rightly knew<br>
 Each nice degree of honour due,<br>
 Their loud auspicious voices raised.<br>
 And royal Bharat blessed and praised.<br>
 With sticks of gold the drum they smote,<br>
 Which thundered out its deafening note,<br>
 Blew loud the sounding shell, and blent<br>
 Each high and low-toned instrument.<br>
 The mingled sound of drum and horn<br>
 Through all the air was quickly borne,<br>
 And as in Bharat's ear it rang,<br>
 Gave the sad prince another pang.<br>
   Then Bharat starting from repose,<br>
 Stilled the glad sounds that round him rose,<br>
 'I am not king--no more mistake:'<br>
 Then to S'atrughna thus he spake:<br>
 'O see what general wrongs succeed<br>
 Sprung from Kaikeyí's evil deed!<br>
 The king my sire has died and thrown<br>
 Fresh miseries on me alone.<br>
 The royal bliss, on duty based.<br>
 Which our just high-souled father graced,<br>
 Wanders in doubt and sore distress<br>
 Like a tossed vessel rudderless.<br>
 And he who was our lordly stay<br>
 Roams in the forest far away,<br>
 Expelled by this my mother, who<br>
 To duty's law is most untrue.'<br>
   As royal Bharat thus gave vent<br>
 To bitter grief in wild lament,<br>
 Gazing upon his face the crowd<br>
 Of pitying women wept aloud.<br>
 His lamentation scarce was o'er,<br>
 When Saint Vas'ishtha, skilled in lore<br>
 Of royal duty, dear to fame,<br>
 To join the great assembly came.<br>
 Girt by disciples ever true<br>
 Still nearer to that hall he drew,<br>
 Resplendent, heavenly to behold,<br>
 Adorned with wealth of gems and gold:<br>
 E'en so a man in duty tried<br>
 Draws near to meet his virtuous bride.<br>
 He reached his golden seat o'erlaid<br>
 With coverlet of rich brocade.<br>
 There sat, in all the Vedas read,<br>
 And called the messengers, and said:<br>
 'Go forth, let Bráhman, Warrior, peer,<br>
 And every captain gather here:<br>
 Let all attentive hither throng:<br>
 Go, hasten: we delay too long.<br>
 S'atrughna, glorious Bharat bring,<br>
 The noble children of the king,  <a name="fr_357"></a><a href="#fn_357"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_190"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 190</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Yudhájit  <a name="fr_358"></a><a href="ry160.htm#fn_358"><font size="1">1</font></a> and Sumantra, all<br>
 The truthful and the virtuous call,'<br>
     He ended: soon a mighty sound<br>
 Of thickening tumult rose around,<br>
 As to the hall they bent their course<br>
 With car, and elephant, and horse,<br>
 The people all with glad acclaim<br>
 Welcomed Prince Bharat as he came:<br>
 E'en as they loved their king to greet,<br>
 Or as the Gods Lord Indra  <a name="fr_359"></a><a href="ry160.htm#fn_359"><font size="1">2</font></a> meet.<br>
     The vast assembly shone as fair<br>
         With Bharat's kingly face<br>
     As Das'aratha's self were there<br>
         To glorify the place.<br>
     It gleamed like some unruffled lake<br>
         Where monsters huge of mould<br>
     With many a snake their pastime take<br>
         O'er shells, sand, gems, and gold.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_357"></a><a href="ry159.htm#fr_357">189:1</a>  The commentator says 'S'atrughna
 accompanied by the other sons of the king.'</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry160.htm">Next: Canto LXXXII.: The Departure.</a></center>
 </body>