<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry152.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry154.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXV.: THE ABJURATION.</h3>
 <p>
 A while he lay: he rose at length,<br>
 And slowly gathering sense and strength,<br>
 With angry eyes which tears bedewed,<br>
 The miserable queen he viewed,<br>
 And spake with keen reproach to her<br>
 Before each lord and minister:<br>
 'No lust have I for kingly sway,<br>
 My mother I no more obey:<br>
 Naught of this consecration knew<br>
 Which Das'aratha kept in view,<br>
 I with S'atrughna all the time<br>
 Was dwelling in a distant clime:<br>
 I knew of Ráma's exile naught,<br>
 That hero of the noble thought:<br>
 I knew not how fair Sítá went,<br>
 And Lakshman, forth to banishment.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus high-souled Bharat, mid the crowd,<br>
 Lifted his voice and cried aloud.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_184"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 184</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Kaus'alyá heard, she raised ner head.<br>
 And quickly to Sumitrá said:<br>
 'Bharat, Kaikeyí's son, is here,--<br>
 Hers whose fell deeds I loathe and fear:<br>
 That youth of foresight keen I fain<br>
 Would meet and see his face again.'<br>
 Thus to Sumitrá spake the dame,<br>
 And straight to Bharat's presence came<br>
 With altered mien, neglected dress,<br>
 Trembling and faint with sore distress.<br>
 Bharat, S'atrughna by his side,<br>
 To meet her, toward her palace hied.<br>
 And when the royal dame they viewed<br>
 Distressed with dire solicitude,<br>
 Sad, fallen senseless on the ground,<br>
 About her neck their arms they wound.<br>
 The noble matron prostrate there,<br>
 Embraced, with tears, the weeping pair,<br>
 And with her load of grief oppressed,<br>
 To Bharat then these words addressed:<br>
 'Now all is thine, without a foe,<br>
 This realm for which thou longest so.<br>
 Ah, soon Kaikeyí's ruthless hand<br>
 Has won the empire of the land,<br>
 And made my guiltless Ráma flee<br>
 Dressed like some lonely devotee.<br>
 Herein what profit has the queen,<br>
 Whose eye delights in havoc, seen?<br>
 Me also, me 'twere surely good<br>
 To banish to the distant wood,<br>
 To dwell amid the shades that hold<br>
 My famous son with limbs like gold.<br>
 Nay, with the sacred fire to guide,<br>
 Will I, Sumitrá by my side,<br>
 Myself to the drear wood repair<br>
 And seek the son of Raghu there.<br>
 This land which rice and golden corn<br>
 And wealth of every kind adorn,<br>
 Car, elephant, and steed, and gem,--<br>
 She makes thee lord of it and them.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With taunts like these her bitter tongue<br>
 The heart of blameless Bharat wrung<br>
 And direr pangs his bosom tore<br>
 Than when the lancet probes a sore.<br>
 With troubled senses all astray<br>
 Prone at her feet he fell and lay.<br>
 With loud lament a while he plained,<br>
 And slowly strength and sense regained.<br>
 With suppliant hand to hand applied<br>
 He turned to her who wept and sighed,<br>
 And thus bespake the queen, whose breast<br>
 With sundry woes was sore distressed:<br>
 'Why these reproaches, noble dame?<br>
 I, knowing naught, am free from blame.<br>
 Thou knowest well what love was mine<br>
 For Ráma, chief of Raghu's line.<br>
 O, never be his darkened mind<br>
 To Scripture's guiding lore inclined,<br>
 By whose consent the prince who led<br>
 The good, the truthful hero, fled.<br>
 May he obey the vilest lord,<br>
 Offend the sun with act abhorred,  <a name="fr_350"></a><a href="#fn_350"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And strike a sleeping cow, who lent<br>
 His voice to Ráma's banishment.<br>
 May the good king who all befriends,<br>
 And, like his sons, the people tends,<br>
 Be wronged by him who gave consent<br>
 To noble Ráma's banishment.<br>
 On him that king's injustice fall,<br>
 Who takes, as lord, a sixth of all,<br>
 Nor guards, neglectful of his trust,<br>
 His people, as a ruler must.<br>
 The crime of those who swear to fee,<br>
 At holy rites, some devotee,<br>
 And then the promised gift deny,<br>
 Be his who willed the prince should fly,<br>
 When weapons clash and heroes bleed,<br>
 With elephant and harnessed steed,<br>
 Ne'er, like the good, be his to fight<br>
 Whose heart allowed the prince's flight.<br>
 Though taught with care by one expert<br>
 May he the Veda's text pervert,<br>
 With impious mind on evil bent,<br>
 Whose voice approved the banishment.<br>
 Mav he with traitor lips reveal<br>
 Whate'er he promised to conceal,<br>
 And bruit abroad his friend's offence,<br>
 Betrayed by generous confidence.<br>
 No wife of equal lineage born<br>
 The wretch's joyless home adorn:<br>
 Ne'er may he do one virtuous deed,<br>
 And dying see no child succeed.<br>
 When in the battle's awful day<br>
 Fierce warriors stand in dread array,<br>
 Let the base coward turn and fly,<br>
 And smitten by the foeman, die.<br>
 Long may he wander, rags his wear,<br>
 Doomed in his hand a skull to bear,<br>
 And like an idiot beg his bread,<br>
 Who gave consent when Rama fled.<br>
 His sin who holy rites forgets,<br>
 Asleep when shows the sun and sets,<br>
 A load upon his soul shall lie<br>
 Whose will allowed the prince to fly.<br>
 His sin who loves his Master's dame,<br>
 His, kindler of destructive flame.<br>
 His who betrays his trusting friend<br>
 Shall, mingled all, on him descend.<br>
 By him no reverence due be paid<br>
 To blessed God or parted shade:<br>
 May sire and mother's sacred name<br>
 In vain from him obedience claim.<br>
 Ne'er may he go where dwell the good,<br>
 Nor win their fame and neighbourhood,<br>
 But lose all hopes of bliss to day,<br>
 Who willed the prince should flee away.<br>
 May he deceive the poor and weak<br>
 Who look to him and comfort seek,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_185"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 185</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Betray the suppliants who complain,<br>
 And make the hopeful hope in vain.<br>
 Long may his wife his kiss expect,<br>
 And pine away in cold neglect.<br>
 May he his lawful love despise,<br>
 And turn on other dames his eyes,<br>
 Fool, on forbidden joys intent,<br>
 Whose will allowed the banishment.<br>
 His sin who deadly poison throws<br>
 To spoil the water as it flows,<br>
 Lay on the wretch its burden dread<br>
 Who gave consent when Rama fled.' <a name="fr_351"></a><a href="ry154.htm#fn_351"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus with his words he undeceived<br>
 Kaus'alyá's troubled heart, who grieved<br>
 For son and husband reft away;<br>
 Then prostrate on the ground he lay.<br>
 Him as he lay half-senseless there,<br>
 Freed by the mighty oaths he sware,<br>
 Kaus'alyá, by her woe distressed,<br>
 With melancholy words addressed:<br>
 'Anew, my son, this sorrow springs<br>
 To rend my heart with keener stings:<br>
 These awful oaths which thou hast sworn<br>
 My breast with double grief have torn.<br>
 Thy soul, and faithful Lakshman's too,<br>
 Are still, thank Heaven! to virtue true.<br>
 True to thy promise, thou shalt gain<br>
 The mansions which the good obtain.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then to her breast that youth she drew,<br>
 Whose sweet fraternal love she knew,<br>
 And there in strict embraces held<br>
 The hero, as her tears outwelled.<br>
 And Bharat's heart grew sick and faint<br>
 With grief and oft-renewed complaint,<br>
 And all his senses were distraught<br>
 By the great woe that in him wrought.<br>
 Thus he lay and still bewailed<br>
     With sighs and loud lament<br>
 Till all his strength and reason failed,<br>
     The hours of night were spent.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_350"></a><a href="ry153.htm#fr_350">184:1</a>  <i>S'úryamcha pratimehata</i>, adversus
 solem mingat. An offence expressly forbidden
 by the Laws of Manu.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry154.htm">Next: Canto LXXVI.: The Funeral</a></center>
 </body>