<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry155.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry157.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXVIII.: MANTHARÁ PUNISHED.</h3>
 <p>
 Satrughna thus to Bharat spake<br>
 Who longed the forest road to take:<br>
 'He who in woe was wont to give<br>
 Strength to himself and all that live--<br>
 Dear Ráma, true and pure in heart,<br>
 Is banished by a woman's art.<br>
 Yet here was Lakshman, brave and strong,<br>
 Could not his might prevent the wrong?<br>
 Could not his arm the king restrain,<br>
 Or make the banished free again?<br>
 One loving right and fearing crime<br>
 Had checked the monarch's sin in time,<br>
 When, vassal of a woman's will,<br>
 His feet approached the path of ill.'<br>
     While Lakshman's younger brother, dread<br>
 S'atrughna, thus to Bharat said,<br>
 Came to the fronting door, arrayed<br>
 In glittering robes, the hump-back maid.<br>
 There she, with sandal-oil besmeared,<br>
 In garments meet for queens appeared:<br>
 And lustre to her form was lent<br>
 By many a gem and ornament.<br>
 She girdled with her broidered zone,<br>
 And many a chain about her thrown,<br>
 Showed like a female monkey round<br>
 Whose body many a string is bound.<br>
 When on that cause of evil fell<br>
 The quick eye of the sentinel,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 He grasped her in his ruthless hold,<br>
 And hastening in, S'atrughna told:<br>
 'Here is the wicked pest,' he cried,<br>
 'Through whom the king thy father died,<br>
 And Ráma wanders in the wood:<br>
 Do with her as thou deemest good.'<br>
 The warder spoke: and every word<br>
 S'atrughna's breast to fury stirred:<br>
 He called the servants all and each.<br>
 And spake in wrath his hasty speech:<br>
 'This is the wretch my sire who slew,<br>
 And misery on my brothers drew:<br>
 Let her this day obtain the meed,<br>
 Vile sinner, of her cruel deed.'<br>
 He spake; and moved by fury laid<br>
 His mighty hand upon the maid,<br>
 Who as her fellows ringed her round.<br>
 Made with her cries the hall resound,<br>
 Soon as the gathered women viewed<br>
 S'atrughna in his angry mood,<br>
 Their hearts disturbed by sudden dread,<br>
 They turned and from his presence fled.<br>
 'His rage,' they cried, 'on us will fall,<br>
 And ruthless, he will slay us all.<br>
 Come, to Kaus'alyá let us flee:<br>
 Our hope, our sure defence is she,<br>
 Approved by all, of virtuous mind,<br>
 Compassionate, and good, and kind.'<br>
     His eyes with burning wrath aglow,<br>
 S'atrughna, shatterer of the foe,<br>
 Dragged on the ground the hump-back maid<br>
 Who shrieked aloud and screamed for aid.<br>
 This way and that with no remorse<br>
 He dragged her with resistless force,<br>
 And chains and glittering trinkets burst<br>
 Lay here and there with gems dispersed,<br>
 Till like the sky of Autumn shone<br>
 The palace floor they sparkled on.<br>
 The lord of men, supremely strong,<br>
 Haled in his rage the wretch along:<br>
 Where Queen Kaikeyí dwelt he came,<br>
 And sternly then addressed the dame.<br>
 Deep in her heart Kaikeyí felt<br>
 The stabs his keen reproaches dealt,<br>
 And of S'atrughna's ire afraid,<br>
 To Bharat flew and cried for aid.<br>
 He looked and saw the prince inflamed<br>
 With burning rage, and thus exclaimed:<br>
 'Forgive! thine angry arm restrain:<br>
 A woman never may be slain,<br>
 My hand Kaikeyí's blood would spill,<br>
 The sinner ever bent on ill,<br>
 But Ráma, long in duty tried,<br>
 Would hate the impious matricide:<br>
 And if he knew thy vengeful blade<br>
 Had slaughtered e'en this hump-back maid,<br>
 Never again, be sure, would he<br>
 Speak friendly word to thee or me."<br>
     When Bharat's speech S'atrughna heard<br>
 He calmed the rage his breast that stirred,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_188"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 188</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Releasing from her dire constraint<br>
 The trembling wretch with terror faint.<br>
 Then to Kaikeyí's feet she crept,<br>
 And prostrate in her misery wept.<br>
 Kaikeyí on the hump-back gazed,<br>
   And saw her weep and gasp.<br>
 Still quivering, with her senses dazed,<br>
   From fierce S'atrughna's grasp.<br>
 With gentle words of pity she<br>
   Assuaged her wild despair.<br>
 Even as a tender hand might free<br>
   A curlew from the snare.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_354"></a><a href="ry155.htm#fr_354">187:1</a>  Birth and death, pleasure and pain,
 loss and gain.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_355"></a><a href="ry155.htm#fr_355">187:2</a>  Erected upon a tree or high staff in
 honour of Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry157.htm">Next: Canto LXXIX.: Bharat's Commands.</a></center>
 </body>