<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry154.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry156.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXVII.: THE GATHERING OF THE ASHES.</h3>
 <p>
 The tenth day passed: the prince again<br>
 Was free from every legal stain.<br>
 Ha bade them on the twelfth the great<br>
 Remaining honour celebrate.<br>
 Much gold he gave, and gems, and food,<br>
 To all the Bráhman multitude,<br>
 And goats whose hair was white and fine,<br>
 And many a thousand head of kine:<br>
 Slaves, men and damsels, he bestowed,<br>
 And many a car and fair abode:<br>
 Such gifts he gave the Bráhman race<br>
 His father's obsequies to grace.<br>
 Then when the morning's earliest ray<br>
 Appeared upon the thirteenth day,<br>
 Again the hero wept and sighed<br>
 Distraught and sorrow-stupefied;<br>
 Drew, sobbing in his anguish, near,<br>
 The last remaining debt to clear,<br>
 And at the bottom of the pyre,<br>
 He thus bespake his royal sire:<br>
 'O father, hast thou left me so,<br>
 Deserted in my friendless woe,<br>
 When he to whom the charge was given<br>
 To keep me, to the wood is driven?<br>
 Her only son is forced away<br>
 Who was his helpless mother's stay:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Ah, whither, father, art thou fled;<br>
 Leaving the queen uncomforted?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He looked upon the pile where lay<br>
 The bones half-burnt and ashes grey,<br>
 And uttering a piteous moan,<br>
 Gave way, by anguish overthrown.<br>
 Then as his tears began to well,<br>
 Prostrate to earth the hero fell;<br>
 So from its seat the staff they drag,<br>
 And cast to earth some glorious flag.<br>
 The ministers approached again<br>
 The prince whom rites had freed from stain:<br>
 So when Yayáti fell, each seer,<br>
 In pity for his fate, drew near.<br>
 S'atrughna saw him lying low<br>
 O'erwhelmed beneath the crush of woe,<br>
 And as upon the king he thought,<br>
 He fell upon the earth distraught.<br>
 When to his loving memory came<br>
 Those noble gifts, that kingly frame,<br>
 He sorrowed, by his woe distressed,<br>
 As one by frenzied rage possessed:<br>
 'Ah me, this surging sea of woe<br>
 Has drowned us with its overflow:<br>
 The source is Manthará, dire and dark,<br>
 Kaikeyí is the ravening shark:<br>
 And the great boons the monarch gave<br>
 Lend conquering might to every wave.<br>
 Ah, whither wilt thou go, and leave<br>
 Thy Bharat in his woe to grieve,<br>
 Whom ever 'twas thy greatest joy<br>
 To fondle as a tender boy?<br>
 Didst thou not give with thoughtful care<br>
 Our food, our drink, our robes to wear?<br>
 Whose love will now for us provide,<br>
 When thou, our king and sire, hast died?<br>
 At such a time bereft, forlorn,<br>
 Why is not earth in sunder torn,<br>
 Missing her monarch's firm control,<br>
 His love of right, his lofty soul?<br>
 Ah me, for Ráma roams afar,<br>
 My sire is where the Blessed are;<br>
 How can I live deserted? I<br>
 Will pass into the fire and die.<br>
 Abandoned thus, I will not brook<br>
 Upon Ayodhyá's town to look,<br>
 Once guarded by Ikshváku's race:<br>
 The wood shall be my dwelling place.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then when the princes' mournful train<br>
 Heard the sad brothers thus complain,<br>
 And saw their misery, at the view<br>
 Their grief burst wilder out anew.<br>
 Faint with lamenting, sad and worn,<br>
 Each like a bull with broken horn,<br>
 The brothers in their wild despair<br>
 Lay rolling, mad with misery, there.<br>
 Then old Vas'ishtha good and true,<br>
 Their father's priest, all lore who knew,<br>
 Raised weeping Bharat on his feet,<br>
 And thus bespake with counsel meet:<br>
 'Twelve days, my lord, have past away<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_187"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 187</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Since flames consumed thy father's clay:<br>
 Delay no more: as rules ordain,<br>
 Gather what bones may yet remain.<br>
 Three constant pairs are ever found<br>
 To hem all mortal creatures round:  <a name="fr_354"></a><a href="ry156.htm#fn_354"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Then mourn not thus, O Prince, for none<br>
 Their close companionship may shun.'<br>
     Sumantra bade S'atrughna rise,<br>
 And soothed his soul with counsel wise,<br>
 And skilled in truth, his hearer taught<br>
 How all things are and come to naught,<br>
 When rose each hero from the ground,<br>
 A lion lord of men, renowned,<br>
 He showed like Indra's flag, <a name="fr_355"></a><a href="ry156.htm#fn_355"><font size="1">2</font></a> whereon<br>
 Fierce rains have dashed and suns have shone.<br>
 They wiped their red and weeping eyes,<br>
 And gently made their sad replies:<br>
 Then, urged to haste, the royal pair<br>
 Performed the rites that claimed their care.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_352"></a><a href="ry154.htm#fr_352">186:1</a>  The Sáma-veda, the hymns of which
 are chanted aloud.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_353"></a><a href="ry154.htm#fr_353">186:2</a>  Walking from right to left.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry156.htm">Next: Canto LXXVIII.: Manthará Punished.</a></center>
 </body>