<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry156.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry158.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXIX.: BHARAT'S COMMANDS.</h3>
 <p>
 Now when the sun's returning ray<br>
 Had ushered in the fourteenth day,<br>
 The gathered peers of state addressed<br>
 To Bharat's ear their new request:<br>
 'Our lord to heaven has parted hence,<br>
 Long served with deepest reverence;<br>
 Ráma, the eldest, far from home,<br>
 And Lakshman, in the forest roam.<br>
 O Prince, of mighty fame, be thou<br>
 Our guardian and our monarch now,<br>
 Lest secret plot or foeman's hate<br>
 Assail our unprotected state<br>
 With longing eyes, O Lord of men,<br>
 To thee look friend and citizen,<br>
 And ready is each sacred thing<br>
 To consecrate our chosen king.<br>
 Come, Bharat, and accept thine own<br>
 Ancient hereditary throne.<br>
 Thee let the priests this day install<br>
 As monarch to preserve us all.'<br>
   Around the sacred gear he bent<br>
 His circling footsteps reverent,<br>
 And, firm to vows he would not break,<br>
 Thus to the gathered people spake:<br>
 'The eldest son is ever king:<br>
 So rules the house from which we spring:<br>
 Nor should ye, Lords, like men unwise,<br>
 With words like these to wrong advise.<br>
 Ráma is eldest born, and he<br>
 The ruler of the land shall be.<br>
 Now to the woods will I repair,<br>
 Five years and nine to lodge me there.<br>
 Assemble straight a mighty force,<br>
 Cars, elephants, and foot and horse,<br>
 For I will follow on his track<br>
 And bring my eldest brother back.<br>
 Whate'er the rites of throning need<br>
 Placed on a car the way shall lead:<br>
 The sacred vessels I will take<br>
 To the wild wood for Ráma's sake,<br>
 I o'er the lion prince's head<br>
 The sanctifying balm will shed,<br>
 And bring him, as the fire they bring<br>
 Forth from the shrine, with triumphing.<br>
 Nor will I let my mother's greed<br>
 In this her cherished aim succeed:<br>
 In pathless wilds will I remain,<br>
 And Ráma here as king shall reign.<br>
 To make the rough ways smooth and clear<br>
 Send workman out and pioneer:<br>
 Let skilful men attend beside<br>
 Our way through pathless spots to guide.'<br>
 As thus the royal Bharat spake,<br>
 Ordaining all for Ráma's sake,<br>
 The audience gave with one accord<br>
 Auspicious answer to their lord:<br>
 'Be royal Fortune aye benign<br>
 To thee for this good speech of thine,<br>
 Who wishest still thine elder's hand<br>
 To rule with kingly sway the land.'<br>
   Their glorious speech, their favouring cries<br>
       Made his proud bosom swell:<br>
   And from the prince's noble eyes<br>
       The tears of rapture fell.  <a name="fr_356"></a><a href="ry158.htm#fn_356"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry158.htm">Next: Canto LXXX.: The Way Prepared.</a></center>
 </body>