<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry151.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry153.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXIV.: BHARAT'S LAMEST.</h3>
 <p>
 When Bharat's anger-sharpened tongue<br>
 Reproaches on the queen had flung,<br>
 Again, with mighty rage possessed,<br>
 The guilty dame he thus addressed:<br>
 'Flee, cruel, wicked sinner, flee,<br>
 Let not this kingdom harbour thee.<br>
 Thou who hast thrown all right aside,<br>
 Ween thou for me when I have died.<br>
 Canst thou one charge against the king,<br>
 Or the most duteous Ráma bring?<br>
 The one thy sin to death has sent,<br>
 The other chased to banishment.<br>
 Our line's destroyer, sin defiled<br>
 Like one who kills an unborn child,<br>
 Ne'er with thy lord in heaven to dwell,<br>
 Thy portion shall be down in hell<br>
 Because thy hand, that stayed for naught,<br>
 This awful wickedness has wrought,<br>
 And ruined him whom all held dear,<br>
 My bosom too is stirred with fear.<br>
 My father by thy sin is dead,<br>
 And Ráma to the wood is fled;<br>
 And of thy deed I bear the stain,<br>
 And fameless in the world remain.<br>
 Ambitious, evil-souled. in show<br>
 My mother, yet my direst foe.<br>
 My throning ne'er thine eyes shall bless,<br>
 Thy husband's wicked murderess.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_183"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 183</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thou art not As'vapati's child,<br>
 That righteous king most sage and mild,<br>
 But thou wast born a fiend, a foe<br>
 My father's house to overthrow.<br>
 Thou who hast made Kaus'alyá, pure,<br>
 Gentle, affectionate, endure<br>
 The loss of him who was her bliss--<br>
 What worlds await thee, Queen, for this?<br>
 Was it not patent to thy sense<br>
 That Ráma was his friends' defence,<br>
 Kaus'alyá's own true child most dear,<br>
 The eldest and his father's peer?<br>
 Men in the son not only trace<br>
 The father's figure, form, and face,<br>
 But in his heart they also find<br>
 The offspring of the father's mind;<br>
 And hence, though dear their kinsmen are,<br>
 To mothers sons are dearer far.<br>
 There goes an ancient legend how<br>
 Good Surabhi, the God-loved cow,<br>
 Saw two of her dear children strain,<br>
 Drawing a plough and faint with pain.<br>
 She saw them on the earth outworn,<br>
 Toiling till noon from early morn,<br>
 And as she viewed her children's woe,<br>
 A flood of tears began to flow.<br>
 As through the air beneath her swept<br>
 The Lord of Gods, the drops she wept,<br>
 Fine, laden with delicious smell,<br>
 Upon his heavenly body fell,<br>
 And Indra lifted up his eyes<br>
 And saw her standing in the skies,<br>
 Afflicted with her sorrow's weight,<br>
 Sad, weeping, all disconsolate.<br>
 The Lord of Gods in anxious mood<br>
 Thus spoke in suppliant attitude:<br>
 'No fear disturbs our rest, and how<br>
 Comes this great dread upon thee now?<br>
 Whence can this woe upon thee fall,<br>
 Say, gentle one who lovest all?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spake the God who rules the skies,<br>
 Indra, the Lord supremely wise;<br>
 And gentle Surabhi, well learned<br>
 In eloquence, this speech returned:<br>
 'Not thine the fault, great God, not thine<br>
 And guiltless are the Lords divine:<br>
 I mourn two children faint with toil,<br>
 Labouring hard in stubborn soil,<br>
 Wasted and sad I see them now,<br>
 While the sun beats on neck and brow,<br>
 Still goaded by the cruel hind,--<br>
 No pity in his savage mind.<br>
 O Indra, from this body sprang<br>
 These children, worn with many a pang.<br>
 For this sad sight I mourn, for none<br>
 Is to the mother like her son.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He saw her weep whose offspring feed<br>
 In thousands over hill and mead,<br>
 And knew that in a mother's eye<br>
 Naught with a son, for love, can vie.<br>
 He deemed her, when the tears that came<br>
 From her sad eyes bedewed his frame,<br>
 Laden with their celestial scent,<br>
 Of living things most excellent,<br>
 If she these tears of sorrow shed<br>
 Who many a thousand children bred,<br>
 Think what a life of woe is left<br>
 Kaus'alyá, of her Ráma reft.<br>
 An only son was hers and she<br>
 Is rendered childless now by thee.<br>
 Here and hereafter, for thy crime,<br>
 Woe is thy lot through endless time.<br>
 And now, O Queen, without delay,<br>
 With all due honour will I pay<br>
 Both to my brother and my sire<br>
 The rites their several fates require.<br>
 Back to Ayodhyá will I bring<br>
 The long-armed chief, her lord and king,<br>
 And to the wood myself betake<br>
 Where hermit saints their dwelling make.<br>
 For, sinner both in deed and thought!<br>
 This hideous crime which thou hast wrought<br>
 I cannot bear, or live to see<br>
 The people's sad eyes bent on me.<br>
 Begone, to Dandak wood retire,<br>
 Or cast thy body to the fire,<br>
 Or bind around thy neck the rope:<br>
 No other refuge mayst thou hope.<br>
 When Ráma, lord of valour true,<br>
 Has gained the earth, his right and due,<br>
 Then, free from duty's binding debt,<br>
 My vanished sin shall I forget.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus like an elephant forced to brook<br>
 The goading of the driver's hook,<br>
 Quick panting like a serpent maimed,<br>
 He fell to earth with rage inflamed.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry153.htm">Next: Canto LXXV.: The Abjuration.</a></center>
 </body>