<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry159.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry161.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXXII.: THE DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 The prudent prince the assembly viewed<br>
 Thronged with its noble multitude,<br>
 Resplendent as a cloudless night<br>
 When the full moon is in his height;<br>
 While robes of every varied hue<br>
 A glory o'er the synod threw.<br>
 The priest in lore of duty skilled<br>
 Looked on the crowd the hall that filled,<br>
 And then in accents soft and grave<br>
 To Bharat thus his counsel gave:<br>
 'The king, dear son, so good and wise,<br>
 Has gone from earth and gained the skies,<br>
 Leaving to thee, her rightful lord,<br>
 This rich wide land with foison stored.<br>
 And still has faithful Ráma stood<br>
 Firm to the duty of the good,<br>
 And kept his father's host aright,<br>
 As the moon keeps its own dear light.<br>
 Thus sire and brother yield to thee<br>
 This realm from all annoyance free:<br>
 Bejoice thy lords: enjoy thine own:<br>
 Anointed king, ascend the throne.<br>
 Let vassal Princes hasten forth<br>
 From distant lands, west, south, and north,<br>
 From Kerala,  <a name="fr_360"></a><a href="#fn_360"><font size="1">3</font></a> from every sea,<br>
 And bring ten million gems to thee.'<br>
 As thus the sage Vas'ishtha spoke,<br>
 A storm of grief o'er Bharat broke.<br>
 And longing to he just and true,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 His thoughts to duteous Ráma flew.<br>
 With sobs and sighs and broken tones,<br>
 E'en as a wounded mallard moans,<br>
 He mourned with deepest sorrow moved,<br>
 And thus the holy priest reproved:<br>
 'O, how can such as Bharat dare<br>
 The power and sway from him to tear,<br>
 Wise, and devout, and true, and chaste,<br>
 With Scripture lore and virtue graced?<br>
 Can one of Das'aratha's seed<br>
 Be guilty of so vile a deed?<br>
 The realm and I are Ráma's: thou,<br>
 Shouldst speak the words of justice now.<br>
 For he, to claims of virtue true,<br>
 Is eldest born and noblest too:<br>
 Nahush, Dilîpa could not be<br>
 More famous in their lives than he.<br>
 As Das'aratha ruled of right,<br>
 So Ráma's is the power and right.<br>
 If I should do this sinful deed<br>
 And forfeit hope of heavenly need,<br>
 My guilty act would dim the shine<br>
 Of old Ikshváku's glorious line.<br>
 Nay, as the sin my mother wrought<br>
 Is grievous to my inmost thought,<br>
 I here, my hands together laid,<br>
 Will greet him in the pathless shade,<br>
 To Ráma shall my steps be bent,<br>
 My King, of men most excellent,<br>
 Raghu's illustrious son, whose sway<br>
 Might, hell, and earth, and heaven obey.'<br>
     That righteous speech, whose every word<br>
 Bore virtue's, stamp, the audience heard;<br>
 On Ráma every thought was set,<br>
 And with glad tears each eye was wet.<br>
 'Then, if the power I still should lack<br>
 To bring my noble brother back,<br>
 I in the wood will dwell, and share<br>
 His banishment with Lakshman there.<br>
 By every art persuasive I<br>
 To bring him from the wood will try,<br>
 And show him to your loving eyes.<br>
 O Brahmans noble, good, and wise.<br>
 E'en now, the road to make and clear,<br>
 Each labourer pressed, and pioneer<br>
 Have I sent forward to precede<br>
 The army I resolve to lead.'<br>
     Thus, by fraternal love possessed,<br>
 His firm resolve the prince expressed.<br>
 Then to Sumantra, deeply read<br>
 In holy texts, he turned and said:<br>
 'Sumantra, rise without delay,<br>
 And as I bid my words obey.<br>
 Give orders for the march with speed,<br>
 And all the army hither lead.'<br>
     The wise Sumantra, thus addressed,<br>
 Obeyed the high-souled chief's behest.<br>
 He hurried forth with joy inspired<br>
 And gave the orders he desired.<br>
 Delight each soldier's bosom filled,<br>
 Aud through each chief and captain thrilled,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_191"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 191</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To hear that march proclaimed, to bring<br>
 Dear Ráma back from wandering.<br>
 From house to house the tidings flew:<br>
 Each soldier's wife the order knew,<br>
 And as she listened blithe and gay<br>
 Her husband urged to speed away.<br>
 Captain and soldier soon declared<br>
 The host equipped and all prepared<br>
 With chariots matching thought for speed,<br>
 And wagons drawn by ox and steed.<br>
 When Bharat by Vás'ishtha's side,<br>
 His ready host of warriors eyed,<br>
 Thus in Sumantra's ear he spoke.:<br>
 'My car and horses quickly yoke.'<br>
 Sumantra hastened to fulfil<br>
 With ready joy his master's will,<br>
 And quickly with the chariot sped<br>
 Drawn by fleet horses nobly bred.<br>
 Then glorious Bharat, true, devout,<br>
 Whose genuine valour none could doubt,<br>
 Gave in fit words his order out;<br>
 For he would seek the shade<br>
 Of the great distant wood, and there<br>
 Win his dear brother with his prayer:<br>
 'Sumantra, haste! my will declare<br>
     The host be all arrayed.<br>
 I to the wood my way will take,<br>
 To Ráma supplication make,<br>
 And for the world's advantage sake,<br>
     Will lead him home again.'<br>
 Then, ordered thus, the charioteer<br>
 Who listened with delighted ear,<br>
 Went forth and gave his orders clear<br>
     To captains of the train.<br>
 He gave the popular chiefs the word,<br>
 And with the news his friends he stirred,<br>
 And not a single man deferred<br>
     Preparing for the road.<br>
 Then Bráhman, Warrior, Merchant, thrall,<br>
 Obedient to Sumantra's call,<br>
 Each in his house arose, and all<br>
 Yoked elephant or camel tall,<br>
 Or ass or noble steed in stall,<br>
     And full appointed showed.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_358"></a><a href="ry159.htm#fr_358">190:1</a>  Not Bharat's uncle, but some councillor.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_359"></a><a href="ry159.htm#fr_359">190:2</a>  <i>S'atakratu</i>, Lord of a hundred sacrifices, the performance of a hundred <i>As'vamedhas</i>
 or sacrifices of a horse entitling the sacrificer
 to this exalted dignity.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_360"></a><a href="ry160.htm#fr_360">190:3</a>  The modern Malabar.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry161.htm">Next: Canto LXXXIII.: The Journey Begun.</a></center>
 </body>