<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry160.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry162.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXXIII.: THE JOURNEY BEGUN.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Bharat rose at early morn,<br>
 And in his noble chariot borne<br>
 Drove forward at a rapid pace<br>
 Eager to look on Ráma's face.<br>
 The priests and lords, a fair array,<br>
 In sun-bright chariots led the way.<br>
 Behind, a well appointed throng,<br>
 Nine thousand elephants streamed along.<br>
 Then sixty thousand cars, and then,<br>
 With various arms, came fighting men.<br>
 A hundred thousand archers showed<br>
 
 </p><p>
 In lengthened line the steeds they rode--<br>
 A mighty host, the march to grace<br>
 Of Bharat, pride of Raghu's race.<br>
 Kaikeyí and Sumitrá came,<br>
 And good Kaus'alyá, dear to fame:<br>
 By hopes of Ráma's coming cheered<br>
 They in a radiant car appeared.<br>
 On fared the noble host to see<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman, wild with glee,<br>
 And still each other's ear to please,<br>
 Of Ráma spoke in words like these:<br>
 'When shall our happv eyes behold<br>
 Our hero true, and pure, and bold,<br>
 So lustrous dark, so strong of arm,<br>
 Who keeps the world from woe and harm?<br>
 The tears that now our eyeballs dim<br>
 Will vanish at the sight of him,<br>
 As the whole world's black shadows fly<br>
 When the bright sun ascends the sky.'<br>
     Conversing thus their way pursued<br>
 The city's joyous multitude,<br>
 And each in mutual rapture pressed<br>
 A friend or neighbour to his breast.<br>
 Thus every man of high renown,<br>
 And every merchant of the town,<br>
 And leading subjects, joyous went<br>
 Toward Ráma in his banishment.<br>
 And those who worked the potter's wheel,<br>
 And artists skilled in gems to deal;<br>
 And masters of the weaver's art,<br>
 And those who shaped the sword and dart;<br>
 And they who golden trinkets made,<br>
 And those who plied the fuller's trade;<br>
 And servants trained the bath to heat,<br>
 And they who dealt in incense sweet;<br>
 Physicians in their business skilled.<br>
 And those who wine and mead distilled;<br>
 And workmen deft in glass who wrought,<br>
 And those whose snares the peacock caught;<br>
 With them who bored the ear for rings,<br>
 Or sawed, or fashioned ivory things:<br>
 And those who knew to mix cement,<br>
 Or lived by sale of precious scent;<br>
 And men who washed, and men who sewed,<br>
 And thralls who mid the herds abode;<br>
 And fishers of the flood, and they<br>
 Who played and sang, and women gay;<br>
 And virtuous Bráhmans, Scripture-wise,<br>
 Of life approved in all men's eyes;<br>
 These swelled the prince's lengthened train,<br>
 Borne each in car or bullock wain.<br>
 Fair were the robes they wore upon<br>
 Their limbs where red-hued unguents shone.<br>
 These all in various modes conveyed<br>
 Their journey after Bharat made;<br>
 The soldiers' hearts with rapture glowed,<br>
 Following Bharat on his road,<br>
 Their chief whose tender love would fain<br>
 Bring his dear brother home again.<br>
 With elephant, and horse, and car,<br>
 The vast procession travelled far,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_192"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 192</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And came where Gangá's waves below<br>
 The town of Sringavera  <a name="fr_361"></a><a href="ry162.htm#fn_361"><font size="1">1</font></a> flow.<br>
 There, with his friends and kinsmen nigh,<br>
 Dwelt Guha, Ráma's dear ally,<br>
 Heroic guardian of the land<br>
 With dauntless heart and ready hand.<br>
 There for a while the mighty force<br>
 That followed Bharat stayed its course,<br>
 Gazing on Gangá's bosom stirred<br>
 By many a graceful water-bird.<br>
 When Bharat viewed his followers there,<br>
 And Gangá's water, blest and fair,<br>
 The prince, who lore of words possessed,<br>
 His councillors and lords addressed:<br>
 'The captains of the army call:<br>
 Proclaim this day a halt for all,<br>
 That so to-morrow, rested, we<br>
 May cross this flood that seeks the sea.<br>
 Meanwhile, descending to the shore,<br>
 The funeral stream I fain would pour<br>
 From Gangá's fair auspicious tide<br>
 To him, my father glorified.'<br>
     Thus Bharat spoke: each peer and lord<br>
 Approved his words with one accord,<br>
 And bade the weary troops repose<br>
 In separate spots where'er they chose.<br>
 There by the mighty stream that day,<br>
 Most glorious in its vast array<br>
 The prince's wearied army lay<br>
     In various groups reclined.<br>
 There Bharat's hours of night were spent,<br>
 While every eager thought he bent<br>
 On bringing home from banishment<br>
 His brother, great of mind.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry162.htm">Next: Canto LXXXIV.: Guha's Anger.</a></center>
 </body>