<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry166.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry168.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXXIX.: THE PASSAGE OF GANGÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 That night the son of Raghu lay<br>
 On Gangá's bank till break of day:<br>
 Then with the earliest light he woke<br>
 And thus to brave S'atrughna spoke.<br>
 'Rise up, S'atrughna, from thy bed:<br>
 Why sleepest thou the night is fled.<br>
 See how the sun who chases night<br>
 Wakes every lotus with his light.<br>
 Arise, arise, and first of all<br>
 The lord of S'ringavera call,<br>
 For he his friendly aid will lend<br>
 Our army o'er the flood to send.'<br>
     Thus urged, S'atrughna answered: 'I,<br>
 Remembering Ráma, sleepless lie.'<br>
 As thus the brothers, each to each,<br>
 The lion-mettled, ended speech,<br>
 Came Guha, the Nishádas' king,<br>
 And spoke with kindly questioning:<br>
 'Hast thou in comfort passed,' he cried,<br>
 'The night upon the river side?<br>
 With thee how fares it? and are these,<br>
 Thy soldiers, health and at ease?'<br>
 Thus the Nishádas' lord inquired<br>
 In gentle words which love inspired,<br>
 And Bharat, Ráma's faithful slave,<br>
 Thus to the king his answer gave:<br>
 'The night has sweetly passed, and we<br>
 Are highly honoured, King, by thee.<br>
 Now let thy servants boats prepare,<br>
 Our army o'er the stream to bear.'<br>
     The speech of Bharat Guha heard,<br>
 And swift to do his bidding stirred.<br>
 Within the town the monarch sped<br>
 And to his ready kinsmen said:<br>
 'Awake, each kinsman, rise, each friend!<br>
 May every joy your lives attend.<br>
 Gather each boat upon the shore<br>
 And ferry all the army o'er.'<br>
 Thus Guha spoke: nor they delayed,<br>
 But, rising quick, their lord obeyed,<br>
 And soon, from every side secured,<br>
 Five hundred boats were ready moored.<br>
 Some reared aloft the mystic sign,  <a name="fr_363"></a><a href="#fn_363"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And mighty bells were hung in line:<br>
 Of firmest build, gay flags they bore,<br>
 And sailors for the helm and oar.<br>
 One such King Guha chose, whereon,<br>
 Of fair white cloth, an awning shone,<br>
 And sweet musicians charmed the ear,--<br>
 And bade his servants urge it near.<br>
 Then Bharat swiftly sprang on board,<br>
 And then S'atrughna, famous lord,<br>
 To whom, with many a royal dame,<br>
 Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá came.<br>
 The household priest went first in place,<br>
 The elders, and the Brahman race,<br>
 And after them the monarch's train<br>
 Of women borne in many a wain,<br>
 Then high to heaven the shouts of those<br>
 Who fired the army's huts,  <a name="fr_364"></a><a href="#fn_364"><font size="1">2</font></a> arose,<br>
 With theirs who bathed along the shore,<br>
 Or to the boats the baggage bore.<br>
 Full freighted with that mighty force<br>
 The boats sped swiftly on their coarse,<br>
 By royal Guha's servants manned,<br>
 And gentle gales the banners fanned.<br>
 Some boats a crowd of dames conveyed,<br>
 In others noble coursers neighed;<br>
 Some chariots and their cattle bore,<br>
 Some precious wealth and golden store.<br>
 Across the stream each boat was rowed,<br>
 There duly disembarked its load,<br>
 And then returning on its way,<br>
 Sped here and there in merry play.<br>
 Then swimming elephants appeared<br>
 With flying pennons high upreared.<br>
 And as the drivers urged them o'er,<br>
 The look of winged mountains wore.<br>
 Some men in barges reached the strand,<br>
 Others on rafts came safe to land:<br>
 Some buoyed with pitchers crossed the tide,<br>
 And others on their arms relied.<br>
 Thus with the help the monarch gave<br>
 The army crossed pure Gangá's wave:<br>
 Then in auspicious hour it stood<br>
 Within Prayuga's famous wood.<br>
 The prince with cheering words addressed<br>
 His weary mem, and bade them rest<br>
     Where'er they chose and he,<br>
 With priest and deacon by his side,<br>
 To Bharadvaja's dwelling hied<br>
     That best of saints to see.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_197"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 197</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_363"></a><a href="ry167.htm#fr_363">196:1</a>  The <i>svastika</i>, a little cross with a
 transverse line at each extremity.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_364"></a><a href="ry167.htm#fr_364">196:2</a>  When an army marched it was customary
 to burn the huts in which it had spent
 the night.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry168.htm">Next: Canto XC.: The Hermitage.</a></center>
 </body>