<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry169.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry171.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCII.: BHARAT'S FAREWELL.</h3>
 <p>
 So Bharat with his army spent<br>
 The watches of the night content,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And gladly, with the morning's light<br>
 Drew near his host the anchorite.<br>
 When Bharadvája saw him stand<br>
 With hand in reverence joined to hand,<br>
 When fires of worship had been fed,<br>
 He looked upon the prince and said:<br>
 'O blameless son, I pray thee tell,<br>
 Did the past night content thee well?<br>
 Say if the feast my care supplied<br>
 Thy host of followers gratified.'<br>
     His hands he joined, his head he bent<br>
 And spoke in answer reverent<br>
 To the most high and radiant sage<br>
 Who issued from his hermitage:<br>
 'Well have I passed the night: thy feast<br>
 Gave joy to every man and beast;<br>
 And I, great lord, and every peer<br>
 Were satisfied with sumptuous cheer,<br>
 Thy banquet has delighted all<br>
 From highest chief to meanest thrall,<br>
 And rich attire and drink and meat<br>
 Banished the thought of toil and heat,<br>
 And now, O Hermit good and great,<br>
 A boon of thee I supplicate.<br>
 To Ráma's side my steps I bend:<br>
 Do thou with friendly eye commend.<br>
 O tell me how to guide my feet<br>
 To virtuous Ráma's lone retreat:<br>
 Great Hermit, I entreat thee, say<br>
 How far from here and which the way.'<br>
     Thus by fraternal love inspired<br>
 The chieftain of the saint inquired:<br>
 Then thus replied the glorious seer<br>
 Of matchless might, of vows austere:<br>
 'Ere the fourth league from here be passed,<br>
 Amid a forest wild and vast,<br>
 Stands Chitrakúta's mountain tall,<br>
 Lovely with wood and waterfall.<br>
 North of the mountain thou wilt see<br>
 The beauteous stream Mandákiní,<br>
 Where swarm the waterfowl below.<br>
 And gay trees on the margin grow.<br>
 Then will a leafy cot between<br>
 The river and the hill be seen:<br>
 'Tis Ráma's, and the princely pair<br>
 Of brothers live for certain there.<br>
 Hence to the south thine army lead,<br>
 And then more southward still proceed.<br>
 So shall thou find his lone retreat,<br>
 And there the son of Raghu meet.'<br>
     Soon as the ordered march they knew,<br>
 The widows of the monarch flew,<br>
 Leaving their cars, most meet to ride,<br>
 And flocked to Bharadvája's side.<br>
 There with the good Sumitrá Queen<br>
 Kaus'alyá, sad and worn, was seen,<br>
 Caressing, still with sorrow faint,<br>
 The feet of that illustrious saint,<br>
 Kaikeyí too, her longings crossed,<br>
 Reproached of all, her object lost,<br>
 Before the famous hermit came,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_201"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 201</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And clasped his feet, overwhelmed with shame.<br>
 With circling steps she humbly went<br>
 Around the saint preëminent,<br>
 And stood not far from Bharat's side<br>
 With heart oppressed, and heavy-eyed.<br>
 Then the great seer, who never broke<br>
 One holy vow, to Bharat spoke:<br>
 'Speak, Raghu's son: I fain would learn<br>
 The story of each queen in turn.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Obedient to the high request<br>
 By Bharadvája thus addressed,<br>
 His reverent hands together laid,<br>
 He, skilled in speech, his answer made:<br>
 'She whom, O Saint, thou seest here<br>
 A Goddess in her form appear,<br>
 Was the chief consort of the king,<br>
 Now worn with fast and sorrowing.<br>
 As Aditi in days of yore<br>
 The all-preserving Vishnu bore,<br>
 Kaus'alyá bore with happy fate<br>
 Lord Ráma of the lion's gait.<br>
 She who, transfixed with torturing pangs,<br>
 On her left arm so fondly hangs,<br>
 As when her withering leaves decay<br>
 Droops by the wood the Cassia spray,<br>
 Sumitrá, pained with woe, is she,<br>
 The consort second of the three:<br>
 Two princely sons the lady bare,<br>
 Fair as the Gods in heaven are fair.<br>
 And she, the wicked dame through whom<br>
 My brothers' lives are wrapped in gloom,<br>
 And mourning for his offspring dear,<br>
 The king has sought his heavenly sphere,--<br>
 Proud, foolish-hearted, swift to ire,<br>
 Self-fancied darling of my sire,<br>
 Kaikeyí, most ambitious queen,<br>
 Unlovely with her lovely mien,<br>
 My mother she, whose impious will<br>
 Is ever bent on deeds of ill,<br>
 In whom the root and spring I see<br>
 Of all this woe which crushes me.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Quick breathing like a furious snake,<br>
 With tears and sobs the hero spake,<br>
 With reddened eyes aglow with rage.<br>
 And Bharadvája, mighty sage,<br>
 Supreme in wisdom, calm and grave,<br>
 In words like these good counsel gave:<br>
 'O Bharat, hear the words I say;<br>
 On her the fault thou must not lay:<br>
 For many a blessing yet will spring<br>
 From banished Ráma's wandering.'<br>
 And Bharat, with that promise cheered,<br>
 Went circling round that saint revered.<br>
 He humbly bade farewell, and then<br>
 Gave orders to collect his men.<br>
 Prompt at the summons thousands flew<br>
 To cars which noble coursers drew,<br>
 Bright-gleaming, glorious to behold,<br>
 Adorned with wealth of burnished gold.<br>
 Then female elephants and male,<br>
 Gold-girthed, with flags that wooed the gale,<br>
 Marched with their bright bells' tinkling chime<br>
 Like clouds when ends the summer time:<br>
 Some cars were huge and some were light,<br>
 For heavy draught or rapid flight,<br>
 Of costly price, of every kind,<br>
 With clouds of infantry behind.<br>
 The dames, Kaus'alyá at their head,<br>
 Were in the noblest chariots led,<br>
 And every gentle bosom beat<br>
 With hope the banished prince to meet.<br>
 The royal Bharat, glory-crowned,<br>
 With all his retinue around,<br>
 Borne in a beauteous litter rode,<br>
 Like the young moon and sun that glowed.<br>
 The army as it streamed along,<br>
 Cars, elephants, in endless throng,<br>
 Showed, marching on its southward way,<br>
 Like autumn clouds in long array.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_368"></a><a href="ry169.htm#fr_368">200:1</a>  The poet does not tell us what these
 lakes contained.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry171.htm">Next: Canto XCIII.: Chitrakúta In Sight.</a></center>
 </body>