<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry173.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry175.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCVI.  <a name="fr_374"></a><a href="#fn_374"><font size="1">1b</font></a>: THE MAGIC SHAFT.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Rama showed to Janak's child<br>
 The varied beauties of the wild,<br>
 The hill, the brook and each fair spot,<br>
 Then turned to seek their leafy cot.<br>
 North of the mountain Rama found<br>
 A cavern in the sloping ground,<br>
 Charming to view, its floor was strown<br>
 With many a mass of ore and stone,<br>
 In secret shadow far retired<br>
 Where gay birds sang with joy inspired,<br>
 And trees their graceful branches swayed<br>
 With loads of blossom downward weighed.<br>
 Soon as he saw the cave which took<br>
 Each living heart and chained the look,<br>
 Thus Rama spoke to Sita, who<br>
 Gazed wondering on the silvan view:<br>
 'Does this fair cave beneath the height,<br>
 Videhan lady, charm thy sight?<br>
 Then let us resting here a while<br>
 The languor of the way beguile.<br>
 That block of stone so smooth and square<br>
 Was set for thee to rest on there,<br>
 And like a thriving Kes'ar tree<br>
 This flowery shrub o'ershadows thee.'<br>
 Thus Rama spoke, and Janak's child,<br>
 By nature ever soft and mild,<br>
 In tender words which love betrayed<br>
 Her answer to the hero made:<br>
 'O pride of Raghu's children, still<br>
 My pleasure is to do thy will.<br>
 Enough for me thy wish to know:<br>
 Far hast thou wandered to and fro.'<br>
     Thus Sita spake in gentle tone,<br>
 And went obedient to the stone,<br>
 Of perfect face and faultless limb<br>
 Prepared to rest a while with him.<br>
 And Rama, as she thus replied,<br>
 Turned to his spouse again and cried:<br>
 'Thou seest, love, this flowery shade<br>
 For silvan creatures' pleasure made,<br>
 How the gum streams from trees and plants<br>
 Torn by the tusks of elephants!<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_205"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 205</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Through all the forest clear and high<br>
 Resounds the shrill cicala's cry.<br>
 Hark how the kite above us moans,<br>
 And calls her young in piteous tones;<br>
 So may my hapless mother be<br>
 Still mourning in her home for me.<br>
 There mounted on that lofty Sál<br>
 The loud Bhringráj  <a name="fr_375"></a><a href="#fn_375"><font size="1">1</font></a> repeats his call:<br>
 How sweetly now he tunes his throat<br>
 Responsive to the Koïl's note.<br>
 Or else the bird that now has sung<br>
 May be himself the Koïl's young,<br>
 Linked with such winning sweetness are<br>
 The notes he pours irregular.<br>
 See, round the blooming Mango clings<br>
 That creeper with her tender rings,<br>
 So in thy love, when none is near,<br>
 Thine arms are thrown round me, my dear.'<br>
   Thus in his joy he cried; and she,<br>
 Sweet speaker, on her lover's knee,<br>
 Of faultless limb and perfect face,<br>
 Grew closer to her lord's embrace.<br>
 Reclining in her husband's arms,<br>
 A goddess in her wealth of charms,<br>
 She filled his loving breast anew<br>
 With mighty joy that thrilled him through.<br>
 His finger on the rock he laid,<br>
 Which veins of sanguine ore displayed,<br>
 And painted o'er his darling's eyes<br>
 The holy sign in mineral dyes.<br>
 Bright on her brow the metal lay<br>
 Like the young sun's first gleaming ray,<br>
 And showed her in her beauty fair<br>
 As the soft light of morning's air.<br>
 Then from the Kes'ar's laden tree<br>
 He picked fair blossoms in his glee,<br>
 And as he decked each lovely tress,<br>
 His heart o'erflowed with happiness.<br>
 So resting on that rocky seat<br>
 A while they spent in pastime sweet,<br>
 Then onward neath the shady boughs<br>
 Went Ráma with his Maithil spouse.<br>
 She roaming in the forest shade<br>
 Where every kind of creature strayed<br>
 Observed a monkey wandering near,<br>
 And clung to Ráma's arm in fear.<br>
 The hero Ráma fondly laced<br>
 His mighty arms around her waist,<br>
 Consoled his beauty in her dread,<br>
 And scared the Monkey till he fled.<br>
 That holy mark of sanguine ore<br>
 That gleamed on Sítá's brow before,<br>
 Shone by that close embrace impressed<br>
 Upon the hero's ample chest.<br>
 Then Sítá, when the beast who led<br>
 The monkey troop, afar had fled,<br>
 Laughed loudly in light-hearted glee<br>
 That mark on Ráma's chest to see.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 A clump of bright As'okas fired<br>
 The forest in their bloom attired:<br>
 The restless blossoms as they gleamed<br>
 A host of threatening monkeys seemed.<br>
 Then Sítá thus to Ráma cried,<br>
 As longingly the flowers she eyed:<br>
 'Pride of thy race, now let us go<br>
 Where those As'oka blossoms grow.'<br>
 He on his darling's pleasure bent<br>
 With his fair goddess thither went<br>
 And roamed delighted through the wood<br>
 Where blossoming As'okas stood,<br>
 As S'iva with Queen Umá roves<br>
 Through Himaván's majestic groves.<br>
 Bright with purpureal glow the pair<br>
 Of happy lovers sported there,<br>
 And each upon the other set<br>
 A flower-inwoven coronet.<br>
 There many a crown and chain they wove<br>
 Of blooms from that As'oka grove,<br>
 And in their graceful sport the two<br>
 Fresh beauty o'er the mountain threw.<br>
 The lover let his love survey<br>
 Each pleasant spot that round them lay,<br>
 Then turned they to their green retreat<br>
 Where all was garnished, gay, and neat.<br>
 By brotherly affection led,<br>
 Sumitrá's son to meet them sped,<br>
 And showed the labours of the day<br>
 Done while his brother was away.<br>
 There lay ten black-deer duly slain<br>
 With arrows pure of poison stain,<br>
 Piled in a mighty heap to dry,<br>
 With many another carcass nigh.<br>
 And Lakshman's brother saw, o'erjoyed,<br>
 The work that had his hands employed,<br>
 Then to his consort thus he cried:<br>
 'Now be the general gifts supplied.'<br>
 Then Sítá, fairest beauty, placed<br>
 The food for living things to taste,<br>
 And set before the brothers meat<br>
 And honey that the pair might eat.<br>
 They ate the meal her hands supplied,<br>
 Their lips with water purified:<br>
 Then Janak's daughter sat at last<br>
 And duly made her own repast.<br>
 The other venison, to be dried,<br>
 Piled up in heaps was set aside,<br>
 And Ráma told his wife to stay<br>
 And drive the flocking crows away.<br>
 Her husband saw her much distressed<br>
 By one more bold than all the rest,<br>
 Whose wings where'er he chose could fly,<br>
 Now pierce the earth, now roam the sky.<br>
 Then Ráma laughed to see her stirred<br>
 To anger by the plaguing bird:<br>
 Proud of his love the beauteous dame<br>
 With burning rage was all aflame.<br>
 Now here, now there, again, again<br>
 She chased the crow, but all in vain,<br>
 Enraging her, so quick to strike<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_206"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 206</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With beak and wing find claw alike:<br>
 Then how the proud lip quivered, how<br>
 The dark frown marked her angry brow!<br>
 When Ráma saw her cheek aglow<br>
 With passion, he rebuked the crow.<br>
 But bold in impudence the bird,<br>
 With no respect for Ráma's word,<br>
 Fearless again at Sítá flew:<br>
 Then Ráma's wrath to fury grew.<br>
 The hero of the mighty arm<br>
 Spoke o'er a shaft the mystic charm,<br>
 Laid the dire weapon on his bow<br>
 And launched it at the shameless crow.<br>
 The bird, empowered by Gods to spring<br>
 Through earth itself on rapid wing,<br>
 Through the three worlds in terror fled<br>
 Still followed by that arrow dread.<br>
 Where'er he flew, now here now there,<br>
 A cloud of weapons filled the air.<br>
 Back to the high-souled prince he fled<br>
 And bent at Ráma's feet his head,<br>
 And then, as Sítá looked, began<br>
 His speech in accents of a man:<br>
 'O pardon, and for pity's sake<br>
 Spare, Ráma, spare my life to take!<br>
 Where'er I turn, where'er I flee,<br>
 No shelter from this shaft I see.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The chieftain heard the crow entreat<br>
 Helpless and prostrate at his feet,<br>
 And while soft pity moved his breast,<br>
 With wisest speech the bird addressed:<br>
 'I took the troubled Sítá's part,<br>
 And furious anger filled my heart.<br>
 Then on the string my arrow lay<br>
 Charmed with a spell thy life to slay.<br>
 Thou seekest now my feet, to crave<br>
 Forgiveness and thy life to save.<br>
 So shall thy prayer have due respect:<br>
 The suppliant I must still protect.<br>
 But ne'er in vain this dart may flee;<br>
 Yield for thy life a part of thee,<br>
 What portion of thy body, say,<br>
 Shall this mine arrow rend away?<br>
 Thus far, O bird, thus far alone<br>
 On thee my pity may be shown.<br>
 Forfeit a part thy life to buy:<br>
 'Tis better so to live than die.'<br>
 Thus Ráma spoke: the bird of air<br>
 Pondered his speech with anxious care,<br>
 And wisely deemed it good to give<br>
 One of his eyes that he might live.<br>
 To Raghu's son he made reply:<br>
 'O Ráma, I will yield an eye.<br>
 So let me in thy grace confide<br>
 And live hereafter single-eyed.'<br>
 Then Ráma charged the shaft, and lo,<br>
 Full in the eye it smote the crow.<br>
 And the Videhan lady gazed<br>
 Upon the ruined eye amazed.<br>
 The crow to Ráma humbly bent,<br>
 Then where his fancy led he went.<br>
 Ráma with Lakshman by his side<br>
 With needful work was occupied.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_374"></a><a href="ry174.htm#fr_374">204:1b</a>  This canto is allowed, by Indian commentators,
 to be an interpolation. It cannot
 be the work of Valmiki.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_375"></a><a href="ry174.htm#fr_375">205:1</a>  A fine bird with a strong, sweet note,
 and great imitative powers.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry175.htm">Next: Canto XCVII.: Lakshman's Anger.</a></center>
 </body>