<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry177.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry179.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO C.: THE MEETING.</h3>
 <p>
 'Then Bharat to Satrughna showed<br>
 The spot, and eager onward strode,<br>
 First bidding Saint Vasishtha bring<br>
 The widowed consorts of the king,<br>
 As by fraternal love impelled<br>
 His onward course the hero held,<br>
 Sumantra followed close behind<br>
 Satrughra with an anxious mind:<br>
 Not Bharat's self more fain could be<br>
 To look on Rama's face than he.<br>
 As, speeding on, the spot he neared,<br>
 Amid the hermits' homes appeared<br>
 His brother's cot with leaves o'erspread,<br>
 And by its side a lowly shed.<br>
 Before the shed great heaps were left<br>
 Of gathered flowers and billets cleft,<br>
 And on the trees hung grass and bark<br>
 Rama and Lakshman's path to mark:<br>
 And heaps of fuel to provide<br>
 Against the cold stood ready dried.<br>
 The long-armed chief, as on he went<br>
 In glory's light preeminent,<br>
 With joyous words like these addressed<br>
 The brave Satrughna and the rest:<br>
 'This is the place, I little doubt,<br>
 Which Bharadvája pointed out,<br>
 Not far from where we stand must be<br>
 The woodland stream, Mandákini.<br>
 Here on the mountain's woody side<br>
 Roam elephants in tusked pride,<br>
 And ever with a roar and cry<br>
 Each other, as they meet, defy.<br>
 And see those smoke-wreaths thick and dark:<br>
 The presence of the flame they mark,<br>
 Which hermits in the forest strive<br>
 By every art to keep alive.<br>
 O happy me! my task is done,<br>
 And I shall look on Raghu's son,<br>
 Like some great saint, who loves to treat<br>
 His elders with all reverence meet.'<br>
 Thus Bharat reached that forest rill,<br>
 Thus roamed on Chitrakuta's hill;<br>
 Then pity in his breast awoke,<br>
 And to his friends the hero spoke:<br>
 'Woe, woe upon my life and birth!<br>
 The prince of men, the lord of earth<br>
 Has sought the lonely wood to dwell<br>
 Sequestered in a hermit's cell.<br>
 Through me, through me these sorrows fall<br>
 On him the splendid lord of all:<br>
 Through me resigning earthly bliss<br>
 He hides him in a home like this.<br>
 Now will I, by the world abhorred,<br>
 Fall at the dear feet of my lord,<br>
 And at fair Sitft's too, to win<br>
 His pardon for my heinous sin.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     As thus he sadly mourned and sighed,<br>
 The son of Dasaratha spied<br>
 A bower of leafy branches made,<br>
 Sacred and lovely in the shade,<br>
 Of fair proportions large and tall,<br>
 Well roofed with boughs of palm, and Sál,<br>
 Arranged in order due o'erhead<br>
 Like grass upor an altar spread.<br>
 Two glorious bows were gleaming there,<br>
 Like Indra's <a name="fr_377"></a><a href="#fn_377"><font size="1">1</font></a> in the rainy air,<br>
 Terror of foemen. backed with gold,<br>
 Meet for the mightiest hand to hold:<br>
 And quivered arrows cast a blaze<br>
 Bright gleaming like the Day-God's rays:<br>
 Thus serpents with their eyes aglow<br>
 Adorn their capital below. <a name="fr_378"></a><a href="#fn_378"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Great swords adorned the cottage, laid<br>
 Each in a case of gold brocade;<br>
 There hung the trusty shields, whereon.<br>
 With purest gold the bosses shone.<br>
 The brace to bind the bowman's arm,<br>
 The glove to shield his hand from harm,<br>
 A lustre to the cottage lent<br>
 From many a golden ornament:<br>
 Safe was the cot from fear of men<br>
 As from wild beasts the lion's den.<br>
 The fire upon the altar burned,<br>
 That to the north and east was turned.<br>
 Bharat his eager glances bent<br>
 And gazed within the cot intent;<br>
 In deerskin dress, with matted hair,<br>
 Rama his chief was sitting there:<br>
 With liou-shl ulders broad and strong,<br>
 With lotus eyes, arms thick and long.<br>
 The righteous sovereign, who should be<br>
 Lord paramount from sea to sea,<br>
 High-minded, born to lofty fate,<br>
 Like Brahma's self supremely great;<br>
 With Lakshman by his side, and her,<br>
 Fair Sita, for his minister.<br>
 And Bharat gazing, overcome<br>
 By sorrow for a while was dumb,<br>
 Then, yielding to his woe, he ran<br>
 To Kama and with sobs began:<br>
 'He who a royal seat should fill<br>
 With subjects round to do his will,<br>
 My elder brother,--see him here,<br>
 With silvan creatures waiting near.<br>
 The high-souled hero, wont to wear<br>
 The costliest robes exceeding fair,<br>
 Now banished, in a deerskin dress,<br>
 Here keeps the path of righteousness.<br>
 How brooks the son of Eaghu now<br>
 The matted locks which load his brow,<br>
 Around whose princely head were twined<br>
 Sweet blossoms of the rarest kind?<br>
 The prince whose merits grew, acquired<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_210"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 210</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 By rites performed as he desired,<br>
 Would now a store of merit gain<br>
 Bought by his body's toil and pain.<br>
 Those limbs to which pure sandal lent<br>
 The freshness of its fragrant scent,<br>
 Exposed to sun. and dust, and rain,<br>
 Are now defiled with many a stain.<br>
 And I the wretched cause why this<br>
 Falls on the prince whose right is bliss!<br>
 Ah me, that ever I was born<br>
 To be the people's hate and scorn!'<br>
     Thus Bharat cried: of anguish sprung,<br>
 Great drops upon his forehead hung.<br>
 He fell o'erpowered-his grief was such-<br>
 Ere he is brother's feet could touch.<br>
 As on the glorious prince he gazed<br>
 In vain his broken voice he raised:<br>
 'Dear lord'--through tears and sobbing came,<br>
 The only words his lips could frame.<br>
 And brave Satrughna wept aloud,<br>
 As low at Ráma's feet he bowed.<br>
 Then Ráma, while his tears ran fast,<br>
 His arms around his brothers cast.<br>
 Guha, Sumantra came to meet<br>
 The princes in their wild retreat.<br>
     Vrihaspati and Sukra bright<br>
         Their greeting thus rejoice to pay<br>
     To the dear Lord who brings the night,<br>
         And the great God who rules the day.<br>
     Then wept the dwellers of the shade,<br>
         Whose eyes the princes, meet to ride<br>
     On mighty elephants, surveyed;<br>
         And cast all thought of joy aside.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_377"></a><a href="ry178.htm#fr_377">209:1</a>  The rainbow is called the bow of Indra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_378"></a><a href="ry178.htm#fr_378">209:2</a>  Bhogavatí, the abode of the Nagas or
 Serpent race.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry179.htm">Next: Canto CI.: Bharat Questioned.</a></center>
 </body>