<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry182.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry184.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CV.: RAMA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 A while they sat, each lip compressed,<br>
 Then Bharat thus his chief addressed:<br>
 'My mother here was made content;<br>
 To me was given the government.<br>
 This now, my lord, I yield to thee:<br>
 Enjoy it, from all trouble free.<br>
 Like a great bridge the floods have rent,<br>
 Impetuous in their wild descent,<br>
 All other hands but thine in vain<br>
 Would strive the burthen to maintain.<br>
 In vain the ass with steeds would vie,<br>
 With Tárkshya,  <a name="fr_381"></a><a href="#fn_381"><font size="1">1</font></a> birds that wing the sky;<br>
 So, lord of men, my power is slight<br>
 To rival thine imperial might.<br>
 Great joys his happy days attend<br>
 On whom the hopes of men depend,<br>
 But wretched is the life he leads<br>
 Who still the aid of others needs.<br>
 And if the seed a man has sown,<br>
 With care and kindly nurture grown,<br>
 Rear its huge trunk and spring in time<br>
 Too bulky for a dwarf to climb,<br>
 Yet, with perpetual blossom gay,<br>
 No fruit upon its boughs display,<br>
 Ne'er can that tree, thus nursed in vain,<br>
 Approval of the virtuous gain.<br>
 The simile is meant to be<br>
 Applied, O mighty-armed, to thee,<br>
 Because, our lord and leader, thou<br>
 Protectest not thy people now.<br>
 O, be the longing wish fulfilled<br>
 Of every chief of house and guild,<br>
 To see again their sun-bright lord<br>
 Victorious to his realm restored!<br>
 As thou returnest through the crowd<br>
 Let roars of elephants be loud.<br>
 And each fair woman lift her voice<br>
 And in her new-found king rejoice.'<br>
   The people all with longing moved,<br>
 The words that Bharat spoke approved,<br>
 And crowding near to Ráma pressed<br>
 The hero with the same request.<br>
 The steadfast Ráma, when he viewed<br>
 His glorious brother's mournful mood,<br>
 With each ambitious thought controlled,<br>
 Thus the lamenting prince consoled:<br>
 'I cannot do the things I will,<br>
 For Ráma is but mortal still.<br>
 Fate with supreme, resistless law<br>
 This way and that its slave will draw,<br>
 All gathered heaps must waste away,<br>
 All lofty lore and powers decay.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Death is the end of life, and all,<br>
 Now firmly joined, apart must fall.<br>
 One fear the ripened fruit must know,<br>
 To fall upon the earth below;<br>
 So every man who draws his breath<br>
 Must fear inevitable death.<br>
 The pillared mansion, high, compact,<br>
 Must fall by Time's strong hand attacked;<br>
 So mortal men, the gradual prey<br>
 Of old and ruthless death, decay.<br>
 The night that flies no more returns:<br>
 Yamuná for the Ocean yearns:<br>
 Swift her impetuous waters flee,<br>
 But roll not backward from the sea.<br>
 The days and nights pass swiftly by<br>
 And steal our moments as they fly.<br>
 E'en as the sun's unpitying rays<br>
 Drink up the floods in summer blaze.<br>
 Then for thyself lament and leave<br>
 For death of other men to grieve,<br>
 For if thou go or if thou stay.<br>
 Thy life is shorter day by day.<br>
 Death travels with us; death attends<br>
 Our steps until our journey ends.<br>
 Death, when the traveller wins the goal,<br>
 Returns with the returning soul.<br>
 The flowing hair grown* white and thin,<br>
 And wrinkles mark the altered skin.<br>
 The ills of age man's strength assail:<br>
 Ah, what can mortal power avail?<br>
 Men joy to see the sun arise,<br>
 They watch him set with joyful eyes:<br>
 But ne'er reflect, too blind to see,<br>
 How fast their own brief moments flee.<br>
 With lovely change for ever new<br>
 The seasons' sweet return they view,<br>
 Nor think with heedless hearts the while<br>
 That lives decay as seasons smile.<br>
 As haply on the boundless main<br>
 Meet drifting logs and part again.<br>
 So wives and children, friends and gold,<br>
 Oures for a little time we hold:<br>
 Soon by resistless laws of fate<br>
 To meet no more we separate.<br>
 In all this changing world not one<br>
 The common lot of all can shun:<br>
 Then why with useless tears deplore<br>
 The dead whom tears can bring no more?<br>
 As one might stand upon the way<br>
 And to a troop of travellers say:<br>
 'If ye allow it, sirs, I too<br>
 Will travel on the road with you:'<br>
 So why should mortal man lament<br>
 When on that path his feet are bent<br>
 Which all men living needs must tread,<br>
 Where sire and ancestors have led?<br>
 Life flies as torrents downward fall<br>
 Speeding away without recall,<br>
 So virtue should our thoughts engage,<br>
 For bliss  <a name="fr_382"></a><a href="#fn_382"><font size="1">1b</font></a> is mortals' heritage,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_215"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 215</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 By ceaseless care and earnest zeal<br>
 For servants and for people's weal,<br>
 By gifts, by duty nobly done,<br>
 Our glorious sire the skies has won.<br>
 Our lord the king, o'er earth who reigned,<br>
 A blissful home in heaven has gained<br>
 By wealth in ample largess spent,<br>
 And many a rite magnificent:<br>
 With constant joy from first to last<br>
 A long and noble life he passed,<br>
 Praised by the good, no tears should dim<br>
 Our eyes, O brother dear, for him.<br>
 His human body, worn and tried<br>
 By length of days, he cast aside,<br>
 And gained the godlike bliss to stray<br>
 In Brahma's heavenly home for aye.<br>
 "For such the wise as we are, deep<br>
 In Veda lore, should never weep.<br>
 Those who are firm and ever wise<br>
 Spurn vain lament and idle sighs.<br>
 Be self-possessed: thy grief restrain:<br>
 Go, in that city dwell again.<br>
 Return, O best of men, and be<br>
 Obedient to our sire's decree,<br>
 While I with every care fulfil<br>
 Our holy father's righteous will,<br>
 Observing in the lonely wood<br>
 His charge approved by all the good,'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     Thus Ráma of the lofty mind<br>
         To Bharat spoke his righteous speech,<br>
     By every argument designed<br>
         Obedience to his sire to teach,<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_381"></a><a href="ry183.htm#fr_381">214:1</a>  Garud, the king of birds.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_382"></a><a href="ry183.htm#fr_382">214:1b</a>  To be won by virtue.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry184.htm">Next: Canto CVI.: Bharat's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>