<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry186.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry188.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CIX.: THE PRAISES OF TRUTH.</h3>
 <p>
 By sage Jáváli thus addressed,<br>
 Ráma of truthful hearts the best,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_218"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 218</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With perfect skill and wisdom high<br>
 Thus to his speech made fit reply:<br>
 'Thy words that tempt to bliss are fair.<br>
 But virtue's garb they falsely wear.<br>
 For he from duty's path who strays<br>
 To wander in forbidden ways,<br>
 Allured by doctrine false and vain,<br>
 Praise from the good can never gain.<br>
 Their lives the true and boaster show,<br>
 Pure and impure, and high and low.<br>
 Else were no mark to judge between<br>
 Stainless and stained and high and mean;<br>
 They to whose lot fair signs may fall<br>
 Were but as they who lack them all,<br>
 And those to virtuous thouguts inclined<br>
 Were but as men of evil mind.<br>
 If in the sacred name of right<br>
 I do this wrong in duty's spite;<br>
 The path of virtue meanly quit,<br>
 And this polluting sin commit,<br>
 What man who marks the bounds between<br>
 Virtue and vice with insight keen,<br>
 Would rank me high in after time.<br>
 Stained with this soul destroying crime?<br>
 Whither could I, the sinner, turn,<br>
 How hope a seat in heaven to earn,<br>
 If I my plighted promise break,<br>
 And thus the righteous path forsake?<br>
 This world of ours is ever led<br>
 To walk the ways which others tread,<br>
 And as their princes they behold,<br>
 The subjects too their lives will mould.<br>
 That truth and mercy still must be<br>
 Beloved of kings, is Heaven's decree.<br>
 Upheld by truth the monarch reigns,<br>
 And truth the very world sustains.<br>
 Truth evermore has been the love<br>
 Of holy saints and Gods above,<br>
 And he whose lips are truthful here<br>
 Wins after death the highest sphere.<br>
 As from a serpent's deadly tooth,<br>
 We shrink from him who scorns the truth.<br>
 For holy truth is root and spring<br>
 Of justice and each holy thing,<br>
 A might that every power transcends,<br>
 Linked to high bliss that never ends.<br>
 Truth is all virtue's surest base,<br>
 Supreme in worth and first in place.<br>
 Oblations, gifts men offer here,<br>
 Vows, sacrifice, and rites austere,<br>
 And Holy Writ, on truth depend:<br>
 So men must still that truth defend.<br>
 Truth, only truth protects the land,<br>
 By truth unharmed our houses stand;<br>
 Neglect of truth makes men distressed,<br>
 And truth in highest heaven is blessed.<br>
 Then how can I, rebellious, break<br>
 Commandments which my father spake--<br>
 I ever* true and faithful found,<br>
 And by my word of honour bound?<br>
 My father's bridge of truth shall stand<br>
 Unharmed by my destructive hand:<br>
 Not folly, ignorance, or greed<br>
 My darkened soul shall thus mislead.<br>
 Have we not heard that God and shade<br>
 Turn from the hated offerings paid<br>
 By him whose false and fickle mind<br>
 No pledge can hold, no promise bind?<br>
 Truth is all duty: as the soul,<br>
 It quickens and supports the whole.<br>
 The good respect this duty: hence<br>
 Its sacred claims I reverence.<br>
 The Warrior's duty I despise<br>
 That seeks the wrong in virtue's guise:<br>
 Those claims I shrink from, which the base,<br>
 Cruel, and covetous embrace.<br>
 The heart conceives the guilty thought,<br>
 Then by the hand the sin is wrought,<br>
 And with the pair is leagued a third,<br>
 The tongue that speaks the lying word.<br>
 Fortune and land and name and fame<br>
 To man's best care have right and claim;<br>
 The good will aye to truth adhere,<br>
 And its high laws must men revere.<br>
 Base were the deed thy lips would teach,<br>
 Approved as best by subtle speech.<br>
 Shall I my plighted promise break,<br>
 That I these woods my home would make?*<br>
 Shall I, as Bharat's words advise,<br>
 My father's solemn charge despise?<br>
 Firm stands the oath which then before<br>
 My father's face I soothly swore,<br>
 Which Queen Kaikeyi's anxious ear<br>
 Bejoiced with highest joy to hear.<br>
 Still in the wood will I remain,<br>
 With food prescribed my life sustain,<br>
 And please with fruit and roots and flowers<br>
 Ancestral shades and heavenly powers.<br>
 Here every sense contented, still<br>
 Heeding the bounds of good and ill,<br>
 My settled course will I pursue,<br>
 Firm in my faith and ever true.<br>
 Here in this wild and far retreat<br>
 Will I my noble task complete;<br>
 And Fire and Wind and *Moon shall be<br>
 Partakers of its fruit with me.<br>
 A hundred offerings duly wrought<br>
 His rank o'er Gods for Indra bought,<br>
 And mighty saints their heaven secured<br>
 By torturing years on earth endured.'<br>
     That scoffing plea the hero spurned,<br>
         And thus he spake once more,<br>
     Chiding, the while his bosom burned,<br>
         Jáváli's impious lore:<br>
     'Justice, and courage ne'er dismayed,<br>
         Pity for all distressed,<br>
     Truth, loving honour duly paid<br>
         To Brahman, God, and guest--<br>
     In these, the true and virtuous say,<br>
         Should lives of men be passed:<br>
     They form the right and happy way<br>
         That leads to heaven at last.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_219"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 219</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 My father's thoughtless act I chide<br>
     That gave thee honoured place,<br>
 Whose soul, from virtue turned aside,<br>
     Is faithless, dark, and base.<br>
 We rank the Buddhist with the thief, <a name="fr_388"></a><a href="ry188.htm#fn_388"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
     And all the impious crew<br>
 Who share his sinful disbelief,<br>
     And hate the right and true.<br>
 Hence never should wise kings who seek<br>
     To rule their people well,<br>
 Admit, before their face to speak,<br>
     The cursed infidel.<br>
 But twice-born men in days gone by,<br>
     Of other sort than thou,<br>
 Have wrought good deeds, whose glories high<br>
     Are fresh among us now:<br>
 This world they conquered, nor in vain<br>
     They strove to win the skies:<br>
 The twice-born hence pure lives maintain,<br>
     And fires of worship rise.<br>
 Those who in virtue's path delight,<br>
     And with the virtuous live,--<br>
 Whose flames of holy zeal are bright,<br>
     Whose hands are swift to give,<br>
 Who injure none, and good and mild<br>
     In every grace excel,<br>
 Whose lives by sin are undefiled,<br>
     We love and honour well.'<br>
 Thus Rama spoke in righteous rage<br>
     *J'av'ali's speech to chide,<br>
 When thus again the virtuous sage<br>
     In truthful words replied:<br>
 'The atheist's lore I use no more,<br>
     Not mine his impious creed:<br>
 His words and doctrine I abhor,<br>
     Assumed at time of need.<br>
 E'en as I rose to speak with thee,<br>
     The fit occasion came<br>
 That bade me use the atheist's plea<br>
     To turn thee from thine aim.<br>
 The atheist creed I disavow,<br>
     Unsay the words of sin,<br>
 And use the faithful's language now<br>
     Thy favour, Prince, to win.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_387"></a><a href="ry186.htm#fr_387">217:1</a>  It was the custom of Indian women
 when mourning for their absent husbands
 to bind their hair in a long single braid.
 
 </p><p>
 Carey and Marshman translate, 'the
 one-tailed city,'</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry188.htm">Next: Canto CX.: The Sons of Ikshva'ku.</a></center>
 </body>