<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry188.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry190.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXI.: COUNSEL TO BHARAT.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus said Vas'ishtha, and again.<br>
 To Ráma spake in duteous strain:<br>
 ' All men the light of life who see<br>
 With high respect should look on three:<br>
 High honour ne'er must be denied<br>
 To father, mother, holy guide.<br>
 First to their sires their birth they owe,<br>
 Nursed with maternal love they grow:<br>
 Their holy guides fair knowledge teach:<br>
 So men should love and honour each.<br>
 Thy sire and thou have learned of me,<br>
 The sacred guide of him and thee,<br>
 And if my word thou wilt obey<br>
 Thou still* wilt keep the virtuous way.<br>
 See, with the chiefs of every guild<br>
 And all thy friends, this place is filled:<br>
 All these, as duty bids, protect;<br>
 So still the righteous path respect.<br>
 O, for thine aged mother feel,<br>
 Nor spurn the virtuous dame's appeal:<br>
 Obey, O Prince, thy mother dear,<br>
 And still to virtue's path adhere.<br>
 Yield thou to Bharat's fond request,<br>
 With earnest supplication pressed,<br>
 So wilt thou to thyself be true,<br>
 And faith and duty still pursue.'<br>
     Thus by his saintly guide addressed<br>
 With pleas in sweetest tones expressed.<br>
 The lord of men in turn replied<br>
 To wise Vas'ishtha by his side:<br>
 'The fondest son's observance ne'er<br>
 Repays the sire and mother's care:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_221"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 221</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The constant love that food provides.<br>
 And dress, and every need besides:<br>
 Their pleasant words still soft and mild,<br>
 Their nurture of the helpless child:<br>
 The words which Das'aratha spake,<br>
 My king and sire, I ne'er will break.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Bharat of the ample chest<br>
 The wise Sumantra thus addressed;<br>
 'Bring sacred grass, O charioteer,<br>
 And strew it on the level here.<br>
 For I will sit and watch his face<br>
 Until I win my brother's grace.<br>
 Like a robbed Bráhman will I lie,  <a name="fr_393"></a><a href="#fn_393"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Nor taste of food nor turn my eye,<br>
 In front of Ráma's leafy cot,<br>
 And till he yield will leave him not.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When Bharat saw Sumantra's eye<br>
 Looked up to Ráma for reply,<br>
 The Prince himself in eager haste<br>
 The sacred grass in order placed.<br>
 Him great and mighty Ráma, best<br>
 Of royal saints, in turn addressed:<br>
 'What, Bharat, have I done, that thou<br>
 Besiegest me,  <a name="fr_394"></a><a href="#fn_394"><font size="1">2</font></a> a suppliant now?<br>
 Thus streched, to force redress for wrongs<br>
 To men of Bráhman birth belongs,<br>
 Not those upon whose kingly head<br>
 The consecrating drops are shed.<br>
 Up, lord of men! arise, and quit<br>
 This fearful vow for thee unfit.<br>
 Go, brother, seek Ayodhyá's town,<br>
 Fair city ot supreme renown.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 But Bharat, as his seat he took.<br>
 Cast all around an eager look:<br>
 'O people, join your prayers with mine,<br>
 And so his stubborn heart incline.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And all the people answered thus:<br>
 'Full well is Ráma known to us.<br>
 Right is the word he speaks and he<br>
 Is faithful to his sire's decree:<br>
 Nor can we rushly venture now<br>
 To turn him from his purposed vow.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma spoke: 'O Bharat, heed<br>
 Thy virtuous friends, and mark their rede.<br>
 Mark well what I and these advise,<br>
 And duty view with clearer eyes.<br>
 Thy hand on mine, O hero, place,<br>
 Touch water, and thy sin efface.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Bharat rose: his hand he dipped,<br>
 And purifying water sipped:<br>
 'Each citizen,' he cried, 'give ear,<br>
 Attend, each counsellor and peer.<br>
 My mother planned, by me untaught,<br>
 To win the sway I never sought:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Ne'er Raghu's son could I despise,<br>
 In duty's lore supremely wise.<br>
 Now if obedience to our sire<br>
 This dwelling in the woods require,<br>
 I, till the destined years he spent,<br>
 Will dwell alone in banishment.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The virtuous Ráma, wonder-stirred.<br>
 The faithful speech of Bharat heard,<br>
 And thus the hero's feelings found<br>
 Due utterance, as he gazed around:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Still to my father's word I hold,<br>
 Whate'er he bought, or pledged, or sold:<br>
 Ne'er shall his living promise be<br>
 Annulled by Bharat or by me.<br>
 Not thus my task will I evade,<br>
 My exile on another laid:<br>
 Most wise was Queen Kaikeyí's rede,<br>
 And just and good my father's deed.<br>
 Dear Bharat's patient soul I know,<br>
 How reverence due he loves to show;<br>
 In him, high-souled and faithful found,<br>
 Must each auspicious grace abound.<br>
 When from the woods I turn again<br>
 I with his aid shall nobly reign,<br>
 With one so good, of peerless worth,<br>
 A glorious lord of happy earth.<br>
 Her boon Kaikeyí sought and won.<br>
 I, as my father swore, have done:<br>
 And O, do thou, my brother dear,<br>
 The monarch's name from falsehood clear.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_393"></a><a href="ry189.htm#fr_393">221:1</a>  A practice which has frequently been
 described, under the name of <i>dherna</i>, by
 European travellers in India.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_394"></a><a href="ry189.htm#fr_394">221:2</a>  Compare Milton's '<i>beseeching or beseiging</i>.'</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry190.htm">Next: Canto CXII.: The Sandals.</a></center>
 </body>