<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry195.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry197.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXVIII.: ANASÚYÁ'S GIFTS.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus by the holy dame addressed<br>
 Who banished envy from her breast,<br>
 Her lowly reverence Sítá paid,<br>
 And softly thus her answer made:<br>
 'No marvel, best of dames, thy speech<br>
 The duties of a wife should teach;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_227"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 227</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Yet I, O lady, also know<br>
 Due reverence to my lord to show.<br>
 Were he the meanest of the base,<br>
 Unhonoured with a single grace,<br>
 My husband still I ne'er would leave,<br>
 But firm through all to him would cleave:<br>
 Still rather to a lord like mine<br>
 Whose virtues high-exalted shine,<br>
 Compassionate, of lofty soul,<br>
 Vith every sense in due control,<br>
 True in his love, of righteous mind,<br>
 Like a dear sire and mother kind.<br>
 E'en as he ever loves to treat<br>
 Kaus'alyá with observance meet,<br>
 Has his behaviour ever been<br>
 To every other honoured queen.<br>
 Nay, more, a sonlike reverence shows<br>
 The noble Ráma e'en to those<br>
 On whom the king his father set<br>
 His eyes one moment, to forget.<br>
 Deep in my heart the words are stored,<br>
 Said by the mother of my lord,<br>
 When from my home I turned away<br>
 In the lone fearful woods to stray.<br>
 The counsel of my mother deep<br>
 Impressed upon my soul I keep,<br>
 When by the fire I took my stand,<br>
 And Ráma clasped in his my hand.<br>
 And in my bosom cherished yet,<br>
 My friends' advice I ne'er forget:<br>
 Woman her holiest offering pays<br>
 When she her husband's will obeys.<br>
 Good Sávitrí her lord obeyed,<br>
 And a high saint in heaven was made,<br>
 And for the self-same virtue thou<br>
 Hast heaven in thy possession now.<br>
 And she with whom no dame could vie,<br>
 Now a bright Goddess in the sky,<br>
 Sweet Rohiní the Moon's dear Queen,<br>
 Without her lord is never seen:<br>
 And many a faithful wife beside<br>
 For her pure love is glorified.'<br>
     Thus Sítá spake: soft rapture stole<br>
 Through Anasúyá's saintly soul:<br>
 Kisses on Sítá's head she pressed,<br>
 And thus the Maithil dame addressed:<br>
 'I by long rites and toils endured<br>
 Rich store of merit have secured:<br>
 From this my wealth will I bestow<br>
 A blessing ere I let thee go.<br>
 So right and wise and true each word<br>
 That from thy lips mine ears have heard,<br>
 I love thee: be my pleasing task<br>
 To grant the boon that thou shalt ask.'<br>
     Then Sítá marvelled much, and while<br>
 Played o'er her lips a gentle smile,<br>
 'All has been done, O Saint, she cried,<br>
 And naught remains to wish beside.<br>
     She spake; the lady's meek reply<br>
 Swelled Anasúyá's rapture high.<br>
 'Sítá,' she said,' my gift to-day<br>
 Thy sweet contentment shall repay.<br>
 Accept this precious robe to wear,<br>
 Of heavenly fabric, rich and rare,<br>
 These gems thy limbs to ornament,<br>
 This precious balsam sweet of scent.<br>
 O Maithil dame, this gift of mine<br>
 Shall make thy limbs with beauty shine,<br>
 And breathing o'er thy frame dispense<br>
 Its pure and lasting influence.<br>
 This balsam on thy fair limbs spread<br>
 New radiance on thy lord shall shed,<br>
 As Lakshmí's beauty lends a grace<br>
 To Vishnu's own celestial face.'<br>
     Then Sítá took the gift the dame<br>
 Bestowed on her in friendship's name,<br>
 The balsam, gems, and robe divine,<br>
 And garlands wreathed of bloomy twine;<br>
 Then sat her down, with reverence meet,<br>
 At saintly Anasúyá's feet.<br>
 The matron rich in rites and vows<br>
 Turned her to Ráma's Maithil spouse,<br>
 And questioned thus in turn to hear<br>
 A pleasant tale to charm her ear:<br>
 'Sítá, 'tis said that Raghu's son<br>
 Thy hand, mid gathered suitors, won.<br>
 I fain would hear thee, lady, tell<br>
 The story as it all befell:<br>
 Do thou repeat each thing that passed,<br>
 Reviewing all from first to last.'<br>
     Thus spake the dame to Sítá: she<br>
 Replying to the devotee,<br>
 'Then, lady, thy attention lend,'<br>
 Rehearsed the story to the end:<br>
     King Janak, just and brave and strong.<br>
 Who loves the right and hates the wrong.<br>
 Well skilled in what the law ordains<br>
 For Warriors, o'er Videha reigns.<br>
 Guiding one morn the plough, his hand<br>
 Marked out, for rites the sacred land,<br>
 When, as the ploughshare cleft the earth,<br>
 Child of the king I leapt to birth.<br>
 Then as the ground he smoothed and cleared,<br>
 He saw me all with dust besmeared,<br>
 And on the new-found babe, amazed<br>
 The ruler of Videha gazed.<br>
 In childless love the monarch pressed<br>
 The welcome infant to his breast:<br>
 'My daughter,' thus he cried, 'is she:'<br>
 And as his child he cared for me.<br>
 Forth from the sky was heard o'erhead<br>
 As 'twere a human voice that said:<br>
 'Yea, even so: great King, this child<br>
 Henceforth thine own be justly styled.'<br>
 Videha's monarch, virtuous souled,<br>
 Rejoiced o'er me with joy untold,<br>
 Delighting in his new-won prize,<br>
 The darling of his heart and eyes.<br>
 To his chief queen of saintly mind<br>
 The precious treasure he consigned,<br>
 And by her side she saw me grow,<br>
 Nursed with the love which mothers know.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_228"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 228</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then as he saw the seasons fly,<br>
 And knew my marriage-time was nigh,<br>
 My sire was vexed with care, as sad<br>
 As one who mourns the wealth he had:<br>
 'Scorn on the maiden's sire must wait<br>
 From men of high and low estate:<br>
 The virgin's father all despise,<br>
 Though Indra's peer, who rules the skies.'<br>
 More near he saw, and still more near,<br>
 The scorn that filled his soul with fear,<br>
 On trouble's billowy ocean tossed,<br>
 Like one whose shattered bark is lost.<br>
 My father knowing how I came,<br>
 No daughter of a mortal dame.<br>
 In all the regions failed to see<br>
 A bridegroom meet to match with me.<br>
 Each way with anxious thought he scanned,<br>
 And thus at length the monarch planned:<br>
 'The Bride's Election will I hold,<br>
 With every rite prescribed of old.'<br>
 It pleased King Varun to bestow<br>
 Quiver and shafts and heavenly bow<br>
 Upon my father's sire who reigned,<br>
 When Daksha his great rite ordained.<br>
 Where was the man might bend or lift<br>
 With utmost toil that wondrous gift?<br>
 Not e'en in dreams could mortal king<br>
 Strain the great bow or draw the string.<br>
 Of this tremendous bow possessed,<br>
 My truthful father thus addressed<br>
 The lords of many a region, all<br>
 Assembled at the monarch's call:<br>
 'Whoe'er this bow can manage, he<br>
 The husband of my child shall be.'<br>
 The suitors viewed with hopeless eyes<br>
 That wondrous bow of mountain size,<br>
 Then to my sire they bade adieu,<br>
 And all with humbled hearts withdrew.<br>
 At length with Vis'vámitra came<br>
 This son of Raghu, dear to fame,<br>
 The royal sacrifice to view.<br>
 Near to my father's home he drew,<br>
 His brother Lakshman by his side,<br>
 Ráma, in deeds heroic tried.<br>
 My sire with honour entertained<br>
 The saint in lore of duty trained,<br>
 Who thus in turn addressed the king:<br>
 'Ráma and Lakshman here who spring<br>
 From royal Das'aratha, long<br>
 To see thy bow so passing strong.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Before the prince's eyes was laid<br>
 That marvel, as the Bráhman prayed.<br>
 One moment on the bow he gazed,<br>
 Quick to the notch the string he raised,<br>
 Then, in the wandering people's view,<br>
 The cord with mighty force he drew.<br>
 Then with an awful crash as loud<br>
 As thunderbolts that cleave the cloud,<br>
 The bow beneath the matchless strain<br>
 Of arms heroic snapped in twain.<br>
 Thus, giving purest water, he,<br>
 My sire, to Ráma offered me.<br>
 The prince the offered gift declined<br>
 Till he should learn his father's mind;<br>
 So horsemen swift Ayodhyá sought<br>
 And back her aged monarch brought.<br>
 Me then my sire to Ráma gave,<br>
 Self-ruled, the bravest of the brave.<br>
 And Urmilá, the next to me,<br>
 Graced with all gifts, most fair to see,<br>
 My sire with Raghu's house allied.<br>
 And gave her to be Lakshman's bride.<br>
 Thus from the princes of the land<br>
 Lord Ráma won my maiden hand,<br>
 And him exalted high above<br>
 Heroic chiefs I truly love.<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *       *       *       *       *'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry197.htm">Next: Canto CXIX.: The Forest.</a></center>
 </body>