<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry207.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry209.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO X.: RÁMA'S REPLY.</h3>
 <p>
 The words that Sítá uttered, spurred<br>
 By truest love, the hero heard:<br>
 Then he who ne'er from virtue strayed<br>
 To Janak's child his answer made:<br>
 'In thy wise speech, sweet love, I find<br>
 True impress of thy gentle mind,<br>
 Well skilled the warrior's path to trace,<br>
 Thou pride of Janak's ancient race.<br>
 What fitting answer shall I frame<br>
 To thy good words, my honoured dame?<br>
 Thou sayst the warrior bears the bow<br>
 That misery's tears may cease to flow;<br>
 And those pure saints who love the shade<br>
 Of Dandak wood are sore dismayed.<br>
 They sought me of their own accord,<br>
 With suppliant prayers my aid implored:<br>
 They, fed on roots and fruit, who spend<br>
 Their lives where bosky wilds extend,<br>
 My timid love, enjoy no rest<br>
 By these malignant fiends distressed.<br>
 These make the flesh of man their meat:<br>
 The helpless saints they kill and eat.<br>
 The hermits sought my side, the chief<br>
 Of Brahman race declared their grief.<br>
 I heard, and from my lips there fell<br>
 The words which thou rememberest well:<br>
 I listened as the hermits cried,<br>
 And to their prayers I thus replied:<br>
     'Your favour, gracious lords, I claim,<br>
 O'erwhelmed with this enormous shame<br>
 That Bráhmans, great and pure as you,<br>
 Who should be sought, to me should sue.'<br>
 And then before the saintly crowd,<br>
 'What can I do?' I cried aloud.<br>
 Then from the trembling hermits broke<br>
 One long sad cry, and thus they spoke:<br>
 'Fiends of the wood, who wear at will<br>
 Each varied shape, afflict us still.<br>
 To thee in our distress we fly:<br>
 O help us, Ráma, or we die.<br>
 When sacred rites of fire are due,<br>
 When changing moons are full or new,<br>
 These fiends who bleeding flesh devour<br>
 Assail us with resistless power.<br>
 They with their cruel might torment<br>
 The hermits on their vows intent:<br>
 We look around for help and see<br>
 Our surest refuge, Prince, in thee.<br>
 We, armed with powers of penance, might<br>
 Destroy the rovers of the night:<br>
 But loth were we to bring to naught<br>
 The merit years of toil have bought.<br>
 Our penance rites are grown too hard,<br>
 By many a check and trouble barred,<br>
 But though our saints for food are slain<br>
 The withering curse we yet restrain.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus many a weary day distressed<br>
 By giants who this wood infest,<br>
 We see at length deliverance, thou<br>
 With Lakshman art our guardian now.'<br>
     As thus the troubled hermits prayed,<br>
 I promised, dame, my ready aid,<br>
 And now--for truth I hold most dear--<br>
 Still to my word must I adhere.<br>
 My love, I might endure to be<br>
 Deprived of Lakshman, life, and thee,<br>
 But ne'er deny my promise, ne'er<br>
 To Bráhmans break the oath I sware.<br>
 I must, enforced by high constraint,<br>
 Protect them all. Each suffering saint<br>
 In me, unasked, his help had found;<br>
 Still more in one by promise bound.<br>
 I know thy words, mine own dear dame,<br>
 From thy sweet heart's affection came:<br>
 I thank thee for thy gentle speech,<br>
 For those we love are those we teach.<br>
 'Tis like thyself, O fair of face,<br>
 'Tis worthy of thy noble race:<br>
 Dearer than life, thy feet are set<br>
 In righteous paths they ne'er forget.'<br>
     Thus to the Maithil monarch's child,<br>
 His own dear wife, in accents mild<br>
     The high-souled hero said:<br>
 Then to the holy groves which lay<br>
 Beyond them fair to see, their way<br>
     The bow-armed chieftain led.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry209.htm">Next: Canto XI.: Agastya.</a></center>
 </body>