<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry200.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry202.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO III.: VIRÁDHA ATTACKED.</h3>
 <p>
 Virádha with a fearful shout<br>
 That echoed through the wood, cried out:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'What men are ye, I bid you say,<br>
 And whither would ye bend your way?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To him whose mouth shot fiery flame<br>
 The hero told his race and name:<br>
 'Two Warriors, nobly bred, are we,<br>
 And through this wood we wander free.<br>
 But who art thou, how born and styled,<br>
 Who roamest here in Dandak's wild?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To Ráma, bravest of the brave,<br>
 His answer thus Virádha gave:<br>
 'Hear, Raghu's son, and mark me well,<br>
 And I my name and race will tell.<br>
 Of S'atahradá born, I spring<br>
 From Java as my sire, O King:<br>
 Me, of this lofty lineage, all<br>
 Giants on earth Virádha call.<br>
 The rites austere I long maintained<br>
 From Brahmá's grace the boon have gained<br>
 To bear a charmed frame which ne'er<br>
 Weapon or shaft may pierce or tear.<br>
 Go as ye came, untouched by fear,<br>
 And leave with me this woman here;<br>
 Go, swiftly from my presence fly,<br>
 Or by this hand ye both shall die.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma with his fierce eyes red<br>
 With fury to the giant said:<br>
 'Woe to thee, sinner, fond and weak,<br>
 Who madly thus thy death wilt seek!<br>
 Stand, for it waits thee in the fray:<br>
 With life thou ne'er shalt flee away.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke, and raised the cord whereon<br>
 A pointed arrow flashed and shone,<br>
 Then, wild with anger, from his bow,<br>
 He launched the weapon on the foe.<br>
 Seven times the fatal cord he drew,<br>
 And forth seven rapid arrows flew,<br>
 Shafts winged with gold that left the wind<br>
 And e'en Suparna's  <a name="fr_406"></a><a href="#fn_406"><font size="1">1</font></a> self behind.<br>
 Full on the giant's breast they smote,<br>
 And purpled like the peacock's throat,<br>
 Passed through his mighty bulk and came<br>
 To earth again like flakes of flame.<br>
 The fiend the Maithil dame unclasped;<br>
 In his fierce hand his spear he grasped,<br>
 And wild with rage, pierced through and through,<br>
 At Ráma and his brother flew.<br>
 So loud the roar which chilled with fear,<br>
 So massy was the monster's spear,<br>
 He seemed, like Indra's flagstaff, dread<br>
 As the dark God who rules the dead.<br>
 On huge Virádha fierce as He  <a name="fr_407"></a><a href="#fn_407"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Who smites, and worlds have ceased to be,<br>
 The princely brothers poured amain<br>
 Their fiery flood of arrowy rain.<br>
 Unmoved he stood, and opening wide<br>
 His dire mouth laughed unterrified,<br>
 And ever as the monster gaped<br>
 Those arrows from his jaws escaped.<br>
 Preserving still his life unharmed,<br>
 By Brahmá's saving promise charmed,<br>
 His mighty spear aloft in air<br>
 He raised, and rushed upon the pair.<br>
 From Ráma's bow two arrows flew<br>
 And cleft that massive spear in two,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_232"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 232</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Dire as the flaming levin sent<br>
 From out the cloudy firmament.<br>
 Cut by the shafts he guided well<br>
 To earth the giant's weapon fell:<br>
 As when from Meru's summit, riven<br>
 By fiery bolts, a rock is driven.<br>
 Then swift his sword each warrior drew,<br>
 Like a dread serpent black of hue,<br>
 And gathering fury for the blow<br>
 Rushed fiercely on the giant foe.<br>
 Around each prince an arm he cast,<br>
 And held the dauntless heroes fast:<br>
 Then, though his gashes gaped and bled,<br>
 Bearing the twain he turned and fled.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma saw the giant's plan,<br>
 And to his brother thus began:<br>
 'O Lakshman, let Virádha still<br>
 Hurry us onward as he will,<br>
 For look, Sumitra's son, he goes<br>
 Along the path we freely chose.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke: the rover of the night<br>
 Upraised them with terrific might,<br>
 Till, to his lofty shoulders swung,<br>
 Like children to his neck they clung.<br>
 Then sending far his fearful roar,<br>
 The princes through the wood he bore,--<br>
 A wood like some vast cloud to view,<br>
 Where birds of every plumage flew,<br>
 And mighty trees o'erarching threw<br>
     Dark shadows on the ground;<br>
 Where snakes and silvan creates made<br>
 Their dwelling, and the jackal strayed<br>
     Through tangled brakes around.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_406"></a><a href="ry201.htm#fr_406">231:1</a>  The King of birds.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_407"></a><a href="ry201.htm#fr_407">231:2</a>  <i>Kálántakayamopamam</i>, resembling Yama the destroyer.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry202.htm">Next: Canto IV.: Virádha's Death.</a></center>
 </body>