<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry199.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry201.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO II.: VIRÁDHA.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus entertained he passed the night,<br>
 Then, with the morning's early light,<br>
 To all the hermits bade adieu<br>
 And sought his onward way anew.<br>
 He pierced the mighty forest where<br>
 Roamed many a deer and pard and bear:<br>
 Its ruined pools he scarce could see.<br>
 For creeper rent and prostrate tree,<br>
 Where shrill cicada's cries were heard,<br>
 And plaintive notes of many a bird.<br>
 Deep in the thickets of the wood<br>
 With Lakshman and his spouse he stood,<br>
 There in the horrid shade he saw<br>
 A giant passing nature's law:<br>
 Vast as some mountain-peak in size,<br>
 With mighty voice and sunken eyes,<br>
 Huge, hideous, tall, with monstrous face,<br>
 Most ghastly of his giant race.<br>
 A tiger's hide the Rákshas wore<br>
 Still reeking with the fat and gore:<br>
 Huge-faced, like Him who rules the dead,<br>
 All living things he struck with dread.<br>
 Three lions, tigers four, ten deer<br>
 He carried on his iron spear,<br>
 Two wolves, an elephant's head beside<br>
 With mighty tusks which blood-drops dyed.<br>
 When on the three his fierce eye fell,<br>
 He charged them with a roar and yell<br>
 As furious as the grisly King<br>
 When stricken worlds are perishing.<br>
 Then with a mighty roar that shook<br>
 The earth beneath their feet, he took<br>
 The trembling Sítá to his side.<br>
 Withdrew a little space, and cried:<br>
 'Ha, short lived wretches, ye who dare,<br>
 In hermit dress with matted hair,<br>
 Armed each with arrows, sword, and bow,<br>
 Through Dandak's pathless wood to go:<br>
 How with one dame, I bid you tell,<br>
 Can you among ascetics dwell?<br>
 Who are ye, sinners, who despise<br>
 The right, in holy men's disguise?<br>
 The great Virádha, day by day<br>
 Through this deep-tangled wood I stray,<br>
 And ever, armed with trusty steel,<br>
 I seize a saint to make my meal.<br>
 This woman young and fair of frame<br>
 Shall be the conquering giant's dame:<br>
 Your blood, ye things of evil life,<br>
 My lips shall quaff in battle strife.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke: and Janak's hapless child,<br>
 Scared by his speech so fierce and wild,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_231"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 231</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Trembled for terror, as a frail<br>
 Young plantain shivers in the gale.<br>
 When Ráma saw Virádha clasp<br>
 Fair Sítá in his mighty grasp,<br>
 Thus with pale lips that terror dried<br>
 The hero to his brother cried:<br>
 'O see Virádha's arm enfold<br>
 My darling in its cursed hold,--<br>
 The child of Janak best of kings,<br>
 My spouse whose soul to virtue clings,<br>
 Sweet princess, with pure glory bright,<br>
 Nursed in the lap of soft delight.<br>
 Now falls the blow Kaikeyí meant,<br>
 Successful in her dark intent:<br>
 This day her cruel soul will be<br>
 Triumphant over thee and me.<br>
 Though Bharat on the throne is set,<br>
 Her greedy eyes look farther yet:<br>
 Me from my home she dared expel,<br>
 Me whom all creatures loved so well.<br>
 This fatal day at length, I ween,<br>
 Brings triumph to the younger queen.<br>
 I see with bitterest grief and shame<br>
 Another touch the Maithil dame.<br>
 Not loss of sire and royal power<br>
 So grieves me as this mournful hour.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus in his anguish cried the chief:<br>
 Then drowned in tears, o'erwhelmed by grief,<br>
 Thus Lakshman in his anger spake,<br>
 Quick panting like a spell-bound snake:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Canst thou, my brother, Indra's peer,<br>
 When I thy minister am near.<br>
 Thus grieve like some forsaken thing,<br>
 Thou, every creature's lord and king?<br>
 My vengeful shaft the fiend shall slay,<br>
 And earth shall drink his blood to-day.<br>
 The fury which my soul at first<br>
 Upon usurping Bharat nursed,<br>
 On this Virádha will I wreak<br>
 As Indra splits the mountain peak.<br>
 Winged by this arm's impetuous might<br>
     My shaft with deadly force<br>
 The monster in the chest shall smite,<br>
     And fell his shattered corse.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *        *        *        *        *<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry201.htm">Next: Canto III.: Virádha Attacked.</a></center>
 </body>