<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry205.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry207.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VIII.: THE HERMITAGE.</h3>
 <p>
 So Ráma and Sumttrá's son,<br>
 When every honour due was done,<br>
 Slept through the night. When morning<br>
     broke,<br>
 The heroes from their rest awoke.<br>
 Betimes the son of Raghu rose,<br>
 With gentle Sítá, from repose,<br>
 And sipped the cool delicious wave<br>
 Sweet with the scent the lotus gave,<br>
 Then to the Gods and sacred flame<br>
 The heroes and the lady came,<br>
 And bent their heads in honour meet<br>
 Within the hermit's pure retreat.<br>
 When every stain was purged away,<br>
 They saw the rising Lord of Day:<br>
 Then to Sutíkhna's side they went,<br>
 And softly spoke, most reverent:<br>
     'Well have we slept, O holy lord,<br>
 Honoured of thee by all adored:<br>
 Now leave to journey forth we pray:<br>
 These hermits urge us on our way.<br>
 We haste to visit, wandering by,<br>
 The ascetics' homes that round you lie,<br>
 And roaming Dandak's mighty wood<br>
 To view each saintly brotherhood,<br>
 For thy permission now we sue,<br>
 With these high saints to duty true,<br>
 By penance taught each sense to tame,--<br>
 In lustre like the smokeless flame.<br>
 Ere on our brows the sun can beat<br>
 With fierce intolerable heat.<br>
 Like some unworthy lord who wins<br>
 His power by tyranny and sins,<br>
 O saint, we fain would part.' The three<br>
 Bent humbly to the dovotee.<br>
 He raised the princes as they pressed<br>
 His feet, and strained them to his breast;<br>
 And then the chief of devotees<br>
 Bespake them both in words like these.<br>
 'Go with thy brother, Ráma, go,<br>
 Pursue thy path untouched by woe:<br>
 Go with thy faithful Sítá, she<br>
 Still like a shadow follows thee<br>
 Roam Dandak wood observing well<br>
 The pleasant homes where hermits dwell,--<br>
 Pure saints whose ordered souls adhere<br>
 To penance rites and vows austere.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 There plenteous roots and berries grow,<br>
 And noble trees their blossoms show,<br>
 And gentle deer and birds of air<br>
 In peaceful troops are gathered there.<br>
 There see the full-blown lotus stud<br>
 The bosom of the lucid flood,<br>
 And watch the joyous mallard shake<br>
 The reeds that fringe the pool and lake.<br>
 See with delighted eye the rill<br>
 Leap sparkling from her parent hill,<br>
 And hear the woods that round thee lie<br>
 Reëcho to the peacock's cry.<br>
 And as I bid thy brother, so,<br>
 Sumitrá's child, I bid thee go.<br>
 Go forth, these varied beauties see,<br>
 And then once more return to me.'<br>
     Thus spake the sage Sutikshna: both<br>
 The chiefs assented, nothing loth.<br>
 Round him with circling steps they paced,<br>
 Then for the road prepared with haste.<br>
 Tnere Sítá stood, the dame long-eyed,<br>
 Fair quivers round their waists she tied,<br>
 And gave each prince his trusty bow,<br>
 And sword which ne*er a spot might know.<br>
 Each took his quiver from her *and.<br>
 And clanging bow and gleaming brand:<br>
 Then from the hermits' home the two<br>
 Went forth each woodland scene to view.<br>
 Eavh beauteous in the bloom of age,<br>
 Dismissed by that illustrious sage,<br>
 With bow and sword accoutred, hied<br>
 Away, and Sítá by their side.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry207.htm">Next: Canto IX.: Sita's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>