<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry208.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry210.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XI.: AGASTYA.</h3>
 <p>
 Ráma went foremost of the three,<br>
 Next Sítá, followed, fair to see,<br>
 And Lakshman with his bow in hand<br>
 Walked hindmost of the little band.<br>
 As onward through the wood they went,<br>
 With great delight their eyes were bent<br>
 On rocky heights beside the way<br>
 And lofty trees with blossoms gay;<br>
 And streamlets running fair and fast<br>
 The royal youths with Sítá passed.<br>
 They watched the sáras and the drake<br>
 On islets of the stream and lake,<br>
 And gazed delighted on the floods<br>
 Bright with gay birds and lotus buds.<br>
 They saw in startled herds the roes,<br>
 The passion-frenzied buffaloes,<br>
 Wild elephants who fiercely tore<br>
 The tender trees, and many a boar.<br>
 A length of woodland way they passed,<br>
 And when the sun was low at last<br>
 A lovely stream-fed lake they spied,<br>
 Two leagues across from side to side.<br>
 Tall elephants fresh beauty gave<br>
 To grassy bank and lilied wave,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_240"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 240</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 By many a swan and sáras stirred,<br>
 Mallard, and gay-winged water-bird.<br>
 From those sweet waters, loud and long,<br>
 Though none was seen to wake the song,<br>
 Swelled high the singer's music blent<br>
 With each melodious instrument.<br>
 Ráma and car-borne Lakshman heard<br>
 The charming strain, with wonder stirred,<br>
 Turned on the margent of the lake<br>
 To Dharmabhait *  <a name="fr_424"></a><a href="#fn_424"><font size="1">1</font></a> the sage, and spake:<br>
   'Our longing souls, O hermit, burn<br>
 This music of the lake to learn:<br>
 We pray thee, noblest sage, explain<br>
 The cause of the mysterious strain.'<br>
 He, as the son of Raghu prayed,<br>
 With swift accord his answer made,<br>
 And thus the hermit, virtuous-souled,<br>
 The story of the fair lake told:<br>
   'Through every age 'tis known to fame,<br>
 Panchápsaras  <a name="fr_425"></a><a href="#fn_425"><font size="1">2</font></a> its glorious name,<br>
 By holy Mándakarni wrought<br>
 With power his rites austere had bought.<br>
 For he, great votarist, intent<br>
 On strictest rule his stern life spent.<br>
 Ten thousand years the stream his bed,<br>
 Ten thousand years on air he fed.<br>
 Then on the blessed Gods who dwell<br>
 In heavenly homes great terror fell:<br>
 They gathered all, by Agni led,<br>
 And counselled thus disquieted:<br>
 'The hermit by ascetic pain<br>
 The seat of one of us would gain.'<br>
 Thus with their hearts by fear oppressed<br>
 In full assembly spoke the Blest,<br>
 And bade five loveliest nymphs, as fair<br>
 As lightning in the evening air,<br>
 Armed with their winning wiles, seduce<br>
 From his stern vows the great recluse.<br>
 Though lore of earth and heaven he knew,<br>
 The hermit from his task they drew,<br>
 And made the great ascetic slave<br>
 To conquering love, the Gods to save.<br>
 Bach of the heavenly five became,<br>
 Bound to the sage, his wedded dame;<br>
 And he, for his beloved's sake,<br>
 Formed a fair palace neath the lake.<br>
 Under the flood the ladies live,<br>
 To joy and ease their days they give,<br>
 And lap in bliss the hermit wooed<br>
 From penance rites to youth renewed.<br>
 So when the sportive nymphs within<br>
 Those secret bowers their play begin,<br>
 You hear the singers' dulcet tones<br>
 Blend sweetly with their tinkling zones.'<br>
       'How wondrous are these words of thine!'<br>
 Cried the famed chiefs of Raghu's line,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 As thus they heard the sage unfold<br>
 The marvels of the tale he told.<br>
     As Ráma spake, his eyes were bent<br>
 Upon a hermit settlement<br>
 With light of heavenly lore endued,<br>
 With sacred grass and vesture strewed.<br>
 His wife and brother by his side,<br>
 Within the holy bounds he hied,<br>
 And there, with honour entertained<br>
 By all the saints, a while remained.<br>
 In time, by due succession led,<br>
 Each votary's cot he visited,<br>
 And then the lord of martial lore,<br>
 Returned where he had lodged before.<br>
 Here for the months, content, he stayed,<br>
 There for a year his visit paid:<br>
 Here for four months his home would fix,<br>
 There, as it chanced, for five or six.<br>
 Here for eight months and there for three<br>
 The son of Raghu's stay would be:<br>
 Here weeks, there fortnights, more or less,<br>
 He spent in tranquil happiness.<br>
 As there the hero dwelt at ease<br>
 Among those holy devotees,<br>
 In days untroubled o'er his head<br>
 Ten circling years of pleasure fled.<br>
 So Raghu's son in duty trained<br>
 A while in every cot remained,<br>
 Then with his dame retraced the road<br>
 To good Sutíkshna's calm abode.<br>
 Hailed by the saints with honours due<br>
 Near to the hermit's home he drew,<br>
 And there the tamer of his foes<br>
 Dwelt for a time in sweet repose.<br>
 One day within that holy wood<br>
 By saint Sutíkstma Ráma stood,<br>
 And thus the prince with reverence meek<br>
 To that high sage began to speak:<br>
     'In the wide woodlands that extend<br>
 Around us, lord most reverend,<br>
 As frequent voice of rumour tells,<br>
 Agastya, saintliest hermit, dwells.<br>
 So vast the wood, I cannot trace<br>
 The path to reach his dwelling place,<br>
 Nor, searching unassisted, find<br>
 That hermit of the thoughtful mind.<br>
 I with my wife and brother fain<br>
 Would go, his favour to obtain,<br>
 Would seek him in his lone retreat<br>
 And the great saint with reverence greet.<br>
 This one desire, O Master, long<br>
 Cherished within my heart, is strong,<br>
 That I may pay of free accord<br>
 My duty to that hermit lord.'<br>
     As thus the prince whose heart was bent<br>
 On virtue told his firm intent,<br>
 The good Sutíkshna's joy rose high,<br>
 And thus in turn he made reply:<br>
 The very thing, O Prince, which thou<br>
 Hast sought, I wished to urge but now,<br>
 Bid thee with wife and brother see<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_241"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 241</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Agastya, glorious devotee.<br>
 I count this thing an omen fair<br>
 That thou shouldst thus thy wish declare,<br>
 And I, my Prince, will gladly teach<br>
 The way Agastya's home to reach.<br>
 Southward, dear son, direct thy feet<br>
 Eight leagues beyond this still retreat:<br>
 Agastya's hermit brother there<br>
 Dwells in a home most bright and fair.<br>
 'Tis on a knoll of woody ground,<br>
 With many a branching Pippal  <a name="fr_426"></a><a href="#fn_426"><font size="1">1</font></a> crowned:<br>
 There sweet birds' voices ne'er are mute,<br>
 And trees are gay with flower and fruit.<br>
 There many a lake gleams bright and cool,<br>
 And lilies deck each pleasant pool,<br>
 While swan, and crane, and mallard's wings<br>
 Are lovely in the water-springs.<br>
 There for one night, O Ráma, stay,<br>
 And with the dawn pursue thy way.<br>
 Still farther, bending southward, by<br>
 The thicket's edge the course must lie,<br>
 And thou wilt see, two leagues from thence<br>
 Agastya's lovely residence,<br>
 Set in the woodland's fairest spot,<br>
 All varied foliage decks the cot:<br>
 There Si'ta', Lakshman thou, at ease<br>
 May spend sweet hours neath shady trees,<br>
 For all of noblest growth are found<br>
 Luxuriant on that *bosky ground,<br>
 If it be still thy firm intent<br>
 To see that saint pree*minent,<br>
 O mighty counsellor, this day<br>
 Depart upon thine onward way.'<br>
     The hermit spake, and Ráma bent<br>
 His head, with Lakshman, reverent,<br>
 And then with him and Janak's child<br>
 Set out to trace the forest wild.<br>
 He saw dark woods that fringed the road,<br>
 And distant hills like clouds that showed,<br>
 And, as the way he followed, met<br>
 With many a lake and rivulet.<br>
 So passing on with ease where led<br>
 The path Sutikshna bade him tread,<br>
 The hero with exulting breast<br>
 His brother in these words addressed:<br>
     'Here, surely, is the home, in sight,<br>
 Of that illustrious anchorite:<br>
 Here great Agastya's brother leads<br>
 A life intent on holy deeds.<br>
 Warned of each guiding mark and sign,<br>
 I see them all herein combine:<br>
 I see the branches bending low<br>
 Beneath the flowers and fruit they show.<br>
 A soft air from the forest springs,<br>
 Fresh from the odorous grass, and brings<br>
 A spicy fragrance as it flees<br>
 O'er the ripe fruit of Pippal trees.<br>
 See, here and there around us high<br>
 Piled up in heaps cleft billets lie,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And holy grass is gathered, bright<br>
 As strips of shining lazulite.<br>
 Full in the centre of the shade<br>
 The hermits' holy fire is laid:<br>
 I see its smoke the pure heaven streak<br>
 Dense as a big cloud's dusky peak.<br>
 The twice-born men their steps retrace<br>
 From each sequestered bathing place,<br>
 And each his sacred gift has brought<br>
 Of blossoms which his hands have sought.<br>
 Of all these signs, dear brother, each<br>
 Agrees with good Sutikshna's speech,<br>
 And doubtless in this holy bound<br>
 Agastya's brother will be found.<br>
 Agastya once, the worlds who viewed<br>
 With love, a Deathlike fiend subdued,<br>
 And armed with mighty power, obtained<br>
 By holy works, this grove ordained<br>
 To be a refuge and defence<br>
 From all oppressors' violence.<br>
 In days of yore within this place<br>
 Two brothers fierce of demon race,<br>
 Va'ta'pi* dire and Ilval, dwelt,<br>
 And slaughter mid the Bra'hmans dealt.<br>
 A Bra'hman's form, the fiend to cloak,<br>
 Fierce Ilval wore, and Sanskrit spoke,<br>
 And twice-born sages would invite<br>
 To solemnize some funeral rite.<br>
 His brother's flesh, concealed within<br>
 A ram's false shape and borrowed skin,--<br>
 As men are wont at funeral feasts,--<br>
 He dressed and fed those gathered priests.<br>
 The holy men, unweeting ill,<br>
 Took of the food and ate their fill.<br>
 Then Ilval with a mighty shout<br>
 Exclaimed 'Vatapi, issue out.'<br>
 Soon as his brother's voice he heard,<br>
 The fiend with ram-like bleating stirred:<br>
 Bending in pieces every frame,<br>
 Forth from the dying priests he came.<br>
 So they who changed their forms at will<br>
 Thousands of Brahmans dared to kill,-<br>
 Fierce fiends who loved each cruel deed,<br>
 And joyed on bleeding flesh to feed.<br>
 Agastya, mighty hermit, pressed<br>
 To funeral banquet like the rest,<br>
 Obedient to the Gods' appeal<br>
 Ate up the monster at a meal.<br>
 'Tis done,'tis done,' fierce Ilval cried,<br>
 And water for his hands supplied:<br>
 Then lifting up his voice he spake:<br>
 'Forth, brother, from thy prison break.'<br>
 Then him who called the fiend, who long<br>
 Had wrought the suffering Bra'hmans wrong,<br>
 Thus thoughtful-souled Agastya, best<br>
 Of hermits, with a smile addresed:<br>
 'How, Ra'kshas, is the fiend empowered<br>
 To issue forth whom I devoured?<br>
 Thy brother in a ram's disguise-<br>
 Is gone where Yama's kingdom lies.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_242"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 242</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 When from the words Agastya said<br>
 He knew his brother fiend was dead,<br>
 His soul on fire with vengeful rage,<br>
 Rushed the night-rover at the sage.<br>
 One lightning glance of fury, hot<br>
 As fire, the glorious hermit shot,<br>
 As the fiend neared him in his stride,<br>
 And straight, consumed to dust, he died.<br>
 In pity for the Brahmans' plight<br>
 Agastya wrought this deed of might:<br>
 This grove which lakes and fair trees grace<br>
 In his great brother's dwelling place.<br>
     As Ráma thus the tale rehearsed,<br>
 And with Sumitrá's son conversed,<br>
 The setting sun his last rays shed,<br>
 And evening o'er the land was spread.<br>
 A while the princely brothers stayed<br>
 And even rites in order paid,<br>
 Then to the holy grove they drew<br>
 And hailed the saint with honour due.<br>
 With courtesy was Rama met<br>
 By that illustrious anchoret,<br>
 And for one night he rested there<br>
 Regaled with fruit and hermit fare.<br>
 But when the night had reached its close,<br>
 And the sun's glorious circle rose,<br>
 The son of Raghu left his bed<br>
 And to the hermit's brother said:<br>
 'Well rested in thy hermit cell,<br>
 I stand, O saint, to bid farewell;<br>
 For with thy leave I journey hence<br>
 Thy broher saint to reverence.'<br>
 'Go, Ráma go,' the sage replied:<br>
 Then from the cot the chieftain hied.<br>
 And while the pleasant grove he viewed,<br>
 The path the hermit showed, pursued.<br>
 Of every leaf, of changing hue.<br>
 Plants, trees by hundreds round him grew,<br>
 With joyous eyes he looked on all,<br>
 Then Jak,  <a name="fr_427"></a><a href="#fn_427"><font size="1">1</font></a> the wild rice, and Sal; <a name="fr_428"></a><a href="#fn_428"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 He saw the red Hibiscus glow,<br>
 He saw the flower-tipped creeper throw<br>
 The glory of her clusters o'er<br>
 Tall trees that loads of blossom bore.<br>
 Some, elephants had prostrate laid,<br>
 In some the monkeys leapt and played,<br>
 And through the whole wide forest rang<br>
 The charm of gay birds as they sang.<br>
 Then Ráma of the lotus eye<br>
 To Lakshman turned who followed nigh,<br>
 And thus the hero youth impressed<br>
 With Fortune's favouring signs, addressed:<br>
     'How soft the leaves of every tree,<br>
 How tame each bird and beast we see!<br>
 Soon the fair home shall we behold<br>
 Of that great hermit tranquil-souled.<br>
 The deed the good Agastya wrought<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 High fame throughout the world has bought:<br>
 I see, I see his calm retreat<br>
 That balms the pain of weary feet.<br>
 Where white clouds rise from flames beneath,<br>
 Where bark-coats lie with many a wreath,<br>
 Where silvan things, made gentle, throng,<br>
 And every bird is loud in song.<br>
 With ruth for suffering creatures filled,<br>
 A deathlike fiend with might he killed,<br>
 And gave this southern realm to be<br>
 A refuge, from oppression free.<br>
 There stands his home, whose dreaded might<br>
 Has put the giant crew to flight,<br>
 Who view with envious eyes afar<br>
 The peaceful shades they cannot mar.<br>
 Since that most holy saint has made<br>
 His dwelling in this lovely shade,<br>
 Checked by his might the giant brood<br>
 Have dwelt in peace with souls subdued.<br>
 And all this southern realm, within<br>
 Whose bounds no fiend may entrance win,<br>
 Now bears a name which naught may dim,<br>
 Made glorious through the worlds by him.<br>
 When Vindhya, best of hills, would stay<br>
 The journey of the Lord of Day,<br>
 Obedient to the saint's behest<br>
 He bowed for aye his humbled crest.<br>
 That hoary hermit, world-renowned<br>
 For holy deeds, within this ground<br>
 Has set his pure and blessed home,<br>
 Where gentle silvan creatures roam.<br>
 Agastya, whom the worlds revere,<br>
 Pure saint to whom the good are dear,<br>
 To us his guests all grace will show,<br>
 Enriched with blessings ere we go.<br>
 I to this aim each thought will turn,<br>
 The favour of the saint to earn,<br>
 That here in comfort may be spent<br>
 The last years of our banishment.<br>
 Here sanctities and high saints stand,<br>
 Gods, minstrels of the heavenly band;<br>
 Upon Agastya's will they wait,<br>
 And serve him, pure and temperate.<br>
 The liar's tongue, the tyrant's mind<br>
 Within these bounds no home may find:<br>
 No cheat, no sinner here can be:<br>
 So holy and so good is he.<br>
 Here birds and lords of serpent race,<br>
 Spirits and Gods who haunt the place,<br>
 Content with scanty fare remain,<br>
 As merit's meed they strive to gain.<br>
 Made perfect here, the paints supreme,<br>
 On cars that mock the Day-God's gleam,--<br>
 Their mortal bodies cast aside,--<br>
 Sought heaven transformed and glorified,<br>
 Here Gods to living things, who win<br>
 Their favour, pure from cruel sin,<br>
 Give royal rule and many a good,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_243"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 243</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Immortal life and spirithood. I<br>
 Now, Lakshman, we are near the place:<br>
 Do thou precede a little space,<br>
 And tell the mighty saint that I<br>
 With Sítá at my side am nigh,"<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_424"></a><a href="ry209.htm#fr_424">240:1</a>  One of the hermits who had followed
 Ráma.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_425"></a><a href="ry209.htm#fr_425">240:2</a>  The lake of the five nymphs.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_426"></a><a href="ry209.htm#fr_426">241:1</a> The holy fig-tree.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_427"></a><a href="ry209.htm#fr_427">242:1</a>  The bread-fruit tree, Artocarpus integri
 folia.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_428"></a><a href="ry209.htm#fr_428">242:2</a>  A fine timber tree, Shores robusta.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry210.htm">Next: Canto XII.: The Heavenly Bow.</a></center>
 </body>