<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry218.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry220.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXI.: THE ROUSING OF KHARA.</h3>
 <p>
 Low in the dust he saw her lie,<br>
 And Khara's wrath grew fierce and high,<br>
 Aloud he cried to her who came<br>
 Disgracefully with baffled aim:<br>
 'I sent with thee at thy request<br>
 The bravest of my giants, best<br>
 Of all who feed upon the slain:<br>
 Why art thou weeping here again?<br>
 Still to their master's interest true,<br>
 My faithful, noble, loyal crew.<br>
 Though slaughtered in the bloody fray.<br>
 Would yet their monarch's word obey.<br>
 Now I, my sister, fain would know<br>
 The cause of this thy fear and woe,<br>
 Why like a snake thou writhest there,<br>
 Calling for aid in wild despair.<br>
 Nay, lie not thus in lowly guise:<br>
 Cast off thy weakness and arise!'<br>
     With soothing words the giant chief<br>
 Assuaged the fury of her grief.<br>
 Her weeping eyes she slowly dried<br>
 And to her brother thus replied:<br>
 'I sought thee in my shame and fear<br>
 With severed nose and mangled ear:<br>
 My gashes like a river bled,<br>
 I sought thee and was comforted.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_254"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 254</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Those twice seven giants, brave and strong,<br>
 Thou sentest to avenge the wrong,<br>
 To lay the savage Ráma low,<br>
 And Lakshman who misused me so.<br>
 But ah, the shafts of Ráma through<br>
 The bodies of my champions flew:<br>
 Though madly fierce their spears they plied,<br>
 Beneath his conquering might they died.<br>
 I saw them, famed for strength and speed,<br>
 I saw my heroes fall and bleed:<br>
 Great trembling seized my every limb<br>
 At the great deed achieved by him.<br>
 In trouble, horror, doubt, and dread,<br>
 Again to thee for help I fled.<br>
 While terror haunts my troubled sight,<br>
 I seek thee, rover of the night.<br>
 And canst thou not thy sister free<br>
 From this wide waste of troublous sea<br>
 Whose sharks are doubt and terror, where<br>
 Each wreathing wave is dark despair?<br>
 Low lie on earth thy giant train<br>
 By ruthless Ráma's arrows slain,<br>
 And all the mighty demons, fed<br>
 On blood, who followed me are dead.<br>
 Now if within thy breast may be<br>
 Pity for them and love for me,<br>
 If thou, O rover of the night,<br>
 Have valour and with him can fight,<br>
 Subdue the giants' cruel foe<br>
 Who dwells where Dandak's thickets grow.<br>
 But if thine arm in vain assay<br>
 This queller of his foes to slay,<br>
 Now surely here before thine eyes,<br>
 Wronged and ashamed thy sister dies.<br>
 Too well, alas, too well I see<br>
 That, strong in war as thou mayst be,<br>
 Thou canst not in the battle stand<br>
 When Ráma meets thee hand to hand.<br>
 Go forth, thou hero but in name,<br>
 Assuming might thou canst not claim;<br>
 Call friend and kin, no longer stay:<br>
 Away from Janasthán, away!<br>
 Shame of thy race! the weak alone<br>
 Beneath thine arm may sink o'erthrown:<br>
 Fly Ráma and his brother: they<br>
 Are men too strong for thee to slay.<br>
 How canst thou hope, O weak and base,<br>
 To make this grove thy dwelling-place?<br>
 With Ráma's might unmeet to vie,<br>
 O'ermastered thou wilt quickly die.<br>
 A hero strong in valorous deed<br>
 Is Ráma, Das'aratha's seed:<br>
 And scarce of weaker might than he<br>
 His brother chief who mangled me.'<br>
     Thus wept and wailed in deep distress<br>
 The grim misshapen giantess:<br>
 Before her brother's feet she lay<br>
 O'erwhelmed with grief, and swooned away.<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *        *        *        *        *<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry220.htm">Next: Canto XXII: Khara's Wrath.</a></center>
 </body>