<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry214.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry216.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVII.: S'U'PANAKHA'</h3>
 <p>
 The bathing and the prayer were o'er;<br>
 He turned him from the grassy shore,<br>
 And with his brother and his spouse<br>
 Sought his fair home beneath the boughs,<br>
 Sitá and Lakshman by his side,<br>
 On to his cot the hero hied,<br>
 And after rites at morning due<br>
 Within the leafy shade withdrew.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_250"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 250</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then, honoured by the devotees,<br>
 As royal Ráma sat at ease,<br>
 With Sítá near him, o'er his head<br>
 A canopy of green boughs spread,<br>
 He shone as shines the Lord of Night<br>
 By Chitrá's  <a name="fr_457"></a><a href="#fn_457"><font size="1">1</font></a> side, his dear delight.<br>
 With Lakshman there he sat and told<br>
 Sweet stories of the days of old,<br>
 And as the pleasant time he spent<br>
 With heart upon each tale intent,<br>
 A giantess, by fancy led,<br>
 Came wandering to his leafy shed.<br>
 Fierce S'úrpanakhí,--her of yore<br>
 The Ten-necked tyrant's mother bore,--<br>
 Saw Ráma with his noble mien<br>
 Bright as the Gods in heaven are seen;<br>
 Him from whose brow a glory gleamed,<br>
 Like lotus leaves his full eyes beamed:<br>
 Long-armed, of elephantine gait,<br>
 With hair close coiled in hermit plait:<br>
 In youthful vigour, nobly framed,<br>
 By glorious marks a king proclaimed:<br>
 Like some bright lotus lustrous-hued,<br>
 With young Kandarpa's  <a name="fr_458"></a><a href="#fn_458"><font size="1">2</font></a> grace endued:<br>
 As there like Indra's self he shone,<br>
 She loved the youth she gazed upon.<br>
 She grim of eye and foul of face<br>
 Loved his sweet glance and forehead's grace:<br>
 She of unlovely figure, him<br>
 Of stately form and shapely limb:<br>
 She whose dim locks disordered hung,<br>
 Him whose bright hair on high brows clung:<br>
 She whose fierce accents counselled fear,<br>
 Him whose soft tones were sweet to hear:<br>
 She whose dire form with age was dried,<br>
 Him radiant in his youthful pride:<br>
 She whose false lips maintained the wrong,<br>
 Him in the words of virtue strong:<br>
 She cruel-hearted, stained with sin,<br>
 Him just in deed and pure within.<br>
 She, hideous fiend, a thing to hate,<br>
 Him formed each eye to captivate:<br>
 Fierce passion in her bosom woke,<br>
 And thus to Raghu's son she spoke:<br>
     'With matted hair above thy brows,<br>
 With bow and shaft and this thy spouse,<br>
 How hast thou sought in hermit dress<br>
 The giant-haunted wilderness?<br>
 What dost thou here? The cause explain:<br>
 Why art thou come, and what to gain?'<br>
 As S'úrpanakhá questioned so,<br>
 Ráma, the terror of the foe,<br>
 In answer to the monster's call,<br>
 With fearless candour told her all.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 'King Das'aratha reigned of old,<br>
 Like Gods celestial brave and bold.<br>
 I am his eldest son and heir,<br>
 And Ráma is the name I bear.<br>
 This brother, Lakshman, younger born,<br>
 Most faithful love to me has sworn.<br>
 My wife, this princess, dear to fame,<br>
 Is Sitá the Videhan dame.<br>
 Obedient to my sire's behest<br>
 And by the queen my mother pressed,<br>
 To keep the law and merit win,<br>
 I sought this wood to harbour in.<br>
 But speak, for I of thee in turn<br>
 Thy name, and race, and sire would learn.<br>
 Thou art of giant race, I ween.<br>
 Changing at will thy form and mien.<br>
 Speak truly, and the cause declare<br>
 That bids thee to these shades repair.'<br>
     Thus Ráma spoke: the demon heard,<br>
 And thus replied by passion spurred:<br>
 'Of giant race, what form soe'er<br>
 My fancy wills, 'tis mine to wear.<br>
 Named S'úrpanakhá here I stray,<br>
 And where I walk spread wild dismay.<br>
 King Rávan is my brother: fame<br>
 Has taught perchance his dreaded name,<br>
 Strong Kumbhakama slumbering deep<br>
 In chains of never-ending sleep:<br>
 Vibhíshan of the duteous mind.<br>
 In needs unlike his giant kind:<br>
 Dúshan and Khara, brave and bold<br>
 Whose fame by every tongue is told:<br>
 Their might by mine is far surpassed;<br>
 But when, O best of men, I cast<br>
 These fond eyes on thy form, I see<br>
 My chosen love and lord in thee.<br>
 Endowed with wondrous might am I:<br>
 Where'er my fancy leads I fly.<br>
 The poor misshapen Sitá leave,<br>
 And me, thy worthier bride receive.<br>
 Look on my beauty, and prefer<br>
 A spouse more meet than one like her:<br>
 I'll eat that ill-formed woman there:<br>
 Thy brother too her fate shall share.<br>
 But come, beloved, thou shalt roam<br>
 With me through all our woodland home;<br>
 Each varied grove with me shalt seek,<br>
 And gaze upon each mountain peak.'<br>
     As thus she spoke, the monster gazed<br>
 With sparkling eyes where passion blazed:<br>
 Then he, in lore of language learned,<br>
 This answer eloquent returned:<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *        *        *        *        *<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_455"></a><a href="ry214.htm#fr_455">249:1</a>  The chief chamberlain and attendant
 of S'iva or Rodra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_456"></a><a href="ry214.htm#fr_456">249:2</a>  Umá or Párvati, the consort of S'iva.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_457"></a><a href="ry215.htm#fr_457">250:1</a>  A star, one of the favourites of the Moon.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_458"></a><a href="ry215.htm#fr_458">250:2</a>  The God of love.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry216.htm">Next: Canto XVIII.: The Mutilation.</a></center>
 </body>