<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry209.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry211.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XII.: THE HEAVENLY BOW.</h3>
 <p>
 He spoke: the younger prince obeyed:<br>
 Within the bounds his way he made,<br>
 And thus addressed, whom first he met,<br>
 A pupil of the anchoret:<br>
     'Brave Ráma, eldest born, who springs,<br>
 From Das'aratha, hither brings<br>
 His wife the lady Sítá: he<br>
 Would fain the holy hermit see.<br>
 Lakshman am I--if happy fame<br>
 E'er to thine ears has brought the name--<br>
 His younger brother, prompt to do<br>
 His will, devoted, fond, and true.<br>
 We, through our royal sire's decree,<br>
 To the dread woods were forced to flee.<br>
 Tell the great Master, I entreat,<br>
 Our earnest wish our lord to greet."<br>
     He spoke: the hermit rich in store<br>
 Of fervid zeal and sacred lore,<br>
 Sought the pure shrine which held the fire,<br>
 To bear his message to the sire.<br>
 Soon as he reached the saint most bright<br>
 In sanctity's surpassing might,<br>
 He cried, uplifting reverent hands:<br>
 'Lord Ráma near thy cottage stands.'<br>
 Then spoke Agastya's pupil dear<br>
 The message for his lord to hear:<br>
 'Ráma and Lakshman, chiefs who spring<br>
 From Das'aratha, glorious king,<br>
 Thy hermitage e'en now have sought,<br>
 And lady Sítá with them brought.<br>
 The tamers of the foe are here<br>
 To see thee, Master, and revere.<br>
 'Tis thine thy further will to say:<br>
 Deign to command, and we obey.'<br>
     When from his pupil's lips he knew<br>
 The presence of the princely two.<br>
 And Sítá born to fortune high.<br>
 The glorious hermit made reply:<br>
 'Great joy at last is mine this day<br>
 That Ráma hither finds his way,<br>
 For long my soul has yearned to see<br>
 The prince who comes to visit me.<br>
 Go forth, go forth, and hither bring<br>
 The royal three with welcoming:<br>
 Lead Ráma in and place him near:<br>
 Why stands he not already here?'<br>
     Thus ordered by the hermit, who,<br>
 Lord of his thought, all dutv knew.<br>
 His reverent hands together laid.<br>
 The pupil answered and obeyed.<br>
 Forth from the place with speed he ran,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To Lakshman came and thus began:<br>
 'Where is he? let not Ráma wait,<br>
 But speed, the sage to venerate.'<br>
     Then with the pupil Lakshman went<br>
 Across the hermit settlement,<br>
 And showed him Ráma where he stood<br>
 With Janak's daughter in the wood.<br>
 The pupil then his message spake<br>
 Which the kind hermit bade him take;<br>
 Then led the honoured Ráma thence<br>
 And brought him in with reverence.<br>
 As nigh the royal Ráma came<br>
 With Lakshman and the Maithil dame,<br>
 He viewed the herds of gentle deer<br>
 Roaming the garden free from fear.<br>
 As through the sacred grove he trod<br>
 He viewed the seat of many a God,<br>
 Brahmá and Agni,  <a name="fr_429"></a><a href="#fn_429"><font size="1">1</font></a> Sun and Moon,<br>
 And His who sends each golden boon;  <a name="fr_430"></a><a href="#fn_430"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Here Vishnu's stood, there Bhaga's  <a name="fr_431"></a><a href="#fn_431"><font size="1">3</font></a> shrine,<br>
 And there Mahendra's Lord divine;<br>
 Here His who formed this earthly frame, <a name="fr_432"></a><a href="#fn_432"><font size="1">4</font></a><br>
 His there from whom all beings came.  <a name="fr_433"></a><a href="#fn_433"><font size="1">5</font></a><br>
 Váyu's, <a name="fr_434"></a><a href="#fn_434"><font size="1">6</font></a> and His who loves to hold<br>
 The great noose, Varim  <a name="fr_435"></a><a href="#fn_435"><font size="1">7</font></a> mighty-souled:<br>
 Here was the Vasus' <a name="fr_436"></a><a href="#fn_436"><font size="1">8</font></a> shrine to see,<br>
 Here that of sacred Gáyatrí, <a name="fr_437"></a><a href="#fn_437"><font size="1">9</font></a><br>
 The king of serpents  <a name="fr_438"></a><a href="#fn_438"><font size="1">10</font></a> here had place,<br>
 And he who rules the feathered race.  <a name="fr_439"></a><a href="#fn_439"><font size="1">11</font></a><br>
 Here Kártikeya,  <a name="fr_440"></a><a href="#fn_440"><font size="1">12</font></a> warrior lord,<br>
 And there was Justice' King adored.<br>
 Then with disciples girt about<br>
 The mighty saint himself came out:<br>
 Through fierce devotion bright as flame<br>
 Before the rest the Master came:<br>
 And then to Lakshman, fortune blest,<br>
 Ráma these hasty words addressed:<br>
 'Behold, Agastya's self draws near,<br>
 The mighty saint, whom all revere:<br>
 With spirit raised I meet my lord<br>
 With richest wealth of penance stored.'<br>
     The strong-armed hero spake, and ran<br>
 Forward to meet the sunbright man.<br>
 Before him, as he came, he bent<br>
 And clasped his feet most reverent,<br>
 Then rearing up his stately height<br>
 Stood suppliant by the anchorite,<br>
 While Lakshman's strength and Sítá's grace<br>
 Stood by the pride of Raghu's race.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_244"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 244</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The sage his arms round Rama threw<br>
 And welcomed him with honours due,<br>
 Asked, was all well, with question sweet.<br>
 And bade the hero to a seat.<br>
 With holy oil he fed the flame,<br>
 He brought the gifts which strangers claim,<br>
 And kindly waiting on the three<br>
 With honours due to high degree,<br>
 He gave with hospitable care<br>
 A simple hermit's woodland fare.<br>
 Then sat the reverend father, first<br>
 Of hermits, deep in duty versed.<br>
 And thus to suppliant Ráma, bred<br>
 In all the lore of virtue, said:<br>
 'Did the false hermit, Prince, neglect<br>
 To hail his guest with due respect,<br>
 He must,--the doom the perjured meet,--<br>
 His proper flesh hereafter eat.<br>
 A car-borne king a lord who sways<br>
 The earth, and virtue's law obeys,<br>
 Worthy of highest honour, thou<br>
 Hast sought, dear guest, my cottage now.'<br>
 He spoke: with fruit and hermit fare,<br>
 With every bloom the branches bare,<br>
 Agastya graceed his honoured guest,<br>
 And thus with gentle words addressed:<br>
 'Accept this mighty bow, divine.<br>
 Whereon red gold and diamonds shine;<br>
 'Twas by the Heavenly Artist planned<br>
 For Vishnu's own almighty hand:<br>
 This God-sent shaft of sunbright hue,<br>
 Whose deadly flight is ever true,<br>
 By Lord Mahendra given of yore:<br>
 This quiver with its endless store.<br>
 Keen arrows hurtling to their aim<br>
 Like kindled fires that flash and flame:<br>
 Accept, in golden sheath encased,<br>
 This sword with hilt of rich gold graced.<br>
 Armed, whilom, with this best of bows<br>
 Lord Vishnu slew his demon foes,<br>
 And mid the dwellers in the skies<br>
 Won brilliant glory for his prize.<br>
 The bow, the quivers, shaft, and sword<br>
 Received from me, O glorious lord:<br>
 These conquest to thine arm shall bring,<br>
 As thunder to the thunder's King.'<br>
     The splendid hermit bade him take<br>
 The noble weapons as he spake,<br>
 And as the prince accepted each<br>
 In words like these renewed his speech:<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_429"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_429">243:1</a>   The God of fire.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_430"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_430">243:2</a>  Kuera, the God of riches.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_431"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_431">243:3</a>  The Sun.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_432"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_432">243:4</a>  Brahma, the creator.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_433"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_433">243:5</a>  Siva.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_434"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_434">243:6</a>  The Wind-God.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_435"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_435">243:7</a>  The God of the sea.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_436"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_436">243:8</a>  A class of demi-gods, eight in number.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_437"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_437">243:9</a>  The holiest text of the Vedas, deified.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_438"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_438">243:10</a>  Vásaki</p>
 <p><a name="fn_439"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_439">243:11</a>  Garnd *</p>
 <p><a name="fn_440"></a><a href="ry210.htm#fr_440">243:12</a>   The War-God.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry211.htm">Next: Canto XIII.: Agastya's Counsel.</a></center>
 </body>