<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry225.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry227.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVIII.: KHARA DISMOUNTED.</h3>
 <p>
 But when he turned his eye where bled<br>
 Both Tris'iras and Dúshan dead,<br>
 Fear o'er the giant's spirit came<br>
 Of Ráma's might which naught could tame.<br>
 He saw his savage legions, those<br>
 Whose force no creature dared oppose,--<br>
 He saw the leader of his train<br>
 By Ráma's single prowess slain.<br>
 With burning grief he marked the few<br>
 Still left him of his giant crew.<br>
 As Namuchi  <a name="fr_474"></a><a href="#fn_474"><font size="1">1b</font></a> on Indra, so<br>
 Rushed the dread demon on his foe.<br>
 His mighty bow the monster strained,<br>
 And angrily on Ráma rained<br>
 His mortal arrows in a flood,<br>
 Like serpent fangs athirst for blood.<br>
 Skilled in the bowman's warlike art,<br>
 He plied the string and poised the dart.<br>
 Here, on his car, and there, he rode,<br>
 And passages of battle showed,<br>
 While all the skyey regions grew<br>
 Dark with his arrows as they flew.<br>
 Then Ráma seized his ponderous bow,<br>
 And straight the heaven was all aglow<br>
 With shafts whose stroke no life might bear<br>
 That filled with flash and flame the air,<br>
 Thick as the blinding torrents sent<br>
 Down from Parjanya's  <a name="fr_475"></a><a href="#fn_475"><font size="1">2b</font></a> firmament.<br>
 In space itself no space remained,<br>
 But all was filled with arrows rained<br>
 Incessantly from each great bow<br>
 Wielded by Ráma and his foe.<br>
 As thus in furious combat, wrought<br>
 To mortal hate, the warriors fought,<br>
 The sun himself grew faint and pale,<br>
 Obscured behind that arrowy veil.<br>
     As when beneath the driver's steel<br>
 An elephant is forced to kneel,<br>
 So from the hard and pointed head<br>
 Of many an arrow Ráma bled.<br>
 High on his car the giant rose<br>
 Prepared in deadly strife to close,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_262"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 262</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And all the spirits saw him stand<br>
 Like Yama with his noose in hand.<br>
 For Khara deemed in senseless pride<br>
 That he, beneath whose hand had died<br>
 The giant legions, failed at length<br>
 Slow sinking with exhausted strength.<br>
 But Ráma, like a lion, when<br>
 A trembling deer comes nigh his den.<br>
 Feared not the demon mad with hate,--<br>
 Of lion might and lion gait.<br>
 Then in his lofty car that glowed<br>
 With sunlike brilliance Khura rode<br>
 At Ráma: madly on he came<br>
 Like a poor moth that seeks the flame.<br>
 His archer skill the fiend displayed,<br>
 And at the place where Ráma laid<br>
 His hand, an arrow cleft in two<br>
 The mighty bow the hero drew.<br>
 Seven arrows by the giant sent,<br>
 Bright as the bolts of Indra, rent<br>
 Their way through mail and harness joints,<br>
 And pierced him with their iron points.<br>
 On Ráma, hero unsurpassed,<br>
 A thousand shafts smote thick and fast,<br>
 While as each missile struck, rang out<br>
 The giant's awful battle-shout.<br>
 His knotted arrows pierced and tore<br>
 The sunbright mail the hero wore,<br>
 Till, band and buckle rent away,<br>
 Glittering on the ground it lay.<br>
 Then pierced in shoulder, breast, and side,<br>
 Till every limb with blood was dyed,<br>
 The chieftain in majestic ire<br>
 Shone glorious as the smokeless fire.<br>
 Then loud and long the war-cry rose<br>
 Of Ráma, terror of his foes,<br>
 As, on the giant's death intent.<br>
 A ponderous bow he strung and bent,--<br>
 Lord Vishnu's own, of wondrous size,--<br>
 Agastya gave the heavenly prize.<br>
 Then rushing on the demon foe,<br>
 He raised on high that mighty bow,<br>
 And with his well-wrought shafts, whereon<br>
 Bright gold between the feathers shone,<br>
 He struck the pennon fluttering o'er<br>
 The chariot, and it waved no more.<br>
 That glorious flag whose every fold<br>
 Was rich with blazonry and gold,<br>
 Fell as the sun himself by all<br>
 The Gods' decree might earthward fall.<br>
 From wrathful Khara's hand, whose art<br>
 Well knew each vulnerable part,<br>
 Four keenly-piercing arrows flew,<br>
 And blood in Ráma's bosom drew,<br>
 With every limb distained with gore<br>
 From deadly shafts which rent and tore,<br>
 From Khara's clanging bowstring shots,<br>
 The prince's wrath waxed wondrous hot.<br>
 His hand upon his bow that best<br>
 Of mighty archers firmly pressed,<br>
 And from the well-drawn bowstring, true<br>
 Each to its mark, six arrows flew.<br>
 One quivered in the giant's head,<br>
 With two his brawny shoulders bled;<br>
 Three, with the crescent heads they bore,<br>
 Deep in his breast a passage tore.<br>
 Thirteen, to which the stone had lent<br>
 The keenest point, were swiftly sent<br>
 On the fierce giant, every one<br>
 Destructive, gleaming like the sun.<br>
 With four the dappled steeds he slew;<br>
 One cleft the chariot yoke in two.<br>
 One, in the heat of battle sped,<br>
 Smote from the neck the driver's head.<br>
 The poles were rent apart by three;<br>
 Two broke the splintered axle-tree.<br>
 Then from the hand of Ráma, while<br>
 Across his lips there came a smile.<br>
 The twelfth, like thunderbolt impelled,<br>
 Cut the great hand and bow it held.<br>
 Then, scarce by Indra's self surpassed,<br>
 He pierced the giant with the last.<br>
 The bow he trusted cleft in twain.<br>
 His driver and his horses slain,<br>
 Down sprang the giant, mace in hand,<br>
 On foot against the foe to stand.<br>
     The Gods and saints in bright array<br>
         Close gathered in the skies,<br>
     The prince's might in battle-fray<br>
         Beheld with joyful eyes.<br>
     Uprising from their golden seats,<br>
         Their hands in honour raised,<br>
     They looked on Ráma's noble feats,<br>
         And blessed him as they praised.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_474"></a><a href="ry226.htm#fr_474">261:1b</a>  'This Asura was a friend of Indra,
 and taking advantage of his friend's
 confidence, he drank up Indra's strength
 along with a draught of wine and Soma.
 Indra then told the As'vins and Sarasvatí
 that Namuchi had drunk up his strength.
 The As'vins in consequence gave Indra a
 thunderbolt in the form of a foam, with
 which he smote off the head of Namuchi.'
 GARRETT'S <i>Classical Dictionary of India</i>,
 See also Book I. p. 39.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_475"></a><a href="ry226.htm#fr_475">261:2b</a>  Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry227.htm">Next: Canto XXIX.: Khara's Defeat.</a></center>
 </body>