<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry228.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry230.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXI.: RÁVAN</h3>
 <p>
 But of the host of giants one,<br>
 Akampan, from the field had run<br>
 And sped to Lanká <a name="fr_481"></a><a href="#fn_481"><font size="1">1</font></a> to relate<br>
 In Rávan's ear the demons' fate:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'King, many a giant from the shade<br>
 Of Janasthán in death is laid:<br>
 Khara the chief is slain, and I<br>
 Could scarcely from the battle fly.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Fierce anger, as the monarch heard,<br>
 Inflamed his look, his bosom stirred,<br>
 And while with scorching glance he eyed<br>
 The messenger, he thus replied:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'What fool has dared, already dead,<br>
 *Strike* Janasthán, the general dread?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Who is the wretch shall vainly try<br>
 In earth, heaven, hell, from me to fly?<br>
 Vais'ravan <a name="fr_482"></a><a href="#fn_482"><font size="1">1b</font></a>,Indra, Vishnu, He<br>
 Who rules the dead, must reverence me;<br>
 For not the mightiest lord of these<br>
 Can brave my will and live at ease.<br>
 Fate finds in me a mightier fate<br>
 To burn the fires that devastate.<br>
 With unresisted influence I<br>
 Can force e'en Death himself to die,<br>
 With all-surpassing might restrain<br>
 The fury of the hurricane,<br>
 And burn in my tremendous ire<br>
 The glory of the sun and fire.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As thus the fiend's hot fury blazed,<br>
 His trembling hands Akampan raised,<br>
 And with a voice which fear made weak,<br>
 Permission craved his tale to speak.<br>
 King Rávan gave the leave he sought,<br>
 And bade him tell the news he brought.<br>
 His courage rose, his voice grew bold,<br>
 And thus his mournful tale he told:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'A prince with mighty shoulders, sprung<br>
 From Das'aratha, brave and young,<br>
 With arms well moulded, bears the name<br>
 Of Ráma with a lion's frame.<br>
 Renowned, successful, dark of limb,<br>
 Earth has no warrior equals him.<br>
 He fought in Janasthán and slew<br>
 Dúshan the fierce and Khara too.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Rávan the giants' royal chief.<br>
 Received Akampan's tale of grief.<br>
 Then, panting like an angry snake,<br>
 These words in turn the monarch spake:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Say quick, did Ráma seek the shade<br>
 Of Janasthán with Indra's aid,<br>
 And all the dwellers in the skies<br>
 To back his hardy enterprise?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Akampan heard, and straight obeyed<br>
 His master, and his answer made.<br>
 Then thus the power and might he told<br>
 Of Raghu's son the lofty-souled:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Best is that chief of all who know<br>
 With deftest art to draw the bow.<br>
 His are strange arms of heavenly might,<br>
 And none can match him in the fight.<br>
 His brother Lakshman brave as he,<br>
 Fair as the rounded moon to see,<br>
 With eyes like night and voice that comes<br>
 Deep as the roll of beaten drums,<br>
 By Ráma's side stands ever near,<br>
 Like wind that aids the flame's career.<br>
 That glorious chief, that prince of kings,<br>
 On Janasthán this ruin brings.<br>
 No Gods were there,--dismiss the thought<br>
 No heavenly legions came and fought.<br>
 His swift-winged arrows Ráma sent,<br>
 Each bright with gold and ornament.<br>
 To serpents many-faced they turned:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_266"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 266</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The giant hosts they ate and burned.<br>
 Where'er these fled in wild dismay<br>
 Ráma was there to strike and slay.<br>
 By him O King of high estate,<br>
 Is Janasthán left desolate.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Akampan ceased: in angry pride<br>
 The giant monarch thus replied:<br>
 'To Janasthán myself will go<br>
 And lay these daring brothers low.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spoke the king in furious mood;<br>
 Akampan then his speech renewed:<br>
 'O listen while I tell at length<br>
 The terror of the hero's strength.<br>
 No power can check, no might can tame<br>
 Ráma, a chief of noblest fame.<br>
 He with resistless shafts can stay<br>
 The torrent foaming on its way.<br>
 Sky, stars, and constellations, all<br>
 To his fierce might would yield and fall.<br>
 His power could earth itself uphold<br>
 Down sinking as it sank of old. <a name="fr_483"></a><a href="#fn_483"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Or all its plains and cities drown,<br>
 Breaking the wild sea's barrier down;<br>
 Crush the great deep's impetuous will,<br>
 Or bid the furious wind be still.<br>
 He glorious in his high estate<br>
 The triple world could devastate,<br>
 And there, supreme of men, could place<br>
 His creatures of a new-born race.<br>
 Never can mighty Ráma be<br>
 O'vercome in fight, my King, by thee.<br>
 Thy giant host the day might win<br>
 From him, if heaven were gained by sin.<br>
 If Gods were joined with demons, they<br>
 Could ne'er, I ween, that hero slay,<br>
 But guile may kill the wondrous man;<br>
 Attend while I disclose the plan.<br>
 His wife, above all women graced,<br>
 Is Sítá of the dainty waist,<br>
 With limbs to fair proportion true,<br>
 And a soft skin of lustrous hue,<br>
 Round neck and arm rich gems are twined:<br>
 She is the gem of womankind.<br>
 With her no bright Gandharví vies,<br>
 No nymph or Goddess in the skies;<br>
 And none to rival her would dare<br>
 'Mid dames who part the long black hair.<br>
 That hero in the wood beguile,<br>
 And steal his lovely spouse the while.<br>
 'Reft of his darling wife, be sure,<br>
 Brief days the mourner will endure.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With flattering hope of triumph moved<br>
 The giant king that plan approved,<br>
 Pondered the counsel in his breast,<br>
 And then Akampan thus addressed:<br>
 'Forth in my car I go at morn,<br>
 None but the driver with me borne,<br>
 And this fair Sítá will I bring<br>
 Back to my city triumphing.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Forth in his car by asses drawn<br>
 The giant monarch sped at dawn,<br>
 Bright as the sun, the chariot cast<br>
 Light through the sky as on it passed.<br>
 Then high in air that best of cars<br>
 Traversed the path of lunar stars,<br>
 Sending a fitful radiance pale<br>
 As moonbeams shot through cloudy veil.<br>
 Far on his airy way he flew:<br>
 Near Tádakeya's <a name="fr_484"></a><a href="#fn_484"><font size="1">1b</font></a> grove he drew,<br>
 Máricha welcomed him, and placed<br>
 Before him food which giants taste,<br>
 With honour led him to a seat,<br>
 And brought him water for his feet;<br>
 And then with timely words addressed<br>
 Such question to his royal guest:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Speak, is it well with thee whose sway<br>
 The giant multitudes obey?<br>
 I know not all, and ask in fear<br>
 The cause, O King, why thou art here.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Rávan, the giants' mighty king,<br>
 Heard wise Máricha's questioning,<br>
 And told with ready answer, taught<br>
 In eloquence, the cause he sought:<br>
 'My guards, the bravest of my band.<br>
 Are slain by Ráma's vigorous hand,<br>
 And Janasthán, that feared no hate<br>
 Of foes, is rendered desolate.<br>
 Come, aid me in the plan I lay<br>
 To steal the conqueror's wife away.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Máricha heard the king's request,<br>
 And thus the giant chief addressed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'What foe in friendly guise is he<br>
 Who spoke of Sítá's name to thee?<br>
 Who is the wretch whose thought would bring<br>
 Destruction on the giants' king?<br>
 Whose is the evil counsel, say,<br>
 That bids thee bear his wife away,<br>
 And careless of thy life provoke<br>
 Earth's loftiest with threatening stroke?<br>
 A foe is he who dared suggest<br>
 This hopeless folly to thy breast,<br>
 Whose ill advice would bid thee draw<br>
 The venomed fang from serpent's jaw.<br>
 By whose unwise suggestion led<br>
 Wilt thou the path of ruin tread?<br>
 Whence falls the blow that would destroy<br>
 Thy gentle sleep of ease and joy?<br>
 Like some wild elephant is he<br>
 That rears his trunk on high,<br>
 Lord of an ancient pedigree,<br>
 Huge tusks, and furious eye.<br>
 Rávan, no rover of the night<br>
 With bravest heart can brook,<br>
 Met in the front of deadly fight,<br>
 On Raghu's son to look.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_267"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 267</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The giant hosts were brave and strong,<br>
     Good at the bow and spear:<br>
 But Ráma slew the routed throng,<br>
     A lion 'mid the deer.<br>
 No lion's tooth can match his sword,<br>
     Or arrows fiercely shot:<br>
 He sleeps, he sleeps--the lion lord;<br>
     Be wise and rouse him not.<br>
 O Monarch of the giants, well<br>
     Upon my counsel think,<br>
 Lest thou for ever in the hell<br>
     Of Ráma's vengeance sink:<br>
 A hell, where deadly shafts are sent<br>
     From his tremendous-bow,<br>
 While his great arms all flight prevent,<br>
     Like deepest mire below:<br>
 Where the wild floods of battle rave<br>
     Above the foeman's head,<br>
 And each with many a feathery wave<br>
     Of shafts is garlanded.<br>
 O, quench the flames that in thy breast<br>
     With raging fury burn;<br>
 And pacified and self-possessed<br>
     To Lanká's town return.<br>
 Rest thou in her imperial bowers<br>
     With thine own wives content,<br>
 And in the wood let Ráma's hours<br>
     With Sitá still be spent.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The lord of Lanká's isle obeyed<br>
 The counsel, and his purpose stayed.<br>
 Borne on his car he parted thence<br>
 And gained his royal residence.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_481"></a><a href="ry229.htm#fr_481">265:1</a>  The capital of the giant king Rávan.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_482"></a><a href="ry229.htm#fr_482">265:1b</a>  Kuvera, the God of gold</p>
 <p><a name="fn_483"></a><a href="ry229.htm#fr_483">266:1</a>  In the great deluge.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_484"></a><a href="ry229.htm#fr_484">266:1b</a>  The giant Máricha, son of Tádaká.
 Tádaká was slain by Ráma. See p. 39.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry230.htm">Next: Canto XXXII.: Rávan Roused.</a></center>
 </body>