<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry220.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry222.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIII.: THE OMENS.</h3>
 <p>
 As forth upon its errand went<br>
 That huge ferocious armament,<br>
 An awful cloud, in dust and gloom,<br>
 With threatening thunders from its womb<br>
 Poured in sad augury a flood<br>
 Of rushing water mixt with blood.<br>
 The monarch's steeds, though strong and fleet,<br>
 Stumbled and fell: and yet their feet<br>
 Passed o'er the bed of flowers that lay<br>
 Fresh gathered on the royal way.<br>
 No gleam of sunlight struggled through<br>
 The sombre pall of midnight hue,<br>
 Edged with a line of bloody red,<br>
 Like whirling torches overhead.<br>
 A vulture, fierce, of mighty size.<br>
 Terrific with his cruel eyes,<br>
 Perched on the staff enriched with pold,<br>
 Whence hung the flag in many a fold<br>
 Each ravening bird, each beast of prey<br>
 Where Janasthán's wild thickets lay,<br>
 Rose with a long discordant cry<br>
 And gathered as the host went by,<br>
 And from the south long, wild, and shrill,<br>
 Came spirit voices boding ill.<br>
 Like elephants in frantic mood,<br>
 Vast clouds terrific, sable-hued,<br>
 Hid all the sky where'er they bore<br>
 Their load of water mixt with gore.<br>
 Above, below, around were spread<br>
 Thick shades of darkness strange and dread,<br>
 Nor could the wildered glance descry<br>
 A point or quarter of the sky.<br>
 Then came o'er heaven a sanguine hue,<br>
 Though evening's flush not yet was due,<br>
 While each ill-omened bird that flies<br>
 Assailed the king with harshest cries.<br>
 There screamed the vulture and the crane,<br>
 And the loud jackal shrieked again.<br>
 Each hideous thing that bodes aright<br>
 Disaster in the coming fight,<br>
 With gaping mouth that hissed and flamed,<br>
 The ruin of the host proclaimed.<br>
 Eclipse untimely reft away<br>
 The brightness of the Lord of Day,<br>
 And near his side was seen to glow<br>
 A mace-like comet boding woe.<br>
 Then while the sun was lost to view<br>
 A mighty wind arose and blew,<br>
 And stars like fireflies shed their light,<br>
 Nor waited for the distant night.<br>
 The lilies drooped, the brooks were dried,<br>
 The fish and birds that swam them died,<br>
 And every tree that was so fair<br>
 With flower and fruit was stripped and bare.<br>
 The wild wind ceased, yet, raised on high,<br>
 Dark clouds of dust involved the sky.<br>
 In doleful twitter long sustained<br>
 The restless Sárikás  <a name="fr_462"></a><a href="#fn_462"><font size="1">1</font></a> complained,<br>
 And from the heavens with flash and flame<br>
 Terrific meteors roaring came.<br>
 Earth to her deep foundation shook<br>
 With rock and tree and plain and brook,<br>
 As Khara with triumphant shout,<br>
 Borne in his chariot, sallied out.<br>
 His left arm throbbed: he knew full well<br>
 That omen, and his visage fell.<br>
 Each awful sign the giant viewed,<br>
 And sudden tears his eye bedewed.<br>
 Care on his brow sat chill and black,<br>
 Yet mad with wrath he turned not back.<br>
 Upon each fearful sight that raised<br>
 The shuddering hair the chieftain gazed,<br>
 And laughing in his senseless pride<br>
 Thus to his giant legions cried:<br>
 'By sense of mightiest strength upborne,<br>
 These feeble signs I laugh to scorn.<br>
 I could bring down the stars that shine<br>
 In heaven with these keen shafts of mine.<br>
 Impelled by warlike fury I<br>
 Could cause e'en Death himself to die.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_256"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 256</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 I will not seek my home again<br>
 Until my pointed shafts have slain<br>
 This Raghu's son so fierce in pride,<br>
 And Lakshman by his brother's side.<br>
 And she, my sister, she for whom<br>
 These sons of Raghu meet their doom,<br>
 She with delighted lips shall drain.<br>
 The lifeblood of her foemen slain.<br>
 Fear not for me: I ne'er have known<br>
 Defeat, in battle overthrown.<br>
 Fear not for me, O giants; true<br>
 Are the proud words I speak to you.<br>
 The king of Gods who rules on high,<br>
 If wild Air'avat bore him nigh,<br>
 Should fall before me bolt in hand:<br>
 And shall these two my wrath withstand!'<br>
     He ended and the giant host<br>
 Who heard their chief's triumphant boast,<br>
 Rejoiced with equal pride elate,<br>
 Entangled in the noose of Fate.<br>
     Then met on high in bright array,<br>
 With eyes that longed to see the fray,<br>
 God and Gandharva, sage and saint,<br>
 With beings pure from earthly taint.<br>
 Blest for good works aforetime wrought,<br>
 Thus each to other spake his thought:<br>
 'Now joy to Br'ahmans, joy to kine,<br>
 And all whom world count half divine!<br>
 May Raghu's offspring slay in fight<br>
 Pulastya's sons who roam by night!'<br>
 In words like these and more, the best<br>
 Of high-souled saints their hopes expressed,<br>
 Bending their eager eyes from where<br>
 Car-borne with Gods they rode in air.<br>
 Beneath them stretching far, they viewed<br>
 The giants' death-doomed multitude.<br>
 They saw where, urged with fury, far<br>
 Before the host rolled Khara's car,<br>
 And close beside their leader came<br>
 Twelve giant peers of might and fame. <a name="fr_463"></a><a href="#fn_463"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Four other chiefs  <a name="fr_464"></a><a href="#fn_464"><font size="1">2</font></a> before the rest<br>
 Behind their leader D'ushan pressed.<br>
     Impetuous, cruel, dark, and dread,<br>
         All thirsting for the fray,<br>
     The hosts of giant warriors sped<br>
         Onward upon their way.<br>
     With eager speed they reached the spot<br>
         Where dwelt the princely two,--<br>
     Like planets in a league to blot<br>
         The sun and moon from view.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_462"></a><a href="ry221.htm#fr_462">255:1</a>  The Sáriká is the Maina, a bird like a
 starling.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_463"></a><a href="ry221.htm#fr_463">256:1</a>  Their names which are rather
 unmanageable and of no importance are
 Syenagama, Prithus'y'ama, Yajnas'atru,
 Vihangama, Durjaya, Parav'ira'ksha,
 Purusha, K'alak'amuka, Megham'ali, M'aham'ali*,
 *Varasya, Rudhir'as'ana.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_464"></a><a href="ry221.htm#fr_464">256:2</a>  Mah'akap'ala, Sth'ul'aksha, Pram'atha,
 Tris'iras.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry222.htm">Next: Canto XXIV.: The Host In Sight.</a></center>
 </body>