<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry226.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry228.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIX.: KHARA'S DEFEAT.</h3>
 <p>
 When Ráma saw the giant nigh.<br>
 On foot, alone, with mace reared high,<br>
 In mild reproof at first he spoke.<br>
 Then forth his threatening anger broke:<br>
 'Thou with the host 'twas thine to lead,<br>
 With elephant and car and steed,<br>
 Hast wrought an act of sin and shame,<br>
 An act which all who live must blame.<br>
 Know that the wretch whose evil mind<br>
 Through the grief of human kind,<br>
 Through the three worlds confess him lord,<br>
 Must perish dreaded and abhorred.<br>
 Night-rover, when a villain's deeds<br>
 Distress the world he little heeds,<br>
 Each hand is armed his life to take,<br>
 And crush him like a deadly snake.<br>
 The end is near when men begin<br>
 Through greed or lust a life of sin,<br>
 E'en as a Bráhman's dame, unwise,<br>
 Eats of the fallen hail  <a name="fr_476"></a><a href="#fn_476"><font size="1">1</font></a> and dies.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_263"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 263</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thy hand has slain the pure and good,<br>
 The hermit saints of Dandak wood,<br>
 Of holy life, the heirs of bliss;<br>
 And thou shalt reap the fruit of this.<br>
 Not long shall they whose cruel breasts<br>
 Joy in the sin the world detests<br>
 Retain their guilty power and pride,<br>
 But fade like trees whose roots are dried.<br>
 Yes, as the seasons come and go.<br>
 Each tree its kindly fruit must show,<br>
 And sinners reap in fitting time<br>
 The harvest of each earlier crime.<br>
 As those must surely die who eat<br>
 Unwittingly of poisoned meat,<br>
 They too whose lives in sin are spent<br>
 Receive ere long the punishment.<br>
 And know, thou rover of the night,<br>
 That I, a king, am sent to smite<br>
 The wicked down, who court the hate<br>
 Of men whose laws they violate.<br>
 This day my vengeful hand shall send<br>
 Shafts bright with gold to tear and rend,<br>
 And pass with fury through thy breast<br>
 As serpents pierce an emmet's nest.<br>
 Thou with thy host this day shalt be<br>
 Among the dead below, and see<br>
 The saints beneath thy hand who bled,<br>
 Whose flesh thy cruel maw has fed.<br>
 They, glorious on their seats of gold,<br>
 Their slayer shall in hell behold.<br>
 Fight with all strength thou callest thine,<br>
 Mean scion of ignoble line,<br>
 Still, like the palm-tree's fruit, this day<br>
 My shafts thy head in dust shall lay.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such were the words that Ráma said:<br>
 Then Khara's eyes with wrath glowed red,<br>
 Who, maddened by the rage that burned<br>
 Within him, with a smile returned:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Thou Das'aratha's son, hast slain<br>
 The meaner giants of my train:<br>
 And canst thou idly vaunt thy might<br>
 And claim the praise not thine by right?<br>
 Not thus in self-laudation rave<br>
 The truly great, the nobly brave:<br>
 No empty boasts like thine disgrace<br>
 The foremost of the human race.<br>
 The mean of soul, unknown to fame,<br>
 Who taint their warrior race with shame,<br>
 Thus speak in senseless pride as thou,<br>
 O Raghu's son, hast boasted now,<br>
 What hero, when the war-dry rings,<br>
 Vaunts the high race from which he springs,<br>
 Or seeks, when warriors meet and die.<br>
 His own descent to glorify?<br>
 Weakness and folly show confessed<br>
 In every vaunt thou utterest,<br>
 As when the flames fed high with grass<br>
 Detect the *simulating* brass,<br>
 Dost thou note see me standing here<br>
 Armed with the mighty mace I rear,<br>
 *Firm* as an earth upholding hill<br>
 Whose summit veins of metal fill?<br>
 Lo, here I stand before thy face<br>
 To slay thee with my murderous mace,<br>
 As Death, the universal lord,<br>
 Stands threatening with his fatal cord.<br>
 Enough of this. Much more remains<br>
 That should be said: but time constrains.<br>
 Ere to his rest the sun descend,<br>
 And shades of night the combat end,<br>
 The twice seven thousand of my band<br>
 Who fell beneath thy bloody hand<br>
 Shall have their tears all wiped away<br>
 And triumph in thy fall to-day.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke, and loosing from his hold<br>
 His mighty mace ringed round with gold,<br>
 Like some red bolt alive with fire<br>
 Hurled it at Ráma, mad with ire.<br>
 The ponderous mace which Khara threw<br>
 Sent fiery flashes as it flew.<br>
 Trees, shrubs were scorched beneath the blast,<br>
 As onward to its aim it passed.<br>
 But Ráma, watching as it sped<br>
 Dire as His noose who rules the dead,<br>
 Cleft it with arrows as it came<br>
 On rushing with a hiss and flame.<br>
 Its fury spent and burnt away,<br>
 Harmless upon the ground it lay<br>
 Like a great snake in furious mood<br>
 By herbs of numbing power subdued.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_476"></a><a href="ry227.htm#fr_476">262:1</a>  Popularly supposed to cause death.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry228.htm">Next: Canto XXX.: Khara's Death.</a></center>
 </body>