<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry222.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry224.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXV.: THE BATTLE.</h3>
 <p>
 When Khara with the hosts he led<br>
 Drew near to Ráma's leafy shed,<br>
 He saw that queller of the foe<br>
 Stand ready with his ordered bow.<br>
 He saw, and burning at the view<br>
 His clanging bow he raised and drew,<br>
 And bade his driver urge apace<br>
 His car to meet him face to face.<br>
 Obedient to his master's hest<br>
 His eager steeds the driver pressed<br>
 On to the spot where, none to aid,<br>
 The strong-armed chief his weapon swayed.<br>
 Soon as the children of the night<br>
 Saw Khara rushing to the fight,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_258"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 258</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 His lords with loud unearthly cry<br>
 Followed their chief and gathered nigh.<br>
 As in his car the leader rode<br>
 With all his lords around, he showed<br>
 Like the red planet fiery Mars<br>
 Surrounded by the lesser stars.<br>
 Then with a horrid yell that rent<br>
 The air, the giant chieftain sent<br>
 A thousand darts in rapid shower<br>
 On Ráma matchless in his power.<br>
 The rovers of the night, impelled<br>
 By fiery rage which naught withheld,<br>
 Upon the unconquered prince, who strained<br>
 His fearful bow, their arrows rained.<br>
 With sword and club, with mace and pike,<br>
 With spear and axe to pierce and strike,<br>
 Those furious fiends on every side<br>
 The unconquerable hero plied.<br>
 The giant legions huge and strong,<br>
 Like clouds the tempest drives along,<br>
 Rushed upon Ráma with the speed<br>
 Of whirling car, and mounted steed,<br>
 And hill-like elephant, to slay<br>
 The matchless prince in battle fray.<br>
 Then upon Ráma thick and fast<br>
 The rain of mortal steel they cast,<br>
 As labouring clouds their torrents shed<br>
 Upon the mountain-monarch's <a name="fr_468"></a><a href="#fn_468"><font size="1">1</font></a> head.<br>
 As near and nearer round him drew<br>
 The warriors of the giant crew,<br>
 He showed like S'iva girt by all<br>
 His spirits when night's shadows fall.<br>
 As the great deep receives each rill<br>
 And river rushing from the hill,<br>
 He bore that flood of darts, and broke<br>
 With well-aimed shaft each murderous stroke.<br>
 By stress of arrowy storm assailed,<br>
 And wounded sore, he never failed,<br>
 Like some high mountain which defies<br>
 The red bolts flashing from the skies.<br>
 With ruddy streams each limb was dyed<br>
 From gaping wounds in breast and side,<br>
 Showing the hero like the sun<br>
 'Mid crimson clouds ere day is done.<br>
 Then, at that sight of terror, faint<br>
 Grew God, Gandharva, sage, and saint,<br>
 Trembling to see the prince oppose<br>
 His single might to myriad foes.<br>
 But waxing wroth, with force unspent,<br>
 He strained his bow to utmost bent,<br>
 And forth his arrows keen and true<br>
 In hundreds, yea in thousands flew,--<br>
 Shafts none could ward, and none endure:<br>
 Death's fatal noose was scarce so sure.<br>
 As 'twere in playful ease he shot<br>
 His gilded shafts, and rested not.<br>
 With swiftest flight and truest aim<br>
 Upon the giant hosts they came.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Each smote, each stayed a foeman's breath<br>
 As fatal as the coil of Death,<br>
 Each arrow through a giant tore<br>
 A passage, and besmeared with gore,<br>
 Pursued its onward way and through<br>
 The air with flamy brilliance flew.<br>
 Unnumbered were the arrows sent<br>
 From the great bow which Ráma bent,<br>
 And every shaft with iron head<br>
 The lifeblood of a giant shed.<br>
 Their pennoned bows were cleft, nor mail<br>
 Nor shield of hide could aught avail.<br>
 For Ráma's myriad arrows tore<br>
 Through arms, and bracelets which they wore,<br>
 And severed mighty warriors' thighs<br>
 Like trunks of elephants in size,<br>
 And cut resistless passage sheer<br>
 Through gold-decked horse and charioteer,<br>
 Slew elephant and rider, slew<br>
 The horseman and the charger too,<br>
 And infantry unnumbered sent<br>
 To dwell 'neath Yama's government.<br>
 Then rose on high a fearful yell<br>
 Of rovers of the night, who fell<br>
 Beneath that iron torrent, sore<br>
 Wounded by shafts that rent and tore.<br>
 So mangled by the ceaseless storm<br>
 Of shafts of every kind and form,<br>
 Such joy they found, as forests feel<br>
 When scorched by flame, from Ráma's steel.<br>
 The mightiest still the fight maintained,<br>
 And furious upon Ráma rained<br>
 Dart, arrow, spear, with wild attacks<br>
 Of mace, and club, and battle-axe.<br>
 But the great chief, unconquered yet,<br>
 Their weapons with his arrows met,<br>
 Which severed many a giant's head,<br>
 And all the plain with corpses spread.<br>
 With sundered bow and shattered shield<br>
 Headless they sank upon the field,<br>
 As the tall trees, that felt the blast<br>
 Of Garud's wing, to earth were cast.<br>
 The giants left unslaughtered there<br>
 Where filled with terror and despair,<br>
 And to their leader Khara fled<br>
 Faint, wounded, and discomfited.<br>
 These fiery Dúshan strove to cheer,<br>
 And poised his bow to calm their fear;<br>
 Then fierce as He who rules the dead,<br>
 When wroth, on angered Ráma sped.<br>
 By Dúshan cheered, the demons cast<br>
 Their dread aside and rallied fast<br>
 With Sáls, rocks, palm-trees in their hands<br>
 With nooses, maces, pikes, and brands,<br>
 Again upon the godlike man<br>
 The mighty fiends infuriate ran,<br>
 These casting rocks like hail, and these<br>
 A whelming shower of leafy trees.<br>
 Wild, wondrous fight, the eye to scare,<br>
 And raise on end each shuddering hair,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_259"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 259</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 As with the fiends who loved to rove<br>
 By night heroic Ráma strove!<br>
 The giants in their fury plied<br>
 Ráma with darts on every side.<br>
 Then, by the gathering demons pressed<br>
 From north and south and east and west,<br>
 By showers of deadly darts assailed<br>
 From every quarter fiercely hailed,<br>
 Girt by the foes who swarmed around,<br>
 He raised a mighty shout whose sound<br>
 Struck terror. On the giant crew<br>
 His great Gándharva <a name="fr_469"></a><a href="ry224.htm#fn_469"><font size="1">1</font></a> arrow flew.<br>
 A thousand mortal shafts were rained<br>
 From the orbed bow the hero strained,<br>
 Till east and west and south and north<br>
 Were filled with arrows volleyed forth.<br>
 They heard the fearful shout: they saw<br>
 His mighty hand the bowstring draw,<br>
 Yet could no wounded giant's eye<br>
 See the swift storm of arrows fly.<br>
 Still firm the warrior stood and cast<br>
 His deadly missiles thick and fast.<br>
 Dark grew the air with arrowy hail<br>
 Which hid the sun as with a veil.<br>
 Fiends wounded, falling, fallen, slain,<br>
 All in a moment, spread the plain,<br>
 And thousands scarce alive were left<br>
 Mangled, and gashed, and torn, and cleft.<br>
 Dire was the sight, the plain o'erspread<br>
 With trophies of the mangled dead.<br>
 There lay, by Ráma's missiles rent,<br>
 Full many a priceless ornament,<br>
 With severed limb and broken gem,<br>
 Hauberk and helm and diadem.<br>
 There lay the shattered car, the steed,<br>
 The elephant of noblest breed,<br>
 The splintered spear, the shivered mace,<br>
 Chouris and screens to shade the face.<br>
 The giants saw with bitterest pain<br>
 Their warriors weltering on the plain,<br>
 Nor dared again his might oppose<br>
 Who scourged the cities of his foes.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_467"></a><a href="ry222.htm#fr_467">257:1b</a>  See <i>Additional Notes</i>--DAKSHA'S
 SACRIFICE.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_468"></a><a href="ry223.htm#fr_468">258:1</a>  Himálaya.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry224.htm">Next: Canto XXVI.: Dúshan's Death.</a></center>
 </body>