<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry219.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry221.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXII: KHARA'S WRATH.</h3>
 <p>
 Roused by the taunting words she spoke,<br>
 The mighty Khara's wrath awoke,<br>
 And there, while giants girt him round,<br>
 In these fierce words an utterance found:<br>
     'I cannot, peerless one, contain<br>
 Mine anger at this high disdain,<br>
 Galling as salt when sprinkled o'er<br>
 The rawness of a bleeding sore.<br>
 Ráma in little count I hold,<br>
 Weak man whose days are quickly told.<br>
 The caitiff with his life to-day<br>
 For all his evil deeds shall pay.<br>
 Dry, sister, dry each needless tear,<br>
 Stint thy lament and banish fear,<br>
 For Ráma and his brother go<br>
 This day to Yama's realm below.<br>
 My warrior's axe shall stretch him slain,<br>
 Ere set of sun, upon the plain,<br>
 Then shall thy sated lips be red<br>
 With his warm blood in torrents shed.'<br>
     As Khara's speech the demon heard,<br>
 With sudden joy her heart was stirred:<br>
 She fondly praised him as the boast<br>
 And glory of the giant host.<br>
 First moved to ire by taunts and stings,<br>
 Now soothed by gentle flatterings,<br>
 To Dúshan, who his armies led,<br>
 The demon Khara spoke, and said:<br>
     'Friend, from the host of giants call<br>
 Full fourteen thousand, best of all,<br>
 Slaves of my will, of fearful might,<br>
 Who never turn their backs in fight:<br>
 Fiends who rejoice to slay and mar,<br>
 Dark as the clouds of autumn are:<br>
 Make ready quickly, O my friend,<br>
 My chariot and the bows I bend.<br>
 My swords, my shafts of brilliant sheen,<br>
 My divers lances long and keen.<br>
 On to the battle will I lead<br>
 These heroes of Pulastya's seed,<br>
 And thus, O famed for warlike skill,<br>
 Ráma my wicked foeman kill.'<br>
     He spoke, and ere his speech was done,<br>
 His chariot glittering like the sun,<br>
 Yoked and announced, by Dúshan's care,<br>
 With dappled steeds was ready there.<br>
 High as a peak from Meru rent<br>
 It burned with golden ornament:<br>
 The pole of lazulite, of gold<br>
 Were the bright wheels whereon it rolled.<br>
 With gold and moonstone blazoned o'er,<br>
 Fish, flowers, trees, rocks, the panels bore;<br>
 Auspicious birds embossed thereon,<br>
 And stars in costly emblem shone.<br>
 O'er flashing swords his banner hung,<br>
 And sweet bells, ever tinkling, swung.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_255"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 255</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 That mighty host with sword and shield<br>
 And oar was ready for the field:<br>
 And Khara saw, and Dúshan cried,<br>
 'Forth to the fight, ye giants, ride."<br>
 Then banners waved, and shield and sword<br>
 Flashed as the host obeyed its lord.<br>
 From Janasthán they sallied out<br>
 With eager speed, and din, and shout,<br>
 Armed with the mace for close attacks,<br>
 The bill, the spear, the battle-axe,<br>
 Steel quoit and club that flashed afar,<br>
 Huge bow and sword and scymitar,<br>
 The dart to pierce, the bolt to strike,<br>
 The murderous bludgeon, lance, and pike.<br>
 So forth from Janasthán, intent<br>
 On Khara's will, the monsters went.<br>
 He saw their awful march: not far<br>
 Behind the host he drove his car.<br>
 Ware of his master's will, to speed<br>
 The driver urged each gold-decked steed.<br>
 Then forth the warrior's coursers sprang,<br>
 And with tumultuous murmur rang<br>
 Each distant quarter of the sky<br>
 And realms that intermediate lie.<br>
 High and more high within his breast<br>
 His pride triumphant rose,<br>
 While terrible as Death he pressed<br>
 Onward to slay his foes,<br>
 'More swiftly yet,' as on they fled,<br>
 He cried in thundering tones<br>
 Loud as a cloud that overhead<br>
 Hails down a flood of stones.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry221.htm">Next: Canto XXIII.: The Omens.</a></center>
 </body>