<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry236.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry238.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIX.: MÁRÍCHA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 'I told thee of that dreadful day<br>
 When Ráma smote and spared to slay.<br>
 Now hear me, Rávan, while I tell<br>
 What in the after time befell.<br>
 At length, restored to strength and pride,<br>
 I and two mighty fiends beside<br>
 Assumed the forms of deer and strayed<br>
 Through Dandak wood in lawn and glade,<br>
 I reared terrific horns: beneath<br>
 Were flaming tongue and pointed teeth.<br>
 I roamed where'er my fancy led,<br>
 And on the flesh of hermits fed,<br>
 In sacred haunt, by hallowed tree,<br>
 Where'er the ritual fires might be.<br>
 A fearful shape, I wandered through<br>
 The wood, and many a hermit slew.<br>
 With ruthless rage the saints I killed<br>
 Who in the grove their tasks fulfilled.<br>
 When smitten to the earth they sank,<br>
 Their flesh I ate, their blood I drank,<br>
 And with my cruel deeds dismayed<br>
 All dwellers in the forest shade,<br>
 Spoiling their rites in bitter hate,<br>
 With human blood inebriate.<br>
 Once in the wood I chanced to see<br>
 Ráma again, a devotee,<br>
 A hermit, fed on scanty fare,<br>
 Who made the good of all his care.<br>
 His noble wife was by his side,<br>
 And Lakshman in the battle tried.<br>
 In senseless pride I scorned the might<br>
 Of that illustrious anchorite,<br>
 And heedless of a hermit foe,<br>
 Recalled my earlier overthow.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_275"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 275</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 I charged him in my rage and scorn<br>
 To slay him with my pointed horn,<br>
 In heedless haste, to fury wrought<br>
 As on my former wounds I thought.<br>
 Then from the mighty bow he drew<br>
 Three foe-destroying arrows flew,<br>
 Keen-pointed, leaping from the string:<br>
 Swift as the wind or feathered king.<br>
 Dire shafts, on flesh of foemen fed,<br>
 Like rushing thunderbolts they sped.<br>
 With knots well smoothed and barbs well bent,<br>
 Shot e'en as one, the arrows went.<br>
 But I who Ráma's might had felt,<br>
 And knew the blows the hero dealt,<br>
 Escaped by rapid flight. The two<br>
 Who lingered on the spot, he slew.<br>
 I fled from mortal danger, freed<br>
 From the dire shaft by timely speed.<br>
 Now to deep thought my days I give,<br>
 And as a humble hermit live.<br>
 In every shrub, in every tree<br>
 I view that noblest devotee.<br>
 In every knotted trunk I mark<br>
 His deerskin and his coat of bark,<br>
 And see the bow-armed Ráma stand<br>
 Like Yama with his noose in hand.<br>
 I tell thee Rávan, in my fright<br>
 A thousand Rámas mock my sight,<br>
 This wood with every bush and bough<br>
 Seems all one fearful Ráma now.<br>
 Throughout the grove there is no spot<br>
 So lonely where I see him not.<br>
 He haunts me in my dreams by night,<br>
 And wakes me with the wild affright.<br>
 The letter that begins his name<br>
 Sends terror through my startled frame.<br>
 The rapid cars whereon we ride,<br>
 The rich rare jewels, once my pride,<br>
 Have names  <a name="fr_494"></a><a href="#fn_494"><font size="1">1</font></a> that strike upon mine ear<br>
 With hated sound that counsels fear.<br>
 His mighty strength too well I know,<br>
 Nor art thou match for such a foe.<br>
 Too strong were Raghus's son in fight<br>
 For Namu*chi or Bali's might.<br>
 Then Ráma to the battle dare,<br>
 Or else be patient and forbear;<br>
 But, wouldst thou see me live in peace,<br>
 Let mention of the hero cease.<br>
 The good whose holy lives were spent<br>
 In deepest thought, most innocent.<br>
 With all their people many a time<br>
 Have perished through another's crime.<br>
 So in the common ruin, I<br>
 Must for another's folly die,<br>
 Do all thy strength and courage can.<br>
 But ne'er will I approve the plan.<br>
 For he, in might supremely great,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The giant world could extirpate,<br>
 Since, when impetuous Khara sought<br>
 The grove of Janasthán and fought<br>
 For Súrpanakhá's sake, he died<br>
 By Ráma's hand in battle tried.<br>
 How has he wronged thee? Soothly swear,<br>
 And Ráma's fault and sin declare.<br>
     I warn thee, and my words are wise,<br>
         I seek thy people's weal:<br>
     But if this rede thou wilt despise.<br>
         Nor hear my last appeal,<br>
     Thou with thy kin and all thy friends<br>
         In fight this day wilt die,<br>
     When his great bow the hero bends,<br>
         And shafts unerring fly.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_494"></a><a href="ry237.htm#fr_494">275:1</a>  The Sanskrit words for car and jewels
 begin with <i>ra</i>.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry238.htm">Next: Canto XL.: Rávan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>