<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry240.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry242.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIII.: THE WONDROUS DEER.</h3>
 <p>
 She stooped, her hands with flowers to fill,<br>
 But gazed upon the marvel still:<br>
 Gazed on its back and sparkling side<br>
 Where silver hues with golden vied.<br>
 Joyous was she of faultless mould,<br>
 With glossy skin like polished gold.<br>
 And loudly to her husband cried<br>
 And bow-armed Lakshman by his side:<br>
 Again, again she called in glee:<br>
 'O come this glorious creature see;<br>
 Quick, quick, my lord, this deer to view.<br>
 And bring thy brother Lakshman too.'<br>
 As through the wood her clear tones rang,<br>
 Swift to her side the brothers sprang.<br>
 With eager eyes the grove they scanned,<br>
 And saw the deer before them stand.<br>
 But doubt was strong in Lakshman's breast,<br>
 Who thus his thought and fear expressed:<br>
     'Stay, for the wondrous deer we see<br>
 The fiend Márícha's self may be.<br>
 Ere now have kings who sought this place<br>
 To take their pastime in the chase,<br>
 Met from his wicked art defeat,<br>
 And fallen slain by like deceit.<br>
 He wears, well trained in magio guile,<br>
 The figure of a deer a while,<br>
 Bright as the very sun, or place<br>
 Where dwell the gay Gaudharya race.<br>
 No deer, O Ráma, e'er was seen<br>
 Thus decked with gold und jewels' sheen.<br>
 'Tis magic, for the world has ne'er,<br>
 Lord of the world, shown aught so fair.'<br>
     But Sítá of the lovely smile,<br>
 A captive to the giant's wile,<br>
 Turned Lakshman's prudent speech aside<br>
 And thus with eager words replied:<br>
 Mv honoured lord, this deer I see<br>
 With beauty rare enraptures me.<br>
 Go, chief of mighty arm, and bring<br>
 For my delight this precious thing.<br>
 Fair creatures ot the woodland roam<br>
 Untroubled near our hermit home.<br>
 The forest cow and stag are there,<br>
 The fawn, the monkey, and the bear,<br>
 Where spotted deer delight to play,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_279"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 279</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And strong and beauteous Kinnars  <a name="fr_495"></a><a href="#fn_495"><font size="1">1</font></a> stray.<br>
 But never, as they wandered by,<br>
 Has such a beauty charmed mine eye<br>
 As this with limbs so fair and slight,<br>
 So gentle, beautiful and bright.<br>
 O see, how fair it is to view<br>
 With jewels of each varied hue:<br>
 Bright as the rising moon it glows,<br>
 Lighting the wood where'er it goes.<br>
 Ah me, what form and grace are there!<br>
 Its limbs how fine, its hues how fair!<br>
 Transcending all that words express,<br>
 It takes my soul with loveliness.<br>
 O, if thou would, to please me, strive<br>
 To take the beauteous thing alive,<br>
 How thou wouldst gaze with wondering eyes<br>
 Delighted on the lovely prize!<br>
 And when our woodland life is o'er,<br>
 And we enjoy our realm once more,<br>
 The wondrous animal will grace<br>
 The chambers of my dwelling-place,<br>
 And a dear treasure will it be<br>
 To Bharat and the queens and me,<br>
 And all with rapture and amaze<br>
 Upon its heavenly form will gaze.<br>
 But if the beauteous deer, pursued,<br>
 Thine arts to take it still elude,<br>
 Strike it, O chieftain, and the akin<br>
 Will be a treasure, laid within.<br>
 O, how I long my time to pass<br>
 Sitting upon the tender grass,<br>
 With that soft fell beneath me spread<br>
 Bright with its hair of golden thread!<br>
 This strong desire, this eager will,<br>
 Befits a gentle lady ill:<br>
 But when I first beheld, its look<br>
 My breast with fascination took.<br>
 See, golden hair its flank adorns,<br>
 And sapphires tip its branching horns.<br>
 Resplendent as the lunar way,<br>
 Or the first blush of opening day,<br>
 With graceful form and radiant hue<br>
 It charmed thy heart, O chieftain, too.'<br>
     He heard her speech with willing ear,<br>
 He looked again upon the deer.<br>
 Its lovely shape his breast beguiled<br>
 Moved by the prayer of Janak's child,<br>
 And yielding for her pleasure's sake,<br>
 To Lakshman Ráma turned and spake:<br>
     'Mark, Lakshman, mark how Sítá's breast<br>
 With eager longing is possessed.<br>
 To-day this deer of wondrous breed<br>
 Must for his passing beauty bleed,<br>
 Brighter than e'er in Nandan strayed,<br>
 Or Chaitraratha's heavenly shade.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 How should the groves of earth possess<br>
 Such all-surpassing loveliness!<br>
 The hair lies smooth and bright and fine,<br>
 Or waves upon each curving line,<br>
 And drops of living gold bedeck<br>
 The beauty of his side and neck.<br>
 O look, his crimson tongue between<br>
 His teeth like flaming fire is seen,<br>
 Flashing, whene'er his lips he parts,<br>
 As from a cloud the lightning darts.<br>
 O see his sunlike forehead shine<br>
 With emerald tints and almandine,<br>
 While pearly light and roseate glow<br>
 Of shells adorn his neck below.<br>
 No eye on such a deer can rest<br>
 But soft enchantment takes the breast:<br>
 No man so fair a thing behold<br>
 Ablaze with light of radiant gold.<br>
 Celestial, bright with jewels' sheen,<br>
 Nor marvel when his eyes have seen,<br>
 A king equipped with bow and shaft<br>
 Delights in gentle forest craft,<br>
 And as in boundless woods he strays<br>
 The quarry for the venison slays.<br>
 There as he wanders with his train<br>
 A store of wealth he oft may gain.<br>
 He claims by right the precious ore.<br>
 He claims the jewels' sparkling store.<br>
 Such gains are dearer in his eyes<br>
 Than wealth that in his chamber lies.<br>
 The dearest things his spirit knows,<br>
 Dear as the bliss which Sukra chose.<br>
 But oft the rich expected gain<br>
 Which heedless men pursue in vain.<br>
 The sage, who prudent counsels know,<br>
 Explain and in a moment show.<br>
 This best of deer, this gem of all,<br>
 To yield his precious spoils must fall,<br>
 And tender Sítá by my side<br>
 Shall sit upon the golden hide.<br>
 Ne'er could I find so rich a coat<br>
 On spotted deer or sheep or goat.<br>
 No buck or antelope has such,<br>
 So bright to view, so soft to touch.<br>
 This radiant deer and one on high<br>
 That moves in glory through the sky,<br>
 Alike in heavenly beauty are,<br>
 One on the earth and one a star.<br>
 But, brother, if thy fears be true,<br>
 And this bright creature that we view<br>
 Be fierce Márícha in disguise,<br>
 Then by this hand he surely dies.<br>
 For that dire fiend who spurns control<br>
 With bloody hand and cruel soul,<br>
 Has roamed this forest and dismayed<br>
 The holiest saints who haunt the shade.<br>
 Great archers, sprung of royal race.<br>
 Pursuing in the wood the chase,<br>
 Have fallen by his wicked art,<br>
 And now my shaft shall strike his heart.<br>
 Vatápi, by his magic power<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_280"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 280</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Made heedless saints his flesh devour,<br>
 Then, from within their frames he rent<br>
 Forth bursting from imprisonment,<br>
 But once his art in senseless pride<br>
 Upon the mightiest saint he tried,<br>
 Agastya's self, and caused him taste<br>
 The baited meal before him placed.<br>
 Vátápi, when the rite* was o'er,<br>
 Would take the giant form he wore,<br>
 But Saint Agastya knew his wile<br>
 And checked the giant with smile<br>
 'Vatápi, thou with cruel spite<br>
 Hast conquered many an achorite<br>
 The noblest of the Brahman ask*--<br>
 And now thy ruin comes at last'<br>
 Now if my power he thus defies,<br>
 This giant, like Vatápi dies,<br>
 Daring to scorn a man like me,<br>
 A self subduing devotee.<br>
 Yea, as Agastya slew the foe,<br>
 My hand shall lay Mancha low<br>
 Clad in thine arms thy bow in hand,<br>
 To guard the Maithil lady stand,<br>
 With watchful eye and thoughtful breast<br>
 Keeping each word of my behest<br>
 I go, and hunting through the brake<br>
 This wondrous deer will bring or take.<br>
 Yea surely I will bring the spoil<br>
 Returning from my hunter's toil<br>
 See, Lakshman how my contort's eyes<br>
 Are longing for the lovely prize<br>
 This day it falls, that I may win<br>
 The treasure of so fair a skin.<br>
 Do thou and Sítá watch with care<br>
 Lest danger seize you unaware.<br>
 Swift from my bow one shaft will fly;<br>
 The stricken deer will fall and die<br>
 Then quickly will I stop the game<br>
 And bring the trophy to my dame.<br>
     Jatavus, guardian good and wise,<br>
         Our old and faithful friend,<br>
     The best and strongest bird that flies,<br>
         His willing aid will lend<br>
     The Maithil lady well protect,<br>
         For every chance provide,<br>
     And in thy tender care suspect<br>
         A foe on every side.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_495"></a><a href="ry241.htm#fr_495">279:1</a>  A race of beings of human shape but
 with the heads of horses, like centaurs
 reversed.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry242.htm">Next: Canto XLIV: Artcha's Death</a></center>
 </body>