<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry247.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry249.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO L.: JATÁYUS.</h3>
 <p>
 The vulture from his slumber woke<br>
 And heard the words which Sítá spoke.<br>
 He raised his eye and looked on her,<br>
 Looked on her giant ravisher.<br>
 That noblest bird with pointed beak,<br>
 Majestic as a mountain peak,<br>
 High on the tree addressed the king<br>
 Of giants, wisely counselling:<br>
 'O Ten-necked lord, I firmly hold<br>
 To faith and laws ordained of old,<br>
 And thou, my brother, shouldst refrain<br>
 From guilty deeds that shame and stain.<br>
 The vulture king supreme in air,<br>
 Jatayus is the name I bear.<br>
 Thy captive, known by Sítá's name,<br>
 Is the dear consort and the dame<br>
 Of Ráma Das'aratha's heir,<br>
 Who makes the good of all his care.<br>
 Lord of the world in might he vies<br>
 With the great Gods of seas and skies.<br>
 The law he boasts to keep allows<br>
 No king to touch another's spouse,<br>
 And, more than all, a prince's dame<br>
 High honour and respect may claim.<br>
 Back to the earth thy way incline,<br>
 Nor think of one who is not thine.<br>
 Heroic souls should hold it shame<br>
 To stoop to deeds which others blame,<br>
 And all respect by them is shown<br>
 To dames of others as their own.<br>
 Not every case of bliss and gain<br>
 The Scripture's holy texts explain,<br>
 And subjects, when that light is dim,<br>
 Look to their prince and follow him.<br>
 The king is bliss and profit, he<br>
 Is store of treasures fair to see,<br>
 And all the people's fortunes spring,<br>
 Their joy and misery, from the king.<br>
 If, lord of giant race, thy mind<br>
 Be fickle, false, to sin inclined,<br>
 How wilt thou kingly place retain?<br>
 High thrones in heaven no sinners gain.<br>
 The soul which gentle passions sway<br>
 Ne'er throws its nobler part away,<br>
 Nor ill the mansion of the base<br>
 Long be the good man's dwelling-place.<br>
 Prince Ráma, chief of high renown,<br>
 Has wronged thee not in field or town.<br>
 Ne'er has he sinned against thee: how<br>
 Canst thou resolve to harm him now?<br>
 If moved by S'úrpankhá's prayer<br>
 The giant Khara sought him there,<br>
 And fighting fell with baffled aim,<br>
 His and not Ráma's is the blame.<br>
 Say, mighty lord of giants, say<br>
 What fault on Ráma canst thou lay?<br>
 What has the world's great master done<br>
 That thou should steal his precious one?<br>
 Quick, quick the Maithil dame release;<br>
 Let Ráma's consort go in peace,<br>
 Lest scorched by his terrific eye<br>
 Beneath his wrath thou fall and die<br>
 Like Vritra when Lord Indra threw<br>
 The lightning flame that smote and slew.<br>
 Ah fool, with blinded eyes to take<br>
 Home to thy heart a venomed snake!<br>
 Ah foolish eyes, too blind to see<br>
 That Death's dire coils entangle thee!<br>
 The prudent man his strength will spare,<br>
 Nor lift a load too great to bear.<br>
 Content is he with wholsome food<br>
 Which gives him life and strength renewed<br>
 But who would dare the guilty deed<br>
 That brings no fame or glorious meed,<br>
 Where merit there is none to win<br>
 And vengeance soon o'ertakes the sin?<br>
 My course of life, Pulastya's son,<br>
 For sixty thousand years has run.<br>
 Lord of my kind I still maintain<br>
 Mine old hereditary reign.<br>
 I, worn by years, am older far<br>
 Than thou, young lord of bow and car,<br>
 In coat of glittering mail encased<br>
 And armed with arrows at thy waist,<br>
 But not unchallenged shalt thou go,<br>
 Or steal the dame without a blow.<br>
 Thou canst not, King, before mine eyes<br>
 Hear off unchecked thy lovely prize,<br>
 Safe as the truth of Scripture bent<br>
 By no close logic's argument.<br>
 Stay if thy courage let thee, stay<br>
 And meet me in the battle fray,<br>
 And thou shalt stain the earth with gore<br>
 Falling as Khara fell before.<br>
 Soon Ráma, clothed in bark shall smite.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_289"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 289</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thee, his proud foe, in deadly fight,--<br>
 Ráma, from whom have oft times fled<br>
 The Daitya hosts discomfited.<br>
 No power have I to kill or slay:<br>
 The princely youths are far away,<br>
 But soon shalt thou with fearful eye<br>
 Struck down beneath their arrows lie,<br>
 But while I yet have life and sense,<br>
 Thou shalt not, tyrant, carry hence<br>
 Fair Sítá, Ramá's honoured queen,<br>
 With lotus eyes and lovely mien.<br>
 Whate'er the pain, whate'er the cost,<br>
 Though in the struggle life be lost,<br>
 The will of Raghu's noblest son<br>
 And Das'aratha must be done.<br>
 Stay for a while, O Rávan, stay,<br>
 One hour thy flying car delay,<br>
 And from that glorious chariot thou<br>
 Shalt fall like fruit from shaken bough,<br>
 For I to thee, while yet I live,<br>
 The welcome of a foe will give.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry249.htm">Next: Canto LI.: The Combat.</a></center>
 </body>