<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry245.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry247.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVIII: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 With knitted brow and furious eye<br>
 The stranger made his fierce reply;<br>
 'In me O fairest dame, behold<br>
 The brother of the King of Gold.<br>
 The Lord of Ten Necks my title, named<br>
 Rávan, for might and valour famed.<br>
 Gods and Gandharva hosts I scare;<br>
 Snakes, spirits, birds that roam the air<br>
 Fly from my coming, wild with fear,<br>
 Trembling like men when Death is near<br>
 Vais'ravan once, my brother, wrought<br>
 To ire, encountered me aud fought,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_286"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 286</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 But yielding to superior might<br>
 Fled from his home in sore affright.<br>
 Lord of the man-drawn chariot, still<br>
 He dwells on famed Kailása's hill.<br>
 I made the vanquished king resign<br>
 The glorious car which now is mine,--<br>
 Pushpak, the far-renowned, that flies<br>
 Will-guided through the buxom skies.<br>
 Celestial hosts by Indra led<br>
 Flee from my face disquieted,<br>
 And where my dreaded feet appear<br>
 The wind is hushed or breathless is fear.<br>
 Where'er I stand, where'er I go<br>
 The troubled waters cease to flow,<br>
 Each spell-bound wave is mute and still<br>
 And the fierce sun himself is chill.<br>
 Beyond the sea my Lanká stands<br>
 Filled with fierce forms and giant bands,<br>
 A glorious city fair to see<br>
 As Indra's Amarávatí.<br>
 A towering height of solid wall,<br>
 Flashing afar, surrounds it all,<br>
 Its golden courts enchant the sight,<br>
 And gates aglow with lazulite.<br>
 Steeds, elephants, and cars are there,<br>
 And drums' loud music fills the air,<br>
 Fair trees in lovely gardens grow<br>
 Whose boughs with varied fruitage glow.<br>
 Thou, beauteous Queen, with me shalt dwell<br>
 In halls that suit a princess well,<br>
 Thy former fellows shall forget<br>
 Nor think of women with regret,<br>
 No earthly joy thy soul shall miss,<br>
 And take its fill of heavenly bliss.<br>
 Of mortal Ráma think no more,<br>
 Whose terms of days will soon be o'er.<br>
 King Das'aratha looked in scorn<br>
 On Ráma though the eldest born,<br>
 Sent to the woods the weakling fool,<br>
 And set his darling son to rule<br>
 What, O thou large-eyed dame, hast thou<br>
 To do with fallen Ráma now,<br>
 From home and kingdom forced to fly,<br>
 A wretched hermit soon to die<br>
 Accept thy lover, nor refuse<br>
 The giant king who fondly woos.<br>
 O listen, nor reject in scorn<br>
 A heart by Káma's arrows torn.<br>
 If thou refuse to hear my prayer,<br>
 Of grief and coming woe beware;<br>
 For the sad fate will fall on thee<br>
 Which came on hapless Urvas'í,<br>
 When with her foot she chanced to touch<br>
 Purúravas, and sorrowed much.  <a name="fr_503"></a><a href="#fn_503"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 My little finger raised in fight<br>
 Were more than match for Ráma's might<br>
 O fairest, blithe and happy be<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 With him whom fortune sends to thee.'<br>
     Such were the words the giant said,<br>
 And Sítá's angry eyes were red.<br>
 She answered in that lonely place<br>
 The monarch of the giant race:<br>
     'Art thou the brother of the Lord<br>
 Of Gold by all the world adored,<br>
 And sprung of that illustrious seed<br>
 Wouldst now attempt this evil deed?<br>
 I tell thee, impious Monarch, all<br>
 The giants by thy sin will fall,<br>
 Whose reckless lord and king thou art,<br>
 With foolish mind and lawless heart.<br>
 Yea, one may hope to steal the wife<br>
 Of Indra and escape with life.<br>
 But he who Ráma's dame would tear<br>
 From his loved side must needs despair,<br>
 Yea, one may steal fair S'achí, dame<br>
 Of Him who shoots the thunder flame,<br>
 May live successful in his aim<br>
     And length of day may see;<br>
 But hope, O giant King, in vain,<br>
 Though cups of Amrit thou may drain,<br>
 To shun the penalty and pain<br>
     Of wronging one like me.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_503"></a><a href="ry246.htm#fr_503">286:1</a>  The story will be found in GARRETT'S
 <i>Classical Dictionary</i>, See ADDITIONAL
 NOTES</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry247.htm">Next: Canto XLIX.: The Rape of Sitá.</a></center>
 </body>