<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry244.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry246.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVII: RÁVAN'S WOOING.</h3>
 <p>
 As, clad in mendicant's disguise,<br>
 He questioned thus his destined prize,<br>
 She to the seeming saintly man<br>
 The story of her life began.<br>
 'My guest is he,' she thought, 'and I,<br>
 To 'scape his curse, must needs reply:'<br>
 'Child of a noble sire I spring<br>
 From Janak, fair Videha's king.<br>
 May every good be thine! my name<br>
 Is Sítá, Ráma's cherished dame.<br>
 Twelve winters with my lord I spent<br>
 Most happily with sweet content<br>
 In the rich home of Raghu's line,<br>
 And every earthly joy was mine.<br>
 Twelve pleasant years flew by, and then<br>
 His peers advised the king of men,<br>
 Ráma, my lord, to consecrate<br>
 Joint ruler of his ancient state.<br>
 But when the rites were scarce begun,<br>
 To consecrate Ikshváku's son,<br>
 The queen Kaikeyí, honoured dame,<br>
 Sought of her lord an ancient claim.<br>
 Her plea of former service pressed,<br>
 And made him grant her new request,<br>
 To banish Ráma to the wild<br>
 And consecrate instead her child.<br>
 This double prayer on him, the best<br>
 And truest king, she strongly pressed<br>
 'Mine eyes in sleep I will not close,<br>
 Nor eat, nor drink, nor take repose.<br>
 This very day my death shall bring<br>
 If Ráma be anointed king.'<br>
 As thus she spake in envious ire,<br>
 The aged king, my husband's sire,<br>
 Besought with fitting words, but she<br>
 Was cold and deaf to every plea.<br>
 As yet my days are few; eighteen<br>
 The years of life that I have seen;<br>
 And Ráma, best of all alive,<br>
 Has passed of years a score and five-<br>
 Ráma the great and gentle, through<br>
 All region famed as pure and true,<br>
 Large-eyed and mighty-armed and tall.<br>
 With tender heart that cares for all.<br>
 But Das'aratha, led astray<br>
 By woman's wile and passion's sway,<br>
 By his strong love of her impelled,<br>
 The consecrating rites withheld.<br>
 When, hopeful of the promised grace,<br>
 My Ráma sought his father's face,<br>
 The queen Kaikeyí, ill at ease,<br>
 Spoke to my lord brief words like these:<br>
 'Hear, son of Raghu, hear from me<br>
 The words thy father says to thee:<br>
 'I yield this day to Bharat's hand,<br>
 Free from all foes, this ancient land.<br>
 Fly from this home no longer thine,<br>
 And dwell in woods five years and nine.<br>
 Live in the forest and maintain<br>
 Mine honour pure from falsehood's stain.'<br>
 Then Ráma spoke, untouched by dread;<br>
 'Yea, it shall be as thou hast said '.<br>
 And answered, faithful to his vows,<br>
 Obeying Das'aratha's spouse:<br>
 'The offered realm I would not take,<br>
 But still keep true the words he spake.'<br>
 Thus, gentle Bráhman, Ráma still<br>
 Clung to his vow with firmest will.<br>
 And valiant Lakshman, dear to fame,<br>
 His brother by a younger dame,<br>
 Bold victor in the deadly fray,<br>
 Would follow Ráma on his way.<br>
 On sternest vows his heart was set,<br>
 And he, a youthful anchoret,<br>
 Bound up in twisted coil his hair<br>
 And took the garb which hermits wear;<br>
 Then with his bow to guard us, he<br>
 Went forth with Ráma and with me.<br>
 By Queen Kaikeyí's art bereft<br>
 The kingdom and our home we left,<br>
 And bound by stern religious vows<br>
 We sought this shade of forest boughs.<br>
 Now, best of Bráhmans, here we tread<br>
 These pathless regions dark and dread.<br>
 But come, refresh thy soul, and rest<br>
 Here for a while an honoured guest.<br>
 For he, my lord, will soon be here<br>
 With fresh supply of woodland cheer,<br>
 Large store of venison of the buck,<br>
 Or some great boar his hand has struck.<br>
 Meanwhile, O stranger, grant my prayer:<br>
 Thy name, thy race, thy birth declare,<br>
 And why with no companion thou<br>
 Roamest in Dandak forest now.'<br>
 Thus questioned Sítá, Ráma's dame.<br>
 Then fierce the stranger's answer came:<br>
 'Lord of the giant legions, he<br>
 From whom celestial armies flee,--<br>
 The dread of hell and earth and sky,<br>
 Rávan the Rákshas king am I.<br>
 Now when thy gold-like form I view<br>
 Arrayed in silks of amber hue,<br>
 My love, O thou of perfect mould,<br>
 For all my dames is dead and cold.<br>
 A thousand fairest women, torn<br>
 From many a land my home adorn.<br>
 But come, loveliest lady, be<br>
 The queen of every dame and me.<br>
 My city Lanká, glorious town,<br>
 Looks from a mountain's forehead down<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_285"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 285</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Where ocean with his flash and foam<br>
 Beats madly on mine island home.<br>
 With me, O Sítá, shalt thou rove<br>
 Delighted through each shady grove,<br>
 Nor shall thy happy breast retain<br>
 Fond memory of this life of pain.<br>
 In gay attire, a glittering band*,<br>
 Five thousand maids shall round thee stand,<br>
 And serve thee at thy beck and sign,<br>
 If thou, fair Sítá, wilt be mine.'<br>
     Then forth her noble passion broke<br>
 As thus in turn the lady spoke:<br>
 'Me, me the wife of Ráma, him<br>
 The lion lord with lion's limb,<br>
 Strong as the sea, firm as the rock,<br>
 Like Indra in the battle shook.<br>
 Tue lord of each auspicious sign,<br>
 The glory of his princely line,<br>
 Like some fair Bodh tree strong and tall,<br>
 The noblest and the best of all,<br>
 Ráma, the heir of happy fate<br>
 Who keeps his word inviolate,<br>
 Lord of the lion gait, possessed<br>
 Of mighty arm and ample chest,<br>
 Rama the lion-warrior, him<br>
 Whose moon bright face no fear can dim,<br>
 Ráma, his bridled passions' lord,<br>
 The darling whom his sire adored,--<br>
 Me, me the true and loving dame<br>
 Of Ráma, prince of deathless fame--<br>
 Me wouldst, thou vainly woo and press?<br>
 A jackal woo a lioness!<br>
 Steal from the sun his glory! such<br>
 Thy hope Lord Ráma's wife to touch.<br>
 Ha! Thou hast seen the trees of gold,<br>
 The sign which dying eyes behold,<br>
 Thus seeking, weary of thy life,<br>
 To win the love of Ráma's wife.<br>
 Fool! wilt thou dare to rend away<br>
 The famished lion's bleeding prey,<br>
 Or from the threatening jaws to take<br>
 The fang of some envenomed snake?<br>
 What, wouldst thou shake with puny hand<br>
 Mount Mandar, <a name="fr_502"></a><a href="#fn_502"><font size="1">1</font></a> towering o'er the laud,<br>
 Put poison to thy lips and think<br>
 The deadly cup a harmless drink?<br>
 With pointed needle touch thine eye,<br>
 A razor to thy tongue apply,<br>
 Who wouldst pollute with impious touch<br>
 The wife whom Ráma loves so much?<br>
 Be round thy neck a millstone tied,<br>
 And swim the sea from side to side;<br>
 Or raising both thy hands on high<br>
 Pluck sun and moon from yonder sky;<br>
 Or let the kindled flame be pressed,<br>
 Wrapt in thy garment, to thy breast;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 More wild the thought that seeks to win<br>
 Ráma's dear wife who knows not sin.<br>
 The fool who thinks with idle aim<br>
 To gain the love of Rama's dame,<br>
 With dark and desperate footing makes<br>
 His way o'er points of iron stakes.<br>
 As Ocean to a bubbling spring,<br>
 The lion to a fox, the king<br>
 Of all the birds that ply the wing<br>
     To an ignoble crow<br>
 As gold to lead of little price,<br>
 As to the drainings of the rice<br>
 The drink they quaff in Paradise,<br>
     The Amrit's heavenly flow,<br>
 As sandal dust with perfume sweet<br>
 Is to the mire that soils our feet,<br>
     A tiger to a cat,<br>
 As the white swan is to the owl,<br>
 The peacock to the waterfowl,<br>
     An eagle to a bat,<br>
 Such is my lord compared with thee;<br>
 And when with bow and arrows he,<br>
 Mighty as Indra's self shall see<br>
     His foeman, armed to slay.<br>
 Thou, death-doomed like the fly that sips<br>
 The oil that on the altar drips,<br>
 Shalt cast the morsel from thy lips<br>
     And lose thy half-won prey.'<br>
 Thus in high scorn the lady flung<br>
 The biting arrows of her tongue<br>
 In bitter words that pierced and stung<br>
     The rover of the night.<br>
 She ceased. Her gentle cheek grew pale,<br>
 Her loosened limbs began to fail,<br>
 And like a plantain in the gale<br>
     She trembled with affright.<br>
 He terrible as Death stood nigh,<br>
 And watched with fierce exulting eye<br>
     The fear that shook her frame.<br>
 To terrify the lady more,<br>
 He counted all his triumphs o'er,<br>
 Proclaimed the titles that he bore,<br>
     His pedigree and name.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_502"></a><a href="ry245.htm#fr_502">285:1</a>  The mountain which was used by the
 Gods as a churning stick at the Churning
 of the Ocean.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry246.htm">Next: Canto XLVIII: Rávan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>