<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry248.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry250.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LI.: THE COMBAT.</h3>
 <p>
 Rávan's red eyes in fury rolled:<br>
 Bright with his armlets' flashing gold,<br>
 In high disdain, by passion stirred<br>
 He rushed against the sovereign bird.<br>
 With clash and din and furious blows<br>
 Of murderous battle met the foes:<br>
 Thus urged by winds two clouds on high<br>
 Meet warring in the stormy sky.<br>
 Then fierce the dreadful combat raged<br>
 As fiend and bird in war engaged,<br>
 As if two winged mountains sped<br>
 To dire encounter overhead.<br>
 Keen pointed arrows think and fast,<br>
 In never ceasing fury cast,<br>
 Rained hurtling on the vulture king<br>
 And smote him on the breast and wing.<br>
 But still that noblest bird sustained<br>
 The cloud of shafts which Rávan rained,<br>
 And with strong beak and talons' bent<br>
 The body of his foeman rent.<br>
 Then wild with rage the ten-necked king<br>
 Laid ten swift arrows on his string,-<br>
 Dread as the staff of Death were they,<br>
 So terrible and keen to slay,<br>
 Straight to his ear the string he drew,<br>
 Straight to the mark the arrows flew,<br>
 And pierced by every iron head<br>
 The vulture's mangled body bled.<br>
 One glance upon the car he bent<br>
 Where Sítá wept with shrill lament,<br>
 Then heedless of his wounds and pain<br>
 Rushed at the giant king again.<br>
 Then the brave vulture with the stroke<br>
 Of his resistless talons broke<br>
 The giant's shafts and bow whereon<br>
 The fairest pearls and jewels shone.<br>
 The monster paused by rage unmanned:<br>
 A second bow soon armed his hand.<br>
 Whence pointed arrows swift and true<br>
 In hundreds, yea in thousands, flew.<br>
 The monarch of the vultures, plied<br>
 With ceaseless darts on every side.<br>
 Showed like bird that turns to rest<br>
 Close covered by the branch-built nest.<br>
 He shook his pinions to repel<br>
 The storm of arrows as it fell;<br>
 Then with his talons snapped in two<br>
 The mighty bow which Rávan drew,<br>
 Next with terrific wing he smote<br>
 So fiercely on the giant's coat,<br>
 The harness, glittering with the glow<br>
 Of fire, gave way beneath the blow.<br>
 With storm of murderous strokes he beat<br>
 The harnessed asses strong and fleet,-<br>
 Each with a goblin's monstrous face<br>
 And plates of gold his neck to grace.<br>
 Then on the car he turned his ire,-<br>
 The will-moved car that shone like fire,<br>
 And broke the glorious chariot, broke<br>
 The golden steps and pole and yoke.<br>
 The chouris and the silken shade<br>
 Like the full moon to view displayed,<br>
 Together with the guards who held<br>
 Those emblems, to the ground he felled.<br>
 The royal vulture hovered o'er<br>
 The driver's head, and pierced and tore<br>
 With his strong beak and dreaded claws<br>
 His mangled brow and cheek and jaws.<br>
 With broken car and sundered bow,<br>
 His charioteer and team laid low,<br>
 One arm about the lady wound,<br>
 Sprang the fierce giant to the ground.<br>
 Spectators of the combat, all<br>
 The spirits viewed the monster's fall:<br>
 Lauding the vulture every one<br>
 Cried with glad voice, Well done! well done!<br>
 But weak with length of days, at last<br>
 The vulture's strength was failing fast.<br>
 The fiend again assayed to bear<br>
 The lady through the fields of air.<br>
 But when the vulture saw him rise<br>
 Triumphant with his trembling prize,<br>
 Bearing the sword that still was left<br>
 When other arms were lost or cleft,<br>
 Once more, impatient of repose,<br>
 Swift from the earth her champion rose,<br>
 Hung in the way the fiend would take,<br>
 And thus addressing Rávan spake:<br>
 'Thou, King of giants, rash and blind,<br>
 Wilt be the ruin of thy kind,<br>
 Stealing the wife of Ráma, him<br>
 With lightning sears on chest and limb.<br>
 A mighty host obeys his will<br>
 And troops of slaves his palace fill;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_290"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 290</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 His lords of state are wise and true,<br>
 Kinsmen has he and retinue.<br>
 As thirsty travellers drain the cup,<br>
 Thou drinkest deadly poison up.<br>
 The rash and careless fool who heeds<br>
 No coming fruit of guilty deeds,<br>
 A few short years of life shall see,<br>
 And perish doomed to death like thee.<br>
 Say whither wilt thou fly to loose<br>
 Thy neck from Death's entangling noose.<br>
 Caught like the fish that finds too late<br>
 The hook beneath the treacherous bait?<br>
 Never, O King--of this be sure--<br>
 Will Raghu's fiery sons endure,<br>
 Terrific in their vengeful rage,<br>
 This insult to their hermitage.<br>
 Thy guilty hands this day have done<br>
 A deed which all reprove and shun,<br>
 Unworthly of a noble chief,<br>
 The pillage loved by coward thief.<br>
 Stay, if thy heart allow thee, stay<br>
 And meet me in the deadly fray.<br>
 Soon shall thou stain the earth with gore,<br>
 And fall as Khara fell before.<br>
 The fruits of former deeds o'erpower<br>
 The sinner in his dying hour:<br>
 And such a fate on thee, O King,<br>
 Thy tyranny and madness bring.<br>
 Not e'en the Self-existent Lord,<br>
 Who reigns by all the worlds adored,<br>
 Would dare attempt a guilty deed<br>
 Which the dire fruits of crime succeed.'<br>
     Thus brave Jatayus, best of birds,<br>
 Addressed the fiend with moving words,<br>
 Then ready for the swift attack<br>
 Swooped down upon the giant's back.<br>
 Down to the bone the talons went<br>
 With many a wound the flesh was rent:<br>
 Such blows infuriate drivers deal<br>
 Their elephants with pointed steel.<br>
 Fixed in his back the strong beak lay,<br>
 The talons stripped the flesh away.<br>
 He fought with claws and beak and wing.<br>
 And tore the long hair of the king.<br>
 Still as the royal vulture beat<br>
 The giant with his wings and feet,<br>
 Swelled the fiend's lips, his body shook<br>
 With furious rage too great to brook.<br>
 About the Maithil dame he cast<br>
 One huge left aim and held her fast.<br>
 In furious rage to frenzy fanned<br>
 He struck the vulture with his hand.<br>
 Jatáyus mocked the vain assay,<br>
 And rent his ten left arms away.<br>
 Down dropped the severed limbs: anew<br>
 Ten others from his body grew:<br>
 Thus bright with pearly radiance glide<br>
 Dread serpents from the hillock side,<br>
 Again in wrath the giant pressed<br>
 The lady closer to his breast,<br>
 And foot and fist sent blow on blow<br>
 In ceaseless fury at the foe.<br>
 So fierce and dire the battle, waged<br>
 Between those mighty champions, raged;<br>
 Here was the lord of giants, there<br>
 The noblest of the birds of air.<br>
 Thus, as his love of Ráma taught,<br>
 The faithful vulture strove and fought.<br>
 But Rávan seized his sword and smote<br>
 His wings and side and feet and throat.<br>
 At mangled side and wing he bled;<br>
 He fell, and life was almost fled.<br>
 The lady saw her champion lie,<br>
 His plumes distained with gory dye,<br>
 And hastened to the vulture's side<br>
 Grieving as though a kinsman died.<br>
 The lord of Lanká's island viewed<br>
         The vulture as he lay:<br>
     Whose back like some dark cloud was hued,<br>
         His breast a paly grey,<br>
     Like ashes, when by none renewed.<br>
         The flame has died away.<br>
     The lady saw with mournful eye,<br>
         Her champion press the plain,--<br>
     The royal bird, her true ally<br>
         Whom Rávan's might had slain.<br>
     Her soft arms locked in strict embrace<br>
         Around his neck she kept.<br>
     And lovely with her moon-bright face<br>
         Bent o'er her friend and wept,<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry250.htm">Next: Canto LII.: Rávan's Flight.</a></center>
 </body>