<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry249.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry251.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LII.: RÁVAN'S FLIGHT.</h3>
 <p>
 Fair as the lord of silvery rays<br>
 Whom every star in heaven obeys,<br>
 The Maithil dame her plaint renewed<br>
 O'er him by Rávan's might subdued:<br>
 'Dreams, omens, auguries foreshow<br>
 Our coming lot of weal and woe:<br>
 But thou, my Ráma, couldst not see<br>
 The grievous blow which falls on thee.<br>
 The birds and deer desert the brakes<br>
 And show the path my captor takes,<br>
 And thus e'en now this royal bird<br>
 Flew to mine aid by pity stirred.<br>
 Slain for my sake in death he lies,<br>
 The broad-winged rover of the skies.<br>
 O Ráma, haste, thine aid I crave:<br>
 O Lakshman, why delay to save?<br>
 Brave sons of old Ikshváku, hear<br>
 And rescue in this hour of fear.'<br>
     Her flowery wreath was torn and rent,<br>
 Crushed was each sparkling ornament.<br>
 She with weak arms and trembling knees<br>
 Clung like a creeper to the trees,<br>
 And like some poor deserted thing<br>
 With wild shrieks made the forest ring.<br>
 But swift the giant reached her side,<br>
 <a name="page_291"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 291</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 As loud on Ráma's name she cried.<br>
 Fierce as grim Death one hand he laid<br>
 Upon her tresses' lovely braid.<br>
 That touch, thou impious King, shall be<br>
 The ruin of thy race and thee.<br>
 The universal world in awe<br>
 That outrage on the lady saw.<br>
 All nature shook convulsed with dread,<br>
 And darkness o'er the land was spread.<br>
 The Lord of Day grew dark and chill,<br>
 And every breath of air was still.<br>
 The Eternal Father of the sky<br>
 Beheld the crime with heavenly eye.<br>
 And spake with solemn voice, 'The deed,<br>
 The deed is done, of old decreed.'<br>
 Sad were the saints within the grove,<br>
 But triumph with their sorrow strove.<br>
 They wept to see the Maithil dame<br>
 Endure the outrage, scorn, and shame:<br>
 They joyed because his life should pay<br>
 The penalty incurred that day.<br>
 Then Rávan raised her up, and bare<br>
 His captive through the fields of air,<br>
 Calling with accents loud and shrill<br>
 On Ráma and on Lakshman still.<br>
 With sparkling gems on arm and breast,<br>
 In silk of paly amber dressed,<br>
 High in the air the Maithil dame<br>
 Gleamed like the lightning's flashing flame.<br>
 The giant, as the breezes blew<br>
 Upon her robes of amber hue,<br>
 And round him twined that gay attire,<br>
 Showed like a mountain girt with fire.<br>
 The lady, fairest of the fair,<br>
 Had wreathed a garland round her hair;<br>
 Its lotus petals bright and sweet<br>
 Rained down about the giant's feet.<br>
 Her vesture, bright as burning gold,<br>
 Gave to the wind each glittering fold,<br>
 Fair as a gilded cloud that gleams<br>
 Touched by the Day-God's tempered beams.<br>
 Yet struggling in the fiend's embrace,<br>
 The lady with her sweet pure face,<br>
 Far from her lord, no longer wore<br>
 The light of joy that shone before.<br>
 Like some sad lily by the side<br>
 Of waters which the sun has dried;<br>
 Like the pale moon uprising through<br>
 An autumn cloud of darkest hue,<br>
 So was her perfect face between<br>
 The arms of giant Rávan seen:<br>
 Fair with the charm of braided tress<br>
 And forehead's finished loveliness;<br>
 Fair with the ivory teeth that shed<br>
 White lustre through the lips' fine red,<br>
 Fair as the lotus when the bud<br>
 Is rising from the parent flood.<br>
 With faultless lip and nose and eye.<br>
 Dear as the moon that floods the sky<br>
 With gentle light, of perfect mould,<br>
 She seemed a thing of burnished gold,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Though on her cheek the traces lay<br>
 Of tears her hand had brushed away,<br>
 But as the moon-beams swiftly fade<br>
 Ere the great Day-God shines displayed,<br>
 So in that form of perfect grace<br>
 Still trembling in the fiend's embrace,<br>
 From her beloved Ráma reft,<br>
 No light of pride or joy was left.<br>
 The lady with her golden hue<br>
 O'er the swart fiend a lustre threw,<br>
 As when embroidered girths enfold<br>
 An elephant with gleams of gold.<br>
 Fair as the lily's bending stem<br>
 Her arms adorned with many a gem,<br>
 A lustre to the fiend she lent<br>
 Gleaming from every ornament,<br>
 As when the cloud-shot flashes light<br>
 The shadows of a mountain height.<br>
 Whene'er the breezes earthward bore<br>
 The tinkling of the zone she wore,<br>
 He seemed a cloud of darkness hue<br>
 Sending forth murmurs as it flew.<br>
 As on her way the dame was sped<br>
 From her sweet neck fair flowers were shed,<br>
 The swift wind caught the flowery rain<br>
 And poured it o'er the fiend again.<br>
 The wind-stirred blossoms, sweet to smell,<br>
 On the dark brows of Rávan fell,<br>
 Like lunar constellations set<br>
 On Meru for a coronet.<br>
 From her small foot an anklet fair<br>
 With jewels slipped, and through the air,<br>
 Like a bright circlet of the flame<br>
 Of thunder, to the valley came.<br>
 The Maithil lady, fair to see<br>
 As the young leaflet of a tree<br>
 Clad in the tender hues of spring,<br>
 Flashed glory on the giant king,<br>
 As when a gold-embroidered zone<br>
 Around an elephant is thrown.<br>
 While, bearing far the lady, through<br>
 The realms of sky the giant flew,<br>
 She like a gleaming meteor cast<br>
 A glory round her as she passed.<br>
 Then from each limb in swift descent<br>
 Dropped many a sparkling ornament:<br>
 On earth they rested dim and pale<br>
 Like fallen stars when virtues fail. <a name="fr_505"></a><a href="#fn_505"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Around her neck a garland lay<br>
 Bright as the Star-God's silvery ray:<br>
 It fell and flashed like Gangá sent<br>
 From heaven above the firmament. <a name="fr_506"></a><a href="#fn_506"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 The birds of every wing had flocked<br>
 To stately trees by breezes rocked:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_292"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 292</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 These bowed their wind-swept heads and<br>
 said:<br>
 'My lady sweet, be comforted.'<br>
 With faded blooms each brook within<br>
 Whose waters moved no gleamy fin,<br>
 Stole sadly through the forest dell<br>
 Mourning the dame it loved so well.<br>
 From every woodland region near<br>
 Came lions, tigers, birds, and deer,<br>
 And followed, each with furious look,<br>
 The way her flying shadow took.<br>
 For Sítá's loss each lofty hill<br>
 Whose tears were waterfall, and rill,<br>
 Lifting on high each arm-like steep,<br>
 Seemed in the general woe to weep.<br>
 When the great sun, the lord of day,<br>
 Saw Rávan tear the dame away,<br>
 His glorious light began to fail<br>
 And all his disk grew cold and pale.<br>
 'If Rávan from the forest hies**<br>
 With Ráma's Sítá as his prize,<br>
 Justice and truth have vanished hence,<br>
 Honour and right and innocence.'<br>
 Thus rose the cry of wild despair<br>
 From spirits as they gathered there.<br>
 In trembling troops in open lawns<br>
 Wept, wild with woe, the startled fawns,<br>
 And a strange terror changed the eyes<br>
 They lifted to the distant skies.<br>
 On silvan Gods who love the dell<br>
 A sudden fear and trembling fell,<br>
 As in the deepest woe they viewed<br>
 The lady by the fiend subdued.<br>
 Still in loud shrieks was heard afar<br>
 That voice whose sweetness naught could<br>
 mar,<br>
 While eager looks of fear and woe<br>
 She bent upon the earth below.<br>
 The lady of each winning wile<br>
 With pearly teeth and lovely smile,<br>
 Seized by the lord of Lanká's isle,<br>
     Looked down for friends in vain.<br>
 She saw no friend to aid her, none,<br>
 Not Ráma nor the younger son<br>
 Of Das'aratha, and undone<br>
     She swooned with fear and pain.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_505"></a><a href="ry250.htm#fr_505">291:1</a>  The spirits of the good dwell in heaven
 until their store of accumulated merit is
 exhausted. Then they redescend to earth
 in the form of falling stars.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_506"></a><a href="ry250.htm#fr_506">291:2</a>  See The Descent of Gangá, Book I
 Canto XLIV.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry251.htm">Next: Canto LIII.: Sitá's Threats.</a></center>
 </body>