<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry255.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry257.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVIII.: THE BROTHERS' MEETING.</h3>
 <p>
 When Ráma's deadly shaft had struck<br>
 The giant in the seeming buck.<br>
 The chieftain turned him from the place<br>
 His homeward way again to trace.<br>
 Then as he hastened onward, fain<br>
 To look upon his spouse again,<br>
 Behind him from a thicket nigh<br>
 Rang out a jackal's piercing cry.<br>
 Alarmed he heard the startling shriek<br>
 That raised his hair and dimmed his cheek,<br>
 And all his heart was filled with doubt<br>
 As the shrill jackal's cry rung out:<br>
 'Alas, some dire disaster seems<br>
 Portended by the jackal's screams.<br>
 O may the Maitil dame be screened<br>
 From outrage of each hungry fiend!<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_298"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 298</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Alas, if Lakshman chanced to hear<br>
 That bitter cry of woe and fear<br>
 What time Márícha, as he died,<br>
 With voice that mocked my accents cried,<br>
 Swift to my side the prince would flee<br>
 And quit the dame to succour me.<br>
 Too well I see the demon band<br>
 The slaughter of my love have planned.<br>
 Me far from home and Sítá's view<br>
 The seeming deer Márícha drew.<br>
 He led me far through brake and dell<br>
 Till wounded by my shaft he fell,<br>
 And as he sank rang out his cry,<br>
 'O save me, Lakshman, or I die.'<br>
 May it be well with both who stayed<br>
 In the great wood with none to aid,<br>
 For every fiend is now my foe<br>
 For Janasthán's great overthrow,<br>
 And many an omen seen to-day<br>
 Has filled my heart with sore dismay.'<br>
     Such were the thoughts and sad surmise<br>
 Of Ráma at the jackal's cries,<br>
 And all his heart within him burned<br>
 As to his cot his steps he turned.<br>
 He pondered on the deer that led<br>
 His feet to follow where it fled,<br>
 And sad with many a bitter thought<br>
 His home in Janasthán he sought.<br>
 His soul was dark with woe and fear<br>
 When flocks of birds and troops of deer<br>
 Move round him from the left, and raised<br>
 Discordant voices as they gazed.<br>
 The omens which the chieftain viewed<br>
 The terror of his soul renewed,<br>
 When lo, to meet him Lakshman sped<br>
 With brows whence all the light had fled.<br>
 Near and more near the princes came,<br>
 Each brother's heart and look the same;<br>
 Alike on each sad visage lay<br>
 The signs of misery and dismay,<br>
 Then Ráma by his terror moved<br>
 His brother for his fault reproved<br>
 In leaving Sítá far from aid<br>
 In the wild wood where giants strayed.<br>
 Lakshman's left hand be took, and then<br>
 In gentle tones the prince of men,<br>
 Though sharp and fierce their tenour ran,<br>
 Thus to his brother chief began:<br>
     'O Lakshman, thou art much to blame<br>
 Leaving alone the Maíthil dame,<br>
 And flying hither to my side:<br>
 O, may no ill my spouse betide!<br>
 But ah. I know my wife is dead,<br>
 And giants on her limbs have fed,<br>
 So strange, so terrible are all<br>
 The omens which my heart appal.<br>
 O Lakshman, may we yet return<br>
 The safety of my love to learn.<br>
 To find the child of Janak still<br>
 Alive and free from scathe and ill!<br>
 Each bird with notes of warning screams,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Though the hot sun still darts his beams.<br>
 The moan of deer, the jackal's yell<br>
 Of some o'erwhelming misery tell.<br>
 O mighty brother, still may she.<br>
 My princess, live from danger free!<br>
 That semblance of a golden deer<br>
         Allured me far away,<br>
     I followed nearer and more near,<br>
         And longed to take the prey.<br>
     I followed where the quarry fled:<br>
         My deadly arrow flew,<br>
     And as the dying creature bled,<br>
         The giant met my view.<br>
     Great tear and pain oppress my heart<br>
         That dreads the coming blow,<br>
     And through my left eye keenly dart<br>
         The throbs that herald woe.<br>
     Ah Lakshman, all these signs dismay,<br>
         My soul that sinks, with dread,<br>
     I know my love is torn away,<br>
         Or, haply, she is dead.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry257.htm">Next: Canto LIX.: Ráma's Return.</a></center>
 </body>