<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry253.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry255.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVI.: SÍTÁ'S DISDAIN.</h3>
 <p>
 His words the Maithil lady heard<br>
 Oppressed by woe but undeterred.<br>
 Fear of the fiend she cast aside,<br>
 And thus in noble scorn replied:<br>
 'His word of honour never stained<br>
 King Das'aratha nobly reigned,<br>
 The bridge of right, the friend of truth.<br>
 His eldest son, a noble youth,<br>
 Is Ráma, virtue's faithful friend,<br>
 Whose glories through the worlds extend.<br>
 Long arms and large full eyes has he,<br>
 Mv husband, yea a God to me.<br>
 With shoulders like the forest king's,<br>
 From old Ikshváku's line he springs.<br>
 He with his brother Lakshman's aid<br>
 Will smite thee with the vengeful blade.<br>
 Hadst thou but dared before his eyes<br>
 To lay thine hand upon the prize,<br>
 Thou stretched before his feet hadst lain<br>
 In Janasthán like Khara slain.<br>
 Thy boasted rovers of the night<br>
 With hideous shapes and giant might,--<br>
 Like serpents when the feathered king<br>
 Swoops down with his tremendous wing,--<br>
 Will find their useless venom fail<br>
 When Ráma's mighty arms assail.<br>
 The rapid arrows bright with gold.<br>
 Shot from the bow he loves to hold.<br>
 Will rend thy frame from flank to flank<br>
 As Gangá's waves erode the bank.<br>
 Though neither God nor fiend have power<br>
 To slay thee in the battle hour,<br>
 Yet from his hand shall come thy fate,<br>
 Struck down before his vengeful hate.<br>
 That mighty lord will strike and end<br>
 The days of life thou hast to spend.<br>
 Thy days are doomed, thy life is sped<br>
 Like victim's to the pillar led.<br>
 Yea, if the glance of Ráma bright<br>
 With fury on thy form should light,<br>
 Thou scorched this day wouldst fall and die<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_296"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 296</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Like Káma slain by Rudra's eye. <a name="fr_507"></a><a href="#fn_507"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 He who from heaven the moon could throw,<br>
 Or bid its bright rays cease to glow,--<br>
 He who could drain the mighty sea<br>
 Will set his darling Sítá free<br>
 Fled is thy life, thy glory, fled<br>
 Thy strength and power: each sense is dead.<br>
 Soon Lanká widowed by thy guilt<br>
 Will see the blood of giants spilt.<br>
 This wicked deed, O cruel King,<br>
 No triumph, no delight will bring.<br>
 Thou with outrageous might and scorn<br>
 A woman from her lord hast torn.<br>
 My glorious husband far away,<br>
 Making heroic strength his stay,<br>
 Dwells with his brother, void of fear,<br>
 In Dandak forest lone and drear.<br>
 No more in force of arms confide:<br>
 That haughty strength, that power and pride<br>
 My hero with his arrowy rain<br>
 From all thy bleeding limbs will drain.<br>
 When urged by fate's dire mandate, nigh<br>
 Comes the fixt hour for men to die.<br>
 Caught in Death's toils their eyes are blind,<br>
 And folly takes each wandering mind.<br>
 So for the outrage thou hast done<br>
 The fate is near thou canst not shun,--<br>
 The fate that on thyself and all<br>
 Thy giants and thy town shall fall.<br>
 I spurn thee: can the altar dight<br>
 With vessels for the sacred rite,<br>
 O'er which the priest his prayer has said,<br>
 Be sullied by an outcaste's tread?<br>
 So me, the consort dear and true<br>
 Of him who clings to virtue too,<br>
 Thy hated touch shall ne'er defile,<br>
 Base tyrant lord of Lanká's isle.<br>
 Can the white swan who floats in pride<br>
 Through lilies by her consort's side,<br>
 Look for one moment, as they pass,<br>
 On the poor diver in the grass?<br>
 This senseless body waits thy will.<br>
 To torture, chain, to wound or kill.<br>
 I will not, King of giants, strive<br>
 To keep this fleeting soul alive<br>
 But never shall they join the name<br>
 Of Sítá with reproach and shame.<br>
     Thus as her breast with fury burned<br>
 Her bitter speech the dame returned.<br>
 Such words of rage and scorn, the last<br>
 She uttered, at the fiend she cast<br>
 Her taunting speech the giant heard,<br>
 And every hair with anger stired,<br>
 Then thus with fury in his eye<br>
 He made in threats his  fierce reply<br>
 'Hear Maithil lady, hear my speech<br>
 * to my words and ponder each<br>
 * thy head twelve months shall fly<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And thou thy love wilt still deny,<br>
 My cooks shall mince thy flesh with steel<br>
 And serve it for my morning meal.'<br>
     Thus with terrific threats to her<br>
 Spake Rávan, cruel ravener.<br>
 Mad with the rage her answer woke<br>
 He called the fiendish train and spoke:<br>
 'Take her, ye Rákshas dames, who fright<br>
 With hideous form and mien the sight,<br>
 Who make the flesh of men your food,--<br>
 And let her pride be soon subdued.'<br>
 He spoke, and at his word the band<br>
 Of fiendish monsters raised each hand<br>
 In reverence to the giant king,<br>
 And pressed round Sítá in a ring.<br>
 Rávan once more with stern behest<br>
 To those she-fiends his speech addressed:<br>
 Shaking the earth beneath his tread,<br>
 He stamped his furious foot and said:<br>
 'To the As'oka garden bear<br>
 The dame, and guard her safely there<br>
 Until her stubborn pride be bent<br>
 By mingled threat and blandishment.<br>
 See that ye watch her well, and tame,<br>
 Like some she-elephant, the dame.'<br>
     They led her to that garden where<br>
 The sweetest flowers perfumed the air,<br>
 Where bright trees bore each rarest fruit,<br>
 And birds, enamoured, ne'er were mute.<br>
 Bowed down with terror and distress,<br>
 Watched by each cruel giantess,--<br>
 Like a poor solitary deer<br>
 When ravening tigresses are near,--<br>
 The hapless lady lay distraught<br>
 Like some wild thing but newly caught,<br>
 And found no solace, no relief<br>
 From agonizing fear and grief;<br>
 Not for one moment could forget<br>
 Each terrifying word and threat,<br>
 Or the fierce eyes upon her set<br>
     By those who watched around.<br>
 She thought of Ráma far away,<br>
 She mourned for Lakshman as she lay<br>
 In grief and terror and dismay<br>
     Half fainting on the ground.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_507"></a><a href="ry254.htm#fr_507">296:1</a>  See Book I Caato XXV</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry255.htm">Next: Canto LVII.: Sítá Comforted.</a></center>
 </body>