<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry256.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry258.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIX.: RÁMA'S RETURN.</h3>
 <p>
 When Ráma saw his brother stand<br>
 With none beside him, all unmanned,<br>
 Eager he questioned why he came<br>
 So far without the Maíthil dame:<br>
 'Where is my wife, my darling, she<br>
 Who to the wild wood followed me?<br>
 Where hast thou left my lady, where<br>
 The dame who chose my lot to share?<br>
 Where is my love who balms my woe<br>
 As through the forest wilds I go,<br>
 Unkinged and banished and disgraced,--<br>
 My darling of the dainty waist?<br>
 She nerves my spirit for the strife,<br>
 She, only she gives zest to life,<br>
 Dear as my breath is she who vies<br>
 In charms with daughters of the skies.<br>
 If Janak's child be mine no more,<br>
 In splendour fair as virgin ore,<br>
 The lordship of the skies and earth<br>
 To me were prize of little worth.<br>
 Ah, lives she yet, the Maíthil dame,<br>
 Dear as the soul within this frame?<br>
 O, let not all my toil be vain,<br>
 The banishment, the woe and pain!<br>
 O, let not dark Kaikeyí win<br>
 The guerdon of her teacherous sin,<br>
 If, Sítá lost, my days I end,<br>
 And thou without me homeward wend!<br>
 O, let not good Kaus'alyá shed<br>
 Her bitter tears to mourn me dead,<br>
 Nor her proud rival's hest obey,<br>
 Strong in her son and queenly sway!<br>
 Back to my cot will I repair<br>
 If Sítá live to greet me there,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_299"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 299</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 But if my wife have perished, I<br>
 Reft of ray love will surely die,<br>
 O Lakshman, if I seek my cot,<br>
 Look for my love and find her not<br>
 Sweet welcome with her smile to give,<br>
 I tell thee, I will cease to live.<br>
 O answer,--let thy words be plain,--<br>
 Lives Sita yet, or is she slain?'<br>
 Didst thou thy sacred trust betray<br>
 Till ravening giants seized the prey?<br>
 Ah me, so young, so soft and fair,<br>
 Lapped in all bliss, untried by care,<br>
 Rent from her own dear husband, how<br>
 Will she support her misery now?<br>
 That voice, O Lakshman smote thine ear,<br>
 And filled, I ween, thy heart with fear,<br>
 When on thy name for succour cried<br>
 The treacherous giant ere he died.<br>
 That voice too like mine own, I ween,<br>
 Was heard by the Videhan queen.<br>
 She bade thee seek my side to aid,<br>
 And quickly was the hest obeyed,<br>
 But ah, thy fault I needs must blame,<br>
 To leave alone the helpless dame,<br>
 And let the cruel giants sate<br>
 The fury of their murderous hate.<br>
 Those blood-devouring demons all<br>
 Grieve in their souls for Khara's fall,<br>
 And Sítá, none to guard her side.<br>
 Torn by their cruel hands has died.<br>
 I sink, O tamer of thy foes,<br>
 Deep in the sea of whelming woes.<br>
 What can I now? I must endure<br>
 The mighty grief that mocks at cure.'<br>
     Thus, all his thoughts on Síta bent,<br>
 To Janasthán the chieftain went,<br>
 Hastening on with eager stride,<br>
 And Lakshman hurried by his side.<br>
 With toil and thirst and hunger worn,<br>
 His breast with doubt and anguish torn,<br>
     He sought the well-known spot.<br>
 Again, again he turned to chide<br>
 With quivering lips which terror dried:<br>
     He looked, and found her not.<br>
 Within his leafy home he sped,<br>
 Each pleasant spot he visited<br>
     Where oft his darling strayed.<br>
 'Tis as I feared', he cried, and there,<br>
 Yielding to pangs too great to bear,<br>
     He sank by grief dismayed.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry258.htm">Next: Canto LX.: Lakshman Reproved.</a></center>
 </body>