<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry258.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry260.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXI.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 As Ráma sought his leafy cot<br>
 Through his left eye keen throbbings shot,<br>
 His wonted strength his frame forsook,<br>
 And all his body reeled aud shook.<br>
 Still on those dreadful signs he thought,<br>
 Sad omens with disaster fraught,<br>
 And from his troubled heart he cried,<br>
 'O, may no ill my spouse betide!'<br>
 He hastened to his dwelling-place,<br>
 Then sinking neath his misery's weight,<br>
 He looked and found it desolate.<br>
 Tossing his mighty arms on high<br>
 He sought her with an eager cry.<br>
 From spot to spot he wildly ran<br>
 Each corner of his home to scan.<br>
 He looked, but Sítá was not there;<br>
 His cot was disolate and bare,<br>
 Like streamlet in the winter frost,<br>
 The glory of her lilies lost.<br>
 With leafy tears the sad trees wept<br>
 As a wild wind their branches swept.<br>
 Mourned bird aud deer, and every flower<br>
 Drooped fainting round the lonely bower.<br>
 The silvan deities had fled<br>
 The spot where all the light was dead,<br>
 Where hermit coats of skin displayed,<br>
 And piles of sacred grass were laid.<br>
 He saw, and maddened by his pain<br>
 Cried in lament again, again:<br>
 'Where is she, dead or torn away.<br>
 Lost, or some hungry giant's prey?<br>
 Or did my darling chance to rove<br>
 For fruit and blossoms though the grove?<br>
 Or has she sought the pool or rill,<br>
 Her pitcher from the wave to fill?'<br>
 His eager eyes on fire with pain<br>
 He roamed about with maddened brain.<br>
 Each grove and glade he searched with care,<br>
 He sought, but found no Sítá there.<br>
 He wildly rushed from hill to hill;<br>
 From tree to tree, from rill to rill.<br>
 As bitter woe his bosom rent<br>
 Still Ráma roamed with fond lament:<br>
 'O sweet Kadamba say has she<br>
 Who loved thy bloom been seen by thee?<br>
 If thou have seen her face most fair,<br>
 Say, gentle tree, I pray thee, where.<br>
 O Bel tree with thy golden fruit<br>
 Round as her breast, no more be mute.<br>
 Where is my radiant darling, gay<br>
 In silk that mocks thy glossy spray?<br>
 O Arjun, say, where is she now<br>
 Who loved to touch thy scented bough?<br>
 Do not thy graceful friend forget,<br>
 But tell me, is she living yet?<br>
 Speak, Basil, thou must surely know,<br>
 For like her limbs thy branches show,--<br>
 Most lovely in thy fair array<br>
 Of twining plant and tender spray.<br>
 Sweet Tila, fairest of the trees,<br>
 Melodious with the hum of bees,<br>
 Where is my darling Sita, tell,--<br>
 The dame who loved thy flowers so well?<br>
 Aœoka, act thy gentle part,--<br>
 Named Heartsease, <a name="fr_508"></a><a href="#fn_508"><font size="1">1</font></a> give me what thou art,<br>
 To these sad eyes my darling show<br>
 And free me from this load of woe.<br>
 O Palm, in rich ripe fruitage dressed<br>
 Round as the beauties of her breast,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_301"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 301</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 If thou have heart to know and feel,<br>
 My peerless consort's fate reveal.<br>
 Hast thou, Rose-apple, chanced to view<br>
 My darling bright with golden hue?<br>
 If thou have seen her quickly speak,<br>
 Where is the dame I wildly seek?<br>
 O glorious Cassia, thou art gay<br>
 With all thy loveliest bloom to-day,<br>
 Where is my dear who loved to hold<br>
 In her full lap thy flowery gold?'<br>
 To many a tree and plant beside,<br>
 To Jasmin, Mango, Sál, he cried.<br>
 'Say, hast thou seen, O gentle deer,<br>
 The fawn-eyed Sítá wandering here?<br>
 It may be that my love has strayed<br>
 To sport with fawns beneath the shade,<br>
 If thou, great elephant, have seen<br>
 My darling of the lovely mien,<br>
 Whose rounded limbs are soft and fine<br>
 As is that lissome trunk of thine,<br>
 O noblest of wild creatures, show<br>
 Where is the dame thou needs must know.<br>
 O tiger, hast thou chanced to see<br>
 My darling? very fair is she.<br>
 Cast all thy fear away, declare,<br>
 Where is my moon-faced darling, where?<br>
 There, darling of the lotus eye,<br>
 I see thee, and 'tis vain to fly.<br>
 Wilt thou not speak, dear love? I see<br>
 Thy form half hidden by the tree.<br>
 Stay if thou love me, Sítá, stay<br>
 In pity cease thy heartless play,<br>
 Why mock me now? thy gentle breast<br>
 Was never prone to cruel jest.<br>
 'Tis vain behind yon bush to steal:<br>
 Thy shimmering silks thy path reveal.<br>
 Fly not, mine eyes pursue thy way;<br>
 For pity's sake, dear Sítá, stay.<br>
 Ah me, ah me, my words are vain;<br>
 My gentle love is lost or slain.<br>
 How could her tender bosom spurn<br>
 Her husband on his home-return?<br>
 Ah no, my love is surely dead,<br>
 Fierce giants on her flesh have fed,<br>
 Rending the soft limbs of their prey<br>
 When I her lord was far away.<br>
 That moon-bright face, that polished brow,<br>
 Red lips, bright teeth--what are they now?<br>
 Alas, my darling's shapely neck<br>
 She loved with chains of gold to deck.--<br>
 That neck that mocked the sandal scent,<br>
 The ruthless fiends have grasped and rent<br>
 Alas, 'twas vain those arms to raise<br>
 Soft as the young tree's tender sprays<br>
 Ah, dainty meal for giants' lips<br>
 Were arms and quivering finger tips.<br>
 Ah, she who counted many a friend<br>
 Was left for fiends to seize and rend,<br>
 Was left by me without defence<br>
 From ravening giants' violence.<br>
 O Lakshman of the arm of might,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Say, is my darling love in sight;<br>
 O dearest Sítá. where art thou?<br>
 Where is my darling consort now?'<br>
     Thus as he cried in wild lament<br>
 From grove to grove the mourner went.<br>
 Here for a moment sank to rest.<br>
 Then started up and onward pressed.<br>
 Thus roaming on like one distraught<br>
 Still for his vanished love he sought.<br>
 He searched in wood and hill and glade,<br>
 By rock and brook and wild cascade.<br>
 Through groves with restless step he sped<br>
 And left no spot unvisited.<br>
 Through lawns and woods of vast extent<br>
 Still searching for his love he went<br>
     With eager steps and fast.<br>
 For many a weary hour he toiled,<br>
 Still in his fond endeavour foiled,<br>
     Yet hoping to the last.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_508"></a><a href="ry259.htm#fr_508">300:1</a>  <i>As'oka</i> is compounded of <i>a</i> not and
 <i>s'oka</i> grief.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry260.htm">Next: Canto LXII.: Ráma's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>