<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry262.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry264.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXV.: RAMA'S WRATH.</h3>
 <p>
 With piteous voice, by woe subdued,<br>
 Thus Raghu's son his speech renewed:<br>
 'Thy steps, my brother, quickly turn<br>
 To bright Godávarí and learn<br>
 If Sítá to the stream have hied<br>
 To cull the lilies on its side.'<br>
     Obedient to the words he said,<br>
 His brother to the river sped.<br>
 The shelving banks he searched in vain,<br>
 And then to Ráma turned again.<br>
     'I searched, but found her not,' he cried;<br>
 'I called aloud, but none replied.<br>
 Where can the Maithil lady stray,<br>
 Whose sight would chase our cares away?<br>
 I know not where, her steps untraced,<br>
 Roams Sítá of the dainty waist.'<br>
     When Ráma heard the words he spoke<br>
 Again he sank beneath the stroke,<br>
 And wiih a bosom anguish-fraught<br>
 Himself the lovely river sought.<br>
 There standing on the shelving side,<br>
 'O Sítá, where art thou?' he cried.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 No spirit voice an answer gave,<br>
 No murmur from the trembling wave<br>
 Of sweet Godávarí declared<br>
 The outrage which the fiend had dared<br>
 'O speak!' the pitying spirits cried,<br>
 But yet the stream their prayer denied,<br>
 Nor dared she, coldly mute, relate<br>
 To the sad chief his darling's fate<br>
 Of Rávan's awful form she thought,<br>
 And the dire deed his arm had wrought,<br>
 And still withheld by fear dismayed,<br>
 The tale for which the mourner prayed.<br>
 When hope was none, his heart to cheer,<br>
 That the bright stream his cry would hear<br>
 While sorrow for his darling tore<br>
 His longing soul he spake once more:<br>
 'Though I have sought with tears and sighs<br>
 Godárvarí no word replies,<br>
 O say, what answer can I frame<br>
 To Janak father of my dame?<br>
 Or how before her mother stand<br>
 Leading no Sítá by the hand?<br>
 Where is my loyal love who went<br>
 Forth with her lord to banishment?<br>
 Her faith to me she nobly held<br>
 Though from my realm and home expelled,--<br>
 A hermit, nursed on woodland fare,--<br>
 She followed still and soothed my care.<br>
 Of all my friends am I bereft,<br>
 Nor is my faithful consort left.<br>
 How slowly will the long nights creep<br>
 While comfortless I wake and weep!<br>
 O, if my wife may yet be found,<br>
 With humble love I'll wander round<br>
 This Janasthán, Pras'ravan's hill,<br>
 Mandákini's delightful rill.<br>
 See how the deer with gentle eyes<br>
 Look on my face and sympathize.<br>
 I mark their soft expression: each<br>
 Would soothe me, if it could, with speech.'<br>
     A while the anxious throng he eyed.<br>
 And 'Where is Sítá, where?' he cried.<br>
 Thus while hot tears his utterance broke<br>
 The mourning son of Raghu spoke.<br>
 The deer in pity for his woes<br>
 Obeyed the summons and arose.<br>
 Upon his right thy stood, and raised<br>
 Their sad eyes up to heaven and gazed<br>
 Each to that quarter bent her look<br>
 Which Rávan with his captive took.<br>
 Then Raghu's son again they viewed,<br>
 And toward that point their way pursued.<br>
 Then Lakshman watched their looks intent<br>
 As moaning on their way they went,<br>
 And marked each sign which struck his sense<br>
 With mute expressive influence,<br>
 Then as again his sorrow woke<br>
 Thus to his brother chief he spoke:<br>
 'Those deer thy eager question heard<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_305"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 305</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And rose at once by pity stirred:<br>
 See, in thy search their aid they lend,<br>
 See, to the south their looks they bend.<br>
 Arise, dear brother, let us go<br>
 The way their eager glances show,<br>
 If haply sign or trace descried<br>
 Our footsteps in the search may guide.'<br>
     The son of Raghu gave assent,<br>
 And quickly to the south they went;<br>
 With eager eyes the earth he scanned,<br>
 And Lakshman followed close at hand.<br>
 An each to other spake his thought,<br>
 And round with anxious glances sought,<br>
 Scattered before them in the way,<br>
 Blooms of a fallen garland lay.<br>
 When Ráma saw that flowery rain<br>
 He spoke once more with bitterest pain:<br>
 'O Lakshman every flower that lies<br>
 Here on the ground I recognize.<br>
 I culled them in the grove, and there<br>
 My darling twined them in her hair.<br>
 The sun, the earth, the genial breeze<br>
 Have spared these flowers my soul to please.'<br>
     Then to that woody hill he prayed,<br>
 Whence flashed afar each wild cascade:<br>
 'O best of mountains, hast thou seen<br>
 A dome of perfect form and mien<br>
 In some sweet spot with trees o'ergrown,-<br>
 My darling whom I left alone?'<br>
 Then as a lion threats a deer<br>
 He thundered with a voice of fear:<br>
 'Reveal her, mountain, to my view<br>
 With golden limbs and golden hue.<br>
 Where is my darling Sítá? speak<br>
 Before I rend thee peak from peak.'<br>
     The mountain seemed her track to show,<br>
 But told not all he sought to know.<br>
 Then Das'aratha's son renewed<br>
 His summons as the mount he viewed:<br>
 'Soon as my flaming arrows fly,<br>
 Consumed to ashes shall thou lie<br>
 Without a herb or bud or tree,<br>
 And birds no more shall dwell in thee.<br>
 And if this stream my prayer deny,<br>
 My wrath this day her flood shall dry,<br>
 Because she lends no aid to trace<br>
 My darling of the lotus face.'<br>
     Thus Ráma spake as though his ire<br>
 Would scorch them with his glance of fire;<br>
 Then searching farther on the ground<br>
 The footprint of a fiend he found,<br>
 And small light traces here and there,<br>
 Where Sítá in her great despair,<br>
 Shrieking for Ráma's help, had fled<br>
 Before the giant's mighty tread.<br>
 His careful eye each trace surveyed<br>
 Which Sítá and the fiend had made,--<br>
 The quivers and the broken bow<br>
 And ruined chariot of the foe,--<br>
 And told, distraught by fear and grief,<br>
 His tidings to his brother chief:<br>
     'O Lakshman, here,' he cried 'behold<br>
 My Sítá's earrings dropped with gold.<br>
 Here lie her garlands torn and rent,<br>
 Here lies each glittering ornament.<br>
 O look, the ground on every side<br>
 With blood-like drops of gold is dyed.<br>
 The fiends who wear each strange disguise<br>
 Have seized, I ween, the helpless prize.<br>
 My lady, by their hands o'erpowered,<br>
 Is slaughtered, mangled, and devoured.<br>
 Methinks two fearful giants came<br>
 And waged fierce battle for the dame.<br>
 Whose, Lakshman, was this mighty bow<br>
 With pearls and gems in glittering row<br>
 Cast to the ground the fragments lie,<br>
 And still their glory charms the eye.<br>
 A bow so mighty sure was planned<br>
 For heavenly God or giant's hand.<br>
 Whose was this coat of golden mail<br>
 Which, though its lustre now is pale,<br>
 Shone like the sun of morning, bright<br>
 With studs of glittering lazulite?<br>
 Whose, Lakshman, was this bloom-wreathed shade<br>
 With all its hundred ribs displayed?<br>
 This screen, most meet for royal brow,<br>
 With broken staff lies useless now.<br>
 And these tall asses, goblin-faced,<br>
 With plates of golden harness graced,<br>
 Whose hideous forms are stained with gore<br>
 Who is the lord whose yoke they bore?<br>
 Whose was this pierced and broken car<br>
 That shoots a flame-like blaze afar?<br>
 Whose these spent shafts at random spread,<br>
 Each fearful with its iron head,--<br>
 With golden mountings fair to see,<br>
 Long as a chariot's axle-tree?<br>
 These quivers see, which, rent in twain,<br>
 Their sheaves of arrows still contain.<br>
 Whose was this driver? Dead and cold,<br>
 His hands the whip and reins still hold.<br>
 See, Lakshman, here the foot I trace<br>
 Of man, nay, one of giant race.<br>
 The hatred that I nursed of old<br>
 Grows mightier now a hundred fold<br>
 Against these giants, fierce of heart,<br>
 Who change their forms by magic art.<br>
 Slain, eaten by the giant press,<br>
 Or stolen is the votaress,<br>
 Nor could her virtue bring defence<br>
 To Sítá seized and hurried hence.<br>
 O, if my love be slain or lost<br>
 All hope of bliss for me is crossed.<br>
 The power of all the worlds were vain<br>
 To bring one joy to soothe my pain.<br>
 The spirits with their blinded eyes<br>
 Would look in wonder, and despise<br>
 The Lord who made the worlds, the great<br>
 Creator when compassionate.<br>
 And so, I ween, the Immortals turn<br>
 Cold eyes upon me now, and spurn<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_306"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 306</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The weakling prompt at pity's call,<br>
 Devoted to the good of all.<br>
 But from this day behold me changed,<br>
 From every gentle grace estranged.<br>
 Now be it mine all life to slay,<br>
 And sweep these cursed fiends away.<br>
 As the great sun leaps up the sky,<br>
 And the cold moonbeams fade and die,<br>
 So vengeance rises in my breast.<br>
 One passion conquering all the rest.<br>
 Gandharvas in their radiant place,<br>
 The Yakshas, and the giant race,<br>
 Kinnars and men shall look in vain<br>
 For joy they ne'er shall see again.<br>
 The anguish of my great despair,<br>
 O Lakshman, fills the heaven and air;<br>
 And I in wrath all life will slay<br>
 Within the triple world to-day.<br>
 Unless the Gods in heaven who dwell<br>
 Restore my Sítá safe and well,<br>
 I armed with all the fires of Fate.<br>
 The triple world will devastate.<br>
 The troubled stars from heaven shall fall,<br>
 The moon be wrapped in gloomy pall,<br>
 The fire be quenched, the wind be stilled,<br>
 The radiant sun grow dark and chilled;<br>
 Crushed every mountain's towering pride,<br>
 And every lake and river dried,<br>
 Dead every creeper, plant, and tree,<br>
 And lost for aye the mighty sea.<br>
 Thou shalt the word this day behold<br>
 In wild disorder uncontrolled,<br>
 With dying life which naught defends<br>
 From the fierce storm my bowstring sends.<br>
 My shafts this day, for Sítá's sake,<br>
 The life of every fiend shall take.<br>
 The Gods this day shall see the force<br>
 That wings my arrows on their course,<br>
 And mark how far that course is held,<br>
 By my unsparing wrath impelled.<br>
 No God, not one of Daitya strain,<br>
 Goblin or Rákshas shall remain.<br>
 My wrath shall end the worlds, and all<br>
 Demons and Gods therewith shall fall.<br>
 Each world which Gods, the Dánav race,<br>
 And giants make their dwelling place,<br>
 Shall fall beneath my arrows sent<br>
 In fury when my bow is bent.<br>
 The arrows loosened from my string<br>
 Confusion on the worlds shall bring.<br>
 For she is lost or breathes no more,<br>
 Nor will the Gods my love restore.<br>
 Hence all on earth with life and breath<br>
 This day I dedicate to death.<br>
 All, till my darling they reveal,<br>
 The fury of my shafts shall feel.'<br>
   Thus as he spake by rage impelled,<br>
 Red grew his eyes, his fierce lips swelled.<br>
 His bark coat round his form he drew<br>
 And coiled his hermit braids anew.<br>
 Like Rudra when he yearned to slay<br>
 The demon Tripur  <a name="fr_510"></a><a href="ry264.htm#fn_510"><font size="1">1</font></a> in the fray.<br>
 So looked the hero brave and wise,<br>
 The fury flashing from his eyes.<br>
 Then Ráma, conqueror of the foe,<br>
 From Lakshman's hand received his bow,<br>
 Strained the great string, and laid thereon<br>
 A deadly dart that flashed and shone,<br>
 And spake these words as fierce in ire<br>
 As He who ends the worlds with fire:<br>
     'As age and time and death and fate<br>
 All life with checkless power await,<br>
 So Lakshman in my wrath to-day<br>
 My vengeful might shall brook no stay,<br>
 Unless this day I see my dame<br>
 In whose sweet form is naught to blame,--<br>
 Yea, as before, my love behold<br>
 Fair with bright teeth and perfect mould,<br>
 This world shall feel a deadly blow<br>
 Destroyed with ruthless overthrow,<br>
 And serpent lords and Gods of air,<br>
 Gandharvas, men, the doom shall share.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry264.htm">Next: Canto LXVI.: Lakshman's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>