<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry266.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry268.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIX.: THE DEATH OF JATÁYUS.</h3>
 <p>
 As Ráma viewed with heart-felt yain<br>
 The vulture whom the fiend had slain,<br>
 In words with tender love impressed<br>
 His brother chief he thus addressed:<br>
     'This royal bird with faithful thought<br>
 For my advantage strove and fought.<br>
 Slain by the fiend in mortal strife<br>
 For me he yields his noble life.<br>
 See, Lakshman, how his wounds have bled;<br>
 His struggling breath will soon have fled.<br>
 Faint is his voice, and near to die,<br>
 He scarce can lift his trembling eye.<br>
 Jatáyus, if thou still can speak,<br>
 Give, give the answer that I seek.<br>
 The fate of ravished Sítá tell,<br>
 And how thy mournful chance befell.<br>
 Say why the giant stole my dame:<br>
 What have I done that he could blame?<br>
 What fault in me has Rávan seen<br>
 That he should rob me of my queen?<br>
 How looked the lady's moon-bright cheek?<br>
 What were the words she found to speak?<br>
 His strength, his might, his deeds declare:<br>
 And tell the form he loves to wear.<br>
 To all my questions make reply:<br>
 Where does the giant's dwelling lie?'<br>
     The noble bird his glances bent<br>
 On Ráma as he made lament,<br>
 And in low accents faint and weak<br>
 With anguish thus began to speak.<br>
 'Fierce Rávan, king of giant race,<br>
 Stole Sítá from thy dwelling-place.<br>
 He calls his magic art to aid<br>
 With wind and cloud and gloomy shade.<br>
 When in the fight my power was spent<br>
 My wearied wings he cleft and rent.<br>
 Then round the dame his arms he threw,<br>
 And to the southern region flew.<br>
 O Raghu's son. I gasp for breath,<br>
 My swimming sight is dim in death.<br>
 Even now before my vision pass<br>
 Bright trees of * with hair of grass,<br>
 *<br>
 Brings on the thief a flood of woe<br>
 The giant in his haste *<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Twas Vinda's hour,  <a name="fr_514"></a><a href="#fn_514"><font size="1">1</font></a> or heeded not.<br>
 Those robbed at such a time obtain<br>
 Their plundered store and wealth again.<br>
 He, like a fish that takes the bait,<br>
 In briefest time shall meet his fate.<br>
 Now be thy troubled heart controlled<br>
 And for thy lady's loss consoled.<br>
 For thou wilt slay the fiend in fight<br>
 And with thy dame have new delight.'<br>
     With senses clear, though sorely tried,<br>
 The royal vulture thus replied,<br>
 While as he sank beneath his pain<br>
 Forth rushed the tide of blood again.<br>
 'Him,  <a name="fr_515"></a><a href="#fn_515"><font size="1">2</font></a> brother of the Lord of Gold,<br>
 Vis'ravas' self begot of old.'<br>
 Thus spoke the bird, and stained with gore<br>
 Resigned the breath that came no more.<br>
     'Speak, speak again!' thus Ráma cried,<br>
 With reverent palm to palm applied,<br>
 But from the frame the spirit fled<br>
 And to the skiey regions sped.<br>
 The breath of life had passed away.<br>
 Stretched on the ground the body lay.<br>
     When Rama saw the vulture lie,<br>
 Hupe as a hill, with darksome eye,<br>
 With many a poignant woe distressed<br>
 His brother chief he thus addressed:<br>
 'Amid these haunted shades content<br>
 Full many a year this bird has spent.<br>
 His life in home of giants passed,<br>
 In Dandak wood he dies at last.<br>
 The years in lengthened course have fled<br>
 Untroubled o'er the vulture's head,<br>
 And now he lies in death, for none<br>
 The stern decrees of Fate may shun.<br>
 See, Lakshman, how the vulture fell<br>
 While for my sake he battled well.<br>
 And strove to free with onset bold<br>
 My Sítá from the giant's hold.<br>
 Supreme amid the vulture kind<br>
 His ancient rule the bird resigned.<br>
 And conquered in tho fruitless strife<br>
 Gave for my sake his noble life.<br>
 O Lakshman, many a time we see<br>
 Great souls who keep the law's decree,<br>
 With whom the weak sure refuge find,<br>
 In creatures of inferior kind.<br>
 The kiss of her, my darling queen,<br>
 Strikes with a pang less fiercely keen<br>
 Than now this slaughtered bird to see<br>
 Who nobly fought and died for me.<br>
 As Das'aratha, good and great,<br>
 Was glorious in his high estate,<br>
 Honoured by all to all endeared,<br>
 So was this royal bird revered.<br>
 Bring fuel for the funeral site:<br>
 These hands the solemn fire shall light<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_310"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 310</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And on the burning pyre shall lay<br>
 The bird who died for me to-day.<br>
 Now on the gathered wood shall lie<br>
 The lord of all the birds that fly,<br>
 And I will burn with honours due<br>
 My champion whom the giant slew.<br>
 O royal bird of noblest heart,<br>
 Graced with all funeral rites depart<br>
 To bright celestial seats above,<br>
 Rewarded for thy faithful love.<br>
 Dwell in thy happy home with those<br>
 Whose constant fires of worship rose.<br>
 Live blest amid the unyielding brave,<br>
 And those who land in largess gave.<br>
     Sore grief upon his bosom weighed<br>
 As on the pyre the bird he laid,<br>
 And bade the kindled flame ascend<br>
 To burn the body of his friend.<br>
 Then with his brother by his side<br>
 The hero to the forest hied.<br>
 There many a stately deer he slew.<br>
 The flesh around the bird to strew.<br>
 The venison into balls he made.<br>
 And on fair grass before him laid.<br>
 Then that the parted soul might rise<br>
 And find free passage to the skies,<br>
 Each solemn word and text he said<br>
 Which Brahmans utter o'er the dead.<br>
 Then hastening went the princely pair<br>
 To bright Godayaní, and there<br>
 Libations of the stream they poured<br>
 In honour of the vulture lord,<br>
 With solemn ritual to the slain,<br>
 As scripture's holy texts ordain.<br>
 Thus offerings to the bird they gave<br>
 And bathed their bodies in the wave,<br>
     The vulture monarch having wrought<br>
     A hard and glorious feat,<br>
 Honoured by Ráma sage in thought,<br>
     Soared to his blissful seat.<br>
 The brothers, when each rite was paid<br>
     To him of birds supreme,<br>
 Their hearts with new-found comfort stayed,<br>
     And turned them from the stream.<br>
 Like soveriegns of celestial race<br>
     Within the wood they came,<br>
 Each pondering the means to trace,<br>
     The captor of the dame.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_514"></a><a href="ry267.htm#fr_514">309:1</a>  From the * </p>
 <p><a name="fn_515"></a><a href="ry267.htm#fr_515">309:2</a>  Rávan</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry268.htm">Next: Canto LXX.: Kabandha.</a></center>
 </body>