<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry268.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry270.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXI.: KABANDHA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Kabandha saw each chieftain stand<br>
 Imprisoned by his mighty hand,<br>
 Which like a snare around him pressed<br>
 And thus the royal pair addressed:<br>
 'Why, warriors, are your glances bent<br>
 On me whom hungry pangs torment?<br>
 Why stand with wildered senses? Fate<br>
 Has brought you now my maw to sate.'<br>
     When Lakshman heard, a while appalled,<br>
 His ancient courage he recalled,<br>
 And to his brother by his side<br>
 With seasonable counsel cried :<br>
     'This vilest of the giant race<br>
 Will draw us to his side apace.<br>
 Come, rouse thee; let the vengeful sword<br>
 Smite off his arms, my honoured lord.<br>
 This awful giant, vast of size,<br>
 On his huge strength of arm relies,<br>
 And o'er the world victorious, thus<br>
 With mighty force would slaughter us,<br>
 But in cold blood to slay, O King.<br>
 Discredit on the brave would bring,<br>
 As when some victim in the rite<br>
 Shuns not the hand up raised to smite.'<br>
     The monstrous fiend, to anger stirred,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The converse of the brothers heard.<br>
 His horrid mouth he opened wide<br>
 And drew the princes to his side.<br>
 They, skilled due time and place to note<br>
 Unsheathed their glittering sword and smote,<br>
 Till fiom the giant's shoulders they<br>
 Had hewn the mighty arms away.<br>
 His trenchant falchion Ráma plied<br>
 And smote him on the better side,<br>
 While valiant Lakshman on the left<br>
 The arm that held him prisoned cleft,<br>
 Then to the earth dismembered fell<br>
 The monster with a hideous yell,<br>
 And like a cloud's his deep roar went<br>
 Through earth and air and firmament.<br>
 Then as the giant's blood flowed fast,<br>
 On his cleft limbs his eye he cast,<br>
 And called upon the princely pair<br>
 Their names and lineage to declare.<br>
 Him then the noble Lakshman, blest<br>
 With fortune's favouring marks, addressed,<br>
 And told the fiend his brother's name<br>
 And the high blood of which he came:<br>
 'Ikshváku's heir here Ráma stands,<br>
 Illustrious through a hundred lands.<br>
 I, younger brother of the heir,<br>
 O fiend, the name of Lakshman bear.<br>
 His mother stole his realm away<br>
 And drove him forth in woods to stray.<br>
 Thus through the mighty forest he<br>
 Roamed with his royal wife and me.<br>
 While glorious as a God he made<br>
 His dwelling in the greenwood shade,<br>
 Some giant stole away his dame,<br>
 And seeking her we hither came.<br>
 But tell me who thou art, and why<br>
 With headless trunk that towered so high.<br>
 With flaming face beneath thy chest,<br>
 Thou liest crushed in wild unrest.'<br>
     He heard the words that Lakshman spoke,<br>
 And memory in his breast awoke,<br>
 Recalling Indra's words to mind<br>
 He spoke in gentle tones and kind:<br>
 'O welcome best of men, are ye<br>
 Whom, blest by fate, this day I see.<br>
 A blessing on each trenchant blade<br>
 That low on earth these arms has laid!<br>
 Thou, lord of men, incline thine ear<br>
 The story of my woe to hear,<br>
 While I the rebel pride declare<br>
 Which doomed me to the form I wear.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry270.htm">Next: Canto LXXII.: Kabandha's Tale.</a></center>
 </body>