<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry273.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry275.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXVI.: PAMPÁ.</h3>
 <p>
     When S'avarí had sought the skies<br>
 And gained her splendid virtue's prize,<br>
 Ráma with Lakshman stayed to brood<br>
 O'er the strange scenes their eyes had viewed.<br>
 His mind upon those saints was bent,<br>
 For power and might preeminent<br>
 And he to musing Lakshman spoke<br>
 The thoughts that in his bosom woke:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_318"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 318</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Mine eyes this wondrous home have viewed<br>
 Of those great saints with souls subdued,<br>
 Where peaceful tigers dwell and birds,<br>
 And deer abound in heedless herds.<br>
 Our feet upon the banks have stood<br>
 Of those seven lakes within the wood,<br>
 Where we have duly dipped, and paid<br>
 Libations to each royal shade.<br>
 Forgotten now are thoughts of ill<br>
 And joyful hopes my bosom fill.<br>
 Again my heart is light and gay<br>
 And grief and care have passed away.<br>
 Come, brother, let us hasten where<br>
 Bright Pampá's flood is fresh and fair,<br>
 And towering in their beauty near<br>
 Mount Rishyamúka's heights appear,<br>
 When, offspring of the Lord of Light,<br>
 Still fearing Báli's conquering might,<br>
 With four brave chiefs of Vánar race<br>
 Sugríva makes his dwelling-place.<br>
 I long with eager heart to find<br>
 That leader of the Vánar kind,<br>
 For on that chief my hopes depend<br>
 That this our quest have prosperous end.'<br>
     Thus Ráma spoke, in battle tried,<br>
 And thus Sumitrá's son replied:<br>
 'Come, brother, come, and speed away:<br>
 My spirit brooks no more delay.'<br>
 Thus spake Sumitrá's son, and then<br>
 Forth from the grove the king of men<br>
 With his dear brother by his side<br>
 To Pampá's lucid waters hied.<br>
 He gazed upon the winds where grew<br>
 Trees rich in flowers of every hue.<br>
 From brake and dell on every side<br>
 The curlew and the peacock cried,<br>
 And flocks of screaming parrots made<br>
 Shrill music in the bloomy shade.<br>
 His eager eyes, as on he went,<br>
 On many a pool and tree were bent.<br>
 Inflamed with love he journeyed on<br>
 Till a fair flood before him shone.<br>
 He stood upon the water's side<br>
     Which streams from distant hills supplied<br>
 Mataranga's * name that water bore:<br>
 There bathed he from the shelving shore.<br>
 Then, each on earnest thoughts intent,<br>
 Still farther on their way they went.<br>
 But Ráma's heart once more gave way<br>
 Beneath his grief and wild dismay.<br>
 Before him lay the noble flood<br>
 Adorned with many a lotus bud.<br>
 On its fair banks As'okas glowed,<br>
 And all bright trees their blossoms showed<br>
 Green banks that silver waves confined<br>
 With lovely groves--were ringed and lined<br>
 The crystal waters in their flow<br>
 Showed level sands that gleamed below.<br>
 There glittering fish and tortoise played,<br>
 And bending trees gave pleasant shade.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 There creepers on the branches hung<br>
 With lover-like embraces clung,<br>
 There gay Gandharvas loved to meet,<br>
 And Kinnar sought the calm retreat.<br>
 There wandering Vakshas* found delight,<br>
 Snake gods and rovers of the night.<br>
 Cool were the pleasant waters, gay<br>
 Each tree with creeper, flower, and spray.<br>
 There flushed the lotus darkly red,<br>
 Here their white glory lilies spread,<br>
 Here sweet buds showed their tints of blue:<br>
 So carpets gleam with many a hue.<br>
 A grove of Mangoes blossomed nigh,<br>
 Echoing with the peacock's cry.<br>
 When Ráma by his brother's side<br>
 The lovely flood of Pampá eyed,<br>
 Decked like a beauty, fair to see<br>
 With every charm of flower and tree,<br>
 His mighty heart with woe was rent<br>
 And thus he spoke in wild lament<br>
     'Here, Lakshman, on this beauteous shore,<br>
 Stands, dyed with tints of many an ore,<br>
 The mountain Rishyamúka bright<br>
 With flowery trees that crown each height.<br>
 Sprung from the chief who, famed of yore,<br>
 The name of Rikshnrajas bore,<br>
 Sugríva, chieftain strong and dread,<br>
 Dwells on that mountain's towering head.<br>
 Go to him, best of men, and seek<br>
 That prince of Vánars on the peak,<br>
 I cannot longer brook my pain,<br>
 Or, Sítá lost, my life retain.'<br>
     Thus by the pangs of love distressed,<br>
         His thoughts on Sítá bent,<br>
     His faithful brother he addressed,<br>
         And cried in wild lament.<br>
     He reached the lovely ground that lay<br>
         On Pampá's wooded side,<br>
     And told in anguish and dismay,<br>
         The grief he could not hide.<br>
     With listless footsteps faint and slow<br>
         His way the chief pursued,<br>
     Till Pampá with her glorious show<br>
         Of flowering woods he viewed.<br>
     Through shades were every bird was found<br>
         The prince with Lakshman passed,<br>
     And Pampá with her groves around<br>
         Burst on his eyes, at last.<br>
 
 <br>
 </p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry275.htm">Next: Book IV</a></center>
 </body>