<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry271.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry273.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXIV.: KABANDHA'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 When wise Kabandha thus had taught<br>
 The means to find the dame they sought,<br>
 And urged them onward in the quest,<br>
 He thus again the prince addressed:<br>
   'This path, O Raghu's son, pursue<br>
 Where those fair trees which charm the view,<br>
 Extending westward far away,<br>
 The glory of their bloom display,<br>
 Where their bright leaves Rose-apples show,<br>
 And the tall Jak and Mango grow.<br>
 Whene'er you will, those trees ascend,<br>
 Or the long branches shake and bend.<br>
 Their savoury fruit like Amrit eat,<br>
 Then onward speed with willing feet.<br>
 Beyond this shady forest, decked<br>
 With flowering trees, your course direct.<br>
 Another grove you then will find<br>
 With every joy to take the mind,<br>
 Like Nandan with its charms displayed,<br>
 Or Northern Kuru's blissful shade;<br>
 Where trees distil their balmy juice.<br>
 And fruit through all the year produce;<br>
 Where shades with seasons ever fair<br>
 With Chaitraratha may compare:<br>
 Where trees whose sprays with fruit are bowed<br>
 Rise like a mountain or a cloud.<br>
 There, when you list, from time to time,<br>
 The loaded trees may Lakshman climb,<br>
 Or from the shaken boughs supply<br>
 Sweet fruit that may with Amrit vie.<br>
 The onward path pursuing still<br>
 From wood to wood, from hill to hill,<br>
 Your happy eyes at length will rest<br>
 On Pampá's lotus-covered breast.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Her banks with gentle slope descend,<br>
 Nor stones nor weed the eyes offend,<br>
 And o'er smooth beds of silver sand<br>
 Lotus and lily blooms expand.<br>
 There swans and ducks and curlews play,<br>
 And keen-eyed ospreys watch their prey,<br>
 And from the limpid waves are heard<br>
 Glad notes of many a water-bird.<br>
 Untaught a deadly foe to fear<br>
 They fly not when a man is near,<br>
 And fat as balls of butter they<br>
 Will, when you list, your hunger stay.<br>
 Then Lakshman with his shafts will take<br>
 The fish that swim the brook and lake,<br>
 Remove each bone and scale and fin,<br>
 Or strip away the speckled skin,<br>
 And then on iron skewers broil<br>
 For thy repast the savoury spoil.<br>
 Thou on a heap of flowers shalt rest<br>
 And eat the meal his hands have dressed<br>
 There shalt thou lie on Pampá's brink.<br>
 And Lakshman's hand shall give thee drink,<br>
 Filling a lotus leaf with cool<br>
 Pure water from the crystal pool,<br>
 To which the opening blooms hare lent<br>
 The riches of divinest scent.<br>
 Beside thee at the close of day<br>
 Will Lakshman through the woodland stray,<br>
 And show thee where the monkeys sleep<br>
 In caves beneath the mountain steep.<br>
 Lurd-voiced as bulls they forth will burst<br>
 And seek the flood, oppressed by thirst;<br>
 Then rest a while, their wants supplied,<br>
 Their well-fed bands on Pampá's side.<br>
 Thou roving there at eve shalt see<br>
 Rich clusters hang on shrub and tree,<br>
 And Pampá flushed with roseate glow,<br>
 And at the view forget thy woe.<br>
 There shalt thou mark with strange delight<br>
 Each loveliest flower that blooms by night,<br>
 While lily buds that shrink from day<br>
 Their tender loveliness display.<br>
 In that far wild no hand but thine<br>
 Those peerless flowers in wreaths shall twine:<br>
 Immortal in their changeless pride,<br>
 Ne'er fade those blooms and ne'er are dried.<br>
 There erst on holy thoughts intent<br>
 Their days Matanga's pupils spent.<br>
 Once for their master food they sought,<br>
 And store of fruit and berries brought.<br>
 Then as they laboured through the dell<br>
 From limb and brow the heat-drops fell:<br>
 Thence sprang and bloomed those wondrous trees:<br>
 Such holy power have devotees.<br>
 Thus, from the hermits' heat-drops sprung,<br>
 Their growth is ever fresh and young.<br>
 There S'avarí is dwelling yet,<br>
 Who served each vanished anchoret.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_316"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 316</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Beneath the shade of holy boughs<br>
 That ancient votaress keeps her vows.<br>
 Her happy eyes on thee will fall,<br>
 O godlike prince, adored by all,<br>
 And she, whose life is pure from sin,<br>
 A blissful seat in heaven will win.<br>
 But cross, O son of Raghu, o'er,<br>
 And stand on Pampa's western shore.<br>
 A tranquil hermitage that lies<br>
 Deep in the woods will meet thine eyes.<br>
 No wandering elephants invade<br>
 The stillness of that holy shade,<br>
 But checked by saint Matanga's power<br>
 They spare each consecrated bower.<br>
 Through many an age those trees have stood<br>
 World-famous as Matanga's wood<br>
 Still, Raghu's son, pursue thy way:<br>
 Through shades where birds are vocal stray,<br>
 Fair as the blessed wood where rove<br>
 Immortal Gods, or Nandan's grove.<br>
 Near Pampa eastward, full in sight,<br>
 Stands Rishyamuka's wood-crowned height.<br>
 'Tis hard to climb that towering steep<br>
 Where serpents unmolested sleep.<br>
 The free and bounteous, formed of old<br>
 By Brahma, of superior mould,<br>
 Who sink when day is done to rest<br>
 Reclining on that mountain crest,<br>
 What wealth or joy in dreams they view<br>
 Awaking find the vision true.<br>
 But if a villain stained with crime<br>
 That holy hill presume to climb,<br>
 The giants in their fury sweep<br>
 From the hill top the wretch asleep.<br>
 There loud and long is heard the loar<br>
 Of elephants on Pampa's shore.<br>
 Who near Matanga's dwelling stray<br>
 And in those waters bathe and play.<br>
 A while they revel by the flood,<br>
 Their temples stained with streams like blood.<br>
 Then wander far away dispersed,<br>
 Dark as huge clouds before they burst.<br>
 But ere they part they drink their fill<br>
 Of bright pure water from the rill.<br>
 Delightful to the touch, where meet<br>
 Scents of ail flowers divinely sweet,<br>
 Then speeding from the river side<br>
 Deep in the sheltering thicket hide.<br>
 Then bears and tigers shalt thou view<br>
 Whose soft skins show the sapphire's hue,<br>
 And silvan deer that wander, nigh<br>
 Shall harmless from thy presence fly.<br>
 High in  that mountains wooded side<br>
 Is a fair cavern deep and wide,<br>
 Yet hard to enter: piles of rock<br>
 The portals-of the cavern block.'  <a name="fr_522"></a><a href="#fn_522"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 By the eastern door a pool<br>
 Gleams with broad waters fresh and cool,<br>
 Where stores of roots and fruit abound,<br>
 And thick trees shade the grassy ground.<br>
 This mountain cave the virtuous-souled<br>
 Sugríva, and his Vánars hold,<br>
 And oft the mighty chieftain seeks<br>
 The summits of those towering peaks,'<br>
     Thus spake Kabandha. high in air<br>
 His counsel to the royal pair,<br>
 Still on his neck that wreath he bore,<br>
 And radiance like the sun's he wore,<br>
 Their eyes the princely brothers raised<br>
 And on that blissful being gazed:<br>
 'Behold, we go: no more delay;<br>
 Begin,' they cried,'thy heavenward way.'<br>
 'Depart,' Kabandha's voice replied,<br>
 'Pursue your search, and bliss betide.'<br>
     Thus to the happy chiefs he said,<br>
 Then on his heavenward journey sped:<br>
   Thus once again Kahandha won<br>
 A shape that glittered like the sun<br>
     Without a spot or stain.<br>
 Thus bade he Ráma from the air<br>
 To great Sugríva's side repair<br>
     His friendly love to gain.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_522"></a><a href="ry272.htm#fr_522">316:1</a>  Or as the commentator Titha says,
 S'ilápidháná, rock-covered, may be the
 name of the cavern.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry273.htm">Next: Canto LXXV.: Savari</a></center>
 </body>