<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry270.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry272.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXIII.: KABANDHA'S COUNSEL.</h3>
 <p>
 The monster ceased: the princely pair<br>
 Heard great Kabandha's eager prayer.<br>
 Within a mountain cave they sped,<br>
 Where kindled fire with care they fed.<br>
 Then Lakshman in his mighty hands<br>
 Brought ample store of lighted brands,<br>
 And to a pile of logs applied<br>
 The flame that ran from side to side.<br>
 The spreading glow with gentle force<br>
 Consumed Kabundha's mighty corse,<br>
 Till the unresting flames had drunk<br>
 The marrow of the monstrous trunk,<br>
 As balls of butter melt away<br>
 Amid the fires that o'er them play.<br>
 Then from the pyre, like flame that glows<br>
 Undimmed by cloudy smoke, he rose,<br>
 In garments pure of spot or speck,<br>
 A heavenly wreath about his neck.<br>
 Resplendent in his bright attire<br>
 He sprang exultant from the pyre.<br>
 While from neck, arm, and foot was sent<br>
 The flash of gold and ornament.<br>
 High on a chariot, bright of hue,<br>
 Which swans of fairest pinion drew,<br>
 He filled each region of the air<br>
 With splendid glow reflected there,<br>
 Then in the sky he stayed his car<br>
 And called to Ráma from afar:<br>
 'Hear, chieftain, while my lips explain<br>
 The means to win thy spouse again.<br>
 Six plans, O prince, the wise pursue<br>
 To reach the aims we hold in view. <a name="fr_520"></a><a href="#fn_520"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 When evils ripening sorely press,<br>
 They load the wretch with new distress.<br>
 So thou and Lakshman, tried by woe,<br>
 Have felt at last a fiercer blow,<br>
 And plunged in bitterest grief to-day<br>
 Lament thy consort torn away.<br>
 There is no course but this: attend;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Make, best of friends, that chief thy friend.<br>
 Unless his prospering help thou gain<br>
 Thy plans and hopes must all be vain.<br>
 O Ráma, hear my words, and seek,<br>
 Sugríva, for of him I speak.<br>
 His brother Báli, Indra's son,<br>
 Expelled him when the fight was won.<br>
 With four great chieftains, faithful still,<br>
 He dwells on Rishyamúka's hill.--<br>
 Fair mountain, lovely with the flow<br>
 Of Pampá's waves that glide below,--<br>
 Lord of the Vánars  <a name="fr_521"></a><a href="#fn_521"><font size="1">1b</font></a> just and true,<br>
 Strong, very glorious, bright to view,<br>
 Unmatched in counsel, firm and meek,<br>
 Bound by each word his lips may speak,<br>
 Good, splendid, mighty, bold and brave,<br>
 Wise in each plan to guide and save,<br>
 His brother, fired by lust of sway,<br>
 Drove forth the prince in woods to stray.<br>
 In all thy search for Sítá he<br>
 Thy ready friend and help will be.<br>
 With him to aid thee in thy quest<br>
 Dismiss all sorrow from thy breast.<br>
 Time is a mighty power, and none<br>
 His fixed decree can change or shun.<br>
 So rich reward thy toil shall bless,<br>
 And naught can stay thy sure success.<br>
 Speed hence, O chief, without delay,<br>
 To strong Sugríva take thy way.<br>
 This hour thy footsteps onward bend,<br>
 And make that mighty prince thy friend.<br>
 With him before the attesting flame<br>
 In solemn truth alliance frame.<br>
 Nor wilt thou, if thy heart be wise,<br>
 Sugríva, Vánar king, despise.<br>
 Of boundless strength, all shapes he wears,<br>
 He hearkens to a suppliant's prayers,<br>
 And, grateful for each kindly deed,<br>
 Will help and save in hour of need,<br>
 And you, I ween, the power possess<br>
 To aid his hopes and give redress.<br>
 He, let his cause succeed or fail,<br>
 Will help you, and you must prevail.<br>
 A banished prince, in fear and woe<br>
 He roams where Pampá's waters flow,<br>
 True offspring of the Lord of Light<br>
 Expelled by Báli's conquering might.<br>
 Go, Raghu's son, that chieftain seek<br>
 Who dwells on Rishyamúka's peak.<br>
 Before the flame thy weapons cast<br>
 And bind the bonds of friendship fast.<br>
 For, prince of all the Vánar race,<br>
 He in his wisdom knows each place<br>
 Where dwell the fierce gigantic brood<br>
 Who make the flesh of man their food.<br>
 To him, O Raghu's son, to him<br>
 Naught in the world is dark or dim,<br>
 Where'er the mighty Day-God gleams<br>
 Resplendent with a thousand beams.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_315"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 315</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He over rocky height and hill,<br>
 Through gloomy cave, by lake and rill,<br>
 Will with his Vánars seek the prize,<br>
 And tell thee where thy lady lies.<br>
 And he will send great chieftains forth<br>
 To east and west and south and north,<br>
 To seek the distant spot where she<br>
 All desolate laments for thee.<br>
 He even in Rávan's halls would find<br>
 Thy Sítá, gem of womankind.<br>
 Yea, if the blameless lady lay<br>
         On Meru's loftiest steep.<br>
     Or, far removed from light of day,<br>
         Where hell is dark and deep,<br>
     That chief of all the Vánar race<br>
         His way would still explore,<br>
     Meet the cowed giants face to face<br>
         And thy dear spouse restore."<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_520"></a><a href="ry271.htm#fr_520">314:1</a>  Peace, war, marching, halting, sowing
 dissensions, and seeking protection.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_521"></a><a href="ry271.htm#fr_521">314:1b</a>  See Book I. Canto XVI.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry272.htm">Next: Canto LXXIV.: Kabandha's Death.</a></center>
 </body>