<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry281.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry283.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VIII.: RÁMA'S PROMISE.</h3>
 <p>
 Doubt from Sugríva's heart had fled,<br>
 And thus to Raghu's son he said:<br>
 'No bliss the Gods of heaven deny.<br>
 Each views me with a favouring eye.<br>
 When thou, whom all good gifts attend,<br>
 Hast sought me and become my friend.<br>
 Leagued, friend, with thee in bold emprise<br>
 My arm might win the conquered skies;<br>
 And shall our banded strength be weak<br>
 To gain the realm which now I seek?<br>
 A happy fate was mine above<br>
 My kith and kin and all I love.<br>
 When, near the witness fire, I won<br>
 Thy friendship, Raghu's glorious son.<br>
 Thou too in ripening time shall see<br>
 Thy friend not all unworthy thee.<br>
 What gifts I have shall thus be shown:<br>
 Not mine the tongue to make them known.<br>
 Strong is the changeless bond that binds<br>
 The friendly faith of noble minds.<br>
 In woe, in danger, firm and sure<br>
 Their constancy and love endure.<br>
 Gold, silver, jewels rich and rare<br>
 They count as wealth for friends to share.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_332"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 332</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Yea, be they rich or poor and low,<br>
 Blest with all joys or sunk in woe,<br>
 Stained with each fault or pure of blame,<br>
 Their friends the nearest place may claim;<br>
 For whom they leave, at friendship's call,<br>
 Their gold, their bliss, their homes and all,<br>
     He spoke by generous impulse moved,<br>
 And Raghu's son his speech approved<br>
 Glancing at Lakshman by his side,<br>
 Like Indra in his beauty's pride.<br>
 The Vánar monarch saw the pair<br>
 Of mighty brothers standing there,<br>
 And turned his rapid eye to view<br>
 The forest trees that near him grew.<br>
 He saw, not far from where he stood,<br>
 A Sál tree towering o'er the wood.<br>
 Amid the thick leaves many a bee<br>
 Graced the scant blossoms of the tree,<br>
 From whose dark shade a bough, that bore<br>
 A load of leafy twigs, he tore,<br>
 Which on the grassy ground he laid<br>
 And seats for him and Ráma made,<br>
 Hanúmán saw them sit, he sought<br>
 A Sál tree's leafy bough and brought<br>
 The burthen, and with meek request<br>
 Entreated Lakshman, too, to rest.<br>
 There on the noble mountain's brow,<br>
 Strewn with the young leaves of the bough,<br>
 Sat Raghu's son in placid ease<br>
 Calm as the sea when sleeps the breeze.<br>
 Sugríva's heart with rapture swelled,<br>
 And thus, by eager love impelled,<br>
 He spoke in gracious tone, that, oft<br>
 Checked by his joy, was low and soft:<br>
 'I, by my brother's might oppressed,<br>
 By ceaseless woe and fear distressed,<br>
 Mourning my consort far away,<br>
 On Rishyamúka's mountain stray.<br>
 Expelled by Báli's cruel hate<br>
 I wander here disconsolate.<br>
 Do thou to whom all sufferers flee,<br>
 From his dread hand deliver me.'<br>
     He spoke, and Rama, just and brave,<br>
 Whose pious soul to virtue clave,<br>
 Smiled as in conscious might he eyed<br>
 The king of Vánars, and replied:<br>
 'Best fruit of friendship is the deed<br>
 That helps the friend in hour of need;<br>
 And this mine arm in death shall lay<br>
 Thy robber ere the close of day.<br>
 For see, these feathered darts of mine<br>
 Whose points so fiercely flash and shine,<br>
 And shafts with golden emblem, came<br>
 From dark woods known by Skanda's name, <a name="fr_562"></a><a href="#fn_562"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Winged from the pinion of the hern<br>
 Like Indra's bolts they strike and burn.<br>
 With even knots and piercing head<br>
 Each like a furious snake is sped;<br>
 With these, to-day, before thine eye<br>
 Shall, like a shattered mountain, lie<br>
 Báli, thy dread and wicked foe,<br>
 O'erwhelmed in hideous overthrow.'<br>
     He spoke: Sugríva's bosom swelled<br>
 With hope and joy unparalleled.<br>
 Then his glad voice the Vánar raised,<br>
 And thus the son of Raghu praised:<br>
 'Long have I pined in depth of grief;<br>
 Thou art the hope of all, O chief.<br>
 Now, Raghu's son, I bail thee friend,<br>
 And bid thee to my woes attend;<br>
 For, by ray truth I swear it, now<br>
 Not life itself is dear as thou,<br>
 Since by the witness fire we met<br>
 And friendly hand in hand was set.<br>
 Friend communes now with friend, and hence<br>
 I tell with surest confidence,<br>
 How woes that on my spirit weigh<br>
 Consume me through the night and day.'<br>
     For sobs and sighs he scarce could speak,<br>
 And his sad voice came low and weak,<br>
 As, while his eyes with tears o'erflowed,<br>
 The burden of his soul he showed.<br>
 Then by strong effort, bravely made,<br>
 The torrent of his tears he stayed,<br>
 Wiped his bright eyes, his grief subdued,<br>
 And thus, more calm, his speech renewed:<br>
 'By Báli's conquering might oppressed,<br>
 Of power and kingship dispossessed,<br>
 Loaded with taunts of scorn and hate<br>
 I left my realm and royal state.<br>
 He tore away my consort: she<br>
 Was dearer than my life to me,<br>
 And many a friend to me and mine<br>
 In hopeless chains was doomed to pine.<br>
 With wicked thoughts, unsated still,<br>
 Me whom he wrongs he yearns to kill;<br>
 And spies of Vánar race, who tried<br>
 To slay me, by this hand have died.<br>
 Moved by this constant doubt and fear<br>
 I saw thee, Prince, and came not near.<br>
 When woe and peril gather rouud<br>
 A foe in every form is found.<br>
 Save Hanúmán, O Raghu's son,<br>
 And these, no friend is left me, none.<br>
 Through their kind aid, a faithful band<br>
 Who guard their lord from hostile hand,<br>
 Rest when their chieftain rests and bend<br>
 Their steps where'er he lists to wend,--<br>
 Through them alone, in toil and pain,<br>
 My wretched life I still sustain.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_333"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 333</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Enough, for thou hast heard in brief<br>
 The story of my pain and grief.<br>
 His mighty strength all regions know,<br>
 My brother, but my deadly foe.<br>
 Ah, if the proud oppressor fell,<br>
 His death would all my woe dispel.<br>
 Yea, on my cruel conqueror's fall<br>
 My joy depends, my life, my all.<br>
 This were the end and sure relief,<br>
 O Ráma, of my tale of grief.<br>
 Fair be his lot or dark with woe.<br>
 No comfort like a friend I know.'<br>
     Then Rama spoke: 'O friend, relate<br>
 Whence sprang fraternal strife and hate,<br>
 That duly taught by thee, I may<br>
 Each foeman's strength and weakness weigh:<br>
 And skilled in every chance restore<br>
 The blissful state thou hadst before.<br>
 For, when I think of all the scorn<br>
 And bitter woe thou long hast borne.<br>
 My soul indignant swells with pain<br>
 Like waters flushed with furious rain.<br>
 Then, ere I string this bended bow,<br>
 Tell me the tale I long to know,<br>
 Ere from the cord my arrow fly,<br>
 And low in death thy foeman lie.'<br>
     He spoke: Sugríva joyed to hear,<br>
 Nor less his lords were glad of cheer:<br>
 And thus to Ráma mighty-souled<br>
 The cause that moved their strife he told;<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_562"></a><a href="ry282.htm#fr_562">332:1</a>  The wood in which Skanda or
 Kártikeva was brought up:
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
                                 'The Warrior-God<br>
 Whose infant steps amid the thickets strayed<br>
 Where the reeds wave over the holy sod.<br>
 </dir>
 
 <p>
 See also Book I. Canto XXIX. <i>Meghadúta</i></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry283.htm">Next: Canto IX.: Sugríva's Story. </a></center>
 </body>