<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry284.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry286.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XI.: DUNDUBHI.</h3>
 <p>
 'I doubt not, Prince, thy peerless might,<br>
 Armed with these shafts so keen and bright,<br>
 Like all-destroying fires of fate,<br>
 The worlds could burn and devastate.<br>
 But lend thou first thy mind and ear<br>
 Of Báli's power and might to hear.<br>
 How bold, how firm, in battle tried,<br>
 Is Báli's heart; and then decide.<br>
 From east to west, from south to north<br>
 On restless errand hunting forth,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 From farthest sea to sea he flies<br>
 Before the sun has lit the skies.<br>
 A mountain top he oft will seek.<br>
 Tear from its root a towering peak.<br>
 Hurl it aloft, as 'twere a ball,<br>
 And catch it ere to earth it fall.<br>
 And many a tree that long has stood<br>
 In health and vigour in the wood,<br>
 His single arm to earth will throw,<br>
 The marvels of his might to show.<br>
 Shaped like a bull, a monster bore<br>
 The name of Dundubhi of yore:<br>
 He matched in size a mountain height,<br>
 A thousand elephants in might.<br>
 By pride of wondrous gifts impelled,<br>
 And strength he deemed unparalleled,<br>
 To Ocean, lord of stream and brook,<br>
 Athirst for war, his way he took.<br>
 He reached the king of rolling waves<br>
 Whose gems are piled in sunless caves,<br>
 And threw his challenge to the sea;<br>
 'Come forth, O King, and fight with me.'<br>
 He spoke, and from his ocean bed<br>
 The righteous  <a name="fr_568"></a><a href="#fn_568"><font size="1">1</font></a> monarch heaved his head,<br>
 And gave, sedate, his calm reply<br>
 To him whom fate impelled to die:<br>
 'Not mine, not mine the power,' he cried,<br>
 'To cope with thee in battle tried;<br>
 But listen to my voice, and seek<br>
 The worthier foe of whom I speak.<br>
 The Lord of Hills, where hermits live<br>
 And love the home his forests give,<br>
 Whose child is S'ankar's darling queen,  <a name="fr_569"></a><a href="#fn_569"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 The King of Snows is he I mean.<br>
 Deep caves has he, and dark boughs shade<br>
 The torrent and the wild cascade.<br>
 From him expect the fierce delight<br>
 Which heroes feel in equal fight.'<br>
 He deemed that fear checked ocean's king,<br>
 And, like an arrow from the string,<br>
 To the wild woods that clothe the side<br>
 Of Lord Himálaya's hills he hied.<br>
 Then Dundubhi, with hideous roar.<br>
 Huge fragments from the summit tore<br>
 Vast as Airávat,  <a name="fr_570"></a><a href="#fn_570"><font size="1">3</font></a> white with snow,<br>
 And hurled them to the plains below.<br>
 Then like a white cloud soft, serene.<br>
 The Lord of Mountains' form was seen.<br>
 It sat upon a lofty crest.<br>
 And thus the furious fiend addressed:<br>
 'Beseems thee not, O virtue's friend,<br>
 My mountain tops to rive and rend;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_336"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 336</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 For I, the hermit's calm retreat,<br>
 For deeds of war am all unmeet,'<br>
     The demon's eye with rage grew red,<br>
 And thus in furious tone he said:<br>
 'If thou from fear or sloth decline<br>
 To match thy strength in war with mine,<br>
 Where shall I find a champion, say,<br>
 To meet me burning for the fray?'<br>
 He spoke: Himálaya, skilled in lore<br>
 Of eloquence, replied once more,<br>
 And, angered in his righteous mind,<br>
 Addressed the chief of demon kind:<br>
 'The Vánar Báli, brave and wise,<br>
 Son of the God who rules the sides, <a name="fr_571"></a><a href="#fn_571"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Sways, glorious in his high renown,<br>
 Kishkindhá his imperial town.<br>
 Well may that valiant lord who knows<br>
 Each art of war his might oppose<br>
 To thine, in equal battle set,<br>
 As Namuehi  <a name="fr_572"></a><a href="#fn_572"><font size="1">2</font></a> and Indra met.<br>
 Go, if thy soul desire the fray;<br>
 To Báli's city speed away,<br>
 And that uoconquered hero meet<br>
 Whose fame is high for warlike feat.'<br>
 He listened to the Lord of Snow,<br>
 And, his proud heart with rage aglow,<br>
 Sped swift away and lighted down<br>
 By vast Kishkindhá, Báli's town.<br>
 With pointed horns to strike and gore<br>
 The semblance of a bull he bore,<br>
 Huge as a cloud that downward bends<br>
 Ere the full flood of rain descends.<br>
 Impelled by pride and rage and hate,<br>
 He thundered at Kishkindhá's gate;<br>
 And with his bellowing, like the sound<br>
 Of pealing drums, he shook the ground,<br>
 He rent the earth and prostrate threw<br>
 The trees that near the portal grew.<br>
 King Báli from the bowers within<br>
 Indignant heard the roar and din.<br>
 Then, moonlike mid the stars, with all<br>
 His dames he hurried to the wall;<br>
 And to the fiend this speech, expressed<br>
 In clear and measured words, addressed:<br>
 'Know me for monarch. Báli styled,<br>
 Of Vánar tribes that roam the wild.<br>
 Say why dost thou this gate molest,<br>
 And bellowing thus disturb our rest?<br>
 I know thee, mighty fiend: beware<br>
 And guard thy life with wiser care.'<br>
 He spoke: and thus the fiend returned,<br>
 While red with rage his eyeballs burned:<br>
 'What! speak when all thy dames are nigh<br>
 And hero-like thy foe defy?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Come, meet me in the fight this day,<br>
 And learn my strength by bold assay.<br>
 Or shall I spare tbee, and relent<br>
 Until the coming night be spent?<br>
 Take then the respite of a night<br>
 And yield thee to each soft delight.<br>
 Then, monarch of the Vánar race.<br>
 With loving arms thy friends embrace.<br>
 Gifts on thy faithful lords bestow,<br>
 Bid each and all farewell, and go.<br>
 Show in the streets once more thy face,<br>
 Instal thy son to fill thy place.<br>
 Dally a while with each dear dame;<br>
 And then my strength thy pride shall tame<br>
 For, should I smite thee drunk with wine<br>
 Enamoured of those dames of thine,<br>
 Beneath diseases bowed and bent,<br>
 Or weak, unarmed, or negligent,<br>
 My deed would merit hate and scorn<br>
 As his who slays the child unborn.'<br>
 Then Báli's soul with rage was tired,<br>
 Queen Tárá and the dames retired;<br>
 And slowly, with a laugh of pride,<br>
 The king of Vánars thus replied:<br>
 'Me, fiend, thou deemest drunk with wine:<br>
 Unless thy fear the fight decline,<br>
 Come, meet me in the fray, and test<br>
 The spirit of my valiant breast.'<br>
 He spoke in wrath and high disdain;<br>
 And, laying down his golden chain,<br>
 Gift of his sire Mahendra, dared<br>
 The demon, for the fray prepared;<br>
 Seized by the horns the monster, vast<br>
 As a huge hill, and held him fast,<br>
 Then fiercely dragged him round and round,<br>
 And, shouting, hurled him to the ground.<br>
 Blood streaming from his ears, he rose,<br>
 And wild with fury strove the foes.<br>
 Then Báli, match for Indra's might,<br>
 With every arm renewed the fight.<br>
 He fought with fists, and feet, and knees,<br>
 With fragments of the rock, and trees.<br>
 At last the monster's strength, assailed<br>
 By S'akra's  <a name="fr_573"></a><a href="#fn_573"><font size="1">1b</font></a> conquering offspring, failed.<br>
 Him Bali raised with mighty strain.<br>
 And dashed upon the ground again;<br>
 Where, bruised and shattered, in a tide<br>
 Of rushing blood, the demon died.<br>
 King Báli saw the lifeless corse,<br>
 And bending, with tremendous force<br>
 Raised the huge bulk from where it lay,<br>
 And hurled it full a league away.<br>
 As through the air the body flew,<br>
 Some blood-drops, caught by gales that blew,<br>
 Welled from his shattered jaw and fell<br>
 By Saint Matanga's hermit cell:<br>
 Matanga saw, illustrious sage,<br>
 Those drops defile his hermitage,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_337"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 337</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And, as he marvelled whence they came,<br>
 Fierce anger filled his soul with flame:<br>
 'Who is the villain, evil-souled,<br>
 With childish thoughts unwise and bold,<br>
 Who is the impious wretch,' he cried,<br>
 'By whom my grove with blood is dyed?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spoke Matanga in his rage,<br>
 And hastened from the hermitage,<br>
 When lo, before his wondering eyes<br>
 Lay the dead bull of mountain size<br>
 His hermit soul was nothing slow<br>
 The doer of the deed to know,<br>
 And thus the Vánar in a burst<br>
 Of wild tempestuous wrath he cursed:<br>
 'Ne'er let that Vánar wander here,<br>
 For, if he come, his death is near.<br>
 Whose impious hand with blood has dyed<br>
 The holy place where I abide,<br>
 Who threw this demon corse and made<br>
 A ruin of the pleasant shade.<br>
 If e'er he plant his wicked feet<br>
 Within one league of my retreat;<br>
 Yea, if the villain come so nigh<br>
 That very hour he needs must die.<br>
 And let the Vánar lords who dwell<br>
 In the dark woods that skirt my cell<br>
 Obey my words, and speeding hence<br>
 Find them some meeter residence.<br>
 Here if they dare to stay, on all<br>
 The terrors of my curse shall fall.<br>
 They spoil the tender saplings, dear<br>
 As children which I cherish here,<br>
 Mar root and branch and leaf and spray,<br>
 And steal the ripening fruit away.<br>
 One day I grant, no further hour,<br>
 To-morrow shall my curse have power,<br>
 And then each Vánar I may see<br>
 A stone through countless years shall be.'<br>
 The Vánars heard the curse and hied<br>
 From sheltering wood and mountain side.<br>
 King Báli marked their haste and dread,<br>
 And to the flying leaders said:<br>
 'Speak, Vánar chiefs, and tell me why<br>
 From Saint Matanga's grove ye fly<br>
 To gather round me: is it well<br>
 With all who in those woodlands dwell?'<br>
 He spoke: the Vánar leaders told<br>
 King Báli with his chain of gold<br>
 What curse the saint had on them laid,<br>
 Which drove them from their ancient shade.<br>
 Then royal Báli sought the sage,<br>
 With reverent hands to soothe his rage.<br>
 The holy man his suppliant spurned,<br>
 And to his cell in anger turned.<br>
 That curse on Báli sorely pressed.<br>
 And long his conscious soul distressed.<br>
 Him still the curse and terror keep<br>
 Afar from Rishyamúka's steep.<br>
 He dares not to the grove draw nigh,<br>
 Nay scarce will hither turn his eye.<br>
 We know what terrors warm him hence,<br>
 And roam these woods in confidence.<br>
 Look, Prince, before thee white and dry<br>
 The demon's bones uncovered lie,<br>
 Who, like a hill in bulk and length,<br>
 Fell ruind for his pride of strength.<br>
 See those high Sál trees seven in row<br>
 That droop their mighty branches low,<br>
 These at one grasp would Báli seize,<br>
 And leafless shake the trembling trees.<br>
 These tales I tell, O Prince, to show<br>
 The matchless power that arms the foe.<br>
 How canst thou hope to slay him? how<br>
 Meet Báli in the battle now?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sugríva spoke and sadly sighed:<br>
 And Lakshman with a laugh replied:<br>
 'What show of power, what proof and test<br>
 May still the doubts that fill thy breast?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke. Sugríva thus replied:<br>
 'See yonder Sál trees side by side.<br>
 King Báli here would take his stand<br>
 Grasping his bow with vigorous hand,<br>
 And every arrow, keen and true.<br>
 Would strike its tree and pierce it through<br>
 If Ráma now his bow will bend,<br>
 And through one trunk an arrow send;<br>
 Or if his arm can raise and throw<br>
 Two hundred measures of his bow,<br>
 Grasped by a foot and hurled through air,<br>
 The demon bull that moulders there,<br>
 My heart will own his might and fain<br>
 Believe my foe already slain.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sugríva spoke inflamed with ire,<br>
 Scanned Ráma with a glance of fire,<br>
 Pondered a while in silent mood.<br>
 And thus again his speech renewed:<br>
 'All lands with Báli's glories ring,<br>
 A valiant, strong, and mighty king;<br>
 In conscious power unused to yield;<br>
 A hero first in every field.<br>
 His wondrous deeds his might declare,<br>
 Deeds Gods might scarcely do or dare;<br>
 And on this power reflecting still<br>
 I roam on Rishyamúka's hill.<br>
 Awed by my brother's might I rove,<br>
 In doubt and fear, from grove to grove,<br>
 While Hanumán, my chosen friend,<br>
 And faithful lords my steps attend;<br>
 And now, O true to friendship's tie,<br>
 I hail in thee my best ally.<br>
 My surest refuge from my foes,<br>
 And steadfast as the Lord of Snows.<br>
 Still, when I muse how strong and bold<br>
 Is cruel Báli, evil-souled,<br>
 But ne'er, O chief of Raghu's line,<br>
 Have seen what strength in war is thine,<br>
 Though in my heart I may not dare<br>
 Doubt thy great might, despise, compare,<br>
 Thoughts of his fearful deeds will rise<br>
 And fill my soul with sad surmise.<br>
 Speech, form, and trust which naught may move<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_338"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 338</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thy secret strength and glory prove,<br>
 As smouldering ashes dimly show<br>
 The dormant fires that live below.'<br>
     He ceased: and Ráma answered, while<br>
 Played o'er his lips a gracious smile:<br>
 'Not yet convinced? This clear assay<br>
 Shall drive each lingering doubt away.'<br>
 Thus Ráma spoke his heart to cheer,<br>
 To Dundubhi's vast frame drew near:<br>
 He touched it with his foot in play<br>
 And sent it twenty leagues away.<br>
 Sugríva marked what easy force<br>
 Hurled through the air that demon's corse<br>
 Whose mighty bones were white and dried,<br>
 And to the son of Raghu cried:<br>
 'My brother Báli, when his might<br>
 Was drunk and weary from the fight,<br>
 Hurled forth the monster body, fresh<br>
 With skin and sinews, blood and flesh.<br>
 Now flesh and blood are dried away.<br>
 The crumbling bones are light as hay,<br>
 Which thou, O Raghu's son, hast sent<br>
 Flying through air in merriment.<br>
 This test alone is weak to show<br>
 If thou be stronger or the foe.<br>
 By thee a heap of mouldering bone,<br>
 By him the recent corse was thrown.<br>
 Thy strength, O Prince, is yet untried:<br>
 Come, pierce one tree: let this decide.<br>
 Prepare thy ponderous bow and bring<br>
 Close to thine ear the straining string.<br>
 On yonder Sál tree fix thine eye,<br>
 And let the mighty arrow fly,<br>
 I doubt not, chief, that I shall see<br>
 Thy pointed shaft transfix the tree.<br>
 Then come, assay the easy task,<br>
 And do for love the thing I ask.<br>
     Best of all lights, the Day-God fills<br>
         With glory earth and sky:<br>
     Himálaya is the lord of hills<br>
         That heave their heads on high.<br>
     The royal lion is the best<br>
         Of beasts that tread the earth;<br>
     And thou, O hero, art confessed<br>
         First in heroic worth.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_568"></a><a href="ry285.htm#fr_568">335:1</a>  Righteous because he never transgresses
 his bounds, and
 </p><dir><br>
       "over his great tides<br>
       Fidelity presides."<br>
 </dir>
 
 <p><a name="fn_569"></a><a href="ry285.htm#fr_569">335:2</a>  Himálaya, the Lord of Snow, is the
 father of Umá the wife of S'iva or S'ankar.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_570"></a><a href="ry285.htm#fr_570">335:3</a>  Indra's celestial elephant.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_571"></a><a href="ry285.htm#fr_571">336:1</a>  Báli was the son of Indra. See
 p.28.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_572"></a><a href="ry285.htm#fr_572">336:2</a>  An Asur slain by Indra. See p. 261
 Note. He is, like Vritra, a form of the
 demon of drought destroyed by the beneficent
 God of the firmament.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_573"></a><a href="ry285.htm#fr_573">336:1b</a>  Another name of Indra or Mahendra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry286.htm">Next: Canto XII.: The Palm Trees.</a></center>
 </body>