<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry283.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry285.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO X.: SUGRÍVA'S STORY.</h3>
 <p>
 'I strove to soothe and lull to rest<br>
 The fury of his troubled breast:<br>
 Well art thou come, dear lord,' I cried.<br>
 'By whose strong arm thy foe has died.<br>
 Forlorn I languished here, but now<br>
 My saviour and defence art thou.<br>
 Once more receive this regal shade  <a name="fr_566"></a><a href="#fn_566"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Like the full moon in heaven displayed;<br>
 And let the chouries*,  <a name="fr_567"></a><a href="#fn_567"><font size="1">2</font></a> thus restored,<br>
 Wave glorious o'er the rightful lord.<br>
 I kept my watch, thy word obeyed,<br>
 And by the cave a year I stayed.<br>
 But when I saw that stream of blood<br>
 Rush from the cavern in a flood,<br>
 My sad heart broken with dismay.<br>
 And every wandering sense astray,<br>
 I barred the entrance with a stone,--<br>
 A crag from some high mountain thrown--<br>
 Turned from the spot I watched in vain.<br>
 And to Kishkindhá came again.<br>
 My deep distress and downcast mien<br>
 By citizen and lord were seen.<br>
 They made me king against my will:<br>
 Forgive me if the deed was ill.<br>
 True as I ever was I see<br>
 My honoured king once more in thee;<br>
 I only ruled a while the state<br>
 When thou hadst left us desolate.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 This town with people, lords, and lands,<br>
 Lay as a trust in guardian hands:<br>
 And now, my gracious lord, accept<br>
 The kingdom which thy servant kept.<br>
 Forgive me, victor of the foe,<br>
 Nor let thy wrath against me glow.<br>
 See joining suppliant hands I pray,<br>
 And at thy feet my head I lay.<br>
 Believe my words: against my will<br>
 The royal seat they made me fill.<br>
 Unkinged they saw the city, hence<br>
 They made me lord for her defence.'<br>
     But Báli, though I humbly sued,<br>
 Reviled me in his furious mood:<br>
 'Out on thee, wretch!' in wrath he cried<br>
 With many a bitter taunt beside<br>
 He summoned every lord, and all<br>
 His subjects gathered at his call.<br>
 Then forth his burning anger broke,<br>
 And thus amid his friends he spoke:<br>
 'I need not tell, for well ye know,<br>
 How fierce Máyáví, fiend and foe,<br>
 Came to Kishkindhá's gate by night,<br>
 And dared me in his wrath to fight.<br>
 I heard each word the demon said:<br>
 Forth from my royal hall I sped;<br>
 And, foe in brother's guise concealed,<br>
 Sugríva followed to the field.<br>
 The mighty demon through the shade<br>
 Beheld me come with one to aid:<br>
 Then shrinking from unequal fight.<br>
 He turned his back in swiftest flight.<br>
 From vengeful foes his life to save<br>
 He sought the refuge of a cave.<br>
 Then when I saw the fiend had fled<br>
 Within that cavern dark and dread,<br>
 Thus to my brother cruel-eyed.<br>
 Impatient in my wrath, I cried:<br>
 'I seek no more my royal town<br>
 Till I have struck the demon down.<br>
 Here by the cavein's mouth remain<br>
 Until my hand the foe have slain.'<br>
 Upon his faith my heart relied,<br>
 And swift within the depths I hied.<br>
 A year went by: in every spot<br>
 I sought the fiend, but found him not.<br>
 At length my foe I saw and slew.<br>
 Whom long I feared when lost to view;<br>
 And all his kinsmen by his side<br>
 Beneath my vengeful fury died.<br>
 The monster, as he reeled and fell,<br>
 Poured forth his blood with roar and yell;<br>
 And, filling all the cavern, dyed<br>
 The portal with the crimson tide.<br>
 Upon my foeman slain at last<br>
 One look, one pitying look, I cast.<br>
 I sought again the light of day:<br>
 The cave was closed and left no way.<br>
 To the barred mouth I sadly came,<br>
 And called aloud Sugríva's name.<br>
 But all was still: no voice replied,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_335"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 335</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And hope within my bosom died.<br>
 With furious efforts, vain at first,<br>
 Through bars of rock my way I burst.<br>
 Then, free once more, the path that brought<br>
 My feet in safety home I sought.<br>
 'Twas thus Sugríva dared despise<br>
 The claim of brothers' friendly ties.<br>
 With crags of rock he barred me in,<br>
 And for himself the realm would win.<br>
     Thus Báli spoke in words severe;<br>
 And then, unmoved by ruth or fear,<br>
 Left me a single robe and sent<br>
 His brother forth in banishment.<br>
 He cast me out with scathe and scorn,<br>
 And from my side my wife was torn,<br>
 Now in great fear and ill at ease<br>
 I roam this land with woods and seas,<br>
 Or dwell on Rishyamúka's hill,<br>
 And sorrow for my consort still.<br>
 Thou hast the tale how first arose<br>
 This bitter hate of brother foes.<br>
 Such are the griefs neath which I pine,<br>
 And all without a fault of mine.<br>
 O swift to save in hour of fear,<br>
 My prayer who dread this Báli, hear<br>
 With gracious love assistance deign,<br>
 And mine oppressor's arm restrain.'<br>
     Then Raghu's son, the good and brave,<br>
 With a gay laugh his answer gate:<br>
 'These shafts of mine which ne'er can fail,<br>
 Before whose sheen the sun grows pale,<br>
 Winged by my fury, fleet and fierce,<br>
 The wicked Báli's heart shall pierce.<br>
 Yea, mark the words I speak, so long<br>
 Shall live that wretch who joys in wrong,<br>
 Until these angered eyes have seen<br>
 The robber of thy darling queen.<br>
 I, taught by equal suffering, know<br>
 What waves of grief above thee flow.<br>
 This hand thy captive wife shall free,<br>
 And give thy kingdom back to thee.'<br>
     Sugríva joyed as Ráma spoke,<br>
 And valour in his breast awoke.<br>
 His eye grew bright, his heart grew bold,<br>
 And thus his wondrous tale he told:<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_566"></a><a href="ry284.htm#fr_566">334:1</a>  The canopy or royal umbrella, one of
 the usual Indian regalia.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_567"></a><a href="ry284.htm#fr_567">334:2</a>  Whisks made of the hair of the Yak
 or Bos grunniers, also regal insignia.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry285.htm">Next: Canto XI.: Dundubhi.</a></center>
 </body>