<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry294.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry296.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXI.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 There, like a fallen star, the dame<br>
 Fell by her lord's half lifeless frame;<br>
 And Hanumán drew softly near,<br>
 And strove her grieving heart to.cheer:<br>
 'By changeless law our bliss and woe<br>
 From ancient worth and folly flow.<br>
 What fruits soe'er we cull, the seeds<br>
 Were scattered by our former deeds. <a name="fr_603"></a><a href="#fn_603"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Why mourn another's mournful fate,<br>
 And weep, thyself unfortunate?<br>
 Be calm, O thou whose heart is wise,<br>
 for none deserves another's sighs.<br>
 Look up, with idle sorrow strive:<br>
 Thy child, his heir, is yet alive.<br>
 Let needful rites be duly done,<br>
 Nor in thy woe forget thy son.<br>
 Regard the law which all obey:<br>
 They spring to life, they pass away.<br>
 Begin the task that bids thee rise,<br>
 And stay these tears, for thou art wise.<br>
 Our lord the king is doomed to die,<br>
 On whom ten million hearts rely,<br>
 Kind, liberal, patient, true, and just<br>
 Was lie in whom they place their trust,<br>
 And now he seeks the land of those<br>
 Who for the right subdue their foes.<br>
 Each Vánar lord with all his train,<br>
 Each ranger of this wild domain,<br>
 And Angad here, thy darling, see<br>
 A governor and friend in thee.<br>
 These twain <a name="fr_604"></a><a href="ry296.htm#fn_604"><font size="1">1b</font></a> whose hearts with sorrow ache<br>
 The funeral rites shall undertake,<br>
 And Angad by his mother's care<br>
 Be king, his father's rightful heir.<br>
 Now let him pay, as laws require,<br>
 His sacred duty to his sire,<br>
 Nor one solemnity omit<br>
 Of all that mighty kings befit.<br>
 And when thy loud eye sees thine own<br>
 Dear Angad on his father's throne,<br>
 Then, lightened of its load of pain,<br>
 Thy spirit will have rest again.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She heard his speech, she heaved her head,<br>
 Looked upon Hanumán and said,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Sweeter my slain lord's limbs to touch,<br>
 Than Angad or a hundred such.<br>
 No rule or right, a widowed dame,<br>
 O'er Angad or the realm I claim,<br>
 Sugriva is the uncle, he<br>
 In every act supreme must be,<br>
 I pray thee, chief, this plan resign,<br>
 Nor claim from me what ne'er is mine.<br>
 The father with his tender care<br>
 Guards the dear child the mother bare,<br>
 Where'er I be, no sweeter task,<br>
 No happier joy I hope or ask<br>
 Than thus to sit with loving eyes<br>
 And watch the bed where Báli lies.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_603"></a><a href="ry295.htm#fr_603">350:1</a>  "Our deeds still follow with us from afar.
 And what we have been makes us what
 we are."</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry296.htm">Next: Canto XXII.: Báli Dead.</a></center>
 </body>