<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry293.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry295.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XX.: TÁRÁ'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 Again she bent her to the ground,<br>
 Her arms about her husband wound.<br>
 Sobbed on his breast, and sick and faint<br>
 With anguish poured her wild complaint:<br>
 Brave in the charge of battle, boast<br>
 And glory of the Vánar host,<br>
 Why on the cold earth wilt thou lie<br>
 And give no answer when I cry!<br>
 Up, warrior, from thy lowly bed!<br>
 A meeter couch for thee is spread.<br>
 It ill beseems a glorious king<br>
 On the bare ground his limbs to fling.<br>
 Ah, surely must thy love be strong<br>
 For her whom thou hast governed long,<br>
 If thou, my hero, canst recline<br>
 On her cold breast forsaking mine.<br>
 Or, famed for justice through the laud.<br>
 Thou on the road to heaven hast planned<br>
 Some city fairer far than this<br>
 To be thy new metropolis.<br>
 Are all our plasures ended now.<br>
 With those delicious hours which thou<br>
 And I, dear lord, together spent<br>
 In woods that breathed the honey's scent?<br>
 Whelmed in my sorrow's boundless sea,<br>
 There is no joy, no hope, for me,<br>
 When my beloved lord, who led<br>
 The Vánars to the fight, is dead,<br>
 My widowed heart is stern and cold.<br>
 Or, at the sight mine eyes behold,<br>
 O'ermastered would it end this ache<br>
 And in a thousand fragments break.<br>
 Ah noble Vánar, doomed to pay<br>
 The penalty of all today--<br>
 Sugriva from his home expelled.<br>
 And Rumá <a name="fr_602"></a><a href="#fn_602"><font size="1">1b</font></a> from his arms withheld.<br>
 Our Vánar race and thee to save.<br>
 Wise counsel for thy weal I gave;<br>
 But thou, by wildest folly stirred,<br>
 Wouldst give no credence to my word.<br>
 And now wilt woo the nymphs above.<br>
 And shake their souls with pangs of love.<br>
 Ah, never could it be that thou<br>
 Beneath Sugriva's power shouldst bow,<br>
 Thy conqueror is none but Fate<br>
 Whose mandates all who breathe await.<br>
 And does no thrill of anguish run<br>
 Through the stern breast of Raghu's son,<br>
 Whose base hand dealt a coward's blow,<br>
 And smote thee fighting with thy foe!<br>
 Reft of my lord my days, alas!<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_350"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 350</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 In bitter bitter woe will pass:<br>
 And I, long blest-with every good,<br>
 Must bear my dreary widowhood.<br>
 And when his uncle's brow is stern,<br>
 When his fierce eyes with fury burn,<br>
 Ah, what will be my Angad's fate,<br>
 So fair and young and delicate?<br>
 Come, darling, for the last sad sight,<br>
 Of thy dear sire who loved the right;<br>
 For soon thine eyes will long in vain<br>
 A look at that loved face to gain.<br>
 And, hero, as thy child draws near,<br>
 With tender words his spirit cheer;<br>
 Thy dying wishes gently speak,<br>
 And kiss him on the brows and cheek.<br>
 High fame, I ween, has Ráma won<br>
 By this great deed his hand has done,<br>
 His debt to brave Sugríva paid<br>
 And kept the promise that he made.<br>
 Be happy, King Sugríva, lord<br>
 Of Rumá to thine arms restored:<br>
 Enjoy uninterrupted reign,<br>
 For he, thy foe, at length is slain.<br>
 Dost thou not hear me speak, and why<br>
 Hast thou no word of soft reply?<br>
 Will thou not lift thine eyes and see<br>
 These dames who look to none but thee?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 From their sad eyes, as Tárá spoke,<br>
 The floods of bitter sorrow broke:<br>
 Then, pressing close to Angad's side,<br>
 Each lifted up her voice and cried:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 How couldst thou leave thine Angad thus,<br>
 And go, for ever go, from us--<br>
 Thy child so dear in brave attire,<br>
 Graced with the virtues of his sire?<br>
 If e'er in want of thought, O chief,<br>
 One deed of mine have caused thee grief,<br>
 Forgive my folly, I entreat,<br>
 And with my head I touch thy feet.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Again the hapless Tárá wept<br>
 As to her husband's side she crept,<br>
 And wild with sorrow and dismay<br>
 Sat on the ground where Bálí lay.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_602"></a><a href="ry294.htm#fr_602">349:1b</a> Sugriva's wife.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry295.htm">Next: Canto XXI.: Hanumán's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>