<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry300.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry302.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVII.: RÁMA ON THE HILL.</h3>
 <p>
 But when the solemn rite was o'er,<br>
 And bold Sugríva reigned once more,<br>
 The sons of Rhaghu sought the hill,<br>
 Prasravan of the rushing rill,<br>
 Where roamed the tiger and the deer,<br>
 And lions raised their voice of fear;<br>
 Thick set with trees of every kind,<br>
 With trailing shrubs and plants entwined;<br>
 Home of the ape and monkey, lair<br>
 Of mountain cat and pard and bear,<br>
 In cloudy gloom against the sky<br>
 The sanctifying hills rose high.<br>
 Pierced in their crest, a spacious cave<br>
 To Raghu's sons a shelter gave.<br>
 Then Ráma, pure from every crime,<br>
 In words well suited to the time<br>
 To Lakshman spake, whose faithful zeal<br>
 Watched humbly for his brother's weal:<br>
 'I love this spacious cavern where<br>
 There breathes a fresh and pleasant air.<br>
 Brave brother, let us here remain<br>
 Throughout the season of the rain.<br>
 For in mine eyes this mountain crest<br>
 Is above all, the loveliest.<br>
 Where copper-hued and black and white<br>
 Show the huge blocks that face the height;<br>
 Where gleams the shine of varied ore,<br>
 Where dark clouds baog and torrents roar;<br>
 Where waving woods are fair to see,<br>
 And creepers climb from tree to tree;<br>
 Where the gay peacock's voice is shrill,<br>
 And sweet birds carol on the hill;<br>
 Where odorous breath is wafted far<br>
 From Jessamine and Sinduvár;  <a name="fr_618"></a><a href="#fn_618"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And opening flowers of every hue<br>
 Give wondrous beauty to the view.<br>
 See, too, this pleasant water near<br>
 Our cavern home is fresh and clear;<br>
 And lilies gay with flower and bud<br>
 Are glorious on the lovely flood.<br>
 This cave that fares north and east<br>
 Will shelter us till rain has ceased;<br>
 And towering hills thut rise behind<br>
 Will screen us from the furious wind.<br>
 Close by the cavern's portal lies<br>
 And level stone of ample size<br>
 And sable hue, a mighty block<br>
 Long severed from the parent rock.<br>
 Now let thine eye bent northward rest<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 A while upon that mountain creat,<br>
 High as a cloud that brings the rain,<br>
 And dark as iron rent in twain.<br>
 Look southward, brother, now and view<br>
 A cloudy pile of paler hue<br>
 Like Mount Kailása's topmost height<br>
 Where ores of every tint are bright,<br>
 See, Lakshman, see before our cave<br>
 That clear brook eastward roll its wave<br>
 As though 'twere Ganga's infant rill<br>
 Down streaming from the three-peaked bill<br>
 See, by the water's gentle flow<br>
 As'oka, sal, and sandal grow.<br>
 And every lovely tree most fair<br>
 With leaf and bud and flower is there.<br>
 See there, beneath the bending trees<br>
 That fringe her bank, the river flees,<br>
 Clothed with their beauty like a maid<br>
 In all her robes and gems arrayed,<br>
 While from the sedgy banks are heard<br>
 The soft notes of each amorous bird.<br>
 O see what lovely islets stud<br>
 Like gems the bosom of the flood.<br>
 And sárases and wild swans crowd<br>
 About her till she laughs aloud.<br>
 See, lotus blooms the brook o'erspread,<br>
 Some tender blue, some dazzling red,<br>
 And opening lilies white as snow<br>
 Their buds in rich profusion show.<br>
 There rings the joyous peacock's scream,<br>
 There stands the curlew by the stream,<br>
 And holy hermits love to throng<br>
 Where the sweet waters speed along.<br>
 Ranged on the grassy margin shine<br>
 Gay sandal trees in glittering line,<br>
 And all the wondrous verdure seems<br>
 The offspring of creative dreams,<br>
 O conquering Prince, there cannot be<br>
 A lovelier place than this we see.<br>
 Here sheltered on the beauteous height<br>
 Our days will pass in calm delight.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Nor is Kishkindhá's city, gay<br>
 With grove and garden, far away.<br>
 Thence will the breeze of evening bring<br>
 Sweet music as the minstrels sing;<br>
 And, when the Vánars dance, will come<br>
 The sound of labour and of drum.<br>
 Again to spouse and realm restored.<br>
 Girt by his friends, the Vánar lord<br>
 Great glory has acquired; and how<br>
 Can he be less than happy now?'<br>
 This said, the son of Raghu made<br>
 His dwelling in that pleasant shade<br>
 Upon the mountain's shelving side<br>
 That sweetly all his wants supplied.<br>
 But still the hero's troubled mind<br>
 No comfort in his woe could find.<br>
 Yet mourning for his stolen wife<br>
 Dearer to Ráma than his life.<br>
 Chief when he saw the Lord of Night<br>
 Rise slowly o'er the eastern height,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_358"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 358</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He tossed upon his leafy  bed<br>
 With eyes by sleep unvisited.<br>
 Outwelled the tears in ceaseless flow,<br>
 And every sense was numbed by woe.<br>
 Each pang that pierced the mourner through<br>
 Smote Lakshman's faithful bosom too,<br>
 Who, troubled for his brother's sake,<br>
 With wisest words the prince bespake:<br>
 'Arise, my brother, and be strong:<br>
 Thy hero heart has mourned too long.<br>
 Thou knowest well that tears and sighs<br>
 Will mar the mightiest enterprise.<br>
 Thine was the soul that loved to dare:<br>
 To serve the Gods was still thy care;<br>
 And ne'er may sorrow's sting subdue<br>
 A heart so resolute and true.<br>
 How canst thou hope to slay in fight<br>
 The giant cruel in his might?<br>
 Unwearied must the champion be<br>
 Who strives with such a foe as he.<br>
 Tear out this sorrow by the root;<br>
 Again be bold and resolute.<br>
 Arise, my brother, and subdue<br>
 The demon and his wicked crew.<br>
 Thou canst destroy the earth, her seas,<br>
 Her rooted hills and giant trees<br>
 Unseated by thy furious hand:<br>
 And shall one fiend thy power withstand?<br>
 Wait through this season of the rain<br>
 Till suns of autumn dry the plain,<br>
 Then shall thy giant foe, and all<br>
 His host and realm, before thee fall.<br>
 I wake thy valour that has slept<br>
 Amid the tears thine eyes have wept;<br>
 As drops of oil in worship raise<br>
 The dormant flame to sudden blaze.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The son of Raghu heard: he knew<br>
 His brother's rede was wise and true;<br>
 And, honouring his friendly guide,<br>
 In gentle words he thus replied:<br>
 'Whate'er a hero firm and bold,,<br>
 Devoted, true, and lofty-souled<br>
 Should speak by deep affection led,<br>
 Such are the words which thou hast said.<br>
 I cast away each pensive thought<br>
 That brings the noblest plans to naught,<br>
 And each uninjured power will strain<br>
 Until the purposed end we gain.<br>
 Thy prudent words will I obey,<br>
 And till the close of rain-time stay,<br>
 When King Sugríva will invite<br>
 To action, and the streams be bright.<br>
 The hero saved in hour of need<br>
 Repays the debt with friendly deed:<br>
 But hated by the good are they<br>
 Who take the boon and ne'er repay.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_618"></a><a href="ry301.htm#fr_618">357:1</a>  Vitex Negundo.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry302.htm">Next: Canto XXVIII.: The Rains.</a></center>
 </body>