<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry308.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry310.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXV.: TÁRÁ'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased: and Tárá starry-eyed<br>
 Thus to the angry prince replied:<br>
 'Not to my lord shouldst thou address<br>
 A speech so fraught with bitterness:<br>
 Not thus reproached my lord should be,<br>
 And least of all, O Prince, by thee.<br>
 He is no thankless coward--no--<br>
 With spirit dead to valour's glow.<br>
 From paths of truth he never strays,<br>
 Nor wanders in forbidden ways.<br>
 Ne'er will Sugríva's heart forget,<br>
 By Ráma saved, the lasting debt.<br>
 Still in his grateful breast will live<br>
 The succour none but he could give.<br>
 Restored to fame by Ráma's grace,<br>
 To empire o'er the Vánar race,<br>
 From ceaseless dread and toil set free,<br>
 Restored to Rumá and to me:<br>
 By grief and care and exile tried,<br>
 New to the bliss so long denied,<br>
 Like Visvámitra once, alas,<br>
 He marks not how the seasons pass.<br>
 That saint ten thousand years remained,<br>
 By sweet Ghritáchís  <a name="fr_642"></a><a href="#fn_642"><font size="1">1</font></a> love enchained,<br>
 And deemed those years, that flew away<br>
 So lightly, but a single day.<br>
 O, if those years unheeded flew<br>
 By him who times and seasons knew,<br>
 Unequalled for his lofty mind.<br>
 What marvel meaner eyes are blind?<br>
 Then be not angry, Raghu's son,<br>
 And let thy brother feel for one<br>
 Who many a weary year has spent<br>
 Stranger to love and blandishment.<br>
 Let not this wrath thy soul inflame,<br>
 Like some mean wretch unknown to fame:<br>
 For high and noble hearts like thine<br>
 Love mercy and to truth incline,<br>
 Calm and deliberate, and slow<br>
 With anger's raging fire to glow.<br>
 At length, O righteous prince, relent,<br>
 Nor let my words in vain be spent.<br>
 This sudden blaze of fury slake,<br>
 I pray thee for Sugríva's sake.<br>
 He would renounce at Ráma's call<br>
 Rumá and Angad, me and all<br>
 Who call him lord: his gold and grain,<br>
 The favour of his friend to gain.<br>
 His arm shall slay the fiend more base<br>
 In soul than all his impious race,<br>
 And happy Ráma reunite<br>
 To Sitá, rival in delight<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Of the triumphant Moon when he<br>
 Rejoins his darling Rohiní.  <a name="fr_643"></a><a href="ry310.htm#fn_643"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Ten million million demons guard<br>
 The gates of Lanká firmly barred.<br>
 All hope until that host be slain,<br>
 To smite the robber king is vain.<br>
 Nor with Sugríva's aid alone<br>
 May king and host be overthrown.<br>
 Thus ere he died--for well he knew--<br>
 Spake Báli, and his words are true.<br>
 I know not what his proofs might be,<br>
 But speak the words he spake to me.<br>
 Hence far and wide our lords are sent<br>
 To raise the mightiest armament.<br>
 For their return Sugríva waits<br>
 Ere he can sally from his gates.<br>
 Still is the oath Sugríva swore<br>
 Kept firmly even as before:<br>
 And the great host this day will be<br>
 Assembled by the king's decree,<br>
 Ten thousand thousand troops, who wear<br>
 The form of monkey and of bear,<br>
 Prepared for thee the war to wage:<br>
 Then let thy wrath no longer rage.<br>
 The matrons of the Vánar race<br>
 See marks of fury in thy face;<br>
 They see thine eyes like blood are red,<br>
 And will not yet be comforted.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_642"></a><a href="ry309.htm#fr_642">367:1</a>  The story is told in Book 1. Canto
 LXIII., but the charmer there is called
 Menaká.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry310.htm">Next: Canto XXXVI.: Sugríva's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>