<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry306.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry308.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIII.: LAKSHMAN'S ENTRY.</h3>
 <p>
 Through the fair city Lakshman came,<br>
 Invited in Sugríva's name.<br>
 Within the gates the guardian bands,<br>
 Of Vánars raised their suppliant hands,<br>
 And in their ordered ranks, amazed,<br>
 Upon the princely hero gazed,<br>
 They marked each burning breath he drew,<br>
 The fury of his soul they knew.<br>
 Their hearts were chilled with sudden fear;<br>
 They gazed, but dared not venture near,<br>
 Before his eyes the city, gay<br>
 With gems and flowery gardens, lay,<br>
 Where *fane and palace rose on high,<br>
 And things of beauty charmed the eye.<br>
 Where trees of every blossom grew<br>
 Yielding their fruit in season due<br>
 To Vánars of celestial seed<br>
 Who wore each varied form at need,<br>
 Fair-faced and glorious with the shine<br>
 Of heavenly robes and wreaths divine.<br>
 There sandal, aloe, lotus bloomed,<br>
 And there delicious breath perfumed<br>
 The city's broad street, redolent<br>
 Df sugary mead <a name="fr_638"></a><a href="#fn_638"><font size="1">1b</font></a> and honey scent.<br>
 There many a lofty palace rose<br>
 Like Vindhya or the Lord of Snows,<br>
 And with sweet murmur sparkling rills<br>
 Leapt lightly down the sheltering hills.<br>
 On many a glorious palace, raised<br>
 For prince and noble, <a name="fr_639"></a><a href="#fn_639"><font size="1">2b</font></a> Lakshman gazed:<br>
 Like clouds of paly hue they shone<br>
 With fragrant wreaths that hung thereon:<br>
 There wealth of jewels was enshrined,<br>
 And fairer gems of womankind.<br>
 There gleamed, of noble height and size,<br>
 Like Indra's mansion in the skies,<br>
 Protected by a crystal fence<br>
 Of rock, the royal residence,<br>
 With roof and turret high and bright<br>
 Like Mount Kailása's loftiest height.<br>
 There blooming trees, Mahendra's gift,<br>
 High o'er the walls were seen to lift<br>
 Their golden fruited boughs, that made<br>
 With leaf and flower delicious shade.<br>
 He saw a band of Vánars wait,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_365"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 365</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Wieiding their weapons, at the gate<br>
 Where golden portals flashed between<br>
 Celestial garlands red and green.<br>
 Within Sugriva's fair abode<br>
 Unchecked the mighty hero strode,<br>
 As when the sun of autumn shrouds<br>
 His glory in a pile of clouds.<br>
 Through seven wide courts he quickly passed,<br>
 And reached the royal tower at last,<br>
 Where seats were set with couch and bed<br>
 Of gold and silver richly spread.<br>
 While the young chieftain's feet drew near<br>
 The sound of music reached his ear,<br>
 As the soft breathings of the flute<br>
 Came blending with the voice and lute.<br>
 Then beauty showed her youth and grace<br>
 And varied charm of form and face:<br>
 Soft bright-eyed creatures, fair and young,--<br>
 Gay garlands round their necks were hung,<br>
 And greater charms to each were lent<br>
 By richest dress and ornament.<br>
 He saw the calm attendants wait<br>
 About their lord in careless state,<br>
 Heard women's girdles chime in sweet<br>
 Accordance with their tinkling feet.<br>
 He heard the anklet's silvery sound,<br>
 He saw the calm that reigned around,<br>
 And o'er him, as he listened, came<br>
 A rush of rage, a flood of shame.<br>
 He drew his bowstring: with the clang<br>
 From ease to west the welkin rang:<br>
 Then in his modest mood withdrew<br>
 A little from the ladies' view.<br>
 And sternly silent stood apart.<br>
 While wrath for Ráma filled his heart.<br>
 Sugriva knew the sounding string,<br>
 And at the call the Vánar king<br>
 Sprang swiftly from his golden seat,<br>
 And feared the coming prince to meet.<br>
 Then with cold lips that terror dried<br>
 To beauteous Tárá thus he cried:<br>
 'What cause of anger, O my spouse<br>
 Fair with the charm of lovely brows,<br>
 Sets Lakshman's gentle breast on fire,<br>
 And brings him in unwonted ire?<br>
 Say, canst thou see, O faultless dame,<br>
 A cause to till his soul with flame?<br>
 For there must be a reason when<br>
 Such fury stirs the king of men.<br>
 Reveal the sin, if sin of mine<br>
 Anger the lord of Raghu's line.<br>
 Or go thyself, his rage subdue,<br>
 And with soft words his favour woo.<br>
 Soon as on thee his eyes are set<br>
 His heart this anger will forget,<br>
 For men like him of lofty mind<br>
 Are never stern with womankind.<br>
 First let thy gentle speech disarm<br>
 His fury, and his spirit charm,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And I, from fear of peril free,<br>
 The conqueror of his foes will see.'<br>
     She heard: with faltering steps and slow,<br>
 With eyes that shone with trembling glow.<br>
 With gold-girt body gently bent<br>
 To meet the stranger prince she went.<br>
 When Lakshman saw the Vánar queen<br>
 With tranquil eyes and modest mien,<br>
 Before the dame he bent his head,<br>
 And anger, at her presence, fled.<br>
 Made bold by draughts of wine, and cheered<br>
 By Lakshman look no more she feared,<br>
 And in the trust his favour lent<br>
 She thus addressed him eloquent:<br>
 'Whence springs thy burning fury? say;<br>
 Who dares thy will to disobey?<br>
 Who checks the maddened flames that seize<br>
 On forests full of withered trees?<br>
   Then Lakshman spoke, her mind to ease,<br>
 His kind reply in words like these:<br>
   'Thy lord his days in pleasure spends,<br>
 Heedless of duty and of friends.<br>
 Nor dost thou mark, though fondly true,<br>
 The evil path his steps pursue.<br>
 He cares not for affairs of state,<br>
 Nor us forlorn and desolate,<br>
 But sits a mere spectator still,<br>
 A sensual slave to pleasure's will.<br>
 Four months were fixed, the time agreed<br>
 When he should help us in our need:<br>
 But, bound in toils of pleasure fast,<br>
 He sees not that the months are past.<br>
 Where beats the heart which draughts of wine<br>
 To virtue or to gain incline?<br>
 Hast thou nor heard those draughts destroy<br>
 Virtue and gain and love and joy?<br>
 For those who, helped at need, refuse<br>
 Their aid in turn, their virtue lose:<br>
 And they who scorn a friend disdain<br>
 A treasure naught may buy again.<br>
 Thy lord has cast his friend away,<br>
 Nor feared from virtue's path to stray.<br>
 If this he true, declare, O dame<br>
 Who knowest duty's every claim.<br>
 What further work remains for us<br>
 Deceived and disappointed thus.'<br>
     She listened, for his words were kind.<br>
 Where virtue showed with gain combined,<br>
 And thus in turn the prince addressed,<br>
 As hope was rising in his breast:<br>
 'No time, no cause of wrath I see<br>
 With those who live and honour thee:<br>
 And thou shouldst bear without offence<br>
 Thy servant's fitful negligence.<br>
 I know the seasons glide away,<br>
 While Ráma maddens at delay<br>
 I know what deed our thanks has earned,<br>
 I know that grace shonld be returned<br>
 But still I know, whatever befall,<br>
 That conquering love is lord of all;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_366"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 366</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Know where Sugríva's thoughts, possessed<br>
 By one absorbing passion, rest.<br>
 But he whom sensual joys debase<br>
 Heeds not the claim of time and place,<br>
 And sees not with his blinded sight<br>
 His duty or his gain aright.<br>
 O pardon him who loves me! spare<br>
 The Vánar caught in pleasure's snare,<br>
 And once again let Ráma grace<br>
 With favour him who rules our race.<br>
 E'en royal saints, whose chief delight<br>
 Was penance and austerest rite,<br>
 At love's commandment have unbent,<br>
 Beguiled by sweetest blandishment.<br>
 And know, Sugríva, roused at last,<br>
 The order to his lords has passed.<br>
 And, long by love and bliss delayed.<br>
 Wakes all on fire your hopes to aid.<br>
 A countless host his city fills,<br>
 New-gathered from a thousand hills:<br>
 Impetuous chiefs, who wear at need<br>
 Each varied form, his legions lead.<br>
 Come then, O hero, kept aloof<br>
 By modest awe, nor fear reproof:<br>
 A faithful friend untouched by blame<br>
 May look upon another's dame.'<br>
     He passed within, by Tárá pressed,<br>
 And by his own impatient breast.<br>
 Refulgent there in sunlike sheen<br>
 Sugríva on his throne was seen.<br>
 Gay garlands round his neck were twined,<br>
 And Rumá by her lord recline.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_638"></a><a href="ry307.htm#fr_638">364:1b</a>  Maireya, a spirituous liquor from the
 blossoms of the Lythrum fruticosum, with
 sugar, &amp;c.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_639"></a><a href="ry307.htm#fr_639">364:2b</a>  Their names are as follows:
 Angad, Mainda, Dwida, Gavaya, Gaváksha,
 Gaja, Sarabha, Vidyunmáli,
 Sampáti, Súryáksa, Hanumán, Virabáhu,
 Subáha, Nala, Kúmuda, Sushena, Tára,
 Jámbuvatu, Dadhivakra, *Nila, S'upátala,
 and Sunetra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry308.htm">Next: Canto XXXIV.: Lakshman's Speech</a></center>
 </body>