<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry307.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry309.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIV.: LAKSHMAN'S SPEECH</h3>
 <p>
 Sugríva started from his rest<br>
 With doubt and terror in his breast.<br>
 He heard the prince's furious tread<br>
 He saw his eyes glow fiercely red.<br>
 Swift sprang the monarch to his feet<br>
 Upstarting from his golden seat.<br>
 Rose Rumá and her fellows, too,<br>
 And closely round Sugríva drew,<br>
 As round the moon's full glory stand<br>
 Attendant stars in glittering band.<br>
 Sugríva glanced with reddened eyes,<br>
 Raised his joined hands in suppliant guise<br>
 Flew to the door, and rooted there<br>
 Stood like the tree that grants each prayer. <a name="fr_640"></a><a href="#fn_640"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And Lakshman saw, and, fiercely moved,<br>
 With angry speech the king reproved:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 'Famed is the prince who loves the truth,<br>
 Whose soul is touched with tender ruth,<br>
 Who, liberal, keeps each sense subdued,<br>
 And pays the debt of gratitude.<br>
 but all unmeet a king to be,<br>
 The meanest of the mean is he<br>
 Who basely breaks the promise made<br>
 To trusting friends who lent him aid.<br>
 He sins who for a steed has lied,<br>
 As if a hundred steeds had died:<br>
 Or if he lie, a cow to win,<br>
 Tenfold as heavy is the sin.<br>
 But if the lie a man betray,<br>
 Both he and his shall all decay. <a name="fr_641"></a><a href="#fn_641"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 O Vánar King, the thankless man<br>
 Is worthy of the general ban.<br>
 Who takes assistance of his friends,<br>
 And in his turn no service lends.<br>
 This verse of old by Brahmá sung<br>
 Is echoed now by every tongue.<br>
 Hear what He cried in angry mood<br>
 Bewailing man's ingratitude:<br>
 'For draughts of wine for slaughtered cows,<br>
 For treacherous theft, for broken vows<br>
 A pardon is ordained: but none<br>
 For thankless scorn of service done.'<br>
 Ungrateful, Vánar King, art thou,<br>
 And faithless to thy plighted vow.<br>
 For Ráma brought thee help, and yet<br>
 Thou shunnest to repay the debt:<br>
 Or, grateful, thou hadst surely pressed<br>
 To aid the hero in his quest.<br>
 Thou art, in vulgar pleasures drowned,<br>
 False to thy bond in honour bound.<br>
 Nor yet has Ráma's guileless heart<br>
 Discerned thee for the thing thou art--<br>
 A snake who holds the frogs that cries<br>
 And lures fresh victims as it dies.<br>
 Brave Ráma, born for glorious fate,<br>
 Has set thee in thy high estate,<br>
 And to the Vánars' throne restored,<br>
 Great-souled himself, their mean-souled lord.<br>
 Now if thy pride disown what he,<br>
 High thoughted prince, has done for thee,<br>
 Struck by his arrows shalt thou fall,<br>
 And Báli meet in Yama's hall.<br>
 Still open, to the gloomy God,<br>
 Lies the sad path thy brother trod.<br>
 Then to thy plighted word be true,<br>
 Nor let thy steps that path pursue.<br>
 Me thinks the shafts of Ráma, shot<br>
 Like thunderbolts, thou heedest not,<br>
 Who canst, absorbed in sensual bliss,<br>
 Thy promise from thy mind dismiss.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_367"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 367</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_640"></a><a href="ry308.htm#fr_640">366:1</a>  The Kalpadruma or Wishing-tree is
 one of the trees of Svarga or Indra's Paradise:
 it has the power of granting all
 desires.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_641"></a><a href="ry308.htm#fr_641">366:1b</a>  The meaning is that if a man promises
 to give a horse and then breaks his word he
 commits a sin as great as if he had killed
 a hundred horses.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry309.htm">Next: Canto XXXV.: Tárá's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>