<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry303.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry305.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXX.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 But Ráma in the autumn night<br>
 Stood musing on the mountain height.<br>
 While grief and love that scorned control<br>
 Shook with wild storms the hero's soul.<br>
 Clear was the sky, without a cloud<br>
 The glory of the moon to shroud.<br>
 And bright with purest silver shone<br>
 Each hill the soft beams looked upon,<br>
 He knew Sugriva's heart was bent<br>
 On pleasure, gay and negligent.<br>
 He thought on Janak's child forlorn<br>
 From his fond arms for ever torn.<br>
 He mourned occasion slipping by,<br>
 And faint with anguish heaved each sigh<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_361"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 361</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He sat where many a varied streak<br>
 Of rich ore marked the mountain peak.<br>
 He raised his eyes the skv to view.<br>
 And to his love his sad thoughts flew.<br>
 He. heard the Sáras cry, and faint<br>
 With sorrow poured his love-born plaint:<br>
 She, she who mocked the softest tone<br>
 Of wild birds' voices with her own,--<br>
 Where strays she now, my love who played<br>
 So happy in our hermit shade '<br>
 How can my absent love behold<br>
 The bright trees with their flowers of gold,<br>
 And a11 their gleaming glory see<br>
 With eyes that vainly look for me?<br>
 How is it with my darling when<br>
 From the deep tangles of the glen<br>
 Float carols of each bird elate<br>
 With rapture singing to his mate?<br>
 In vain my weary glances rove<br>
 From lake to hill, from stream to grove:<br>
 I find no rapture in the scene,<br>
 And languish fur my fawn-eyed queen.<br>
 Ah, does strong love with wild unrest,<br>
 Born no the autumn, stir her breast?<br>
 And does the gentle lady pine<br>
 Till her bright eyes shall look in mine?'<br>
     Thus Raghu's son in piteous tone,<br>
 O'erwhelmed with sorrow, made his moan.<br>
 E'en as the bird that drinks the rains  <a name="fr_633"></a><a href="#fn_633"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 To Indra thousand-eyed complains.<br>
 Then Lakshman who had wandered through<br>
 The copses where the berries grew,<br>
 Returning to the cavern found<br>
 His brother chief* in sorrow drowned,<br>
 And pitying the woes that broke<br>
 The spirit, of the hero spoke:<br>
     'Why east thy strength of soul away,<br>
 And weakly yield to passion's sway?<br>
 Arise, my brother, do and dare<br>
 Ere action perish in despair.<br>
 Refill the firmness of thy heart,<br>
 And nerve thee for a hero's part.<br>
 Whose is the hand unscathed to sieze<br>
 The red flame quickened by the breeze?<br>
 Where is the foe will dare to wrong<br>
 Or keep the Maithil lady long?'<br>
 Then with pale lips that sorrow dried<br>
 The son of Raghu thus replied:<br>
 Lord Indra thousand-eyed, has sent<br>
 The sweet rain from the firmament,<br>
 Sees the rich promise of the grain,<br>
 And turns him to his rest again.<br>
 The clouds with voices loud and deep,<br>
 Veiling each tree upon the steep,<br>
 Up on the thirsty earth have shed<br>
 Their precious burden and are fled.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Now in kings' hearts ambition glows:<br>
 They rush to battle with their foes; <a name="fr_634"></a><a href="#fn_634"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 But in Sugríva's sloth I see<br>
 No care for deeds of chivalry.<br>
 See, Lakshman, on each breezy height<br>
 A thousand autumn blooms are bright.<br>
 See how the wings of wild swans gleam<br>
 On every islet of the stream.<br>
 Four months of flood and rain are past:<br>
 A hundred years they seemed to last<br>
 To me whom toil and trouble tried,<br>
 My Sitá severed from my side.<br>
 She, gentlest woman, weak and young,<br>
 Still to her lord unwearied clung.<br>
 Still by the exile's side she stood<br>
 In the wild ways of Dandak wood,<br>
 Like a fond bird disconsolate<br>
 If parted from her darling mate.<br>
 Sugríva, lapped in soft repose.<br>
 Untouched by pity for my woes,<br>
 Scorns the poor exile, dispossessed,<br>
 By Rávan's mightier arm oppressed,<br>
 The wretch who comes to sue and pray<br>
 From his lost kingdom far away.<br>
 Hence falls on me the Vánar's scorn,<br>
 A suitor friendless and forlorn.<br>
 The time is come: with heedless eye<br>
 He sees the hour of action fly,--<br>
 Unmindful, now his hopes succeed,<br>
 Of promise made in stress of need.<br>
 Go seek him sunk in bliss and sloth,<br>
 Forgetful of his royal oath,<br>
 And as mine envoy thus upbraid<br>
 The monarch for his help delayed:<br>
 'Vile is the wretch who will not pay<br>
 The favour of an earlier day,<br>
 Hope in the supplicant's breast awakes,<br>
 And then his plighted promise breaks.<br>
 Noblest, mid all of women born,<br>
 Who keeps the words his lips have sworn.<br>
 Yea, if those words be good or ill.<br>
 Maintains his faith unbroken still.<br>
 The *ss who forget to aid<br>
 The friend who helped them when they prayed,<br>
 Dishonoured in their death shall lie,<br>
 And dogs shall pass their corpses by.<br>
 Sure thou wouldst see my strained arm hold<br>
 My bow of battle backed with gold,<br>
 Wouldst gaze upon its awful from<br>
 Like lightning flashing through the storm,<br>
 And hear the clanging bowstring loud<br>
 As thunder from a labouring cloud<br>
     His valour and his strength I know:<br>
 But pleasure's sway now sinks them low<br>
 With thee, my brother, for ally<br>
 That strength and valour I defy<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_362"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 362</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He promised, when the rains should end,<br>
 The succour of his arm to lend.<br>
 Those months are past: he dares forget.<br>
 And, lapped in pleasure, slumbers yet.<br>
 No thought disturbs his careless breast<br>
 For us impatient and distressed.<br>
 And, while we sadly wait and pine,<br>
 Girt by his lords he quaffs the wine.<br>
 Go, brother, go, his palace seek,<br>
 And boldly to Sugríva speak.<br>
 Thus give the listless king to know<br>
 What waits him if my anger glow:<br>
 Still open, to the gloomy God,<br>
 Lies the sad path that Báli trod.<br>
 'Still to thy plighted word be true,<br>
 Lest thou, O King, that path pursue.<br>
 I launched the shaft I pointed well.<br>
 And Báli, only Báli, fell.<br>
 But, if from truth thou dare to stray,<br>
 Both thee and thine this hand shall slay.'<br>
 Thus be the Vánar king addressed,<br>
 Then add thyself what seems the best.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_632"></a><a href="ry303.htm#fr_632">360:1</a>  The troops who guard the frontiers on
 the north, south, east and west.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_633"></a><a href="ry304.htm#fr_633">361:1</a>  The <i>Chátake, Cualus Melanoleucus</i>,
 is supposed to drink nothing but the water
 for the clouds.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_634"></a><a href="ry304.htm#fr_634">361:1b</a>  The time for warlike expeditions began
 when the rains had ceased.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry305.htm">Next: Canto XXXI.: The Envoy.</a></center>
 </body>