<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry301.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry303.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVIII.: THE RAINS.</h3>
 <p>
 'See, brother, see'  thus Ráma cried<br>
 On Mályavat's  <a name="fr_619"></a><a href="#fn_619"><font size="1">1</font></a> dark-wooded side,<br>
 'A chain of clouds. like lofty hills,<br>
 The sky with gathering shadow fills.<br>
 Nine months those clouds have borne the load<br>
 Conceived from sunbeams as they glowed,<br>
 And, having drunk the seas, give birth,<br>
 And drop their offspring on the earth.<br>
 Easy it seems at such a time<br>
 That flight of cloudy stairs to climb,<br>
 And, from their summit, safely won,<br>
 Hang flowery wreaths about the sun.<br>
 Bee how the flash of evening's red<br>
 Fringes the fleecy clouds o'erhead<br>
 Till all the sky is streaked and lined<br>
 With bleeding wounds incarnadined,<br>
 Or the wide firmament above<br>
 Shows like a lover sick with love<br>
 And, pale with cloudlets, heaves a sigh<br>
 ln the soft breeze that wanders by.<br>
 See, by the fervent heat embrowned,<br>
 How drenched with recent showers, the ground<br>
 Pours out in floods her gushing tears,<br>
 Like Sítá wild with torturing fears.<br>
 So softly blows this cloud-borne breeze<br>
 Cool through the boughs of camphor trees<br>
 That one might hold it in the cup<br>
 Of hollowed hands and drink it up.<br>
 See, brother, where that rocky steep,<br>
 Where odorous shrubs in rain-drops weep,<br>
 Shows like Sugríva when they shed<br>
 Tne royal balm upon his head.<br>
 Like students at their task appear<br>
 These hills whose misty peaks are near:<br>
 Black deerskin  <a name="fr_620"></a><a href="#fn_620"><font size="1">2</font></a> garments wrought of cloud<br>
 Their forms with fitting mantles shroud,<br>
 Each torrent from the summit poured<br>
 Supplies the place of sacred cord.  <a name="fr_621"></a><a href="#fn_621"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 And winds that in their caverns moan.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_359"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 359</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sound like the voice's undertone.  <a name="fr_622"></a><a href="#fn_622"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 From east to west red lightnings flash,<br>
 And, quivering neath the golden lash,<br>
 The great sky like a generous steed<br>
 Groans inly at each call to speed<br>
 Yon lightning, as it flashes through<br>
 The giant cloud of sable hue,<br>
 Recalls my votaress Sítá pressed<br>
 Mid struggles to the demon's breast.<br>
 See, on those mountain ridges stand<br>
 Sweet shrubs that bud and bloom expand.<br>
 The soft ram ends their pangs of grief.<br>
 And drops its pearls on flower and leaf.<br>
 But all their raptures stab me through<br>
 And wake my pining love anew.  <a name="fr_623"></a><a href="#fn_623"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Now through the air no wild bird flies,<br>
 Each lily shuts her weary eyes;<br>
 And blooms of opening jasmin show<br>
 The parting sun has ceased to glow<br>
 No captain now for conquest burns,<br>
 But homeward with his host returns;<br>
 For roads and kings' ambitious dreams<br>
 Have vanished neath descending streams.<br>
 This is the watery month <a name="fr_624"></a><a href="#fn_624"><font size="1">3</font></a> wherein<br>
 The Sáman's  <a name="fr_625"></a><a href="#fn_625"><font size="1">4</font></a> sacred chants begin.<br>
 Áshádha  <a name="fr_626"></a><a href="#fn_626"><font size="1">5</font></a> past, now Kosal's lord  <a name="fr_627"></a><a href="#fn_627"><font size="1">6</font></a><br>
 The harvest of the spring has stored,  <a name="fr_628"></a><a href="#fn_628"><font size="1">7</font></a><br>
 And dwells within his palace freed<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 From every care of pressing need<br>
 Full is the moon, and fierce and strong<br>
 Impetuous Sarjú  <a name="fr_629"></a><a href="ry303.htm#fn_629"><font size="1">1b</font></a> roars along<br>
 As though Ayodhyá's crowds ran out<br>
 To greet their king with echoing shout.<br>
 In this sweet time of ease and rest<br>
 No care disturbs Sugríva's breast,<br>
 The foe that marred his peace o'erthrown,<br>
 And queen and realm once more his own.<br>
 Alas, a harder fate is mine,<br>
 Reft both of realm and queen to pine,<br>
 And, like the bank which floods erode,<br>
 I sink beneath my sorrow's load.<br>
 Sore on my soul my miseries weigh,<br>
 And these long rains our action stay,<br>
 While Rávan seems a mightier foe<br>
 Than I dare hope to overthrow.<br>
 I saw the roads were barred by rain,<br>
 I knew the hopes of war were vain;<br>
 Nor could I bid Sugríva rise,<br>
 Though prompt to aid my enterprise.<br>
 E'en now I scarce can urge my friend<br>
 On whom his house and realm depend,<br>
 Who, after toil and peril past,<br>
 Is happy with his queen at last.<br>
 Sugríva after rest will know<br>
 The hour is come to strike the blow,<br>
 Nor will his grateful soul forget<br>
 My succour, or deny the debt<br>
 I know his generous heart, and hence<br>
 Await the time with confidence<br>
 When he his friendly zeal will show,<br>
 And brooks again untroubled flow.'  <a name="fr_630"></a><a href="ry303.htm#fn_630"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_619"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_619">358:1</a>  Mályavat: "The name of this mountain
 appears to me to be erroneous, and I
 think that instead o£ Mályavat should be
 read Malayavat, Malaya is a group of
 mountains situated exactly in that southern
 part of India where Ráma now was.
 while Mályavat is placed to the north
 east." GORRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_620"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_620">358:2</a>  Mantles of the skin of the black antelope
 were the prescribed dress of ascetics
 and religious students.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_621"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_621">358:3</a>  The sacred cord worn as the badge of
 religious initiation by men of the three
 twice-born castes.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_622"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_622">359:1</a>  The hum with which students con
 their tasks.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_623"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_623">359:2</a>  I omit here a long general description
 of the rainy season which (<i>is</i>?) not found in
 the Bengal recension and appears to have
 been interpolated by a far inferior and
 much later hand than Valmiki's. It is
 composed in a metre different from that
 of the rest of the Canto, and contains
 figures of poetical rhetoric and commonplaces
 which are the delight of more recent poets.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_624"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_624">359:3</a>  Praushthapada or Bhadra, the modern
 *Bhaden*, corresponds to half of August
 and half of September.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_625"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_625">359:4</a>  The Sáman or Sáma-veda, the third
 of the four Vedas, is really merely a
 reproduction of parts of the Rig-veda,
 transposed and scattered about piece-meal,
 only 78 verses in the whole being, it is
 said, untraceable to the present recension
 of the Rig-veda.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_626"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_626">359:5</a>  Áshádha is the month corresponding
 to parts of June and July.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_627"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_627">359:6</a>  Bharat, who was regent during Ráma's
 absence.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_628"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_628">359:7</a>  Or with Goriesio, following the gloss
 of another commentary: "Has completed every
 holy rite and accumulated stores of merit."</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry303.htm">Next: Canto XXIX.: Hanumán's Counsel.</a></center>
 </body>