<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry305.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry307.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXII.: HANUMAN'S COUNSEL.</h3>
 <p>
 Sugríva heard, and, trained and tried<br>
 In counsel, to his lords replied:<br>
 'No deed of mine, no hasty word<br>
 The anger of the prince has stirred.<br>
 But haply some who hate me still<br>
 And watch their time to work me ill,<br>
 Have slandered me to Raghu's son,<br>
 Accused of deeds I ne'er have done.<br>
 Now, O my lords--for you are wise--<br>
 Speak truly what your hearts advise.<br>
 And, pondering each event, inquire<br>
 The reason of the prince's ire.<br>
 No fear have I of Lakshman: none:<br>
 No dread of Raghu's mightier son.<br>
 But wrath, that fires a friendly breast<br>
 Without due cause, distrubs my rest.<br>
 With labour light is friendship gained.<br>
 But with severest toil maintained.<br>
 And doubt is strong, and faith is weak,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_364"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 364</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And friendship dies when traitors speak.<br>
 Hence is my troubled bosom cold<br>
 With fear of Rama lofty-souled;<br>
 For heavy on my spirit weigh<br>
 His favours I can ne'er repay.'<br>
     He ceased: and Hanuman of all<br>
 The Vánars in the council hall<br>
 In wisdom first, and rank, expressed<br>
 The thoughts that filled his prudent breast:<br>
 'No marvel thou rememberest yet<br>
 The service thou shouldst ne'er forget,<br>
 How the brave prince of Raghu'a seed<br>
 Thy days from fear and peril freed;<br>
 And Báli for thy sake o'erthrew,<br>
 Whom Indra's self might scarce subdue.<br>
 I doubt not Ráma's anger burns<br>
 For the scant love thy heart returns.<br>
 For this he sends his brother, him<br>
 Whose glory never waxes dim.<br>
 Sunk in repose thy careless eye<br>
 Marks not the seasons as they fly,<br>
 Nor sees that autumn has begun<br>
 With dark blooms opening to the sun.<br>
 Clear is the sky no cloudlet mars<br>
 The splendour of the shining stars.<br>
 The balmy air is soft and still,<br>
 And clear and bright are lake and rill.<br>
 Thou heedest not with blinded eyes<br>
 The hour for warlike enterprise.<br>
 Hence Lakshman hither comes to break<br>
 Thy slothful trance and bid thee wake.<br>
 Then, Monarch, with a patient ear<br>
 The high-souled Ráma's message hear,<br>
 Which, reft of wife and realm and friends,<br>
 Thus by another's mouth he sends.<br>
 Thou, Vánar King, hast done amiss:<br>
 And now I see no way but this;<br>
 Before his envoy humbly stand<br>
 And sue for peace with suppliant hand.<br>
 High duty bids a courtier seek<br>
 His master's weal, and freely speak.<br>
 So by no thought of fear controlled<br>
 My speech, O King, is free and bold,<br>
 For Ráma, if his anger glow,<br>
 Can, with the terrors of his bow.<br>
 This earth with all the Gods subdue,<br>
 Gandharvas, <a name="fr_637"></a><a href="#fn_637"><font size="1">1</font></a> and the demon crew.<br>
 Unwise to stir his wrathful mood<br>
 Whose favour must again be wooed.<br>
 And, most of all, unwise for one<br>
 Grateful like thee for service done.<br>
 Go with thy son and kinsmen: bend<br>
 Thy humble head and greet thy friend.<br>
 And, like a fond obedient spouse,<br>
 Be faithful to thy plighted vows.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_636"></a><a href="ry305.htm#fr_636">363:1</a>  In a note on the corresponding passage
 in the Bengal recension Gorresio
 says: 'The text here makes use of a
 strange and something more than bold
 metaphor which I have sought to modify.
 The text says: "Here is Lakshman the
 charioteer of words who by the orders of
 Rama has come hither upon the ear
 of resolution." In his Italian translation
 he renders the passage: "Here is Laksh-
 man, the brother of Rama who by his
 orders comes hither the determined bearer
 of words."</p>
 <p><a name="fn_637"></a><a href="ry306.htm#fr_637">364:1</a>  Indra's associates in arms, and musicians
 of his heaven.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry307.htm">Next: Canto XXXIII.: Lakshman's Entry.</a></center>
 </body>