<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry310.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry312.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVII.: THE GATHERING.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased: and King Sugriva cried<br>
 To sage Hanúmán  <a name="fr_644"></a><a href="#fn_644"><font size="1">1</font></a> by his side:<br>
 'Summon the Vánar legions, those<br>
 Who dwell about the Lord of Snows:<br>
 Those who in Vindhyan groves delight,<br>
 Kailása's, or Mahendra's height,<br>
 Dwell on the Five bright Peaks, or where<br>
 Mandar's white summit cleaves the air:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Wherever they are wandring free<br>
 In highlands by the western sea,<br>
 On that east hill whence springs the sun,<br>
 Or where he sinks when day is done.<br>
 Call the great chiefs whose legions till<br>
 The forests of the Lotus Hill,  <a name="fr_645"></a><a href="#fn_645"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Where every one in strength and size<br>
 With the stupendous Anjan  <a name="fr_646"></a><a href="#fn_646"><font size="1">2b</font></a> vies.<br>
 Call those, with tints ot burnished gold<br>
 Whom Mahás'aila's caverns hold:<br>
 Those who on Dhúnira roam, or hide<br>
 In the wild woods on Meru's side.<br>
 Call those who, brilliant as the sun,<br>
 On high Mahárun leap and run,<br>
 Quaffing sweet juices that distil<br>
 From odorous trees upon the hill,<br>
 Call those whom tranquil haunts delight<br>
 Where dwell the sage and anchorite<br>
 In groves that through their wide extent<br>
 Exhale a thousand blossoms' scent.<br>
 Send out, send out: from coast to coast<br>
 Assemble all the Vánar host:<br>
 With force, with words, with gifts of price<br>
 Compel, admonish and entice.<br>
 Already envoys have been sent<br>
 To warn them of their lord's intent.<br>
 Let others urged by thee repeat<br>
 My mandate that their steps be fleet.<br>
 Those lords who yielding to the sway<br>
 Of love's delight would fain delay,<br>
 Urge hither with the utmost speed,<br>
 Or with thee to my presence lead:<br>
 And those who linger to the last<br>
 Until ten days be come and passed,<br>
 And dare their sovereign to defy.<br>
 For their offence shall surely die.<br>
 Thousands, yea millions, shall there be,<br>
 Obedient to their king's decree,<br>
 The lions of the Vánar race,<br>
 Assembled from each distant place.<br>
 Forth shall they haste like hills in size,<br>
 Or mighty clouds that veil the skies,<br>
 And swiftly speeding on their way<br>
 Bring all our legions in array.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_369"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 369</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: the son of Váyu  <a name="fr_647"></a><a href="#fn_647"><font size="1">1</font></a> heard,<br>
 Submissive to his sovereign's word;<br>
 And sent his rapid envoys forth<br>
 To east and west and south and north.<br>
 They bent their airy course afar<br>
 Along the paths of bird and star,<br>
 And sped through ether farther yet<br>
 Where Vishnu's splendid sphere is set. <a name="fr_648"></a><a href="#fn_648"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 By sea, on hill, by wood and lake<br>
 They called to arms for Ráma's sake,<br>
 As each with terror in his breast<br>
 Obeyed his awful king's behest.<br>
 Three million Vánars, fierce and strong<br>
 As Anjan's self, a wondrous throng.<br>
 Sped from the spot where Ráma still<br>
 Gazed restless from the woody hill.<br>
 Ten million others, brave and bold,<br>
 With coats that shone like burning gold,<br>
 Came flying from the mountain crest<br>
 Where sinks the weary sun to rest.<br>
 Impetuous from the northern skies,<br>
 Wnere Mount Kailása's summits rise,<br>
 Ten hundred millions hasted, hued<br>
 Like manes of lions, ne'er subdued:<br>
 The dwellers on Himálaya's side,<br>
 Whose food his roots and fruit supplied,<br>
 With rangers of the Vindhyan chain<br>
 And neighbours of the Milky Main.  <a name="fr_649"></a><a href="#fn_649"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 Some from the palm groves where they fed,<br>
 Some from the woods of betel sped:<br>
 In countless numbers, fierce and brave,<br>
 They came from mountain, lake, and cave.<br>
     As on their way the Vánars went<br>
 To rouse each distant armament,<br>
 They chanced that wondrous tree to view<br>
 That on Himálaya's summit grew.<br>
 Of old upon that sacred height<br>
 Was wrought Mahes'var's  <a name="fr_650"></a><a href="#fn_650"><font size="1">4</font></a> glorious rite,<br>
 Which every God in heaven beheld,<br>
 And his glad heart with triumph swelled.<br>
 There from pure seed at random sown<br>
 Bright plants with luscious fruit had grown,<br>
 And, sweet as Amrit to the taste,<br>
 The summit of the mountain graced.<br>
 Who once should eat the virtuous fruit<br>
 That sprang from so divine a root,<br>
 One whole revolving moon should be<br>
 From every pang of hunger free.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The Vánars culled the fruit they found<br>
 Ripe on the sacrificial ground<br>
 With rare celestial odours sweet,<br>
 To lay them at Sugríva's feet.<br>
 Those noble envoys scoured the land<br>
 To summon every Vánar band<br>
 Then swiftly homeward at the head<br>
 Of countless armaments they sped.<br>
 They gathered by Kishkindhá's wall.<br>
 They thronged Sugríva's palace hall,<br>
 And, richly laden, bare within<br>
 That fruit of heavenly origin.<br>
 Their gifts before their king they spread,<br>
 And thus in tones of triumph said:<br>
 'Through every land our way we took<br>
 To visit hill and wood and brook,<br>
 And all thy hosts from east to west<br>
 Flock hither at their lord's behest.'<br>
 Sugríva with delighted look<br>
 The present of his envoys took.<br>
 Then bade them go, with gracious speech<br>
 Rewarding and dismissing each.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_644"></a><a href="ry311.htm#fr_644">368:1</a>  Válmíki and succeeding poets make the
 second vowel in this name long or Short
 at their pleasure.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_645"></a><a href="ry311.htm#fr_645">368:1b</a>  Some of the mountains here mentioned
 are fabulous and others it is impossible
 to identify. Sugríva means to include
 all the mountains of India from Kailás
 the residence of the God Kuvera, regarded
 as one of the loftiest peaks of the Himálayas,
 to Mabendra in the extreme south,
 from the mountain in the east where the
 sun is said to rise to Astáchal or the western
 mountain where he sets. The commentators
 give little assistance: that
 Mahás'aila, &amp;c. are certain mountains is
 about all the information they give.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_646"></a><a href="ry311.htm#fr_646">368:2b</a>  One of the celestial elephants of the
 Gods who protect the four quarters and
 intermediate points of the compass.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_647"></a><a href="ry311.htm#fr_647">369:1</a>  Va'yu or the Wind was the father of
 Hanumán.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_648"></a><a href="ry311.htm#fr_648">369:2</a>  The path or station of Vishnu is the
 space between the seven Risbis or Ursa
 Major, and Dhruva or the polar star.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_649"></a><a href="ry311.htm#fr_649">369:3</a>  One of the seven seas which surround
 the earth in concentric circles.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_650"></a><a href="ry311.htm#fr_650">369:4</a>  The title of Mahes'var * or Mighty Lord
 is sometimes given to Indra, but more
 generally to S'iva whom it here denotes.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry312.htm">Next: Canto XXXVIII.: Sugríva's Departure.</a></center>
 </body>