<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry309.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry311.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVI.: SUGRÍVA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 She ceased: and Lakshman gave assent,<br>
 Won by her gentle argument.<br>
 So Tárá's pleading, just and mild,<br>
 His softening heart had reconciled.<br>
 His altered mood Sugríva saw,<br>
 And cast aside the fear and awe<br>
 Like raiment heavy with the rain<br>
 Which on his troubled soul had lain.<br>
 Then quickly to the ground he threw<br>
 His flowery garland, bright of hue,<br>
 Which round his royal neck he wore,<br>
 And, sobered, was himself once more.<br>
 Then turning to the princely man<br>
 In soothing words the king began:<br>
 'My glory, wealth, and royal sway<br>
 To other hands had passed away:<br>
 But Ráma to my rescue came,<br>
 And gave me back my power and fame.<br>
 O Lakshman, say, whose grateful heart<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_368"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 368</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Could nurse the hope to pay in part,<br>
 By service of a life, the deed<br>
 Of Ráma sprung of heavenly seed?<br>
 His foeman Rávan shall be slain,<br>
 And Sítá shall be his again.<br>
 The hero's side I will not leave,<br>
 But he the conquest shall achieve.<br>
 What need of help has he who drew<br>
 His bow, and one great arrow flew<br>
 Trough seven tall trees, a mountain rent,<br>
 And cleft the earth with force unspent?<br>
 What aid needs he who shook his bow,<br>
 And at the sound the earth below<br>
 With hill and wood and rooted rock<br>
 Quaked feverous with the thunder shock?<br>
 Yet all my legions will I bring.<br>
 And follow close the warrior king<br>
 Marching on his impetuous way<br>
 Fierce Rávan and his hosts to slay.<br>
 If I be guilty of offence,<br>
 Careless through love or negligence,<br>
 Let him his loyal slave forgive;<br>
 For error cleaves to all who live.'<br>
     Thus king Sugriva, good and brave,<br>
 In humble words his answer gave,<br>
 Softened was Lakshman's angry mood<br>
 Who thus his friendly speech renewed:<br>
 'My brother, Vánar King, will see<br>
 A champion and a friend in thee.<br>
 So strong art thou, so brave and bold,<br>
 So pure in thought, so humble-souled,<br>
 That thou deservest well to reign<br>
 And all a monarch's bliss to gain.<br>
 Lend thou my brother aid, and all<br>
 His foes beneath his arm will fall.<br>
 Full well the words thou speakest suit<br>
 A chieftain wise and resolute.<br>
 With grateful heart that loves the right,<br>
 And foot that never yields in tight.<br>
 O come, and my sad brother cheer<br>
 Who mourns the wife he holds so dear.<br>
 O pardon, friend, my harsh address,<br>
 And Ráma's frantic bitterness.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_643"></a><a href="ry309.htm#fr_643">367:1b</a>  Rohiní is the name of the ninth Nakshatra
 or lunar asterism personified as a
 daughter of Daksha, and the favourite
 wife of the Moon.
 
 </p><p>
       Aldebaran is the principal star in the
 constellation.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry311.htm">Next: Canto XXXVII.: The Gathering.</a></center>
 </body>