<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry312.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry314.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIX.: THE VÁNAR HOST.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma, best of all who guide<br>
 Their steps by duty, thus replied:<br>
 'What marvel if Lord Indra send<br>
 The kindly rain, O faithful friend?<br>
 If, thousand-rayed, the God of Day<br>
 Drive every darksome cloud away?<br>
 Or, rising high, the Lord of Night<br>
 Flood the broad heaven with silver light?<br>
 What marvel, King, that one like thee<br>
 The glory of his friends.should be?<br>
 No marvel, O my lord, that thou<br>
 Hast shown thy noble nature now.<br>
 Thy heart, Sugriva, well I know:<br>
 Naught from thy lips but truth may flow,<br>
 With thee for friend and champion all<br>
 My foes beneath my arm will fall.<br>
 The Rákshas, when my queen he stole,<br>
 Brought sure destruction on his soul,<br>
 Like Anuhláda  <a name="fr_653"></a><a href="#fn_653"><font size="1">2b</font></a> who beguiled<br>
 Queen Sachí called Puloma's child.<br>
 Yes, near, Sugriva, is the day<br>
 When I my demon foe shall slay,<br>
 As conquering Indra in his ire<br>
 Slew Queen Paulomi's haughty sire.' <a name="fr_654"></a><a href="#fn_654"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_371"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 371</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     He ceased: thick clouds of dust rose high<br>
 To every quarter of the sky:<br>
 The very sun grew faint and pale<br>
 Behind the darkly-gathering veil.<br>
 The mighty clouds that hung o'erhead<br>
 From east to west thick darkness spread,<br>
 And earth to her foundations shook<br>
 With hill and forest, lake and brook.<br>
 Then hidden was the ground beneath<br>
 Fierce warriors armed with fearful teeth,<br>
 Hosts numberless, each lord in size<br>
 A match for him who rules the skies:<br>
 From many a sea and distant hill,<br>
 From rock and river, lake and rill.<br>
 Some like the morning sun were bright.<br>
 Some, like the moon, were silver white:<br>
 These green as lotus fibres, those<br>
 White-coated from their native snows. <a name="fr_655"></a><a href="#fn_655"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Then S'atabali came in view<br>
 Girt by a countless retinue.<br>
 Like some gold mountain high in air<br>
 Tárá's illustrious sire <a name="fr_656"></a><a href="#fn_656"><font size="1">2</font></a> was there.<br>
 There Rumá's father, <a name="fr_657"></a><a href="#fn_657"><font size="1">3</font></a> far-renowned,<br>
 With tens of thousands ranged around.<br>
 There, tinted like the tender green<br>
 Of lotus filaments, was seen,<br>
 Compassed by countless legions, one<br>
 Whose face was as the morning sun,<br>
 Hanúmán's father good and great,<br>
 Kesarí, <a name="fr_658"></a><a href="#fn_658"><font size="1">4</font></a> wisest in debate.<br>
 There the proud king Gaváksha, feared<br>
 For his strong warrior arm, appeared.<br>
 There Dhúmra, mighty lord, the dread<br>
 Of foes, his ursine legions led.<br>
 There Panas, first for warlike fame,<br>
 With twenty million warriors came.<br>
 There glorious Níla, dark of hue,<br>
 Arrayed his countless troops in view.<br>
 There moved lord Gavaya brave and bold,<br>
 Resplendent like a hill of gold,<br>
 And near him Darímukha stood<br>
 With millions from the hill and wood<br>
 And *Dwivid famed for strength and speed,<br>
 And Mamda, both of Asvin seed.<br>
 There Gaja, strong and glorious, led<br>
 The countless troops around him spread,<br>
 And Jámbaván <a name="fr_659"></a><a href="#fn_659"><font size="1">5</font></a> the king whose sway<br>
 The bears delighted to obey,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 With swarming myriads onward pressed<br>
 True to his lord Sugríva's hest;<br>
 And princely Ruman, dear to fame,<br>
 Led millions whom no hosts could tame,<br>
 All these and many a chief beside <a name="fr_660"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fn_660"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Came onward fierce in warlike pride.<br>
 They covered all the plain, and still<br>
 Pressed forward over wood and hill.<br>
 In rows for many a league around<br>
 They rested on the grassy ground;<br>
 Or to Sugríva made their way.<br>
 Like clouds about the Lord of Day,<br>
 And to the king their proud heads bent<br>
 In power and might preeminent.<br>
 Sugríva then to Ráma sped.<br>
 And raised his reverent hands, and said<br>
 That every chief from coast to coast<br>
 Was present with his warrior host.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_652"></a><a href="ry312.htm#fr_652">370:1b</a>  The numbers are unmanageable in
 English verse. The poet speaks of hundreds
 of <i>arbudas</i>; and an <i>arbuda</i> is a
 hundred millions.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_653"></a><a href="ry313.htm#fr_653">370:2b</a>  Anuhláda or Anuhráda is one of
 the four sons of the mighty Hiranyakasipu,
 an Asur or a Daitya son of Kasyapa
 and Diti and killed by Vishnu in his incarnation
 of the Man-Lion <i>Narasinha</i>. According
 to the Bhágavata Purána the Daitya
 or Asur Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyáksha
 his brother, both killed by Vishnu,
 were born again as Rávan and Kumbhakarna
 his brother.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_654"></a><a href="ry313.htm#fr_654">370:3b</a>  Putoma, a demon, was the father-in-law
 of Indra who destroyed him in order
 to avert an imprecation. Paulomit is a
 patronymic denoting Sachi the daughter
 of Puloma.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_655"></a><a href="ry313.htm#fr_655">371:1</a>  "Observe the variety of colours which
 the poem attributes to all these inhabitants
 of the different mountainous regions,
 some white, others yellow, &amp;c. Such dif-
 ferent colours were perhaps peculiar and
 distinctive characteristics of those various
 races." GORRESSIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_656"></a><a href="ry313.htm#fr_656">371:2</a>  Sushen.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_657"></a><a href="ry313.htm#fr_657">371:3</a>  Tara.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_658"></a><a href="ry313.htm#fr_658">371:4</a>  Kesari was the husband of Hanumnán's
 mother, and is here called his father.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_659"></a><a href="ry313.htm#fr_659">371:5</a>  "I here unite under one heading two
 animals of <a name="page_372"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 372</font></a>
 but which from some gross resemblances,
 probably helped by an equivoque in the
 language, are closely affiliated in the
 Hindoo myth.....a reddish colour of the
 skin, want of symmetry and ungainliness
 of form, strength in hugging with the fore
 paws or arms, the faculty of climbing,
 shortness of tail(?), sensuality, capacity
 of instruction in dancing and in music,
 are all characteristics which more or less
 distinguish and meet in bears as well as
 in monkeys In the <i>Rámáyanam</i>, the
 wise Jámnavant, the Odysseus of the expedition
 of Lanká, is called now king of
 the bears (rikshaparthivah), now great
 monkey (<i>Mahákapih</i>). DeGubernatis:
 <i>Zoological Mythology</i>, Vol. II. p. 97.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry314.htm">Next: Canto XL.: The Army of The East.</a></center>
 </body>