<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry320.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry322.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVII.: THE RETURN.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus forth in quest of Sitá<br>
 The legions King Sugríva.<br>
 To many a distant town they hied<br>
 By many a lake and river's side.<br>
 As their great sovereign's order taught,<br>
 Through valleys, plains, and groves they sought.<br>
 They toiled unresting through the day:<br>
 At night upon the ground they lay<br>
 Where the tall trees, whose branches swayed<br>
 Beneath their fruit, gave pleasant shade.<br>
 Then, when a weary month was spent,<br>
 Back to Prasravan's hill they went,<br>
 And stood with faces of despair<br>
 Before their king Sugrívae.<br>
 Thus, having wandered through the east,<br>
 Great Vinata his labours ceased,<br>
 And weary of the fruitless pain<br>
 Returned to meet the king again,<br>
 Brave S'atabali to the north<br>
 Had led his Vánarons forth.<br>
 Now to Sugríva he sped<br>
 With all his host dispirited.<br>
 Sushen the western realms had sought.<br>
 And homeward now his legions brought.<br>
 All to Sugriva came, where still<br>
 He sat with Ráma on the hill.<br>
 Before their sovereign humbly bent<br>
 And thus addressed him reverent:<br>
 'On every hill our steps have been,<br>
 By wood and cave and deep ravine;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And all the wandering brooks we know<br>
 throughout the land that seaward flow,<br>
 Our feet by thy command have traced<br>
 the tangled thicket and the waste,<br>
 and dens and dingles hard to pass<br>
 for creeping plants and matted grass<br>
 Well have we searched with toil and pain,<br>
 And monstrous creatures have we slain<br>
 But Hanumánoblest mind<br>
 The Maithil lady yet will find;<br>
 For to his quarter of the sky  <a name="fr_751"></a><a href="ry322.htm#fn_751"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 The robber fiend was seen to fly,'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_749"></a><a href="ry320.htm#fr_749">380:1</a>  Himálaya, the Hills of Snow.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_750"></a><a href="ry320.htm#fr_750">380:2</a>  Canto XI.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry322.htm">Next: Canto XLVIII.: The Asur's Death.</a></center>
 </body>