<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry319.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry321.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVI.: SUGRÍVA'S.</h3>
 <p>
 'How, King,' cried Ráma, 'didst thou gain<br>
 Thy lore of sea and hill and plain?<br>
 'I told thee how,' Sugríva,<br>
 From Báli's arm Máyáví  <a name="fr_746"></a><a href="#fn_746"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 To Malaya's hill, and strove to save<br>
 His life by hiding in the cave.<br>
 I told how Báli sought, to kill<br>
 His foe, the hollow of the hill;<br>
 Nor need I, King, again unfold<br>
 The wondrous tale already told.<br>
 Then, wandering forth, my way I took<br>
 By many a town and wood and brook.<br>
 I roamed the earth from place to place,<br>
 Till, like a mirror's polished face,<br>
 The whole broad disk, that lies between<br>
 Its farthest bounds, mine eyes had seen.<br>
 I wandered first to eastern skies<br>
 Where fairest trees rejoiced mine eyes,<br>
 And many a cave and wooded hill<br>
 Where lilies robed the lake and rill.<br>
 There metal dyes that hill  <a name="fr_747"></a><a href="#fn_747"><font size="1">2</font></a> adorn<br>
 Whence springs the sun to light the morn.<br>
 There, too, I viewed the Milky sea,<br>
 Where nymphs of heaven delight to be.<br>
 Then to the south I made my way<br>
 From regions of the rising day,<br>
 And roamed o'er Vindhya, where the breeze<br>
 Is odorous of sandal trees.<br>
 Still in my fear I found no rest:<br>
 I sought the regions of the west,<br>
 And gazed on Asta,  <a name="fr_748"></a><a href="#fn_748"><font size="1">3</font></a> where the sun<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_380"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 380</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sinks when his daily course is run<br>
 Then from that noblest hill I fled<br>
 And to the northern country sped,<br>
 Saw Himavánt <a name="fr_749"></a><a href="ry321.htm#fn_749"><font size="1">1</font></a> and Meru'Meru'sp,<br>
 And stood beside the northern deep.<br>
 But when, by Báli's might oppressed,<br>
 E'en in those wilds I could not rest,<br>
 Came Hanumánwise and brave,<br>
 And thus his prudent counsel gave:<br>
 'I told thee how Matanga  <a name="fr_750"></a><a href="ry321.htm#fn_750"><font size="1">2</font></a> cursed<br>
 Thy tyrant, that his head should burst<br>
 In pieces, should be dare invade<br>
 The precincts of that tranquil shade.<br>
 There may we dwell in peace and be<br>
 From thy oppressor's malice free.'<br>
 We went to Rishyamúka's,<br>
 And spent our days secure from ill<br>
 Where, with that curse upon his head,<br>
 The cruel Báli durst not tread.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_746"></a><a href="ry320.htm#fr_746">379:1</a>  Canto IX.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_747"></a><a href="ry320.htm#fr_747">379:2</a>  Udayagiri or the hill from which the
 sun rises.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_748"></a><a href="ry320.htm#fr_748">379:3</a>  Asta is the mountain behind which
 the sun sets.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry321.htm">Next: Canto XLVII.: The Return.</a></center>
 </body>