<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry321.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry323.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVIII.: THE ASUR'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 But Hanumánl onward pressed<br>
 With Tára, Angad, and the rest,<br>
 Through Vindhya's pathless glens he sped<br>
 And left no spot unvisited.<br>
 He gazed from every mountain height,<br>
 He sought each cavern dark as night,<br>
 And wandered through the bloomy shade<br>
 By pool and river and cascade,<br>
 But, though they sought in every place,<br>
 Of Sitáthey found no trace.<br>
 On fruit and woodland berries fed<br>
 Through many a lonely wild they sped,<br>
 And reached at last, untouched by fear,<br>
 A desert terrible and drear:<br>
 A fruitless waste, a land of gloom<br>
 Where trees were bare of leaf and bloom<br>
 Where every scanty stream was dried,<br>
 And niggard earth her roots denied.<br>
 No elephants through all the ground,<br>
 No buffaloes or deer are found.<br>
 There roams no tiger, pard, or bear,<br>
 No creature of the wood is there.<br>
 No bird displays his glittering wings,<br>
 No tree, no shrub, no creeper springs.<br>
 There rise no lilies from the flood,<br>
 Resplendent with their flower and bud,<br>
 Where the delighted bees may throng<br>
 About the fragrance with their song.<br>
 There lived a hermit Kandu named,<br>
 For truth and wealth of penance famed.<br>
 Whom fervent zeal and holy rite<br>
 Had dowered with all-surpassing might.<br>
 His little son, a ten year child--<br>
 So chanced it--perished in the wild.<br>
 His death with fury stirred the sage,<br>
 Who cursed the forest in his rage,<br>
 Doomed from that hour to shelter none,<br>
 A waste for bird and beast to shun.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_381"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 381</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 They searched by every forest edge,<br>
 They searched each cave and mountain ledge,<br>
 And thickets whence the water fell<br>
 Wandering through the tangled dell.<br>
 Striving to do Sugríva's<br>
 They roamed along each leafy rill.<br>
 But vain were all endeavours, vain<br>
 The careful search, the toil and pain.<br>
 Through one dark grove they scarce could wind,<br>
 So thick were creepers intertwined.<br>
 There as they struggled through the wood<br>
 Before their eyes an Asur  <a name="fr_752"></a><a href="ry323.htm#fn_752"><font size="1">1</font></a> stood.<br>
 High as a towering hill, his pride<br>
 The very Gods in heaven defied.<br>
 When on the fiend their glances fell<br>
 Each braced him for the combat well.<br>
 The demon raised his arm on high,<br>
 And rushed upon them with a cry.<br>
 Him Angad smote,--for, sure, he thought<br>
 This was the fiend they long had sought.<br>
 From his huge mouth by Angad felled,<br>
 The blood in rushing torrents welled,<br>
 As, like a mountain from his base<br>
 Uptorn, he dropped upon his face.<br>
 Thus fell the mighty fiend: and they<br>
 Through the thick wood pursued their way;<br>
 Then, weary with the toil, reclined<br>
 Where leafy boughs to shade them twined.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_751"></a><a href="ry321.htm#fr_751">380:1b</a>  Hanumánthe leader of the army
 of the south which was under the nominal
 command of Angad the heir apparent.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry323.htm">Next: Canto XLIX.: Angad's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>