<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry322.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry324.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIX.: ANGAD'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Angad spake: 'We Vánars<br>
 Have searched each valley, cave, and dell,<br>
 And hill, and brook, and dark recess,<br>
 And tangled wood, and wilderness.<br>
 But all in vain: no eye has seen<br>
 The robber or the Maithil queen.<br>
 A dreary time has passed away,<br>
 And stern is he we all obey.<br>
 Come, cast your grief and sloth aside:<br>
 Again be every effort tried;<br>
 So haply may our toil attain<br>
 The sweet success that follows pain.<br>
 Laborious effort, toil, and skill,<br>
 The firm resolve, the constant will<br>
 Secure at last the ends we seek:<br>
 Hence, O my friends, I boldly speak.<br>
 Once more then, noble hearts, once more<br>
 Let us to-day this wood explore,<br>
 And, languor and despair subdued,<br>
 Purchase success with toil renewed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Sugríva king austere,<br>
 And Ráma's wrath we needs must fear.<br>
 Come, Vánarsye think it wise,<br>
 And do the thing that I advise'<br>
     Then Gandhamádan replied<br>
 With lips that toil and thirst had dried;<br>
 'Obey his words, for wise and true<br>
 Is all that he has counselled you.<br>
 Come, let your hosts their toil renew<br>
 And search each grove and desert through,<br>
 Each towering hill and forest glade.<br>
 By lake and brook and white cascade,<br>
 Till every spot, as our great lord<br>
 Commanded, be again explored.'<br>
     Uprose the Vánarsand all,<br>
 Obedient to the chieftain's call,<br>
 And over the southern region sped<br>
 Where Vindhya's tangled forests spread.<br>
 They clomb that hill that towers on high<br>
 Like a huge cloud in autumn's sky,<br>
 Where many a cavern yawns, and streaks<br>
 Of radiant silver deck the peaks.<br>
 In eager search they wandered through<br>
 The forests where the Lodh trees grew,<br>
 Where the dark leaves were thick and green,<br>
 But found not Ráma's darling queen.<br>
 Then faint with toil, their hearts depressed,<br>
 Descending from the mountain's crest,<br>
 Their weary limbs a while to ease<br>
 They lay beneath the spreading trees.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_752"></a><a href="ry322.htm#fr_752">381:1</a>  The Bengal recension--Corrosions edition--
 calls this Asur or demon the son of
 Márícha</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry324.htm">Next: Canto L.: The Enchanted Cave.</a></center>
 </body>