<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry330.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry332.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVI.: SAMPÁTI.</h3>
 <p>
 Then came the vultures' mighty king<br>
 Where sat the Vánars sorrowing,--<br>
 Sampáti,  <a name="fr_763"></a><a href="#fn_763"><font size="1">2</font></a> best of birds that fly<br>
 On sounding pinions through the sky,<br>
 Jatáyus' brother, famed of old,<br>
 Most glorious and strong and bold.<br>
 Upon the slope of Vindhya's hill<br>
 He saw the Vánars calm and still.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_386"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 386</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 These words he uttered while the sight<br>
 Filled his fierce spirit with delight:<br>
 'Behold how Fate with changeless laws<br>
 Within his toils the sinner draws,<br>
 And brings me, after long delay,<br>
 A rich and noble feast to-day,<br>
 These Vánars who are doomed to die<br>
 My hungry maw to satisfy.'<br>
     He spoke no more: and Angad heard<br>
 The menace of the mighty bird;<br>
 And thus, while anguish filled his breast,<br>
 The noble Hanumán addressed:<br>
 'Vivasvat's  <a name="fr_764"></a><a href="#fn_764"><font size="1">1</font></a> son has sought this place<br>
 For vengeance on the Vánar race.<br>
 See, Yama, wroth for Sítá's sake,<br>
 Is come our guilty lives to take.<br>
 Our king's decree is left undone,<br>
 And naught achieved for Raghu's son.<br>
 In duty have we failed, and hence<br>
 Comes punishment for dire offence.<br>
 Have we not heard the marvels wrought<br>
 By King Jatáyus,  <a name="fr_765"></a><a href="#fn_765"><font size="1">2</font></a> how he fought<br>
 With Rávan's might, and, nobly brave,<br>
 Perished, the Maithil queen to save?<br>
 There is no living creature, none,<br>
 But loves to die for Raghu's son,<br>
 And in long toils and dangers we<br>
 Have placed our lives in jeopardy<br>
 Blest is Jatáyus, he who gave<br>
 His life the Maithil queen to save,<br>
 And proved his love for Ráma well<br>
 When by the giant's hand he fell<br>
 Now raised to bliss and high renown<br>
 He fears not fierce Sugríva's frown.<br>
 Alas, alas! what miseries spring<br>
 From that rash promise of the king!  <a name="fr_766"></a><a href="#fn_766"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 His own sad death, and Ráma sent<br>
 With Lakshman forth to banishment:<br>
 The Maithil lady borne away:<br>
 Jatáyus slain in mortal fray:<br>
 The fall of Báli when the dart<br>
 Of Ráma quivered in his heart:<br>
 And, after toil and pain and care,<br>
 Our misery and deep despair.'<br>
     He ceased: the feathered monarch heard,<br>
 His heart with ruth and wonder stirred:<br>
 'Whose is that voice,' the vulture cried,<br>
 'That tells me how Jatáyus died,<br>
 And shakes my inmost soul with woe<br>
 For a loved brother's overthrow?<br>
 After long days at length I hear<br>
 The glorious name of one so dear.<br>
 Once more, O Vánar chieftains, tell<br>
 How King Jatáyus fought and fell.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 But first your aid, I pray you, lend,<br>
 And from this peak will I descend.<br>
 The sun has burnt my wings, and I<br>
 No longer have the power to fly.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_762"></a><a href="ry330.htm#fr_762">385:1</a>  The name of various kinds of grass
 used at sacrificial ceremonies, especially,
 of the Ku'sa grass, Poa cynosuroides,
 which was used to strew the ground in
 preparing for a sacrifice, the officiating
 Brahmans being purified by sittihg on it.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_763"></a><a href="ry331.htm#fr_763">385:2</a>  Sampáti is the eldest son of the celebrated Garuda the king of birds.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_764"></a><a href="ry331.htm#fr_764">386:1</a>  Vivasvat or the Sun is the father of
 Yama the God of Death.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_765"></a><a href="ry331.htm#fr_765">386:2</a>  Book III. Canto LI.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_766"></a><a href="ry331.htm#fr_766">386:3</a>  Das'aratha's rash oath and fatal promise
 to his wife Kaikeyí.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry332.htm">Next: Canto LVII.: Angad's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>