<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry335.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry337.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXI.: SAMPÁTI'S STORY.</h3>
 <p>
 'Ah me I o'erwhelmed with shame and weak<br>
 With wounds,' I cried, 'I scarce can speak.<br>
 My hapless brother once and I<br>
 Our strength of flight resolved to try.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And by our foolish pride impelled<br>
 Our way through realms of ether held.<br>
 We vowed before the saints who tread<br>
 The wilds about Kailása's head,<br>
 That we with following wings would chase<br>
 The swift sun to his resting place.<br>
 Up on our soaring pinions through<br>
 The fields of cloudless air we flew.<br>
 Beneath us far, and far away,<br>
 Like chariot wheels bright cities lay,<br>
 Whence in wild snatches rose the song<br>
 Of women mid the gay-clad throng,<br>
 With sounds of sweetest music blent<br>
 And many a tinkling ornament.<br>
 Then as our rapid wings we strained<br>
 The pathway of the sun we gained,<br>
 Beneath us all the earth was seen<br>
 Clad in her garb of tender green,<br>
 And every river in her bed<br>
 Meandered like a silver thread.<br>
 We looked on Meru far below.<br>
 And Vindhya and the Lord of Snow,<br>
 Like elephants that bend to cool<br>
 Their fever in a lilied pool.<br>
 But fervent heat and toil o'ercame<br>
 The vigour of each yielding frame,<br>
 Our weary hearts began to quail,<br>
 And wildered sense to reel and fail.<br>
 We knew not, fainting and distressed,<br>
 The north or south or east or west.<br>
 With a great strain mine eyes I turned<br>
 Where the fierce sun before me burned,<br>
 And seemed to my astonished eyes<br>
 The equal of the earth in size.  <a name="fr_777"></a><a href="#fn_777"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 At length, o'erpowered, Jatáyus fell<br>
 Without a word to say farewell,<br>
 And when to earth I saw him hie<br>
 I followed headlong from the sky.  <a name="fr_778"></a><a href="#fn_778"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 With sheltering wings I intervened<br>
 And from the sun his body screened,<br>
 But lost, for heedless folly doomed,<br>
 My pinions which the heat consumed.<br>
 ln Janasthán, I hear them say,<br>
 My hapless brother fell and lay.<br>
 I, pinionless and faint and weak,<br>
 Dropped upon Vindhya's woody peak.<br>
 Now with my swift wings burnt away,<br>
 Reft of my brother and my sway.<br>
 From this tall mountain's summit I<br>
 Will cast me headlong down and die.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_390"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 390</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_776"></a><a href="ry335.htm#fr_776">389:1</a>  Mátarisva is identified with Váyu, the
 wind.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_777"></a><a href="ry336.htm#fr_777">389:1b</a>  Of course not equal to the whole earth,
 says the Commentator, but equal to
 Janasthán.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_778"></a><a href="ry336.htm#fr_778">389:2b</a>  This appears to be the Indian form of
 the stories of Phaethon and Daedalus and
 Icarus.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry337.htm">Next: Canto LXII.: Sampáti's Story.</a></center>
 </body>