<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry329.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry331.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LV.: ANGAD'S REPLY</h3>
 <p>
 'What truth or justice canst thou find,'<br>
 Cried Angad, 'in Sugríva's mind ?<br>
 Where is his high and generous soul,<br>
 His purity and self-control?<br>
 How is he worthy of our trust,<br>
 Righteous, and true, and wise, and just,<br>
 Who, shrinking not from sin and shame,<br>
 Durst take his living brother's dame?<br>
 Who, when, in stress of mortal strife<br>
 His noble brother fought for life,<br>
 Against the valiant warrior barred<br>
 The portal which he stood to guard?<br>
 Can he be grateful--he who took<br>
 The hand of Ráma, and forsook<br>
 That friend who saved him in his woes,<br>
 To whom his life and fame he owes?<br>
 Ah no! his heart is cold and mean,<br>
 What bids him search for Ráma's queen?<br>
 Not honour's law, not friendship's debt,<br>
 But angry Lakshman's timely threat.<br>
 No prudent heart will ever place<br>
 Its trust in one so false and base,<br>
 Who heeds not friendship, kith or kin,<br>
 Who scorns the law and cleaves to sin.<br>
 But true or false, whate'er he be,<br>
 One consequence I clearly see;<br>
 Me, in my youth anointed heir<br>
 Against his wish, he will not spare,<br>
 But strike with eager hand the blow<br>
 That rids him of a household foe.<br>
 Shall I of power and friends despoiled,<br>
 In all my purpose crossed and foiled,--<br>
 Shall I Kishkindhá seek, and wait,<br>
 Like some poor helpless thing, my fate?<br>
 The cruel wretch through lust of sway<br>
 Will seize upon his hapless prey,<br>
 And to a prison's secret gloom<br>
 The remnant of my years will doom.<br>
 'Tis better far to fast and die<br>
 Than hopeless bound in chains to lie,<br>
 Your steps, O Vánars, homeward bend<br>
 And leave me here my life to end.<br>
 Better to die of hunger here<br>
 Than meet at home the fate I fear<br>
 Go, bow you at Sugríva's feet,<br>
 And in my name the monarch greet.<br>
 Before the sons of Raghu bend,<br>
 And give the greeting that I send<br>
 Greet kindly Rumá too, for she<br>
 A son's affection claims from me,<br>
 And gently calm with friendly care<br>
 My mother Tárá's wild despair;<br>
 Or when she hears her darling's fate<br>
 The queen will die disconsolate.'<br>
     Thus Angad bade the chiefs adieu:<br>
 Then on the ground his limbs he threw<br>
 Where sacred Darbha  <a name="fr_762"></a><a href="ry331.htm#fn_762"><font size="1">1</font></a> grass was spread,<br>
 And wept as every hope had fled.<br>
 The moving words of Augad drew<br>
 Down aged cheeks the piteous dew.<br>
 And, as the chieftains' eyes grew dim,<br>
 They swore to stay and die with him.<br>
 On holy grass whose every blade<br>
 Was duly, pointing southward, laid,<br>
 The Vánars sat them down and bent<br>
 Their faces to the orient,<br>
 While 'Here, O comrades, let us die<br>
 With Angad,' was the general cry.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry331.htm">Next: Canto LVI.: Sampáti.</a></center>
 </body>