<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry336.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry338.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXII.: SAMPÁTI'S STORY.</h3>
 <p>
 'As to the saint I thus complained<br>
 My bitter tears fell unrestrained.<br>
 He pondered for a while, then broke<br>
 The silence, and thus calmly spoke:<br>
 'Forth from thy sides again shall spring,<br>
 O royal bird, each withered wing,<br>
 And all thine ancient power and might<br>
 Return to thee with strength of sight.<br>
 A noble deed has been foretold<br>
 In prophecy pronounced of old:<br>
 Nor dark to me are future things,<br>
 Seen by the light which penance brings.<br>
 A glorious king shall rise and reign,<br>
 The pride of old Ikshváku's strain.<br>
 A good and valiant prince, his heir,<br>
 Shall the dear name of Ráma bear.<br>
 With his brave brother Lakshman he<br>
 An exile in the woods shall be,<br>
 Where Rávan, whom no God may slay,  <a name="fr_779"></a><a href="ry338.htm#fn_779"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Shall steal his darling wife away,<br>
 In vain the captive will be wooed<br>
 With proffered love and dainty food,<br>
 She will not hear, she will not taste:<br>
 But, lest her beauty wane and waste,<br>
 Lord Indra's self will come to her<br>
 With heavenly food, and minister.<br>
 Then envoys of the Vánar race<br>
 By Ráma sent will seek this place.<br>
 To them, O roamer of the air,<br>
 The lady's fate shalt thou declare.<br>
 Thou must not move--so maimed thou art<br>
 Thou canst not from this spot depart.<br>
 Await the day and moment due,<br>
 And thy burnt wings will sprout anew.<br>
 I might this day the boon bestow<br>
 And bid again thy pinions grow,<br>
 But wait until thy saving deed<br>
 The nations from their fear have freed.<br>
 Then for this glorious aid of thine<br>
 The princes of Ikshváku's line,<br>
 And Gods above and saints below<br>
 Eternal gratitude shall owe.<br>
 Fain would mine aged eyes behold<br>
 That pair of whom my lips have told,<br>
 Yet wearied here I must not stay,<br>
 But leave my frame and pass away.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry338.htm">Next: Canto LXIII.: Sampáti's Story.</a></center>
 </body>