<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry337.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry339.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIII.: SAMPÁTI'S STORY.</h3>
 <p>
 'With this and many a speech beside.<br>
 My failing heart he fortified,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 With glorious hope my breast inspired,<br>
 And to his holy home retired.<br>
 I scaled the mountain height, to view<br>
 The region round, and looked for you.<br>
 In ceaseless watchings night and day<br>
 A hundred seasons passed away,<br>
 And by the sage's words consoled<br>
 I wait the hour and chance foretold.<br>
 But since Nis'ákar sought the skies.<br>
 And cast away all earthly ties,<br>
 Full many a care and doubt has pressed<br>
 With grievous weight upon my breast.<br>
 But for the saint who turned aside<br>
 My purpose I had surely died.<br>
 Those hopeful words the hermit spake,<br>
 That bid me live for Ráma's sake,<br>
 Dispel my anguish as the light<br>
 Of lamp and torch disperse the night.'<br>
     He ceased: and in the Vánars' view<br>
 Forth from his side young pinions grew,<br>
 And boundless rapture filled his breast<br>
 As thus the chieftains he addressed:<br>
 'Joy, joy! the pinions, which the Lord<br>
 Of Day consumed, are now restored<br>
 Through the dear grace &amp; boundless might<br>
 Of that illustrious anchorite.<br>
 The tire of youth within me burns,<br>
 And all my wonted strength returns.<br>
 Onward, ye Vánars, toil strive,<br>
 And you shall find the dame alive.<br>
 Look on these new-found wings, and hence<br>
 Be strong in surest confidence.'<br>
     Swift from the crag he sprang to try<br>
 His pinions in his nativie sky.<br>
 His words the chieftains' doubts had stilled?<br>
 And every heart with courage filled. <a name="fr_780"></a><a href="ry339.htm#fn_780"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_779"></a><a href="ry337.htm#fr_779">390:1</a>  According to the promise, given him
 by Brahmá. See Book 1. Canto XIV.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry339.htm">Next: Canto LXIV.: The Sea.</a></center>
 </body>