<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry333.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry335.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIX.: SAMPATI'S STORY.</h3>
 <p>
 They heard his counsel to the close,<br>
 Then swiftly to their feet they rose;<br>
 And Jambavan with joyous breast<br>
 The vulture king again addressed:<br>
   "Where, where is Sítá? who has seen,<br>
 Who borne away the Maithil queen?<br>
 Who would the lightning flight withstand<br>
 Of arrows shot by Lakshman's hand"<br>
   Again Sampáti spoke to cheer<br>
 The Vánars as they bent to hear:<br>
 'Now listen, and my words shall show<br>
 What of the Maithil dame I know,<br>
 And in what distant prison lies<br>
 The lady of the long dark eyes.<br>
 Scorched by the fiery God of Day,<br>
 High on this mighty hill I lay.<br>
 A long and weary time had passed,<br>
 And strength and life were failing fast.<br>
 Yet, ere the breath had left my frame,<br>
 My son, my dear Supárs'va, came.<br>
 Each morn and eve he brought me food,<br>
 And filial care my life renewed.<br>
 But serpents still are swift to ire.<br>
 Gandbarvas slaves to soft desire.<br>
 And we, imperial vultures, need<br>
 A full supply our maws to feed.<br>
 Once he turned at close of day,<br>
 Stood by my side, but brought no prey.<br>
 He looked upon my ravenous eye,<br>
 Heard my complaint and made reply:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
   'Borne on swift wings ere day was light<br>
 I stood upon Mahendra's  <a name="fr_775"></a><a href="ry335.htm#fn_775"><font size="1">1b</font></a> height,<br>
 And, far below, the sea I viewed<br>
 And birds in countless multitude.<br>
 Before mine eyes a giant flew<br>
 Whose monstrous form was dark of hue<br>
 And struggling in his grasp was borne<br>
 A lady radiant as the morn.<br>
 Swift to the south his course he bent,<br>
 And cleft the yielding element.<br>
 The holy spirits of the air<br>
 Came round me as I marvelled there,<br>
 And cried as their bright legions met:<br>
 'O say, is Sítá living yet?'<br>
 Thus cried the saints and told the name<br>
 Of him who held the struggling dame.<br>
 Then while mine eye with eager look<br>
 Pursued the path the robber took,<br>
 I marked the lady's streaming hair,<br>
 And heard her cry of wild despair.<br>
 I saw her silken vesture rent<br>
 And stripped of every ornament,<br>
 Thus, O my father, fled the time:<br>
 Forgive, I pray, the heedless crime.'<br>
 In vain the mournful tale I heard<br>
 My pitying heart to fury stirred.<br>
 What could a helpless bird of air,<br>
 Reft of his boasted pinions, dare?<br>
 Yet can I aid with all that will<br>
 And words can do, and friendly skill.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_772"></a><a href="ry333.htm#fr_772">388:1</a>  Garuda, son of Vinatá, the sovereign
 of the birds.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_773"></a><a href="ry333.htm#fr_773">388:2</a>  "The well winged one," Garuda.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_774"></a><a href="ry333.htm#fr_774">388:3</a>  The God of the sea.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry335.htm">Next: Canto LX.: Sampáti's Story</a></center>
 </body>