<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry345.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry347.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO III.: THE GUARDIAN GODDESS.</h3>
 <p>
 There from the circling rampart's height<br>
 He gazed upon the wondrous sight;<br>
 Broad gates with burnished gold displayed,<br>
 And courts with turkises inlaid;<br>
 With gleaming silver, gems, and rows<br>
 Of crystal stairs and porticoes.<br>
 In semblance of a Rakshas dame<br>
 The city's guardian Goddess came,--<br>
 For she with glances sure and keen<br>
 The entrance of a foe had seen,--<br>
 And thus with fury in her eye<br>
 Addressed him with an angry cry:<br>
 'Who art thou? what has led thee, say,<br>
 Within these walls to find thy way?<br>
 Thou mayst not enter here in spite<br>
 Of Ravan and his warriors' might.<br>
 'And who art thou?' the Vanar cried,<br>
 By form and frown unterrified,<br>
 'Why hast thou met me by the gate,<br>
 And chid me thus infuriate?'<br>
     He ceased: andd Lanka made reply:<br>
 'The guardian of the town am I,<br>
 Who watch for ever to fulfil<br>
 My lord the Rakshas monarch's will.<br>
 But thou shalt fall this hour, and deep<br>
 Shall be thy never-ending sleep.<br>
 Again he spake:'In spite of thee<br>
 This golden city will I see.<br>
 Her gates and towers, and all the pride<br>
 Of street and square from side to side,<br>
 And freely wander where I please<br>
 Amid her groves of flowering trees;<br>
 On all her beauties sate mine eye.<br>
 Then, as I came, will homeward hie.'<br>
     Swift with an angry roar she smote<br>
 With her huge hand the Vanar's throat.<br>
 The smitten Vanar, rage-impelled,<br>
 With fist upraised the monster felled:<br>
 But quick repented, stirred with shame<br>
 And pity for a vanquished dame,<br>
 When with her senses troubled, weak<br>
 With terror, thus she strove to speak:<br>
 'O spare me thou whose arm is strong:<br>
 O spare me, and forgive the wrong.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The brave that law will ne'er transgress<br>
 That spares a woman's helplessness.<br>
 Hear, best of Vanars, brave and bold,<br>
 What Brahma's self of yore foretold;<br>
 'Beware,' he said, 'the fatal hour<br>
 When tbou shalt own a Vanar's power.<br>
 Then is the giants' day of fear,<br>
 For terror and defeat are near.'<br>
 Now, Vanar chief, o'ercome by thee,<br>
 I own the truth of heaven's decree.<br>
 For Sita's sake will ruin fall<br>
 On Ravan, and his town, and all.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_808"></a><a href="ry345.htm#fr_808">398:1</a>  So in Paradise Lost Satan when he
 has stealthily entered the garden of Eden
 assumes the form of a cormorant.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry347.htm">Next: Canto IV.: Within The City.</a></center>
 </body>