<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry341.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry343.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVII.: HANUMAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Soon as his stature they beheld.<br>
 Their fear and sorrow were dispelled;<br>
 And joyous praises loud and long<br>
 Rang out from all the Vánar throng.<br>
 On the great chief their eyes they bent<br>
 In rapture and astonishment,<br>
 As, when his conquering foot he raised,<br>
 The Gods upon Naráyan  <a name="fr_787"></a><a href="#fn_787"><font size="1">2</font></a> gazed.<br>
 He stood amid the joyous crowd,<br>
 Bent to the chiefs, and cried aloud:<br>
 'The Wind-God, Fire's eternal friend.<br>
 Whose blasts the mountain summits rend,<br>
 With boundless force that none may stay,<br>
 Takes where he lists his viewless way,<br>
 Sprung from that glorious father, I<br>
 In power and speed with him may vie,<br>
 A thousand times with airy leap<br>
 Can circle loftiest Meru's steep:<br>
 With my fierce arms can stir the sea<br>
 Till from their bed the waters flee<br>
 And rush at my command to drown<br>
 This land with grove and tower and town.<br>
 I through the fields of air can spring<br>
 Far swifter than the feathered King,<br>
 And leap before him as he dies.<br>
 On sounding pinions through the skies,<br>
 I can pursue the Lord of Light<br>
 Uprising from the eastern height,<br>
 And reach him ere his course be sped<br>
 With burning beams engarlanded,<br>
 I will dry up the mighty main,<br>
 Shatter the rocks and rend the plain.<br>
 O'er earth and ocean will I bound,<br>
 And every flower that grows on ground,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And bloom of climbing plants shall show<br>
 Strewn on the ground, the way I go.<br>
 Bright as the lustrous path that lies<br>
 Athwart the region of the skies.  <a name="fr_788"></a><a href="#fn_788"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 The Maithil lady will I find,--<br>
 Thus speaks mine own prophetic mind,--<br>
 And cast in hideous ruin down<br>
 The shattered walls of Lanká's town.'<br>
     Still on the chief in rapt surprise<br>
 The Vánar legions bent their eyes,<br>
 And thus again sage Jámbaván<br>
 Addressed the glorious Hanumán;<br>
 'Son of the Wind, thy promise cheers<br>
 The Vánars' hearts, and calms their fears,<br>
 Who, rescued from their dire distress.<br>
 With prospering vows thy way will bless.<br>
 The holy saints their favour lend,<br>
 And all our chiefs the deed commend<br>
 Urging thee forward on thy way;<br>
 Arise then, and the task assay.<br>
 Thou art our only refuge; we.<br>
 Our lives and all, depend on thee.'<br>
     Then sprang the Wind-God's son the best<br>
 Of Vánara, on Mahendra's crest.<br>
 And the great mountain rocked and swayed<br>
 By that unusual weight dismayed,<br>
 As reels an elephant beneath<br>
 The lion's spring and rending teeth.<br>
 The shady wood that crowned him shook,<br>
 The trembling birds the boughs forsook,<br>
 And ape and pard and lion fled<br>
 From brake and lair disquieted.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 <br>
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_786"></a><a href="ry341.htm#fr_786">393:1</a>  Vishnu, the God of the Three Steps.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_787"></a><a href="ry342.htm#fr_787">393:2</a>  Náráyan, 'He who moved upon the
 waters,' is Vishnu. The allusion is to the
 famous three steps of that God.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_788"></a><a href="ry342.htm#fr_788">393:1b</a>  The Milky Way.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry343.htm">Next: Book V</a></center>
 </body>