<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry351.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry353.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO X.: RÁVAN ASLEEP.</h3>
 <p>
 Apart a dais of crystal rose<br>
 With couches spread for soft repose.<br>
 Adorned with gold and gems of price<br>
 Meet for the halls of Paradise.<br>
 A canopy was o'er them spread<br>
 Pale as the light the moon beams shed,<br>
 And female figures, <a name="fr_820"></a><a href="#fn_820"><font size="1">1</font></a> deftly planned,<br>
 The faces of the sleepers fanned,<br>
 There on a splendid couch, asleep<br>
 On softest skins of deer and sheep.<br>
 Dark as a cloud that dims the day<br>
 The monarch of the giants lay,<br>
 Perfumed with sandal's precious scent<br>
 And gay with golden ornament.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_402"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 402</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 His fiery eyes in slumber closed,<br>
 In glittering robes the king reposed<br>
 Like Mandar's mighty hill asleep<br>
 With flowery trees that clothe his steep.<br>
 Near and more near the Vánar<br>
 The monarch of the fiends to view,<br>
 And saw the giant stretched supine<br>
 Fatigued with play and drunk with wine.<br>
 While, shaking all the monstrous frame,<br>
 His breath like hissing serpents' came.<br>
 With gold and glittering bracelets gay<br>
 His mighty arms extended lay<br>
 Huge as the towering shafts that bear<br>
 The flag of Indra high in air.<br>
 Scars by Airávat's impressed<br>
 Showed red upon his shaggy breast.<br>
 And on his shoulders were displayed<br>
 The dints the thunder-bolt had made.  <a name="fr_821"></a><a href="ry353.htm#fn_821"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The spouses of the giant king<br>
 Around their lord were slumbering,<br>
 And, gay with sparkling earrings, shone<br>
 Fair as the moon to look upon.<br>
 There by her husband's side was seen<br>
 Mandodarífavourite queen,<br>
 The beauty of whose youthful face<br>
 Beamed a soft glory through the place.<br>
 The Vánared the dame more fair<br>
 Than all the royal ladies there,<br>
 And thought, 'These rarest beauties speak<br>
 The matchless dame I come to seek.<br>
 Peerless in grace and splendour, she<br>
 The Maithil queen must surely be.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_820"></a><a href="ry352.htm#fr_820">401:1</a>  Women, says Válmíki. But the commentator
 says that automatic figures only
 are meant. Women would have seen Hanumán
 and given the alarm.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry353.htm">Next: Canto XI.: The Banquet Hall.</a></center>
 </body>