<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry349.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry351.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VIII.: THE ENCHANTED CAR.</h3>
 <p>
 There gleamed the car with wealth untold<br>
 Of precious gems and burnished gold;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Nor could the Wind-God's son withdraw<br>
 His rapt gaze from the sight he saw,<br>
 By Vis'vakarmá's  <a name="fr_817"></a><a href="ry351.htm#fn_817"><font size="1">1b</font></a> self proclaimed<br>
 The noblest work his hand had framed.<br>
 Uplifted in the air it glowed<br>
 Bright as the sun's diurnal road.<br>
 The eye might scan the wondrous frame<br>
 And vainly seek one spot to blame,<br>
 So fine was every part and fair<br>
 With gems inlaid with lavish care.<br>
 No precious stones so rich adorn<br>
 The cars wherein the Gods are borne,<br>
 Prize of the all-resistless might<br>
 That sprang from pain and penance rite,  <a name="fr_818"></a><a href="ry351.htm#fn_818"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Obedient to the master's will<br>
 It moved o'er wood and towering hill,<br>
 A glorious marvel well designed<br>
 By Vis'vakarmá's artist mind,<br>
 Adorned with every fair device<br>
 That decks the cars of Paradise.<br>
 Swift moving as the master chose<br>
 It flew through air or sank or rose,  <a name="fr_819"></a><a href="ry351.htm#fn_819"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 And in its fleetness left behind<br>
 The fury of the rushing wind:<br>
 Meet mansion for the good and great,<br>
 The holy, wise, and fortunate.<br>
 Throughout the chariot's vast extent<br>
 Were chambers wide and excellent,<br>
 All pure and lovely to the eyes<br>
 As moonlight shed from cloudless skies.<br>
 Fierce goblins, rovers of the night<br>
 Who cleft the clouds with swiftest flight<br>
 In countless hosts that chariot drew,<br>
 With earrings clashing as they flew.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_815"></a><a href="ry349.htm#fr_815">400:1</a>  Pushpak from <i>pushpa</i> a flower. The
 car has been mentioned before in Ravan's
 expedition to carry off Sitá, Book III.
 Canto XXXV.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_816"></a><a href="ry349.htm#fr_816">400:2</a>  Lakshmi is the wife of Vishnu and the
 Goddess of Beauty and Felicity. She rose,
 like Aphrodite, from the foam of the sea.
 For an account of her birth aud beauty,
 see Book 1. Canto XLV.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry351.htm">Next: Canto IX.: The Ladies' Bower.</a></center>
 </body>