<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry354.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry356.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIII.: DESPAIR AND HOPE.</h3>
 <p>
 Then rapid as the lightning's flame<br>
 From Rávan's halls the Vánar came<br>
 Each lingering hope was cold and dead,<br>
 And thus within his heart he said:<br>
 'Alas, my fruitless search is done:<br>
 Long have I toiled for Raghu's son;<br>
 And yet with all my care have seen<br>
 No traces of the ravished queen.<br>
 It may be, while the giant through<br>
 The lone air with his captive flew,<br>
 The Maithil lady, tender-souled,<br>
 Slipped struggling from the robber's hold,<br>
 And the wild sea is rolling now<br>
 O'er Sítá of the beauteous brow.<br>
 Or did she perish of alarm<br>
 When circled by the monster's arm?<br>
 Or crushed, unable to withstand<br>
 The pressure of that monstrous hand?<br>
 Or when she spurned his suit with scorn,<br>
 Her tender limbs were rent and torn.<br>
 And she, her virtue unsubdued,<br>
 Was slaughtered for the giant's food.<br>
 Shall I to Raghu's son relate<br>
 His well-beloved consort's fate,<br>
 My crime the same if I reveal<br>
 The mournful story or conceal?<br>
 If with no happier tale to tell<br>
 I seek our mountain citadel,<br>
 How shall I face our lord the king,<br>
 And meet his angry questioning?<br>
 How shall I greet my friends, and brook<br>
 The muttered taunt, the scornful look?<br>
 How to the son of Raghu go<br>
 And kill him with my tale of woe?<br>
 For sure the mournful tale I bear<br>
 Will strike him dead with wild despair.<br>
 And Lakshman ever fond and true,<br>
 Will, undivided, perish too.<br>
 Bharat will learn his brother's fate,<br>
 And die of grief disconsolate,<br>
 And sad Satrughna with a cry<br>
 Of anguish on his corpse will die.<br>
 Our king Sugrívar found;<br>
 True to each bond in honour bound.<br>
 Will mourn the pledge he vainly gave,<br>
 And die with him he could not save.<br>
 Then Rumá his devoted wife<br>
 For her dead lord will leave her life,<br>
 And Tára, widowed and forlorn,<br>
 Will die in anguish, sorrow-worn.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 On Angad too the blow will fall<br>
 Killing the hope and joy of all.<br>
 The ruin of their prince and king<br>
 The Vánarsls with woe will wring,<br>
 And each, overwhelmed with dark despair,<br>
 Will beat his head and rend his hair.<br>
 Each, graced and honoured long, will miss<br>
 His careless life of easy bliss,<br>
 In happy troops will play no more<br>
 On breezy rock and shady shore,<br>
 But with his darling wife and child<br>
 Will seek the mountain top, and wild<br>
 With hopeless desolation, throw<br>
 Himself, his wife, and babe, below.<br>
 All no: unless the dame I find<br>
 I ne'er will meet my Vánar,<br>
 Here rather in some distant dell<br>
 A lonely hermit will I dwell,<br>
 Where roots and berries will supply<br>
 My humble wants until I die;<br>
 Or on the shore will raise a pyre<br>
 And perish in the kindled fire.<br>
 Or I will strictly fast until<br>
 With slow decay my life I kill,<br>
 And ravening dogs and birds of air<br>
 The limbs of Hanumánl tear.<br>
 Here will I die, but never bring<br>
 Destruction on my race and king.<br>
 But still unsearched one grove I see<br>
 With many a bright As'oka tree.<br>
 There will I enter in, and through<br>
 The tangled shade my search renew.<br>
 Be glory to the host on high,<br>
 The Sun and Moon who light the sky,<br>
 The Vasus  <a name="fr_822"></a><a href="ry356.htm#fn_822"><font size="1">1</font></a> and the Maruts'  <a name="fr_823"></a><a href="ry356.htm#fn_823"><font size="1">2</font></a> train,<br>
 Ádityas  <a name="fr_824"></a><a href="ry356.htm#fn_824"><font size="1">3</font></a> and the As'vins  <a name="fr_825"></a><a href="ry356.htm#fn_825"><font size="1">4</font></a> twain.<br>
 So may I win success, and bring<br>
 The lady back with triumphing,'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry356.htm">Next: Canto XIV.: The As'oka Grove.</a></center>
 </body>