<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry362.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry364.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXI.: SITA'S SCORN.</h3>
 <p>
 She thought upon her lord and sighed,<br>
 And thus in gentle tones replied:<br>
 'Beseems thee not, O King, to woo<br>
 A matron, to her husband true.<br>
 Thus vainly one might hope by sin<br>
 And evil deeds success to win.<br>
 Shall I, so highly born, disgrace<br>
 My husband's house, my royal race?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Shall I, a true and loyal dame,<br>
 Defile my soul with deed of shame?'<br>
     Then on the king her back she turned,<br>
 And answered thus the prayer she spurned:<br>
 'Turn, Rávan, turn thee from thy sin;<br>
 Seek virtue's paths and walk therein.<br>
 To others dames be honour shown;<br>
 Protect them as thou wouldst thine own.<br>
 Taught by thyself, from wrong abstain<br>
 Which, wrought on thee, thy heart would pain.  <a name="fr_837"></a><a href="#fn_837"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Beware: this lawless love of thine<br>
 Will ruin thee and all thy line;<br>
 And for thy sin, thy sin alone,<br>
 Will Lanká perish overthrown.<br>
 Dream not that wealth and power can sway<br>
 My heart from duty's path to stray<br>
 Linked like the Day-God and his shine,<br>
 I am my lord's and he is mine.<br>
 Repent thee of thine impious deed;<br>
 To Ráma's side his consort lead.<br>
 Be wise; the hero's friendship gain,<br>
 Nor perish in his fury slain.<br>
 Go, ask the God of Death to spare,<br>
 Or red bolt flashing through the air.<br>
 But look in vain for spell or charm<br>
 To stay my Ráma's vengeful arm.<br>
 Thou, when the hero bends his bow,<br>
 Shalt hear the clang that heralds woe,<br>
 Loud as the clash when clouds are rent<br>
 And Indra's bolt to earth is sent.<br>
 Then shall his furious shafts be sped,<br>
 Each like a snake with fiery head.<br>
 And in their flight shall hiss and flame<br>
 Marked with the mighty archer's name.  <a name="fr_838"></a><a href="#fn_838"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Then in the fiery deluge all<br>
 Thy giants round their king shall fall.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_408"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 408</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_835"></a><a href="ry362.htm#fr_835">407:1</a>  Janak, king of Mithilá, was Sitá's
 father.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_836"></a><a href="ry362.htm#fr_836">407:2</a>  Hiranyakas'ipu was a king of the
 Daityas celebrated for his blasphemous
 impieties. When his pious son Prahlada
 praised Vishun the Daitya tried to kill him,
 when the God appeared in the incarnation
 of the man-lion and tore the tyrant to
 pieces.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_837"></a><a href="ry363.htm#fr_837">407:1b</a>  Do unto others as thou wouldst they
 should do unto thee, is a precept frequently
 occurring in the old Indian poems.
 
 </p><p>
 This charity is to embrace not human
 beings only, but bird and beast as well:
 "He prayeth best who loveth best all
 things both great and small"</p>
 <p><a name="fn_838"></a><a href="ry363.htm#fr_838">407:2b</a>  It was the custom of Indian warriors
 to mark their arrows with their ciphers or
 names, and it seems to have been regarded
 as a point of honour to give an enemy
 the satisfaction of knowing who had shot
 at him. This passage however contains, if
 my memory serves me well, the first mention
 in the poem of this practice, and as
 arrows have been so frequently mentioned
 and described with almost every conceivable
 epithet, its occurrence here seems
 suspicious. No mention of, or allusion to
 writing has hitherto occurred in the poem.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry364.htm">Next: Canto XXII.: Rávan's Threat.</a></center>
 </body>