<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry363.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry365.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXII.: RÁVAN'S THREAT.</h3>
 <p>
 Then anger swelled in Rávan's breast,<br>
 Who fiercely thus the dame addressed:<br>
 'Tis ever thus: in vain we sue<br>
 To woman, and her favour woo.<br>
 A lover's humble words impel<br>
 Her wayward spirit to rebel.<br>
 The love of thee that fills my soul<br>
 Still keeps my anger in control.<br>
 As charioteers with bit and rein<br>
 The swerving of the steed restrain.<br>
 The love that rules me bids me spare<br>
 Thy forefeit life, O thou most fair.<br>
 For this, O Sítá, have I borne<br>
 The keen reproach, the bitter scorn,<br>
 And the fond love thou boastest yet<br>
 For that poor wandering anchoret;<br>
 Else had the words which thou hast said<br>
 Brought death upon thy guilty head.<br>
 Two months, fair dame, I grant thee still<br>
 To bend thee to thy lover's will.<br>
 If when that respite time is fled<br>
 Thou still refuse to share my bed,<br>
 My cooks shall mince thy limbs with steel<br>
 And serve thee for my morning meal.'  <a name="fr_839"></a><a href="#fn_839"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
     The minstrel daughters of the skies<br>
 Looked on her woe with pitying eyes,<br>
 And sun-bright children of the Gods  <a name="fr_840"></a><a href="#fn_840"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Consoled the queen with smiles and nods.<br>
 She saw, and with her heart at ease,<br>
 Addressed the fiend in words like these;<br>
 'Hast thou no friend to love thee, none<br>
 In all this isle to bid thee shun<br>
 The ruin which thy crime will bring<br>
 On thee and thine, O impious King?<br>
 Who in all worlds save thee could woo<br>
 Me, Ráma's consort pure and true,<br>
 As though he tempted with his love<br>
 Queen Sachí <a name="fr_841"></a><a href="#fn_841"><font size="1">3</font></a> on her throne above?<br>
 How canst thou hope, vile wretch, to fly<br>
 The vengeance that e'en now is nigh,<br>
 When thou hast dared, untouched by shame,<br>
 To press thy suit on Ráma's dame?<br>
 Where woods are thick and grass is high<br>
 A lion and a hare may lie;<br>
 My Ráma is the lion, thou<br>
 Art the poor hare beneath the bough,<br>
 Thou railest at the lord of men.<br>
 But wilt not stand within his ken,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 What! is that eye unstricken yet<br>
 Whose impious glance on me was set?<br>
 Still moves that tongue that would not spare<br>
 The wife of Das'aratha's heir?'<br>
     Then, hissing like a furious snake,<br>
 The fiend again to Sítá spake:<br>
 'Deaf to all prayers and threats art thou,<br>
 Devoted to thy senseless vow.<br>
 No longer respite will I give,<br>
 And thou this day shalt cease to live;<br>
 Now I, as sunlight kills the morn,<br>
 Will slay thee for thy scathe and scorn.'<br>
     The Rákshas guard was summoned: all<br>
 The monstrous crew obeyed the call,<br>
 And hastened to the king to take<br>
 The orders which he fiercely spake:<br>
 'See that ye guard her well, and tame,<br>
 Like some wild thing, the stubborn dame,<br>
 Until her haughty boul be bent<br>
 By mingled threat and blandishment.'  <a name="fr_842"></a><a href="ry365.htm#fn_842"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
     The monsters heard: away he strode,<br>
 And passed within his queens' abode.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_839"></a><a href="ry364.htm#fr_839">408:1</a>  This threat in the same words occurs
 in Book III. Canto LVI.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_840"></a><a href="ry364.htm#fr_840">408:2</a>  Rávan carried off and kept in his
 palace not only earthly princesses but the
 daughters of Gods and Gandharvas.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_841"></a><a href="ry364.htm#fr_841">408:3</a>  The wife of Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry365.htm">Next: Canto XXIII.: The Demons' Threats</a></center>
 </body>