<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry367.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry369.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVI.: SITÁ'S LAMENT</h3>
 <p>
 'I Ráma's wife, on that sad day.<br>
 By Rávan's arm was borne away,<br>
 Seized, while I sat and feared no ill,<br>
 By him who wears each form at will,<br>
 A helpless captive, left forlorn<br>
 To demons' threats and taunts and scorn,<br>
 Here for my lord I weep and sigh,<br>
 And worn with woe would gladly die.<br>
 For what is life to me afar<br>
 From Ráma of the mighty car?<br>
 The robber in his fruitless sin<br>
 Would hope his captives love to win.<br>
 My meaner foot shall never touch<br>
 The demon whom I loathe so much.<br>
 The senseless fool! he knows me not,<br>
 Nor the proud soul his love would blot.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Yea, limb from limb will I be rent,<br>
 But never to his prayer consent;<br>
 Be burnt and perish in the fire,<br>
 But never meet his base desire.<br>
 My lord was grateful, true and wise,<br>
 And looked on woe with piting eyes;<br>
 But now, recoiling from the strife<br>
 He pities not his captive wife.<br>
 Alone in Janasthán he slew<br>
 The thousands of the Rákshas crew.<br>
 His arm was strong, his heart was brave,<br>
 Why comes he not to free and save?<br>
 Why blame my lord in vain surmise<br>
 He knows not where his lady lies.<br>
 O, if he knew, o'er land and sea<br>
 His feet were swift to set me free;<br>
 This Lanká, girdled by the deep.<br>
 Would fall consumed, a shapeless heap,<br>
 And from each ruined home would rise<br>
 A Rákshas widow's groans and cries.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_847"></a><a href="ry367.htm#fr_847">410:1</a>  The mother of Ráma.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_848"></a><a href="ry367.htm#fr_848">410:2</a>  The mother of Lakshman.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry369.htm">Next: Canto XXVII.: Trijatá's Dream.</a></center>
 </body>