<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry360.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry362.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIX.: SÍTA'S FEAR.</h3>
 <p>
 Then o'er the lady's soul and frame<br>
 A sudden fear and trembling came,<br>
 When, glowing in his youthful pride,<br>
 She saw the monarch by her side.<br>
 Silent she sat, her eyes depressed,<br>
 Her soft arms folded o'er her breast,<br>
 And,--all she could,--her beauties screened<br>
 From the bold gazes of the fiend.<br>
 There where the wild she-demons kept<br>
 Their watch around, she sighed and wept.<br>
 Then, like a severed bough, she lay<br>
 Prone on the bare earth in dismay.<br>
 The while her thoughts on love's fleet wings<br>
 Flew to her lord the best of kings.<br>
 She fell upon the ground, and there<br>
 Lay struggling with her wild despair,<br>
 Sad as a lady born again<br>
 To misery and woe and pain,<br>
 Now doomed to grief and low estate,<br>
 Once noble fair and delicate:<br>
 Like faded light of holy lore,<br>
 Like Hope when all her dreams are o'er;<br>
 Like ruined power and rank debased,<br>
 Like majesty of kings disgraced:<br>
 Like woman *** led by erring slips,<br>
 The moon that labors in eclipse<br>
 A pool with all her lillies* dead<br>
 An army when its king has fled:<br>
 So sad and helpless wan and worn,<br>
 She lay among the fiends forlorn.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_831"></a><a href="ry360.htm#fr_831">406:1</a>  Rávan is one of those beings who can
 'limb* them as they will' and can of
 course assume the loveliest form to please
 human eyes as well as the terrific* shape
 that sits * the king of the Rákshas.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_832"></a><a href="ry360.htm#fr_832">406:2</a>  White and lovely as the Arant or
 nectar recovered from the depths of the
 Milky Sea when churned by the assembled
 Gods.  See Book I. Canto XLV.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry362.htm">Next: Canto XX.: Rávan's Wooing.</a></center>
 </body>