<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry375.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry377.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVI.: RÁMA'S RING.</h3>
 <p>
 'Receive,' he cried, 'this precious ring,  <a name="fr_865"></a><a href="#fn_865"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Sure token from thy lord the king:<br>
 The golden ring he wont to wear:<br>
 See, Ráma's name engraven there.'<br>
 Then, as she took the ring he showed,<br>
 The tears that spring of rapture flowed.<br>
 She seemed to touch the hand that sent<br>
 The dearly valued ornament,<br>
 And with her heart again at ease,<br>
 Replied in gentle words like these:<br>
 'O thou, whose soul no fears deter.<br>
 Wise, brave, and faithful messenger!<br>
 And hast thou dared, o'er wave and foam,<br>
 To seek me in the giants' home!<br>
 In thee, true messenger, I find<br>
 The noblest of thy woodland kind.<br>
 Who couldst, unmoved by terror, brook<br>
 On Rávan, king of fiends, to look.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_415"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 415</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Now may we commune here as friends,<br>
 For he whom royal Ráma sends<br>
 Must needs he one in danger tried,<br>
 A valiant, wise, and faithful guide.<br>
 Say, is it well with Ráma still?<br>
 Lives Lakshman yet untouched by ill?<br>
 Then why should Ráma's hand be slow<br>
 To free his consort from her woe?<br>
 Why spare to burn, in search of me,<br>
 The land encircled by the sea?<br>
 Can Bharat send no army out<br>
 With banners, cars and battle shout?<br>
 Cannot thy king Sugríva lend<br>
 His legions to assist his friend?'<br>
     His hands upon his head he laid<br>
 And thus again his answer made:<br>
 'Not yet has Ráma learnt where lies<br>
 His lady of the lotus eyes,<br>
 Or he like Indra from the sky<br>
 To S'achí's  <a name="fr_866"></a><a href="#fn_866"><font size="1">1</font></a> aid, to thee would fly.<br>
 Soon will he hear the tale, and then,<br>
 Roused to revenge, the lord of men<br>
 Will to the giants' island lead<br>
 Fierce myriads of the woodland breed,<br>
 Bridging his conquering way, and make<br>
 The town a ruin for thy sake.<br>
 Believe my words, sweet dame; I swear<br>
 By roots and fruit, my woodland fare,<br>
 By Meru's peak and Vindhva's chain,<br>
 And Mandar of the Milky Main,<br>
 Soon shalt thou see thy lord, though now<br>
 He waits upon Prasravan's  <a name="fr_867"></a><a href="#fn_867"><font size="1">2</font></a> brow,<br>
 Come glorious as the breaking morn,<br>
 Like Indra on Airávat  <a name="fr_868"></a><a href="#fn_868"><font size="1">3</font></a> borne.<br>
 For thee he looks with longing eyes;<br>
 The wood his scanty food supplies.<br>
 For thee his brow is pale and worn,<br>
 For thee are meat and wine forsworn.<br>
 Thine image in his heart he keeps,<br>
 For thee by night he wakes and weeps.<br>
 Or if perchance his eyes he close<br>
 And win brief respite from his woes,<br>
 E'en then the name of Sítá slips<br>
 In anguish from his murmuring lips.<br>
 If lovely flowers or fruit lie sees,<br>
 Which women love, upon the trees,<br>
 To thee, to thee his fancy flies.<br>
 And 'Sítá! O my love!' he cries.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_864"></a><a href="ry375.htm#fr_864">414:1b</a>  Sítá of course knows nothing of what
 has happened to Ráma since the time
 when she was carried away by Rávan,
 The poet therefore thinks it necessary to
 repeat the whole story of the meeting
 between Ráma and Sugríva, the defeat of
 Báli, and subsequent events. I give the
 briefest possible outline of the story.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_865"></a><a href="ry376.htm#fr_865">414:2b</a>  DE GUBERNATIS thinks that this ring
 which the Sun Ráma sends to the Dawn
 Sítá is a symbol of the sun's disc.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_866"></a><a href="ry376.htm#fr_866">415:1</a>  S'achí is the loved and lovely wife of
 Indra, and she is taken as the type of a
 woman protected by a jealous and all-powerful husband.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_867"></a><a href="ry376.htm#fr_867">415:2</a>  The mountain near Kishkindhá.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_868"></a><a href="ry376.htm#fr_868">415:3</a>  Airávat is the mighty elephant on
 which Indra delights to ride.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry377.htm">Next: Canto XXXVII.: Sítá's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>