<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry374.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry376.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXV.: HANUMAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 With joyous heart she heard him tell<br>
 Of the great lord she loved so well,<br>
 And in sweet accents, soft and low,<br>
 Spoke, half forgetful of her woe:<br>
 'How didst thou stand by Ráma's side?<br>
 How came my lord and thou allied?<br>
 How met the people of the wood<br>
 With men on terms of brotherhood?<br>
 Declare each grace and regal sign<br>
 That decks the lords of Raghu's line.<br>
 Each circumstance and look relate<br>
 Tell Ráma's form and speech, and gait.'<br>
     'Thy fear and doubt,' he cried, 'dispelled,<br>
 Hear, lady, what mine eyes beheld.<br>
 Hear the imperial signs that grace<br>
 The glory of Ikshváku's race.<br>
 With moon-bright face and lotus eyes,<br>
 Most beautiful and good and wise,<br>
 With sun-like glory round his head,<br>
 Long-suffering as the earth we tread,<br>
 He from all foes his realm defends.<br>
 Yea, o'er the world his care extends.<br>
 He follows right in all his ways,<br>
 And ne'er from royal duty strays.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 He knows the lore that strengthens kings;<br>
 His heart to truth and honour clings.<br>
 Each grace and gift of form and mind<br>
 Adorns that prince of human kind;<br>
 And virtues like his own endue<br>
 His brother ever firm and true.<br>
 O'er all the land they roamed distaught,<br>
 And thee with vain endeavour sought,<br>
 Until at length their wandering feet<br>
 Trod wearily our wild retreat.<br>
 Our banished king Sugríva spied<br>
 The princes from the mountain side.<br>
 By his command I sought the pair<br>
 And led them to our monarch there.<br>
 Thus Ráma and Sugríva met,<br>
 And joined the bonds that knit them yet,<br>
 When each besought the other's aid,<br>
 And friendship and alliance made.<br>
 An arrow launched from Ráma's bow<br>
 Laid Báli dead, Sugríva's foe.<br>
 Then by commandment of our lord<br>
 The Vánar hosts each land explored.<br>
 We reached the coast: I crossed the sea<br>
 And found my way at length to thee.'  <a name="fr_864"></a><a href="ry376.htm#fn_864"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_863"></a><a href="ry374.htm#fr_863">414:1</a>  Kuvera the God of Gold.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry376.htm">Next: Canto XXXVI.: Ráma's Ring.</a></center>
 </body>