<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry372.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry374.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIII.: THE COLLOQUY.</h3>
 <p>
 Down from the tree Hanumán came<br>
 And humbly stood before the dame.<br>
 Then joining reverent palm to palm<br>
 Addressed her thus with words of balm:<br>
 'Why should the tears of sorrow rise,<br>
 Sweet lady, to those lovely eyes,<br>
 As when the wind-swept river floods<br>
 Two half expanded lotus buds?<br>
 Who art thou, O most fair of face?<br>
 Of Asur, <a name="fr_856"></a><a href="#fn_856"><font size="1">1</font></a> or celestial race?<br>
 Did Nága mother give thee birth?<br>
 For sure thou art no child of earth.<br>
 Do Rudras  <a name="fr_857"></a><a href="#fn_857"><font size="1">2</font></a> claim that heavenly form?<br>
 Or the swift Gods  <a name="fr_858"></a><a href="#fn_858"><font size="1">3</font></a> who ride the storm?<br>
 Or art thou Rohiní  <a name="fr_859"></a><a href="#fn_859"><font size="1">4</font></a> the blest,<br>
 That star more lovely than the rest,--<br>
 Reft from the Moon thou lovest well<br>
 And doomed a while on earth to dwell?<br>
 Or canst thou, fairest wonder, be<br>
 The starry queen Arundhatí, <a name="fr_860"></a><a href="#fn_860"><font size="1">5</font></a><br>
 Fled in thy wrath or jealous pride<br>
 From her dear lord Vas'ishtha's side?<br>
 Who is the husband, father, son<br>
 Or brother, O thou loveliest one,<br>
 Gone from this world in heaven to dwell,<br>
 For whom those eyes with weeping swell?<br>
 Yet, by the tears those sweet eyes shed,<br>
 Yet, by the earth that bears thy tread, <a name="fr_861"></a><a href="#fn_861"><font size="1">6</font></a><br>
 By calling on a monarch's name,<br>
 No Goddess but a royal dame.<br>
 Art thou the queen, fair lady, say,<br>
 Whom Rávan stole and bore away?<br>
 Yea, by that agony of woe,<br>
 That form unrivalled here below,<br>
 That votive garb, thou art, I ween,<br>
 King Janak's child and Ráma's queen.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Hope at the name of Ráma woke,<br>
 And thus the gentle lady spoke:<br>
 'I am that Sítá wooed and won<br>
 By Das'aratha's royal son,<br>
 The noblest of Ikshváku's line;<br>
 And every earthly joy was mine.<br>
 But Ráma left his royal home<br>
 In Dandak's tangled wilds to roam.<br>
 Where with Sumitrá's son and me,<br>
 He lived a saintly devotee.<br>
 The giant Rávan came with guile<br>
 And bore me thence to Lanká's isle.<br>
 Some respite yet the fiend allows,<br>
 Two months of life, to Ráma's spouse.<br>
 Two moons of hopeless woe remain.<br>
 And then the captive will be slain.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_856"></a><a href="ry373.htm#fr_856">413:1</a>  The Asurs were the fierce enemies of
 the Gods.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_857"></a><a href="ry373.htm#fr_857">413:2</a>  The Rudras are manifestations of S'iva.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_858"></a><a href="ry373.htm#fr_858">413:3</a>  The Maruts or Storm Gods.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_859"></a><a href="ry373.htm#fr_859">413:4</a>  Rohiní is an asterism personified as
 the daughter of Daksha and the favourite
 wife of the Moon. The chief star in the
 constellation is Aldebaran.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_860"></a><a href="ry373.htm#fr_860">413:5</a>  Arundhatí was the wife of the great
 sage Vas'ishtha, and regarded as the pattern
 of conjugal excellence. She was raised
 to the heavens as one of the Pleiades.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_861"></a><a href="ry373.htm#fr_861">413:6</a>  The Gods do not shed tears; nor do
 they touch the ground when they walk
 or stand. Similarly Milton's angels marched
 above the ground and "the passive
 air upbore their nimble tread."
 
 </p><p>
 Virgil's 'vera incessu patuit dea' may
 refer to the same belief.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry374.htm">Next: Canto XXXIV.: Hanumán's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>