<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry385.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry387.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVIIL: HANUMÁN CAPTURED.</h3>
 <p>
 To Indrajit  <a name="fr_885"></a><a href="#fn_885"><font size="1">1b</font></a> the bold and brave<br>
 The giant king his mandate gave:<br>
 'O trained in warlike science, best<br>
 In arms of all our mightiest,<br>
 Whose valour in the conflict shown<br>
 To Asurs and to Gods is known,<br>
 The Kinkars whom I sent are slain,<br>
 And Jambumálí and his train;<br>
 The lords who led our giant bands<br>
 Have fallen by the monkey s hands;<br>
 With shattered cars the ground is spread,<br>
 And Aksha lies amid the dead.<br>
 Thou art my best and bravest: go,<br>
 Unmatched in power, and slay the foe.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_421"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 421</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He heard the hest: he bent his head;<br>
 Athirst for battle forth he sped.<br>
 Four tigers fierce, of tawny hue,<br>
 With fearful teeth, his chariot drew.<br>
     Hanúmán heard his strong bow clang,<br>
 And swiftly from the earth he sprang,<br>
 While weak and ineffective fell<br>
 The archer's shafts though pointed well.<br>
 The Rákshas saw that naught might kill<br>
 The wondrous foe who mocked his skill,<br>
 And launched a magic shaft to throw<br>
 A binding spell about his foe.<br>
 Forth flew the shaft: the mystic charm<br>
 Stayed his swift feet and numbed his arm.<br>
 Through all his frame he felt the spell,<br>
 And motionless to earth he fell.<br>
 Nor would the reverent Vánar loose<br>
 The bonds that bound him as a noose.<br>
 He knew that Brahmá's self had charmed<br>
 The weapon that his might disarmed.<br>
     They saw him helpless on the ground,<br>
 And all the giants pressed around,<br>
 And bonds of hemp and bark were cast<br>
 About his limbs to hold him fast.<br>
 They drew the ropes round feet and wrists;<br>
 They beat him with their hands and fists.<br>
 And dragged him as they strained the cord<br>
 With shouts of triumph to their lord.  <a name="fr_886"></a><a href="ry387.htm#fn_886"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_885"></a><a href="ry386.htm#fr_885">420:1b</a>  Conqueror of lndra, another of
 Rávan's sons.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry387.htm">Next: Canto XLIX.: Rávan.</a></center>
 </body>