<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry380.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry382.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIII.: THE RUIN OF THE TEMPLE.</h3>
 <p>
 The Wind-God's son a temple  <a name="fr_880"></a><a href="ry382.htm#fn_880"><font size="1">1b</font></a> scaled<br>
 Which, by his fury unassailed,<br>
 High as the hill of Meru, stood<br>
 Amid the ruins of the wood;<br>
 And in his fury thundered out<br>
 Again his haughty battle-shout:<br>
 'I am the slave of Kosal's King<br>
 Whose wondrous deeds the minstrels sing.'<br>
 Forth hurried, by that shout alarmed,<br>
 The warders of the temple armed<br>
 With every weapon haste supplied,<br>
 And closed him in on every side,<br>
 With bands that strove to pierce and strike<br>
 With shaft and axe and club and pike.<br>
 Then from its base the Vánar tore<br>
 A pillar with the weight it bore.<br>
 Against the wall the mass he dashed,<br>
 And forth the flames in answer flashed,<br>
 That wildly ran o'er roofs and wall<br>
 In hungry rage consuming all.<br>
 He whirled the pillar round his head<br>
 And struck a hundred giants dead.<br>
 Then high upheld on air he rose<br>
 And called in thunder to his foes:<br>
 'A thousand Vánar chiefs like me<br>
 Roam at their will o'er land and sea,<br>
 Terrific might we all possess:<br>
 Our stormy speed is limitless.<br>
 And all, unconquered in the fray,<br>
 Our king Sugríva's word obey.<br>
 Backed by his bravest myriads, he<br>
 Our warrior lord will cross the sea,<br>
 Then Lanká's lofty towers, and all<br>
 Your hosts and Rávan's self shall fall.<br>
 None shall be left unslaughtered; none<br>
 Who braves the wrath of Raghu's son.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry382.htm">Next: Canto XLIV.: Jambumáli's Death.</a></center>
 </body>