<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry383.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry385.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVI.: THE CAPTAINS.</h3>
 <p>
 Mad with the rage of injured pride<br>
 King Ráven summoned to his side<br>
 The valiant *** who led his host,<br>
 Supreme in war and honoured most.<br>
     'Go forth,' he cried, 'with car and steed,<br>
 A** **** feet this monkey lead.<br>
 But watch each chance of time and place<br>
 To seize this thing of silvan race.<br>
 For from his wondrous exploits he<br>
 No monkey of the woods can be,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_420"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 420</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 But some new kind of creature meant<br>
 To work us woe, by Indra sent.<br>
 Gandharvas, Nágas, and the best<br>
 Of Yakshas have our might confessed.<br>
 Have we not challenged and subdued<br>
 The whole celestial multitude?<br>
 Yet will you not, if you are wise,<br>
 A chief of monkey race despise.<br>
 For I myself have Báli known,<br>
 And King Sugríva's power I own.<br>
 But none of all their woodland throng<br>
 Was half so terrible and strong.'<br>
     Obedient to the words he spake<br>
 They hastened forth the foe to take.<br>
 Swift were the cars whereon they rode,<br>
 And bright their weapons flashed and glowed.<br>
 They saw: they charged in wild career<br>
 With sword and mace and axe and spear.<br>
 From Durdhar's bow five arrows sped<br>
 And quivered in the Vánar's head.<br>
 He rose and roared; the fearful sound<br>
 Made all the region echo round.<br>
 Then from above his weight he threw<br>
 On Durdhar's car that near him drew.<br>
 The weight that came with lightning speed<br>
 Crushed pole and axle, car and steed.<br>
 It shattered Durdhar's head and neck,<br>
 And left him lifeless mid the wreck.<br>
 Yúpáksha saw the warrior die,<br>
 And Virúpáksha heard his cry,<br>
 And, mad for vengeance for the slain,<br>
 They charged their Vánar foe again.<br>
 He rose in air: they onward pressed<br>
 And fiercely smote him on the breast.<br>
 In vain they struck his iron frame:<br>
 With eagle swoop to earth he came,<br>
 Tore from the ground a tree that grew<br>
 Beside him, and the demons slew.<br>
 Then Bhásakama raised his spear,<br>
 And Praghas with a laugh drew near,<br>
 And, maddened at the sight, the two<br>
 Against the undaunted Vánar flew.<br>
 As from his wounds the torrents flowed,<br>
 Like a red sun the Vánar showed.<br>
 He turned, a mountain peak to seize<br>
 With all its beasts and snakes and trees.<br>
 He hurled it on the pair: and they<br>
 Crushed, overwhelmed, beneath it lay.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_883"></a><a href="ry383.htm#fr_883">419:1b</a>  Armed with the bow of Indra, the
 rainbow.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry385.htm">Next: Canto XLVII.: The Death of Aksha.</a></center>
 </body>