<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry392.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry394.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LV.: FEAR FOR SÍTÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 But other thoughts resumed their sway<br>
 When Lanká's town in ruin lay;<br>
 And, as his bosom felt their weigh<br>
 He stood a while to meditate<br>
 'What have I done?', he thought with shame,<br>
 'Destroyed the town with hostile flame.<br>
 O happy they whose firm control<br>
 Checks the wild passion of the soul;<br>
 Who on the fires of anger throw<br>
 The cooling drops that check their glow.<br>
 But woe is me, whom wrath could lead<br>
 To do this senseless shameless deed.<br>
 The town to fire and death I gave,<br>
 Nor thought of her I came to save,--<br>
 Doomed by my own rash folly, doomed<br>
 To perish in the flames consumed.<br>
 If I, when anger drove me wild.<br>
 Have caused the death of Janak's child,<br>
 The kindled flame shall end my woe,<br>
 Or the deep fires that burn below, <a name="fr_895"></a><a href="ry394.htm#fn_895"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Or my forsaken corse shall be<br>
 Food for the monsters of the sea.<br>
 How can I meet Sugríva? how<br>
 Before the royal brothers bow,--<br>
 I whose rash deed has madly foiled.<br>
 The noble work in which we toiled?<br>
 Or has her own bright virtue shed<br>
 Its guardian influence round her head?<br>
 She lives untouched,--the peerless dame;<br>
 Flame has no fury for the flame. <a name="fr_896"></a><a href="ry394.htm#fn_896"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 The very fire would ne'er consent<br>
 To harm a queen so excellent,--<br>
 The high-souled Ráma's faithful wife,<br>
 Protected by her holy life.<br>
 She lives, she lives. Why should I fear<br>
 For one whom Raghu's sons hold dear?<br>
 Has not the pitying fire that spared<br>
 The Vánar for the lady cared?'<br>
     Such were his thoughts: he pondered long,<br>
 And fear grew faint and hope grew strong.<br>
 Then round him heavenly voices rang,<br>
 And, sweetly tuned, his praises sang:<br>
 'O glorious is the exploit done<br>
 By Hanumán the Wind-God's son.<br>
 The flames o'er Lanká's city rise:<br>
 The giants' home in ruin lies.<br>
 O'er roof and wall the fires have spread,<br>
 Nor harmed a hair of Sítá's head.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry394.htm">Next: Canto LVI: Mount Arishta.</a></center>
 </body>