<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry395.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry397.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXI.: THE FEAST OF HONEY.</h3>
 <p>
 They rose in air: the region grew<br>
 Dark with their shadow as they flew.<br>
 Swift to a lovely grove  <a name="fr_900"></a><a href="#fn_900"><font size="1">2</font></a> they came<br>
 That rivalled heavenly Nandan's  <a name="fr_901"></a><a href="#fn_901"><font size="1">3</font></a> fame<br>
 Where countless bees their honey stored,--<br>
 The pleasance of the Vánars' lord,<br>
 To every creature fenced and barred,<br>
 Which Dadhimukh was set to guard,<br>
 A noble Vánar, brave and bold,<br>
 Sugríva's uncle lofty-souled.<br>
 To Angad came with one accord<br>
 The Vánars, and besought their lord<br>
 That they those honeyed stores might eat<br>
 That made the grove so passing sweet.<br>
     He gave consent: they sought the trees<br>
 Thronged with innumerable bees.<br>
 They rifled all the treasured store,<br>
 And ate the fruit the branches bore,<br>
 And still as they prolonged the feast<br>
 Their merriment and joy increased.<br>
 Drunk with the sweets, they danced and bowed,<br>
 They wildly sang, they laughed aloud.<br>
 Some climbed and sprang from tree to tree,<br>
 Some sat and chattered in their glee.<br>
 Some scaled the trees which creepers crowned,<br>
 And rained the branches to the ground.<br>
 There with loud laugh a Vánar sprang<br>
 Close to his friend who madly sang,<br>
 In doleful mood another crept<br>
 To mix his tears with one who wept.<br>
     Then Dadhimukh with fury viewed<br>
 The intoxicated multitude.<br>
 He looked upon the rifled shade,<br>
 And all the ruin they had made;<br>
 Then called with angry voice, and strove<br>
 To save the remnant of the grove,<br>
 But warning cries and words were spurned,<br>
 And angry taunt and threat returned.<br>
 Then fierce and wild contention rose:<br>
 With furious words he mingled blows.<br>
 They by no shame or fear withheld,<br>
 By drunken mood and ire impelled,<br>
 Used claws, and teeth, and hands, and beat<br>
 The keeper under trampling feet.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_899"></a><a href="ry395.htm#fr_899">426:1</a>  Three Cantos of repetition are omitted.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_900"></a><a href="ry396.htm#fr_900">426:2</a>  <i>Madhuvan</i> the 'honey-wood.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_901"></a><a href="ry396.htm#fr_901">426:3</a>  Indra's pleasure-ground or elysium.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry397.htm">Next: Canto LXV. : The Tidings.</a></center>
 </body>