<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry393.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry395.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVI: MOUNT ARISHTA.</h3>
 <p>
 He looked upon the burning waste,<br>
 Then sought the queen in joyous haste,<br>
 With words of hope consoled her heart,<br>
 And made him ready to depart.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_425"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 425</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He sealed Arishta's glorious steep<br>
 Whose summits beetled o'er the deep.<br>
 The woods in varied beauty dressed<br>
 Hung like a garland round his crest,<br>
 And clouds of ever changing hue<br>
 A robe about his shoulders threw.<br>
 On him the rays of morning fell<br>
 To wake the hill they loved so well,<br>
 And bid unclose those splendid eyes<br>
 That glittered in his mineral dyes.<br>
 He woke to hear the music made<br>
 By thunders of the white cascade,<br>
 While every laughing rill that sprang<br>
 From crag to crag its carol sang.<br>
 For arms, he lifted to the stars<br>
 His towering stems of Deodárs,<br>
 And morning heard his pealing call<br>
 In tumbling brook and waterfall.<br>
 He trembled when his woods were pale<br>
 And bowed beneath the autumn gale,<br>
 And when his vocal reeds were stirred<br>
 His melancholy moan was heard.<br>
   Far down against the mountain's feet<br>
 The Vánar heard the wild waves beat;<br>
 Then turned his glances to the north.<br>
 Sprang from the peak and bounded forth,<br>
 The mountain felt the fearful shock<br>
 And trembled through his mass of rock.<br>
 The tallest trees were crushed and rent<br>
 And headlong to the valley sent,<br>
 And as the rocking shook each cave<br>
 Loud was the roar the lions gave.<br>
 Forth from the shaken cavern came<br>
 Fierce serpents with their tongues aflame;<br>
 And every Yaksha, wild with dread,<br>
 And Kinnar and Gandharva, fled.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_895"></a><a href="ry393.htm#fr_895">424:1</a>  The fire which is supposed to burn
 beneath the sea.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_896"></a><a href="ry393.htm#fr_896">424:2</a>  Sítá is likened to the fire which is an
 emblem of purity.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry395.htm">Next: Canto LVII.: Hanúmán's Return.</a></center>
 </body>