<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry400.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry402.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO II.: SUGRÍVA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased: and King Sugríva tried<br>
 To calm his grief, and thus replied:<br>
 'Be to thy nobler nature true,<br>
 Nor let despair thy soul subdue.<br>
 This cloud of causeless woe dispel,<br>
 For all as yet has prospered well,<br>
 And we have traced thy queen, and know<br>
 The dwelling of our Rákshas foe.<br>
 Arise, consult: thy task must be<br>
 To cast a bridge athwart the sea,<br>
 The city of our foe to reach<br>
 That crowns the mountain by the beach;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_428"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 428</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And when our feet that isle shall tread,<br>
 Rejoice and deem thy foeman dead.<br>
 The sea unbridged, his walls defy<br>
 Both fiends and children of the sky,<br>
 Though at the fierce battalions' head<br>
 Lord Indra's self the onset led.<br>
 Yea, victory is thine before<br>
 The long bridge touch the farther shore,<br>
 So fleet and fierce and strong are these<br>
 Who limb them as their fancies please.<br>
 Away with grief and sad surmise<br>
 That mar the noblest enterprise,<br>
 And with their weak suspicion blight<br>
 The sage's plan, the hero's might.<br>
 Come, this degenerate weakness spurn,<br>
 And bid thy dauntless heart return,<br>
 For each fair hope by grief is crossed<br>
 When those we love are dead or lost.<br>
 Arise, O best of those who know,<br>
 Arm for the giant's overthrow.<br>
 None in the triple world I see<br>
 Who in the fight may equal thee;<br>
 None who before thy face may stand<br>
 And brave the bow that arms thy hand,<br>
 Trust to these mighty Vánars: they<br>
 With full success thy trust will pay,<br>
 When thou shalt reach the robber's hold,<br>
 And loving arms round Sítá fold.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_905"></a><a href="ry399.htm#fr_905">427:1b</a>  The Sixth Book is called in Sanskrit
 <i>Yuddha-Kánda</i> or <i>The War</i>, and <i>Lanká-Kánda</i>.
 It is generally known at the
 present day by the latter title.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_906"></a><a href="ry400.htm#fr_906">427:2b</a>  Váyu is the God of Wind.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_907"></a><a href="ry400.htm#fr_907">427:3b</a>  Garuda the King of Birds.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_908"></a><a href="ry400.htm#fr_908">427:4b</a>  Serpent-Gods.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry402.htm">Next: Canto III.: Lanká.</a></center>
 </body>