<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry401.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry403.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO III.: LANKÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased: and Raghu's son gave heed,<br>
 Attentive to his prudent rede:<br>
 Then turned again, with hope inspired,<br>
 To Hanumán, and thus inquired:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Light were the task for thee, I ween,<br>
 To bridge the sea that gleams between<br>
 The mainland and the island shore.<br>
 Or dry the deep and guide as o'er.<br>
 Fain would I learn from thee whose feet<br>
 Have trod the stones of every street,<br>
 Of fenced Lanká's towers and forts,<br>
 And walls and moats and guarded ports,<br>
 And castles where the giants dwell,<br>
 And battlemented citadel.<br>
 O Váyu's son, describe it all,<br>
 With palace, fort, and gate, and wall.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: and, skilled in arts that guide<br>
 The eloquent, the chief replied:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Vast is the city, gay and strong,<br>
 Where elephants unnumbered throng,<br>
 And countless hosts of Rákshas breed<br>
 Stand ready by the car and steed,<br>
 Four massive gates, securely barred,<br>
 All entrance to the city guard,<br>
 With murderous engines fixt to throw<br>
 Bolt, arrow, rock to check the foe,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And many a mace with iron head<br>
 That strikes at once a hundred dead.<br>
 Her golden ramparts wide and high<br>
 With massy strength the foe defy,<br>
 Where inner walls their rich inlay<br>
 Of coral, turkis, pearl display.<br>
 Her circling moats are broad and deep,<br>
 Where ravening monsters dart and leap.<br>
 By four great piers each moat is spanned<br>
 Where lines of deadly engines stand.<br>
 In sleepless watch at every gate<br>
 Unnumbered hosts of giants wait,<br>
 And masters of each weapon, rear<br>
 The threatening pike and sword and spear.<br>
 My fury hurled those ramparts down,<br>
 Filled up the moats that gird the town,<br>
 The piers and portals overturned,<br>
 And stately Lanká spoiled and burned,<br>
 Howe'er we Vánars force our way<br>
 O'er the wide seat of Varun's <a name="fr_909"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fn_909"><font size="1">1</font></a> sway,<br>
 Be sure that city of the foe<br>
 Is doomed to sudden overthrow,<br>
 Nay, why so vast an army lead?<br>
 Brave Angad, Dwivid good at need,<br>
 Fierce Mainda, Panas famed in fight,<br>
 And Níla's skill and Nala's might,<br>
 And Jámbaván the strong and wise,<br>
 Will dare the easy enterprise.<br>
 Assailed by these shall Lanká fall<br>
 With gate and rampart, tower and wall.<br>
 Command the gathering, chief: and they<br>
 In happy hour will haste away.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry403.htm">Next: Canto IV.: The March.</a></center>
 </body>