<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry407.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry409.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO IX.: VIBHÍSHAN'S COUNSEL.</h3>
 <p>
 A score of warriors  <a name="fr_924"></a><a href="#fn_924"><font size="1">1</font></a> forward sprang,<br>
 And loud the clashing iron rang<br>
 Of mace and axe and spear and sword,<br>
 As thus they spake unto their lord:<br>
 'Their king Sugríva will we slay,<br>
 And Raghu's sons, ere close of day,<br>
 And strike the wretch Hanúmán down,<br>
 The spoiler of our golden town.'<br>
     But sage Vibhíshan strove to calm<br>
 The chieftains' fury; palm to palm<br>
 He joined in lowly reverence, pressed<br>
 Before them, and the throng addressed: <a name="fr_925"></a><a href="#fn_925"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
     'Dismiss the hope of conquering one<br>
 So stern and strong as Raghu's son.<br>
 In due control each sense he keeps<br>
 With constant care that never sleeps.<br>
 Whose daring heart has e'er conceived<br>
 The exploit Hanumán achieved,<br>
 Across the fearful sea to spring,<br>
 The tributary rivers' king?<br>
 O Rákshas lords, in time be wise,<br>
 Nor Ráma's matchless power despise.<br>
 And say, what evil had the son<br>
 Of Raghu to our monarch done,<br>
 Who stole the dame he loved so well<br>
 And keeps her in his citadel;<br>
 If Kharu in his foolish pride<br>
 Encountered Ráma, fought, and died,<br>
 May not the meanest love his life<br>
 And guard it in the deadly strife?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The Maithil dame, O Rákshas King,<br>
 Sore peril to thy realm will bring.<br>
 Restore her while there yet is time,<br>
 Nor let us perish for thy crime.<br>
 O, let the Maithil lady go<br>
 Ere the avenger bend his bow<br>
 To ruin with his arrowy showers<br>
 Our Lanká with her gates and towers.<br>
 Let Janak's child again be free<br>
 Ere the wild Vánars cross the sea,<br>
 In their resistless might assail<br>
 Our city and her ramparts scale.<br>
 Ah, I conjure thee by the ties<br>
 0f brotherhood, be just and wise.<br>
 In all my thoughts thy good I seek,<br>
 And thus my prudent counsel speak.<br>
 Let captive Sitá be restored<br>
 Ere, fierce as autumn's sun, her lord<br>
 Send his keen arrows from the string<br>
 To drink the life-blood of our king.<br>
 This fury from thy soul dismiss,<br>
 The bane of duty, peace, and bliss.<br>
 Seek duty's path and walk therein,<br>
 And joy and endless glory win.<br>
 Restore the captive, ere we feel<br>
 The piercing point of Ráma's steel.<br>
 O spare thy city, spare the lives<br>
 Of us, our friends, our sons and wives.'<br>
     Thus spake Vibhíshan wise and brave:<br>
 The Rákshas king no answer gave,<br>
 But bade his lords the council close,<br>
 And sought his chamber for repose.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_924"></a><a href="ry408.htm#fr_924">433:1</a>  Their names are Nikumbha, Rabhasa,
 Súryas'atru, Suptaghna, Yajnakopa, Mahápárava,
 Mahodara, Agniketu, Ras'miketu,
 Durdharsha, Indrasatru, Prahasta, Virupáksha,
 Vajradanshtra, Dhúmráksha, Durmukha,
 Mahábala.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_925"></a><a href="ry408.htm#fr_925">433:2</a>  Similarly Antenor urges the
 restoration of Helen:
 </p><dir><br>
     'Let Sparta's treasures be this hour restored,<br>
     And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.<br>
     As this advice ye practise or reject,<br>
     So hope success, or dread the dire effect,'<br>
 </dir>
     POPE'S <i>Homer's Iliad,</i> Book VII.
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry409.htm">Next: Canto X.: Vibhíshan's Counsel.</a></center>
 </body>