<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry410.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry412.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XII.: RAVAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 The king in counsel unsurpassed<br>
 His eye around the synod cast,<br>
 And fierce Prahasta, first and best<br>
 Of all his captains, thus addressed:<br>
     'Brave master of each warlike art,<br>
 Arouse thee and perform thy part.<br>
 Array thy fourfold forces  <a name="fr_928"></a><a href="#fn_928"><font size="1">1</font></a> well<br>
 To guard our isle and citadel.'<br>
     The captain of the hosts obeyed,<br>
 The troops with prudent skill arrayed;<br>
 Then to the hall again he hied,<br>
 And stood before the king and cried:<br>
     'Each inlet to the town is closed<br>
 Without, within, are troops disposed.<br>
 With fearless heart thine aim pursue<br>
 And do the deed thou hast in view,'<br>
     Thus spoke Prahasta in the zeal<br>
 That moved him for the kingdom's weal.<br>
 And thus the monarch, who pursued<br>
 His own delight, his speech renewed:<br>
 'In ease and bliss, in toil and pain,<br>
 In doubts of duty, pleasure, pain,<br>
 Your proper path I need not tell.<br>
 For of yourselves ye know it well.<br>
 The Storm-Gods, Moon, and planets bring<br>
 New glory to their heavenly king, <a name="fr_929"></a><a href="#fn_929"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 And, ranged about your monarch, ye<br>
 Give joy and endless fame to me.<br>
 My secret counsel have I kept,<br>
 While senseless Kumbhakarna slept.<br>
 Six months the warrior's slumbers last<br>
 And bind his torpid senses fast;<br>
 Bat now his deep repose he breaks,<br>
 The beat of all our champions wakes.<br>
 I captured, Ráma's heart to wring,<br>
 This daughter of Videha's king.<br>
 And brought her from that distant land  <a name="fr_930"></a><a href="#fn_930"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 Where wandered many a Rákshas band.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Disdainful still my love she spurns.<br>
 Still from each prayer and offering turns,<br>
 Yet in all lands beneath the sun<br>
 No dame may rival Sítá, none,<br>
 Her dainty waist is round and slight,<br>
 Her cheek like autumn's moon is bright.<br>
 And she like fruit in graven gold<br>
 Mocks her  <a name="fr_931"></a><a href="#fn_931"><font size="1">1b</font></a> whom Maya framed of old.<br>
 Faultless in form, how firmly tread<br>
 Her feet whose soles are rosy red!<br>
 Ah, as I gaze her beauty takes<br>
 My spirit, and my passion wakes.<br>
 Looking for Ráma far away<br>
 She sought with tears a year's delay<br>
 Nor gazing on her love-lit eye<br>
 Could I that earnest prayer deny.<br>
 But baffled hopes and vain desire<br>
 At length my patient spirit tire.<br>
 How shall the sons of Raghu sweep<br>
 To vengeance o'er the pathless deep?<br>
 How shall they lead the Vánar train<br>
 Across the monster-teeming main?<br>
 One Vánar yet could find a way<br>
 To Lanká's town, and burn and slay.<br>
 Take counsel then, remembering still<br>
 That we from men need fear no ill;<br>
 And give your sentence in debate,<br>
 For matchless is the power of fate.<br>
 Assailed by you the Gods who dwell<br>
 In heaven beneath our fury fell.<br>
 And shall we fear these creatures bred<br>
 In forests, by Sugríva led?<br>
 E'en now on ocean's farther strand,<br>
 The sons of Das'aratha stand.<br>
 And follow, burning to attack<br>
 Their giant foes, on Sítá's track.<br>
 Consult then, lords for ye are wise:<br>
 A seasonable plan devise.<br>
 The captive lady to retain,<br>
 And triumph when the foes are slain.<br>
 No power can bring across the foam<br>
 Those Vánars to our island home;<br>
 Or if they madly will defy<br>
 Our conquering might, they needs must die.'<br>
     Then Kumbhakarna's anger woke.<br>
 And wroth at Rávan's words he spoke:<br>
 'O Monarch, when thy ravished eyes<br>
 First looked upon thy lovely prize,<br>
 Then was the time to bid us scan<br>
 Each peril and mature a plan.<br>
 Blest is the king who acts with heed,<br>
 And ne'er repents one hasty deed;<br>
 And hapless he whose troubled soul<br>
 Mourns over days beyond control.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_436"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 436</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thou hast, in beauty's toils ensnared,<br>
 A desperate deed of boldness dared;<br>
 By fortune saved ere Ráma's steel<br>
 One wound, thy mortal bane, could deal.<br>
 But, Rávan, as the deed is done,<br>
 The toil of war I will not shun.<br>
 This arm, O rover of the night,<br>
 Thy foemen to the earth shall smite,<br>
 Though Indra with the Lord of Flame,<br>
 The Sun and Storms, against me came.<br>
 E'en Indra, monarch of the skies,<br>
 Would dread my club and mountain size,<br>
 Shrink from these teeth and quake to hear<br>
 The thunders of my voice of fear.<br>
 No second dart shall Ráma cast:<br>
 The first he aims shall be the last.<br>
 He falls, and these dry lips shall drain<br>
 The blood of him my hand has slain;<br>
 And Sitá, when her champion dies,<br>
 Shall be thine undisputed prize.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_928"></a><a href="ry411.htm#fr_928">435:1</a>  Consisting of warriors on elephants,
 warriors in chariots, charioteers, and
 infantry.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_929"></a><a href="ry411.htm#fr_929">435:2</a>  Indra, generally represented as
 surrounded by the Maruts or Storm-Gods.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_930"></a><a href="ry411.htm#fr_930">435:3</a>  Janasthán, where Ráma a lived as an
 ascetic.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_931"></a><a href="ry411.htm#fr_931">435:1b</a>  Máyá, regarded as the paragon of
 female beauty, was the creation of Maya
 the chief artificer of the Datyas or
 Dinavs.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry412.htm">Next: Canto XIII.: Rávan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>