<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry416.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry418.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVIII.: RÁMA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma's rising doubt was stilled,<br>
 And friendly thoughts his bosom filled.<br>
 Thus, deep in Scripture's lore, he spake:<br>
 'The suppliant will I ne'er forsake,<br>
 Nor my protecting aid refuse<br>
 When one in name of friendship sues.<br>
 Though faults and folly blot his fame,<br>
 Pity and help he still may claim.'<br>
     He ceased: Sugríva bowed his head<br>
 And pondered for a while, and said:<br>
     'Past number be his faults or few,<br>
 What think ye of the Rákshas who,<br>
 When threatening clouds of danger rise,<br>
 Deserts his brother's side and flies?<br>
 Say, Vánars, who may hope to find<br>
 True friendship in his faithless kind?'<br>
     The son of Raghu heard his speech:<br>
 He cast a hasty look on each<br>
 Of those brave Vánar chiefs, and while<br>
 Upon his lips there played a smile,<br>
 To Lakshman turned and thus expressed<br>
 The thoughts that moved his gallant breast:<br>
 'Well versed in Scripture's lore, and sage<br>
 And duly reverent to age,<br>
 Is he, with long experience stored,<br>
 Who counsels like this Vánar lord.<br>
 Yet here, methinks, for searching eyea<br>
 Some deeper, subtler matter lies.<br>
 To you and all the world are known<br>
 The perils of a monarch's throne,<br>
 While foe and stranger, kith and kin<br>
 By his misfortune trust to win.<br>
 By hope of *such advantage led,<br>
 Vibhíshan o'er the sea has fled.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He in his brother's stead would reign,<br>
 And our alliance seeks to gain;<br>
 And we his offer may embrace,<br>
 A stranger and of alien race.<br>
 But if he comes a spy and foe,<br>
 What power has he to strike a blow<br>
 In furtherance of his close design?<br>
 What is his strength compared with mine?<br>
 And can I, Vánar King, forget<br>
 The great, the universal debt,<br>
 Ever to aid and welcome those<br>
 Who pray for shelter, friends or foes?<br>
 Hast thou not heard the deathless praise<br>
 Won by the dove in olden days,<br>
 Who conquering his fear and hate<br>
 Welcomed the slayer of his mate,<br>
 And gave a banquet, to refresh<br>
 The weary fowler, of his flesh?<br>
 Now hear me, Vánar King, rehearse<br>
 What Kandu  <a name="fr_939"></a><a href="#fn_939"><font size="1">1</font></a> spoke in ancient verse,<br>
 Saint Kanva's son who loved the truth<br>
 And clave to virtue from his youth:<br>
 'Strike not the suppliant when he stands<br>
 And asks thee with beseeching hands<br>
 For shelter: strike him not although<br>
 He were thy father's mortal foe.<br>
 No, yield him, be he proud or meek,<br>
 The shelter which he comes to seek,<br>
 And save thy foeman, if the deed<br>
 Should cost thy life, in desperate need.'<br>
 And shall I hear the wretched cry,<br>
 And my protecting aid deny?<br>
 Shall I a suppliant's prayer refuse,<br>
 And heaven and glory basely lose?<br>
 No, I will do for honour sake<br>
 E'en as the holy Kandu spake,<br>
 Preserve a hero's name from stain,<br>
 And bliss in heaven and glory gain.<br>
 Bound by a solemn vow I sware<br>
 That all my saving help should share<br>
 Who sought me in distress and cried,<br>
 'Thou art my hope, and none beside,'<br>
 Then go, I pray thee, Vánar King,<br>
 Vibhíshan to my presence bring.<br>
 Yea, were he Rávan's self, my vow<br>
 Forbids me to reject him now.'<br>
     He ceased: the Vánar king approved;<br>
 And Ráma toward Vibhíshan moved.<br>
 So moves, a brother God to greet,<br>
 Lord Indra from his heavenly seat.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_441"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 441</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_939"></a><a href="ry417.htm#fr_939">440:1</a>  In Book II. Canto XXI, Kandu is mentioned
 by Ráma as an example of filial
 obedience. At the command of his father
 he is said to have killed a cow.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry418.htm">Next: Canto XIX.: Vibhíshan's Counsel.</a></center>
 </body>