<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry422.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry424.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIV.: THE SPY'S RETURN.</h3>
 <p>
 As shine the heavens with autumn's moon<br>
 Refulgent in the height of noon,<br>
 So shone with light which Ráma gave<br>
 That army of the bold and brave,<br>
 As from the sea it marched away<br>
 In war's magnificent array,<br>
 And earth was shaken by the beat<br>
 And trampling of unnumbered feet.<br>
 Then to the giants' ears were borne,<br>
 The mingled notes of drum and horn,<br>
 And clash of tambours smote the sky,<br>
 And shouting and the battle cry.<br>
 The sound of martial strains inspired<br>
 Each chieftain, and his bosom fired:<br>
 While giants from their walls replied,<br>
 And answering shouts the foe defied,<br>
 Then Ráma looked on Lanká where<br>
 Bright banners floated in the air,<br>
 And, pierced with anguish at the view.<br>
 His loving thoughts to Sitá flew.<br>
 'There, prisoned by the giant, lies<br>
 My lady of the tender eyes,<br>
 Like Rohini the queen of stars<br>
 O'erpowered by the fiery Mars.'<br>
 Then turned he to his brother chief<br>
 And cried in agony of grief:<br>
 'See on the hill, divinely planned<br>
 And built by Vis'vakarmá's hand,<br>
 The towers and domes of Lanká rise<br>
 In peerless beauty to the skies.<br>
 Bright from afar the city shines<br>
 With gleam of palaces and shrines,<br>
 Like pale clouds through the region spread<br>
 Bv Vishnu's self inhabited.<br>
 Fair gardens grow, and woods between<br>
 The stately domes are fresh and green,<br>
 Where trees their bloom and fruit display,<br>
 And sweet birds sing on every spray.<br>
 Each bird is mad with joy, and bees<br>
 Sing labouring in the bloomy trees<br>
 On branches by the breezes bowed.<br>
 Where the gay Koïl's voice is loud.'<br>
     This said, he ranged with warlike art<br>
 Each body of the host apart.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_446"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 446</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'There in the centre,' Ráma cried,<br>
 'Be Angad's place by Níla's side.<br>
 Let Rishabh of impetuous might<br>
 Be lord and leader on the right,<br>
 And Gandhamádan, next in rank,<br>
 Be captain of the farther flank.<br>
 Lakshman and I the hosts will lead,<br>
 And Jámbaván of ursine breed,<br>
 With bold Sushen unused to fear,<br>
 And Vegadarsí, guide the rear.'<br>
     Thus Ráma spoke: the chiefs obeyed;<br>
 And all the Vánar hosts arrayed<br>
 Showed awful as the autumn sky<br>
 When clouds embattled form on high.<br>
 Their arms were mighty trees o'erthrown<br>
 And massy blocks of mountain stone.<br>
 One hope in every warlike breast,<br>
 One firm resolve, they onward pressed,<br>
 To die in fight or batter down<br>
 The walls and towers of Lanká's town.<br>
     Those marshalled legions Ráma eyed,<br>
 And thus to King Sugríva cried:<br>
 'Now, Monarch, ere the hosts proceed,<br>
 Let S'uka, Rávan's spy, be freed.'<br>
 He spoke: the Vánar gave consent<br>
 And loosed him from imprisonment:<br>
 And S'uka, trembling and afraid,<br>
 His homeward way to Rávan made.<br>
 Loud laughed the lord of Lanká's isle:<br>
 'Where hast thou stayed this weary while?<br>
 'Why is thy plumage marred, and why<br>
 Do twisted cords thy pinions tie?<br>
 Say, comest thou in evil plight<br>
 The victim of the Vánars' spite?'<br>
     He ceased: the spy his fear controlled,<br>
 And to the king his story told:<br>
 'I reached the ocean's distant shore,<br>
 Thy message to the king I bore,<br>
 In sudden wrath the Vánars rose,<br>
 They struck me down with furious blows;<br>
 They seized me helpless on the ground,<br>
 My plumage rent, my pinions bound.<br>
 They would not, headlong in their ire,<br>
 Consider, listen, or inquire;<br>
 So fickle, wrathful, rough and rude<br>
 Is the wild forest multitude.<br>
 There, marshalling the Vánar bands,<br>
 King Ráma with Sugríva stands,<br>
 Ráma the matchless warrior, who<br>
 Virádha and Kabandha slew,<br>
 Khara, and countless giants more.<br>
 And tracks his queen to Lankás shore.<br>
 A bridge athwart the sea was cast,<br>
 And o'er it have his legions passed.<br>
 Hark I heralded by horns and drums<br>
 The terrible avenger comes.<br>
 E'en now the giants' isle he fills<br>
 With warriois huge as clouds and hills,<br>
 And burning with vindictive hate<br>
 Will thunder soon at Lanká's gate.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Yield or oppose him: choose between<br>
 Thy safety and the Maithil queen.'<br>
     He ceased: the tyrant's eyeballs blazed<br>
 With fury as his voice he raised:<br>
 'No, if the dwellers of the sky,<br>
 Gandharvas, fiends assail me, I<br>
 Will keep the Maithil lady still,<br>
 Nor yield her back for fear or ill.<br>
 When shall my shafts with iron bail<br>
 My foeman, Raghu's son, assail,<br>
 Thick as the bees with eager wing<br>
 Beat on the flowery trees of spring?<br>
 O, let me meet my foe at length,<br>
 And strip him of his vaunted strength,<br>
 Fierce as the sun who shines afar<br>
 Stealing the light of every star.<br>
 Strong as the sea's impetuous might<br>
 My ways are like the tempest's flight;<br>
 But Ráma knows not this, or he<br>
 In terror from my face would flee.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry424.htm">Next: Canto XXV.: Rávan's Spies.</a></center>
 </body>