<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry421.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry423.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIII.: THE OMENS.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma, peerless in the skill<br>
 That marks each sign of good and ill,<br>
 Strained his dear brother to his breast,<br>
 And thus with prudent words addressed:<br>
 'Now, Lakshman, by the water's side<br>
 In fruitful groves the host divide,<br>
 That warriors of each woodland race<br>
 May keep their own appointed place.<br>
 Dire is the danger: loss of friends,<br>
 Of Vánars and of bears, impends.<br>
 Distained with dust the breezes blow,<br>
 And earth is shaken from below.<br>
 The tall hills rock from foot to crown,<br>
 And stately trees come toppling down.<br>
 In threatening shape, with voice of fear,<br>
 The clouds like cannibals appear,<br>
 And rain in fitful torrents, red<br>
 With sanguinary drops, is shed.<br>
 Long streaks of lurid light invest<br>
 The evening skies from east to west.<br>
 And from the sun at times a ball<br>
 Of angry fire is seen to fall.<br>
 From every glen and brake is heard<br>
 The boding voice of beast and bird:<br>
 From den and lair night-prowlers run<br>
 And shriek against the falling sun.<br>
 Up springs the moon, but hot and red<br>
 Kills the sad night with woe and dread;<br>
 No gentle lustre, but the gloom.<br>
 That heralds universal doom.<br>
 A cloud of dust and vapour mars<br>
 The beauty of the evening stars,<br>
 And wild and fearful is the sky<br>
 As though the wreck of worlds were nigh.<br>
 Around our heads in boding flight<br>
 Wheel hawk and vulture, crow and kite;<br>
 And every bird of happy note<br>
 Shrieks terror from his altered throat.<br>
 Sword, spear and shaft shall strew the plain<br>
 Dyed red with torrents of the slain.<br>
 To-day the Vánar troops shall close<br>
 Around the city of our foes.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry423.htm">Next: Canto XXIV.: The Spy's Return.</a></center>
 </body>