<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry426.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry428.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVIII.: THE CHIEFTAINS.</h3>
 <p>
 There Sáran ceased: then S'uka broke<br>
 The silence and to Rávan spoke:<br>
 'O Monarch, yonder chiefs survey:<br>
 Like elephants in size are they,<br>
 And tower like stately trees that grow<br>
 Where Gangá's nursing waters flow;<br>
 Yea, tall as mountain pines that fling<br>
 Long shadows o'er the snow-crowned king.<br>
 They all in wild Kishkindhá dwell<br>
 And serve their lord Sugríva well.<br>
 The Gods' and bright Gandharvas' seed,<br>
 They take each form that suits their need.<br>
 Now farther look, O Monarch, where<br>
 Those chieftains stand, a glorious pair,<br>
 Conspicuous for their godlike frames;<br>
 Dwivid and Mainda are their names.<br>
 Their lips the drink of heaven have known,<br>
 And Brahmá claims them for his own.<br>
 That chieftain whom thine eyes behold<br>
 Refulgent like a hill of gold,<br>
 Before whose wrathful might the sea<br>
 Roused from his rest would turn and flee,<br>
 The peerless Vánar, he who came<br>
 To Lanká for the Maithil dame,<br>
 The Wind-God's son Hamúmán; thou<br>
 Hast seen him once, behold him now.<br>
 Still nearer let thy glance be bent,<br>
 And mark that prince preëminent<br>
 Mid chieftains for his strength and size<br>
 And splendour of his lotus eyes.<br>
 Far through the worlds his virtues shine,<br>
 The glory of Ikshváku's line.<br>
 The path of truth he never leaves,<br>
 And still through all to duty cleaves.<br>
 Deep in the Vedas, skilled to wield<br>
 The mystic shafts to him revealed:<br>
 Whose flaming darts to heaven ascend,<br>
 And through the earth a passage rend:<br>
 In might like him who rules the sky;<br>
 Like Yama, when his wrath grows high:<br>
 Whose queen, the darling of his soul.<br>
 Thy magic art deceived and stole:<br>
 There royal Ráma stands and longs<br>
 For battle to avenge his wrongs.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Near on his right a prince, in hue<br>
 Like pure gold freshly burnished, view:<br>
 Broad is his chest, his eye is red,<br>
 His black hair curls about his head:<br>
 'Tis Lakshman, faithful friend, who shares<br>
 His brother's joys, his brother's cares.<br>
 By Ráma's side he loves to stand<br>
 And serve him as his better hand,<br>
 For whose dear sake without a sigh<br>
 The warrior youth would gladly die<br>
 On Ráma's left Vibhíshan view,<br>
 With giants for his retinue:<br>
 King-making drops have dewed his head,<br>
 Appointed monarch in thy stead.<br>
 Behold that chieftain sternly still,<br>
 High towering like a rooted hill,<br>
 Supreme in power and pride of place,<br>
 The monarch of the Vánar race.<br>
 Raised high above his woodland kind,<br>
 In might and glory, frame and mind,<br>
 His head above his host he shows<br>
 Conspicuous as the Lord of Snows.<br>
 His home is far from hostile eyes<br>
 Where deep in woods Kishkindhá lies.<br>
 A glistering chain which flowers bedeck<br>
 With burnished gold adorns his neck.<br>
 Queen Fortune, loved by Gods and kings,<br>
 To him her chosen favourite clings.<br>
 That chain he owes to Ráma's grace,<br>
 And Tárá and his kingly place.<br>
 In him the great Sugríva know,<br>
 Whom Ráma rescued from his foe.' <a name="fr_952"></a><a href="ry428.htm#fn_952"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry428.htm">Next: Canto XXIX.: S'árdúla Captured.</a></center>
 </body>