<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry431.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry433.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIII.: SARAMÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 But Saramá, of gentler mood,<br>
 With pitying eyes the mourner viewed,<br>
 Stole to her side and softly told<br>
 Glad tidings that her heart consoled.<br>
 Revealing with sweet voice and smile<br>
 The secret of the giant's guile.<br>
 She, one of those who night and day<br>
 Watching in turns by Sítá lay.<br>
 Though Rákshas born felt pity's touch,<br>
 And loved the hapless lady much.<br>
     'I heard,' she said, 'thy bitter cry,<br>
 Heard Rávan's speech and thy reply,<br>
 For, hiding in the thicket near,<br>
 No word or tone escaped mine ear.<br>
 When Rávan hastened forth I bent<br>
 My steps to follow as he went,<br>
 And learnt the secret cause that drove<br>
 The monarch from the As'oka grove.<br>
 Believe me, Queen, thou needst not weep<br>
 For Ráma slaughtered in his sleep.<br>
 Thy lion lord of men defies<br>
 By day attack, by night surprise.<br>
 Can even giants slay with ease<br>
 Vast hosts who fight with brandished tree,<br>
 For whom, with eye that never sleeps,<br>
 His constant watch thy Ráma keeps?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_453"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 453</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Lord of the mighty arm and chest,<br>
 Of earthly warriors first and best,<br>
 Whose fame through all the regions rings,<br>
 Proud scion of a hundred kings;<br>
 Who guards his life and loves to lend<br>
 His saving succour to a friend:<br>
 Whose bow no hand but his can strain,--<br>
 Thy lord, thy Ráma is not slain.<br>
 Obedient to his master's will,<br>
 A great magician, trained in ill.<br>
 With deftest art surpassing thought<br>
 That marvellous illusion wrought.<br>
 Let rising hope thy grief dispel:<br>
 Look up and smile, for all is well.<br>
 And gentle Lakshmí, Fortune's Queen,<br>
 Regards thee with a favouring mien.<br>
 Thy Ráma with his Vánar train<br>
 Has thrown a bridge athwart the main,<br>
 Has led his countless legions o'er,<br>
 And ranged them on this southern shore.<br>
 These eyes have seen the hero stand<br>
 Girt by his hosts on Lanká's strand,<br>
 And breathless spies each moment bring<br>
 Fresh tidings to the giant king;<br>
 And every peer and lord of state<br>
 Is called to counsel and debate.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She ceased: the sound, long loud and clear,<br>
 Of gathering armies smote her ear,<br>
 Where call of drum and shell rang out,<br>
 The tambour and the battle shout;<br>
 And, while the din the echoes woke,<br>
 Again to Janak's child she spoke:<br>
 'Hear, lady, hear the loud alarms<br>
 That call the Rákshas troops to arms,<br>
 From stable and from stall they lead<br>
 The elephant and neighing steed,<br>
 Brace harness on with deftest care,<br>
 And chariots for the fight prepare.<br>
 Swift o'er the trembling ground career<br>
 Mailed horsemen armed with axe and spear.<br>
 And here and there in road and street<br>
 The terrible battalions meet.<br>
 I hear the gathering near and far,<br>
 The snorting steed, the rattling car.<br>
 Bold chieftains, leaders of the brave,<br>
 Press densely on, like wave on wave,<br>
 And bright the evening sunbeams glance<br>
 On helm and shield, on sword and lance.<br>
 Hark, lady, to the ringing steel,<br>
 Hark to the rolling chariot wheel:<br>
 Hark to the mettled courser's neigh<br>
 And drums' loud thunder far away.<br>
 The Queen of Fortune holds thee dear,<br>
 For Lanká's troops are struck with fear,<br>
 And Ráma with the lotus eyes,<br>
 Like Indra monarch of the skies,<br>
 With conquering arm will slay his foe<br>
 And free his lady from her woe.<br>
 Soon will his breast support thy head,<br>
 And tears of joy thine eyes will shed.<br>
 Soon by his mighty arm embraced<br>
 The long-lost rapture wilt thou taste,<br>
 And Ráma, meet for highest bliss,<br>
 Will gain his guerdon in thy kiss.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry433.htm">Next: Canto XXXIV.: Saramá's Tidings.</a></center>
 </body>