<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry447.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry449.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIX.: RÁMA'S LAMENT</h3>
 <p>
 Ranged round the spot where Ráma fell<br>
 Each Vánar chief stood sentinel.<br>
 At length the mighty hero broke<br>
 The trance that held him, and awoke.<br>
 He saw his senseless brother, dyed<br>
 With blood from head to foot, and cried:<br>
 'What have I now to do with life<br>
 Or rescue of my prisoned wife,<br>
 When thus before my weeping eyes,<br>
 Slain in the fight, my brother lies?<br>
 A queen like Sítá I may find<br>
 Among the best of womankind,<br>
 But never such a brother, tried<br>
 In war, my guardian, friend, and guide.<br>
 If he be dead, the brave and true,<br>
 I will not live but perish too.<br>
 How, reft of Lakshman, shall I meet<br>
 My mother, and Kaikeyí greet?<br>
 Mv brother's eager question brook,<br>
 And fond Sumitrá's longing look?<br>
 What shall I say, o'erwhelmed with shame<br>
 To cheer the miserable dame?<br>
 How, when she hears her son is dead,<br>
 Will her sad heart be comforted?<br>
 Ah me, for longer life unfit<br>
 This mortal body will I quit;<br>
 For Lakshman slaughtered for my sake,<br>
 From sleep of death will never wake.<br>
 Ah when I sank oppressed with care,<br>
 Thy gentle voice could soothe despair.<br>
 And art thou, O my brother, killed?<br>
 Is that dear voice for ever stilled?<br>
 Cold are those lips, my brother, whence<br>
 Came never word to breed offence?<br>
 Ah stretched upon the gory plain<br>
 My brother lies untimely slain;<br>
 Numbed is the mighty arm that slew<br>
 The leaders of the giant crew.<br>
 Transfixed with shafts, with blood-streams red.<br>
 Thou liest on thy lowly bed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_464"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 464</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 So sinks to rest, his journey done,<br>
 Mid arrowy rays the crimson sun.<br>
 Thou, when from home and sire I fled,<br>
 The wood's wild ways with me wouldst tread:<br>
 Now close to thine my steps shall be,<br>
 For I in death will follow thee.<br>
 Vibhíshan now will curse my name,<br>
 And Ráma as a braggart blame.<br>
 Who promised--but his word is vain--<br>
 That he in Lanká's isle should reign.<br>
 Return, Sugríva: reft of me<br>
 Lead back thy Vánars o'er the sea,<br>
 Nor hope to battle face to face<br>
 With him who rules the giant race.<br>
 Well have ye done and nobly fought,<br>
 And death in desperate combat sought.<br>
 All that heroic might can do,<br>
 Brave Vánars, has been done by you.<br>
 My faithful friends I now dismiss:<br>
 Return: my last farewell is this.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Bedewed with tears was every cheek<br>
 As thus the Vánars heard him speak.<br>
 Vibhíshan on the field had stayed<br>
 The Vánar hosts who fled dismayed.<br>
 Now lifting up his mace on high<br>
 With martial step the chief drew nigh.<br>
 The hosts who watched by Ráma's side<br>
 Beheld his shape and giant stride.<br>
 'Tis he,'tis Rávan's son, they thought:<br>
 And all in flight their safety sought.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry449.htm">Next: Canto L.: The Broken Spell.</a></center>
 </body>