<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry442.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry444.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIV.: THE NIGHT.</h3>
 <p>
 The lord of Light had sunk and set:<br>
 Night came; the foeman struggled yet;<br>
 And fiercer for the gloom of night<br>
 Grew the wild fury of the fight.<br>
 Scarce could each warrior's eager eye<br>
 The foeman from the friend descry.<br>
 'Rákshas or Vánar? say;' cried each,<br>
 And foe knew foeman by his speech.<br>
 'Why wilt thou fly? O warrior, stay:<br>
 'Turn on the foe, and rend and slay:'<br>
 Such were the cries, such words of fear<br>
 Smote through the gloom each listening ear.<br>
 Each swarthy rover of the night<br>
 Whose golden armour flashed with light,<br>
 Showed like a towering hill embraced<br>
 By burning woods about his waist.<br>
 The giants at the Vánars flew,<br>
 And ravening ate the foes they slew:<br>
 With mortal bite like serpent's fang,<br>
 The Vánars at the giants sprang,<br>
 And car and steeds and they who bore<br>
 The pennons fell bedewed with gore,<br>
 No serried band, no firm array<br>
 The fury of their charge could stay<br>
 Down went the horse and rider, down<br>
 Went giant lords of high renown.<br>
 Though midnight's shade was dense and dark,<br>
 With skill that swerved not from the mark<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Their bows the sons of Raghu drew,<br>
 And each keen shaft a chieftain slew.<br>
 Uprose the blinding dust from meads<br>
 Ploughed by the cars and trampling steeds,<br>
 And where the warriors fell the flood<br>
 Was dark and terrible with blood.<br>
 Six giants  <a name="fr_962"></a><a href="ry444.htm#fn_962"><font size="1">1b</font></a> singled Ráma out,<br>
 And charged him with a furious shout<br>
 Loud as the roaring of the sea<br>
 When every wind is raging free.<br>
 Six times he shot: six heads were cleft;<br>
 Six giants dead on earth were left.<br>
 Nor ceased he yet: his bow he strained,<br>
 And from the sounding weapon rained<br>
 A storm of shafts whose fiery glare<br>
 Filled all the region of the air;<br>
 And chieftains dropped before his aim<br>
 Like moths that perish in the flame.<br>
 Earth glistened where the arrows fell,<br>
 As shines in autumn nights a dell<br>
 Which fireflies, flashing through the gloom,<br>
 With momentary light illume.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 But Indrajit, when Báli's son  <a name="fr_963"></a><a href="ry444.htm#fn_963"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 The victory o'er the foe had won.<br>
 Saw with a fury-kindled eye<br>
 His mangled steeds and driver die;<br>
 Then, lost in air, he fled the fight,<br>
 And vanished from the victor's sight.<br>
 The Gods and saints glad voices raised,<br>
 And Angad for his virtue praised;<br>
 And Raghu's sons bestowed the meed<br>
 Of honour due to valorous deed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Compelled his shattered car to quit,<br>
 Rage filled the soul of Indrajit,<br>
 Who brooked not, strong by Brahmá's grace<br>
 Defeat from one of Vánar race.<br>
 In magic mist concealed from view<br>
 His bow the treacherous warrior drew,<br>
 And Raghu's sons were first to feel<br>
 The tempest of his winged steel.<br>
 Then when his arrows failed to kill<br>
 The princes who defied him still,<br>
 He bound them with the serpent noose,  <a name="fr_964"></a><a href="ry444.htm#fn_964"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 The magic bond which none might loose.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_961"></a><a href="ry442.htm#fr_961">460:1</a>  I have omitted several of these single
 combats, as there is little variety in the
 details and each duel results in the victory
 of the Vánar or his ally.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry444.htm">Next: Canto XLV.: Indrajit's Victory.</a></center>
 </body>