<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry448.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry450.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO L.: THE BROKEN SPELL.</h3>
 <p>
 Sugríva viewed the flying crowd,<br>
 And thus to Angad cried aloud:<br>
 'Why run the trembling hosts, as flee<br>
 Storm-scattered barks across the sea?'<br>
 'Dost thou not mark,' the chief replied,<br>
 Transfixed with shafts, with bloodstreams dyed,<br>
 With arrowy toils about them wound,<br>
 The sons of Raghu on the ground?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 That moment brought Viohishan* near.<br>
 Sugríva knew the cause of fear,<br>
 And ordered Jámbavan, who led<br>
 The bears, to check the hosts that fled.<br>
 The king of bears his hest obeyed:<br>
 The Vanars' headlong flight was stayed<br>
 A little while Vibhishan eyed<br>
 The brothers fallen side by side.<br>
 His giant fingers wet with dew<br>
 Across the heroes' eyes he drew,<br>
 Still on the pair his sad look bent,<br>
 And spoke these word in wild lament:<br>
 'Ah for the mighty chiefs brought low<br>
 By coward hand and stealthy blow!<br>
 Brave pair who loved the open fight,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Slain by that rover of the night.<br>
 Dishonest is the victory won<br>
 By Indrajit my brother's son.<br>
 I on their might for aid relied,<br>
 And in my cause they fought and died.<br>
 Lost is the hope that soothed each pain:<br>
 I live, but live no more to reign,<br>
 While Lanká's lord, untouched by ill,<br>
 Exults in safe defiance still.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Not thus,' Sugríva said, 'repine,<br>
 For Lanká's isle shall still be thine.<br>
 Nor let the tyrant and his son<br>
 Exult before the fight be done,<br>
 These royal chiefs, though now dismayed,<br>
 Freed from the spell by Garud'a aid,<br>
 Triumphant yet the foe shall meet<br>
 And lay the robber at their feet.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 His hope the Vánar monarch told,<br>
 And thus Vibhíshan's grief consoled.<br>
 Then to Sushen who at his side<br>
 Expectant stood, Sugríva cried:<br>
 'When these regain their strength and sense,<br>
 Fly, bear them to Kishkindhá hence.<br>
 Here with my legions will I stay,<br>
 The tyrant and his kinsmen slay,<br>
 And rescued from the giant king.<br>
 The Maithil lady will I bring,<br>
 Like Glory lost of old, restored<br>
 By S'akra, heaven's almighty lord.'<br>
   <br>
 Sushen made answer: 'Hear me yet:<br>
 When Gods and fiends in battle met,<br>
 So fiercely fought the demon crew,<br>
 So wild a storm of arrows flew,<br>
 That heavenly warriors faint with pain,<br>
 Sank smitten by the ceaseless rain.<br>
 Vrihaspati,  <a name="fr_969"></a><a href="#fn_969"><font size="1">1</font></a> with herb and spell,<br>
 Cured the sore wounds of those who fell.<br>
 And, skilled in arts that heal and save,<br>
 New life and sense and vigour gave.<br>
 Far, on the Milky Ocean's shore,<br>
 Still grow those herbs in boundless store;<br>
 Let swiftest Vánars thither speed<br>
 And bring them for our utmost need.<br>
 Those herbs that on the mountain spring<br>
 Let Panas and Sampáti bring,<br>
 For well the wondrous leaves they know.<br>
 That heal each wound and life bestow.<br>
 Beside that sea which, churned of yore,<br>
 The amrit on its surface bore,<br>
 Where the white billows lash the land,<br>
 Chandra's fair height and Drona stand.<br>
 Planted by Gods each glittering steep<br>
 Looks down upon the milky deep.<br>
 Let fleet Hanúmán bring us thence<br>
 Those herbs of wondrous influence.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Meanwhile the rushing wind grew loud,<br>
 Red lightnings flashed from banks of cloud.<br>
 The mountains shook, the wild waves rose,<br>
 And smitten with resistless blows<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_465"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 465</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Unrooted fell each stately tree<br>
 That fringed the margin of the sea.<br>
 All life within the waters feared<br>
 Then, as the Vánars gazed, appeared<br>
 King Garud's self, a wondrous sight,<br>
 Disclosed in flames of fiery light.<br>
 From his fierce eye in sudden dread<br>
 All serpents in a moment fled.<br>
 And those transformed to shaft that bound<br>
 The princes vanished in the ground.<br>
 On Raghu's sons his eyes he bent,<br>
 And hailed the lords armipotent.<br>
 Then o'er them stooped the feathered king,<br>
 And touched their faces with his wing.<br>
 His healing touch their pangs allayed,<br>
 And closed each rent the shafts had made.<br>
 Again their eyes were bright and bold,<br>
 Again the smooth skin shone like gold.<br>
 Again within their shell enshrined<br>
 Came memory and each power of mind:<br>
 And, from those numbing bonds released,<br>
 Their spirit, zeal, and strength increased.<br>
 Firm on their feet they stood, and then<br>
 Thus Ráma spake, the lord of men:<br>
     'By thy dear grace in sorest need<br>
 From deadly bonds we both are freed.<br>
 To these glad eyes as welcome now<br>
 As Aja  <a name="fr_970"></a><a href="#fn_970"><font size="1">1</font></a> or my sire art thou.<br>
 Who art thou, mighty being? say,<br>
 Thus glorious in thy bright array.'<br>
 He ceased: the king of birds replied,<br>
 While flashed his eye with joy and pride:<br>
 'In me, O Raghu's son, behold<br>
 One who has loved thee from of old:<br>
 Garud, the lord of all that fly,<br>
 Thy guardian and thy friend am I.<br>
 Not all the Gods in heaven could loose<br>
 These numbing bonds, this serpent noose,<br>
 Wherewith fierce Rávan's son, renowned<br>
 For magic arts, your limbs had bound.<br>
 Those arrows fixed in every limb<br>
 Were mighty snakes, transformed by him.<br>
 Blood thirsty race, they live beneath<br>
 The earth, and slay with venomed teeth.<br>
 On, smite the lord of Lanká's isle,<br>
 But guard you from the giants' guile<br>
 Who each dishonest art employ<br>
 And by deceit brave foes destroy.<br>
 So shall the tyrant Rávan bleed,<br>
 And Sítá from his power be freed.'<br>
 Thus Garud spake: then, swift as thought,<br>
 The region of the sky he sought,<br>
 Where in the distance like a blaze<br>
 Of fire he vanished from the gaze.<br>
     Then the glad Vánars joy rang out<br>
 In many a wild tumultuous shout,<br>
 And the loud roar of drum and shell<br>
 Startled each distant sentinel.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_969"></a><a href="ry449.htm#fr_969">464:1</a>  The preceptor of the Gods.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_970"></a><a href="ry449.htm#fr_970">465:1</a>  Ráma's grandfather.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry450.htm">Next: Canto LI.: Dhúmráksha's Sally.</a></center>
 </body>