<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry439.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry441.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLI.: RÁMA'S ENVOY.</h3>
 <p>
 When Ráma saw each bloody trace<br>
 On King Sugríva's limbs and face,<br>
 He cried, while, sorrowing at the view,<br>
 His arms about his friend he threw:<br>
 'Too venturous chieftain, kings like us<br>
 Bring not their lives in peril thus;<br>
 Nor, save when counsel shows the need,<br>
 Attempt so bold, so rash a deed.<br>
 Remember. I, Vibhíshan all<br>
 Have sorrowed fearing for thy fall.<br>
 O do not--for us all I speak--<br>
 These desperate adventures seek,<br>
 'I could not,' cried Sugríva, 'brook<br>
 Upon the giant king to look,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_458"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 458</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Nor challenge to the deadly strife<br>
 The fiend who robbed thee of thy wife.'<br>
 'Now Lakshman, marshal,' Ráma cried,<br>
 'Our legions where the woods are wide,<br>
 And stand we ready to oppose<br>
 The fury of our giant foes.<br>
 This day our armies shall ascend<br>
 The walls which Rávan's powers defend,<br>
 And floods of Rákshas blood shall stain<br>
 The streets encumbered with the slain.'<br>
 Down from the peak he came, and viewed<br>
 The Vánars' ordered multitude.<br>
 Each captain there for battle burned,<br>
 Each fiery eye to Lanká turned.<br>
 On, where the royal brothers led<br>
 To Lanká's walls the legions sped.<br>
 The northern gate, where giant foes<br>
 Swarmed round their monarch, Ráma chose<br>
 Where he in person might direct<br>
 The battle, and his troops protect.<br>
 What arm but his the post might keep<br>
 Where, strong as he who sways the deep,  <a name="fr_959"></a><a href="#fn_959"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Mid thousands armed with bow and mace,<br>
 Stood Rávan mightiest of his race?<br>
 The eastern gate was Níla's post.<br>
 Where marshalled stood his Vánar host,<br>
 And Mainda with his troops arrayed,<br>
 And Dwivid stood to lend him aid.<br>
 The southern gate was Angad's care,<br>
 Who ranged his bold battalions there.<br>
 Hanúmán by the port that faced<br>
 The setting sun his legions placed,<br>
 And King Sugríva held the wood<br>
 East of the gate where Rávan stood.<br>
 On every side the myriads met,<br>
 And Lanká's walls of close beset<br>
 That scarce the roving gale could win<br>
 A passage to the hosts within.<br>
 Loud as the angry ocean's roar<br>
 When wild waves lash the rocky shore,<br>
 Ten thousand thousand throats upsent<br>
 A shout that tore the firmament,<br>
 And Lanká with each grove and brook<br>
 And tower and wall and rampart shook.<br>
 The giants heard, and were appalled:<br>
 Then Raghu's son to Angad called,<br>
 And, led by kingly duty,  <a name="fr_960"></a><a href="#fn_960"><font size="1">2</font></a> gave<br>
 This order merciful as brave:<br>
 'Go, Angad, Rávan's presence seek,<br>
 And thus my words of warning speak:<br>
 'How art thou changed and fallen now,<br>
 O Monarch of the giants, thou<br>
 Whose impious fury would not spare<br>
 Saint, nymph, or spirit of the air;<br>
 Whose foot in haughty triumph trod<br>
 On Yaksha, king, and Serpent God:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 How art thou fallen from thy pride<br>
 Which Brahmá's favour fortified!<br>
 With myriads at thy Lanká's gate<br>
 I stand my righteous ire to sate,<br>
 And punish thee with sword and flame,<br>
 The tyrant fiend who stole my dame.<br>
 Now show the might, employ the guile,<br>
 O Monarch of the giants' isle,<br>
 Which stole a helpless dame away:<br>
 Call up thy power and strength to-day.<br>
 Once more I warn thee, Rákshas King,<br>
 This hour the Maithil lady bring,<br>
 And, yielding while there yet is time,<br>
 Seek, suppliant, pardon for the crime,<br>
 Or I will leave beneath the sun<br>
 No living Rákshas, no, not one.<br>
 In vain from battle wilt thou fly,<br>
 Or borne on pinions seek the sky;<br>
 The hand of Ráma shall not spare;<br>
 His fiery shaft shall smite thee there.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: and Angad bowed his head;<br>
 Thence like embodied flame be sped,<br>
 And lighted from his airy road<br>
 Within the Rákshas king's abode.<br>
 There sate, the centre of a ring<br>
 Of counsellors, the giant king.<br>
 Swift through the circle Angad pressed,<br>
 And spoke with fury in his breast:<br>
 'Sent by the lord of Kosal's land,<br>
 His envoy here, O King, I stand,<br>
 Angad the son of Báli: fame<br>
 Has haply taught thine ears my name.<br>
 Thus in the words of Ráma I<br>
 Am come to warn thee or defy:<br>
 Come forth, and fighting in the van<br>
 Display the spirit of a man.<br>
 This arm shall slay thee, tyrant: all<br>
 Thy nobles, kith and kin shall fall:<br>
 And earth and heaven, from terror freed,<br>
 Shall joy to see the oppressor bleed,<br>
 Vibhíshan, when his foe is slain,<br>
 Anointed king in peace shall reign.<br>
 Once more I counsel thee: repent,<br>
 Avoid the mortal punishment,<br>
 With honour due the dame restore,<br>
 And pardon for thy sin implore.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Loud rose the king's infuriate cry:<br>
 'Seize, seize the Vánar, let him lie.'<br>
 Four of his band their lord obeyed,<br>
 And eager hands on Angad laid.<br>
 He purposing his strength to show<br>
 Gave no resistance to the foe,<br>
 But swiftly round his captors cast<br>
 His mighty arms and held them fast.<br>
 Fierce shout and cry around him rang:<br>
 Light to the palace roof he sprang,<br>
 There his detaining arms unwound.<br>
 And hurled the giants to the ground,<br>
 Then, smiting with a fearful stroke,<br>
 A turret from the roof he broke,--<br>
 As when the fiery levin sent<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_459"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 459</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 By Indra from the clouds has rent<br>
 The proud peak of the Lord of Snow,-<br>
 And flung the stony mass below.<br>
 Again with loud terrific cry<br>
 He sprang exulting to the sky,<br>
 And, joyous for his errand done,<br>
 Stood by the side of Raghu's son.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_958"></a><a href="ry439.htm#fr_958">457:1</a>  The Rusuk * also called Palas'a, is
 Bruten Frondosa, a tree that bears
 beautiful red crescent shaped blossoms
 and is deservedly a favorite with poets.
 * ??????? Seekal the silk cotton
 * ????? bush also bears red blossoms.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_959"></a><a href="ry440.htm#fr_959">458:1</a>  Varuna.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_960"></a><a href="ry440.htm#fr_960">458:2</a>  The duty of a king to save the lives
 of his people and avoid bloodshed until
 milder methods have been tried in vain.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry441.htm">Next: Canto XLII.: The Sally.</a></center>
 </body>