<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry446.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry448.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVIII.: SITÁ'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 'False are they all, proved false to-day,<br>
 The prophets of my fortune, they<br>
 Who in the tranquil time of old<br>
 A blessed life for me foretold,<br>
 Predicting I should never know<br>
 A childless dame's, a widow's woe,<br>
 False are they all, their words are vain.<br>
 For thou, my lord and life, art slain.<br>
 False was the priest and vain his lore<br>
 Who blessed me in those days of yore<br>
 By Ráma's side in bliss to reign:<br>
 For thou, my lord and life, art slain.<br>
 They hailed me happy from my birth,<br>
 Proud empress of the lord of earth.<br>
 They blessed me--but the thought is pain--<br>
 For thou, my lord and life, art slain.<br>
 Ah, fruitless hope! each glorious sign<br>
 That stamps the future queen is mine,<br>
 With no ill-omened mark to show<br>
 A widow's crushing hour of woe.<br>
 They say my hair is black and fine,<br>
 They praise my brows' continuous line;<br>
 My even teeth divided well.<br>
 My bosom for its graceful swell.<br>
 They praise my feet and fingers oft;<br>
 They say my skin is smooth and soft,<br>
 And call me happy to possess<br>
 The twelve fair marks that bring success.  <a name="fr_965"></a><a href="#fn_965"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 But ah, what profit shall I gain?<br>
 Thou, O my lord and life, art slain.<br>
 The flattering seer in former days<br>
 My gentle girlish smile would praise,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_463"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 463</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And swear that holy water shed<br>
 By Bráhman hands upon my head<br>
 Should make me queen, a monarch's bride:<br>
 How is the promise verified?<br>
 Matchless in might the brothers slew<br>
 In Janasthán the giant crew,<br>
 And forced the indomitable sea<br>
 To let them pass to rescue me.<br>
 Theirs was the fiery weapon hurled<br>
 By him who rules the watery world;  <a name="fr_966"></a><a href="#fn_966"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Theirs the dire shaft by Indra sped;<br>
 Theirs was the mystic Brahmá's Head.  <a name="fr_967"></a><a href="#fn_967"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 In vain they fought, the bold and brave:<br>
 A coward's hand their death-wounds gave.<br>
 By secret shafts and magic spell<br>
 The brothers, peers of Indra, fell.<br>
 That foe, if seen by Ráma's eye<br>
 One moment, had not lived to fly.<br>
 Though swift as thought, his utmost speed<br>
 Had failed him in the hour of need.<br>
 No might, no tear, no prayer may stay<br>
 Fate's dark inevitable day.<br>
 Nor could their matchless valour shield<br>
 These heroes on the battle field.<br>
 I sorrow for the noble dead,<br>
 I mourn my hopes for ever fled;<br>
 But chief my weeping eyes o'erflow<br>
 For Queen Kaus'alyá's hopeless woe.<br>
 The widowed queen is counting now<br>
 Each hour prescribed by Ráma's vow,<br>
 And lives because she longs to see<br>
 Once more her princely sons and me.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Trijatá,  <a name="fr_968"></a><a href="#fn_968"><font size="1">3</font></a> of gentler mould<br>
 Though Rákshas born, her grief consoled:<br>
 'Dear Queen, thy causeless woe dispel:<br>
 Thy husband lives, and all is well.<br>
 Look round: in every Vánar face<br>
 The light of joyful hope I trace.<br>
 Not thus, believe me, shine the eyes<br>
 Of warriors when their leader dies.<br>
 An Army, when the chief is dead,<br>
 Flies from the field dispirited.<br>
 Here, undisturbed in firm array,<br>
 The Vánars by the brothers stay.<br>
 Love prompts my speech; no longer grieve;<br>
 Ponder my counsel, and believe.<br>
 These lips of mine from earliest youth<br>
 Have spoken, and shall speak, the truth.<br>
 Deep in my heart thy gentle grace<br>
 And patient virtues hold their place.<br>
 Turn, lady, turn once more thine eye:<br>
 Though pierced with shafts the heroes lie,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 On brows and cheeks with blood-drops wet<br>
 The light of beauty lingers yet.<br>
 Such beauty ne'er is found in death,<br>
 But vanishes with parting breath.<br>
 O, trust the hope these tokens give:<br>
 The heroes are not dead, but live.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Sítá joined her hands, and sighed,<br>
 'O, may thy words be verified!'<br>
 The car was turned, which fleet as thought<br>
 The mourning queen to Lanká brought.<br>
 They led her to the garden, where<br>
 Again she yielded to despair,<br>
 Lamenting for the chiefs who bled<br>
 On earth's cold bosom with the dead.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_965"></a><a href="ry447.htm#fr_965">462:1</a>  On each foot, and at the root of each
 finge.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_966"></a><a href="ry447.htm#fr_966">463:1</a>  Varun.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_967"></a><a href="ry447.htm#fr_967">463:2</a>  The name of one of the mystical
 weapons the command over which was
 given by Vis'vámitra to Ráma, as related
 in Book I.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_968"></a><a href="ry447.htm#fr_968">463:3</a>  One of Sítá's guard, and her comforter
 on a former occasion also.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry448.htm">Next: Canto XLIX.: Ráma's Lament</a></center>
 </body>