<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry445.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry447.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVII.: SITÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 Still on the ground where Ráma slept<br>
 Their faithful watch the Vánars kept.<br>
 There Angad stood o'erwhelmed with grief<br>
 And many a lord and warrior chief;<br>
 And, ranged in densest mass around,<br>
 Their tree-armed legions held the ground.<br>
 Far ranged each Vánar's eager eye,<br>
 Now swept the land, now sought the sky,<br>
 All fearing, if a leaf was stirred,<br>
 A Rákshas in the sound they heard.<br>
 The lord of Lanká in his hall,<br>
 Rejoicing at his foeman's fall,<br>
 Commanded and the warders came<br>
 Who ever watched the Maithil dame.<br>
 'Go,' cried the Rákshas king, 'relate<br>
 To Janak's child her husband's fate.<br>
 Low on the earth her Ráma lies,<br>
 And dark in death are Lakshman's eyes.<br>
 Bring forth my car and let her ride<br>
 To view the chieftains side by side.<br>
 The lord to whom her fancy turned<br>
 For whose dear sake my love she spurned,<br>
 Lies smitten, as he fiercely led<br>
 The battle, with his brother dead.<br>
 Lead forth the royal lady: go<br>
 Her husband's lifeless body show.<br>
 Then from all doubt and terror free<br>
 Her softening heart will turn to me.'<br>
 They heard his speech: the car was brought;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 That shady grove the warders sought<br>
 Where, mourning Ráma night and day,<br>
 The melancholy lady lay.<br>
 They placed her in the car and through<br>
 The yielding air they swiftly flew.<br>
 The lady looked upon the plain,<br>
 Looked on the heaps of Vánar slain,<br>
 Saw where, triumphant in the fight,<br>
 Thronged the fierce rovers of the night,<br>
 And Vánar chieftains, mournful-eyed,<br>
 Watched by the fallen brothers' side.<br>
 There stretched upon his gory bed<br>
 Each brother lay as lie the dead,<br>
 With shattered mail and splintered bow<br>
 Pierced by the arrows of the foe.<br>
 When on the pair her eyes she bent,<br>
 Burst from her lips a wild lament<br>
 Her eyes o'erflowed, she groaned and sighed<br>
 And thus in trembling accents cried:<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry447.htm">Next: Canto XLVIII.: Sitá's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>