<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry451.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry453.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIII.: VAJRADANSHTRA'S SALLY.</h3>
 <p>
 When Rávan in his palace heard<br>
 The mournful news, his wrath was stirred;<br>
 And, gasping like a furious snake,<br>
 To Vajradanshtra thus he spake:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Go forth, my fiercest captain, lead<br>
 The bravest of the giants' breed.<br>
 Go forth, the sons of Raghu slay<br>
 And by their side Sugríva lay.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: the chieftain bowed his head<br>
 And forth with gathered troops he sped.<br>
 Cars, camels, steeds were well arrayed,<br>
 And coloured banners o'er them played.<br>
 Rings decked his arms: about his waist<br>
 The life-protecting mail was braced,<br>
 And on the chieftain's forehead set<br>
 Glittered his cap and coronet.<br>
 Home on a bannered car that glowed<br>
 With golden sheen the warrior rode.<br>
 And footmen marched with spear and sword<br>
 And bow and mace behind their lord.<br>
 In pomp and pride of warlike state<br>
 They sallied from the southern gate,<br>
 But saw, as on their way they sped,<br>
 Dread signs around and overhead.<br>
 For there were meteors falling fast,<br>
 Though not a cloud its shadow cast;<br>
 And each ill-omened bird and beast,<br>
 Forboding death, the fear increased,<br>
 While many a giant slipped and reeled,<br>
 Falling before he reached the field.<br>
 They met in mortal strife engaged,<br>
 And long and fierce the battle raged.<br>
 Spears, swords uplifted, gleamed and flashed,<br>
 And many a chief to earth was dashed.<br>
 A ceaseless storm of arrows rained,<br>
 And limbs were pierced and blood-distained.<br>
 Terrific was the sound that filled<br>
 The air, and every heart was chilled,<br>
 As hurtling o'er the giants flew<br>
 The rocks and trees which Vánars threw.<br>
 Fierce as a hungry lion when<br>
 Unwary deer approach his den,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_467"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 467</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Angad, his eyes with fury red,<br>
 Waving a tree above his head.<br>
 Rushed with wild charge which none could stay<br>
 Where stood the giants' dense array.<br>
 Like tall trees levelled by the blast<br>
 Before him fell the giants fast,<br>
 And earth that streamed with blood was strown<br>
 With warriors, steeds, and cars o'erthrown.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry453.htm">Next: Canto LIV.: Vajradanshtra's Death.</a></center>
 </body>