<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry458.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry460.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIII.: KUMBHAKABNA'S BOAST.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Kumbhakarna laughed aloud<br>
 And cried; 'O Monarch, once so proud,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 We warned thee, but thou wouldst not hear<br>
 And now the fruits of sin appear.<br>
 We warned thee, I, thy nobles, all<br>
 Who loved thee, in thy council hall.<br>
 Those sovereigns who with blinded eyes<br>
 Neglect the foe their hearts despise,<br>
 Soon, falling from the their high estate<br>
 Bring on themselves the stroke of fate.<br>
 Accept at length, thy life to save,<br>
 The counsel sage Vibhíshan gave,<br>
 The prudent counsel spurned before,<br>
 And Sita to her lord restore.'  <a name="fr_989"></a><a href="#fn_989"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The monarch frowned, by passion moved<br>
 And thus in angry words reproved:<br>
 ' Wilt thou thine elder brother school,<br>
 Forgetful of the ancient rule<br>
 That bids thee treat him as the sage<br>
 Who guides thee with the lore of age?<br>
 Think on the dangers of the day,<br>
 Nor idly throw thy words away:<br>
 If, led astray, by passion stirred,<br>
 I in the pride of power have erred;<br>
 If deeds of old were done amiss.<br>
 No time for vain reproach is this.<br>
 Up, brother; let thy loving care<br>
 The errors of thy king repair.'<br>
     To calm his wrath, his soul to ease,<br>
 The younger spake in words like these:<br>
 ' Yea, from our bosoms let us cast<br>
 All idle sorrow for the past.<br>
 Let grief and anger be repressed:<br>
 Again be firm and self-possessed.<br>
 This day, O Monarch, shalt thou see<br>
 The Vánar legions turn and flee,<br>
 And Ráma and his brother slain<br>
 With their hearts' blood shall dye the plain<br>
 Yea, if the God who rules the dead,<br>
 And Varun their battalions led;<br>
 If Indra with the Storm-Gods came<br>
 Against me, and the Lord of Flame,<br>
 Still would I fight with all and slay<br>
 Thy banded foes, my King, to-day.<br>
 If Raghu's son this day withstand<br>
 The blow of mine uplifted hand.<br>
 Deep in his breast my darts shall sink,<br>
 And torrents of his life-blood drink.<br>
 O fear not, in my promise trust;<br>
 This arm shall lay him in the dust,<br>
 Shall leave the fierce Sugríva dyed<br>
 With gore, and Lakshman by his side,<br>
 And strike the great Hanúmán down.<br>
 The spoiler of our glorious town.'  <a name="fr_990"></a><a href="#fn_990"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_476"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 476</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_989"></a><a href="ry459.htm#fr_989">475:1</a>  I omit a tedious sermon on the danger
 of rashness and the advantages of prudence,
 sufficient to irritate a less passionate
 hearer than Rávan.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_990"></a><a href="ry459.htm#fr_990">475:2</a>  The Bengal recension assigns a very
 different speech to Kumbhakarna and
 makes him say that Nárad the messenger
 of the Gods had formerly told him that <a name="page_473"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 473</font></a>
 Vishn'u himself incarnate as Das'aratha's
 son should come to destroy Rávan.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry460.htm">Next: Canto LXIV.: Mahodar's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>