<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry457.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry459.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXII: RÁVAN'S REQUEST</h3>
 <p>
 Along bright Lanká's royal road<br>
 The giant, roused from slumber, strode,<br>
 While from the houses on his head<br>
 A rain of fragrant flowers was shed.<br>
 He reached the monarch's gate whereon<br>
 Rich gems and golden fretwork shone.<br>
 Through court and corridor that shook<br>
 Beneath his tread his way he took,<br>
 And stood within the chamber where<br>
 His brother sat in dark despair.<br>
 But sudden, at the grateful sight<br>
 The monarch's eye again grew bright.<br>
 He started up, forgot his fear,<br>
 And drew his giant brother near.<br>
 The younger pressed the elder's feet<br>
 And paid the King observance meet,<br>
 Then cried: 'O Monarch, speak thy will,<br>
 And let my care thy word fulfil.<br>
 What sudden terror and dismay<br>
 Have burst the bonds in which I lay?'<br>
 Fierce flashed the flame from Rávan's eye.<br>
 As thus in wrath he made reply:<br>
 ' Fair time, I ween, for sleep is this,<br>
 To lull thy soul in tranquil bliss,<br>
 Unheeding, in oblivion drowned,<br>
 The dangers that our lives surround.<br>
 Brave Ráma, Das'aratha's son,<br>
 A passage o'er the sea has won,<br>
 And, with the Vánar monarch's aid.<br>
 Round Lanká's walls his hosts arrayed.<br>
 Though never in the deadly field<br>
 My Rákshas troops were known to yield,<br>
 The bravest of the giant train<br>
 Have fallen by the Vánars slain.<br>
 Hence comes my fear. O fierce and brave,<br>
 Go forth, our threatened Lanká' save.<br>
 Go forth, a dreadful vengeance take:<br>
 For this, O chief, I bade thee wake.<br>
 The Gods and trembling fiends have felt<br>
 The furious blows thine arm has dealt.<br>
 Earth has no warrior, heaven has none<br>
 To match thy might, Paulastya's eon,'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry459.htm">Next: Canto LXIII.: Kumbhakabna's Boast.</a></center>
 </body>