<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry467.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry469.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXII.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 The giants bent, in rage and grief,<br>
 Their eyes upon the fallen chief:<br>
 Then flying wild with fear and pale<br>
 To Rávan bore the mournful tale.<br>
 He heard how Atikáya died,<br>
 Then turned him to his lords, and cried:<br>
 'Where are they now--my bravest--where,<br>
 Wise to consult and prompt to dare?<br>
 Where is Dhúmráksha, skilled to wield<br>
 All weapons in the battle field?<br>
 Akampan, and Prahasta's might,<br>
 And Kumbhakarna hold in fight?<br>
 These, these and many a Rákshas more,<br>
 Each master of the arms he bore,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_484"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 484</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Who every foe in fight o'erthrew,<br>
 The victors none could e'er subdue,<br>
 Have perished by the might of one,<br>
 The vengeful arm of Raghu's son.<br>
 In vain I cast mine eyes around,<br>
 No match for Ráma here is found,<br>
 No chief to stand before that bow<br>
 Whose deadly shafts have caused our woe.<br>
 Now, warriors, to your stations hence;<br>
 Provide ye for the wall's defence,<br>
 And be the As'oka garden, where<br>
 The lady lies, your special care.<br>
 Be every lane and passage barred,<br>
 Set at each gate a chosen guard.<br>
 And with your troops, where danger calls,<br>
 Be ready to defend the walls.<br>
 Each movement of the Vánars mark;<br>
 Observe them when the sides grow dark;<br>
 Be ready in the dead of night,<br>
 And ere the morning bring the light.<br>
 Taught by our loss we may not scorn<br>
 These legions of the forest-born."<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: the Rákshas lords obeyed;<br>
 Each at his post his troops arrayed:<br>
 And, torn with pangs that pierced him through<br>
 The monarch from the hall withdrew.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry469.htm">Next: Canto LXXIII.: Indrajit's Victory.</a></center>
 </body>