<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry459.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry461.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIV.: MAHODAR'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased: and when his lips were closed<br>
 Mahodar thus his rede opposed:<br>
 'Why wilt thou shame thy noble birth<br>
 And speak like one of little worth?<br>
 Why boast thee thus in youthful pride<br>
 Rejecting wisdom for thy guide?<br>
 How will thy single arm oppose<br>
 The victor of a thousand foes,<br>
 Who proved in Janasthán his might<br>
 And slew the rovers of the night?<br>
 The remnant of those legions, they<br>
 Who saw his power that fatal day.<br>
 Now in this leaguered city dread<br>
 The mighty chief from whom they fled.<br>
 And wouldst thou meet the lord of men,<br>
 Beard the great lion in his den,<br>
 And, when thine eyes are open, break<br>
 The slumber of a deadly snake?<br>
 Who may an equal battle wage<br>
 With him, so awful in his rage.<br>
 Fierce as the God of Death whom none<br>
 May vanquish, Das'aratha's son?<br>
 But, Rávan, shall the lady still<br>
 Refuse compliance with thy will?<br>
 No, listen, King, to this design<br>
 Which soon shall make the captive thine.<br>
 This day through Lanka's streets proclaim<br>
 That four of us  <a name="fr_991"></a><a href="#fn_991"><font size="1">1</font></a> of highest fame<br>
 With Kumbhakarna at our head<br>
 Will strike the son of Raghu dead.<br>
 Forth to the battle will we go<br>
 And prove our prowess on the foe.<br>
 Then, if our bold attempt succeed,<br>
 No further plans thy hopes will need.<br>
 But if in vain our warriors strive,<br>
 And Raghu's son be left alive,<br>
 We will return, and, wounded sore,<br>
 Our armour stained with gouts of gore,<br>
 Will show the shafts that rent each frame,<br>
 Keen arrows marked with Ráma's name,<br>
 And say we giants have devoured<br>
 The princes whom our might o'erpowered.<br>
 Then let the joyful tidings spread<br>
 That Raghu's royal sons are dead.<br>
 To all around thy pleasure show,<br>
 Gold, pearls, and precious robes, bestow.<br>
 Gay garlands round the portals twine,<br>
 Enjoy the banquet and the wine.<br>
 Then go, the scornful lady seek,<br>
 And woo her when her heart is weak.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Rich robes and gold and gems display,<br>
 And gently wile her grief away.<br>
 Then will she feel her hopeless state,<br>
 Widowed, forlorn, and desolate;<br>
 Know that on thee her bliss depends,<br>
 Far from her country and her friends;<br>
 Then, her proud spirit overthrown,<br>
 The lady will be all thine own.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_991"></a><a href="ry460.htm#fr_991">476:1</a>  Mahodar, Dwijihva, Sanhráda, and
 Vitardan.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry461.htm">Next: Canto LXV.: Khumbhakarna's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>