<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry464.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry466.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIX.: NARÁNTAK'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 Pierced to the soul by sorrow's sting<br>
 Thus wailed the evil-hearted king.<br>
 Then Tris'iras stood forth and cried:<br>
 'Yea, father, he has fought and died,<br>
 Our bravest: and the loss is sore:<br>
 But rouse thee, and lament no more.<br>
 Hast thou not still thy coat of mail,<br>
 Thy bow and shafts which never fail?<br>
 A thousand asses draw thy car<br>
 Which roars like thunder heard afar.<br>
 Thy valour and thy warrior skill,<br>
 Thy God-given strength, are left thee still.<br>
 Unarmed, thy matchless might subdued<br>
 The Gods and Da'nav multitude.<br>
 Armed with thy glorious weapons, how<br>
 Shall Raghu's son oppose thee now?<br>
 Or, sire, within thy palace stay;<br>
 And I myself will sweep away<br>
 Thy foes, like Garúd when he makes<br>
 A banquet of the writhing snakes<br>
 Soon Raghu's son shall press the plain,<br>
 As Narak  <a name="fr_1001"></a><a href="#fn_1001"><font size="1">1</font></a> fell by Vishnu slain,<br>
 Or S'ambar  <a name="fr_1002"></a><a href="#fn_1002"><font size="1">2</font></a> in rebellious pride<br>
 Who met the King of Gods  <a name="fr_1003"></a><a href="#fn_1003"><font size="1">3</font></a> and died.'<br>
     The monarch heard: his courage grew,<br>
 And life and spirit came anew.<br>
 Devántak and Narántak heard,<br>
 And their fierce souls with joy were stirred;<br>
 And Atikáya  <a name="fr_1004"></a><a href="#fn_1004"><font size="1">4</font></a> burned to fight,<br>
 And heard the summons with delight;<br>
 While from the rest loud rang the cry,<br>
 'I too will fight,' 'and I,' 'and I.'<br>
     The joyous king his sons embraced,<br>
 With gold and chains and jewels graced,<br>
 And sent them forth with stirring speech<br>
 Of benison and praise to each.<br>
 Forth from the gate the princes sped<br>
 And ranged for war the troops they led.<br>
 The Vánar legions charged anew.<br>
 And trees and rocks for missiles flew.<br>
 They saw Narántak's mighty form<br>
 Borne on a steed that mocked the storm.<br>
 To check his charge in vain they strove:<br>
 Straight through their host his way he clove,<br>
 As springs a dolphin through the tide:<br>
 And countless Vánars fell and died,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And mangled limbs and corpses lay<br>
 To mark the chief's ensanguined way,<br>
 Sugrívá saw them fall or fly<br>
 When fierce Narántak's steed was nigh,<br>
 And marked the giant where he sped<br>
 O'er heaps of dying or of dead.<br>
 He bade the royal Angad face<br>
 That bravest chief of giant race.<br>
 As springs the sun from clouds dispersed,<br>
 So Angad from the Vánars burst.<br>
 No weapon for the fight he bore<br>
 Save nails and teeth, and sought no more.<br>
 'Leave, giant chieftain,' thus he spoke,<br>
 'Leave foes unworthy of thy stroke,<br>
 And bend against a nobler heart<br>
 The terrors of thy deadly dart.'<br>
     Narántak heard the words he spake:<br>
 Fast breathing, like an angry snake,<br>
 With bloody teeth his lips he pressed<br>
 And hurled his dart at Angad's breast.<br>
 True was the aim and fierce the stroke,<br>
 Yet on his breast the missile broke.<br>
 Then Angad at the giant flew.<br>
 And with a blow his courser slew:<br>
 The fierce hand crushed through flesh and bone,<br>
 And steed and rider fell o'erthrown.<br>
 Narántak's eyes with fury blazed:<br>
 His heavy hand on high he raised<br>
 And struck in savage wrath the head<br>
 Of Báli's son, who reeled and bled,<br>
 Fainted a moment and no more:<br>
 Then stronger, fiercer than before<br>
 Smote with that fist which naught could stay,<br>
 And crushed to death the giant lay.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1001"></a><a href="ry465.htm#fr_1001">481:1</a>  Narak was a demon, son of Bhúmi or
 Earth, who haunted the city Prágjyotisha.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1002"></a><a href="ry465.htm#fr_1002">481:2</a>  S'ambar was a demon of drought.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1003"></a><a href="ry465.htm#fr_1003">481:3</a>  Indra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1004"></a><a href="ry465.htm#fr_1004">481:4</a>  Devántak (Slayer of Gods) Narántak
 (Slayer of Men) Atiktaya (Huge of Frame)
 and Tris'iras (Three Headed) were all sons
 of Rávan.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry466.htm">Next: Canto LXX.: The Death of Tris'iras.</a></center>
 </body>