<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry461.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry463.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVI.: KOMBHAKARNA'S SALLY.</h3>
 <p>
 In pomp and pride of warlike state<br>
 The giant passed the city gate.<br>
 He raised his voice: the hills, the shore<br>
 Of Lanka's sea returned the roar.<br>
 The Vánars saw the chief draw nigh<br>
 Whom not the ruler of the sky,<br>
 Nor Yama, monarch of the dead,<br>
 Might vanquish, and affrighted fled.<br>
 When royal Angad, Báli's son,<br>
 Saw the scared Vánars turn and run,<br>
 Undaunted still he kept his ground,<br>
 And shouted as he gazed around:<br>
 'O Nala, Níla, stay nor let<br>
 Your souls your generous worth forget,<br>
 O Kumud and Gaváksha, why<br>
 Like base-born Vánars will ye fly?<br>
 Turn, turn, nor shame your order thus:<br>
 This giant is no match for us'<br>
     They heard his voice: the flight was stayed;<br>
 Again for war they stood arrayed,<br>
 And hurled upon the foe a shower<br>
 Of mountain peaks and trees in flower.<br>
 Still on his limbs their missiles rained:<br>
 Unmoved, their blows he still sustained,<br>
 And seemed unconscious of the stroke<br>
 When rocks against his body broke.<br>
 Fierce as the flame when woods are dry<br>
 He charged with fury in his eye.<br>
 Like trees consumed with fervent heat<br>
 They fell beneath the giant's feet.<br>
 Some o'er the ground, dyed red with gore,<br>
 Fled wild with terror to the shore,<br>
 And, deeming that all hope was lost,<br>
 Ran to the bridge they erst had crossed.<br>
 Some clomb the trees their lives to save,<br>
 Some sought the mountain and the cave;<br>
 Some hid them in the bosky dell,<br>
 And there in deathlike slumber fell.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
     When Angad saw the chieftains fly<br>
 He called them with a mighty cry:<br>
 'Once more, O Vánars, charge once more,<br>
 On to the battle as before.<br>
 In all her compass earth has not,<br>
 To hide you safe, one secret spot.<br>
 What! leave your arms? each nobler dame<br>
 Will scorn her consort for the shame.<br>
 This blot upon your names efface,<br>
 And keep your valour from disgrace.<br>
 Stay, chieftains; wherefore will ye run,<br>
 A band of warriors scared by one?'<br>
     Scarce would they hear: they would not stay,<br>
 And barely spoke in wild dismay:<br>
 'Have we not fought, and fought in vain<br>
 Have we not seen our mightiest slain?<br>
 The giant's matchless force we fear,<br>
 And fly because our lives are dear.'<br>
 But Báli's son with gentle art<br>
 Dispelled their dread and cheered each heart.<br>
 They turned and formed and waited still<br>
 Obedient to the prince's will.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_993"></a><a href="ry461.htm#fr_993">477:1</a>  There is so much commonplace repetition
 in these Sallies of the Rákshas chieftains
 that omissions are frequently necessary.
 The usual ill omens attend the
 sally of Kumbhakarna, and the Canto
 ends with a description of the terrified
 Vánars' flight which is briefly repeated in
 different words at the begining of the
 next Canto.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry463.htm">Next: Canto LXVII.: Kumbhakarna's Death.</a></center>
 </body>