<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry466.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry468.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXI.: ATIKÁYA'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 But Atikáya's wrath grew high<br>
 To see his noblest kinsmen die.<br>
 He, fiercest of the giant race,<br>
 Presuming still on Brahmá's grace;<br>
 Proud tamer of the immortals' pride,<br>
 Whose power and might with Indra's vied,<br>
 For blood and vengeful carnage burned,<br>
 And on the foe his fury turned.<br>
 High on a car that flashed and glowed<br>
 Bright as a thousand suns he rode.<br>
 Around his princely brows was set<br>
 A rich bejewelled coronet.<br>
 Gold pendants in his ears he wore;<br>
 He strained and tried the bow he bore,<br>
 And ever, as a shaft he aimed,<br>
 His name and royal race proclaimed.<br>
 Scarce might the Vánars brook to hear<br>
 His clanging bow and voice of fear:<br>
 To Raghu's elder son they fled,<br>
 Their sure defence in woe and dread.<br>
 Then Ráma bent his eyes afar<br>
 And saw the giant in his car<br>
 Fast following the flying crowd<br>
 And roaring like a rainy cloud.<br>
 He, with the lust of battle fired,<br>
 Turned to Vibhíshan and inquired:<br>
 'Say, who is this, of mountain size,<br>
 This archer with the lion eyes?<br>
 His car, which strikes our host with awe,<br>
 A thousand eager coursers draw.<br>
 Surrounded by the flashing spears<br>
 Which line his car, the chief appears<br>
 Like some huge cloud when lightnings play<br>
 About it on a stormy day;<br>
 And the great bow he joys to hold<br>
 Whose bended back is bright with gold,<br>
 As Indra's bow makes glad the skies,<br>
 That best of chariots glorifies.<br>
 O see the sunlike splendour flung<br>
 From the great flag above him hung,<br>
 Where, blazened with refulgent lines,<br>
 Ráhu  <a name="fr_1005"></a><a href="#fn_1005"><font size="1">1</font></a> the dreadful Dragon shines.<br>
 Full thirty qivers near his side,<br>
 His car with shafts is well supplied:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_483"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 483</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And flashing like the light of stars<br>
 Gleam his two mighty scimitars.<br>
 Say, best of giants, who is he<br>
 Before whose face the Vánars flee?'<br>
     Thus Ráma spake. Vibhíshan eyed<br>
 The giants chief, and thus replied:<br>
 'This Ráma, this is Rávan's son:<br>
 High fame his youthful might has won.<br>
 He, best of warriors, bows his ear<br>
 The wisdom of the wise to hear.<br>
 Supreme is he mid those who know<br>
 The mastery of sword and bow.<br>
 Unrivalled in the bold attack<br>
 On elephant's or courser's back,<br>
 He knows, beside, each subtler art,<br>
 To win the foe, to bribe, or part.<br>
 On him the giant hosts rely,<br>
 And fear no ill when he is nigh.<br>
 This peerless chieftain bears the name<br>
 Of Atikáva huge of frame,<br>
 Whom Dhanyamáliní of yore<br>
 To Rávan lord of Lanká bore.'<br>
     Roused by his bow-string's awful clang,<br>
 To meet their foes the Vánars sprang.<br>
 Armed with tall trees from Lanká's wood,<br>
 And rocks and mountain peaks, they stood.<br>
 The giant's arrows, gold-bedecked,<br>
 The storm of hurtling missiles checked;<br>
 And ever on his foemen poured<br>
 Fierce tempest from his clanging cord;<br>
 Nor could the Vánar chiefs sustain<br>
 His shafts' intolerable rain.<br>
 They fled: the victor gained the place<br>
 Where stood the lord of Raghu's race,<br>
 And cried with voice of thunder: 'Lo,<br>
 Borne on my car, with shaft and bow,<br>
 I, champion of the giants, scorn<br>
 To fight with weaklings humbly born.<br>
 Come forth your bravest, if he dare,<br>
 And right with one who will not spare.'<br>
     Forth sprang Sumitrá's noble child,  <a name="fr_1006"></a><a href="#fn_1006"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And strained his ready bow, and smiled;<br>
 And giants trembled as the clang<br>
 Through heaven and earth reechoing rang.<br>
 The giant to his string applied<br>
 A pointed shaft, and proudly cried;<br>
 'Turn, turn, Sumitrá's son and fly,<br>
 For terrible as Death am I<br>
 Fly, nor that youthful form oppose,<br>
 Untrained in war, to warriors' blows.<br>
 What! wilt thou waste thy childish breath<br>
 And wake the dormant fire of death?<br>
 Cast down, rash boy, that useless bow:<br>
 Preserve thy life, uninjured go.'<br>
     He ceased: and stirred by wrath &amp; pride<br>
 Sumitrá's noble son replied:<br>
 'By warlike deed, not words alone,<br>
 The valour of the brave is shown.<br>
 Cease with vain boasts my scorn to move,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And with thine arm thy prowess prove.<br>
 Borne on thy car, with sword and bow,<br>
 With all thine arms, thy valour show.<br>
 Fight, and my deadly shafts this day<br>
 Low in the dust thy head shall lay,<br>
 And, rushing fast in ceaseless flood,<br>
 Shall rend thy flesh and drink thy blood.'<br>
     His giant foe no answer made,<br>
 But on his string an arrow laid.<br>
 He raised his arm, the cord he drew,<br>
 At Lakshman's breast the arrow flew.<br>
 Sumitrá's son, his foemen's dread,<br>
 Shot a fleet shaft with crescent head,<br>
 Which cleft that arrow pointed well,<br>
 And harmless to the earth it fell.<br>
 A shower of shafts from Lakshman's bow<br>
 Fell fast and furious on the foe<br>
 Who quailed not as the missiles smote<br>
 With idle force his iron coat.<br>
 Then came the friendly Wind-God near,<br>
 And whispered thus in Lakshman's ear:<br>
 'Such shafts as these in vain assail<br>
 Thy foe's impenetrable mail.<br>
 A more tremendous missile try,<br>
 Or never may the giant die.<br>
 Employ the mighty spell, and aim<br>
 The weapon known by Brahma's name.'<br>
 He ceased - Sumitrá's son obeyed:<br>
 On his great bow the shaft was laid,<br>
 And with a roar like thunder, true<br>
 As Indra's flashing bolt, it flew.<br>
 The giant poured his shafts like rain<br>
 To check its course, but all in vain.<br>
 With spear and mace and sword he tried<br>
 To turn the fiery dart aside.<br>
 Winged with a force which naught could check.<br>
 It smote the monster in the neck,<br>
 And, sundered from his shoulders, rolled<br>
 To earth his head and helm of gold.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1005"></a><a href="ry467.htm#fr_1005">482:1</a>  The demon of eclipse who seizes the
 Sun and Moon.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1006"></a><a href="ry467.htm#fr_1006">483:1</a>  Lakshman.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry468.htm">Next: Canto LXXII.: Rávan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>