<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry473.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry475.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO C.: RAVAN IN THE FIELD.</h3>
 <p>
 The plain with bleeding limbs was spread,<br>
 And heaps of dying and of dead.<br>
 His mighty bow still Ráma strained,<br>
 And shafts upon the giants rained.<br>
 Still Angad and Sugríva, wrought<br>
 To fury, for the Vánars fought.<br>
 Crushed with huge rocks through chest and side<br>
 Mahodar, Mahápárs'va died,<br>
 And Vinúpáksha stained with gore<br>
 Dropped on the plain to rise no more.<br>
 When Rávan saw the three o'erthrown<br>
 He cried aloud in furious tone:<br>
 'Urge, urge the car, my charioteer.<br>
 The haughty Vánars' death is near.<br>
 This very day shall end our griefs<br>
 For leaguered town and slaughtered chiefs.<br>
 Ráma the tree whose lovely fruit<br>
 Is Sítá, shall this arm uproot,--<br>
 Whose branches with protecting shade<br>
 Are Vánar lords who lend him aid.'<br>
 Thus cried the king: the welkin rang<br>
 As forth the eager coursers sprang,<br>
 And earth beneath the chariot shook<br>
 With flowery grove and hill and brook.<br>
 Fast rained his shafts: where'er he sped<br>
 The conquered Vánars fell or fled,<br>
 On rolled the car in swift career<br>
 Till Raghu's noble sons were near.<br>
 Then Ráma looked upon the foe<br>
 And strained and tried his sounding bow.<br>
 Till earth and all the region rang<br>
 Re-echoing to the awful clang.<br>
 His bow the younger chieftain bent.<br>
 And shaft on shaft at Rávan sent.<br>
 He shot: but Rávan little recked;<br>
 Each arrow with his own he checked,<br>
 And headless, baffled of its aim,<br>
 To earth the harmless missile came;<br>
 And Lakshman stayed his arm o'erpowered<br>
 By the thick darts the giant showered.<br>
 Fierce waxed the fight and fiercer yet,<br>
 For Rávan now and Ráma met,<br>
 And each on other poured amain<br>
 The tempest of his arrowy rain.<br>
 While all the sky above was dark<br>
 With missles speeding to their mark<br>
 Like clouds, with flashing lightning twined<br>
 About them, hurried by the wind.<br>
 Not fiercer was the wondrous fight<br>
 When Vritra fell by Indra's might.<br>
 All arts off war each foeman knew,<br>
 And trained alike, his bowstring drew.<br>
 Red-eyed with fury Lanká's king<br>
 Pressed his huge fingers on the string,<br>
 And fixed in Ráma's brows a flight<br>
 Of arrows winged with matchless flight.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Still Raghu's son endured, and bore<br>
 That crown of shafts though wounded sore.<br>
 O'er a dire dart a spell he spoke<br>
 With mystic power to aid the stroke.<br>
 In vain upon the foe it smote<br>
 Rebounding from the steelproof coat.<br>
 The giant armed his bow anew,<br>
 And wondrous weapons hissed and flew,<br>
 Terrific, deadly, swift of flight,<br>
 Beaked like the vulture and the kite,<br>
 Or bearing heads of fearful make,<br>
 Of lion, tiger, wolf and snake. <a name="fr_1016"></a><a href="ry475.htm#fn_1016"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Then Ráma, troubled by the storm<br>
 Of flying darts in every form<br>
 Shot by an arm that naught could tire,<br>
 Launched at the foe his dart of fire,<br>
 Which, sacred to the Lord of Flame,<br>
 Burnt and consumed where'er it came.<br>
 And many a blazing shaft beside<br>
 The hero to his string applied.<br>
 With fiery course of dazzling hue<br>
 Swift to the mark each missile flew,<br>
 Some flashing like a shooting star,<br>
 Some as the tongues of lightning are;<br>
 One like a brilliant plant, one<br>
 In splendour like the morning sun.<br>
 Where'er the shafts of Ráma burned<br>
 The giant's darts were foiled and turned.<br>
 Far into space his weapons fled,<br>
 But as they flew struck thousands dead.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry475.htm">Next: Canto CI.: Lakshman's Fall.</a></center>
 </body>