<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry476.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry478.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CIII.: INDRA'S CAR.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Raghu's son forgot his woe;<br>
 Again he grasped his fallen bow<br>
 And hurled at Lanká's lord amain<br>
 The tempest of his arrowy rain.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_491"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 491</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Drawn by the steeds his lords had brought,<br>
 Again the giant turned and fought.<br>
 And drove his glittering chariot nigh<br>
 As springs the Day-God through the sky.<br>
 Then, as his sounding bow he bent,<br>
 Like thunderbolts his shafts were sent,<br>
 As when dark clouds in rain time shed<br>
 Fierce torrents on a mountain's head.<br>
 High on his car the giant rode,<br>
 On foot the son of Raghu strode.<br>
 The Gods from their celestial height<br>
 Indignant saw the unequal fight.<br>
 Then he whom heavenly hosts revere,<br>
 Lord Indra, called his charioteer:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Haste, Matali,' he cried,'descend;<br>
 To Raghu's son my chariot lend.<br>
 With cheering words the chief address;<br>
 And all the Gods thy deed will bless.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He bowed; he brought the glorious car<br>
 Whose tinkling bells were heard afar;<br>
 Fair as the sun of morning, bright<br>
 With gold and pearl and lazulite<br>
 He yoked the steeds of tawny hue<br>
 That swifter than the tempest flew.<br>
 Then down the slope of heaven he hied<br>
 And stayed the car by Ráma's side.<br>
 'Ascend, O Chief.' he humbly cried,<br>
 'The chariot which the Gods provide.<br>
 The mighty bow of Indra see,<br>
 Sent by the Gods who favour thee;<br>
 Behold this coat of glittering mail,<br>
 And spear and shafts which never fail.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Cheered by the grace the Immortals showed<br>
 The chieftain on the chariot rode.<br>
 Then as the car-borne warriors met<br>
 The awful fight raged fiercer yet.<br>
 Each shaft that Rávan shot became<br>
 A serpent red with kindled flame,<br>
 And round the limbs of Ráma hung<br>
 With fiery jaws and quivering tongue.<br>
 But every serpent fled dismayed<br>
 When Raghu's valiant son displayed<br>
 The weapon of the Feathered King,  <a name="fr_1019"></a><a href="#fn_1019"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And loosed his arrows from the string.<br>
 But Rávan armed his bow anew,<br>
 And showers of shafts at Ráma flew,<br>
 While the fierce king in swift career<br>
 Smote with a dart the charioteer.<br>
 An arrow shot by Rávan's hand<br>
 Laid the proud banner on the sand,<br>
 And Indra's steeds of heavenly strain<br>
 Fell by the iron tempest slain.<br>
 On Gods and spirits of the air<br>
 Fell terror, trembling, and despair.<br>
 The sea's white billows mounted high<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 With froth and foam to drench the sky.<br>
 The sun by lurid clouds was veiled,<br>
 The friendly lights of heaven were paled;<br>
 And, fiercely gleaming, fiery Mars<br>
 Opposed the beams of gentler stars.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma's eyes with fury blazed<br>
 As Indra's heavenly spear he raised.<br>
 Loud rang the bells: the glistering head<br>
 Bright flashes through the region shed.<br>
 Down came the spear in swift descent:<br>
 The giant's lance was crushed and bent.<br>
 Then Rávan's horses brave and fleet<br>
 Fell dead beneath his arrowy sleet.<br>
 Fierce on his foeman Ráma pressed,<br>
 And gored with shafts his mighty breast.<br>
 And spouting streams of crimson dyed<br>
 The weary giant's limbs and side.  <a name="fr_1020"></a><a href="ry478.htm#fn_1020"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1017"></a><a href="ry476.htm#fr_1017">490:1</a>  Apparently a peak of the Himalaya
 chain.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1018"></a><a href="ry476.htm#fr_1018">490:2</a>  This exploit of Hanumán is related
 with inordinate prolixity in the Bengal
 recension (Gortesio's text) Among other
 adventures he narrowly escapes being
 shot by Bharat as he passes over Nandigrama
 near Ayodhyá. Hanumán stays
 Bharat in time, and gives him an account
 of what has befallen Ráma and Sitá in
 the forest and in Lanká.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1019"></a><a href="ry477.htm#fr_1019">491:1</a>  As Garud the king of birds is the
 mortal enemy of serpents the weapon
 sacred to him is of course best calculated
 to destroy the serpent arrows of Rávan.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry478.htm">Next: Canto CVI.: Glory To The Sun.</a></center>
 </body>