<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry471.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry473.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCIII.: RÁVAN'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 They sought the king, a mournful train,<br>
 And cried. 'My lord, thy son is slain.<br>
 By Lakshmau's hand, before these eyes,<br>
 The warrior fell no more to rise.<br>
 No time is this for vain regret:<br>
 Thy hero son a hero met;<br>
 And he whose might in battle pressed<br>
 Lord Indra and the Gods confessed,<br>
 Whose power was stranger to defeat,<br>
 Has gained in heaven a blissful seat.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The monarch heard the mournful tale:<br>
 His heart was faint, his cheek was pale;<br>
 His fleeting sense at length regained,<br>
 In trembling tones he thus complained:<br>
 'Ah me, my son, my pride: the boast<br>
 And glory of the giant host.<br>
 Could Lakshman's puny might defeat<br>
 The foe whom Indra feared to meet?<br>
 Could not thy deadly arrows split<br>
 Proud Mandar's peaks, O Indrajit,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And the Destroyer's self destroy?<br>
 And wast thou conquered by a boy?<br>
 I will not weep: thy noble deed<br>
 Has blessed thee with immortal meed<br>
 Gained by each hero in the skies<br>
 Who fighting for his sovereign dies.<br>
 Now, fearless of all meaner foes.<br>
 The guardian Gods  <a name="fr_1011"></a><a href="#fn_1011"><font size="1">1b</font></a> will taste repose:<br>
 But earth to me, with hill and plain,<br>
 In* desolate, for thou art slain.<br>
 Ah, whither hast thou fled, and left<br>
 Thy mother, Lanká, me bereft;<br>
 Left pride and state and wives behind,<br>
 And lordship over all thy kind?<br>
 I fondly hoped thy hand should pay<br>
 Due honours on my dying day:<br>
 And couldst thou, O beloved, flee<br>
 And leave thy funeral rites to me?<br>
 Life has no comfort left me, none,<br>
 O Indrajit my son, my son.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus wailed he broken by his woes:<br>
 But swift the thought of vengeance rose.<br>
 In awful wrath his teeth he gnashed,<br>
 And from his eyes red lightning flashed.<br>
 Hot from his mouth came fire and smoke,<br>
 As thus the king in fury spoke:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Through many a thousand years of yore<br>
 The penance and the pain I bore,<br>
 And by fierce torment well sustained<br>
 The highest grace of Brahmá, gained,<br>
 His plighted word my life assured,<br>
 From Gods of heaven and fiends secured.<br>
 He armed my limbs with burnished mail<br>
 Whose lustre turns the sunbeams pale,<br>
 In battle proof gainst heavenly bands<br>
 With thunder in their threatening hands.<br>
 Armed in this mail myself will go<br>
 With Brahmá's gift my deadly bow,<br>
 And, cleaving through the foes my way,<br>
 The slayers of my son will slay.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then, by his grief to frenzy wrought,<br>
 The captive in the grove he sought.<br>
 Swift through the shady path he sped:<br>
 Earth trembled at his furious tread.<br>
 Fierce were his eyes: his monstrous hand<br>
 Held drawn for death his glittering brand.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_488"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 488</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 There weeping stood the Maithil dame:<br>
 She shuddered as the giant came.<br>
 Near drew the rover of the night<br>
 And raised his sword in act to smite;<br>
 But, by his nobler heart impelled,<br>
 One Rákshas lord his arm withheld:<br>
 'Wilt thou, great Monarch,' thus he cried,<br>
 'Wilt thou, to heavenly Gods allied,<br>
 Blot for all time thy glorious fame,<br>
 The slayer of a gentle dame?<br>
 What! shall a woman's blood be spilt<br>
 To stain thee with eternal guilt,<br>
 Thee deep in all the Veda's lore?<br>
 Far be the thought for evermore.<br>
 Ah look, and let her lovely face<br>
 This fury from thy bosom chase.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: the prudent counsel pleased<br>
 The monarch, and his wrath appeased;<br>
 Then to his council hall in haste<br>
 The giant lord his steps retraced.  <a name="fr_1012"></a><a href="ry473.htm#fn_1012"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1010"></a><a href="ry471.htm#fr_1010">487:1</a>  I have briefly despatched Kumbha
 and Nikumbha, each of whom has in the
 text a long Canto to himself. When they
 fall Rávan sends forth Makaráksha or
 Crocodile-Eye, the son of Khara who was
 slain by Ráma in the forest before the
 abduction of Sitá. The account of his
 sallying forth, of his battle with Ráma
 and of his death by the fiery dart of that
 hero occupies two Cantos which I entirely
 pass over. Indrajit again comes forth
 and, rendered invisible by his magic art
 slays countless Vánars with his unerring
 arrows. He retires to the city and returns
 bearing in his chariot an effigy of
 Sitá, the work of magic, weeping and
 wailing by his side. He grasps the lovely
 image by the hair and cuts it down with
 his scimitar in the sight of the enraged
 Hanúmán and all the Vánar host. At
 last after much fighting of the usual kind
 Indrajit's chariot is broken in pieces, his
 charioteer is slain, and he himself falls
 by Lakshman's hand, to the inexpressible
 delight of the high-souled saints, the
 nymphs of heaven aud other celestial
 beings.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1011"></a><a href="ry472.htm#fr_1011">487:1b</a>  The Lokapálas are sometimes regarded
 as deities appointed by Brahmá at the
 creation of the word* to act as guardians
 of different orders of beings, but more
 commonly they are identified with the
 deities presiding over the four cardinal
 and four intermediate points of the compass,
 which, according to Manu V.96, are
 1, Indra, guardian of the East; 2, Agni,
 of the South-east; 3, Yama, of the South;
 4, Súrya, of the South-west: 5, Varuna,
 of the West; 6, Pavana or Váyu, of the
 North-west; 7, Kuvera, of the North; 8,
 Soma or Chandra, of the North-east.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry473.htm">Next: Canto XCVI.: Rávan's Sally.</a></center>
 </body>