<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry480.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry482.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CX.: RÁVAN'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Mátali to Ráma cried:<br>
 'Let other arms the day decide.<br>
 Why wilt thou strive with useless toil<br>
 And see his might thy efforts foil?<br>
 Launch at the foe thy dart whose fire<br>
 Was kindled by the Almighty Sire.'<br>
 He ceased: and Raghu's son obeyed:<br>
 Upon his string the hero laid<br>
 An arrow, like a snake that hissed.<br>
 Whose fiery flight had never missed:<br>
 The arrow Saint Agastya gave<br>
 And blessed the chieftain's life to save<br>
 That dart the Eternal Father made<br>
 The Monarch of the Gods to aid;<br>
 By Brahmá's self on him bestowed<br>
 When forth to fight Lord Indra rode.<br>
 'Twas feathered with the rushing wind;<br>
 The glowing sun and fire combined<br>
 To the keen point their splendour lent;<br>
 The shaft, ethereal element,<br>
 By Meru's hill and Mandar, pride<br>
 Of mountains, had its weight supplied.<br>
 He laid it on the twisted cord,<br>
 He turned the point at Lanká's lord,<br>
 And swift the limb-dividing dart<br>
 Pierced the huge chest and cleft the heart,<br>
 And dead he fell upon the plain<br>
 Like Vritra by the Thunderer slain.<br>
 The Rákahas host when Rávan fell<br>
 Sent forth a wild terrific yell,<br>
 Then turned and fled, all hope resigned,<br>
 Through Lanká's gates, nor looked behind<br>
 His voice each joyous Vánar raised,<br>
 And Ráma, conquering Ráma, praised.<br>
 Soft from celestial minstrels came<br>
 The sound of music and acclaim.<br>
 Soft, fresh, and cool, a rising breeze<br>
 Brought odours from the heavenly trees,<br>
 And ravishing the sight and smell<br>
 A wondrous rain of blossoms fell:<br>
 And voices breathed round Raghu's son:<br>
 'Champion of Gods, well done, well done.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry482.htm">Next: Canto CXI.: Vibhíshan's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>