<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry486.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry488.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXVI.: THE MEETING.</h3>
 <p>
 He looked upon that archer chief<br>
 Whose full eye mocked the lotus leaf,<br>
 Arid thus the noble Vánar spake:<br>
 'Now meet the queen for whose dear sake<br>
 Thy mighty task was first begun,<br>
 And now the glorious fruit is won.<br>
 Overwhelmed with woe thy lady lies,<br>
 The hot tears streaming from her eyes.<br>
 And still the queen must long and pine<br>
 Until those eyes be turned to thine.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 But Ráma stood in pensive mood,<br>
 And gathering tears his eyes bedewed.<br>
 His sad looks sought the ground: he sighed<br>
 And thus to King Vibhíshan cried:<br>
 'Let Sítá bathe and tire her head<br>
 And hither to my sight be led<br>
 In raiment sweet with precious scent,<br>
 And gay with golden ornament.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The Rákshas king his palace sought,<br>
 And Sítá from her bower was brought.<br>
 Then Rákshas bearers tall and strong,<br>
 Selected from the menial throng,<br>
 Through Lanká's gate the queen, arrayed<br>
 In glorious robes and gems, conveyed.<br>
 Concealed behind the silken screen,<br>
 Swift to the plain they bore the queen,<br>
 While Vánars, close on every side,<br>
 With eager looks the litter eyed.<br>
 The warders at Vibhíshan's hest<br>
 The onward rushing throng repressed,<br>
 While like the roar of ocean loud<br>
 Rose the wild murmur of the crowd.<br>
 The son of Raghu saw and moved<br>
 With anger thus the king reproved:<br>
 'Why vex with hasty blow and threat<br>
 The Vánars, and my rights forget?<br>
 Repress this zeal, untimely shown:<br>
 I count this people as mine own.<br>
 A woman's guard is not her bower,<br>
 The lofty wall, the fenced tower:<br>
 Her conduct is her best defence,<br>
 And not a king's magnificence.<br>
 At holy rites, in war and woe,<br>
 Her face unveiled a dame may show;<br>
 When at the Maiden's Choice  <a name="fr_1038"></a><a href="#fn_1038"><font size="1">1</font></a> they meet,<br>
 When marriage troops parade the street.<br>
 And she, my queen, who long has lain<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 In prison racked with care and pain,<br>
 May cease a while her face to hide,<br>
 For is not Ráma by her side?<br>
 Lay down the litter: on her feet<br>
 Let Sítá come her lord to meet.<br>
 And let the hosts, of woodland race<br>
 Look near upon the lady's face.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Lakshman and each Vánar chief<br>
 Who heard his words were filled with grief.<br>
 The lady's gentle spirit sank,<br>
 And from each eye in fear she shrank,<br>
 As, her sweet eyelids veiled for shame.<br>
 Slowly before her lord she came.<br>
 While rapture battled with surprise<br>
 She raised to his her wistful eyes.<br>
 Then with her doubt and fear she strove,<br>
 And from her breast all sorrow drove.<br>
 Regardless of the gathering crowd,<br>
 Bright as the moon without a cloud,<br>
 She bent her eyes, no longer dim,<br>
 In joy and trusting love on him.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1038"></a><a href="ry487.htm#fr_1038">497:1</a>  The Swayamvara, Self-choice or
 election of a husband by a princess or daughter
 of a Kshatriya at a public assembly of
 suitors held for the purpose. For a description
 of the ceremony see <i>Nala and Damayantí</i>
 an episode of the Mahábhárat translated
 by the late Dean Milman, and <i>Idylls
 from the Sanskrit</i>.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry488.htm">Next: Canto CXVII.: Sítá's Disgrace.</a></center>
 </body>