<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry496.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry498.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXXVI.: BHARAT CONSOLED.</h3>
 <p>
 But Ráma bade the chariot stay,<br>
 And halting in his airy way,<br>
 In Bharadvá's holy shade<br>
 His homage to the hermit paid.<br>
 'O saint,' he cried, 'I yearn to know<br>
 My dear Ayodhyá's weal and woe.<br>
 O tell me that the people thrive,<br>
 And that the queens are yet alive.'<br>
     Joy gleamed in Bhardvája's eye,<br>
 Who gently smiled and made reply:<br>
 'Thy brother, studious of thy will,<br>
 Is faithful and obedient still.<br>
 In tangled twine he coils his hair:<br>
 Thy safe return is all his care.<br>
 Before thy shoes he humbly bends,<br>
 And to thy house and realm attends.<br>
 When first these dreary years began,<br>
 When first I saw the banished man,<br>
 With Sitá, in his hermit coat,<br>
 At this sad heart compassion smote.<br>
 My breast with tender pity swelled:<br>
 I saw thee from thy home expelled,<br>
 Reft of all princely state, forlorn,<br>
 A hapless wanderer travel-worn,<br>
 Firm in thy purpose to fulfil<br>
 Thy duty and thy father's will.<br>
 But boundless is my rapture now:<br>
 Triumphant, girt with friends, art thou.<br>
 Where'er thy wandering steps have been,<br>
 Thy joy and woe mine eyes have seen.<br>
 Thy glorious deeds to me art known,<br>
 The Bráhmans saved, the foes o'erthrown.<br>
 Such power have countless seasons spent<br>
 In penance and devotion lent.<br>
 Thy virtues, best of chiefs, I know,<br>
 And now a boon would fain bestow.<br>
 This hospitable gift  <a name="fr_1047"></a><a href="ry498.htm#fn_1047"><font size="1">1</font></a> receive:<br>
 Then with the dawn my dwelling leave.'<br>
 The bended head of Ráma showed<br>
 His reverence for the grace bestowed;<br>
 Then for each brave companion's sake<br>
 He sought a further boon and spake:<br>
     'O let that mighty power of thine<br>
 The road to fair Ayodhyá line<br>
 With trees where fruit of every hue<br>
 The Vánars' eye and taste may woo,<br>
 And flowers of every season, sweet<br>
 With stores of honeyed juice, may meet,'<br>
 The hero ceased: the hermit bent<br>
 His reverend head in glad assent;<br>
 And swift, as Bharadvája willed,<br>
 The prayer of Ráma was fulfilled.<br>
 For many a league the lengthening road<br>
 Trees thick with fruit and blossom showed<br>
 With luscious beauty to entice<br>
 The taste like trees of Paradise.<br>
 The Vánars passed beneath the shade<br>
 Of that delightful colonnade,<br>
 Still tasting with unbounded glee<br>
 The treasures of each wondrous tree.<br>
 
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry498.htm">Next: Canto CXXVII.: Ráma's Message.</a></center>
 </body>