<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry492.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry494.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXXII.: INDRA'S BOON.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Indra, he whose fiery stroke<br>
 Slew furious Páka, turned and spoke:<br>
 'A glorious day, O chief, is this,<br>
 Rich with the fruit of lasting bliss.<br>
 Well pleased are we: we love thee well<br>
 Now speak, thy secret wishes tell.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spake the sovereign of the sky,<br>
 And this was Ráma's glad reply:<br>
 'If I have won your grace, incline<br>
 To grant this one request of mine.<br>
 Restore, O King: the Vánar dead<br>
 Whose blood for me was nobly shed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_501"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 501</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To life and strength my friends recall,<br>
 And bring them back from Yama's hall.<br>
 When, fresh in might the warriors rise,<br>
 Prepare a feast to glad their eyes.<br>
 Let fruits of every season glow,<br>
 And streams of purest water flow.'<br>
     Thus Raghu's son, great-hearted, prayed,<br>
 And Indra thus his answer made:<br>
 'High is the boon thou seekest: none<br>
 Should win this grace but Raghu's son.<br>
 Yet, faithful to the word I spake,<br>
 I grant the prayer for thy dear sake.<br>
 The Vánars whom the giants slew<br>
 Their life and vigour shall renew.<br>
 Their strength repaired, their gashes healed<br>
 Whose torrents dyed the battle field,<br>
 The warrior hosts from death shall rise *<br>
 Like sleepers when their slumber flies.'<br>
     Restored from Yama's dark domain<br>
 The Vánar legions filled the plain,<br>
 And, round the royal chief arrayed,<br>
 With wondering hearts obeisance paid.<br>
 Each God the son of Raghu praised,<br>
 And cried as loud his voice he raised:<br>
 'Turn, King, to fair Ayodhyá speed,<br>
 And leave thy friends of Vánar breed.<br>
 Thy true devoted consort cheer<br>
 After long days of woe and fear.<br>
 Bharat, thy loyal brother, see,<br>
 A hermit now for love of thee.<br>
 The tears of Queen Kaus'alyá dry,<br>
 And light with joy each stepdame's eye;<br>
 Then consecrated king of men<br>
 Make glad each faithful citizen,'<br>
     They ceased: and borne on radiant cars<br>
 Sought their bright home amid the stars.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry494.htm">Next: Canto CXXIII.: The Magic Car.</a></center>
 </body>