<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry493.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry495.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXXIII.: THE MAGIC CAR.</h3>
 <p>
 Then slept the tamer of his foes<br>
 And spent the night in calm repose.<br>
 Vibhíshan came when morning broke,<br>
 And hailed the royal chief, and spoke:<br>
 'Here wait thee precious oil and scents,<br>
 And rich attire and ornaments.<br>
 The brimming urns are newly filled,<br>
 And women in their duty skilled,<br>
 With lotus-eyes, thy call attend,<br>
 Assistance at thy bath to lend.'<br>
 'Let others,' Ráma cried,'desire<br>
 These precious scents, this rich attire,<br>
 I heed not such delights as these,<br>
 For faithful Bharat, ill at ease,<br>
 Watching for me is keeping now<br>
 Far far away his rigorous vow.<br>
 By Bharat's side I long to stand,<br>
 I long to see my fatherland.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Far is Ayodhvá: long, alas,<br>
 The dreary road and hard to pass.'<br>
     'One day,' Vibhíshan cried, 'one day<br>
 Shall bear thee o'er that length of way.<br>
 Is not the wondrous chariot mine,<br>
 Named Pushpak, wrought by hands divine.<br>
 The prize which Rávan seized of old<br>
 Victorious o'er the God of Gold<br>
 This chariot, kept with utmost care,<br>
 Will waft thee through the fields of air,<br>
 And thou shalt light unwearied down<br>
 In fair Ayodhyá's royal town.<br>
 But yet if aught that I have done<br>
 Has pleased thee well, O Raghu's son;<br>
 If still thou carest for thy friend,<br>
 Some little time in Lanká spend;<br>
 There after toil of battle rest<br>
 Within my halls an honoured guest.'<br>
 Again the son of Raghu spake:<br>
 'Thy life was perilled for my sake.<br>
 Thy counsel gave me priceless aid:<br>
 All honours have been richly paid.<br>
 Scarce can my love refuse, O best<br>
 Of giant kind, thy last request.<br>
 But still I yearn once more to see<br>
 My home and all most dear to me;<br>
 Nor can I brook one hour's delay:<br>
 Forgive me, speed me on my way.'<br>
     He ceased: the magic car was brought,<br>
 Of yore by Vis'vakarmá wrought.<br>
 In sunlike sheen it flashed and blazed;<br>
 And Raghu's sons in wonder gazed.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry495.htm">Next: Canto CXXIV.: The Departure.</a></center>
 </body>