<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry499.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry501.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXXIX.: THE MEETING WITH BHARAT.</h3>
 <p>
 O'erwhelmed with rapture Bharat heard<br>
 The tale that all his being stirred,<br>
 And, heralding the glad event,<br>
 This order to Satrughna sent:<br>
 'Let every shrine with flowers be gay<br>
 Let incense burn and music play.<br>
 Go forth, go forth to meet your king,<br>
 Let tabours sound and minstrels sing,<br>
 Let bards swell high the note of praise<br>
 Skilled in the lore of ancient days.<br>
 Call forth the royal matrons: call<br>
 Each noble from the council hall.<br>
 Send all we love and honour most,<br>
 Send Bráhmans and the warrior host,<br>
 A glorious company to bring<br>
 In triumph home our lord the king.'<br>
     Great rapture filled S'atrughna's breast,<br>
 Obedient to his brother's hest.<br>
 'Send forth ten thousand men' he cried,<br>
 'Let brawny arms be stoutly plied,<br>
 And, smoothing all with skilful care,<br>
 The road for Kosal's king prepare.<br>
 Then o'er the earth let thousands throw<br>
 Fresh showers of water cool as snow,<br>
 And others strew with garlands gay<br>
 With loveliest blooms our monarch's way.<br>
 On tower and temple porch and gate<br>
 Let banners wave in royal state.<br>
 And be each roof and terrace lined<br>
 With blossoms loose and chaplets twined.'<br>
     The nobles hasting forth fulfilled<br>
 His order as S'atrughna willed.<br>
 Sublime on elephants they rode<br>
 Whose gilded girths with jewels glowed.<br>
 Attended close by thousands more<br>
 Gay with the gear and flags they bore.<br>
 A thousand chiefs their steeds bestrode,<br>
 Their glittering cars a thousand showed.<br>
 And countless hosts in rich array<br>
 Pursued on foot their eager way.<br>
 Veiled from the air with silken screens<br>
 In litters rode the widowed queens.<br>
 Kausalyá first, acknowledged head<br>
 And sovereign of the household, led:<br>
 Sumitrá next, and after, dames<br>
 Of lower rank and humbler names.<br>
 Then compassed by a white-robed throng<br>
 Of Bráhmans, heralded with song,<br>
 With shouts of joy from countless throats,<br>
 And shells' and tambours' mingled notes,<br>
 And drums resounding long and loud,<br>
 Exulting Bharat joined the crowd.<br>
 Still on his head, well-trained in lore<br>
 Of duty, Ráma's shoes he bore.<br>
 The moon-white canopy was spread<br>
 With flowery twine engarlanded<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And jewelled chouries, meet to hold<br>
 O'er Ráma's brow, shone bright with gold,<br>
 Though Nandigráma's town they neared,<br>
 Of Ráma yet no sign appeared.<br>
 Then Bharat called the Vánar chief<br>
 And questioned thus in doubt and grief:<br>
 'Hast thou uncertain, like thy kind,<br>
 A sweet delusive guile designed?<br>
 Where, where is royal Ráma? show<br>
 The hero, victor of the foe.<br>
 I gaze, but see no Vánars still<br>
 Who wear each varied shape at will.'<br>
     In eager love thus Bharat cried,<br>
 And thus the Wind-God's son replied:<br>
 'Look, Bharat, on those laden trees<br>
 That murmur with the song of bees;<br>
 For Ráma's sake the saint has made<br>
 Untimely fruits, unwonted shade.<br>
 Such power in ages long ago<br>
 Could Indra's gracious boon bestow.<br>
 O, hear the Vánars' voices, hear<br>
 The shouting which proclaims them near<br>
 E'en now about to cross they seem<br>
 Sweet Gomati's delightful stream.<br>
 I see, I see the car designed<br>
 By Brahmá's own creative mind,<br>
 The car which, radiant as the moon,<br>
 Moves at the will by Brahmá's boon;<br>
 The car which once was Rávan's pride,<br>
 The victor's spoil when Rávan died.<br>
 Look, there are Raghu's sons: between<br>
 The brothers stands the rescued queen.<br>
 There is Vibhíshan full in view,<br>
 Sugríva and his retinue.'<br>
     He ceased: then rapture loosed each tongue:<br>
 From men and dames, from old and young,<br>
 One long, one universal cry,<br>
 'Tis he,'tis Ráma, smote the sky.<br>
 All lighted down with eager speed<br>
 From elephant and car and steed,<br>
 And every joyful eye intent<br>
 On Ráma's moonbright face was bent.<br>
 Entranced a moment Bharat gazed:<br>
 Then reverential hands he raised,<br>
 And on his brother humbly pressed<br>
 The honours due to welcome guest.<br>
 Then Bharat clomb the car to greet<br>
 His king and bowed him at his feet,<br>
 Till Ráma raised him face to face<br>
 And held him in a close embrace.<br>
 Then Lakshman and the Maithil dame<br>
 He greeted as he spoke his name  <a name="fr_1049"></a><a href="#fn_1049"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 He greeted next, supreme in place,<br>
 The sovereign of the Vánar race,<br>
 And Jámbaván and Báli's son,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_506"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 506</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And lords and chiefs, omitting none. <a name="fr_1050"></a><a href="#fn_1050"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Sugríva to his heart he pressed<br>
 And thus with grateful words addressed:<br>
 'Four brothers, Vánar king, were we,<br>
 And now we boast a fifth in thee.<br>
 By kindly acts a friend we know:<br>
 Offence and wrong proclaim the foe,'<br>
 To King Vibhíshan then he spake:<br>
 'Well hast thou fought fov Ráma's sake.'<br>
 Nor was the brave S'atrughna slow<br>
 His reverential love to show<br>
 To both his brothers, as was meet,<br>
 And venerate the lady's feet.<br>
 Then Ráma to his mother came,<br>
 Saw her pale cheek and wasted frame,<br>
 With gentle words her heart consoled,<br>
 And clasped her feet with loving hold.<br>
 Then at Sumitra's feet he bent,<br>
 And fair Kaikeyi's, reverent,<br>
 Greeted each dame from chief to least,<br>
 And bowed him to the household priest.<br>
 Up rose a shout from all the throng:<br>
 'O welcome, Ráma, mourned so long.<br>
 Welcome, Kausalyá's joy and pride,'<br>
 Ten hundred thousand voices cried.<br>
 Then Bharat placed, in duty taught,<br>
 On Ráma's feet the shoes he brought:<br>
 'My King,' he cried, 'receive again<br>
 The pledge preserved through years of pain,<br>
 The rule and lordship of the land<br>
 Entrusted to my weaker hand.<br>
 No more I sigh o'er sorrows past,<br>
 My birth and life are blest at last<br>
 In the glad sight this day has shown,<br>
 When Ráma comes to rule his own.'<br>
     He ceased: the faithful love that moved<br>
 The prince's soul each heart approved;<br>
 Nor could the Vánar chiefs refrain<br>
 From tender tears that fell like rain.<br>
 Then Ráma, stirred with joy anew,<br>
 His arms about his brother threw,<br>
 And to the grove his course he bent<br>
 Where Bharat's hermit days were spent.<br>
 Alighting in that pure retreat<br>
 He pressed the earth with eager feet.<br>
 Then, at his hest, the car rose high<br>
 And sailing through the northern sky<br>
 Sped homeward to the Lord of Gold<br>
 Who owned the wondrous prize of old.  <a name="fr_1051"></a><a href="#fn_1051"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1049"></a><a href="ry500.htm#fr_1049">505:1</a>  In these respectful salutations the
 person who salutes his superior mentions
 his own name even when it is well known
 to the person whom he salutes.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1050"></a><a href="ry500.htm#fr_1050">506:1</a>  I have omitted the chieftains' names
 as they could not be introduced without
 padding. They are Mainda, Dwivid, Níla
 Rishabh, Sushen, Nala, Gaváksha, Gandhamádan,
 S'arabh, and Panas.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1051"></a><a href="ry500.htm#fr_1051">506:2</a>  The following addition is found in
 the Bengal recension: But Vais'ravan
 (Kuvera) when he beheld his chariot said
 unto it: 'Go, and carry Ráma, and come
 unto me when my thought shall call thee,
 And the chariot returned unto Ráma:'
 and he honoured it when he had heard
 what had passed.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry501.htm">Next: Canto CXXX.: The Consecration.</a></center>
 </body>