<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_327.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_329.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:324</h3><p><i>Narrated Ali:</i></p>
 I got a she-camel in my share of the war booty on the day (of the 
 battle) of Badr, and the Prophet had given me a she-camel from the 
 Khumus. When I intended to marry Fatima, the daughter of Allah's 
 Apostle, I had an appointment with a goldsmith from the tribe of Bani 
 Qainuqa' to go with me to bring Idhkhir (i.e. grass of pleasant smell)
 and sell it to the goldsmiths and spend its price on my wedding party.
 I was collecting for my she-camels equipment of saddles, sacks and 
 ropes while my two she-camels were kneeling down beside the room of an
 Ansari man. I returned after collecting whatever I collected, to see 
 the humps of my two she-camels cut off and their flanks cut open and 
 some portion of their livers was taken out. When I saw that state of 
 my two she-camels, I could not help weeping. I asked, "Who has done 
 this?" The people replied, "Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib who is staying 
 with some Ansari drunks in this house." I went away till I reached the
 Prophet and Zaid bin Haritha was with him. The Prophet noticed on my 
 face the effect of what I had suffered, so the Prophet asked. "What is
 wrong with you." I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! I have never seen such
 a day as today. Hamza attacked my two she-camels, cut off their humps,
 and ripped open their flanks, and he is sitting there in a house in 
 the company of some drunks." The Prophet then asked for his covering 
 sheet, put it on, and set out walking followed by me and Zaid bin 
 Haritha till he came to the house where Hamza was. He asked permission
 to enter, and they allowed him, and they were drunk. Allah's Apostle 
 started rebuking Hamza for what he had done, but Hamza was drunk and 
 his eyes were red. Hamza looked at Allah's Apostle and then he raised 
 his eyes, looking at his knees, then he raised up his eyes looking at 
 his umbilicus, and again he raised up his eyes look in at his face. 
 Hamza then said, "Aren't you but the slaves of my father?" Allah's 
 Apostle realized that he was drunk, so Allah's Apostle retreated, and 
 we went out with him.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_329.htm">Next: 4:325: 'Aisha: (mother of the believers) After the death of Allah 's Apostle Fatima  ...</a></center>
 </body>