<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_143.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_145.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:143</h3><p><i>Narrated Anas bin Malik:</i></p>
 The Prophet said to Abu Talha, "Choose one of your boy servants to 
 serve me in my expedition to Khaibar." So, Abu Talha took me letting 
 me ride behind him while I was a boy nearing the age of puberty. I 
 used to serve Allah's Apostle when he stopped to rest. I heard him 
 saying repeatedly, "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from distress and 
 sorrow, from helplessness and laziness, from miserliness and 
 cowardice, from being heavily in debt and from being overcome by men."
 Then we reached Khaibar; and when Allah enabled him to conquer the 
 Fort (of Khaibar), the beauty of Safiya bint Huyai bin Akhtab was 
 described to him. Her husband had been killed while she was a bride. 
 So Allah's Apostle selected her for himself and took her along with 
 him till we reached a place called Sad-AsSahba,' where her menses were
 over and he took her for his wife. Haris (a kind of dish) was served 
 on a small leather sheet. Then Allah's Apostle told me to call those 
 who were around me. So, that was the marriage banquet of Allah's 
 Apostle and Safiya. Then we left for Medina. I saw Allah's Apostle 
 folding a cloak round the hump of the camel so as to make a wide space
 for Safiya (to sit on behind him) He sat beside his camel letting his 
 knees for Safiya to put her feet on so as to mount the camel. Then, we
 proceeded till we approached Medina; he looked at Uhud (mountain) and 
 said, "This is a mountain which loves us and is loved by us." Then he 
 looked at Medina and said, "O Allah! I make the area between its (i.e.
 Medina's) two mountains a sanctuary as Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary.
 O Allah! Bless them (i.e. the people of Medina) in their Mudd and Sa 
 (i.e. measures)."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_145.htm">Next: 4:144: Anas bin Malik: Um Haram told me that the Prophet one day took a midday nap in her ...</a></center>
 </body>