<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_373.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_375.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:370</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Qatada:</i></p>
 We set out in the company of Allah's Apostle on the day (of the 
 battle) of Hunain. When we faced the enemy, the Muslims retreated and 
 I saw a pagan throwing himself over a Muslim. I turned around and came
 upon him from behind and hit him on the shoulder with the sword He 
 (i.e. the pagan) came towards me and seized me so violently that I 
 felt as if it were death itself, but death overtook him and he 
 released me. I followed 'Umar bin Al Khattab and asked (him), "What is
 wrong with the people (fleeing)?" He replied, "This is the Will of 
 Allah," After the people returned, the Prophet sat and said, "Anyone 
 who has killed an enemy and has a proof of that, will posses his 
 spoils." I got up and said, "Who will be a witness for me?" and then 
 sat down. The Prophet again said, "Anyone who has killed an enemy and 
 has proof of that, will possess his spoils." I (again) got up and 
 said, "Who will be a witness for me?" and sat down. Then the Prophet 
 said the same for the third time. I again got up, and Allah's Apostle 
 said, "O Abu Qatada! What is your story?" Then I narrated the whole 
 story to him. A man (got up and) said, "O Allah's Apostle! He is 
 speaking the truth, and the spoils of the killed man are with me. So 
 please compensate him on my behalf." On that Abu Bakr As-Siddiq said, 
 "No, by Allah, he (i.e. Allah's Apostle ) will not agree to give you 
 the spoils gained by one of Allah's Lions who fights on the behalf of 
 Allah and His Apostle." The Prophet said, "Abu Bakr has spoken the 
 truth." So, Allah's Apostle gave the spoils to me. I sold that armor 
 (i.e. the spoils) and with its price I bought a garden at Bani Salima,
 and this was my first property which I gained after my conversion to 
 Islam.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_375.htm">Next: 4:371: Urwa bin Az-Zubair: Hakim bin Hizam said,  I asked Allah's Apostle for something, and he ...</a></center>
 </body>