<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_292.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_294.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:290</h3><p><i>Narrated Ibn 'Umar:</i></p>
 Umar and a group of the companions of the Prophet set out with the 
 Prophet to Ibn Saiyad. He found him playing with some boys near the 
 hillocks of Bani Maghala. Ibn Saiyad at that time was nearing his 
 puberty. He did not notice (the Prophet's presence) till the Prophet 
 stroked him on the back with his hand and said, "Ibn Saiyad! Do you 
 testify that I am Allah's Apostle?" Ibn Saiyad looked at him and said,
 "I testify that you are the Apostle of the illiterates."
 <p>
 Then Ibn Saiyad asked the Prophet. "Do you testify that I am the 
 apostle of Allah?" The Prophet said to him, "I believe in Allah and 
 His Apostles." Then the Prophet said (to Ibn Saiyad). "What do you 
 see?" Ibn Saiyad replied, "True people and false ones visit me." The 
 Prophet said, "Your mind is confused as to this matter." The Prophet 
 added, " I have kept something (in my mind) for you." Ibn Saiyad said,
 "It is Ad-Dukh." The Prophet said (to him), "Shame be on you! You 
 cannot cross your limits." On that 'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle! 
 Allow me to chop his head off." The Prophet said, "If he should be him
 (i.e. Ad-Dajjal) then you cannot overpower him, and should he not be 
 him, then you are not going to benefit by murdering him."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_294.htm">Next: 4:290: Ibn Umar: (Later on) Allah's Apostle (once again) went along with Ubai bin Ka'b ...</a></center>
 </body>