<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_38.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_40.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:40</h3><p><i>Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari:</i></p>
 My father was martyred on the day (of the Ghazwa) of Uhud and left six
 daughters and some debts to be paid. When the time of plucking the 
 date-fruits came, I went to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's 
 Apostle! you know that my father was martyred on Uhud's day and owed 
 much debt, and I wish that the creditors would see you." The Prophet 
 said, "Go and collect the various kinds of dates and place them 
 separately in heaps"' I did accordingly and called him. On seeing him,
 the creditors started claiming their rights pressingly at that time. 
 When the Prophet saw how they behaved, he went round the biggest heap 
 for three times and sat over it and said, "Call your companions (i.e. 
 the creditors)." Then he kept on measuring and giving them, till Allah
 cleared all my father's debts. By Allah, it would have pleased me that
 Allah would clear the debts of my father even though I had not taken a
 single date to my sisters. But by Allah, all the heaps were complete, 
 (as they were) and I looked at the heap where Allah's Apostle was 
 sitting and noticed as if not a single date had been taken thereof.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_40.htm">Next: 4:41: Abdullah bin Masud: I asked Allah's Apostle,  O Allah's Apostle! What is the best deed?  ...</a></center>
 </body>