<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_364.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_366.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:361</h3><p><i>Narrated Zahdam:</i></p>
 Once we were in the house of Abu Musa who presented a meal containing 
 cooked chicken. A man from the tribe of Bani Taim Allah with red 
 complexion as if he were from the Byzantine war prisoners, was 
 present. Abu Musa invited him to share the meal but he (apologised) 
 saying. "I saw chickens eating dirty things and so I have had a strong
 aversion to eating them, and have taken an oath that I will not eat 
 chickens." Abu Musa said, "Come along, I will tell you about this 
 matter (i.e. how to cancel one's oat ). I went to the Prophet in the 
 company of a group of Al-Ashariyin, asked him to provide us with means
 of conveyance. He said, 'By Allah, I will not provide you with any 
 means of conveyance and I have nothing to make you ride on.' Then some
 camels as booty were brought to Allah's Apostle and he asked for us 
 saying. 'Where are the group of Al-Ash'ariyun?' Then he ordered that 
 we should be given five camels with white humps. When we set out we 
 said, 'What have we done? We will never be blessed (with what we have 
 been given).' So, we returned to the Prophet and said, 'We asked you 
 to provide us with means of conveyance, but you took an oath that you 
 would not provide us with any means of conveyance. Did you forget 
 (your oath when you gave us the camels)? He replied. 'I have not 
 provided you with means of conveyance, but Allah has provided you with
 it, and by Allah, Allah willing, if ever I take an oath to do 
 something, and later on I find that it is more beneficial to do 
 something different, I will do the thing which is better, and give 
 expiation for my oath."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_366.htm">Next: 4:362: Nafi from Ibn Umar: Allah's Apostle sent a Sariya towards Najd, and Abdullah bin 'Umar was...</a></center>
 </body>