<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_252.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_254.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:251</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin Abi Rafi:</i></p>
 I heard 'Ali saying, "Allah's Apostle sent me, Az-Zubair and Al-Miqdad
 somewhere saying, 'Proceed till you reach Rawdat Khakh. There you will
 find a lady with a letter. Take the letter from her.' " So, we set out
 and our horses ran at full pace till we got at Ar-Rawda where we found
 the lady and said (to her). "Take out the letter." She replied, "I 
 have no letter with me." We said, "Either you take out the letter or 
 else we will take off your clothes." So, she took it out of her braid.
 We brought the letter to Allah's Apostle and it contained a statement 
 from Hatib bin Abi Balta a to some of the Meccan pagans informing them
 of some of the intentions of Allah's Apostle. Then Allah's Apostle 
 said, "O Hatib! What is this?" Hatib replied, "O Allah's Apostle! 
 Don't hasten to give your judgment about me. I was a man closely 
 connected with the Quraish, but I did not belong to this tribe, while 
 the other emigrants with you, had their relatives in Mecca who would 
 protect their dependents and property . So, I wanted to recompense for
 my lacking blood relation to them by doing them a favor so that they 
 might protect my dependents. I did this neither because of disbelief 
 not apostasy nor out of preferring Kufr (disbelief) to Islam." Allah's
 Apostle, said, "Hatib has told you the truth." Umar said, O Allah's 
 Apostle! Allow me to chop off the head of this hypocrite." Allah's 
 Apostle said, "Hatib participated in the battle of Badr, and who 
 knows, perhaps Allah has already looked at the Badr warriors and said,
 'Do whatever you like, for I have forgiven you."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_254.htm">Next: 4:252: Jabir bin 'Abdullah: When it was the day (of the battle) of Badr, prisoners of war were ...</a></center>
 </body>