<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_295.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_297.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:292</h3><p><i>Narrated Aslam:</i></p>
 Umar bin Al-Khattab appointed a freed slave of his, called Hunai, 
 manager of the Hima (i.e. a pasture devoted for grazing the animals of
 the Zakat or other specified animals). He said to him, "O Hunai! Don't
 oppress the Muslims and ward off their curse (invocations against you)
 for the invocation of the oppressed is responded to (by Allah); and 
 allow the shepherd having a few camels and those having a few sheep 
 (to graze their animals), and take care not to allow the livestock of 
 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and the livestock of ('Uthman) bin 'Affan, for 
 if their livestock should perish, then they have their farms and 
 gardens, while those who own a few camels and those who own a few 
 sheep, if their livestock should perish, would bring their dependents 
 to me and appeal for help saying, 'O chief of the believers! O chief 
 of the believers!' Would I then neglect them? (No, of course). So, I 
 find it easier to let them have water and grass rather than to give 
 them gold and silver (from the Muslims' treasury). By Allah, these 
 people think that I have been unjust to them. This is their land, and 
 during the pre-lslamic period, they fought for it and they embraced 
 Islam (willingly) while it was in their possession. By Him in Whose 
 Hand my life is! Were it not for the animals (in my custody) which I 
 give to be ridden for striving in Allah's Cause, I would not have 
 turned even a span of their land into a Hima."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_297.htm">Next: 4:293: Hudhaifa: The Prophet said (to us),   List the names of those people who have ...</a></center>
 </body>