<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_278.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_280.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:276</h3><p><i>Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:</i></p>
 The Prophet appointed 'Abdullah bin Jubair as the commander of the 
 infantry men (archers) who were fifty on the day (of the battle) of 
 Uhud. He instructed them, "Stick to your place, and don't leave it 
 even if you see birds snatching us, till I send for you; and if you 
 see that we have defeated the infidels and made them flee, even then 
 you should not leave your place till I send for you." Then the 
 infidels were defeated. By Allah, I saw the women fleeing lifting up 
 their clothes revealing their leg-bangles and their legs. So, the 
 companions of 'Abdullah bin Jubair said, "The booty! O people, the 
 booty ! Your companions have become victorious, what are you waiting 
 for now?" 'Abdullah bin Jubair said, "Have you forgotten what Allah's 
 Apostle said to you?" They replied, "By Allah! We will go to the 
 people (i.e. the enemy) and collect our share from the war booty." But
 when they went to them, they were forced to turn back defeated. At 
 that time Allah's Apostle in their rear was calling them back. Only 
 twelve men remained with the Prophet and the infidels martyred seventy
 men from us.
 <p>
 On the day (of the battle) of Badr, the Prophet and his companions had
 caused the 'Pagans to lose 140 men, seventy of whom were captured and 
 seventy were killed. Then Abu Sufyan asked thrice, "Is Muhammad 
 present amongst these people?" The Prophet ordered his companions not 
 to answer him. Then he asked thrice, "Is the son of Abu Quhafa present
 amongst these people?" He asked again thrice, "Is the son of 
 Al-Khattab present amongst these people?" He then returned to his 
 companions and said, "As for these (men), they have been killed." 
 'Umar could not control himself and said (to Abu Sufyan), "You told a 
 lie, by Allah! O enemy of Allah! All those you have mentioned are 
 alive, and the thing which will make you unhappy is still there." Abu 
 Sufyan said, "Our victory today is a counterbalance to yours in the 
 battle of Badr, and in war (the victory) is always undecided and is 
 shared in turns by the belligerents, and you will find some of your 
 (killed) men mutilated, but I did not urge my men to do so, yet I do 
 not feel sorry for their deed" After that he started reciting 
 cheerfully, "O Hubal, be high! (1) On that the Prophet said (to his 
 companions), "Why don't you answer him back?" They said, "O Allah's 
 Apostle What shall we say?" He said, "Say, Allah is Higher and more 
 Sublime." (Then) Abu Sufyan said, "We have the (idol) Al Uzza, and you
 have no Uzza." The Prophet said (to his companions), "Why don't you 
 answer him back?" They asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What shall we say?" 
 He said, "Says Allah is our Helper and you have no helper."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_280.htm">Next: 4:277: Anas: Allah's Apostle was the (most handsome), most generous and the bravest...</a></center>
 </body>