<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_372.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_374.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:369</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:</i></p>
 While I was standing in the row on the day (of the battle) of Badr, I 
 looked to my right and my left and saw two young Ansari boys, and I 
 wished I had been stronger than they. One of them called my attention 
 saying, "O Uncle! Do you know Abu Jahl?" I said, "Yes, What do you 
 want from him, O my nephew?" He said, "I have been informed that he 
 abuses Allah's Apostle. By Him in Whose Hands my life is, if I should 
 see him, then my body will not leave his body till either of us meet 
 his fate." I was astonished at that talk. Then the other boy called my
 attention saying the same as the other had said. After a while I saw 
 Abu Jahl walking amongst the people. I said (to the boys), "Look! This
 is the man you asked me about." So, both of them attacked him with 
 their swords and struck him to death and returned to Allah'S Apostle 
 to inform him of that. Allah's Apostle asked, "Which of you has killed
 him?" Each of them said, "I Have killed him." Allah's Apostle asked, 
 "Have you cleaned your swords?" They said, "No. " He then looked at 
 their swords and said, "No doubt, you both have killed him and the 
 spoils of the deceased will be given to Muadh bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh."  
 The two boys were Muadh bin 'Afra and Muadh bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_374.htm">Next: 4:370: Abu Qatada: We set out in the company of Allah's Apostle on the day (of the ...</a></center>
 </body>