<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_59.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_61.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:61</h3><p><i>Narrated Anas:</i></p>
 My uncle Anas bin An-Nadr was absent from the Battle of Badr. He said,
 "O Allah's Apostle! I was absent from the first battle you fought 
 against the pagans. (By Allah) if Allah gives me a chance to fight the
 pagans, no doubt. Allah will see how (bravely) I will fight." On the 
 day of Uhud when the Muslims turned their backs and fled, he said, "O 
 Allah! I apologize to You for what these (i.e. his companions) have 
 done, and I denounce what these (i.e. the pagans) have done." Then he 
 advanced and Sad bin Muadh met him. He said "O Sad bin Muadh ! By the 
 Lord of An-Nadr, Paradise! I am smelling its aroma coming from before 
 (the mountain of) Uhud," Later on Sad said, "O Allah's Apostle! I 
 cannot achieve or do what he (i.e. Anas bin An-Nadr) did. We found 
 more than eighty wounds by swords and arrows on his body. We found him
 dead and his body was mutilated so badly that none except his sister 
 could recognize him by his fingers." We used to think that the 
 following Verse was revealed concerning him and other men of his sort:
 "Among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with
 Allah.........." (33.23)
 <p>
 His sister Ar-Rubbaya' broke a front tooth of a woman and Allah's 
 Apostle ordered for retaliation. On that Anas (bin An-Nadr) said, "O 
 Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with the Truth, my sister's 
 tooth shall not be broken." Then the opponents of Anas's sister 
 accepted the compensation and gave up the claim of retaliation. So 
 Allah's Apostle said, "There are some people amongst Allah's slaves 
 whose oaths are fulfilled by Allah when they take them."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_61.htm">Next: 4:62: Kharija bin Zaid: Zaid bin Thabit said,  When the Quran was compiled from various ...</a></center>
 </body>