<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_417.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_419.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:414</h3><p><i>Narrated Imran bin Husain:</i></p>
 I went to the Prophet and tied my she-camel at the gate. The people of
 Bani Tamim came to the Prophet who said "O Bani Tamim! Accept the good
 tidings." They said twice, 'You have given us the good tidings, now 
 give us something" Then some Yemenites came to him and he said, 
 "Accept the good tidings, O people of Yemem, for Bani Tamim refused 
 them." They said, "We accept it, O Allah's Apostle! We have come to 
 ask you about this matter (i.e. the start of creations)." He said, 
 "First of all, there was nothing but Allah, and (then He created His 
 Throne). His throne was over the water, and He wrote everything in the
 Book (in the Heaven) and created the Heavens and the Earth." Then a 
 man shouted, "O Ibn Husain! Your she-camel has gone away!" So, I went 
 away and could not see the she-camel because of the mirage. By Allah, 
 I wished I had left that she-camel (but not that gathering).
 <p>
 period and informed us about the beginning of creation (and talked 
 about everything in detail) till he mentioned how the people of 
 Paradise will enter their places and the people of Hell will enter 
 their places. Some remembered what he had said, and some forgot it.
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_419.htm">Next: 4:415: Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said,  Allah the Most Superior said,  The son of Adam ...</a></center>
 </body>