<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="tsr125.htm">Previous</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">ADDITIONAL SLOKS</h1>
 <p>When Guru Nanak visited Ceylon he gave the following advice to its queen, who was proud of her beauty and her state:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Hear, young woman with the gazelle eyes, hear my serious and weighty words.<br>
 First examine thy goods and make thy traffic.<br>
 Dismiss[1] the evil and welcome the good.<br>
 Consider, O young woman, what proclamation to give by which thou mayest find friends.<br>
 Give thy soul and body to thy friends, and thou shalt thus enjoy the utmost hilarity.<br>
 Love not that which is transitory<br>
 Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who understand this.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>In spiritual matters consult the holy:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>If thou art to cross the. water, consult those who have the skill to cross:<br>
 They are very wise and will keep clear of the whirlpool.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The dangers of the world:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>There are continual showers, squalls, and torrents hundreds of thousands of waves succeed one another.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>[1. <i>Dohi dichai</i>. Literally-make a proclamation to depart.]</p>
 </font><p>{p. 380}</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Address the True Guru, and there shall be no fear that thy bark will founder.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>Another of the Guru's reflections on the sinfulness of his age:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Nanak, to what hath the world come?<br>
 No companion or friend remaineth.<br>
 Love hath ceased among brethren and kinsmen<br>
 Faith is lost on account of mammon.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The following was composed by Guru Nanak on seeing women mourning:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>They are saying 'Hai hai!' and 'Oh Oh!';<br>
 They beat their cheeks and pluck out the hairs of their heads;<br>
 They utter God's name[1] <i>without meaning it: if they</i> were absorbed in it,<br>
 Then would Nanak be a sacrifice unto them.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The Guru went to visit a man of reputed sanctity, but on finding him a hypocrite composed the following:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>The raven washeth and rubbeth itself in a small pool in the desert;<br>
 Its mind and body are full of demerits and its beak of filth.<br>
 The swan of the lake, not knowing that the raven was an evil bird, associated with him.<br>
 Such is affection for the infidel; O man of divine knowledge, understand the allusion.<br>
 Congratulate the congregation of the saints, and act like a holy man.<br>
 Pure is the ablution, O Nanak, when the Guru is deemed the river of pilgrimage.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The really holy are few:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>The saints are few, not many; deceit and wrangling Prevail in the world.[2]</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>[1. <i>Oh hai</i>. He is.</p>
 <p>2. Also translated--They who act as become faqîrs are few in the world.]</p>
 </font><p>{p. 381}</p>
 <p>The following has reference to the concremation of widows:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Nanak, <i>the widow</i> followeth her <i>husband</i> and dieth; she hath no power to live.<br>
 But she who dieth struck <i>by the news of her husband's death</i> is acceptable.<br>
 When the Allwise hath struck her with the arrow of love it cannot be extracted.<br>
 She whom God hath struck with it is struck, and being struck is acceptable.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The body is frail and cannot be saved without God's grace:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Who can wash a vessel which is fragile in its construction?<br>
 The body is a compound of five elements; it hath a false gilding.<br>
 If it please God, the vessel shall be acceptable,<br>
 The supreme light shall shine and God's praises resound in it.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>Pride without merit:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Nanak, those men are the real donkeys who are proud without merit.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>A definition of a Brahman:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>He is a Brahman who knoweth God,<br>
 Who performeth works of devotion, penance, and self-restraint;<br>
 And who observeth the religion of mildness and patience.<br>
 Such a Brahman shall burst his bonds, obtain salvation,.<br>
 And be worthy of worship.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>A definition of a Khatri:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>He is a Khatri who is brave in good deeds<br>
 And who employeth his body in charity.[1]<br>
 The Khatri who inspecteth his ground before sowing his gifts,</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>[1. That is, who sacrifices himself for others.]</p>
 </font><p>{p. 382}</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Shall be acceptable in <i>God's</i> court.<br>
 The Khatri who practiseth greed, covetousness, and falsehood,<br>
 Shall suffer for his misdeeds.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The Guru required complete self-sacrifice from his disciples:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>If thou desire to play at love with me,<br>
 Come my way with thy head in the palm of thy hand.<br>
 Put thy feet on this road;<br>
 Give thy head and regard not human opinion.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The Guru, faith, truth, and the capital of God's name are necessary for salvation:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Without the Guru there is no divine knowledge, without faith no meditation;<br>
 Without truth there is no credit, and without capital no balance.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>If Ram had been God he would not have lost his queen Sita, and he would himself have healed his half-brother Lachhman instead of calling on Hanuman to do so:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Ram Chandar mourned in his soul for Sita and Lachhman<br>
 He remembered Hanuman,[l] and he came to meet him.<br>
 The misguided demon <i>Rawan</i> did not know it was <i>not Ram but God</i> who did this.<br>
 Nanak, God is independent: Ram could not erase his destiny.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>A purse-proud person addressed improper language to the Guru. When the Guru's disciples took this amiss, the Guru uttered the following:--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>Impute not blame to the Rai;[2] his intellect is forsaking him in his old age.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>[1. See the story of Hanumân going for a plant to heal Lachhman, in Dowson's <i>Dictionary of Hindu Mythology</i>.</p>
 <p>2. This word means a nobleman.]</p>
 </font><p>{p. 383}</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <p>The blind man talketh much and falleth into the pit.<br>
 Whatever the Perfect One hath done is perfect; there is no deficiency or excess in it.<br>
 Nanak, the pious who know this, shall be absorbed in the Perfect One.</p></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p align="CENTER">END OF VOL. I</p></body>