<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">African</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="yl26.htm">Previous</a> <a href="yl28.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 46------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_46"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 46</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h2 align="center">XXV<br> THE STAFF OF ORANYAN</h2>
 
 <p>O<small>RANYAN</small>, a brave and warlike King, founded the city of <u>O</u>y<u>o</u>. As it was necessary for him to lead an expedition to a distant part of his kingdom, he left his son in charge of the capital during his absence.</p>
 
 <p> But the King was away for such a long period that it was thought he and his soldiers must have perished, and at last the people made his son King, and for some time he ruled them wisely and happily.</p>
 
 <p> However, Oranyan was not dead, and after many delays and hardships he again drew near to <u>O</u>y<u>o</u> with his few surviving followers.</p>
 
 <p> As he approached the city he was startled to hear the notes of the Kakaki trumpet, which is sounded for the King alone.</p>
 
 <p> Feeling sure that nobody could be aware of his return, he asked a man working in
 
 <!------------------------page 47------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_47"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 47</font></a>
 
 the fields for whom the trumpet was being sounded.</p>
 
 <p> “For the King,” replied the man.</p>
 
 <p> “Yes, but which King?” asked the travel-worn stranger.</p>
 
 <p> “Do you not know that the son of Oranyan is King, and rules over us wisely and well? His father was killed in battle many months ago.”</p>
 
 <p> Desiring his son’s happiness more than his own, the old King retraced his steps, and settled down with his few friends in humble retirement in a remote part of the country. Only at Oranyan’s death was his presence made known to his son.</p>
 
 <p> The young Prince, now King, grieving at his noble father’s sacrifice, erected an obelisk over the spot where he died, and the monument, which is known as the Staff of Oranyan, is still to be seen.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="yl28.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 </body>