<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Legends &amp; Sagas</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="hoe2-41.htm">Previous</a> <a href="hoe2-43.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 132------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_132"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 132</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h1 align="center">SECTION VI</h1>
 
 <h3 align="center"><i>HEATH LEGENDS.</i><br> (J<small>ANNSEN.</small>)</h3>
 
 <p>J<small>ANNSEN</small> gives the following account of heath-spirits, &amp;c. Abstracts of stories not included under other headings we have appended to his general observations.</p>
 
 <p> In former days, when trees and bushes talked, animals and birds understood a wonderful language, and the Old Boy wandered about openly and unabashed, and wonderful things often happened on the heaths. He who wished to cross a heath must keep his eyes open day and night. In the daytime, indeed, no spectre dared to appear; but it often happened at night that people were teased and frightened on the heath. If any one was on the heath on a summer or autumn evening, he often heard a rustling and tapping in the bushes, and perhaps water suddenly spurted out under his feet. On winter evenings, or at midnight, he saw
 
 <!------------------------page 133------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_133"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 133</font></a>
 
 little flames dancing on the moor, and if he went towards them, they disappeared suddenly, and danced up again in the distance. But if a man was on the moor at night-time, he could not escape from it till cockcrow. If a man had to fetch anything from the heath during hay-harvest, he heard strange voices, or heard a bird singing with a human voice; and whoever drove across the moor in winter with a light sledge must have heard an invisible hand striking against the tree-trunks or the ice. Then you whip up your horse, and hasten across the moor, if you can.</p>
 
 <p> Jannsen also relates a story of a herd-boy who was scolding at some girls who were gathering berries on the heath, and defying the devil; when he was suddenly seized by the feet and dragged down into the ground, crying for help.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="hoe2-43.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>