<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Legends &amp; Sagas</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="hoe2-82.htm">Previous</a> <a href="hoe2-84.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h2 align="center">THE HERALD OF WAR<a name="page_287_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_287_note_1"><font size="1">1</font></a></h2>
 
 <table align="center" cellpadding="10">
 
 <tr><td><small>T<small>O</small> the Finnish Bridge when driving<br> On the west wind’s path of copper,<br> On the pathway of the rainbow,<br> With the king’s note in my wallet,<br> And his mandate in my bosom,<br> And upon my tongue defiance,<br> What was that which came to meet me,<br> And what horror to confound me?<br> Nothing but an ancient corbie,<br> Aged crow, a wretched creature;<br>
 
 <!------------------------page 288------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_288"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 288</font></a>
 
 With his beak he sniffed around him,<br> And his nostrils snuffed the vapour;<br> He had smelt the war already,<br> When his nostrils snuffed the vapour,<br> That he might discern the message<br> Which I carried in my pocket;<br> He had smelt the war already,<br> And the scent of blood allured him.<br>  To the Finnish Bridge when driving<br> On the west wind’s path of copper,<br> On the pathway of the rainbow,<br> Swift I hastened as an envoy,<br> With the king’s note in my wallet,<br> And his mandate in my bosom,<br> In my charge the leader’s orders,<br> And upon my tongue the secret<br> That the flags in breeze should flutter,<br> And the lance-points smite in battle,<br> And the swords should do their duty.<br> What was that which came to meet me,<br> And what horror to confound me?<br> ’ Twas an eagle came to meet me,<br> Eagle fierce with beak hooked sharply;<br> With his beak he sniffed around him,<br> Through the mist he pushed his nostrils,<br> By the scent he sought to fathom<br> What was in the envoy’s message.<br> He had smelt the war already,<br> And the scent of blood had reached him,<br> And he went to call his comrades.<br>  To the Finnish Bridge when driving<br> 
 
 <!------------------------page 289------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_289"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 289</font></a>
 
 On the west wind’s path of copper,<br> On the pathway of the rainbow,<br> Swift I hastened on as envoy,<br> With the king’s note in my wallet,<br> And his mandate in my bosom,<br> And upon my tongue the secret<br> And the leader’s secret orders<br> That the flags should now be waving,<br> And the spear-points should be sharpened,<br> What was it I there encountered,<br> And what met me there to vex me?<br> ’ Twas the raven’s son that met me,<br> ’ Twas a carrion-bird that met me;<br> With his beak he sniffed around him,<br> And his nostrils snuffed the vapour,<br> That the meaning of my message<br> With his nose he thus might fathom.<br> He had smelt the war already,<br> And the scent of blood had reached him,<br> And he went to call his comrades.<br>  To the Finnish Bridge when driving<br> On the west wind’s path of copper,<br> On the pathway of the rainbow,<br> While I hastened as an envoy,<br> With the king’s note in my wallet,<br> And his mandate in my bosom,<br> And upon my tongue the secret,<br> And the leader’s secret orders,<br> What was that which came to meet me,<br> And what horror to confound me?<br> ’ Twas a little wolf that met me,<br> 
 
 <!------------------------page 290------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_290"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 290</font></a>
 
 And a bear that followed closely;<br> With their snouts they sniffed around them,<br> Through the mist they pushed their nostrils,<br> Seeking thus to probe the secret,<br> And the letter to discover;<br> They had smelt the war already,<br> And the scent of blood had reached them,<br> And they ran to spread the tidings.<br>  To the Finnish Bridge when driving<br> On the west wind’s path of copper,<br> On the pathway of the rainbow,<br> While I hastened as an envoy,<br> With the king’s note in my wallet,<br> And his mandate in my bosom,<br> And upon my tongue defiance,<br> With the leader’s secret orders<br> That the flags unfurled should flutter,<br> And the spear-points do their duty,<br> And the axes should be lifted,<br> And the swords should flash in sunlight,<br> What was that which came to meet me,<br> And what horror to confound me?<br> It was Famine met me tottering,<br> Tottering Famine, chewing garbage;<br> With her nose she sniffed around her,<br> That the meaning of my message<br> With her nose she thus might fathom;<br> For she smelt the war already,<br> And the scent of blood had reached her,<br> And she went to call her comrades.<br>  To the Finnish Bridge while driving<br> 
 
 <!------------------------page 291------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_291"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 291</font></a>
 
 On the west wind’s path of copper,<br> On the pathway of the rainbow,<br> While I hastened as an envoy,<br> With the king’s note in my wallet,<br> And his mandate in my bosom,<br> On my tongue the secret orders<br> That the flags unfurled should flutter,<br> And the spear-points do their duty,<br> And the axes and the fish-spears<br> All should do the work before them,<br> What was that which came to meet me,<br> What unlooked-for horror met me?<br> ’ Twas the Plague I there encountered,<br> Crafty Plague, the people’s murderer,<br> Of the sevenfold war-plagues direst;<br> With his nose he sniffed around him,<br> And his nostrils snuffed the vapour,<br> Seeking thus to probe the matter,<br> And the letter to discover;<br> He had smelt the war already,<br> And the scent of blood had lured him<br> And he went to call his comrades.<br>  After this my horse I halted,<br> Yoked him with a yoke of iron,<br> Fettered him with Kalev’s fetters,<br> That he stood as rooted firmly,<br> From the spot to move unable,<br> While I pondered and considered,<br> Deeply in my heart reflecting<br> If the profit of my journey<br> Were not lost in greater evil<br> 
 
 <!------------------------page 292------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_292"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 292</font></a>
 
 For the war brings wounds and bloodshed,<br> And the war has throat of serpent.<br> Wherefore then should I the battle,<br> Whence springs only pain and murder,<br> Forth to peaceful homesteads carry?<br> Let a message so accursed<br> In the ocean-depths be sunken,<br> There to sleep in endless slumber,<br> Lost among the spawn of fishes,<br> There to rest in deepest caverns,<br> Rather than that I should take it,<br> Till it spreads among the hamlets.<br> Thereupon I took the mandate<br> Which I carried in my wallet,<br> And amid the depths I sunk it,<br> Underneath the waves of ocean,<br> Till the waves to foam had torn it,<br> And to mud had quite reduced it,<br> While the fishes fled before it.<br> Thus was hushed the sound of warfare,<br> Thus was lost the news of battle.<br></small></td></tr>
 
 </table>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="hoe2-84.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 287------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_287"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 287</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_287_note_1"></a><a href="#page_287_fr_1">1</a> <i>Kalevipoeg</i>, Canto 9, lines 769-925. Neus, <i>Ehstnische Volkslieder</i>, pp. 305-311. The manner in which the gathering symbols of the horrors of war, each more terrible than the last, are successively brought upon the scene in this poem is very fine.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>