<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_413.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_415.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:413</h3><p><i>Narrated Anas:</i></p>
 Some goods came to Allah's Apostle from Bahrain. The Prophet ordered 
 the people to spread them in the mosque --it was the biggest amount of
 goods Allah's Apostle had ever received. He left for prayer and did 
 not even look at it. After finishing the prayer, he sat by those goods
 and gave from those to everybody he saw. Al-'Abbas came to him and 
 said, "O Allah's Apostle! give me (something) too, because I gave 
 ransom for myself and 'Aqil" Allah's Apostle told him to take. So he 
 stuffed his garment with it and tried to carry it away but he failed 
 to do so. He said, "O Allah's Apostle! Order someone to help me in 
 lifting it." The Prophet refused. He then said to the Prophet: Will 
 you please help me to lift it?" Allah's Apostle refused. Then 
 Al-'Abbas threw some of it and tried to lift it (but failed). He again
 said, "O Allah's Apostle Order someone to help me to lift it." He 
 refused. Al-'Abbas then said to the Prophet: "Will you please help me 
 to lift it?" He again refused. Then Al-'Abbas threw some of it, and 
 lifted it on his shoulders and went away. Allah's Apostle kept on 
 watching him till he disappeared from his sight and was astonished at 
 his greediness. Allah's Apostle did not get up till the last coin was 
 distributed.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_415.htm">Next: 1:414: Anas: I found the Prophet in the mosque along with some people. He said to ...</a></center>
 </body>