<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_123.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_125.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:124</h3><p><i>Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:</i></p>
 The Prophet said, "Once the Prophet Moses stood up and addressed Bani 
 Israel. He was asked, "Who is the most learned man amongst the people.
 He said, "I am the most learned." Allah admonished Moses as he did not
 attribute absolute knowledge to Him (Allah). So Allah inspired to him 
 "At the junction of the two seas there is a slave amongst my slaves 
 who is more learned than you." Moses said, "O my Lord! How can I meet 
 him?" Allah said: Take a fish in a large basket (and proceed) and you 
 will find him at the place where you will lose the fish. So Moses set 
 out along with his (servant) boy, Yusha' bin Nuin and carried a fish 
 in a large basket till they reached a rock, where they laid their 
 heads (i.e. lay down) and slept. The fish came out of the basket and 
 it took its way into the sea as in a tunnel. So it was an amazing 
 thing for both Moses and his (servant) boy. They proceeded for the 
 rest of that night and the following day. When the day broke, Moses 
 said to his (servant) boy: "Bring us our early meal. No doubt, we have
 suffered much fatigue in this journey." Moses did not get tired till 
 he passed the place about which he was told. There the (servant) boy 
 told Moses, "Do you remember when we betook ourselves to the rock, I 
 indeed forgot the fish." Moses remarked, "That is what we have been 
 seeking. So they went back retracing their foot-steps, till they 
 reached the rock. There they saw a man covered with a garment (or 
 covering himself with his own garment). Moses greeted him. Al-Khadir 
 replied saying, "How do people greet each other in your land?" Moses 
 said, "I am Moses." He asked, "The Moses of Bani Israel?" Moses 
 replied in the affirmative and added, "May I follow you so that you 
 teach me of that knowledge which you have been taught." Al-Khadir 
 replied, "Verily! You will not be able to remain patient with me, O 
 Moses! I have some of the knowledge of Allah which He has taught me 
 and which you do not know, while you have some knowledge which Allah 
 has taught you which I do not know." Moses said, "Allah willing, you 
 will find me patient and I will not disobey you in aught. So both of 
 them set out walking along the sea-shore, as they did not have a boat.
 In the meantime a boat passed by them and they requested the crew of 
 the boat to take them on board. The crew recognized Al-Khadir and took
 them on board without fare. Then a sparrow came and stood on the edge 
 of the boat and dipped its beak once or twice in the sea. Al-Khadir 
 said: "O Moses! My knowledge and your knowledge have not decreased 
 Allah's knowledge except as much as this sparrow has decreased the 
 water of the sea with its beak." Al-Khadir went to one of the planks 
 of the boat and plucked it out. Moses said, "These people gave us a 
 free lift but you have broken their boat and scuttled it so as to 
 drown its people." Al-Khadir replied, "Didn't I tell you that you will
 not be able to remain patient with me." Moses said, "Call me not to 
 account for what I forgot." The first (excuse) of Moses was that he 
 had forgotten. Then they proceeded further and found a boy playing 
 with other boys. Al-Khadir took hold of the boy's head from the top 
 and plucked it out with his hands (i.e. killed him). Moses said, "Have
 you killed an innocent soul who has killed none." Al-Kha,dir replied, 
 "Did I not tell you that you cannot remain patient with me?" Then they
 both proceeded till when they came to the people of a town, they asked
 them for food, but they refused to entertain them. Then they found 
 there a wall on the point of collapsing. Al-Khadir repaired it with 
 his own hands. Moses said, "If you had wished, surely you could have 
 taken wages for it." Al-Khadir replied, "This is the parting between 
 you and me." The Prophet added, "May Allah be Merciful to Moses! Would
 that he could have been more patient to learn more about his story 
 with Al-Khadir. "
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_125.htm">Next: 1:125: Abu Musa: A man came to the Prophet and asked,  O Allah's Apostle! What kind of ...</a></center>
 </body>