<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_111.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_113.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:112</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Huraira:</i></p>
 In the year of the Conquest of Mecca, the tribe of Khuza'a killed a 
 man from the tribe of Bani Laith in revenge for a killed person, 
 belonging to them. They informed the Prophet about it. So he rode his 
 Rahila (she-camel for riding) and addressed the people saying, "Allah 
 held back the killing from Mecca. (The sub-narrator is in doubt 
 whether the Prophet said "elephant or killing," as the Arabic words 
 standing for these words have great similarity in shape), but He 
 (Allah) let His Apostle and the believers over power the infidels of 
 Mecca. Beware! (Mecca is a sanctuary) Verily! Fighting in Mecca was 
 not permitted for anyone before me nor will it be permitted for anyone
 after me. It (war) in it was made legal for me for few hours or so on 
 that day. No doubt it is at this moment a sanctuary, it is not allowed
 to uproot its thorny shrubs or to uproot its trees or to pick up its 
 Luqatt (fallen things) except by a person who will look for its owner 
 (announce it publicly). And if somebody is killed, then his closest 
 relative has the right to choose one of the two-- the blood money 
 (Diyya) or retaliation having the killer killed. In the meantime a man
 from Yemen came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Get that written for 
 me." The Prophet ordered his companions to write that for him. Then a 
 man from Quraish said, "Except Al-Iqhkhir (a type of grass that has 
 good smell) O Allah's Apostle, as we use it in our houses and graves."
 The Prophet said, "Except Al-Idhkhiri.e. Al-Idhkhir is allowed to be 
 plucked."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_113.htm">Next: 1:113: Abu Huraira: There is none among the companions of the Prophet who has narrated ...</a></center>
 </body>