<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_45.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_47.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:47</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Huraira:</i></p>
 One day while the Prophet was sitting in the company of some people, 
 (The angel) Gabriel came and asked, "What is faith?" Allah's Apostle 
 replied, 'Faith is to believe in Allah, His angels, (the) meeting with
 Him, His Apostles, and to believe in Resurrection." Then he further 
 asked, "What is Islam?" Allah's Apostle replied, "To worship Allah 
 Alone and none else, to offer prayers perfectly to pay the compulsory 
 charity (Zakat) and to observe fasts during the month of Ramadan."  
 Then he further asked, "What is Ihsan (perfection)?" Allah's Apostle 
 replied, "To worship Allah as if you see Him, and if you cannot 
 achieve this state of devotion then you must consider that He is 
 looking at you." Then he further asked, "When will the Hour be 
 established?" Allah's Apostle replied, "The answerer has no better 
 knowledge than the questioner. But I will inform you about its 
 portents.
 <p>
 1. When a slave (lady) gives birth to her master.
 </p><p>
 2. When the shepherds of black camels start boasting and competing 
 with others in the construction of higher buildings. And the Hour is 
 one of five things which nobody knows except Allah.
 </p><p>
 The Prophet then recited: "Verily, with Allah (Alone) is the knowledge
 of the Hour--." (31. 34) Then that man (Gabriel) left and the Prophet 
 asked his companions to call him back, but they could not see him. 
 Then the Prophet said, "That was Gabriel who came to teach the people 
 their religion." Abu 'Abdullah said: He (the Prophet) considered all 
 that as a part of faith.
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_47.htm">Next: 1:48: 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: I was informed by Abu Sufyan that Heraclius said to him,  I asked you ...</a></center>
 </body>