<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_01.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_03.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:3</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Aisha:</i></p>
 (the mother of the faithful believers) The commencement of the Divine 
 Inspiration to Allah's Apostle was in the form of good dreams which 
 came true like bright day light, and then the love of seclusion was 
 bestowed upon him. He used to go in seclusion in the cave of Hira 
 where he used to worship (Allah alone) continuously for many days 
 before his desire to see his family. He used to take with him the 
 journey food for the stay and then come back to (his wife) Khadija to 
 take his food like-wise again till suddenly the Truth descended upon 
 him while he was in the cave of Hira. The angel came to him and asked 
 him to read. The Prophet replied, "I do not know how to read.
 <p>
 The Prophet added, "The angel caught me (forcefully) and pressed me so
 hard that I could not bear it any more. He then released me and again 
 asked me to read and I replied, 'I do not know how to read.' Thereupon
 he caught me again and pressed me a second time till I could not bear 
 it any more. He then released me and again asked me to read but again 
 I replied, 'I do not know how to read (or what shall I read)?' 
 Thereupon he caught me for the third time and pressed me, and then 
 released me and said, 'Read in the name of your Lord, who has created 
 (all that exists) has created man from a clot. Read! And your Lord is 
 the Most Generous." (96.1, 96.2, 96.3) Then Allah's Apostle returned 
 with the Inspiration and with his heart beating severely. Then he went
 to Khadija bint Khuwailid and said, "Cover me! Cover me!" They covered
 him till his fear was over and after that he told her everything that 
 had happened and said, "I fear that something may happen to me." 
 Khadija replied, "Never! By Allah, Allah will never disgrace you. You 
 keep good relations with your Kith and kin, help the poor and the 
 destitute, serve your guests generously and assist the deserving 
 calamity-afflicted ones."
 </p><p>
 Khadija then accompanied him to her cousin Waraqa bin Naufal bin Asad 
 bin 'Abdul 'Uzza, who, during the PreIslamic Period became a Christian
 and used to write the writing with Hebrew letters. He would write from
 the Gospel in Hebrew as much as Allah wished him to write. He was an 
 old man and had lost his eyesight. Khadija said to Waraqa, "Listen to 
 the story of your nephew, O my cousin!" Waraqa asked, "O my nephew! 
 What have you seen?" Allah's Apostle described whatever he had seen. 
 Waraqa said, "This is the same one who keeps the secrets (angel 
 Gabriel) whom Allah had sent to Moses. I wish I were young and could 
 live up to the time when your people would turn you out." Allah's 
 Apostle asked, "Will they drive me out?" Waraqa replied in the 
 affirmative and said, "Anyone (man) who came with something similar to
 what you have brought was treated with hostility; and if I should 
 remain alive till the day when you will be turned out then I would 
 support you strongly." But after a few days Waraqa died and the Divine
 Inspiration was also paused for a while.
 </p><p>
 of pause in revelation reporting the speech of the Prophet "While I 
 was walking, all of a sudden I heard a voice from the sky. I looked up
 and saw the same angel who had visited me at the cave of Hira' sitting
 on a chair between the sky and the earth. I got afraid of him and came
 back home and said, 'Wrap me (in blankets).' And then Allah revealed 
 the following Holy Verses (of Quran):
 </p><p>
 'O you (i.e. Muhammad)! wrapped up in garments!' Arise and warn (the 
 people against Allah's Punishment),... up to 'and desert the idols.' 
 (74.1-5) After this the revelation started coming strongly, frequently
 and regularly."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_03.htm">Next: 1:4: Said bin Jubair: Ibn 'Abbas in the explanation of the Statement of Allah. 'Move not ...</a></center>
 </body>