<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_366.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_368.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:367</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:</i></p>
 Anas said, 'When Allah's Apostle invaded Khaibar, we offered the Fajr 
 prayer there yearly in the morning) when it was still dark. The 
 Prophet rode and Abu Talha rode too and I was riding behind Abu Talha.
 The Prophet passed through the lane of Khaibar quickly and my knee was
 touching the thigh of the Prophet . He uncovered his thigh and I saw 
 the whiteness of the thigh of the Prophet. When he entered the town, 
 he said, 'Allahu Akbar! Khalbar is ruined. Whenever we approach near a
 (hostile) nation (to fight) then evil will be the morning of those who
 have been warned.' He repeated this thrice. The people came out for 
 their jobs and some of them said, 'Muhammad (has come).' (Some of our 
 companions added, "With his army.") We conquered Khaibar, took the 
 captives, and the booty was collected. Dihya came and said, 'O Allah's
 Prophet! Give me a slave girl from the captives.' The Prophet said, 
 'Go and take any slave girl.' He took Safiya bint Huyai. A man came to
 the Prophet and said, 'O Allah's Apostles! You gave Safiya bint Huyai 
 to Dihya and she is the chief mistress of the tribes of Quraiza and 
 An-Nadir and she befits none but you.' So the Prophet said, 'Bring him
 along with her.' So Dihya came with her and when the Prophet saw her, 
 he said to Dihya, 'Take any slave girl other than her from the 
 captives.' Anas added: The Prophet then manumitted her and married 
 her."
 <p>
 Thabit asked Anas, "O Abu Hamza! What did the Prophet pay her (as 
 Mahr)?" He said, "Her self was her Mahr for he manumitted her and then
 married her." Anas added, "While on the way, Um Sulaim dressed her for
 marriage (ceremony) and at night she sent her as a bride to the 
 Prophet . So the Prophet was a bridegroom and he said, 'Whoever has 
 anything (food) should bring it.' He spread out a leather sheet (for 
 the food) and some brought dates and others cooking butter. (I think 
 he (Anas) mentioned As-SawTq). So they prepared a dish of Hais (a kind
 of meal). And that was Walrma (the marriage banquet) of Allah's 
 Apostle ."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_368.htm">Next: 1:368: 'Aisha: Allah's Apostle used to offer the Fajr prayer and some believing women...</a></center>
 </body>