<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_723.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_725.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:722</h3><p><i>Narrated Jabir bin Samura:</i></p>
 The People of Kufa complained against Sa'd to 'Umar and the latter 
 dismissed him and appointed 'Ammar as their chief . They lodged many 
 complaints against Sa'd and even they alleged that he did not pray 
 properly. 'Umar sent for him and said, "O Aba Ishaq! These people 
 claim that you do not pray properly." Abu Ishaq said, "By Allah, I 
 used to pray with them a prayer similar to that of Allah's Apostle and
 I never reduced anything of it. I used to prolong the first two Rakat 
 of 'Isha prayer and shorten the last two Rakat." 'Umar said, "O Aba 
 Ishaq, this was what I thought about you." And then he sent one or 
 more persons with him to Kufa so as to ask the people about him. So 
 they went there and did not leave any mosque without asking about him.
 All the people praised him till they came to the mosque of the tribe 
 of Bani 'Abs; one of the men called Usama bin Qatada with a surname of
 Aba Sa'da stood up and said, "As you have put us under an oath; I am 
 bound to tell you that Sa'd never went himself with the army and never
 distributed (the war booty) equally and never did justice in legal 
 verdicts." (On hearing it) Sa'd said, "I pray to Allah for three 
 things: O Allah! If this slave of yours is a liar and got up for 
 showing off, give him a long life, increase his poverty and put him to
 trials." (And so it happened). Later on when that person was asked how
 he was, he used to reply that he was an old man in trial as the result
 of Sa'd's curse. 'Abdul Malik, the sub narrator, said that he had seen
 him afterwards and his eyebrows were over-hanging his eyes owing to 
 old age and he used to tease and assault the small girls in the way.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_725.htm">Next: 1:723: 'Ubada bin As-Samit: Allah's Apostle said,  Whoever does not recite Al-Fatiha in his ...</a></center>
 </body>