<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_76.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_78.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:78</h3><p><i>Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:</i></p>
 that he differed with Hur bin Qais bin Hisn Al-Fazari regarding the 
 companion of the Prophet Moses. Meanwhile, Ubai bin Ka'b passed by 
 them and Ibn 'Abbas called him saying, "My friend (Hur) and I have 
 differed regarding Moses' companion whom Moses asked the way to meet. 
 Have you heard Allah's Apostle mentioning something about him? Ubai 
 bin Ka'b said: "Yes, I heard the Prophet mentioning something about 
 him (saying) while Moses was sitting in the company of some 
 Israelites, a man came and asked him: "Do you know anyone who is more 
 learned than you? Moses replied: "No." So Allah sent the Divine 
 Inspiration to Moses: '--Yes, Our slave Khadir is more learned than 
 you. Moses asked Allah how to meet him (Al-Khadir). So Allah made the 
 fish a sign for him and he was told when the fish was lost, he should 
 return (to the place where he had lost it) and there he would meet him
 (Al-Khadir). So Moses went on looking for the sign of the fish in the 
 sea. The servant-boy of Moses said: 'Do you remember when we betook 
 ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the fish, none but Satan made 
 me forget to remember it. On that Moses said, 'That is what we have 
 been seeking.' So they went back retracing their footsteps, and found 
 Kha,dir. (and) what happened further about them is narrated in the 
 Holy Qur'an by Allah." (18.54 up to 18.82)
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_78.htm">Next: 1:79: Abu Musa: The Prophet said,  The example of guidance and knowledge with which ...</a></center>
 </body>