<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_682.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_684.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:681</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Aisha:</i></p>
 When Allah's Apostle became seriously ill, Bilal came to him for the 
 prayer. He said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." I 
 said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted man and if he 
 stands in your place, he would not be able to make the people hear 
 him. Will you order 'Umar (to lead the prayer)?" The Prophet said, 
 "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." Then I said to 
 Hafsa, "Tell him, Abu i Bakr is a soft-hearted man and if he stands in
 his place, he would not be able to make the people hear him. Would you
 order 'Umar to lead the prayer?' " Hafsa did so. The Prophet said, 
 "Verily you are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the 
 people in the prayer." So Abu- Bakr stood for the prayer. In the 
 meantime Allah's Apostle felt better and came out with the help of two
 persons and both of his legs were dragging on the ground till he 
 entered the mosque. When Abu Bakr heard him coming, he tried to 
 retreat but Allah's Apostle beckoned him to carry on. The Prophet sat 
 on his left side. Abu Bakr was praying while standing and Allah's 
 Apostle was leading the prayer while sitting. Abu Bakr was following 
 the Prophet and the people were following Abu Bakr (in the prayer).
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_684.htm">Next: 1:682: Abu Huraira: Once Allah's Apostle prayed two Rakat (instead of four) and finished ...</a></center>
 </body>