<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_84.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_86.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:86</h3><p><i>Narrated Asma:</i></p>
 I came to 'Aisha while she was praying, and said to her, "What has 
 happened to the people?" She pointed out towards the sky. (I looked 
 towards the mosque), and saw the people offering the prayer. Aisha 
 said, "Subhan Allah." I said to her, "Is there a sign?" She nodded 
 with her head meaning, "Yes." I, too, then stood (for the prayer of 
 eclipse) till I became (nearly) unconscious and later on I poured 
 water on my head. After the prayer, the Prophet praised and glorified 
 Allah and then said,
 <p>
 "Just now at this place I have seen what I have never seen before, 
 including Paradise and Hell. No doubt it has been inspired to me that 
 you will be put to trials in your graves and these trials will be like
 the trials of Masiah-ad-Dajjal or nearly like it (the sub narrator is 
 not sure which expression Asma' used). You will be asked, 'What do you
 know about this man (the Prophet Muhammad)?' Then the faithful 
 believer (or Asma' said a similar word) will reply, 'He is Muhammad 
 Allah's Apostle who had come to us with clear evidences and guidance 
 and so we accepted his teachings and followed him. And he is 
 Muhammad.' And he will repeat it thrice. Then the angels will say to 
 him, 'Sleep in peace as we have come to know that you were a faithful 
 believer.' On the other hand, a hypocrite or a doubtful person will 
 reply, 'I do not know, but I heard the people saying something and so 
 I said it.' (the same). "
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_86.htm">Next: 1:87: Abu Jamra: I was an interpreter between the people and Ibn 'Abbas. Once Ibn ...</a></center>
 </body>