<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_417.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_419.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:417</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Itban bin Malik:</i></p>
 who was one of the companions of Allah's Apostle and one of the 
 Ansar's who took part in the battle of Badr: I came to Allah's Apostle
 and said, "O Allah's Apostle I have weak eyesight and I lead my people
 in prayers. When it rains the water flows in the valley between me and
 my people so I cannot go to their mosque to lead them in prayer. O 
 Allah's Apostle! I wish you would come to my house and pray in it so 
 that I could take that place as a Musalla. Allah's Apostle said. 
 "Allah willing, I will do so." Next day after the sun rose high, 
 Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr came and Allah's Apostle asked for 
 permission to enter. I gave him permission and he did not sit on 
 entering the house but said to me, "Where do you like me to pray?" I 
 pointed to a place in my house. So Allah's Apostle stood there and 
 said, 'Allahu Akbar', and we all got up and aligned behind him and 
 offered a two-Rak'at prayer and ended it with Taslim. We requested him
 to stay for a meal called "Khazira" which we had prepared for him. 
 Many members of our family gathered in the house and one of them said,
 "Where is Malik bin Al-Dukhaishin or Ibn Al-Dukhshun?" One of them 
 replied, "He is a hypocrite and does not love Allah and His Apostle." 
 Hearing that, Allah's Apostle said, "Do not say so. Haven't you seen 
 that he said, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah' for 
 Allah's sake only?" He said, "Allah and His Apostle know better. We 
 have seen him helping and advising hypocrites."
 <p>
 Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has forbidden the (Hell) fire for those 
 who say, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah' for Allah's 
 sake only."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_419.htm">Next: 1:418: 'Aisha: The Prophet used to start every thing from the right (for good things)...</a></center>
 </body>