<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_470.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_472.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:469</h3><p><i>Narrated </i></p>
 Narrates Ibn Sirin:
 <p>
 Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle led us in one of the two 'Isha' 
 prayers (Abu Huraira named that prayer but I forgot it)." Abu Huraira 
 added, "He prayed two Rakat and then finished the prayer with Tasllm. 
 He stood up near a piece of wood Lying across the mosque and leaned on
 it in such a way as if he was angry. Then he put his right hand over 
 the left and clasped his hands by interlacing his fingers and then put
 his J right cheek on the back of his left hand. The people who were in
 haste left the mosque through its gates. They wondered whether the 
 prayer was reduced. And amongst them were Abu Bakr and 'Umar but they 
 hesitated to ask the Prophet. A long-handed man called Dhul-Yadain 
 asked the Prophet, 'O Allah's Apostle! Have you; forgotten or has the 
 prayer been reduced?' The Prophet replied, 'I have neither forgotten 
 nor has the prayer been reduced' The Prophet added, 'Is what Dhul 
 Yadain has said true?' They (the people) said, 'Yes, it is true.' The 
 Prophet stood up again and led the prayer, completing the remaining 
 prayer, forgotten by him, and performed Talsrm, and then said, 'Allahu
 Akbar.' And then he did a prostration as he used to prostrate or 
 longer than that. He then raised his head saying, 'Allahu Akbar; he 
 then again said, 'Allahu Akbar', and prostrated as he used to 
 prostrate or longer than that. Then he raised his head and said, 
 'Allahu Akbar.' " (The subnarrator added, "I think that they asked 
 (Ibn Sirin) whether the Prophet completed the prayer with Taslim. He 
 replied, "I heard that 'Imran bin Husain had said, 'Then he (the 
 Prophet) did Taslim.")
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_472.htm">Next: 1:470: Fudail bin Sulaiman: Musa bin 'Uqba said,  I saw Salim bin 'Abdullah looking for some ...</a></center>
 </body>