<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_420.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_422.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:420</h3><p><i>Narrated Anas:</i></p>
 When the Prophet arrived Medina he dismounted at 'Awali-i-Medina 
 amongst a tribe called Banu 'Amr bin 'Auf. He stayed there For 
 fourteen nights. Then he sent for Bani An-Najjar and they came armed 
 with their swords. As if I am looking (just now) as the Prophet was 
 sitting over his Rahila (Mount) with Abu Bakr riding behind him and 
 all Banu An-Najjar around him till he dismounted at the courtyard of 
 Abu Aiyub's house. The Prophet loved to pray wherever the time for the
 prayer was due even at sheep-folds. Later on he ordered that a mosque 
 should be built and sent for some people of Banu-An-Najjar and said, 
 "O Banu An-Najjar! Suggest to me the price of this (walled) piece of 
 land of yours." They replied, "No! By Allah! We do not demand its 
 price except from Allah." Anas added: There were graves of pagans in 
 it and some of it was unleveled and there were some date-palm trees in
 it. The Prophet ordered that the graves of the pagans be dug out and 
 the unleveled land be level led and the date-palm trees be cut down . 
 (So all that was done). They aligned these cut date-palm trees towards
 the Qibla of the mosque (as a wall) and they also built two stone 
 side-walls (of the mosque). His companions brought the stones while 
 reciting some poetic verses. The Prophet was with them and he kept on 
 saying, "There is no goodness except that of the Hereafter, O Allah! 
 So please forgive the Ansars and the emigrants. "
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_422.htm">Next: 1:421: Abu Al-Taiyah: Anas said,  The Prophet prayed in the sheep fold.  Later on I heard ...</a></center>
 </body>