<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_656.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_658.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:655</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Ubaid-Ullah Ibn 'Abdullah bin 'Utba:</i></p>
 I went to 'Aisha and asked her to describe to me the illness of 
 Allah's Apostle. 'Aisha said, "Yes. The Prophet became seriously ill 
 and asked whether the people had prayed. We replied, 'No. O Allah's 
 Apostle! They are waiting for you.' He added, 'Put water for me in a 
 trough." 'Aisha added, "We did so. He took a bath and tried to get up 
 but fainted. When he recovered, he again asked whether the people had 
 prayed. We said, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle,' He
 again said, 'Put water in a trough for me.' He sat down and took a 
 bath and tried to get up but fainted again. Then he recovered and 
 said, 'Have the people prayed?' We replied, 'No, they are waiting for 
 you. O Allah's Apostle.' He said, 'Put water for me in the trough.' 
 Then he sat down and washed himself and tried to get up but he 
 fainted. When he recovered, he asked, 'Have the people prayed?' We 
 said, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle! The people 
 were in the mosque waiting for the Prophet for the 'Isha prayer. The 
 Prophet sent for Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer. The 
 messenger went to Abu Bakr and said, 'Allah's Apostle orders you to 
 lead the people in the prayer.' Abu Bakr was a soft-hearted man, so he
 asked 'Umar to lead the prayer but 'Umar replied, 'You are more 
 rightful.' So Abu Bakr led the prayer in those days. When the Prophet 
 felt a bit better, he came out for the Zuhr prayer with the help of 
 two persons one of whom was Al-'Abbas. while Abu Bakr was leading the 
 people in the prayer. When Abu Bakr saw him he wanted to retreat but 
 the Prophet beckoned him not to do so and asked them to make him sit 
 beside Abu Bakr and they did so. Abu Bakr was following the Prophet 
 (in the prayer) and the people were following Abu Bakr. The Prophet 
 (prayed) sitting."
 <p>
 'Ubaid-Ullah added "I went to 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas and asked him, 
 Shall I tell you what Aisha has told me about the fatal illness of the
 Prophet?' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'Go ahead. I told him her narration and he 
 did not deny anything of it but asked whether 'Aisha told me the name 
 of the second person (who helped the Prophet ) along with Al-Abbas. I 
 said. 'No.' He said, 'He was 'Ali (Ibn Abi Talib). 
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_658.htm">Next: 1:656: Aisha: the mother of the believers: Allah's Apostle during his illness prayed...</a></center>
 </body>