<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">African</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ppj008.htm">Previous</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h2 align="CENTER">BIBLIOGRAPHY</h2>
 <p>Space restricts us to such works as may be found in the Boston College Library, Chestnut Hill, Mass.</p>
 <p>ANONYMOUS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Acts of Assembly, passed in the Island of Jamaica from 1681 to 1737, inclusive, London, 1743.</p>
 <i></i><p>Acts of Assembly, passed in the Island of Jamaica from 1681 to 1754, inclusive, London, 1756.</p>
 <i></i><p>Acts of Assembly, passed in the Island of Jamaica from 1770 to 1783, Kingston, 1786.</p>
 <i></i><p>Act to Remedy the Evils arising from irregular Assemblies of Slaves, etc. Passed by the Assembly of Jamaica in December, 1760. (Photostatic copy in the Boston College Library.)</p>
 <i></i><p>Consolidated Slave Law, passed 22 December 1826 .London, 1827<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Hints respecting Christian Education of the Negro Population in the British Colonies, London, 1833.</p>
 <i></i><p>Religious Instruction of the Coloured and Slave Population of Jamaica, London, 1832.</p>
 <i></i><p>Report of the Jamaica Royal Commission of Inquiry respecting certain Disturbances in the Island of Jamaica and the Measures taken in the Course of their Suppression, London, 1866.</p>
 <i></i><p>Report of the Lords of the Committee of the Council appointed for the Consideration of all Matters relating to Trade and Foreign Plantation, London, 1789,</p>
 <i></i><p>Re-view of Hamel, the Obeah Man, London, 1827<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Slave Law of Jamaica and Documents relative thereto, London, 1828.</p>
 <p>ANDERSON AND CUNDALL.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica Proverbs and Sayings, London, 1927, 296</p>
 <p>{p. 287}</p>
 <p>ARMISTEAD, WILSON.</p>
 <i></i><p>Tribute for the Negro, Manchester, 1848.</p>
 <p>ARNAUD, ODETTE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Mer Caraïbe, Paris, 1934<i>.</i></p>
 <p>BACON, EDGAR MAYHEW.</p>
 <i></i><p>The New Jamaica, New York, 1890.</p>
 <p>BANBURY, R. THOMAS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica Superstitions or The Obeah Book, Kingston, 1894.</p>
 <p>BARCLAY, ALEXANDER.</p>
 <i></i><p>A Practical View of the Present Stage of Slavery in the West Indies, London, 1828.</p>
 <p>BASTIAN, ADOLF.</p>
 <i></i><p>Der Fetisch an der Küste Guineas, Berlin, 1884<i>.</i></p>
 <p>BAYLEY, F. W. N.</p>
 <i></i><p>Four Years' Residence in the West Indies, London, 1830<i>.</i></p>
 <p>BECKFORD, WILLIAM.</p>
 <i></i><p>A Descriptive Account of the Island of Jamaica, London, 1790.</p>
 <p>BECKWITH, MARTHA WARREN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Folk-Games of Jamaica, Poughkeepsie, 1922.</p>
 <i></i><p>Christmas Mummings in Jamaica, Poughkeepsie, 1923<i>.</i></p>
 <p>The Hussey Festival in Jamaica, Poughkeepsie, 1924.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica Anansi Stories, New York, 1924<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Jamaica Folk-Lore, New York, 1928.</p>
 <i></i><p>Black Roadways; a Study of Jamaica Folk-Lore, Chapel Hill, 1928.</p>
 <p>BELL, HESKETH J.</p>
 <i></i><p>Obeah; Witchcraft in the West Indies, London, 1889.</p>
 <p>BICKNELL, R.</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indies as they are, or a Real Picture of Slavery, but more particularly as it exists in the Island of Jamaica, London, 1825. BIGELOW, JOHN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica in 1850, New York, 1851</p>
 <p>BLEBY, HENRY.</p>
 <i></i><p>Death Struggle of Slavery, London, 1853<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Scenes in the Caribbean Sea, London, 1868.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Reign of Terror, London, 1868.</p>
 <p>BLOME, RICHARD.</p>
 <i></i><p>Description of the Island of Jamaica, London, 1678</p>
 <p>{p. 288}</p>
 <p>BOSMAN, WILLIAM.</p>
 <i></i><p>A New and Accurate Description of the Coast of Guinea, London, 1705.</p>
 <p>BOWDITCH, T. EDWARD.</p>
 <i></i><p>Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee, London, 1819.</p>
 <i></i><p>Essay on Superstitions, Customs and Acts, Common to the Ancient Egyptian, Abyssineans and Ashantee, Paris, 1821.</p>
 <p>BOWLER, LOUIS P.</p>
 <i></i><p>Gold Coast Palava: Life on the Gold Coast, London, 1911.</p>
 <p>BRAWLEY, B. G.</p>
 <i></i><p>Short History of the American Negro, New York, 1913.</p>
 <i></i><p>Social History of the American Negro, New York, 1921.</p>
 <p>BRIDGES, GEORGE WILSON.</p>
 <i></i><p>A Voice from Jamaica; in reply to William Wilberforce, London, 1823<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Annals of Jamaica, London, 1828.</p>
 <p>BROWNE, PATRICK.</p>
 <i></i><p>Civil and Natural History of Jamaica, London, 1756.</p>
 <p>BRYMNER, D.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Jamaica Maroons, London, 1895.</p>
 <p>BUCHANAN, CLAUDIUS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Colonial Ecclesiastical Establishment, London, 1812.</p>
 <p>BURDETT, WILLIAM.</p>
 <i></i><p>Life and Exploits of Mansong, commonly called Three-finger Jack, the Terror of Jamaica, Sommers Town, 1800.</p>
 <p>BURKHARDT, G. E.</p>
 <i></i><p>Die Evangelische Mission unter den Negern in Westindien und Sued-Amerika, Leipzig, 1876.</p>
 <p>CALDECOTT, A.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Church in the West Indies, London, 1898.</p>
 <p>CAMERON, NORMAN EUSTACE.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Evolution of the Negro, Georgetown, Demerara, 1929.</p>
 <p>CARDINALL, A. W.</p>
 <i></i><p>In Ashanti and Beyond, London, 1927<i>.</i></p>
 <p>{p. 289}</p>
 <p>CARMICHAEL, MRS. A. C.</p>
 <i></i><p>Domestic Manners and Social Conditions of the White, Coloured and Negro Population of the West Indies, London, 1834<i>.</i></p>
 <p>CHRISTALLER, J. G.</p>
 <i></i><p>Dictionary of the Asante and Fante Language Called Tshi (Twi), Basel, 1933.</p>
 <p>CLARIDGE, W. WALTON.</p>
 <i></i><p>History of the Gold Coast and Ashanti, London, 1915<i>.</i></p>
 <p>CLARK, A. H.</p>
 <i></i><p>Ingenious Method of Causing Death Employed by the Obeah Men of the West Indies,--American Anthropologist, 1912.</p>
 <p>CLARKE, JOHN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Memoir of Richard Merrick, Missionary in Jamaica, London, 1850<i>.</i></p>
 <p>COKE, THOMAS.</p>
 <i></i><p>History of the West Indies, Liverpool, 1808-11.</p>
 <p>COLERIDGE, HENRY NELSON.</p>
 <i></i><p>Six Months in the West Indies in 1825, New York, 1826.</p>
 <p>COOK, E. M.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica: The Lodestone of the Caribbean, Bristol, 1924<i>.</i></p>
 <p>COOPER, THOMAS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Facts, illustrative of the Condition of the Negro Slaves in Jamaica, London, 1824.</p>
 <i></i><p>Correspondence Relative to the Condition of the Negro Slaves in Jamaica, London, 1824<i>.</i></p>
 <p>CROWNINSHIELD, MRS. SCHUYLER.</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indian Tales, New York, 1898.</p>
 <p>CUNDALL, FRANK.</p>
 <i></i><p>Historic Jamaica, London, 1915.</p>
 <i></i><p>Chronological Outlines of Jamaica History, 1492-1926, Kingston, 1927<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Studies in Jamaica History, London, 1900.</p>
 <p>DALLAS, ROBERT CHARLES.</p>
 <i></i><p>History of the Maroons, London, 1803<i>.</i></p>
 <p>DANQUAH, J. B.</p>
 <i></i><p>Akan Laws and Customs, London, 1928.</p>
 <p>{p. 290}</p>
 <p>DELANY, FRANCIS X.</p>
 <i></i><p>History of the Catholic Church in Jamaica, New York, 1930.</p>
 <p>DeLISSER, HERBERT G.</p>
 <i></i><p>In Jamaica and Cuba, Kingston, 1927<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Twentieth Century Jamaica, Kingston, 1913.</p>
 <i></i><p>Revenge: a Tale of Old Jamaica, Kingston, 1919.</p>
 <i></i><p>White Witch of Rosehall, London, 1929.</p>
 <p>DENNETT, R. E.</p>
 <i></i><p>At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, London, 1906.</p>
 <p>DODSWORTH, FRANCIS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Book of the West Indies, London, 1904.</p>
 <p>DOWD, JEROME.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Negro Races, New York, 1907.</p>
 <p>DUNCAN, PETER.</p>
 <i></i><p>Narrative of the Wesleyan Mission to Jamaica, London, 1849.</p>
 <p>DUPUIS, JOSEPH.</p>
 <i></i><p>Journal of a Residence in Ashantee, London, 1824.</p>
 <p>EDWARDS, BRYAN.</p>
 <i></i><p>History, Civil and Commercial, of the British Colonies in the West Indies, London, 1793.</p>
 <i></i><p>Proceedings of the Governor and Assembly of Jamaica in regard to the Maroon Negroes, London, 1796.</p>
 <p>ELLIS, ALFRED BURTON.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Land of Fetish, London, 1883.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Tshi-Speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast of West Africa, London, 1887<i>.</i></p>
 <p>History of the Gold Coast of West Africa, London, 1893.</p>
 <i></i><p>West African Folklore--Popular Science Monthly, 1894<i>.</i></p>
 <p>EMERICK, ABRAHAM J.</p>
 <i></i><p>Obeah and Duppyism in Jamaica (Printed Privately) Woodstock, 1915.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica Mialism, (Printed Privately) Woodstock, 1916.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica Duppies, (Printed Privately) Woodstock, 1916.</p>
 <p>EVANS, H. B.</p>
 <i></i><p>Our West Indian Colonies, London, 1855.</p>
 <p>EVES, CHARLES WASHINGTON.</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indies, London, 1889.</p>
 <p>FISKE, Amos KIDDER.</p>
 <i></i><p>The West Indies, New York, 1899.</p>
 <p>{p. 291}</p>
 <p>FOULKES, THEODORE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Eighteen Months in Jamaica, London, 1833<i>.</i></p>
 <p>FOX-BOURNE, H. R.</p>
 <i></i><p>Story of the Colonies, London, 1869.</p>
 <p>FRANK, HARRY A.</p>
 <i></i><p>Roaming through the West Indies, New York, 1920.</p>
 <p>FREEMAN) RICHARD AUSTIN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Travel and Life in Ashanti and Jaman, Westminster, 1898.</p>
 <p>FREEMAN, THOMAS B.</p>
 <i></i><p>Journal of Various Visits to the Kingdoms of Ashanti, etc., London, 1844.</p>
 <p>FROUDE, JAMES ANTHONY.</p>
 <i></i><p>England in the West Indies or the Bow of Ulysses, London, 1888.</p>
 <p>FULLER, STEPHEN.</p>
 <i></i><p>New Act of Assembly of the Island of Jamaica . . . commonly called the New Consolidated Act, London, 1789<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Two Reports from the Committee of the Honourable House of Assembly of Jamaica, London, 1789.</p>
 <i></i><p>Proceedings of the Honourable House of Assembly of Jamaica, on the Sugar and Slave Trade, London, 1793.</p>
 <p>GARDNER, WILLIAM JAMES.</p>
 <i></i><p>History of Jamaica from its Discovery by Christopher Columbus to the Present Time, London, 1873.</p>
 <p>GAUNT, MARY.</p>
 <i></i><p>Where the Twain Meet, New York, 1922.</p>
 <i></i><p>Reflection--In Jamaica, London, 1932.</p>
 <p>GRAINGER, JAMES.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Sugar-Cane; a Poem, London, 1766.</p>
 <p>GREEN, SAMUEL.</p>
 <i></i><p>Baptist Mission in Jamaica, London, 1842.</p>
 <p>GROS, JULES.</p>
 <i></i><p>Voyages, Aventures et Captivitié de J. Benet chez les Achantis, Paris, 1884<i>.</i></p>
 <p>GURNEY, JOHN JOSEPH.</p>
 <i></i><p>Familiar Letters to Henry Clay of Kentucky, Describing a Winter in the West Indies, New York, 1840<i>.</i></p>
 <p>HARVEY, THOMAS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica in 1866, London, 1867,</p>
 <p>{p. 292}</p>
 <p>HAWTAYNE, G. H. ("X. BEKE").</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indian Yarns, Demerara, 1890.</p>
 <p>HAY, J. DALRYMPLE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Ashanti and the Gold Coast, London, 1874<i>.</i></p>
 <p>HAYFORD, CASELY.</p>
 <i></i><p>Gold Coast Native Institutions, London, 1874,</p>
 <p>HERSKOVITS, MELVILLE J.</p>
 <i></i><p>On the Provenience of New World Negroes, Evanston, 1933.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Second Northwestern University Expedition for study of the Suriname Bush-Negroes, 1929, The Hague, 1929.</p>
 <p>HILL, ROBERT T.</p>
 <i></i><p>Cuba and Porto Rico with the Other Islands of the West Indies, New York, 1898.</p>
 <p>HINE, JOHN B.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaican Obeah texts, Miskatonic University Press, 1886</p>
 <p>HOLFORD, G.</p>
 <i></i><p>Observations on the Necessity of Introducing a Sufficient Number of Respectable Clergymen into Our Colonies in the West Indies, London, 1808.</p>
 <p>HOVEY, SYLVESTER.</p>
 <i></i><p>Letters from the West Indies: relating especially to Jamaica, New York, 1838,</p>
 <p>HOWE, E. W.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Trip to the West Indies, Topeka, 1910.</p>
 <p>JAY, CHARLES.</p>
 <i></i><p>Observations on the Present State and Future Prospects of the West Indies, London, 1847<i>.</i></p>
 <p>JAY, E. A. HASTINGS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Glimpse of the Tropics, or, Four Months Cruising in the West Indies, London, 1900.</p>
 <p>JECKYLL, WALTER.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica Song and Story; Anancy Stories, Digging Songs, Ring Tunes and Dancing Tunes, London, 1907<i>.</i></p>
 <p>JOHNSTON, HARRY H.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Negro in the New World, London, 1910.</p>
 <p>JONES, CHESTER LLOYD.</p>
 <i></i><p>Caribbean Backgrounds and Prospects, New York, 1931<i>.</i></p>
 <p>KEMP, DENNIS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Nine Years at the Gold Coast, London, 1898.</p>
 <p>{p. 293}</p>
 <p>KINGSLEY, CHARLES.</p>
 <i></i><p>At Last: a Christmas in the West Indies, London, 1871<i>.</i></p>
 <p>KINGSLEY, MARY H.</p>
 <i></i><p>Travels in West Africa. London, 1897<i>.</i></p>
 <p>West African Studies, London, 1899.</p>
 <p>KNATCHBULL-HUGESSON, E. H.</p>
 <i></i><p>Immigrants and Liberated Africans admitted into each of the British West India Colonies, London, 1872<i>.</i></p>
 <p>KNIBB, WILLIAM.</p>
 <i></i><p>Facts and Documents connected with the late Insurrection in Jamaica and the Violations of Civil and Religious Liberty arising out of it, London, 1832<i>.</i></p>
 <p>LABAT, PÈRE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Nouveau Voyage aux Isles de l'Amérique, La Haye, 1724<i>.</i></p>
 <p>LESLIE, CHARLES.</p>
 <i></i><p>New History of Jamaica, London, 1740.</p>
 <p>LEWIS, MATTHEW GREGORY.</p>
 <i></i><p>Journal of a West Indian Proprietor, kept during a Residence in the Island of Jamaica, London, 1834<i>.</i></p>
 <p>LINDBLOM, GERHARD.</p>
 <i></i><p>Africanische Relikte und Indianische Entelehnungen in der Kultur der Busch-Neger Surinams, Göteborg, 1924.</p>
 <p>LIVINGSTON, WILLIAM PRINGLE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Black Jamaica: a Study in Evolution, London, 1899.</p>
 <p>LLOYD, WILLIAM.</p>
 <i></i><p>Letters from the West Indies, London, 1837.</p>
 <p>LONG, EDWARD.</p>
 <i></i><p>History of Jamaica, London, 1774<i>.</i></p>
 <p>LOWE, JOSEPH.</p>
 <i></i><p>Inquiry into the State of the British West Indies, London, 1807<i>.</i></p>
 <p>LUCKOCK, BENJAMIN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica: Enslaved and Free, New York, 1846.</p>
 <p>LUNAN, JOHN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Abstract of the Laws of Jamaica relating to Slaves, St. Jago de la Vega, 1819.</p>
 <p>McCREA, HARRY.</p>
 <i></i><p>Sub-Officers' Guide, Kingston, 1903.</p>
 <p>MAC DONALD, GEORGE.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Gold Coast, Past and Present, New York, 1898.</p>
 <p>{p. 294}</p>
 <p>McKAY, CLAUDE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Banana Bottom, New York, 1933.</p>
 <p>MAC LEAN, ISABEL CRANSTOUN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Children of Jamaica, Edinburgh, 1910.</p>
 <p>McMAHON, BENJAMIN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica Plantership, London, 1839<i>.</i></p>
 <p>MADDEN, RICHARD ROBERT.</p>
 <i></i><p>A Twelvemonths' Residence in the West Indies, during the Transition from Slavery to Apprenticeship, London, 1835<i>.</i></p>
 <p>MANNINGTON, GEORGE.</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indies with British Guiana and British Honduras, New York, 1925.</p>
 <p>MARRYAT, JOSEPH.</p>
 <i></i><p>Thoughts on the Abolition of the Slave Trade, London, 1816.</p>
 <i></i><p>More Thoughts occasioned by two Publications, London, 1816.</p>
 <i></i><p>More Thoughts Still on the State of the West India Colonies, London, 1818.</p>
 <p>MARTIN, ROBERT MONTGOMERY.</p>
 <i></i><p>History of the West Indies, London, 1836-37<i>.</i></p>
 <p>MEREDITH, HENRY.</p>
 <i></i><p>Account of the Gold Coast of Africa, London, 1812.</p>
 <p>MILNE-HOME, MARY PAMELA.</p>
 <i></i><p>Mamma's Black Nurse Stories, Edinburgh, 1890.</p>
 <p>MILNER, T. H.</p>
 <i></i><p>Present and Future State of Jamaica Considered, London, 1839<i>.</i></p>
 <p>MONTAGNAC, NOEL DE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Negro Nobodies, London, 1899.</p>
 <p>MOORE, J. HAMPTON.</p>
 <i></i><p>With Speaker Cannon through the Tropics, Philadelphia, 1907<i>.</i></p>
 <p>MORAND, PAUL.</p>
 <i></i><p>Magie Noire, Paris, 19,28.</p>
 <p>MORETON, J. B.</p>
 <i></i><p>West India Customs and Manners, London, 1793.</p>
 <p>MOSELEY, BENJAMIN.</p>
 <i></i><p>A Treatise on Sugar, London, 1800.</p>
 <p>{p. 295}</p>
 <p>NASSAU, ROBERT HAMMILL.</p>
 <i></i><p>Fetishism in West Africa, London, 1904<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Where Animals Talk, London, 1914<i>.</i></p>
 <p>NUGENT, LADY MARIA.</p>
 <i></i><p>Journal of a Voyage to, and Residence in, the Island of Jamaica from 1801 to 1805, London, 1839<i>.</i></p>
 <p>OLDMIXON, JOHN.</p>
 <i></i><p>History of Jamaica, London, 1708.</p>
 <p>OLIVER, VERE LANGFORD.</p>
 <i></i><p>Caribbeana, London, 1910-19.</p>
 <p>PARSONS, ELSIE CLEWS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Folk-Lore of the Antilles, New York, 1933.</p>
 <p>PHILLIPPO, JAMES MURCEL.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica: Its Past and Present State, London, 1843,</p>
 <p>PIM, BEDFORD CLAPPERTON THEVELYAN.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Negro and Jamaica, London, 1866.</p>
 <p>PITMAN, FRANK WESLEY.</p>
 <i></i><p>Development of the British West Indies 1700-1763, New Haven, 1917<i>.</i></p>
 <p>PITTARD, EUGÈNE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Contribution à l'Étude Anthropologie des Achanti,--L'Anthropolie, Paris, 1925<i>.</i></p>
 <p>PULLEN-BURRY, BESSIE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica as it is, 1903, London, 1903.</p>
 <i></i><p>Ethiopia in Exile: Jamaica Revisited, London, 1905.</p>
 <p>RAGATZ, LOWELL JOSEPH.</p>
 <i></i><p>Fall of the Planter Class in the British Caribbean, 1763-1833, New York, 1928.</p>
 <p>RAMPINI, CHARLES.</p>
 <i></i><p>Letters from Jamaica, Edinburgh, 1873.</p>
 <p>RATTRAY, R. SUTHERLAND.</p>
 <i></i><p>Ashanti Proverbs, Oxford, 1916.</p>
 <i></i><p>Ashanti, Oxford, 1923<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Religion and Art in Ashanti, Oxford, 1927.</p>
 <i></i><p>Ashanti Law and Constitution, Oxford, 1929.</p>
 <i></i><p>Akan-Ashanti Folk-Tales, Oxford, 1930<i>.</i></p>
 <p>REGNAULT, ELIAS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Histoire des Antilles, Paris, 1849<i>.</i></p>
 <p>RENNY, ROBERT.</p>
 <i></i><p>History of Jamaica, London, 1807</p>
 <p>{p. 296}</p>
 <p>RILAND, JOHN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Memoir of a West India Planter, London, 1827,</p>
 <p>ROBERTS, HELEN H.</p>
 <i></i><p>Three Jamaica Folk Stories,--Journal of American Folklore, 1922.</p>
 <i></i><p>A Study of Folksong Variants based on Field Work in Jamaica,--Journal of American Folklore, 1925<i>.</i></p>
 <p>RODWAY, JAMES.</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indies and the Spanish Main, London, 1896.</p>
 <p>ROSE, G. H.</p>
 <i></i><p>Letter on the Means and Importance of Converting the Slaves in the West Indies to Christianity, London, 1823<i>.</i></p>
 <p>ROSNY, LUCIEN DE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Les Antilles, Paris, 1886.</p>
 <p>ROUGHLEY, THOMAS.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Jamaica Planter's Guide, London, 1823.</p>
 <p>ST. JOHNSTON, T. R.</p>
 <i></i><p>West India Pepper-pot, or Thirteen "Quashie" Stories, London, 1928.</p>
 <p>SAMUEL, PETER.</p>
 <i></i><p>Wesleyan-Methodist Missions in Jamaica and Honduras London, 1850.</p>
 <p>SCOTT, MICHAEL.</p>
 <i></i><p>Tom Cringle's Log, Edinburgh, 1833<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Cruise of the Midge, Paris, 1836.</p>
 <i></i><p>Captain Clutterbuck's Champagne, Edinburgh, 1862.</p>
 <p>SCOTT, SIBBALD DAVID.</p>
 <i></i><p>To Jamaica and Back, London, 1876.</p>
 <p>SELIGMAN, C. G.</p>
 <i></i><p>Races of Africa, London, 1930<i>.</i></p>
 <p>SENIOR, BERNARD MARTIN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica as it was, as it is, and as it may be, London, 1835<i>.</i></p>
 <p>SEWELL, WILLIAM G.</p>
 <i></i><p>Ordeal of Free Labour in the British West Indies, New York, 1861.</p>
 <p>SHERLOCK, P. M.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica Superstitions, Empire Review, 1924.</p>
 <p>SHORE, JOSEPH.</p>
 <i></i><p>In Old St. James, Kingston, 1911.</p>
 <p>{p. 297}</p>
 <p>SINCLAIR, AUGUSTUS CONSTANTINE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Parliamentary Debates of Jamaica, Vol. XIII, Spanish-Town, 1866.</p>
 <i></i><p>Chronological History of Jamaica, Jamaica, 1889.</p>
 <p>SINGLETON, J.</p>
 <i></i><p>Description of the West Indies: a Poem, London, 1776.</p>
 <p>SLOANE, HANS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Voyage to the Islands . . . and Jamaica, London, 1707-25<i>.</i></p>
 <p>SPENCER, HERBERT.</p>
 <i></i><p>Descriptive Sociology: African Races: Compiled and abstracted by Prof. Duncan, London, 1875.</p>
 <p>Reissue, entirely rewritten by E. Torday, London, 1930<i>.</i></p>
 <p>STEPHEN, JAMES.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Slavery of the British West India Colonies, delineated, London, 1824<i>.</i></p>
 <p>STERNE, HENRY.</p>
 <i></i><p>A Statement of Facts, London, 1837<i>.</i></p>
 <p>STEWART, J.</p>
 <i></i><p>Account of Jamaica and Its Inhabitants, London, 1808.</p>
 <i></i><p>View of the Past and Present State of the Island of Jamaica, Edinburgh, 1817<i>.</i></p>
 <p>STODDARD, CHARLES AUGUSTINE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Cruising among the Caribbees, New York, 1895.</p>
 <p>STUART, VILLIERS.</p>
 <i></i><p>Jamaica Revisited, London, 1891.</p>
 <p>STURGE, JOSEPH.</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indies in 1837, London, 1838.</p>
 <p>TALBOYS, W. P.</p>
 <i></i><p>West India Pickles, New York, 1876.</p>
 <p>TAYLOR, R.</p>
 <i></i><p>Negro Slavery Especially in Jamaica, London, 1823<i>.</i></p>
 <p>THOMAS, HERBERT T.</p>
 <i></i><p>Untrodden Jamaica, Kingston, 1890.</p>
 <p>TREVES, FREDERICK.</p>
 <i></i><p>Cradle of the Deep, New York, 1920.</p>
 <p>TROLLOPE, ANTHONY.</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indies and the Spanish Main, London, 1857<i>.</i></p>
 <p>TROWBRIDGE, WILLIAM R. H.</p>
 <i></i><p>Gossip of the Caribbies. Sketches of Anglo-West Indian Life, London, 1895</p>
 <p>{p. 298}</p>
 <p>TRUMAN, GEORGE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Narrative of a Visit to the West Indies in 1863-64, Philadelphia, 1867.</p>
 <p>TURNBULL, DAVID.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Jamaica Movement, London, 1850.</p>
 <p>UDAL, J. S.</p>
 <i></i><p>Obeah in the West Indies, Folk-Lore, London, 1915<i>.</i></p>
 <p>UNDERHILL, EDWARD BEAN.</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indies: their Social and Religious Condition, London, 1862.</p>
 <p>VAN DYKE, JOHN C.</p>
 <i></i><p>In the West Indies, New York, 1932.</p>
 <p>VERRILL, ALPHEUS HYATT.</p>
 <i></i><p>Book of the West Indies, New York, 1917.</p>
 <p>WALKER, H. DE R.</p>
 <i></i><p>West Indies and the Empire, London, 1901.</p>
 <p>WALKER, JAMES.</p>
 <i></i><p>Letters on the West Indies, London, 1818.</p>
 <p>WALKER, WILLIAM.</p>
 <i></i><p>On the Social and Economic Position and Prospects of the British West India Possessions, London, 1873<i>.</i></p>
 <p>WATSON, RICHARD.</p>
 <i></i><p>Defence of the Wesleyan Methodist Missions in the West Indies, London, 1817.</p>
 <p>WEATHERFORD, WILLIS DUKE.</p>
 <i></i><p>The Negro from Africa to America, New York, 1924.</p>
 <p>WENTWORTH, TRELAWNEY.</p>
 <i></i><p>West India Sketch Book, London, 1834<i>.</i></p>
 <p>WERNER, ALICE.</p>
 <i></i><p>Natives of British Central Africa. London, 1906.</p>
 <p>WHITEHEAD, HENRY S.</p>
 <i></i><p>Obi in the Caribbean, The Commonweal, 1927.</p>
 <p>WHITELEY, HENRY.</p>
 <i></i><p>Three Months in Jamaica in 1832, London, 1833<i>.</i></p>
 <p>WILBERFORCE, WILLIAM.</p>
 <i></i><p>An Appeal to the Religion, Justice, and Humanity of the Inhabitants of the British Empire, in behalf of the Negro Slaves in the West Indies, London, 1823<i>.</i></p>
 <p>WILCOX, ELLA WHEELER.</p>
 <i></i><p>Sailing Sunny Seas, Chicago, 1909.</p>
 <p>{p. 299}</p>
 <p>WILLIAMS, CYNRIC R.</p>
 <i></i><p>Tour through the Island of Jamaica from the Western to the Eastern End, in the Year 1823, London, 1826.</p>
 <p>WILLIAMS, JAMES.</p>
 <i></i><p>Narrative of Events since the First of August, 1834, London, 1837,</p>
 <p>WILLIAMS, JOSEPH JOHN.</p>
 <i></i><p>Whisperings of the Caribbean, New York, 1925<i>.</i></p>
 <p>Hebrewisms of West Africa, New York, 1930.</p>
 <i></i><p>Voodoos and Obeahs, New York, 1932<i>.</i></p>
 <p>WILSON, J. LEIGHTON.</p>
 <i></i><p>Western Africa, Its History, Condition and Prospects, London, 1856.</p>
 <p>WILSON, MRS. W. E. (WONA).</p>
 <i></i><p>Selections of Anancy Stories, Kingston, 1899.</p>
 <p>YOUNG, ROBERT.</p>
 <i></i><p>View of Slavery in connection with Christianity, London, 1825.</p>
 <p>ZELLER, RUDOLF.</p>
 </body>