<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_494.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_496.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:494</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:</i></p>
 While I was sitting with Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) two person came to 
 him; one of them complained about his poverty and the other complained
 about the prevalence of robberies. Allah's Apostle said, "As regards 
 stealing and robberies, there will shortly come a time when a caravan 
 will go to Mecca (from Medina) without any guard. And regarding 
 poverty, The Hour (Day of Judgment) will not be established till one 
 of you wanders about with his object of charity and will not find 
 anybody to accept it And (no doubt) each one of you will stand in 
 front of Allah and there will be neither a curtain nor an interpreter 
 between him and Allah, and Allah will ask him, 'Did not I give you 
 wealth?' He will reply in the affirmative. Allah will further ask, 
 'Didn't send a messenger to you?' And again that person will reply in 
 the affirmative Then he will look to his right and he will see nothing
 but Hell-fire, and then he will look to his left and will see nothing 
 but Hell-fire. And so, any (each one) of you should save himself from 
 the fire even by giving half of a date-fruit (in charity). And if you 
 do not find a hall date-fruit, then (you can do it through saying) a 
 good pleasant word (to your brethren). (See Hadith No. 793 Vol. 4). 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_496.htm">Next: 2:495: Abu Musa: Thy Prophet (p.b.u.h) said,  A time will come upon the people when a ...</a></center>
 </body>