<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_383.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_385.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:383</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Amir bin Sad bin Abi Waqqas:</i></p>
 That his father said, "In the year of the last Hajj of the Prophet I 
 became seriously ill and the Prophet used to visit me inquiring about 
 my health. I told him, 'I am reduced to this state because of illness 
 and I am wealthy and have no inheritors except a daughter, (In this 
 narration the name of 'Amir bin Sad is mentioned and in fact it is a 
 mistake; the narrator is 'Aisha bint Sad bin Abi Waqqas). Should I 
 give two-thirds of my property in charity?' He said, 'No.' I asked, 
 'Half?' He said, 'No.' then he added, 'One-third, and even one-third 
 is much. You'd better leave your inheritors wealthy rather than 
 leaving them poor, begging others. You will get a reward for whatever 
 you spend for Allah's sake, even for what you put in your wife's 
 mouth.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Will I be left alone after my 
 companions have gone?' He said, 'If you are left behind, whatever good
 deeds you will do will up-grade you and raise you high. And perhaps 
 you will have a long life so that some people will be benefited by you
 while others will be harmed by you. O Allah! Complete the emigration 
 of my companions and do not turn them renegades.' But Allah's Apostle 
 felt sorry for poor Sad bin Khaula as he died in Mecca." (but Sad bin 
 Abi Waqqas lived long after the Prophet (p.b.u.h).) 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_385.htm">Next: 2:384: 'Abdullah: The Prophet said,  He who slaps the cheeks, tears the clothes and ...</a></center>
 </body>