<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_159.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_161.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:161</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:</i></p>
 The sun eclipsed in the life-time of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) . Allah's 
 Apostle offered the eclipse prayer and stood for a long period equal 
 to the period in which one could recite Surat-al-Baqara. Then he bowed
 for a long time and then stood up for a long period which was shorter 
 than that of the first standing, then bowed again for a long time but 
 for a shorter period than the first; then he prostrated twice and then
 stood up for a long period which was shorter than that of the first 
 standing; then he bowed for a long time which was shorter than the 
 previous one, and then he raised his head and stood up for a long 
 period which was shorter than the first standing, then he bowed for a 
 long time which was shorter than the first bowing, and then prostrated
 (twice) and finished the prayer. By then, the sun (eclipse) had 
 cleared. The Prophet then said, "The sun and the moon are two of the 
 signs of Allah. They eclipse neither because of the death of somebody 
 nor because of his life (i.e. birth). So when you see them, remember 
 Allah." The people say, "O Allah's Apostle! We saw you taking 
 something from your place and then we saw you retreating." The Prophet
 replied, "I saw Paradise and stretched my hands towards a bunch (of 
 its fruits) and had I taken it, you would have eaten from it as long 
 as the world remains. I also saw the Hell-fire and I had never seen 
 such a horrible sight. I saw that most of the inhabitants were women."
 The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Why is it so?" The Prophet 
 replied, "Because of their ungratefulness." It was asked whether they 
 are ungrateful to Allah. The Prophet said, "They are ungrateful to 
 their companions of life (husbands) and ungrateful to good deeds. If 
 you are benevolent to one of them throughout the life and if she sees 
 anything (undesirable) in you, she will say, 'I have never had any 
 good from you.' " 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_161.htm">Next: 2:162: Fatima bint Al-Mundhir: Asma' bint Al Bakr said,  I came to 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet ...</a></center>
 </body>