<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_157.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_159.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:159</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:</i></p>
 A Jewess came to ask 'Aisha (the wife of the Prophet) about something.
 She said to her, "May Allah give you refuge from the punishment of the
 grave." So 'Aisha ' asked Allah's Apostle "Would the people be 
 punished in their graves?" Allah's Apostle after seeking refuge with 
 Allah from the punishment of the grave (and thus replied in the 
 affirmative). Then one day, Allah's Apostle rode to go to some place 
 but the sun eclipsed. He returned in the forenoon and passed through 
 the rear of the dwellings (of his wives) and stood for the (eclipse) 
 prayer, and the people stood behind him. He stood up for a long period
 and then performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first
 bowing. Then he raised his head and prostrated. Then he stood up (for 
 the second Raka) for a long while but the standing was shorter than 
 that of the first Raka. Then he performed a prolonged bowing which was
 shorter than the first one. Then he raised his head and prostrated. 
 Then he stood up for a long time but shorter than the first. Then he 
 performed a prolonged bowing but shorter than the first. Then he 
 raised his head and prostrated and finished the prayer and (then 
 delivered the sermon and) said as much as Allah wished. And then he 
 ordered the people to seek refuge with Allah from the punishment of 
 the grave. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_159.htm">Next: 2:160: 'Abdullah bin 'Amr When the sun eclipsed in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and an ...</a></center>
 </body>