<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_327.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_329.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:326</h3><p><i>Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi :</i></p>
 The news about the differences amongst the people of Bani'Amr bin 'Auf
 reached Allah's Apostle and so he went to them along with some of his 
 companions to affect a reconciliation between them. Allah's Apostle 
 was delayed there, and the time of the prayer was due. Bilal went to 
 Abu Bakr and said to him, "Allah's Apostle has been delayed (there) 
 and the time of prayer is due. So will you lead the people in prayer?"
 Abu Bakr said, "Yes, if you wish." Bilal pronounced the Iqama and Abu 
 Bakr, went forward and said Takbir for the people. In the mean-time 
 Allah's Apostle came crossing the rows (of the praying people) and 
 stood in the (first) row and the people started clapping. Abu Bakr, 
 would never glance side-ways in his prayer but when the people clapped
 much he looked back and (saw) Allah's Apostle . Allah's Apostle 
 beckoned him to carry on the prayer. Abu Bakr raised his hands and 
 thanked Allah, and retreated till he reached the (first) row. Allah's 
 Apostle went forward and led the people in the prayer. When he 
 completed the prayer he faced the people and said, "O people! Why did 
 you start clapping when something unusual happened to you in the 
 prayer? Clapping is only for women. So whoever amongst you comes 
 across something in the prayer should say, 'Subhan-Allah' for there is
 none who will not turn round on hearing him saying Subhan-Allah. O 
 Ab-u Bakr! What prevented you from leading the people in the prayer 
 when I beckoned you to do so?" Abu Bakr replied, "How dare the son of 
 Abu Quhafa lead the prayer in the presence of Allah's Apostle ?" 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_329.htm">Next: 2:327: Asma': I went to 'Aisha and she was standing praying and the people, too, ...</a></center>
 </body>