<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_798.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_800.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:797</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Bakra:</i></p>
 The Prophet delivered to us a sermon on the Day of Nahr. He said, "Do 
 you know what is the day today?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle know 
 better." He remained silent till we thought that he might give that 
 day another name. He said, "Isn't it the Day of Nahr?" We said, "It 
 is." He further asked, "Which month is this?" We said, "Allah and His 
 Apostle know better." He remained silent till we thought that he might
 give it another name. He then said, "Isn't it the month of 
 Dhul-Hijja?" We replied: "Yes! It is." He further asked, "What town is
 this?" We replied, "Allah and His Apostle know it better." He remained
 silent till we thought that he might give it another name. He then 
 said, "Isn't it the forbidden (Sacred) town (of Mecca)?" We said, 
 "Yes. It is." He said, "No doubt, your blood and your properties are 
 sacred to one another like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this 
 month of yours, in this town of yours, till the day you meet your 
 Lord. No doubt! Haven't I conveyed Allah's message to you? They said, 
 "Yes." He said, "O Allah! Be witness. So it is incumbent upon those 
 who are present to convey it (this information) to those who are 
 absent because the informed one might comprehend it (what I have said)
 better than the present audience, who will convey it to him. Beware! 
 Do not renegade (as) disbelievers after me by striking the necks 
 (cutting the throats) of one another." 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_800.htm">Next: 2:798: Ibn 'Umar: At Mina, the Prophet (p.b.u.h) said,  Do you know what is the day ...</a></center>
 </body>