<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_707.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_709.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:706</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Urwa:</i></p>
 I asked 'Aisha : "How do you interpret the statement of Allah,. : 
 Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols of 
 Allah, and whoever performs the Hajj to the Ka'ba or performs 'Umra, 
 it is not harmful for him to perform Tawaf between them (Safa and 
 Marwa.) (2.158). By Allah! (it is evident from this revelation) there 
 is no harm if one does not perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa." 
 'Aisha said, "O, my nephew! Your interpretation is not true. Had this 
 interpretation of yours been correct, the statement of Allah should 
 have been, 'It is not harmful for him if he does not perform Tawaf 
 between them.' But in fact, this divine inspiration was revealed 
 concerning the Ansar who used to assume lhram for worship ping an idol
 called "Manat" which they used to worship at a place called 
 Al-Mushallal before they embraced Islam, and whoever assumed Ihram 
 (for the idol), would consider it not right to perform Tawaf between 
 Safa and Marwa. 
 <p>
 When they embraced Islam, they asked Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) 
 regarding it, saying, "O Allah's Apostle! We used to refrain from 
 Tawaf between Safa and Marwa." So Allah revealed: 'Verily; (the 
 mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols of Allah.' " 
 Aisha added, "Surely, Allah's Apostle set the tradition of Tawaf 
 between Safa and Marwa, so nobody is allowed to omit the Tawaf between
 them." Later on I ('Urwa) told Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman (of 'Aisha's
 narration) and he said, 'i have not heard of such information, but I 
 heard learned men saying that all the people, except those whom 'Aisha
 mentioned and who used to assume lhram for the sake of Manat, used to 
 perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. 
 </p><p>
 When Allah referred to the Tawaf of the Ka'ba and did not mention Safa
 and Marwa in the Quran, the people asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! We used 
 to perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa and Allah has revealed (the 
 verses concerning) Tawaf of the Ka'ba and has not mentioned Safa and 
 Marwa. Is there any harm if we perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa?' 
 So Allah revealed: "Verily As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols 
 of Allah." Abu Bakr said, "It seems that this verse was revealed 
 concerning the two groups, those who used to refrain from Tawaf 
 between Safa and Marwa in the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance and 
 those who used to perform the Tawaf then, and after embracing Islam 
 they refrained from the Tawaf between them as Allah had enjoined Tawaf
 of the Ka'ba and did not mention Tawaf (of Safa and Marwa) till later 
 after mentioning the Tawaf of the Ka'ba.' 
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_709.htm">Next: 2:707: Nafi': Ibn 'Umar said,  When Allah's Apostle performed the first Tawaf he did...</a></center>
 </body>