<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_751.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_753.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:750</h3><p><i>Narrated Ibn 'Umar:</i></p>
 During the last Hajj (Hajj-al-Wada') of Allah's Apostle he performed 
 'Umra and Hajj. He drove a Hadi along with him from Dhul-Hulaifa. 
 Allah's Apostle started by assuming Ihram for'Umra and Hajj. And the 
 people, too, performed the 'Umra and Hajj along with the Prophet. Some
 of them brought the Hadi and drove it along with them, while the 
 others did not. So, when the Prophet arrived at Mecca. he said to the 
 people, "Whoever among you has driven the Hadi, should not finish his 
 Ihram till he completes his Hajj. And whoever among you has not 
 (driven) the Hadi with him, should perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba and the 
 Tawaf between Safa and Marwa, then cut short his hair and finish his 
 Ihram, and should later assume Ihram for Hajj; but he must offer a 
 Hadi (sacrifice); and if anyone cannot afford a Hadi, he should fast 
 for three days during the Hajj and seven days when he returns home. 
 The Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba on his arrival (at Mecca); he
 touched the (Black Stone) corner first of all and then did Ramal (fast
 walking with moving of the shoulders) during the first three rounds 
 round the Ka'ba, and during the last four rounds he walked. After 
 finishing Tawaf of the Ka'ba, he offered a two Rakat prayer at Maqam 
 Ibrahim, and after finishing the prayer he went to Safa and Marwa and 
 performed seven rounds of Tawaf between them and did not do any deed 
 forbidden because of Ihram, till he finished all the ceremonies of his
 Hajj and sacrificed his Hadi on the day of Nahr (10th day of 
 Dhul-Hijja). He then hastened onwards (to Mecca) and performed Tawaf 
 of the Ka'ba and then everything that was forbidden because of Ihram 
 became permissible. Those who took and drove the Hadi with them did 
 the same as Allah's Apostle did. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_753.htm">Next: 2:751: Nafi': 'Abdullah (bin 'Abdullah) bin 'Umar said to his father,  Stay here, ...</a></center>
 </body>