<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_124.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_126.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:126</h3><p><i>Narrated Sharik bin 'Abdullah bin Abi Namir:</i></p>
 I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "On a Friday a person entered the main 
 Mosque through the gate facing the pulpit while Allah's Apostle was 
 delivering the Khutba. The man stood in front of Allah's Apostle and 
 said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the roads are 
 cut off; so please pray to Allah for rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's 
 Apostle (p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Bless us 
 with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain!' 
 " Anas added, "By Allah, we could not see any trace of cloud in the 
 sky and there was no building or a house between us and (the mountains
 of) Sila." Anas added, "A heavy cloud like a shield appeared from 
 behind it (i.e. Sila' Mountain). When it came in the middle of the 
 sky, it spread and then rained." Anas further said, "By Allah! We 
 could not see the sun for a week. Next Friday a person entered through
 the same gate and at that time Allah's Apostle was delivering the 
 Friday's Khutba. The man stood in front of him and said, 'O Allah's 
 Apostle! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut off, please 
 pray to Allah to with-hold rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's Apostle I 
 raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Round about us and not on 
 us. O Allah! On the plateaus, on the mountains, on the hills, in the 
 valleys and on the places where trees grow.' So the rain stopped and 
 we came out walking in the sun." Sharik asked Anas whether it was the 
 same person who had asked for the rain (the last Friday). Anas replied
 that he did not know. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_126.htm">Next: 2:127: Sharik: Anas bin Malik said,  A person entered the Mosque on a Friday through ...</a></center>
 </body>