<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_14a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_16a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question XV</h2>
 <h3>It is Shown that, on Account of the Sins of Witches, the Innocent are often Bewitched, yea, Sometimes even for their Own Sins.</h3></center>
 
         
 It is a fact that, by Divine permission, many innocent people suffer loss 
 and are punished by the aforesaid plagues, not for their own sins, but for 
 those of witches. And lest this should seem to any a paradox, S. Thomas 
 shows in the <i>Second of the Second</i>, quest. 8, that this is just in 
 God. For he divides the punishments of this life into three classes. First, 
 one man belongs to another; therefore, if a man be punished in his 
 possessions, it may be that another man suffers for this punishment. For, 
 bodily speaking, sons are a property of the father, and slaves and animals 
 are the property of their masters; and so the sons are sometimes punished 
 for their parents. Thus the son born to David from adultery quickly died; 
 and the animals of the Amalekites were bidden to be killed. Yet the reason 
 for these things remains a mystery.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, the sin of one may be passed on to another; and this in two ways. 
 By imitation, as children imitate the sins of their parents, and slaves and 
 dependents the sins of their masters, that they may sin more boldly. In 
 this way the sons inherit ill-gotten gain, and slaves share in robberies and 
 unjust feuds, in which they are often killed. And they who are subject to 
 Governors sin the more boldly when they see them sin, even if they do not 
 commit the same sins; wherefore they are justly punished.<br>
 
         
 Also the sin of one is passed on to another in the way of desert, as when 
 the sins of wicked subjects are passed on to a bad Governor, because the 
 sins of the subjects deserve a bad Governor. See <i>Job</i>: He makes 
 Hypocrites to reign on account of the sins of the people.<br>
 
         
 Sin, and consequently punishment, can also be passed on through some consent 
 or dissimulation. For when those in authority neglect to reprove sin, then 
 very often the good are punished with the wicked, as S. Augustine says in 
 the first book <i>de Ciuitate Dei</i>. An example was brought to our notice 
 as Inquisitors. A town was once rendered almost destitute by the death of 
 its citizens; and there was a rumour that a certain buried woman was 
 gradually eating the shroud in which she had been buried, and that the 
 plague could not cease until she had eaten the whole shroud and absorbed it 
 into her stomach. A council was held, and the Podesta with the Governor of 
 the city dug up the grave, and found half the shroud absorbed through the 
 mouth and throat into the stomach, and consumed. In horror at this sight, 
 the Podesta drew his sword and cut off her head and threw it out of the 
 grave, and at once the plague ceased. Now the sins of that old woman were, 
 by Divine permission, visited upon the innocent on account of the 
 dissimulation of what had happened before. For when an Inquisition was held 
 it was found that during a long time of her life she had been a Sorceress 
 and Enchantress. Another example is the punishment of a pestilence because 
 David numbered the people.<br>
 
         
 Thirdly, sin is passed on by Divine permission in commendation of the unity 
 of human society, that one man should take care for another by refraining 
 from sin; and also to make sin appear the more detestable, in that the sin 
 of one redounds upon all, as though all were one body. An example is the sin 
 of Achan in <i>Joshua</i> vii.<br>
 
         
 We can add to these two other methods: that the wicked are punished sometimes 
 by the good, and sometimes by other wicked men. For as Gratianus says 
 (XXIII, 5), sometimes God punishes the wicked through those who are 
 exercising their legitimate power at His command; and this in two ways: 
 sometimes with merit on the part of the punishers, as when He punished the 
 sins of the Canaanites through His people; sometimes with no merit on the 
 part of the punishers, but even to their own punishment, as when He punished 
 the tribe of Benjamin and destroyed it except for a few men. And sometimes 
 He punishes by His nations being aroused, either by command or permission, 
 but with no intention of obeying God, but rather greedy for their own gain, 
 and therefore to their own damnation; as He now punished His people by the 
 Turks, and did so more often by strange nations in the Old Law.<br>
 
         
 But it must be noted that for whatever cause a man be punished, if he does 
 not bear his pains patiently, then it becomes a scourge, not a correction, 
 but only of vengeance, that is, of punishment. See <i>Deuteronomy</i> xxxii: 
 A fire is kindled in min anger (that is, my punishment; for there is no 
 other anger in God), and shall burn unto the lowest hell (that is, 
 vengeance shall begin here and burn unto the last damnation, as S. Augustine 
 explains), And there is further authority concerning punishment in his 
 Fourth Distinction. But if men patiently bear their scourges, and are patient 
 in the state of grace, they take the place of a correction, as S. Thomas 
 says in his Fourth Book. And this is true even of one punished for committing 
 witchcraft, or of a witch, to a greater or less degree according to the 
 devotion of the sufferer and the quality of his crime.<br>
 
         
 But the natural death of the body, being the last terror, is not a 
 correction, since of its nature it partakes in the punishment for original 
 sin. Nevertheless, according to Scotus, when it is awaited with resignation 
 and devotion, and offered in its bitterness to God, it can in some way 
 become a correction. But violent death, whether a man deserves it or not, is 
 always a correction, if it is borne patiently and in grace. So much for 
 punishments inflicted on account of the sins of others.<br>
 
         
 But God also punishes men in this life for their own sins, especially in the 
 matter of bewitchment. For see <i>Tobias</i> vii: The devil has power over 
 those who follow their lusts. And this is clear from what we have already 
 said concerning the member and the genital powers, which God chiefly allows 
 to be bewitched.<br>
 
         
 However, for the purpose of preaching to the public it is to be noted that, 
 notwithstanding the aforesaid punishments which God inflicts on men for 
 their own and others' sins, the preacher should keep as his basic principle 
 and to the people this ruling of the law; which says, No one must be 
 punished without guilt, unless there is some cause for doing so. And this 
 ruling holds good in the Court of Heaven, that is, of God, just as it does 
 in the human Courts of Justice, whether secular or ecclesiastic.<br>
 
         
 The preacher may predicate this of the Court of Heaven. For the punishment 
 of God is of two kinds, spiritual and temporal. In the former, punishment is 
 never found without guilt. In the latter it is sometimes found quite without 
 guilt, but not without cause. The first, or spiritual punishment, is of 
 three kinds; the first being forfeiture of grace and a consequent hardening 
 in sin, which is never inflicted except for the sufferer's own guilt. The 
 second is the punishment of loss, that is, deprivation of glory, which is 
 never inflicted without personal guilt in adults, or contracted guilt in 
 children born from their parents' sin. The third is the punishment of pain, 
 that is, the torture of hell fire, and is plainly due to guilt. Wherefore 
 when it is said in <i>Exodus</i> xx: I am a jealous God, visiting the sins 
 of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation: it is 
 understood as speaking of the imitators of their fathers' crimes, as Gratian 
 has explained, Book I, quest. 4; where he also gives other expositions.<br>
 
         
 Now with regard to God's second, or temporal punishment: first, it may be, 
 as has been said before, for the sin of another (but not without cause), or 
 for personal guilt only, without any other's sin. But if you wish to know 
 the causes for which God punishes, and even without any guilt of the 
 sufferer or of another man, you may refer to the five methods which the 
 Master expounds in Book IV, dist. 15, cap. 2. And you must take the three 
 first causes, for the other two refer to personal guilt.<br>
 
         
 For he says that for five causes God scourges man in this life, or inflicts 
 punishment. First, that God may be glorified; and this is when some 
 punishment or affliction is miraculously removed, as in the case of the man 
 born blind (<i>S. John</i> ix), or of the raising of Lazarus (<i>S. John</i> 
 xi).<br>
 
         
 Secondly, if the first cause is absent, it is sent that merit may be acquired 
 through the exercise of patience, and also that inner hidden virtue may be 
 made manifest to others. Examples are <i>Job</i> i and <i>Tobias</i> ii.<br>
 
         
 Thirdly that virtue may be preserved through the humiliation of castigation. 
 S. Paul is an example, who says of himself in II. <i>Corinthians</i> xii: 
 There was given unto me a thorn in my flesh, the messenger of Satan. And 
 according to Remigius this thorn was the infirmity of carnal desire. These 
 are the cause that are without guilt in the sufferer.<br>
 
         
 Fourthly, that eternal damnation should begin in this life, that it might be 
 in some way shown what will be suffered in hell. Examples are Herod (<i>Acts</i> 
 xii) and Antiochus (II. <i>Maccabees</i> ix).<br>
 
         
 Fifthly, that man may be purified, by the expulsion and obliteration of his 
 guilt through scourges. Examples may be taken from Miriam, Aaron's sister, 
 who was stricken with leprosy, and from the Israelites wandering in the 
 wilderness, according to S. Jerome, XXIII, 4. Or it may be for the correction 
 of sin, as is exemplified by the case of David, who, after being pardoned 
 for his adultery, was driven from his kingdom, as is shown in II. <i>Kings</i>, 
 and is commented on by S. Gregory in his discourse on sin. It may, in fact, 
 be said that every punishment that we suffer proceeds from our own sin, or 
 at least from the original sin in which we were born, which is itself the 
 cause of all causes.<br>
 
         
 But as to the punishment of loss, meaning by that eternal damnation which 
 they will suffer in the future, no one doubts that all the damned will be 
 tortured with grevious pains. For just as grace is followed by the blessed 
 vision of the Kingdom of Heaven, so is mortal sin followed by punishment in 
 hell. And just as the degrees of blessedness in Heaven are measured in 
 accordance with the degrees of charity and grace in life, so the degrees of 
 punishment in hell are measured according to the degree of crime in this 
 life. See <i>Deuteronomy</i> xxv: The measure of punishment will be according 
 to the measure of sin. And this is so with all other sins, but applies 
 especially to witches. See <i>Hebrews</i> x: Of how much sorer punishment, 
 suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden underfoot the Son 
 of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was 
 sanctified, an unholy thing?<br>
 
         
 And such are the sins of witches, who deny the Faith, and work many evil 
 bewitchments through the most Holy Sacrament, as will be shown in the 
 Second Part.
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_16a.htm">Next: Question XVI</a><br>The Foregoing Truths are Set out in Particular, this by a Comparison of the Works of Witches with Other Baleful Superstitions.<br>
 </center>
 </body>