<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_17a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a00a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question XVIII</h2>
 <h3>Here follows the Method of Preaching against and Controverting Five Arguments of Laymen and Lewd Folk, which seem to be Variously Approved, that God does not Allow so Great Power to the Devil and Witches as is involved in the Performance of such Mighty Works of Witchcraft.</h3></center>
 
         
 Finally, let the preacher br armed against certain arguments of laymen, and 
 even of some learned men, who deny, up to a certain point, that there are 
 witches. For, although they conceded the malice and power of the devil to 
 inflict such evils at his will, they deny that the Divine permission is 
 granted to him, and will not admit that God allows such things to be done. 
 And although they have no method in their argument, groping blindly now this 
 way and now that, it is yet necessary to reduce their assertions to five 
 arguments, from which all their cavillings proceed. And the first is, that 
 God does not permit the devil to rage against men wish such great power.<br>
 
         
 The question put is whether the Divine permission must always accompany an 
 infliction caused by the devil through a witch. And give arguments are 
 submitted to prove that God does not permit it, and that therefore there is 
 no witchcraft in the world. And the first argument is taken from God; the 
 second from the devil; the third from the witch; the fourth from the 
 affliction ascribed to witchcraft; and the fifth from the preachers and 
 judges, on the assumption that they have so preached against and punished 
 witches that they would have no security in life.<br>
 
         
 And first as follows: God can punish men for their sins, and He punishes 
 with the sword, famine, and pestilence; as well as with various and countless 
 other infirmities to which human nature is subject. Wherefore, there being 
 no need for Him to add further punishments, He does not permit witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, if that which is said of the devil were true, namely, that he can 
 obstruct the generative forces so that a woman cannot conceive, or that if 
 she does conceive, he can cause an abortion; or, if there is no abortion, he 
 can cause the children to be killed after birth; in that case he would be 
 able to destroy the whole world; and it could also be said that the devil's 
 works were stronger than God's, since the Sacrament of matrimony is a work 
 of God.<br>
 
         
 Thirdly, they argue from man himself, that if there were any witchcraft in 
 the world, then some men would be more bewitched than others; and that it is 
 a false argument to say that men are bewitched for a punishment of their 
 sins, and therefore false to maintain that there is witchcraft in the world. 
 And they prove that it is false by arguing that, if it were true, then the 
 greater sinners would receive the greater punishment, and that this is not 
 the case; for sinners are less punished sometimes than the just, as is seen 
 in the case of innocent children who are alleged to be bewitched.<br>
 
         
 Their fourth argument can be added to that which they adduce concerning God; 
 namely, that a thing which a man can prevent and does not prevent, but 
 allows it to be done, may be judged to proceed from his will. But since God 
 is All-Good, He cannot wish evil, and therefore cannot permit evil to be 
 done which He is able to prevent.<br>
 
         
 Again, taking their argument from the infliction itself, which is alleged to 
 be due to witchcraft; they submit that they are similar to natural 
 infirmities and defects, and may therefore by cause by a natural defect. For 
 it may happen through some natural defect that a man becomes lame, or blind, 
 or loses his reason, or even dies; wherefore such things cannot confidently 
 be ascribed to witches.<br>
 
         
 Lastly, they argue that preachers and judges have preached and practised 
 against witches in such a way that, if there were witches, their lives would 
 never be safe from them on account of the great hatred that witches would 
 have for them.<br>
 
         
 But the contrary arguments may be taken from the First Question, where it 
 treats of the third postulate of the First Part; and those points may be 
 propounded to the people which are most fitting. How God permits evil to be, 
 even though He does not wish it; but He permits it for the wonderful 
 perfecting of the universe, which may be considered in the fact that good 
 things are more highly commendable, are more pleasing and laudable, when 
 they are compared with bad things; and authority can be quoted in support of 
 this. Also that the depth of God's Divine wisdom, justice, and goodness 
 should be shown forth, whereas it would otherwise remain hidden.<br>
 
         
 For a brief settlement of this question there are various treatises available 
 on this subject for the information of the people, to the effect, namely, 
 that God justly permitted two Falls, that of the Angels and that of our 
 first parents; and since these were the greatest of all falls, it is no 
 matter for wonder if other smaller ones are permitted. But it is in their 
 consequences that those two Falls were the greatest, not in their 
 circumstances, in which last respect, as was shown in the last Question, the 
 sins of witches exceed those of the bad angels and our first parents. In the 
 same place it is shown how God justly permitted those first Falls, and 
 anyone is at liberty to collect and enlarge upon what is there said as much 
 as he wishes.<br>
 
         
 But we must answer their arguments. As to the first, that God punishes quite 
 enough by means of natural diseases, and by sword and famine, we make a 
 threefold answer. First, that God did not limit His power to the processes 
 of nature, or even to the influences of the stars, in such a way that He 
 cannot go beyond those limits; for He has often exceeded them in the 
 punishment of sins, by sending plagues and other afflictions beyond all the 
 influence of that stars; as when He punished the sin of pride in David, when 
 he numbered the people, by sending a pestilence upon the people.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, it agrees with the Divine wisdom that He should so govern all 
 things that He allows them to act at their own instigation. Consequently, it 
 is not His purpose to prevent altogether the malice of the devil, but rather 
 to permit it as far as He sees it to be for the ultimate good of the 
 universe; although it is true that the devil is continually held in check by 
 the good Angels, so that he may not do all the harm that he wishes. 
 Similarly He does not propose to restrain the human sins which are possible 
 to man through his free-will, such as the abnegation of the Faith, and the 
 devotion of himself to the devil, which things are in the power of the human 
 will. From these two premisses it follows that, when God is most offended, 
 He justly permits those evils which are chiefly sought for by witches, and 
 for which they deny the Faith, up to the extent of the devil's power; and 
 such is the ability to injure men, animals, and the fruits of the earth.<br>
 
         
 Thirdly, God justly permits those evils which indirectly cause the greatest 
 uneasiness and torment to the devil; and of such a sort are those evils 
 which are done by witches through the power of devils. For the devil is 
 indirectly tormented very greatly when he sees that, against his will, God 
 uses all evil for the glory of His name, for the commendation of the Faith, 
 for the purgation of the elect, and for the acquisition of merit. For it is 
 certain that nothing can be more galling to the pride of the devil, which he 
 always rears up against God (as it is said: The pride of them that hate Thee 
 increases ever), than that God should convert his evil machinations to His 
 own glory. Therefore God justly permits all these things.<br>
 
         
 Their second argument has been answered before; but there are two points in 
 it which must be answered in detail. In the first place, far from its being 
 true that the devil, or his works, as stronger than God, it is apparent that 
 his power is small, since he can do nothing without the Divine permission. 
 Therefore it may be said that the devil's power is small in comparison with 
 the Divine permission, although it is very great in comparison with earthly 
 powers, which it naturally excels, as is shown in the often quoted text in 
 <i>Job</i> xi: There is no power on earth to be compared with him.<br>
 
         
 In the second place, we must answer the question with God permits witchcraft 
 to affect the generative powers more than any other human function. This has 
 been dealt with above, under the title, How witches can obstruct the 
 generative powers and the venereal act. For it is on account of the 
 shamefulness of that act, and because the original sin due to the guilt of 
 our first parents is inherited by means of that act. It is symbolized also 
 by the serpent, who was the first instrument of the devil.<br>
 
         
 To their third we answer that the devil has more intention and desire to 
 tempt the good than the wicked; although he does in fact tempt the wicked 
 more than the good, for the reason that the wicked have more aptitude than 
 the good to respond to his temptation. In the same way, he is more eager to 
 injure the good than the bad, but he finds it easier to injure the wicked. 
 And the reason for this is, according to S. Gregory, that the more often a 
 man gives way to the devil, the harder he makes it for himself to struggle 
 against him. But since it is the wicked who most often give way to the devil, 
 their temptations are the hardest and most frequent, as they have not the 
 shield of Faith with which to protect themselves. Concerning this shield S. 
 Paul speaks in <i>Ephesians</i> vi. Above all, taking the shield of faith, 
 wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. But 
 on the other hand, he assails the good more bitterly than the wicked. And 
 the reason for this is that he already possesses the wicked, but not the 
 good; and therefore he tried the harder to draw into his power through 
 tribulation the just, who are not his, than the wicked, who are already his. 
 In the same way, an earthly prince more severely chastises those who disobey 
 his laws, or injure his kingdom, that those who do not set themselves against 
 him.<br>
 
         
 In answer to their fourth argument, in addition to what has already been 
 written on this subject, the preacher can expound the truth that God permits 
 evil to be done, but does not wish it to be done, by the five signs of the 
 Divine will, which are Precept, Prohibition, Advice, Operation, and 
 Permission. See S. Thomas, especially in his First Part, quest. 19, art. 12, 
 where this is very plainly set forth. For although there is only one will in 
 God, which is God Himself, just as His Essence is One; yet in respect of its 
 fulfilment, His will is shown and signified to us in many ways, as the 
 <i>Psalm</i> says: The mighty works of the Lord are fulfilled in all His 
 wishes. Wherefore there is a distinction between the actual essential Will 
 of God and its visible effects; even as the will, properly so called, is the 
 will of a man's good pleasure, but in a metaphorical sense it is the will 
 expressed by outward signs. For it is by signs and metaphors that we are 
 shown that God wishes this to be.<br>
 
         
 We may take an example from a human father who, while he has only one will 
 in himself, expresses that will in five ways, either by his own agency, or 
 through that of someone else. Through his own agency he expresses it in two 
 ways, either directly or indirectly. Directly, when he himself does a thing; 
 and then it is Operation. Indirectly, when he does not hinder someone else 
 from acting (see Aritotle's <i>Physics</i>, IV: Prohibition is indirect 
 causation), and this is called the sign of Permission. And the human father 
 signifies his will through the agency of someone else in three ways. Either 
 he orders someone to do something, or conversely forbids something; and 
 these are the signs of Precept and Prohibition. Or he persuades and advises 
 someone to do something; and this is the sign of Advice. And just as the 
 human will is manifested in these five ways, so is God's will. For that 
 God's will is shown by Precept, Prohibition, and Advice is seen in 
 <i>S. Matthew</i> vi: Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: that is 
 to say, may we on earth fulfil His Precepts, avoid His Prohibitions, and 
 follow His Advice. And in the same way, S. Augustine shows that Permission 
 and Operation are signs of God's will, where he says in the <i>Enchiridion:</i> 
 Nothing is done unless Almighty God wishes it to be done, either by 
 permitting it or by Himself doing it.<br>
 
         
 To return to the argument; it is perfectly true that when a man can prevent 
 a thing, and does not, that thing may be said to proceed from his will. And 
 the inference that God, being All-Good, cannot wish evil to be done, is also 
 true in respect of the actual Good Pleasure of God's Will, and also in 
 respect of four of the signs of His Will; for it is needless to say that He 
 cannot operate evil, or command evil to be done, or fail to be opposed to 
 evil, or advise evil; but He can, however, permit evil to be done.<br>
 
         
 And if it is asked how it is possible to distinguish whether an illness is 
 caused by witchcraft or by some natural physical defect, we answer that 
 there are various methods. And the first is by means of the judgement of 
 doctors. See the words of S. Augustine <i>On the Christian Doctrine:</i> To 
 this class of superstition belong all charms and amulets suspended or bound 
 about the person, which the School of Medicine despises. For example, 
 doctors may perceive from the circumstances, such as the patient's age, 
 healthy complexion, and the reaction of his eyes, that his disease does not 
 result from any defect of the blood or the stomach, or any other infirmity; 
 and they therefore judge that it is not due to any natural defect, but to 
 some extrinsic cause. And since that extrinsic cause cannot be any 
 poisonous infection, which would be accompanied by ill humours in the blood 
 and stomach, they have sufficient reason to judge that it is due to 
 witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 And secondly, when the disease is incurable, so that the patient can be 
 relieved by no drugs, but rather seems to be aggravated by them.<br>
 
         
 Thirdly, the evil may come so suddenly upon a man that it can only be 
 ascribed to witchcraft. An example of how this happened to one man has been 
 made known to us. A certain well-born citizen of Spires had a wife who was 
 of such an obstinate disposition that, though he tried to please her in 
 every way, yet she refused in nearly every way to comply with his wishes, 
 and was always plaguing him with abusive taunts. It happened that, on going 
 into his house one day, and his wife railing against him as usual with 
 opprobrious words, he wished to go out of the house to escape from 
 quarrelling. But she quickly ran before him and locked the door by which he 
 wished to go out; and loudly swore that, unless he beat her, there was no 
 honesty or faithfulness in him. At these heavy words he stretched out his 
 hand, not intending to hurt her, and struck her lightly with his open palm 
 on the buttock; whereupon he suddenly fell to the ground and lost all his 
 senses, and lay in bed for many weeks afflicted with a most grievous illness. 
 Now it is obvious that this was not a natural illness, but was caused by 
 some witchcraft of the woman. And very many similar cases have happened, 
 and been made known to many.<br>
 
         
 There are some who can distinguish such illnesses by means of a certain 
 practice, which is as follows. They hold molten lead over the sick man, and 
 pour it into a bowl of water. And if the lead condenses into some image, 
 they judge that the sickness is due to witchcraft. And when such men are 
 asked whether the image so formed is caused by the work of devils, or is due 
 to some natural cause, they answer that it is due to the power of Saturn 
 over lead, the influence of that planet being in other respects evil, and 
 that the sun has a similar power over gold. But what should be thought of 
 this practice, and whether it is lawful or not, will be discussed in the 
 Second Part of this treatise. For the Canonists say that it is lawful that 
 vanity may be confounded by vanity; but the Theologians hold a directly 
 opposite view, saying that it is not right to do evil that good may come.<br>
 
         
 In their last argument they advance several objections. First, why do not 
 witches become rich? Secondly, why, having the favour of princes, do they 
 not co-operate for the destruction of all their enemies? Thirdly, why are 
 they unable to injure Preachers and others who persecute them?<br>
 
         
 For the first, it is to be said that witches are not generally rich for this 
 reason: that the devils like to show their contempt for the Creator by 
 buying witches for the lowest possible price. And also, lest they should be 
 conspicuous by their riches.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, they do not injure princes because they wish to retain, as far as 
 possible, their friendship. And if it is asked why they do not hurt their 
 enemies, it is answered that a good Angel, working on the other side, 
 prevents such witchcraft. Compare the passage in 
 <i>Daniel:</i> The Prince of the Persians 
 withstood me for twenty-one days. See S. Thomas in the <i>Second Book of 
 Sentences</i>, where he debates whether there is any contest among the good 
 Angels, and of what sort.<br>
 
         
 Thirdly, it is said that they cannot injure Inquisitors and other officials, 
 because they dispense public justice. Many examples could be adduced to 
 prove this, but time does not permit it.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a00a.htm">Next: Question I</a><br>Of those against whom the Power of Witches availeth not at all.<br>
 </center>
 </body>