<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_10a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_12a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question XI</h2>
 <h3>That Witches who are Midwives in Various Ways Kill the Child Conceived in the Womb, and Procure an Abortion; or if they do not this Offer New-born Children to Devils.</h3></center>
 
         
 Here is set forth the truth concerning four horrible crimes which devils 
 commit against infants, both in the mother's womb and afterwards. And since 
 the devils do these things through the medium of women, and not men, this 
 form of homicide is associated rather with women than with men, And the 
 following are the methods by which it is done.<br>
 
         
 The Canonists treat more fully than the Theologians of the obstructions due 
 to witchcraft; and they say that is is witchcraft, not only when anyone is 
 unable to perform the carnal act, of which we have spoken above; but also 
 when a woman is prevented from conceiving, or is made to miscarry after she 
 has conceived. A third and fourth method of witchcraft is when they have 
 failed to procure an abortion, and then either devour the child or offer it 
 to a devil.<br>
 
         
 There is no doubt concerning the first two methods, since, without the help 
 of devils, a man can by natural means, such as herbs, savin for example, or 
 other emmenagogues, procure that a woman cannot generate or conceive, as has 
 bee mentioned above. But with the other two methods it is different; for 
 they are effected by witches. And there is no need to bring forward the 
 arguments, since very evident instances and examples will more readily show 
 the truth of this matter.<br>
 
         
 The former of these two abominations is the fact that certain witches, 
 against the instinct of human nature, and indeed against the nature of all 
 beasts, with the possible exception of wolves, are in the habit of devouring 
 and eating infant children. And concerning this, the Inquisitor of Como, 
 who has been mentioned before, has told us the following: that he was 
 summoned by the inhabitants of the County of Barby to hold an inquisition, 
 because a certain man had missed his child from its cradle, and finding a 
 congress of women in the night-time, swore that he saw them kill his child 
 and drink its blood and devour it. Also, in one single year, which is the 
 year now last passed, he says that forty-one witches were burned, certain 
 others taking flight to the Lord Archduke of Austria, Sigismund. For 
 confirmation of this there are certain writings of 
 John Nider in his <i>Formicarius</i>, of 
 whom, as of those events which he recounts, the memory is still fresh in 
 men's minds; wherefore it is apparent that such things are not incredible. 
 We must add that in all these matters witch midwives cause yet greater 
 injuries, as penitent witches have often told to us and to others, saying: 
 No one does more harm to the Catholic Faith than midwives. For when they do 
 not kill children, then, as if for some other purpose, they take them out of 
 the room and, raising them up in the air, offer them to devils. But the 
 method which they observe in crimes of this sort will be shown in the 
 Second Part, which we must soon approach. But first one more question must 
 be inquired into, namely, that of the Divine permission. For it was said at 
 the beginning that three things are necessary for the effecting of 
 witchcraft: the devil, a witch, and the Divine permission.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_12a.htm">Next: Question XII</a><br>Whether the Permission of Almighty God is an Accompaniment of Witchcraft.<br>
 </center>
 </body>