<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a00a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a02a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter I</h2>
 <h3>Of the several Methods by which Devils through Witches Entice and Allure the Innocent to the Increase of that Horrid Craft and Company.</h3></center>
 
         
 There are three methods above all by which devils, through the agency of 
 witches, subvert the innocent, and by which that perfidy is continually 
 being increased. And the first is through weariness, through inflicting 
 grievous losses in their temporal possessions. For, as S. Gregory says: The 
 devil often tempts us to give way from very weariness. And it is to be 
 understood that it is within the power of a man to resist such temptation; 
 but that God permits it as a warning to us not to give way to sloth. And in 
 this sense is <i>Judges</i> ii to be understood, where it says that God did 
 not destroy those nations, that through them He might prove the people of 
 Israel; and it speaks of the neighbouring nations of the Canaanites, 
 Jebusites, and others. And in our time the Hussites and other Heretics are 
 permitted, so that they cannot be destroyed. Devils, therefore, by means of 
 witches, so afflict their innocent neighbours with temporal losses, that 
 they are to beg the suffrages of witches, and at length to submit themselves 
 to their counsels; as many experiences have taught us.<br>
 
         
 We know a stranger in the diocese of Augsburg, who before he was forty-four 
 years old lost all his horses in succession through witchcraft. His wife, 
 being afflicted with weariness by reason of this, consulted with witches, 
 and after following their counsels, unwholesome as they were, all the horses 
 which he bought after that (for he was a carrier) were preserved from 
 witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 And how many women have complained to us in our capacity of Inquisitors, 
 that when their cows have been injured by being deprived of their milk, or 
 in any other way, they have consulted with suspected witches, and even been 
 given remedies by them, on condition that they would promise something to 
 some spirit; and when they asked what they would have to promise, the 
 witches answered that it was only a small thing, that they should agree to 
 execute the instructions of that master with regard to certain observances 
 during the Holy Offices of the Church, or to observe some silent reservations 
 in their confessions to priests.<br>
 
         
 Here it is to be noted that, as has already been hinted, this iniquity has 
 small and scant beginnings, as that of the time of the elevation of the Body 
 of Christ they spit on the ground, or shut their eyes, or mutter some vain 
 words. We know a woman who yet lives, protected by the secular law, who, 
 when the priest at the celebration of the Mass blesses the people, saying, 
 <i>Dominus uobiscum</i>, always adds to herself these words in the vulgar 
 tongue “Kehr mir die Zung im Arss umb.” Or they even say some 
 such thing at confession after they have received absolution, or do not 
 confess everything, especially mortal sins, and so by slow degrees are led 
 to a total abnegation of the Faith, and to the abominable profession of 
 sacrilege.<br>
 
         
 This, or something like it, is the method which witches use towards honest 
 matrons who are little given to carnal vices but concerned for worldly 
 profit. But towards young girls, more given to bodily lusts and pleasures, 
 they observe a different method, working through their carnal desires and 
 the pleasures of the flesh.<br>
 
         
 Here it is to be noted that the devil is more eager and keen to tempt the 
 good than the wicked, although in actual practice he tempts the wicked more 
 than the good, because more aptitude for being tempted is found in the 
 wicked than in the good. Therefore the devil tries all the harder to seduce 
 all the more saintly virgins and girls; and there is reason in this, besides 
 many examples of it.<br>
 
         
 For since he already possesses the wicked, but not the good, he tries the 
 harder to seduce into his power the good whom he does not, than the wicked 
 whom he does, possess. Similarly any earthly prince takes up arms against 
 those who do not acknowledge his rule rather than those who do not oppose 
 him.<br>
 
         
 And here is an example. Two witches were burned in Ratisbon, as we shall 
 tell later where we treat of their methods of raising tempests. And one of 
 them, who was a bath-woman, had confessed among other things the following: 
 that she had suffered much injury from the devil for this reason. There was 
 a certain devout virgin, the daughter of a very rich man whom there is no 
 need to name, since the girl is now dead in the disposition of Divine mercy, 
 and we would not that his thought should be perverted by evil; and the witch 
 was ordered to seduce her by inviting her to her house on some Feast Day, in 
 order that the devil himself, in the form of a young man, might speak with 
 her. And although she had tried very often to accomplish this, yet whenever 
 she had spoken to the young girl, she had protected herself with the sign of 
 the Holy Cross. And no one can doubt that she did this at the instigation of 
 a holy Angel, to repel the works of the devil.<br>
 
         
 Another virgin living in the diocese of Strasburg confessed to one of us 
 that she was alone on a certain Sunday in her father's house, when an old 
 woman of that town came to visit here and, among other scurrilous words, 
 made the following proposition; that, if she liked, she would take her to a 
 place where there were some young men unknown to all the townsmen. And when, 
 said the virgin, I consented, and followed her to her house, the old woman 
 said, “See, we go upstairs to an upper room where the young men are; 
 but take care not to make the sign of the Cross.” I gave her my 
 promise not to do so, and as she was going up before me and I was going up 
 the stairs, I secretly crossed myself. At the top of the stairs, when we 
 were both standing outside the room, the hag turned angrily upon me with a 
 horrible countenance, and looking at me said, “Curse you! Why did you 
 cross yourself? Go away from here. Depart in the name of the devil.” 
 And so I returned unharmed to my home.<br>
 
         
 It can be seen from this how craftily that old enemy labours in the 
 seduction of souls. For it was in this way that the bath-woman whom we have 
 mentioned, and who was burned, confessed that she had been seduced by some 
 old women. A different method, however, was used in the case of her 
 companion witch, who had met the devil in human form on the road while she 
 herself was going to visit her lover for the purpose of fornication. And 
 when the Incubus devil had seen her, and has asked her whether she 
 recognized him, and she had said that she did not, he had answered" “I 
 am the devil; and if you wish, I will always be ready at your pleasure, and 
 will not fail you in any necessity.” And when she had consented, she 
 continued for eighteen years, up to the end of her life, to practise 
 diabolical filthiness with him, together with a total abnegation of the 
 Faith as a necessary condition.<br>
 
         
 There is also a third method of temptation through the way of sadness and 
 poverty. For when girls have been corrupted, and have been scorned by their 
 lovers after they have immodestly copulated with them in the hope and 
 promise of marriage with them, and have found themselves disappointed in all 
 their hopes and everywhere despised, they turn to the help and protection of 
 devils; either for the sake of vengeance by bewitching those lovers or the 
 wives they have married, or for the sake of giving themselves up to every 
 sort of lechery. Alas! experience tells us that there is no number to such 
 girls, and consequently the witches that spring from this class are 
 innumerable. Let us give a few out of many examples.<br>
 
         
 There is a place in the diocese of Brixen where a young man deposed the 
 following facts concerning the bewitchment of his wife.<br>
 
         
 “In the time of my youth I loved a girl who importuned me to marry her; 
 but I refused her and married another girl from another country. But wishing 
 for friendship's sake to please her, I invited her to the wedding. She came, 
 and while the other honest women were wishing us luck and offering gifts, 
 she raised her hand and, in the hearing of the other women who were standing 
 round, said, You will have few days of health after to-day. My bride was 
 frightened, since she did not know her (for, as I have said, I had married 
 her from another country), and asked the bystanders who she was who had 
 threatened her in that way; and they said that she was a loose and vagrom 
 woman. None the less, it happened just as she had said. For after a few days 
 my wife was so bewitched that she lost the use of all her limbs, and even 
 now, after ten years, the effects of witchcraft can be seen on her body.”<br>
 
         
 If we were to collect all the similar instances which have occurred in one 
 town of that diocese, it would take a whole book; but they are written and 
 preserved at the house of the Bishop of Brixen, who still lives to testify 
 to their truth, astounding and unheard-of though they are.<br>
 
         
 But we must not pass over in silence one unheard-of and astonishing instance. 
 A certain high-born Count in the ward of Westerich, in the diocese of 
 Strasburg, married a noble girl of equal birth; but after he had celebrated 
 the wedding, he was for three years unable to know her carnally, on account, 
 as the event proved, of a certain charm which prevented him. In great 
 anxiety, and not knowing what to do, he called loudly on the Saints of God. 
 It happened that he went to the State of Metz to negotiate some business; 
 and while he was talking about the streets and squares of the city, attended 
 by his servants and domiciles, he met a certain women who had formerly been 
 his mistress. Seeing her, and not at all thinking of the spell that was on 
 him, he spontaneously addressed her kindly for the sake of their old 
 friendship, asking her how she did, and whether she was well. And she, 
 seeing the Count's gentleness, in her turn asked very particularly after his 
 health and affairs; and when he answered that he was well, and that 
 everything prospered with him, she was astonished and was silent for a time. 
 The Count, seeing her thus astonished, again spoke kindly to her, inviting 
 her to converse with him. So she inquired after his wife, and received a 
 similar reply, that she was in all respects well. Then she asked if he had 
 any children; and the Count said he had three sons, one born in each year. 
 At that she was more astonished, and was again silent for a while. And the 
 Count asked her, Why, my dear, do you make such careful inquiries? I am sure 
 that you congratulate my on my happiness. Then she answered, Certainly I 
 congratulate you; but curse that old woman who said she would bewitch your 
 body so that you could not have connexion with your wife! And in proof of 
 this, there is a pot in the well in the middle of your yard containing 
 certain objects evilly bewitched, and this was placed there in order that, 
 as long as its contents were preserved intact, for so long you would be 
 unable to cohabit. But see! it is all in vain, and I am glad, etc. On his 
 return home the Count did not delay to have the well drained; and, finding 
 the pot, burned its contents and all, whereupon he immediately recovered the 
 virility which he had lost. Wherefore the Countess again invited all the 
 nobility to a fresh wedding celebration, saying that she was now the Lady of 
 that castle and estate, after having for so long remained a virgin. For the 
 sake of the Count's reputation it is not expedient to name that castle and 
 estate; but we have related this story in order that the truth of the matter 
 may be known, to bring so great a crime into open detestation.<br>
 
         
 From this it is clear that witches use various methods to increase their 
 numbers. For the above-mentioned woman, because she had been supplanted by 
 the Count's wife, case that spell upon the Count with the help of another 
 witches; and this is how one witchcraft brings innumerable others in its 
 train.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a02a.htm">Next: Chapter II</a><br>Of the Way whereby a Formal Pact with Evil is made.<br>
 </center>
 </body>