<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a04a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a06a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter V</h2>
 <h3>Witches commonly perform their Spells through the Sacraments of the Church. And how they Impair the Powers of Generation, and how they may Cause other Ills to happen to God's Creatures of all kinds. But herein we except the Question of the Influence of the Stars.</h3></center>
 
         
 But now there are several things to be noted concerning their methods of 
 bringing injury upon other creatures of both sexes, and upon the fruits of 
 the earth: first with regard to men, then with regard to beasts, and thirdly 
 with regard to the fruits of the earth. And as to men, first, how they can 
 cast an obstructive spell on the procreant forces, and even on the venereal 
 act, so that a woman cannot conceive, or a man cannot perform the act. 
 Secondly, how that act is obstructed sometimes with regard to one woman but 
 not another. Thirdly, how they take away the virile member as though it were 
 altogether torn away from the body. Fourthly, if it is possible to 
 distinguish whether any of the above injuries have been caused by a devil 
 on his own account, or if it has been through the agency of a witch. Fifthly, 
 how witches change men and women into beasts by some prestige or glamour. 
 Sixthly, how witch midwives in various ways kill that which has been 
 conceived in the mother's womb; and when they do not do this, offer the 
 children to devils. And lest these things should seem incredible, they have 
 been proved in the First Part of this work by questions and answers to 
 arguments; to which, if necessary, the doubtful reader may turn back for the 
 purpose of investigating the truth.<br>
 
         
 For the present our object is only to adduce actual facts and examples which 
 have been found by us, or have been written by others in detestation of so 
 great a crime, to substantiate those former arguments in case they should be 
 difficult for anyone to understand; and, by those things that are related 
 in this Second Part, to bring back to the Faith and away from their error 
 those who think there are no witches, and that no witchcraft can be done in 
 the world.<br>
 
         
 And with regard to the first class of injuries with which they afflict the 
 human race, it is to be noted that, apart from the methods by which they 
 injure other creatures, they have six ways of injuring humanity. And one is, 
 to induce an evil love in a man for a woman, or in a woman for a man. The 
 second is to plant hatred or jealousy in anyone. The third is to bewitch 
 them so that a man cannot perform the genital act with a woman, or conversely 
 a woman with a man; or by various means to procure an abortion, as has been 
 said before. The fourth is to cause some disease in any of the human organs. 
 The fifth, to take away life. The sixth, to deprive them of reason.<br>
 
         
 In this connexion it should be said that, saving the influence of the stars, 
 the devils can by their natural power in every way cause real defects and 
 infirmities, and this by their natural spiritual power, which is superior to 
 any bodily power. For no one infirmity is quite like another, and this is 
 equally true of natural defects in which there is no physical infirmity. 
 Therefore they proceed by different methods to cause each different infirmity 
 or defect. And of those we shall give instances in the body of this work as 
 the necessity arises.<br>
 
         
 But first, lest the reader's mind should be kept in any doubt as to why they 
 have no power to alter the influence of the stars, we shall say that there 
 is a threefold reason. First, the stars are above them even in the region of 
 punishment, which is the region of the lower mists; and this by reason of 
 the duty which is assigned to them. See the First Part, Question II, where 
 we dealt with Incubus and Succubus devils.<br>
 
         
 The second reason is that the stars are governed by the good Angels. See 
 many places concerning the Powers which move the stars, and especially S. 
 Thomas, part I, quest. 90. And in this matter the Philosophers agree with 
 the Theologians.<br>
 
         
 Thirdly, it is on account of the general order and common good of the 
 Universe. which would suffer general detriment if evil spirits were allowed 
 to cause any alteration in the influence of the stars. Wherefore those 
 changes which were miraculously caused in the Old or New Testament were done 
 by God through the good Angels; as, for example, when the sun stood still 
 for Joshua, or when it went backward for Hezekiah, or when it was 
 supernaturally darkened at the Passion of Christ. But in all other matters, 
 with God's permission, they can work their spells, either the devils 
 themselves, or devils through the agency of witches; and, in fact, it is 
 evident that they do so.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, it is to be noted that in all their methods of working injury 
 they nearly always instruct witches to make their instruments of witchcraft 
 by means of the Sacraments or sacramental things of the Church, or some holy 
 thing consecrated to God: as when they sometimes place a waxen image under 
 the Altar-cloth, or draw a thread through the Holy Chrism, or use some other 
 consecrated thing in such a way. And there are three reasons for this.<br>
 
         
 For a similar reason they are wont to practise their witchcraft at the more 
 sacred time of the year, especially at the  Advent of Our Lord, and at 
 Christmas. First, that by such means they may make men guilty of not only 
 perfidy, but also sacrilege, by contaminating whatever is divine in them; 
 and that so they may the more deeply offend God their Creator, damn their 
 own souls, and cause many more to rush into sin.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, that God, being so heavily offended by men, may grant the devil 
 greater power of tormenting them. For so says S. Gregory, that in His anger 
 He sometimes grants the wicked their prayers and petitions, which He 
 mercifully denies to others. And the third reason is that, by the seeming 
 appearance of good, he may more easily deceive certain simple men, who think 
 that they have performed some pious act and obtained the grace from God, 
 whereas they have only sinned the more heavily.<br>
 
         
 A fourth reason also can be added touching the more sacred seasons and the 
 New Year. For, according to S. Augustine, there are other mortal sins 
 besides adultery by which the observance of the Festivals may be infringed. 
 Superstition, moreover, and witchcraft arising from the most servile 
 operations of the devil are contrary to the reverence that is due to God. 
 Therefore, as has been said, he causes a man to fall more deeply, and the 
 Creator is the more offended.<br>
 
         
 And of the New Year we may say, according to S. Isidore, <i>Etym.</i> VIII. 
 2, that Janus, from whom the month of January is named, which also begins 
 on the Day of Circumcision, was an idol with two faces, as if one were the 
 end of the old year and the other the beginning of the new, and, as it were, 
 the protector and auspicious author of the coming year. And in honour of him, 
 or rather of the devil in the form of that idol, the Pagans made much 
 boisterous revelry, and were very merry among themselves, holding various 
 dances and feasts. And concerning these Blessed Augustine makes mention in 
 many places, and gives a very ample description of them in his Twenty-sixth 
 Book.<br>
 
         
 And now bad Christians imitate these corruptions, turning them to 
 lasciviousness when the run about at the time of 
 Carnival with masks and jests and other 
 superstitions. Similarly witches use these revelries of the devil for their 
 own advantage, and work their spells about the time of the New Year in 
 respect of the Divine Offices and Worship; as on S. Andrew's Day and at 
 Christmas.<br>
 
         
 And now, as to how they work their witchcraft, first by means of the Sacraments, 
 and then by means of sacramental objects, we will refer to a few known 
 facts, discovered by us in the Inquisition.<br>
 
         
 In a town which it is better not to names, for the sake of charity and 
 expediency, when a certain witch received the Body of Our Lord, she suddenly 
 lowered her head, as is the detestable habit of women, placed her garment 
 near her mouth, and taking the Body of the Lord out of her mouth, wrapped it 
 in a handkerchief; and afterwards, at the suggestion of the devil, placed it 
 in a pot in which there was a toad, and hid it in the ground near her house 
 by the storehouse, together with several other things, by means of which she 
 had to work her witchcraft. But with the help 
 of God's mercy this great crime was detected and brought to light. For on 
 the following day a workman was going on his business near that house, and 
 heard a sound like a child crying; and when he had come near to the stone 
 under which the pot had been hidden, he heard it much more clearly, and 
 thinking that some child have been buried there by the woman, went to the 
 Mayor or chief magistrate, and told him what had been done, as he thought, 
 by the infanticide. And the Mayor quickly send his servants and found it to 
 be as he had said. But they were unwilling to exhume the child, thinking it 
 wiser to place a watch and wait to see if any woman came near the place; for 
 they did not know that it was the Lord's Body that was hidden there. And so 
 it happened that the same witch came to the place, and secretly hid to pot 
 under her garment before their eyes. And when she was taken and questioned, 
 she discovered her crime, saying that the Lord's Body had been hidden in the 
 pot with a toad, so that by means of their dust she might be able to cause 
 injuries at her will to men and other creatures.<br>
 
         
 It is also to be noted that when witches communicate they observe this 
 custom, that, when they can do so without being noticed, they receive the 
 Lord's Body under their tongue instead of on the top. And as far as can be 
 seen, the reason is that they never wish to receive any remedy that might 
 counteract their abjuration of the Faith, either by Confession or by 
 receiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist; and secondly, because in this way 
 it is easier for them to take the Lord's Body out of their mouths so that 
 they can apply it, as has been said, to their own uses, to the greater 
 offence of the Creator.<br>
 
         
 For this reason all rectors of the Church and those who communicate the 
 people are enjoined to take the utmost care when they communicate women that 
 the mouth shall be well open and the tongue thrust well out, and their 
 garments be kept quite clear. And the more care is taken in this respect, 
 the more witches become known by this means.<br>
 
         
 Numberless other superstitions they practise by means of sacramental objects. 
 Sometimes they place a waxen image or some aromatic substance under the 
 altar cloth, as we said before, and then hide 
 it under the threshold of a house, so that the person for whom it is placed 
 there may be bewitched on crossing over it. Countless instances could be 
 brought forward, but these minor sorts of spells are proved by the greater.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a06a.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a><br>How Witches Impede and Prevent the Power of Procreation.<br>
 </center>
 </body>