<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a07a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a09a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter VIII</h2>
 <h3>Of the Manner whereby they Change Men into the Shapes of Beasts.</h3></center>
 
         
 But that witches, by the power of devils, change men into the shapes of 
 beasts (for this is their chief manner of transmutation), although it has 
 been sufficiently proved in the First Part of the work, Question 10, Whether 
 witches can do such things: nevertheless, since that question with its 
 arguments and solutions may be rather obscure to some; especially since no 
 actual examples are adduced to prove them, and even the method by which 
 they so transform themselves is not explained; therefore we add the present 
 exposition by the resolution of several doubts.<br>
 
         
 And first, that Canon (26, Q. 5, Episcopi) is not to be understood in this 
 matter in the way in which even many learned men (but would that their 
 learning were good!) are deceived; who do not fear to affirm publicly in 
 their sermons that such prestidigitatory transmutations are in no way possible 
 even by the power of devils. And we have often said that this doctrine is 
 greatly to the detriment of the Faith, and strengthens the witches, who 
 rejoice very much in such sermons.<br>
 
         
 But such preachers, as has been noted, touch only the outer surface, and 
 fail to reach the inner meaning of the words of the Canon. For when it says: 
 Whoever believes that any creature can be made, or can be changed for the 
 better or the worse, or be transformed into any other shape or likeness 
 except by the Creator Himself Who made all, is without doubt an infidel. . . .<br>
 
         
 The reader must here remark two chief things. First, concerning the words 
 “be made”; and secondly, concerning the words “be 
 transformed into another likeness.” And as to the first, it is 
 answered that “be made” can be understood in two ways: namely, 
 as meaning “be created,” or as in the sense of the natural 
 production of anything. Now in the first sense it belongs only to God, as is 
 well known, Who in His infinite might can make something out of nothing.<br>
 
         
 But in the second sense there is a distinction to be drawn between creatures; 
 for some are perfect creatures, like a man, and an ass, etc. And other are 
 imperfect, such as serpents, frogs, mice, etc., for they can also be 
 generated from putrefaction. Now the Canon obviously speaks only of the 
 former sort, not of the second; for in the case of the second it can be 
 proved from what Blessed Albert says in his book <i>On Animals</i>, where he 
 asks: whether devils can make true animals; and still with this difference, 
 that they cannot do so in an instant, as God does, but by some motion, 
 however sudden, as is shown in the case of the Magicians in <i>Exodus</i> 
 vii. The reader may, if he likes, refer to some of the remarks in the 
 question we have quoted in the First Part of the work, and in the solution 
 of the first argument.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, it is said that they cannot transmute any creature. You may say 
 that transmutation is of two sorts, substantial and accidental; and this 
 accidental is again of two kinds, consisting either in the natural form 
 belonging to the thing which is seen, or in a form which does not belong to 
 the thing which is seen, but exists only in the organs and perceptions of 
 him who sees. The Canon speaks of the former, and especially of formal and 
 actual transmutation, in which one substance is transmuted into another; and 
 this sort only God can effect, Who is the Creator of such actual substances. 
 And it speaks also of the second, although the devil can effect that, in so 
 far as, with God's permission, he causes certain diseases and induces some 
 appearance on the accidental body. As when a face appears to be leprous, or 
 some such thing.<br>
 
         
 But properly speaking it is not such matters that are in question, but 
 apparitions and glamours, by which things seem to be transmuted into other 
 likenesses; and we say that the words of the Canon cannot exclude such 
 transmutations; for their existence is proved by authority, by reason, and 
 by experience; namely, by certain experiences related by S. Augustine in 
 Book XVIII, chapter 17, of the <i>De Ciuitate Die</i>, and by the arguments 
 in explanation of them. For among other prestidigitatory transformations, he 
 mentions that the very famous Sorceress, Circe, changed the companions of 
 Ulysses into beasts; and that certain innkeepers' wives had turned their 
 guests into beasts of burden. He mentions also that the companions of 
 Diomedes were changed into birds, and for a long time flew about the temple 
 of Diomedes; and that Praestantius tells it for a fact that his father said 
 that he had been a packhorse, and had carried corn with other animals.<br>
 
         
 Now when the companions of Ulysses were changed into beasts, it was only in 
 appearance, or deception of the eyes; for the animal shapes were drawn out 
 of the repository or memory of images, and impressed on the imaginative 
 faculty. And so imaginary vision was caused, and through the strong impression 
 on the other senses and organs, the beholder thought that he saw animals, in 
 the manner of which we have already treated. But how these things can be done 
 by the devil's power without injury will be shown later.<br>
 
         
 But when the guests were changed into beasts of burden by the innkeepers' 
 wives; and when the father of Praestantius thought he was a packhorse and 
 carried corn; it is to be noted that in these cases there were three 
 deceptions.<br>
 
         
 First, that those men were caused by a glamour to seem to be changed into 
 beasts of burden, and this change was caused in the way we have said. 
 Second, that devils invisibly bore those burdens up when they were too heavy 
 to be carried. Third, that those who seemed to others to be changed in shape 
 seemed also to themselves to be changed into beasts; as it happened to 
 Nabuchodonosor, who lived for seven years eating straw like 
 an ox.<br>
 
         
 And as to the comrades of Diomedes being changed into birds and flying round 
 his temple, it is to be said that this Diomedes was one of the Greeks who 
 went to the siege of Troy; and when he wished to return home, he was drowned 
 with his comrades in the sea; and then, at the suggestion of some idol, a 
 temple was built to him that he might be numbered among the gods; and for a 
 long time, to keep that error alive, devils in the shape of birds flew about 
 in place of his companions. Therefore that superstition was one of the 
 glamours we have spoken of; for it was not caused by the impression of 
 mental images on the imaginative faculty, but by their flying in the sight 
 of men in the assumed bodies of birds.<br>
 
         
 But if it is asked whether the devils could have deluded the onlookers by 
 the above-mentioned method of working upon the mental images, and not by 
 assuming aerial bodies like flying birds, the answer is that they could have 
 done so.<br>
 
         
 For it was the opinion of some (as S. Thomas tells in the <i>Second Book of 
 Sentences</i>, dist. 8, art. 2) that no Angel, good or bad, ever assumed a 
 body; but that all that we read in the Scriptures about their appearances 
 was caused by a glamour, or by the imaginary vision.<br>
 
         
 And here the learned Saint notes a difference between a glamour and 
 imaginary vision. For in a glamour there may be an exterior object which is 
 seen, but it seems other than it is. But imaginary vision does not necessarily 
 require an exterior object, but can be caused without that and only by those 
 inner mental images impressed on the imagination.<br>
 
         
 So, following their opinion, the comrades of Diomedes were not represented 
 by devils in the assumed bodies and likeness of birds, but only by a 
 fantastic and imaginary vision caused by working upon those mental images, 
 etc.<br>
 
         
 But the learned Saint condemns this as an erroneous and not a simple 
 opinion (though, it is piously believed, it is not actually heretical), 
 although such appearances of good and bad Angels may at times have been 
 imaginary, with no assumed body. But, as he says, the saints are agreed that 
 the Angels also appeared to the actual sight, and such appearance was in an 
 assumed body. And the scriptural text reads more as if it speaks of bodily 
 appearance than imaginary or prestidigitatory ones. Therefore we can say for 
 the present concerning any visions like that of the comrades of Diomedes: 
 that although those comrades could by the devil's work have appeared in the 
 imaginary vision of the beholders in the manner we have said, yet it is 
 rather presumed that they were caused to be seen by devils in assumed aerial 
 bodies like flying birds; or else that other natural birds were caused by 
 devils to represent them.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a09a.htm">Next: Chapter IX</a><br>How Devils may enter the Human Body and the Head without doing any Hurt, when they cause such Metamorphosis by Means of Prestidigitation.<br>
 </center>
 </body>