<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a13a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a15a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter XIV</h2>
 <h3>Here followeth how Witches Injure Cattle in Various Ways.</h3></center>
 
         
 When S. Paul said, Doth God care for oxen? he 
 meant that, though all things are subject to Divine providence, both man and 
 beast each in its degree, as the Psalmist 
 says, yet the sons of men are especially in His governance and under the 
 protection of His wings. I say, therefore, if men are injured by witches, 
 with God's permission, both the innocent and just as well as sinners, and if 
 parents are bewitched in their children, as being part of their possessions, 
 who can then presume to doubt that, with God's permission, various injuries 
 can be brought by witches upon cattle and the fruits of the earth, which are 
 also part of men's possessions? For so was Job stricken by the devil and 
 lost all his cattle. So also there is not even the smallest farm where 
 women do not injure each other's cows, by drying up their milk, and very 
 often killing them.<br>
 
         
 But first let us consider the smallest of these injuries, that of drying up 
 the milk. If it is asked how they can do this, it can be answered that, 
 according to Blessed Albert in his <i>Book on Animals</i>, milk is naturally 
 menstrual in any animal; and, like another flux in women, when it is not 
 stopped by some natural infirmity, it is due to witchcraft that it is 
 stopped. Now the flow of milk is naturally stopped when the animal becomes 
 pregnant; and it is stopped by an accidental infirmity when the animal eats 
 some herb the nature of which is to dry up the milk and make the cow ill.<br>
 
         
 But they can cause this in various ways by witchcraft. For on the more holy 
 nights according to the instructions of the devil and for the greater 
 offence to the Divine Majesty of God, a witch will sit down in a corner of 
 her house with a pail between her legs, stick a knife or some instrument in 
 the wall or a post, and make as if to milk it with her hands. Then she 
 summons her familiar who always works with her in everything, and tells him 
 that she wishes to milk a certain cow from a certain house, which is healthy 
 and abounding in milk. And suddenly the devil takes the milk from the udder 
 of that cow, and brings it to where the witch is sitting, as if it were 
 flowing from the knife.<br>
 
         
 But when this is publicly preached to the people they get no bad information 
 by it; for however much anyone may invoke the devil, and think that by this 
 alone he can do this thing, he deceives himself, because he is without the 
 foundation of that perfidy, not having rendered homage to the devil or 
 abjured the Faith. I have set this down because some have thought that 
 several of the matter of which I have written ought not to be preacher to 
 the people, on account of the danger of giving them evil knowledge; whereas 
 it is impossible for anyone to learn from a preacher how to perform any of 
 the things that have been mentioned. But they have been written rather to 
 bring so great a crime into detestation, and should be preached from the 
 pulpit, so that judges may be more eager to punish the horrible crime of the 
 abnegation of the Faith. Yet they should not always be preached in this way; 
 for the secular mind pays more attention to temporal losses, being more 
 concerned with earthly than spiritual matters; therefore when witches can be 
 accused of inflicting temporal loss, judges are more zealous to punish them. 
 But who can fathom the cunning of the devil?<br>
 
         
 I know of some men in a certain city who wished to eat some May butter one 
 May time. And as they were walking along they came to a meadow and say down 
 by a stream; and one of them, who had formed some open or tacit pact with 
 the devil, said: I will get you the best May butter. And at once he took off 
 his clothes and went into the stream, not standing up but sitting with his 
 back against the current; and while the others looked on, he uttered certain 
 words, and moved the water with his hands behind his back; and in a short 
 time he brought out a great quantity of butter of the sort that the country 
 women sell in the market in May. And the others tasted it and declared that 
 it was the very best butter.<br>
 
         
 From this we can deduce first the following fact concerning their practices. 
 They are either true witches, by reason of an expressed pact formed with the 
 devil, or they know by some tacit understanding that the devil will do what 
 they ask. In the first case there is no need for any discussion, for such 
 are true witches. But in the second case, then they owed the devil's help to 
 the fact that they were blasphemously offered to the devil by a midwife or 
 by their own mothers.<br>
 
         
 But it may be objected that the devil perhaps brought the butter without any 
 compact, expressed or tacit, and without any previous dedication to himself. 
 It is answered that no one can ever use the devil's help in such matters 
 without invoking him; and that by that very act of seeking help from the 
 devil he is an apostate from the Faith. This is the decision of S. Thomas in 
 the <i>Second Book of Sentences</i>, dist. 8, on the question, Whether it is 
 apostasy from the Faith to use the devil's help. And although Blessed Albert 
 the Great agrees with the other Doctors, yet he says more expressly that in 
 such matters there is always apostasy either in word or in deed. For if 
 invocations, conjurations, fumigations and adorations are used, then an open 
 pact is formed with the devil, even if there has been no surrender of body 
 and soul together with explicit abjuration of the Faith either wholly or in 
 part. For by the mere invocation of the devil a man commits open verbal 
 apostasy. But if there is no spoken invocation, but only a bare action from 
 which follows something that could not be done without the devil's help, 
 then whether a man does it be beginning in the name of the devil, or with 
 some other unknown words, or without any words but with that intention; then, 
 says Blessed Albert, it is apostasy of deed, because that action is looked 
 for from the devil. But since to expect or receive anything from the devil 
 is always a disparagement of the Faith, it is also apostasy.<br>
 
         
 So it is concluded that, by whatever means that sorcerer procured the butter, 
 it was done with either a tacit or an expressed pact with the devil; and 
 since, if it had been with an expressed pact, he would have behaved after 
 the usual manner of witches, it is probably that there was a tacit or secret 
 pact, originating either from himself or from his mother or a midwife. And I 
 say that it arose from himself, since he only went through certain motions, 
 and expected the devil to produce the effect.<br>
 
         
 The second conclusion we can draw from this and similar practices is this. 
 The devil cannot create new species of things; therefore when natural butter 
 suddenly came out of the water, the devil did not do this by changing the 
 water into milk, but by taking butter from some place where it was kept and 
 bringing it to the man's hand. Or else he took natural milk from a natural 
 cow and suddenly churned it into natural butter; for while the art of women 
 takes a little time to make butter, the devil could do it in the shortest 
 space of time and bring it to the man.<br>
 
         
 It is in the same way that certain dealers in magic, when they find 
 themselves in need of wine or some such necessity, merely go out in the 
 night with a flask or vessel, and bring it back suddenly filled with wine. 
 For then the devil takes natural wine from some vessel and fills their 
 flasks for them.<br>
 
         
 And with regard to the manner whereby witches kill animals and cattle, it 
 should be said that they act very much as they do in the case of men. They 
 can bewitch them by a touch and a look, or by a look only; or by placing 
 under the threshold of the stable door, or near the place where they go to 
 water, some charm or periapt of witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 For in this way those witches who were burned at Ratisbon, of whom we shall 
 say more later on, were always incited by the devil to bewitch the best 
 horses and the fattest cattle. And when they were asked how they did so, one 
 of them named Agnes said that they hid certain things under the threshold of 
 the stable door. And, asked what sort of things, she said: The bones of 
 different kinds of animals. She was further asked in whose name they did 
 this, and answered, In the name of the devil and all the other devils. And 
 there was another of them, named Anna, who had killed twenty-three horses in 
 succession belonging to one of the citizens who was a carrier. This man at 
 last, when he had bought his twenty-fourth horse and reduced to extreme 
 poverty, stood in his stable and said to the witch, who was standing in the 
 door of her house: “See, I have bought a horse, and I swear to God and 
 His Holy Mother that if this horse dies I shall kill you with my own hands.” 
 At that the witch was frightened, and left the horse alone. But when she was 
 taken and asked how she had done these things, she answered that she had done 
 nothing but dig a little hole, after which the devil had put in it certain 
 things unknown to her. From this it is concluded that the witch co-operates 
 sufficiently if it is only by a touch or a look; for the devil is permitted 
 no power of injuring creatures without some co-operation on the part of the 
 witch, as has been shown before. And this is for the great offence to the 
 Divine Majesty.<br>
 
         
 For shepherds have often seen animals in the fields give three or four jumps 
 into the air, and then suddenly fall to the ground and die; and this is 
 caused by the power of witches at the instance of the devil.<br>
 
         
 In the diocese of Strasburg, between the town of Fiessen and Mount Ferrer, 
 a certain very rich man affirmed that more than forty oxen and cows belonging 
 to him and others had been bewitched in the Alps within the space of one 
 year, and that there had been no natural plague or sickness to cause it. To 
 prove this, he said that when cattle die from some change plague or disease, 
 they do not do so all at once, but by degrees; but that this witchcraft had 
 suddenly taken all the strength from them, and therefore everyone judged 
 that they had been killed by witchcraft. I have said forty head of cattle, 
 but I believe he put the number higher than that. However, it is very true 
 that many cattle are said to have been bewitched in some districts, 
 especially in the Alps; and it is known that this form of witchcraft if 
 unhappily most widespread. We shall consider some similar cases later, in 
 the chapter where we discuss the remedies for cattle that have been 
 bewitched.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a15a.htm">Next: Chapter XV</a><br>How they Raise and Stir up Hailstorms and Tempests, and Cause Lightning to Blast both Men and Beasts.<br>
 </center>
 </body>