<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02b06a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02b08a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter VII</h2>
 <h3>Remedies prescribed against Hailstorms, and for animals that are Bewitched.</h3></center>
 
         
 With regard to the remedies for betwitched animals, and charms against 
 tempests, we must first note some unlawful remedies which are practised by 
 certain people. For these are done by means of superstitious words or 
 actions; as when men cure the worms in the fingers or limbs by means of 
 certain words or charms, the method of 
 deciding the legality of which has been explained in the preceding chapter. 
 There are others who do not sprinkle Holy Water over bewitched cattle, but 
 pour it into their mouths.<br>
 
         
 Beside the proofs we have already given that the remedy of words is 
 unlawful, William of Paris, whom we have often quoted, gives the following 
 reason. If there were any virtue in words as words, then it would be due 
 to one of three things: either their material, which is air; or their form, 
 which is sound; or their meaning; or else to all three together. Now it 
 cannot be due to air, which has no power to kill unless it be poisonous; 
 neither can it be due to sound, the power of which is broken by a more 
 solid object; neither can it be due to the meaning, for in that case the 
 words Devil or Death or Hell would always be harmful, and the words Health 
 and Goodness always be beneficial. Also it cannot be due to all these three 
 together; for when the parts of a whole are invalid, the whole itself is 
 also invalid.<br>
 
         
 And it cannot validly be objected that God gave virtue to words just as He 
 did to herbs and stones. For whatever virtue there is in certain sacramental 
 words and benedictions and lawful incantations belongs to them, not as words, 
 but by Divine institution and ordinance according to God's promise. It is, 
 as it were, a promise from God that whoever does such and such a thing will 
 receive such and such a grace. And so the words of the sacraments are 
 effective because of their meaning; although some hold that they have an 
 intrinsic virtue; but these two opinions are not mutually inconsistent. But 
 the case of other words and incantations is clear from what has already been 
 said; for the mere composing or uttering or writing of words, as such, can 
 have no effect; but the invocation of the Divine Name, and public prayer, 
 which is a sacred protestation committing the effect to the Divine Will, are 
 beneficial.<br>
 
         
 We have treated above of remedies performed by actions which seem to be 
 unlawful. The following is a common practice in parts of Swabia. On the first 
 of May before sunrise the women of the village go out and gather from the 
 woods leaves and branches from willow trees, and weave them into a wreath 
 which they hang over the stable door, affirming that all the cattle will then 
 remain unhurt and safe from witchcraft for a whole year. And in the opinion 
 of those who hold that vanity may be opposed by vanity, this remedy would 
 not be unlawful; and neither would be the driving away of diseases by 
 unknown cantrips and incantations. But without meaning and offence, we say 
 that a woman or anyone else may go out on the first or any other day of the 
 month, without considering the rising or the setting of the sun, and collect 
 herbs or leaves and branches, saying the Lord's Prayer or the Creed, and 
 hang them over the stable door in good faith, trusting to the will of God 
 for their protective efficacy; yet even so the practice is not above reproach, 
 as was shown in the preceding chapter in the words of S. Jerome; for even if 
 he is not invoked, the devil has some part in the efficacy of herbs and 
 stones.<br>
 
         
 It is the same with those who make the sign of the Cross with leaves and 
 consecrated flowers on Palm Sunday, and set it up among their vines or crops; 
 asserting that, although the crops all round should be destroyed by hail, 
 yet they will remain unharmed in their own fields. Such matters should be 
 decided upon according to the distinction of which we have already treated.<br>
 
         
 Similarly there are women who, for the preservation of milk and that cows 
 should not be deprived of their milk by witchcraft, give freely to the poor 
 in God's name the whole of a Sunday's yield of milk; and say that, by this 
 sort of alms, the cows yield even more milk and are preserved from 
 witchcraft. This need not be regarded as superstitious, provided that it is 
 done out of pity for the poor, and that they implore the Divine mercy for 
 the protection of their cattle, leaving the effect to the good pleasure of 
 Divine providence.<br>
 
         
 Again, Nider in the First chapter of his <i>Præceptorium</i> says that 
 it is lawful to bless cattle, in the same way as sick men, by means of 
 written charms and sacred words, even if they have the appearance of 
 incantations, as long as the seven conditions we have mentioned are 
 observed. For he says that devout persons and virgins have been known to 
 sign a cow with the sign of the Cross, together with the Lord's Prayer and 
 the Angelic Salutation, upon which the devil's work has been driven off, if 
 it is due to witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 And in his <i>Formicarius</i> he tells that witches confess that their 
 witchcraft is obstructed by the reverent observation of the ceremonies of 
 the Church; as by the aspersion of Holy Water, or the consumption of 
 consecrated salt, by the lawful use of candles on the Day of Purification 
 and of blessed palms, and such things. For this reason the Church uses these 
 in her exorcisms, that they may lessen the power of the devil.<br>
 
         
 Also, because when witches wish to deprive a cow of milk they are in the 
 habit of begging a little of the milk or butter which comes from that cow, 
 so that they may afterwards by their art bewitch the cow; therefore women 
 should take care, when they are asked by persons suspected of this crime, 
 not to give away the least thing to them.<br>
 
         
 Again, there are women who, when they have been turning a church for a long 
 while to no purpose, and if they suspect that this is due to some witch, 
 procure if possible a little butter from the house of that witch. Then they 
 make that butter into three pieces and throw them into the churn, invoking 
 the Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and so all 
 witchcraft is put to flight. Here again it is a case of opposing vanity to 
 vanity, for the simple reason that the butter must be borrowed from the 
 suspected witch. But if it were done without this; if with the invocation of 
 the Holy Trinity and the Lord's Prayer the woman were to commit the effect 
 of the Divine Will, she would remain beyond reproach. Nevertheless it is not 
 a commendable practice to throw in the three pieces of butter; for it would 
 be better to banish the witchcraft by means of sprinkling Holy Water or 
 putting in some exorcised salt, always with the prayers we have mentioned.<br>
 
         
 Again, since often the whole of a person's cattle are destroyed by witchcraft, 
 those who have suffered in this way ought to take care to remove the soil 
 under the threshold of the stable or stall, and where the cattle go to 
 water, and replace it with fresh soil sprinkled with Holy Water. For witches 
 have often confessed that they have placed some instrument of witchcraft at 
 the instance of devils, they have only had to make a hole in which the devil 
 has placed the instrument of witchcraft; and that this was a visible object, 
 such as a stone or a piece of wood or a mouse or some serpent. For it is 
 agreed that the devil can perform such things by himself without the need of 
 any partner; but usually, for the perdition of her soul, he compels a witch 
 to co-operate with him.<br>
 
         
 In addition to the setting up of the sign of the Cross which we have 
 mentioned, the following procedure is practised against hailstorms and 
 tempests. Three of the hailstones are thrown into the fire with an invocation 
 of the Most Holy Trinity, and the Lord's Prayer and the Angelic Salutation 
 are repeated twice or three times, together with the Gospel of S. John, 
 <i>In the beginning was the Word</i>. And the sign of the Cross is made in 
 every direction towards each quarter of the world. Finally, <i>The Word was 
 made Flesh</i> is repeated three times, and three times, “By the words 
 of this Gospel may this tempest be dispersed.” And suddenly, if the 
 tempest is due to witchcraft, it will cease. This is most true and need not 
 be regarded with any suspicion. For if the hailstones were thrown into the 
 fire without the invocation of the Divine Name, then it would be considered 
 superstitious.<br>
 
         
 But it may be asked whether the tempest could not be stilled without the use 
 of those hailstones. We answer that it is the other sacred words that are 
 chiefly effective; but by throwing in the hailstones a man means to torment 
 the devil, and tries to destroy his works by the invocation of the Holy 
 Trinity. And he throws them into the fire rather than into water, because 
 the more quickly they are dissolved the sooner is the devil's work destroyed. 
 But he must commit to the Divine Will the effect which is hoped for.<br>
 
         
 Relevant to this is the reply given by a witch to a Judge who asked her if 
 there were any means of stilling a tempest raised by witchcraft. She 
 answered: Yes, by this means. I adjure you, hailstorms and winds, by the 
 five wounds of Christ, and by the three nails which pierced His hands and 
 feet, and by the four Holy Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, that 
 you be dissolved and fall as rain.<br>
 
         
 Many also confess, some freely and some under stress of torture, that there 
 are five things by which they are much hindered, sometimes entirely, 
 sometimes in part, sometimes so that they cannot harm his friends. And 
 these are, that a man should have a pure faith and keep the commandments of 
 God; that he should protect himself with the sign of the Cross and with 
 prayer; that he should reverence the rites and ceremonies of the Church; 
 that he should be diligent in the performance of public justice; and that he 
 should meditate aloud or in his heart on the Passion of Christ. And of these 
 things Nider also speaks. And for this reason it is a general practice of 
 the Church to ring bells as a protection against storms, both that the 
 devils may flee from them as being consecrated to God and refrain from their 
 wickedness, and also that the people may be roused up to invoke God against 
 tempests with the Sacrament of the Altar and sacred words, following the 
 very ancient custom of the Church in France and Germany.<br>
 
         
 But since this method of carrying out the Sacrament to still a storm seems 
 to many a little superstitious, because they do not understand the rules by 
 which it is possible to distinguish between that which is superstitious and 
 that which is not; therefore it must be considered that five rules are given 
 by which anyone may know whether an action is superstitious, that is, outside 
 the observances of the Christian religion, or whether it is in accordance 
 with the due and proper worship and honour of God, proceeding from the true 
 virtue of religion both in the thoughts of the heart and in the actions of 
 the body. For these are explained in the gloss on <i>Colossians</i> ii, where 
 S. Paul says: Which things have a show of wisdom in superstition; and the 
 gloss says: Superstition is religion observed without due discipline; as 
 was said before.<br>
 
         
 The first of these is, that in all our works the glory of God ought to be 
 our chief aim; as it is said: Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever else ye 
 do, do all in the glory of God. Therefore in 
 every work relating to the Christian religion let care be taken that it is 
 to the glory of God, and that in it man should give the glory chiefly to 
 God, so that by that very work the mind of man may be put in subjection to 
 God. And although, according to this rule, the ceremonies and legal 
 procedures of the Old Testament are not now observed, since they are to be 
 understood figuratively, whereas the truth is made known in the New 
 Testament, yet the carrying out of the Sacrament or of Relics to still a 
 storm does not seem to militate against this rule.<br>
 
         
 The second rule is that care should be taken that the work is a discipline 
 to restrain concupiscence, or a bodily abstinence, but in the way that is 
 owed to virtue, that is, according to the rites of the Church and moral 
 doctrine. For S. Paul says, <i>Romans</i> xii: Let your service be 
 reasonable. And because of this rule, they are foolish who make a vow not 
 to comb their hair on the Sabbath, or who fast on Sunday, saying, The better 
 the day the better the deed, and such like. But again it does not seem that 
 it is superstitious to carry out the Sacrament, etc.<br>
 
         
 The third rule is to be sure that what is done is in accordance with the 
 statutes of the Catholic Church, or with the witness of Holy Scripture, or 
 according at least to the rites of some particular Church, or in accordance 
 with universal use, which S. Augustine says may be taken as a law. 
 Accordingly when the Bishops of the English were in doubt because the Mass 
 was celebrated in different manners in different Churches, S. Gregory wrote 
 to them that they might use whatever methods they found most pleasing to 
 God, whether they followed the rites of the Roman or of the Gallican or of 
 any other Church. For the fact that different Churches have different 
 methods in Divine worship does not militate against the truth, and therefore 
 such customs are to be preserved, and it is unlawful to neglect them. And 
 so, as we said in the beginning, it is a very ancient custom in the Churches 
 of France and some parts of Germany, after the consecration of the Eucharist 
 to carry It out into the open; and this cannot be unlawful, provided that It 
 is not carried exposed to the air, but enclosed and contained in a Pyx.<br>
 
         
 The fourth rule is to take care that what is done bears some natural relation 
 to the effect which is expected; for if it does not, it is judged to be 
 superstitious. On this account unknown characters and suspected names, and 
 the images or charts of necromancers and astronomer, are altogether to be 
 condemned as suspect. But we cannot say that on this account it is 
 superstitious to carry out Holy Relics or the Eucharist as a protection 
 against the plagues of the devil; for it is rather a most religious and 
 salutary practice, since in that Sacrament lies all our help against the 
 Adversary.<br>
 
         
 The fifth rule is to be careful that what is done should give no occasion 
 for scandal or stumbling; for in that case, although it be not superstitious, 
 yet because of the scandal it should be forgone or postponed, or done 
 secretly without scandal. Therefore if this carrying of the Sacrament can be 
 done without scandal, or even secretly, then it should not be neglected. For 
 by this rule many secular priests neglect the use of benedictions by means 
 of devout words either uttered over the sick or bound round their necks. I 
 say that nothing should be done, at least publicly, if it can give any 
 occasion of stumbling to other simple folk.<br>
 
         
 Let this be enough on the subject of the remedies against hailstorms, either 
 by words or lawful actions.
 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02b08a.htm">Next: Chapter VIII</a><br>Certain Remedies prescribed against those Dark and Horrid Harms with which Devils may Afflict Men.<br>
 </center>
 </body>