<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02b01a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02b03a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter II</h2>
 <h3>Remedies prescribed for Those who are Bewitched by the Limitation of the Generative Power.</h3></center>
 
         
 Although far more women are witches than men, as was shown in the 
 First Part of the work, yet men are more often bewitched than 
 women. And the reason for this lies in the fact that God allows 
 the devil more power over the venereal act, by which the original 
 sin is handed down, than over other human actions. In the same 
 way He allows more witchcraft to be performed by means of 
 serpents, which are more subject to incantations than other 
 animals, because that was the first instrument of the devil. And 
 the venereal act can be more readily and easily bewitched in a 
 man than in a woman, as has been clearly shown. For there are 
 five ways in which the devil can impede the act of generation, 
 and they are more easily operated against men.
 <br>
 
         
 As far as possible we shall set out the remedies which can be 
 applies in each separate kind of obstruction; and let him who is 
 bewitched in this faculty take note to which class of obstruction 
 he belongs. For there are five classes, according to Peter a 
 Palude in his Fourth Book, dist. 34, of the trial of this sort of 
 bewitchment.
 <br>
 
         
 For the devil, being a spirit, has by his very nature power, with 
 God's permission,  over a bodily creature, especially to promote 
 or to prevent local motion. So by this power they can prevent the 
 bodies of men and women from approaching each other; and this 
 either directly or indirectly. Directly, when they remove one to 
 a distance from another, and do not allow him to approach the 
 other. Indirectly, when they cause some obstruction, or when they 
 interpose themselves in an assumed body. So it happened that a 
 young Pagan who had married an idol, but none the less contracted 
 a marriage with a girl; but because of this he was unable to 
 copulate with her, as has been shown above. 
 <br>
 
         
 Secondly, the devil can inflame a man towards one woman and 
 render him impotent towards another; and this he can secretly 
 cause by the application of certain herbs or other matters of 
 which he well knows the virtue for this purpose.
 <br>
 
         
 Thirdly, he can disturb the apperception of a man or a woman, so 
 that he makes one appear hideous to the other; for, as has been 
 shown, he can influence the imagination.
 <br>
 
         
 Fourthly, he can suppress the vigour of that member which is 
 necessary for procreation; just as he can deprive any organ of 
 the power of local motion.
 <br>
 
         
 Fifthly, he can prevent the flow of the semen to the members in 
 which is the motive power, by as it were closing the seminal duct 
 so that it does not descend to the genital vessels, or does not 
 ascend again from them, or cannot come forth, or is spent vainly.
 <br>
 
         
 But if a man should say: I do not know by which of these 
 different methods I have been bewitched; all I know is that I 
 cannot do anything with my wife: he should be answered in this 
 way. If he is active and able with regard to other women, but not 
 with his wife, then he is bewitched in the second way; for he can 
 be certified as to the first way, that he is being deluded by 
 Succubus or Incubus devils. Moreover, if he does not find his 
 wife repellent, and yet cannot know her, but can know other 
 women, then again it is the second way; but if he finds her 
 repellent and cannot copulate with her, then it is the second and 
 the third way. If he does not find her repellent and wishes to 
 have connexion with her, but has no power in his member, then it 
 is the fourth way. But if he has power in his member, yet cannot 
 emit his semen, then it is the fifth way. The method of curing 
 these will be shown where we consider whether those who live in 
 grace and those who do not are equally liable to be bewitched in 
 these manners; and we answer that they are not, with the 
 exception of the fourth manner, and even then very rarely. For 
 such an affliction can happen to a man living in grace and 
 righteousness; but the reader must understand that in this case 
 we speak of the conjugal act between married people; for in any 
 other case they are all liable to bewitchment; for every venereal 
 act outside wedlock is a mortal sin, and is only committed by 
 those who are not in a state of grace.
 <br>
 
         
 We have, indeed, the authority of the whole of Scriptural 
 teaching that God allows the devil to afflict sinners more than 
 the just. For although that most just man, Job, was stricken, yet 
 he was not so particularly or directly in respect of the 
 procreant function. And it may be said that, when a married 
 couple are afflicted in this way, either both the parties or one 
 of them is not living in a state of grace; and this opinion is 
 substantiated in the Scriptures both by authority and by reason. 
 For the Angel said to Tobias: The 
 devil receives power against those who are given over to lust: 
 and he proved it in the slaying of the seven husbands of the 
 virgin Sara. 
 <br>
 
         
 Cassian, in his <i>Collation of the Fathers</i>, quotes S. Antony as 
 saying that the devil can in no way enter our mind or body unless 
 he has first deprived it of all holy thoughts and made it empty 
 and bare of spiritual contemplation. These words should not be 
 applies to an evil affliction over the whole of the body, for 
 when Job was so afflicted he was not denuded of Divine grace; but 
 they have particular reference to a particular infirmity 
 inflicted upon the body for some sin. And the infirmity we are 
 considering can only be due to the sin of incontinence. For, as 
 we have said, God allows the devil more power over that act than 
 over other human acts, because of its natural nastiness, and 
 because by it the first sin was handed down to posterity. 
 Therefore when people joined in matrimony have for some sin been 
 deprived of Divine help, God allows them to be bewitched chiefly 
 in their procreant functions.
 <br>
 
         
 But if it is asked of what sort are those sins, it can be said, 
 according to S. Jerome, that even in a state of matrimony it is 
 possible to commit the sin of incontinence in various ways. See 
 the text: He who loves his wife to excess is an adulterer. And 
 they who love in this way are more liable to be bewitched after 
 the manner we have said.
 <br>
 
         
 The remedies of the Church, then, are twofold: one applicable in 
 the public court, the other in the tribunal of the confessional. 
 As for the first, when it has been publicly found that the 
 impotence is due to witchcraft, then it must be distinguished 
 whether it is temporary or permanent. If it is only temporary, it 
 does not annul the marriage. And it is assumed to be temporary 
 if, within the space of three years, by using every possible 
 expedient of the Sacraments of the Church and other remedies, a 
 cure can be caused. But if, after that time, they cannot be cured 
 by any remedy, then it is assumed to be permanent.
 <br>
 
         
 Now the disability either precedes both the contract and the 
 consummation of marriage; and in this case it impedes the 
 contract: or it follows the contract but precedes the 
 consummation; and in this case it annuls the contract. For men 
 are very often bewitched in this way because they have cast off 
 their former mistresses, who, hoping that they were to be married 
 and being disappointed, so bewitch the men that they cannot 
 copulate with another woman. And in such a case, according to the 
 opinion of many, the marriage already contracted is annulled, 
 unless, like Our Blessed Lady and S. Joseph they are willing to 
 live together in holy continence. This opinion is supported by 
 the Canon where it says (23, q. I) that a marriage is confirmed 
 by the carnal act. And a little later it says that impotence 
 before such confirmation dissolves the ties of marriage. 
 <br>
 
         
 Or else the disability follows the consummation of a marriage, 
 and then it does not dissolve the bonds of matrimony. Much more 
 to this effect is noted by the Doctors, where in various writings 
 they treat of the obstruction due to witchcraft; but since it is 
 not precisely relevant to the present inquiry, it is here 
 omitted. 
 <br>
 
         
 But some may find it difficult to understand how this function 
 can be obstructed in respect of one woman but not of another. S. 
 Bonaventura answers that this may be because some witch has 
 persuaded the devil to effect this only with respect to one 
 woman, or because God will not allow the obstruction to apply 
 save to some particular woman. The judgement of God in this 
 matter is a mystery, as in the case of the wife of Tobias. But 
 how the devil procures this disability is plainly shown by what 
 has already been said. And S. Bonaventura says that he obstructs 
 the procreant function, not intrinsically by harming the organ, 
 but extrinsically by impeding its use; and it is an artificial, 
 not a natural impediment; and so he an cause it to apply to one 
 woman and not to another. Or else he takes away all desire for 
 one or another woman; and this he does by his own power, or else 
 by means of some herb or stone or some occult creature. And in 
 this he is in substantial agreement with Peter a Palude.
 <br>
 
         
 The ecclesiastical remedy in the tribunal of God is set forth in 
 the Canon where it says: If with the permission of the just and 
 secret judgement of God, through the arts of sorceresses and 
 witches and the preparation of the devil, men are bewitched in 
 their procreant function, they are to be urged to make clean 
 confession to God and His priest of all their sins with a 
 contrite heart and a humble spirit; and to make satisfaction to 
 God with many tears and large offerings and prayers and fasting.
 <br>
 
         
 From these words it is clear that such afflictions are only on 
 account of sin, and occur only to those who do not live in a 
 state of grace. It proceeds to tell how the ministers of the 
 Church can effect a cure by means of exorcisms and the other 
 protections and cures provided by the Church. In this way, with 
 the help of God, Abraham cured by his prayers 
 Abimelech and his house.
 <br>
 
         
 In conclusion we may say that there are five remedies which may 
 lawfully be applied to those who are bewitched in this way: 
 namely, a pilgrimage to some holy and venerable shrine; true 
 confession of their sins with contrition; the plentiful use of 
 the sign of the Cross and devout prayer; lawful exorcism by 
 solemn words, the nature of which will be explained later; and 
 lastly, a remedy can be effected by prudently approaching the 
 witch, as was shown in the case of the Count who for three years 
 was unable to cohabit carnally with a virgin whom he had married.
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02b03a.htm">Next: Chapter III</a><br>Remedies prescribed for those who are Bewitched by being Inflamed with Inordinate Love or Extraordinary Hatred.<br>
 </center>
 </body>