<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02b05a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02b07a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter VI</h2>
 <h3>Prescribed Remedies; to wit, the Lawful Exorcisms of the Church, for all Sorts of Infirmities and Ills due to Witchcraft; and the Method of Exorcising those who are Bewitched.</h3></center>
 
         
 It has already been stated that witches can afflict men with 
 every kind of physical infirmity; therefore it can be taken as a 
 general rule that the various verbal or practical remedies which 
 can be applied in the case of those infirmities which we have 
 just been discussing are equally applicable to all other 
 infirmities, such as epilepsy or leprosy, for example. And as 
 lawful exorcisms are reckoned among the verbal remedies and have 
 been most often considered by us, they may be taken as a general 
 type of such remedies; and there are three matters to be 
 considered regarding them.<br> 
 
         
 First, we must judge whether a person who has not been ordained 
 as an exorcist, such as a layman or a secular cleric, may 
 lawfully exorcise devils and their works. Bound up with this 
 question are three others: namely; first, what constitutes the 
 legality of this practice; secondly, the seven conditions which 
 must be observed when one wishes to make private use of charms 
 and benedictions; and thirdly, in what way the disease is to be 
 exorcised and the devil conjured.<br> 
 
         
 Secondly, we must consider what is to be done when no healing 
 grace results from the exorcism.<br> 
 
         
 Thirdly, we must consider practical and not verbal remedies; 
 together with the solution of certain arguments.<br> 
 
         
 For the first, we have the opinion of S. Thomas in Book IV, dist. 
 23. He says: When a man is ordained as an exorcist, or into any 
 of the other minor Orders, he has conferred upon him the power of 
 exorcism in his official capacity; and this power may even 
 lawfully be used by those who belong to no Order, but such do not 
 exercise it in their official capacity. Similarly the Mass can be 
 said in an unconsecrated house, although the very purpose of 
 consecrating a church is that the Mass may be said there; but 
 this is more on account of the grace which is in the righteous 
 than of the grace of the Sacrament.<br> 
 
         
 From these words we may conclude that, although it is good that 
 in the liberation of a bewitched person recourse should be had to 
 an exorcist having authority to exorcise such bewitchments, yet 
 at times other devout persons may, either with or without any 
 exorcism, cast out this sort of diseases.<br> 
 
         
 For we hear of a certain poor and very devout virgin, one of 
 whose friends has been grievously bewitched in his foot, so that 
 it was clear to the physicians that he could be cured by no 
 medicines. But it happened that the virgin went to visit the sick 
 man, and he at once begged her to apply some benediction to his 
 foot. She consented, and did no more than silently say the Lord's 
 Prayer and the Apostles' Creed, at the same time making use of 
 the sign of the life-giving Cross. The sick man then felt himself 
 at once cured, and, that he might have a remedy for the future, 
 asked the virgin what charms she had used. But she answered: You 
 are of little faith and do not hold to the holy and lawful 
 practices of the Church, and you often apply forbidden charms and 
 remedies for your infirmities; therefore you are rarely healthy 
 in your body, because you are always sick in your soul. But if 
 you would put your trust in prayer and in the efficacy of lawful 
 symbols, you will often be very easily cured. For I did nothing 
 but repeat the Lord's Prayer and the Apostles' Creed, and you are 
 now cured.<br> 
 
         
 This example gives rise to the question, whether there is not any 
 efficacy in other benedictions and charms, and even conjurations 
 by way of exorcism; for they seem to be condemned in this story. 
 We answer that the virgin condemned only unlawful charms and 
 unlawful conjurations and exorcisms.<br> 
 
         
 To understand these last we must consider how they originated, 
 and how they came to be abused. For they were in their origin 
 entirely sacred; but just as by the means of devils and wicked 
 men all things can be defiled, so also were these sacred words. 
 For it is said in the last chapter of S. Mark, of the Apostles 
 and holy men: In My Name shall they cast out devils; and they 
 visited the sick, and prayed over them with sacred words; and in 
 after times priests devoutly used similar rites; and therefore 
 there are to be found to-day in ancient Churches devout prayers 
 and holy exorcisms which men can use or undergo, when they are 
 applied by pious men as they used to be, without any 
 superstition; even as there are now to be found learned men and 
 Doctors of holy Theology who visit the sick and use such words 
 for the healing not only of demoniacs, but of other diseases as 
 well.<br> 
 
         
 But, alas! superstitious men have, on the pattern of these, found 
 for themselves many vain and unlawful remedies which they employ 
 these days for sick men and animals; and the clergy have become 
 too slothful to use any more the lawful words when they visit the 
 sick. On this account Gulielmus Durandus, 
 the commentator on S. Raymond, says that such lawful exorcisms may be 
 used by a religious and discreet priest, or by a layman, or even by a 
 woman of good life and proved discretion; by the offering of lawful 
 prayers over the sick: not over fruits or animals, but over the 
 sick. For the Gospel says: They shall place their hands upon the 
 sick, etc. And such persons are not to be prevented from 
 practising in this way; unless perhaps it is feared that, 
 following their example, other indiscreet and superstitious 
 persons should make improper use of incantations. It is these 
 superstitious diviners whom that virgin we have mentioned 
 condemned, when she said that they who consulted with such had 
 weak, that is to say bad, faith.<br> 
 
         
 Now for the elucidation of this matter it is asked how it is 
 possible to know whether the words of such charms and 
 benedictions are lawful or superstitious, and how they ought to 
 be used; and whether the devil can be conjured and diseases 
 exorcised.<br> 
 
         
 In the first place, that is said to be lawful in the Christian 
 religion which is not superstitious; and that is said to be 
 superstitious which is over and above the prescribed form of 
 religion. See <i>Colossians</i> ii: which things indeed have a 
 show of wisdom in superstition: on which the gloss says: 
 Superstition is undisciplined religion, that is, religion 
 observed with defective methods in evil circumstance.<br> 
 
         
 Anything, also, is superstition which human tradition without 
 higher authority has caused to usurp the name of religion; such 
 is the interpolation of hymns at Holy Mass, the alteration of the 
 Preface for Requiems, the abbreviation of the Creed which it to 
 be sung at Mass, the reliance upon an organ rather than upon the 
 choir for the music, neglect to have a Server on the Altar, and 
 such practices. But to return to our point, when a work is done 
 by virtue of the Christian religion, as when someone wishes to 
 heal the sick by means of prayer and benediction and sacred 
 words, which is the matter we are considering), such a person 
 must observe seven conditions by which such benedictions are 
 rendered lawful. And even if he uses adjurations, through the 
 virtue of the Divine Name, and by the virtue of the works of 
 Christ, His Birth, Passion and Precious Death, by which the devil 
 was conquered and cast out; such benedictions and charms and 
 exorcisms shall be called lawful, and they who practise them are 
 exorcists or lawful enchanters. See S. Isidore, <i>Etym</i>. 
 VIII, Enchanters are they whose art and skill lies in the use of 
 words.<br> 
 
         
 And the first of these conditions, as we learn from S. Thomas, is 
 that there must be nothing in the words which hints at any 
 expressed or tacit invocation of devils. If such were expressed, 
 it would be obviously unlawful. If it were tacit, it might be 
 considered in the light of intention, or in that of fact: in that 
 of intention, when the operator has no care whether it is God or 
 the devil who is helping him, so long as he attains his desired 
 result; in that of fact, when a person has no natural aptitude 
 for such work, but creates some artificial means. And of such not 
 only must physicians and astronomers be the judges, but 
 especially Theologians. For in this way do necromancers work, 
 making images and rings and stones by artificial means; which 
 have no natural virtue to effect the results which they very 
 often expect: therefore the devil must be concerned in their 
 works.<br> 
 
         
 Secondly, the benedictions or charms must contain no unknown 
 names; for according to S. John Chrysostom such are to be 
 regarded with fear, lest they should conceal some matter of 
 superstition.<br> 
 
         
 Thirdly, there must be nothing in the words that is untrue; for 
 if there is, the effect of them cannot be from God, Who is not a 
 witness to a lie. But some old women in their incantations use 
 some such jingling doggerel as the following:<p> 
 
 Blessed MARY went a-walking<br>
 Over Jordan river.<br>
 Stephen met her, and fell a-talking, etc.</p><p>
 
         
 Fourthly, there must be no vanities, or written characters beyond 
 the sign of the Cross. Therefore the charms which soldiers are 
 wont to carry are condemned.<br> 
 
         
 Fifthly, no faith must be placed in the method of writing or 
 reading or binding the charm about a  person, or in any such 
 vanity, which has nothing to do with the reverence of God, 
 without which a charm is altogether superstitious.<br> 
 
         
 Sixthly, in the citing and uttering of Divine words and of Holy 
 Scripture attention must only be paid to the sacred words 
 themselves and their meaning, and to the reverence of God; 
 whether the effect be looked for from the Divine virtue, or from 
 the relics of Saints, which are a secondary power, since their 
 virtue springs originally from God.<br> 
 
         
 Seventhly, the looked-for effect must be left tot he Divine Will; 
 for He knows whether it is best for a man to be healed or to be 
 plagued, or to die. This condition was set down by S. Thomas.<br> 
 
         
 So we may conclude that if none of these conditions be broken, 
 the incantation will be lawful. And S. Thomas writes in this 
 connexion on the last chapter of <i>S. Mark: </i>And these signs 
 shall follow them that believe; in my name shall they cast out 
 devils; they shall take up serpents. From this it is clear that, 
 provided the above conditions are observed, it is lawful by means 
 of sacred words to keep serpents away.<br> 
 
         
 S. Thomas says further: The words of God are not less holy than 
 the Relics of the Saints. As S. Augustine says: The word of God 
 is not less than the Body of Christ. But all are agreed that it 
 is lawful to carry reverently about the person the Relics of the 
 Saints: therefore let us by all means invoke the name of God by 
 duly using the Lord's Prayer and the Angelic Salutation, by His 
 Birth and Passion, by His Five Wounds, and by the Seven Words 
 which He spoke on the Cross, by the Triumphant Inscription, by 
 the three nails, and by the other weapons of Christ's army 
 against the devil and his works. By all these means it is lawful 
 to work, and our trust may be placed in them, leaving the issue 
 to God's will.<br> 
 
         
 And what has been said about the keeping off of serpents applies 
 also to other animals, provided that the attention is fixed only 
 on the sacred words and the Divine virtue. But great care is to 
 be used in incantations of this nature. For S. Thomas says: Such 
 diviners often use unlawful observances, and obtain magic effects 
 by means of devils, especially in the case of serpents; for the 
 serpent was the devil's first instrument by which he deceived 
 mankind.<br> 
 
         
 For in the town of Salzburg there was a certain mage who one day, 
 in open view of all, wanted to charm all the snakes into a 
 particular pit, and kill them all within an area of a mile. So he 
 gathered all the snakes together, and was himself standing over 
 the pit, when last of all there came a huge and horrible serpent 
 which would not go into the pit. This serpent kept making signs 
 to the man to let it go away and crawl where it would; but he 
 would not cease from his incantation, but insisted that, as all 
 the other snakes had entered the pit and there died, so also must 
 this horrible serpent. But it stood on the opposite side to the 
 warlock, and suddenly leapt over the pit and fell upon the man, 
 wrapping itself round his belly, and dragged him with itself into 
 the pit, where they both died. From this it may be seen that only 
 for a useful purpose, such as driving them away from men's 
 houses, are such incantations to be practised, and they are to be 
 done by the Divine virtue, and in the fear of God, and with 
 reverence.<br> 
 
         
 In the second place we have to consider how exorcisms or charms 
 of this kind ought to be used, and whether they should be worn 
 round the neck or sewn into the clothing. It may seem that such 
 practices are unlawful; for S. Augustine says, in the <i>Second 
 Book on the Christian Doctrine:</i> There are a thousand magic 
 devices and amulets and charms which are all superstitious, and 
 the School of Medicine utterly condemns them all, whether they 
 are incantations, or certain marks which are called characters, 
 or engraved charms to be hung round the neck.<br> 
 
         
 Also S. John Chrysostom, commenting on <i>S. Matthew</i>, says: 
 Some persons wear round their neck some written portion of the 
 Gospel; but is not the Gospel every day read in the church and 
 heard by all? How then shall a man be helped by wearing the 
 Gospel round his neck, when he has reaped no benefit from hearing 
 it with his ears? For in what does the virtue of the Gospel 
 consist; in the characters of its letters, or in the meaning of 
 its words? If in the characters, you do well to hang it round 
 your neck; but if in the meaning, surely it is of more benefit 
 when planted in the heart than when worn round the neck.<br> 
 
 </p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02b07a.htm">Next: Chapter VII</a><br>Remedies prescribed against Hailstorms, and for animals that are Bewitched.<br>
 </center>
 </body>