<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_26a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_28a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XVII</h2>
 <h3>The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy, but is still not Penitent</h3></center>
 
 
         
 The eighth method of terminating a process on behalf of the faith 
 is used when the person accused of heresy, after a careful 
 examination of the merits of the process in consultation with 
 learned lawyers, is found to have confessed his heresy, but to be 
 penitent, and not truly to have relapsed into heresy. And this is 
 when the accused has himself confessed in a Court of law under 
 oath before the Bishop and Inquisitor that he has for so long 
 lived and persisted in that heresy of which he is accused, or in 
 any other, and has believed in and adhered to it; but that 
 afterwards, being persuaded by the Bishop and others, he wishes 
 to be converted and to return to the bosom of the Church, and to 
 abjure that and every heresy, and to make such satisfaction as 
 they require of him; and it is found that he has made no previous 
 abjuration of any other heresy, but is now willing and prepared 
 to abjure.<br> 
 
         
 In such a case the procedure will be as follows. Although such a 
 person has for many years persisted in the said heresy and even 
 in others, and has believed and practised them and led many 
 others into error; yet if at last he has consented to abjure 
 those heresies and to make such satisfaction as the Bishop and 
 the ecclesiastical Judge shall decree, he is not to be delivered 
 up to the secular Court to suffer the extreme penalty; nor, if he 
 is a cleric, is he to be degraded. But he is to admitted to 
 mercy, according to the Canon <i>ad abolendam</i>. And after he 
 has abjured his former heresy he is to be confined in prison for 
 life (see the Canon <i>excommunicamus</i>, where it provides for 
 the absolution of such). But great care must be taken that he has 
 no simulated a false penitence in order to be received back into 
 the Church. Also the secular Court is not at all bound by such a 
 sentence as the above.<br> 
 
         
 He shall make his abjuration in the manner already set out, with 
 this difference. He shall with his own mouth confess his crimes 
 before the congregation in church on a Feast Day, in the 
 following manner. The clerk shall ask him, have you for so many 
 years persisted in the heresy of witches? And he shall answer, 
 Yes. And then, Have you done this and this to which you have 
 confessed? And he shall answer, Yes. And so on. And finally he 
 shall make his abjuration kneeling on his knees. And since, 
 having been convicted of heresy, he has been excommunicated, 
 after he has by abjuration returned to the bosom of the Church, 
 he is to be granted the grace of absolution, according to the 
 manner used by the Bishops with Apostolic authority of absolving 
 from the major excommunication. And sentence shall at once be 
 pronounced in the following manner:<br> 
 
         
 We, the Bishop of such city, or the Judge in the territories of 
 such Prince, seeing that you, N., of such a place in such a 
 Diocese, have been by public report and the information of 
 credible persons accused before us of the sin of heresy; and 
 since you had for many years been infected with that heresy to 
 the great damage of your soul; and because this accusation 
 against you has keenly wounded our hearts: we whose duty it is by 
 reason of the office which we have received to plant the Holy 
 Catholic Faith in the hearts of men and to keep away all heresy 
 from their minds, wishing to be more certainly informed whether 
 there was any truth in the report which had come to our ears, in 
 order that, if it were true, we might provide a healthy and 
 fitting remedy, proceeded in the best way which was open to us to 
 question and examine witness and to interrogate you on oath 
 concerning that of which you were accused, doing all and singular 
 which was required of us by justice and the canonical 
 sanctions.<br> 
 
         
 And since we wished to bring your case to a suitable conclusion, 
 and to have a clear understanding of your past state of mind, 
 whether you were walking in the darkness or in the light, and 
 whether or not you had fallen into the sin of heresy; having 
 conducted the whole process, we summoned together in council 
 before us learned men of the Theological faculty and men skilled 
 in both the Canon and the Civil Law, knowing that, according to 
 canonical institution, the judgement is sound which is confirmed 
 by the opinion of many; and having on all details consulted the 
 opinion of the said learned men, and having diligently and 
 carefully examined all the circumstances of the process; we find 
 that you are, by your own confession made on oath before us in 
 the Court, convicted of many of the sins of witches. (Let them be 
 expressed in detail.)<br> 
 
         
 But since the Lord in His infinite mercy permits men at times to 
 fall into heresies and errors, not only that learned Catholics 
 may be exercised in sacred arguments, but that they who have 
 fallen from the faith may become more humble thereafter and 
 perform works of penitence: having carefully discussed the 
 circumstances of this same process, we find that you, at our 
 frequent instance and following the advice of us and other honest 
 men, have with a healthy mind returned to the unity and bosom of 
 the Holy Mother Church, detesting the said errors and heresies, 
 and acknowledging the irrefragable truth of the Holy Catholic 
 Faith, laying it t your inmost heart: wherefore, following in His 
 footsteps Who wishes that no one should perish, we have admitted 
 you to this adjuration and public abjuration of the said an all 
 other heresies. And having done this, we absolve you from the 
 sentence of major excommunication by which you were bound for 
 your fall into heresy, and reconciling you to the Holy Mother 
 Church we restore you to the sacraments of the Church; provided 
 that with a true heart, and not with simulated faith, you return 
 to the unity of the Church, as we believe and hope that you have 
 done.<br> 
 
         
 But because it would be a very scandalous thing to avenge the 
 injuries done to temporal Lords and to tolerate the offences 
 committed against God the Creator of all the Heavens, since it is 
 a far greater sin to offend against the Eternal than against a 
 temporal Majesty, and that God Who pities sinners may have mercy 
 upon you, that you may be an example for others, and that your 
 sins may not remain unpunished, and that you may become more 
 careful in the future, and not more prone but less apt to commit 
 the said and any other crimes: We the said Bishop and Judge, or 
 Judges, on behalf of the faith, sitting in tribunal as Judges 
 judging, etc., as above . . . that you put on a grey-blue 
 garment, etc. Also we sentence and condemn you to perpetual 
 imprisonment, there to be punished with the bread of affliction 
 and the water of distress; 
 reserving to ourselves the right to mitigate, aggravate, change, 
 or remit wholly or in part the said sentence if, when, and as 
 often as it shall seem good to us to do so. This sentence was 
 given, etc.<br> 
 
         
 After this the Judge shall proceed point by point, pronouncing 
 sentence in the following or some similar manner:<br> 
 
         
 My son, your sentence or penance consists in this, that you bear 
 this cross during the whole period of your life, that you stand 
 so bearing it on the altar steps or in the door of such churches, 
 and that you be imprisoned for life on bread and water. But, my 
 son, lest this may seem too hard for you, I assure you that if 
 you patiently bear your punishment you will find mercy with us; 
 therefore doubt not nor despair, but hope strongly.<br> 
 
         
 After this, let the sentence be duly executed, and let him put on 
 the said garment and be placed on high upon the altar steps in 
 full view of the people as they go out, surrounded by the 
 officers of the secular Court. And at the dinner hour let him be 
 led by the officers to prison, and the rest of the sentence be 
 carried out and duly performed. And after he is led out through 
 the door of the church, let the ecclesiastical Judge have no more 
 to do with the matter; and if the secular Court be satisfied, it 
 is well, but if not, let it do its pleasure. 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_28a.htm">Next: Question XVIII</a><br>The Method of passing Sentence upon one who hath Confessed to Heresy but is Relapsed, Albeir now Penitent<br>
 </center>
 </body>