<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_00a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_02a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question I</h2>
 <h3>The Method of Initiating a Process</h3></center>
 
 
         
 The first question, then, is what is the suitable method of instituting 
 a process on behalf of the faith against witches. In answer to this it must 
 be said that there are three methods allowed by Canon Law. The first is 
 when someone accuses a person before a judge of the crime of heresy, or of 
 protecting heretics, offering to prove it, and to submit himself to the 
 penalty of talion if he fails to prove it. The second method is when someone 
 denounces a person, but does not offer to prove it and is not willing to 
 embroil himself in the matter; but says that he lays information out of zeal 
 for the faith, or because of a sentence of excommunication inflicted by the 
 Ordinary or his Vicar; or because of the temporal punishment exacted by the 
 secular Judge upon those who fail to lay information.<br>
 
         
 The third method involves an inquisition, that is, when there is no accuser 
 or informer, but a general report that there are witches in some town or 
 place; and then the Judge must proceed, not at the instance of any party, 
 but simply by the virtue of his office.<br>
 
         
 Here it is to be noted that a judge should not readily admit the first 
 method of procedure. For one thing, it is not actuated by motives of faith, 
 nor is it very applicable to the case of witches, since they commit their 
 deeds in secret. Then, again, it is full of danger to the accuser, because 
 of the penalty of talion which he will incur if he fails to prove his case. 
 Then, again, it is very litigious.<br>
 
         
 Let the process begin with a general citation affixed to the walls of the 
 Parish Church or the Town Hall, in the following manner.<br>
 
         
 WHEREAS we, the Vicar of such and such Ordinary (or the Judge of such and 
 such county), do endeavour with all our might and strive with our whole 
 heart to preserve the Christian people entrusted to us in unity and the 
 happiness of the Catholic faith and to keep them far removed from every 
 plague of abominable heresy: Therefore we the aforesaid Judge to whose office 
 it belongs, to the glory and honour of the worshipful name of JESUS Christ 
 and for the exaltation of the Holy Orthodox Faith, and for the putting down 
 of the abomination of heresy, especially in all witches in general and in 
 each one severally of whatever condition or estate: (Here, if he is an 
 ecclesiastical Judge, let him add a summons to all priests and dignitaries 
 of the Church in that town and for a distance of two miles about it, who 
 have knowledge of this notice. And he shall add) By the authority which we 
 exercise in this district, and in virtue of holy obedience and under pain 
 of excommunication, we direct, command, require, and admonish that within 
 the space of twelve days (Here the secular Judge shall command in his own 
 manner under pain of penalties suitable to his office), the first four of 
 which shall stand for the first warning, the second for the second, and the 
 third for the third warning; and we give this treble canonical warning that 
 if anyone know, see, or have heard that any person is reported to be a 
 heretic or a witch, or of any is suspected especially of such practices as 
 cause injury to men, cattle, or the fruits of the earth, to the loss of the 
 State. But if any do not obey these aforesaid commands and admonitions by 
 revealing such matters within the term fixed, let him know (Here the 
 ecclesiastical Judge shall add) that he is cut off by the sword of 
 excommunication (The secular Judge shall add the temporal punishments). 
 Which sentence of excommunication we impose as from this time by this writing 
 upon all and several who thus stubbornly set at naught these our canonical 
 warnings aforesaid, and our requirement of their obedience, reserving to 
 ourselves alone the absolution of such sentence (The secular Judge shall 
 conclude in this manner). Given, etc.<br>
 
         
 Note also that in the case of the second method the following caution should 
 be observed. For it has been said that the second method of procedure and of 
 instituting a process on behalf of the faith is by means of an information, 
 where the informer does not offer to prove his statement and is not ready 
 to be embroiled in the case, but only speaks because of a sentence of 
 excommunication, or out of zeal for the faith and for the good of the State. 
 Therefore the secular Judge must specify in his general citation or warning 
 aforesaid, that none should think that he will become liable to a penalty 
 even if he fails to proved his words; since he comes forward not as an 
 accuser but as an informer.<br>
 
         
 And then, since several will appear to lay information before the Judge, 
 he ought to take care to proceed in the following manner. First, let him 
 have a Notary and two honest persons, either clerics or laymen; or if a 
 Notary is not to be procured, then let there be two suitable men in the 
 place of the Notary. For this is dealt with in the c. <i>ut officium</i>, 
 § <i>uerum</i>, lib. 6, where it is said: But because it is expedient 
 to proceed with great caution in the trial of a grave crime, that no error 
 may be committed in imposing upon the guilty a deservedly severe punishment; 
 we desire and command that, in the examination of the witnesses necessary 
 in such a charge, you shall have two religious and discreet persons, either 
 clerics or laymen.<br>
 
         
 It goes on to say: In the presence of these persons the depositions of the 
 witnesses shall be faithfully written down by a public official if one is 
 obtainable, or, if not, by two suitable men. Note therefore that, having 
 these persons, the Judge shall order the informer to lay his information 
 in writing, or at least give it clearly by word of mouth. And then the 
 Notary or the Judge shall begin to process in the following manner.
 
         
 In the year of Our Lord —, on the — day of the — month, in 
 the presence of me the Notary and of the witnesses subscribed, N. of the 
 town of — in the Diocese of —, as above, appeared in the person 
 at — before the honourable Judge, and offered him a schedule to the 
 following effect.<br>
 
         
 (Here shall follow the schedule in its entirety. But if he has not deposed 
 in writing buy by word of mouth, it shall continue thus.)<br>
 
         
 He appeared, etc. and laid information to the Judge that N. of the town or 
 parish of — in the Diocese of — had said and asserted that he 
 knew how to perform or had actually done certain injuries to the deponent 
 or to other persons.<br>
 
         
 After this, he shall immediately make the deponent take the oath in the 
 usual manner, either on the four Gospels of God, or on the Cross, raising 
 three fingers and depressing two in witness of the Holy Trinity and of the 
 damnation of his soul and body, that he will speak the truth in his 
 depositions. And when the oath has been sworn, he shall question him as to 
 how he knows that his depositions are true, and whether he saw or heard 
 that to which he swears. And if he says that he has seen anything, as, for 
 example, that the accused was present at such a time of tempest, or that he 
 had touched an animal, or had entered a stable, the Judge shall ask when he 
 saw him, and where, and how often, and in what manner, and who were present. 
 If he says that he did not see it, but heard of it, he shall ask him from 
 whom he heart it, where, when, and how often, and in whose presence, making 
 separate articles of each of the several points above mentioned. And the 
 Notary or scribe shall set down a record of them immediately after the 
 aforesaid denunciation; and it shall continue thus:<br>
 
         
 This denunciation, as we have said, having been made, the Inquisitor himself 
 did at once cause him to swear as above on the four Gospels, etc. that he 
 was speaking the truth in his depositions, and did ask him how and why he 
 knew or suspected that he what he said was true. He did make answer either 
 that he saw, or that he heard. The Inquisitor did then ask him where he saw 
 or heard this; and he answered on the — day of the — month in 
 the year — in the town or parish of —. He asked him how often he 
 saw or heard it, etc. And separate articles shall be made, and the whole set 
 down in process, as has been said. And particularly he shall be asked who 
 shared or could share in his knowledge of the case.<br>
 
         
 When all this has been done, he shall finally be asked whether he lays his 
 information out of ill-will, hatred, or rancour; or if he has omitted 
 anything through favour or love; of if he has been requested or suborned to 
 lay information.<br>
 
         
 Finally, he shall be enjoined, by virtue of his oath, to keep secret 
 whatever he has said there, or whatever the Judge has said to him; and the 
 whole process shall be set down in writing. And when all this is completed, 
 it shall be set down a little lower as follows. This was done at such a 
 place on the — day of the — month in the year —, in the 
 presence of me the Notary or scribe together with those associated with me 
 in the duty of writing, and of such and such witnesses summoned and 
 interrogated.<br>
 
         
 The third method of beginning a process is the commonest and most usual one, 
 because it is secret, and no accuser or informer has to appear. But when 
 there is a general report of witchcraft in some town or parish, because of 
 this report the Judge may proceed without a general citation or admonition 
 as above, since the noise of that report comes often to his ears; and then 
 again he can begin a process in the presence of the persons, as we have said 
 before.
 
         
 In the year of Our Lord —, on the — day of the — month, 
 to the ears of such and such official or judge there came a persistent 
 public report and rumour that N. of the town or parish of — did or 
 said such and such a thing savouring of witchcraft, against the faith and 
 the common good of the State.<br>
 
         
 And the whole shall be set down according to the common report. And a little 
 lower:<br>
 
         
 The case was heard on the — day of the — month in the year 
 —, in the presence of me the Notary of such and such authority, or of 
 such and such a scribe, and of such and such witnesses who were called and 
 interrogated.<br>
 
         
 But before we proceed to the second Head, which deals with the method of 
 conducting this sort of process, we must first say something of the witnesses 
 who are to be examined, as to how many they should be, and what should be 
 their condition.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_02a.htm">Next: Question II</a><br>Of the Number of Witnesses<br>
 </center>
 </body>