<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_34a.htm">Previous</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XXXV</h2>
 <h3>Finally, of the Method of passing Sentence upon Witches who Enter or Cause to be Entered an Appeal, whether such be Frivolous or Legitimate and Just</h3></center>
 
 
         
 But if the Judge perceives that the accused is determined to have 
 recourse to an appeal, he must first take note that such appeals 
 are sometimes valid and legitimate, and sometimes entirely 
 frivolous. Now it has already been explained that cases 
 concerning the Faith are to be conducted in a simple and summary 
 fashion, and therefore that no appeal is admitted in such cases. 
 Nevertheless it sometimes happens that Judges, on account of the 
 difficulty of the case, gladly prorogue and delay it; therefore 
 they may consider that it would be just to allow an appeal when 
 the accused feels that the Judge has really and actually acted 
 towards him in a manner contrary to the law and justice; as that 
 he has refused to allow him to defend himself, or that he has 
 proceeded to a sentence against the accused on his own 
 responsibility and without the counsel of others, or even without 
 consent of the Bishop or his Vicar, when he might have taken into 
 consideration much further evidence both for and against. For 
 such reasons an appeal may be allowed, but not otherwise.<br> 
 
         
 Secondly, it is to be noted that, when notice of appeal has been 
 given, the Judge should, without perturbation or disturbance, ask 
 for a copy of the appeal, giving his promise that the matter 
 shall not be delayed. And when the accused has given him a copy 
 of the appeal, the Judge shall notify him that he has yet two 
 days before he need answer it, and after those two days thirty 
 more before he need prepare the apostils of the case. And 
 although he may give his answer at once, and at once proceed to 
 issue his apostils if he is very expert and experienced, yet it 
 is better to act with caution, and fix a term of ten or twenty or 
 twenty-five days, reserving to himself the right to prorogue the 
 hearing of the appeal up to the legal limit of time.<br> 
 
         
 Thirdly, let the Judge take care that during the legal and 
 appointed interval he must diligently examine and discuss the 
 causes of the appeal and the alleged grounds of objection. And if 
 after having taken good counsel he sees that he has unduly and 
 unjustly proceeded against the accused, by refusing him 
 permission to defend himself, or by exposing him to questions at 
 an unsuitable time, or for any such reason; when the appointed 
 time comes let him correct his mistake, carrying the process back 
 to the point and stage where it was when the accused asked to be 
 defended, or when he put a term to his examination, etc., and so 
 remove the objection; and then let him proceed as we have said. 
 For by the removal of the grounds for objection the appeal, which 
 was legitimate, loses its weight.<br> 
 
         
 But here the circumspect and provident Judge will carefully take 
 note that some grounds of objection or reparable; and they are 
 such as we have just spoken of, and are to be dealt with in the 
 above manner. But others are irreparable: as when the accused has 
 actually and in fact been questioned, but has afterwards escaped 
 and lodged an appeal; or that some box or vessel or such 
 instruments as witches use has been seized and burned; or some 
 other such irreparable and irrevocable action has been committed. 
 In such a case the above procedure would not hold good, namely, 
 taking the process back to the point where the objection 
 arose.<br> 
 
         
 Fourthly, the Judge must note that, although thirty days may 
 elapse between his receiving the appeal and his completing the 
 apostils of the case, and he can assign to the petitioner the 
 last day, that is, the thirtieth, for the hearing of his appeal; 
 yet, that it may not seem that the wishes to molest the accused 
 or some under suspicion of unduly harsh treatment of him, and 
 that his behaviour may not seem to lend support to the objection 
 which has caused the appeal, it is better that he should assign 
 some day within the legal limit, such as the tenth or twentieth 
 day, and he can afterwards, if he does not wish to be in a hurry, 
 postpone it until the last legal day, saying that he is busy with 
 other affairs.<br> 
 
         
 Fifthly, the Judge must take care that, when he affixes a term 
 for the accused who is appealing and petitioning for apostils, he 
 must provide not only for the giving, but both for the giving and 
 receiving of apostils. For if he provided only for the giving of 
 them, then the Judge against whom the appeal is lodged would have 
 to discharge the appellant. Therefore let him assign to him a 
 term, that is, such a day of such a year, for the giving and 
 receiving from the Judge such apostils as he shall have decided 
 to submit.<br> 
 
         
 Sixthly, he must take care that, in assigning this term, he shall 
 not in his answer say that he will give either negative or 
 affirmative apostils; but that he may have opportunity for fuller 
 reflection, let him say that he will give such as he shall at the 
 appointed time have decided upon.<br> 
 
         
 Let him also take care that in assigning this term to the 
 appellant he give the appellant no opportunity to exercise any 
 malicious precautions or cunning, and that he specify the place, 
 day and hour. For example, let him assign the twentieth day of 
 August, in the present year, at the hour of vespers, and the 
 chamber of the Judge himself in such a house, in such a city, for 
 the giving and receiving of apostils such as shall have been 
 decided upon for such appellant.<br> 
 
         
 Seventhly, let him note that, if he has decided in his mind that 
 the charge against the accused justly requires that he should be 
 detained, in assigning the term he must set it down that he 
 assigns that term for the giving or receiving of apostils by the 
 appellant in person, and that he assigns to the said appellant 
 such a place for giving to him and receiving from him apostils; 
 and then it will be fully in the power of the Judge to detain the 
 appellant, granted that he has first given negative apostils; but 
 otherwise it will not be so.<br> 
 
         
 Eighthly, let the Judge take care not to take any further action 
 in respect of the appellant, such as arresting him, or 
 questioning him, or liberating him from prison, from the time 
 when the appeal is presented to  him up to the time when he has 
 returned negative apostils.<br> 
 
         
 To sum up. Note that it often happens that, when the accused is 
 in doubt as to what sort of sentence he will receive, since he is 
 conscious of his guilt, he frequently takes refuge in an appeal, 
 that so he may escape the Judge's sentence. Therefore he appeals 
 from that Judge, advancing some frivolous reason, as that the 
 Judge held him in custody without allowing him the customary 
 surety; or in some such way he may colour his frivolous appeal. 
 In this case the Judge shall ask for a copy of the appeal; and 
 having received it he shall either at once or after two days give 
 his answer and assign to the appellant for the giving and 
 receiving of such apostils as shall have been decided upon a 
 certain day, hour, and place, within the legal limit, as, for 
 instance, the 25th, 26th or 30th day of such a month. And during 
 the assigned interval the Judge shall diligently examine the copy 
 of the appeal, and the reasons or objections upon which it is 
 based, and shall consult with learned lawyers whether he shall 
 submit negative apostils, that is, negative answers, and thereby 
 disallow the appeal, or whether he shall allow the appeal and 
 submit affirmative and fitting apostils to the Judge to whom the 
 appeal is made.<br> 
 
         
 But if he sees that the reasons for the appeal are frivolous and 
 worthless, and that the appellant only wishes to escape or to 
 postpone his sentence, let his apostils be negative and 
 refutatory. If, however, he sees that the objections are true and 
 just, and not irreparable; or if he is in doubt whether the 
 accused is maliciously causing him trouble, and wishes to clear 
 himself of all suspicion, let him grant the appellant affirmative 
 and fitting apostils. And when the appointed time for the 
 appellant has arrived, if the Judge has not prepared his apostils 
 or answers, or in some other way is not ready, the appellant can 
 at once demand that his appeal be heard, and may continue to do 
 so on each successive day up to the thirtieth, which is the last 
 day legally allowed for the submission of the apostils.<br> 
 
         
 But if he has prepared them and is ready, he can at once give his 
 apostils to the appellant. If, then, he has decided to give 
 negative or refutatory apostils, he shall, at the expiration of 
 the appointed time, submit them in the following manner:<br>
 
         
 AND the said Judge, answering to the said appeal, if it may be 
 called an appeal, says that he, the Judge, has proceeded and did 
 intend to proceed in accordance with the Canonical decrees and 
 the Imperial statutes and laws, and has not departed from the 
 path of either law nor intended so to depart, and has in no way 
 acted or intended to act unjustly towards the appellant, as is 
 manifest from an examination of the alleged grounds for this 
 appeal. For he has not acted unjustly towards him by detaining 
 him and keeping him in custody; for he was accused of such 
 heresy, and there was such evidence against him that he was 
 worthily convicted of heresy, or was strongly suspected, and as 
 such it was and is just that he should be kept in custody: 
 neither has he acted unjustly by refusing him sureties; for the 
 crime of heresy is one of the more serious crimes, and the 
 appellant had been convicted but persisted in denying the charge, 
 and therefore not even the very best sureties were admissable, 
 but he is and was to be detained in prison. And so he shall 
 proceed with the other objections.<br>
 
         
 Having done this, let him say as follows: Wherefore it is 
 apparant that the Judge has duly and justly proceeded, and has 
 not deviated from the path of justice, and has in no way unduly 
 molested the appellant; but the appellant, advancing pretended 
 and false objections, has by an undue and unjust appeal attempted 
 to escape his sentence. Wherefore his appeal is frivolous and 
 worthless, having no foundation, and erring in matter and form. 
 And since the laws do not recognize frivolous appeals, nor are 
 they to be recognized by the Judge, therefore the Judge has 
 himself said that he does not admit and does not intend to admit 
 the said appeal, nor does he recognize nor yet propose to 
 recognize it. And he gives this answer to the said accused who 
 make this undue appeal in the form of negative apostils, and 
 commands that they be given to him immediately after the said 
 appeal. And so he shall give it to the Notary who has presented 
 the appeal to him.<br> 
 
         
 And when these negative apostils have been given to the 
 appellant, the Judge shall at once proceed with his duty, 
 ordering the accused to be seized and detained, or assigning to 
 him a day to appear before him, as shall seem best to him. For he 
 does not cease to be the Judge, but shall continue his process 
 against the appellant until the Judge to whom the appeal was made 
 shall order him to cease.<br>
 
         
 But let the Judge take care not to commence any new proceedings 
 against the appellant, by arresting him or, if he is in custody, 
 liberating him from prison, from the time of the presentation of 
 the appeal up to the time of the return of negative apostils to 
 him. But after that time, as we have said, he can do so if 
 justice requires it, until he is prevented by the Judge to whom 
 the appeal has been made. Then, with the process sealed under 
 cover, and with a sure and safe escort and if necessary a 
 suitable surety, let him send him to the said Judge.<br> 
 
         
 But if the Judge has decided to return affirmative and fitting 
 apostils, let him submit them in writing in the following manner 
 on the arrival of the day appointed for the giving and receiving 
 of apostils:<br> 
 
         
 AND the said Judge, answering to the said appeal, if it may be 
 called an appeal, if it may be called an appeal, says that he has 
 proceeded in the present cause justly and as he ought and not 
 otherwise, nor has he molested or intended to molest the 
 appellant, as is apparent from a perusal of the alleged 
 objections. For he has not molested him by, etc. (Here he shall 
 answer to each of the objections in the appeal, in the best and 
 most truthful manner that he can.) <br>
 
         
 Wherefore it is apparent that the said Judge has in no way dealt 
 unjustly by the appellant nor given him cause to appeal, but that 
 the appellant is afraid lest justice should proceed against him 
 according to his crimes. And therefore the appeal is frivolous 
 and worthless, having no foundation, and not being admissable by 
 the laws or the Judge. But in reverence for the Apostolic See, to 
 which the appeal is made, the said Judge says that he admits the 
 appeal an intends to recognize it, deferring the whole matter to 
 out Most Holy Lord the Pope, and leaving it to the Holy Apostolic 
 See: assigning to the said appellant a certain time, namely, so 
 many months now following, within which, with the process sealed 
 under cover given to him by the said Judge, or having given 
 suitable sureties to present himself at the Court of Rome, or 
 under a sure and safe escort appointed to him by the said Judge, 
 he must present himself in the Court of Rome before our Lord the 
 Pope. And this answer the said Judge gives tot he said appellant 
 as affirmative apostils, and orders that it be given to him 
 immediately after the appeal presented to him. And so he shall 
 hand it to the Notary who has presented the appeal to him.<br>
 
         
 The prudent Judge must here take note that, as soon as he has 
 given these fitting apostils to the appellant, he at once ceases 
 to be the Judge in that cause from which the appeal was made, and 
 can proceed no further in it, unless it be referred back to him 
 by our Most Holy Lord the Pope. Therefore let him have no more to 
 do with that case, except to send the said appellant in the above 
 manner to out Lord the Pope, assign to him a convenient time, say 
 one, two or three months, within which he must prepare and make 
 himself ready to appear and present himself at the Court of Rome, 
 giving a suitable surety; or, if he cannot do this, let him be 
 sent under a sure and safe escort. For he must either bind 
 himself by the best means in his power to present himself within 
 the assigned time before our Lord the Pope in the Court of Rome, 
 or his appeal must necessarily fall to the ground.<br>
 
         
 But if the Judge has another case, and proceeds against the 
 accused in another case in which he has not lodged any appeal: in 
 that other case he remains, as before, Judge. And even if, after 
 the appeal has been admitted, and the affirmative apostils have 
 been given, the appellant is accused and denounced to the Judge 
 in respect of other heresies which were not in question in the 
 case from which he appealed, he does not cease to be the Judge, 
 and can proceed with the inquiry and the examination of witnesses 
 as before. And when the first case has been finished in the Court 
 of Rome, or after reference back to the Judge, he is free to 
 proceed with the second.<br> 
 
         
 Let Judges also take care that they send the process to the Court 
 of Rome, sealed and under cover, to the Judges appointed to 
 execute justice, together with a digest of the merits of the 
 process. And Inquisitors should not concern themselves to appear 
 at Rome against the appellants; but should leave them to their 
 own Judges, who, if the Inquisitors are unwilling to appear 
 against the appellants, shall provide their own advocates for the 
 appellant, if they wish to expedite the case.<br> 
 
         
 Let Judges also take note that, if they are personally summoned 
 by the appellant, and appear, they must beware at all costs 
 against engaging in litigation, but must leave the whole process 
 and cause to those Judges, and so manage that they may be able to 
 return as soon as possible; so that they may not be sorely 
 troubled with fatigues, misery, labour, and expense in Rome. For 
 by this means much damage is caused to the Church, and heretics 
 are greatly encouraged; and thereafter Judges will not receive so 
 much respect and reverence, not will they be so much feared as 
 before. Also other heretics, seeing the Judges fatigued and 
 detained in the Court of Rome, will exalt their horns, and 
 despise and malign them, and more boldly proclaim their heresies; 
 and when they are accused, they will appeal in the same way. 
 Other Judges, also, will have their authority weakened when they 
 proceed on behalf of the Faith and are zealous in extirpating 
 heretics, since they will fear lest they may be troubled with 
 miseries and fatigues arising from similar appeals. All this is 
 most prejudicial to the Faith of the Holy Church of God; 
 wherefore may the Spouse of that Church in mercy preserve her 
 from all such injuries. 
 </body>