<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_21a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_23a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XXII</h2>
 <h3>Of the Third Kind of Sentence, to be Pronounced on one who is Defamed, and who is to be put to the Question</h3></center>
 
 
         
 THE Third method of bringing a process on behalf of the faith to 
 a conclusive termination is when the person accused of heresy, 
 after a careful consideration of the merits of the process in 
 consultation with learned lawyers, is found to be inconsistent in 
 his statements, or is found that there are sufficient grounds to 
 warrant his exposure to the question and torture: so that if, 
 after he has been thus questioned, he confesses nothing, he may 
 be considered innocent. And this is when the prisoner has not 
 been taken in heresy, nor has he been convicted by his own 
 confession, or by the evidence of the facts, or by the legitimate 
 production of witnesses, and there are no indications that he is 
 under such a suspicion as to warrant his being made to abjure the 
 heresy; but nevertheless he is inconsistent in his answers when 
 interrogated. Or there may be other sufficient reasons for 
 exposing him to torture. And in such a case the following 
 procedure is to be observed.<br> 
 
         
 And because such a judgement in includes an interlocutory 
 sentence which must be against and not for the prisoner, the 
 Inquisitor must not divide it into two sentences, but include it 
 all in one. And in the first place, if the accused remains firm 
 in his denials and can in no way be induced by honest men to 
 confess the truth, the following manner of sentence, which is in 
 some respects definitive, shall be used.<br> 
 
         
 We N., by the mercy of God Bishop of such a town, or Judge in the 
 territory subject to the rule of such a Prince, having regard to 
 the merits of the process conducted by us against you N., of such 
 a place in such a Diocese, and after careful examination, find 
 that you are not consistent in your answers, and that there are 
 sufficient indications besides that you ought to be exposed to 
 the question and torture. Therefore, that the truth may be known 
 from your own mouth and that from henceforth you may not offend 
 the ears of your Judges with your equivocations, we declare, 
 pronounce, and give sentence that on this present day at such an 
 hour you are to be subjected to an interrogatory under torture. 
 This sentence was given, etc.<br> 
 
         
 If the person to be questioned is both found to be equivocal and 
 at the same time there are other indications sufficient to 
 warrant his being tortured, let both these facts be included in 
 the sentence, as they are above. But if only one or the other of 
 these hold good, let that one only be put in the sentence. But 
 let the sentence be soon put into execution, or let them make as 
 if to execute it. Nevertheless let not the Judge be too willing 
 to subject a person to torture, for this should only be resorted 
 to in default of other proofs. Therefore let him seek for other 
 proofs; and if he cannot find them, and thinks it probable that 
 the accused is guilty, but denied the truth out of fear, let him 
 use other approved methods, always with due precautions, and by 
 using the persuasions of the friends of the accused do his utmost 
 to extract the truth from his own lips. And let him not hasten 
 the business; for very often meditation, and the ordeal of 
 imprisonment, and the repeated persuasion of honest men will 
 induce the accused to discover the truth.<br> 
 
         But if, after keeping the accused in 
 suspense, and after due and decent postponements of the time, and 
 many exhortations of the accused, the Bishop and the Judge are 
 well persuaded that, all circumstances considered, the accused is 
 denying the truth, let them torture him slightly, without 
 shedding blood, bearing in mind that torture is often fallacious 
 and ineffective. For some are so soft-hearted and feeble-minded 
 that at the least torture they will confess anything, whether it 
 be true or not. Others are so stubborn that, however much they 
 are tortured, the truth is not to be had from them. There are 
 others who, having been tortured before, are the better able to 
 endure it a second time, since their arms have been accomodated 
 to the stretchings and twistings involved; whereas the effect on 
 others is to make them weaker, so that they can the less easily 
 endure torture. Others are bewitched, and make use of the fact in 
 their torture, so that they will die before the will confess 
 anything; for they become, as it were, insensible to pain. 
 Therefore there is need for much prudence in the matter of 
 torture, and the greatest attention is to be given to the 
 condition of the person who is to be tortured.<br> 
 
         
 When, then, the sentence has been pronounced, the officers shall 
 without delay prepare to torture the accused. And while they are 
 making their preparations, the Bishop or Judge shall use his own 
 persuasions and those of other honest men zealous for the faith 
 to induce the accused to confess the truth freely, if necessary 
 promising to spare his life, as we have shown above.<br> 
 
         
 But if the accused cannot thus be terrified into telling the 
 truth, a second or third day may be appointed for the 
 continuation of the torture; but it must not be repeated then and 
 there. For such a repetition is not permissible unless some 
 further indications against the accused should transpire. But 
 there is nothing to prevent a continuation of the torture on 
 another day.<br> 
 
         Let it be said: We N. Bishop and N. 
 Judge (if he is present) aforesaid, assign to you N. such a day 
 for the continuation of the torture, that the truth may be known 
 from your own mouth. And let all be set down in the process. And 
 during the interval appointed to him, let them use their own 
 persuasions and those of other honest men to induce him to 
 confess the truth.<br> 
 
         
 But if he has refused to confess, the torture can be continued on 
 the day assigned, more or less severely according to the gravity 
 of the offences in question. And the Judges will be able to 
 observe many lawful precautions, both in word and deed, by which 
 they may come at the truth; but these are more easily learned by 
 use and experience and the variety of different cases than by the 
 art of teaching of anyone.<br> 
 
         
 But if, after having been fittingly questioned and tortured, he 
 will not discover the truth, let him not be further molested, but 
 be freely allowed to depart. If, however, he confesses, and 
 abides by his confession, and uncovers the truth, acknowledging 
 his guilt and asking the pardon of the Church; then according to 
 the Canon <i>ad abolendam</i> he is to be treated as one taken in 
 heresy on his own confession, but penitent, and he must abjure 
 the heresy, and sentence must be pronounced against him as in the 
 case of those who are convicted by their own confession as being 
 taken in heresy. This will be explained in the eighth method of 
 sentencing such, to which the reader may refer.<br> 
 
         
 If, on the other hand, he confesses the truth, but is not 
 penitent but obstinately persists in his heresy, but is not a 
 relapsed heretic, then according to the Canon, after a decent 
 interval and due warning, he is to be condemned as a heretic and 
 handed over to the secular Court to suffer the extreme penalty, 
 as we show later in the tenth method. But if he is a relapsed 
 heretic, he is to be condemned in the way which is again 
 explained in the tenth method, to which the reader may refer.<br> 
 
         
 But here it must be particularly noted that in some instances he 
 who is to be questioned confesses nothing against himself before 
 the torture, nor is anything proved on the strength of which he 
 can be required to abjure the heresy or be condemned as a 
 heretic; and in such cases the above procedure should be adopted, 
 as we have said, immediately. But in other cases the accused is 
 taken in heresy, or he is to be considered either lightly or 
 strongly suspected; and he is not to be tortured in respect of 
 such matters; but if, apart from these, he denies some points 
 which are not proved, but of which there is sufficient indication 
 to warrant his being tortured; and if, having been questioned as 
 to these under torture, he confesses to none of them, he is not 
 on that account to be absolved in accordance with the first 
 method; but he must be proceeded against according to that which 
 has been proved against him, and he or she must abjure the heresy 
 as being one under suspicion of or taken in heresy, as the merits 
 of the process may exact or require. And if, after torture, he 
 confesses all or part of that for which he was tortured, then he 
 must abjure both this and the former heresy which was proved 
 against him, and sentence must be pronounced against him in 
 respect of both of these. 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_23a.htm">Next: Question XXIII</a><br>The Fourth Method of Sentencing, in the Case of one Accused upon a Light Suspicion<br>
 </center>
 </body>