<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02b08a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_01a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>General and Introductory</h2>
 <h3>Who are the Fit and Proper Judges in the Trial of Witches?</h3></center>
 
 
         
 The question is whether witches, together with their patrons and protectors 
 and defenders, are so entirely subject to the jurisdiction of the Diocesan 
 Ecclesiastical Court and the Civil Court so that the Inquisitors of the 
 crime of heresy can be altogether relieved from the duty of sitting in 
 judgement upon them. And it is argued that this is so. For the Canon (c. 
 <i>accusatus</i>, § <i>sane</i>, lib. VI) says: Certainly those whose 
 high privilege it is to judge concerning matters of the faith ought not to 
 be distracted by other business; and Inquisitors deputed by the Apostolic 
 See to inquire into the pest of heresy should manifestly not have to concern 
 themselves with diviners and soothsayers, unless these are also heretics, 
 nor should it be their business to punish such, but they may leave them to 
 be punished by their own judges.<br>
 
         
 Nor does there seem any difficulty in the fact that the heresy of witches is 
 not mentioned in that Canon. For these are subject to the same punishment 
 as the others in the court of conscience, as the Canon goes on to say (dist. 
 I, <i>pro dilectione</i>). If the sin of diviners and witches is secret, a 
 penance of forty days shall be imposed upon them: if it is notorious, they 
 shall be refused the Eucharist. And those whose punishment is identical 
 should receive it from the same Court. Then, again, the guilt of both being 
 the same, since just as soothsayers obtain their results by curious means, 
 so do witches look for and obtain from the devil the injuries which they do 
 to creatures, unlawfully seeking from His creatures that which should be 
 sought from God alone; therefore both are guilty of the sin of idolatry.<br>
 
         
 This is the sense of <i>Ezechiel</i> xxi, 23; that the King of Babylon stood 
 at the cross-roads, shuffling his arrows and 
 interrogating idols.<br>
 
         
 Again it may be said that, when the Canon says “Unless these are also 
 heretics,” it allows that some diviners and soothsayers are heretics, 
 and should therefore be subject to trial by the Inquisitors; but in that 
 case artificial diviners would also be so subject, and no written authority 
 for that can be found.<br>
 
         
 Again, if witches are to be tried by the Inquisitors, it must be for the 
 crime of heresy; but it is clear that the deeds of witches can be committed 
 without any heresy. For when they stamp into the mud of the Body of Christ, 
 although this is a most horrible crime, yet it may be done without any 
 error in the understanding, and therefore without heresy. For it is 
 entirely possible for a person to believe that It is the Lord's body, and 
 yet throw It into the mud to satisfy the devil, and this by reason of some 
 pact with him, that he may obtain some desired end, such as the finding of 
 a treasure or anything of that sort. Therefore the deeds of witches need 
 involved no error in faith, however great the sin may be; in which case they 
 are not liable to the Court of the Inquisition, but are left to their own 
 judges.<br>
 
         
 Again, Solomon showed reverence to the gods of his wives out of complaisance, 
 and was not on that account guilty of apostasy from the Faith; for in his 
 heart he was faithful and kept the true Faith. So also when witches give 
 homage to devils by reason of the pact they have entered into, but keep the 
 Faith in their hearts, they are not on that account to be reckoned as 
 heretics.<br>
 
         
 But it may be said that all witches have to deny the Faith, and therefore 
 must be judged heretics. On the contrary, even if they were to deny the 
 Faith in their hearts and minds, still they could not be reckoned as 
 heretics, but as apostates. But a heretic is different from an apostate, 
 and it is heretics who are subject to the Court of the Inquisition; therefore 
 witches are not so subject.<br>
 
         
 Again it is said, in c. 26, quest. 5: Let the Bishops and their 
 representatives strive by every means to rid their parishes entirely of the 
 pernicious art of soothsaying and magic derived from Zoroaster; and if they 
 find any man or woman addicted to this crime, let him be shamefully cast out 
 of their parishes in disgrace. So when it says at the end of c. 348, Let 
 them leave them to their own Judges; and since it speaks in the plural, 
 both of the Ecclesiastic and the Civil Court; therefore, according to this 
 Canon they are subject to no more than the Diocesan Court.<br>
 
         
 But if, just as these arguments seem to show it to be reasonable in the 
 case of Inquisitors, the Diocesans also wish to be relieved of this 
 responsibility, and to leave the punishment of witches to the secular 
 Courts, such a claim could be made good by the following arguments. For the 
 Canon says, c. <i>ut inquisitionis:</i> We strictly forbid the temporal 
 lords and rulers and their officers in any way to try to judge this crime, 
 since it is purely an ecclesiastical matter: and it speaks of the crime of 
 heresy. It follows therefore that, when the crime is not purely ecclesiastical, 
 as is the case with witches because of the temporal injuries which they 
 commit, it must be punished by the Civil and not by the Ecclesiastical Court.<br>
 
         
 Besides, in the last Canon Law concerning Jews it says: His goods are to be 
 confiscated, and he is to be condemned to death, because with perverse 
 doctrine he opposed the Faith of Christ. But if it is said that this law 
 refers to Jews who have been converted, and have afterwards returned to the 
 worship of the Jews, this is not a valid objection. Rather is the argument 
 strengthened by it; because the civil Judge has to punish such Jews as 
 apostates from the Faith; and therefore witches who abjure the Faith ought 
 to be treated in the same way; for abjuration of the Faith, either wholly or 
 in part, is the essential principle of witches.<br>
 
         
 And although it says that apostasy and heresy are to be judged in the same 
 way, yet it is not the part of the ecclesiastical but of the civil Judge to 
 concern himself with witches. For no one must cause a commotion among the 
 people by reason of a trial for heresy; but the Governor himself must make 
 provision for such cases.<br>
 
         
 The <i>Authentics</i> of Justinian, speaking of ruling princes, says: You 
 shall not permit anyone to stir up your Province by reason of a judicial 
 inquiry into matters concerning religions or heresies, or in any way allow 
 an injunction to be put upon the Province over which you govern; but you 
 shall yourself provide, making use of such monies and other means of 
 investigation as are competent, and not allow anything to be done in matters 
 of religion except in accordance with our precepts. It is clear from this 
 that no one must meddle with a rebellion against the Faith except the 
 Governor himself.<br>
 
         
 Besides, if the trial and punishment of such witches were not entirely a 
 matter for the civil Judge, what would be the purpose of the laws which 
 provide as follows? All those who are commonly called witches are to be 
 condemned to death. And again: Those who harm innocent lives by magic arts 
 are to be thrown to the beasts. Again, it is laid down that thy are to be 
 subjected to questions and tortures; and that none of the faithful are to 
 associate with them, under pain of exile and the confiscation of all their 
 goods. And many other penalties are added, which anyone may read in those 
 laws.<br>
 
         
 But in contradiction of all these arguments, the truth of the matter is 
 that such witches may be tried and punished conjointly by the Civil and the 
 Ecclesiastical Courts. For a canonical crime must be tried by the Governor 
 and the Metropolitan of the Province; not by the Metropolitan alone, but 
 together with the Governor. This is clear in the <i>Authentics</i>, where 
 ruling princes are enjoined as follows: If it is a canonical matter which is 
 to be tried, you shall inquire into it together with the Metropolitan of the 
 Province. And to remove all doubt on this subject, the gloss says: If it is 
 a simple matter of the observance of the faith, the Governor alone may try 
 it; but if the matter is more complicated, then it must be tried by a 
 Bishop and the Governor; and the matter must be kept within decent limits 
 by someone who has found favour with God, who shall protect the orthodox 
 faith, and impose suitable indemnities of money, and keep our subjects 
 inviolate, that is, shall not corrupt the faith in them.<br>
 
         
 And again, although a secular prince may impose the capital sentence, yet 
 this does not exclude the judgement of the Church, whose part it is to try 
 and judge the case. Indeed this is perfectly clear from the Canon Law in the 
 chapters <i>de summa trin.</i> and <i>fid. cath.</i>, and again in the Law 
 concerning heresy, c. <i>ad abolendam</i> and c. <i>urgentis</i> and c. 
 <i>excommunicamus</i>, 1 and 2. For the same penalties are provided by both 
 the Civil and the Canon Laws, as is shown by the Canon Laws concerning the 
 Manichaean and Arian heresies. Therefore the 
 punishment of witches belongs to both Courts together, and not to one 
 separately.<br>
 
         
 Again, the laws decree that clerics shall be corrected by their own Judges, 
 and not by the temporal or secular Courts, because their crimes are 
 considered to be purely ecclesiastical. But the crime of witches is partly 
 civil and partly ecclesiastical, because they commit temporal harm and 
 violate the faith; therefore it belongs to the Judges of both Courts to try, 
 sentence, and punish them.<br>
 
         
 This opinion is substantiated by the <i>Authentics</i>, where it is said: 
 If it is an ecclesiastical crime needing ecclesiastical punishment and fine, 
 it shall be tried by a Bishop who stands in favour with God, and not even 
 the most illustrious Judges of the Province shall have a hand in it. And we 
 do not wish the civil Judges to have any knowledge of such proceedings; for 
 such matters must be examined ecclesiastically and the souls of the offenders 
 must be corrected by ecclesiastical penalties, according to the sacred and 
 divine rules which our laws worthily follow. So it is said. Therefore it 
 follows that on the other hand a crime which is of a mixed nature must be 
 tried and punished by both courts.<br>
 
         
 We make our answer to all the above as follows. Our main object here is to 
 show how, with God's pleasure, we Inquisitors of Upper Germany may be 
 relieved of the duty of trying witches, and leave them to be punished by 
 their own provincial Judges; and this because of the arduousness of the work: 
 provided always that such a course shall in no way endanger the preservation 
 of the faith and the salvation of souls. And therefore we engaged upon this 
 work, that we might leave to the Judges themselves the methods of trying, 
 judging and sentencing in such cases.<br>
 
         
 Therefore in order to show that the Bishops can in many cases proceed against 
 witches without the Inquisitors; although they cannot so proceed without the 
 temporal and civil Judges in cases involving capital punishment; it is 
 expedient that we set down the opinions of certain other Inquisitors in 
 parts of Spain, and (saving always the reverence due to them), since we all 
 belong to one and the same Order of Preachers, to refute them, so that each 
 detail may be more clearly understood.<br>
 
         
 Their opinion is, then, that all witches, diviners, necromancers, and in 
 short all who practise any kind of divination, if they have once embraced 
 and professed the Holy Faith, are liable to the Inquisitorial Court, as in 
 the three cases noted in the beginning of the chapter, <i>Multorum querela</i>, 
 in the decretals of Pope Clement concerning 
 heresy; in which it says that neither must the Inquisitor proceed without 
 the Bishop, nor the Bishop without the Inquisitor: although there are five 
 other cases in which one may proceed without the other, as anyone who reads 
 the chapter may see. But in one case it is definitively stated that one must 
 not proceed without the other, and that is when the above diviners are to 
 be considered as heretics.<br>
 
         
 In the same category they place blasphemers, and those who in any way invoke 
 devils, and those who are excommunicated and have contumaciously remained 
 under the ban of excommunication for a whole year, either because of some 
 matter concerning faith or, in certain circumstances, not on account of the 
 faith; and they further include several other such offences. And by reason 
 of this the authority of the Ordinary is weakened, since so many more 
 burdens are placed upon us Inquisitors which we cannot safely bear in the 
 sight of the terrible Judge who will demand from us a strict account of the 
 duties imposed upon us.<br>
 
         
 And because their opinion cannot be refuted unless the fundamental thesis 
 upon which  it is founded is proved unsound, it is to be noted that it is 
 based upon the commentators on the Canon, especially on the chapter 
 <i>accusatus</i>, and § <i>sane</i>, and on the words “savour 
 of heresy.” Also they rely upon the sayings of the Theologians, S. 
 Thomas, Blessed Albert, and S. Bonaventura, in the <i>Second Book of 
 Sentences</i>, dist. 7.<br>
 
         
 It is best to consider some of these in detail. For when the Canon says, as 
 was shown in the first argument, that the Inquisitors or heresy should not 
 concern themselves with soothsayers and diviners unless they manifestly 
 savour of heresy, they say that soothsayers and diviners are of two sorts, 
 either artificial or heretical. And the first sort are called diviners pure 
 and simple, since they work merely by art; and such are referred to in the 
 chapter <i>de sortilegiis</i>, where it says that the presbyter Udalricus 
 went to a secret place with a certain infamous person, that is, a diviner, 
 says the gloss, not with the intention of invoking the devil, which would 
 have been heresy, but that, by inspecting the astrolabe, he might find out 
 some hidden thing. And this, they say, is pure divination or sortilege.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_01a.htm">Next: Question I</a><br>The Method of Initiating a Process<br>
 </center>
 </body>