<body bgcolor="black" text="white" link="red" alink="red" vlink="red"><center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Gothic</a> 
 <a href="../../eso/index.htm">Esoteric</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="vc01.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="vc03.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">II. Beginnings</h4>
 <p>Eternal, we wander the aeons, moving to the rhythm of our own inner tides.</p>
 <p>Freed from the most fundamental of cycles, we are nevertheless beings bound by cycles. Our heightened awareness of ourselves and the world around us forces us to acknowledge natural rhythms that others simply ignore.</p>
 <p>As the day waxes and wanes, we can feel it, and we know that the true realm of magick is the night, for that is when we wax in power. As the moon grows gravid and slim, we feel it, and we know, too, that there are more complex rhythms of power tied to her phases. As the wheel of the year turns round, we feel the wild times, the apogees and nadirs of power.</p>
 <p>The dark time of the year is our time, as are the threshold times when we celebrate Samhain and Beltane. These days are our Im Kheperu, the Day of Transformation, and our Im Sekhemu, the Day of Double Power. As beings poised on the threshold of many things, the energies of these holidays affect us profoundly. At these times we enjoy our greatest power, but in balance, we also pay a stronger price. Waves of energy rise and fall within us, and when in their grip, our hunger burns.</p>
 <p>Forever, we are active elements moving through passive worlds.</p>
 <p>Our rules are our own. We accept no others. We define who we are and what we shall become. There is nothing in our lives which we cannot control if we but choose to.</p>
 <p>Our memories are carried like gems within our souls. Over the lifetimes they build and crystallize until we can take them out and gaze upon them as we choose.</p>
 <p>Life sustains us, but death defines us. We are the many-born. Our conception was in death, and each death now brings us a new beginning, forever without end.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="vc03.htm">Next: III. Catalysts of Change</a></center>
 </body>