<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Women</a> 
 <a href="../../bib/index.htm">Bible</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="wb13.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="wb15.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">CHAPTER XII.</h1>
 <font size="2"><p><i>Genesis xxxix.</i></p>
 <p>1 And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the Ishmaelites, which bad brought him down thither.</p>
 <p>2 And the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master, the Egyptian.</p>
 <p>4 And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him overseer over his house and all that he had he put into his hand.</p>
 <p>7 ¶ And it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she solicited him.</p>
 <p>8 But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master wotteth not what <i>is</i> with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand.</p>
 <p>9 How then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?</p>
 <p>10 And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, and she caught him by his garment, and he left his garment in her hand and fled.</p>
 <p>13 And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and was fled forth,</p>
 <p>14 That she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath brought in a Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me, and I cried with a loud voice:</p>
 <p>15 And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled.</p>
 <p>16 And she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.</p>
 <p>17 And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me:</p>
 <p>18 And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled out.</p>
 <p>19 And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, that his wrath was kindled.</p>
 <p>20 And Joseph's master took him; and put him into the prison, a place where the king's prisoners were bound: and he was there in the prison.</p>
 <p>211 But the Lord was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.</p>
 <p>22 And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that <i>were</i> in the prison; and whatever they did there, he was the doer <i>of it</i>.</p>
 </font><p>POTIPHAR'S wife surpasses all the women yet mentioned in perfidy and dishonor.</p>
 <p>Joseph's virtues, his dignity, his honor, go far to redeem the reputation of his ancestors, and the customs of his times. It would have been generous, at least, if the editor of these pages could have given us one woman the counterpart of Joseph, a noble, high-minded, virtuous type. Thus far those of all the different nationalities have been of an ordinary low type. Historians usually dwell on the virtues of the people, the heroism of their deeds, the wisdom of their words, but the sacred fabulist dwells on the most questionable behavior of the Jewish race,</p>
 <p>{p. 66}</p>
 <p>and much in character and language that we can neither print nor answer.</p>
 <p>Indeed the Pentateuch is a long painful record of war, corruption, rapine, and lust. Why Christians who wished to convert the heathen to our religion should send them these books, passes all understanding. It is most demoralizing reading for children and the unthinking masses, giving all alike the lowest possible idea of womanhood, having no hope nor ambition beyond conjugal unions with men they scarcely knew, for whom they could not have had the slighest {<i>sic</i>} sentiment of friendship, to say nothing of affection. There is no mention of women except when the advent of sons is announced. When the Children of Israel go down into Egypt we are told that the wives of Jacob's sons were taken too, but we hear nothing of Jacob's wives or concubines, until the death and burial of Leah is incidentally mentioned. Throughout the book of Genesis the leading men declare from time to that the Lord comes to them and promises great fruitfulness. A strange promise in that it could only be fulfilled in questionable relations. To begin with Abraham, and go through to Joseph, leaving out all conjugal irregularities, we find Abraham and Sarah had Isaac, Isaac and Rebekah had Jacob and Esau. Jacob and Rachel (for she alone was his true wife), had Joseph and Benjamin. Joseph and Asenath had Manassah and Ephraim. Thus giving the Patriarchs just seven legitimate descendants in the first generation. If it had not been for polygamy and concubinage, the great harvest so recklessly promised would have been meagre indeed.</p>
 <font size="2"><p><i>Genesis xli.</i></p>
 <p>45 ¶ And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potar-pherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.</p>
 <p>46 ¶ And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt.</p>
 <p>50 And unto Joseph were born two sons, before the years of the famine came: which Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah priest of On bare unto him.</p>
 <p>51 And Joseph called the name of the first-born Manassah: For God, <i>said he</i>, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house.</p>
 <p>52 And the name of the second called he Ephraim: For God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.</p>
 </font><p>This is all we ever hear of Asenath, that she was a good woman,</p>
 <p>{p. 67}</p>
 <p>probably worthy of Joseph, it is fair to infer, for had she been otherwise her evil deeds would have been recorded. A few passing remarks where ever we find the mention of woman is about all we can vouchsafe. The writer probably took the same view of the virtuous woman as the great Roman General who said "the highest praise for Cæsar's wife is that she should never be mentioned at all."</p>
 <p>The texts on Lot's daughters and Tamar we omit altogether, as unworthy a place in the "Woman's Bible." In the remaining chapters of Genesis, the brethren of Joseph take leave of each other; the fathers bless their sons and grandsons, and also take leave of each other, some to go to remote parts of the country, some to die at a ripe old age. As nothing is said of their wives and daughters, the historian probably knew nothing of their occupations nor environments. Joseph was a hundred and ten years old when he died. They embalmed him according to the custom in Egypt, and put him in a coffin, and buried him in the land of his fathers, where his brethren had promised to take his bones after death to rest with his kindred at last.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">E. C. S.</p>
 <p>The literal translation of the first verse of chapter xxxix of Genesis is as follows:</p>
 <p>"And Joseph was brought down to Egypt, and Potiphar, Pharaoh's eunuch, chief of the cooks, an Egyptian bought him of the Ishmaelites who brought him down."</p>
 <p>These facts which are given in Julia Smith's translation of the Bible throw a new light on the story of Joseph and the woman who was Potiphar's wife only in name.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">L. D. B.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="wb15.htm">Next: THE BOOK OF EXODUS.</a></center>
 </body>