<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Women</a> 
 <a href="../../bib/index.htm">Bible</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="wb24.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="wb26.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">THE BOOK OF NUMBERS</h1>
 <h2 align="CENTER">CHAPTER I.</h2>
 <font size="2"><p><i>Numbers i</i>.</p>
 <p>And the Lord spake unto Moses in tire wilderness of Sinai, saying,</p>
 <p>2 Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the number of <i>their</i> names, every male by their polls:</p>
 <p>3 ¶ These <i>are</i> those which were numbered of the children of Israel by the house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps throughout their hosts <i>were</i> six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.</p>
 </font><p>In this chapter Moses is commanded to number the people and the princes of the tribe, males only, and by the houses of their fathers. As the object was to see how many effective men there were able to go to war, the priests, the women, the feeble old men and children were not counted. Women have frequently been classified with priests in some privileges and disabilities. At one time in the United States the clergy were not allowed to vote nor hold office. Like women, they were considered too good to mingle in political circles. For them to have individual opinions on the vital questions of the hour might introduce dissensions alike into the church and the home.</p>
 <p>This census of able bodied men still runs on through chapter ii, and all these potential soldiers are called children of their fathers. Although at this period woman's chief duty and happiness was bearing children, no mention is made of the mothers of this mighty host, though some woman had gone to the gates of death to give each soldier life; provided him with rations long before he could forage for himself, and first taught his little feet to march to tune and time. But, perhaps, if we could refer to the old Jewish census tables we might</p>
 <p>{p. 98}</p>
 <p>find that the able bodied males of these tribes, favorites of Heaven, had all sprung, Minerva-like, from the brains of their fathers, and that only the priests, the feeble old men and the children had mothers to care for them, in the absence of the princes and soldiers.</p>
 <p>However, in some valuable calculations of Schencher we learn that there was some thought of the mothers of the tribes by German commentators. We find in his census such references as the following: The children of Jacob by Leah. The children of Jacob by Zilpah. The children of Jacob by Rachel. The children of Jacob by Bilhah. But even this generous mention of the mothers of the tribe of Jacob does not satisfy the exacting members of the Revising Committee. We feel that the facts should have been stated thus: The children of Leah, Zilpah, Rachel and Bilhah by Jacob, making Jacob the incident instead of the four women. Men may consider this a small matter on which to make a point, but in restoring woman's equality everywhere we must insist on her recognition in all these minor particulars, and especially in the Bible, to which people go for their authority on the civil and social status of all womankind.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">E. C. S.</p>
 <p>{p. 99}</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="wb26.htm">Next: NUMBERS CHAPTER II.</a></center>
 </body>