<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_95.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_97.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:95</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:</i></p>
 Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit and said, "Nothing worries me as 
 to what will happen to you after me, except the temptation of worldly 
 blessings which will be conferred on you." Then he mentioned the 
 worldly pleasures. He started with the one (i.e. the blessings) and 
 took up the other (i.e. the pleasures). A man got up saying, "O 
 Allah's Apostle! Can the good bring about evil?" The Prophet remained 
 silent and we thought that he was being inspired divinely, so all the 
 people kept silent with awe. Then the Prophet wiped the sweat off his 
 face and asked, "Where is the present questioner?" "Do you think 
 wealth is good?" he repeated thrice, adding, "No doubt, good produces 
 nothing but good. Indeed it is like what grows on the banks of a 
 stream which either kills or nearly kills the grazing animals because 
 of gluttony except the vegetation-eating animal which eats till both 
 its flanks are full (i.e. till it gets satisfied) and then stands in 
 the sun and defecates and urinates and again starts grazing. This 
 worldly property is sweet vegetation. How excellent the wealth of the 
 Muslim is, if it is collected through legal means and is spent in 
 Allah's Cause and on orphans, poor people and travelers. But he who 
 does not take it legally is like an eater who is never satisfied and 
 his wealth will be a witness against him on the Day of Resurrection."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_97.htm">Next: 4:96: Zaid bin Khalid: Allah's Apostle said,   He who pre pares a Ghazi going in Allah's ...</a></center>
 </body>