<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh4_618.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh4_620.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 4:616</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Huraira:</i></p>
 Allah's Apostle said, "(The Prophet) Moses was a shy person and used 
 to cover his body completely because of his extensive shyness. One of 
 the children of Israel hurt him by saying, 'He covers his body in this
 way only because of some defect in his skin, either leprosy or scrotal
 hernia, or he has some other defect.' Allah wished to clear Moses of 
 what they said about him, so one day while Moses was in seclusion, he 
 took off his clothes and put them on a stone and started taking a 
 bath. When he had finished the bath, he moved towards his clothes so 
 as to take them, but the stone took his clothes and fled; Moses picked
 up his stick and ran after the stone saying, 'O stone! Give me my 
 garment!' Till he reached a group of Bani Israel who saw him naked 
 then, and found him the best of what Allah had created, and Allah 
 cleared him of what they had accused him of. The stone stopped there 
 and Moses took and put his garment on and started hitting the stone 
 with his stick. By Allah, the stone still has some traces of the 
 hitting, three, four or five marks. This was what Allah refers to in 
 His Saying:-- "O you who believe! Be you not like those Who annoyed 
 Moses, But Allah proved his innocence of that which they alleged, And 
 he was honorable In Allah's Sight." (33.69)
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh4_620.htm">Next: 4:617: Abdullah: Once the Prophet distributed something (among his followers. A man ...</a></center>
 </body>