<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="jj02.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="jj04.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <div style="text-align: center;">
 <div style="text-align: center;">
 <center><font face="Times New Roman,Times"><font size="+3">Joseph The Righteous
 (PUH)</font></font></center>
 </div>
 
 <div style="text-align: left;"><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Joseph
 was the beloved son of Jacob, and almost he could not leave him alone.
 Joseph was a man of nice face and shape, and so his father prefered him
 over his other children and even over himself and took care of him so much
 beyond the known limits, and that was the reason for his brothers envy
 and for his troubles since he was a kid and for troubling his father with
 great matters such as being away from him for almost twenty years at least.
 The children of Jacob saw how Joseph got all the attention of their father
 and so they got mad about it and they were in young ages so they plotted
 against him and said to their father: O our father! Why wilt thou not trust
 us with Joseph, when lo! we are good friends to him ? Send him with us
 to-morrow that he may enjoy himself and play. And lo! we shall take good
 care of him(Yousof:11-12). Then Jacob felt some danger from them but for
 he was afraid on Joseph against them he did not show anything and tried
 hardly to keep his feelings and so he answered them: Lo! in truth it saddens
 me that ye should take him with you, and I fear less the wolf devour him
 while ye are heedless of him(Yousof:13), and God knows that he was afraid
 from them and not the wolf, and their answer to him did not contain any
 covenant or a promise to take care of him and did not make a way for their
 father to disaprove so they said: If the wolf should devour him when we
 are (so strong) a band, then surely we should have already perished(Yousof:14).
 It is mentioned that their land had some lions and at that time the lions
 were so beasty. They said that Jacob saw in his dream that ten wolves surrounded
 Joseph to kill him, and then one wolf of them jumped to protect him, and
 then as if the ground was cut into half and Joseph got into it deep inside
 then went out after three days, and for this he said: I fear less the wolf
 devour him, and in fact that was a lesson from him towards them but he
 did not feel it, for it is mentioned that at that time they did not know
 that a wolf can devour a human, and as attributed to the prophet (PUH)
 that he said: do not teach how to lie and so you lie then, for the children
 of Jacob did not know before that the wolf can devour a human until their
 father told them so and so then they lied.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">God had revealed in the chapter
 of Yousof in His holy book explanations about His servant Joseph and whatever
 He revelaed upon him from troubles and tests and virtues and fortunes,
 so He gave him what no one of the prophets did have, and tested him as
 no one before, so said God in the chapter of Yousof speaking to His beloved
 the prophet (PUH): We narrate unto thee (Muhammad) the best of narratives
 in that We have inspired in thee this Qur'an, though aforetime thou wast
 of the heedless(Yousof:3), so stories come from quran and other ways, and
 there is a difference between its stories and stories brought by other
 sources, and God called it "best narratives" for it reached the ultimate
 level of literature and rhyme with harmony, and it was been narrated in
 the best of ways because it contained the wonders and sermons, and 
 because quran mostly tells the tidings of old nations and of coming nations
 and tells what servenats may need for their after-life so all of that was
 to be mentioned in the best rhyme and best order, and because the story
 of Joseph contains the jokes and wonders with benefits as no other story
 did for its details in a wide manner, it did not let a question to be in
 the mind of any one that might be asking about him, so then God said: When
 Joseph said unto his father: O my father! Lo! I saw in a dream eleven planets
 and the sun and the moon, I saw them prostrating themselves unto me. He
 said: O my dear son! Tell not thy brethren of thy vision, lest they plot
 a
 plot against thee. Lo! Satan is for man an open foe(Yousof:4-5), and they
 say the reason for revealing this chapter in quran was that some disbelievers
 in Mecca met some jews and they nagotiated about the condition of Muhammad
 (PUH) and so one of jews said: ask him (the prophet) why the family of
 Jacob moved from the lands of Shem to Egypt and ask him about the story
 of Joseph, and so the chapter was revealed. What is apparent from the talk
 of Jacob to his son Joseph which is "Tell not thy brethren of thy vision"
 is that they did not know about his dream and neither about telling their
 father about this dream but all of that happened without their knowledgement.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">What is mentioned in Torah is that
 all of that happened while his brothers were with him and then his father
 rebuked him for telling the dream in front of them and said to him: me
 and your mother and your brothers may prostrate for you, as for mocking
 at him, and this is the first point of difference. Then what is appointed
 by quran and its interpretations is that they asked their father to send
 Joseph with them by saying: Send him with us to-morrow that he may enjoy
 himself and play. And lo! we shall take good care of him(Yousof:13), and
 in Torah is that his father sent him with them by his own will to check
 their manners and acts and then tell his father about what he saw, and
 for this Torah claimed that he was seventeen years old, but the point is
 that anyone in this age would be not be under such action as his brothers
 did to him, and it is attributed to Torah: when he went with them and they
 went far away with him and said: here comes the one of dreams wearing his
 stripped garment (and it was a garment given to him by his father) and
 then they plotted a plot and they decided to throw him in the well after
 getting his garment from him and never hurt him and tell their father that
 some devoured him.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">They said that when he was thrown
 into the well he was ten years old, and some said that he was twelve years
 old and some said nine and seven, and he met his father again and he was
 forty years old. When they wanted to throw him in the well they said to
 him: take off your garment, so he cried and said: O brothers, take off
 my beholdings?! Then one of them got a knife towards him and said: if you
 do not take it off I will kill you, so he took it off and they got him
 down into the well and went away, then Joseph said while he was in the
 well: O God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, have mercy upon me for my weakness
 and youth, and then a caravan came from Egypt and its traders sent someone
 to get them water from the well, and when he put the bucket down into the
 well, Joseph cought it tightly and when the man pulled the bucket back
 he felt the heaviness, so then he looked and saw a boy hanging on it with
 a beautiful face that he never saw before, so he left him and went back
 to his people and said: this is a boy, we can get him out and sell him
 and make a trade out of him. His brothers were watching at that time for
 who will take him, and some of them used to give him food while he was
 in the well and guard the well as well and never left him alone in any
 day as it is most famously announced, and when the caravan passed by the
 well they were there beside the well and when the traders insisted on taking
 him, his brothers came and said: this is a servant for us and he escaped
 away and we are seeking him.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Then the brothers of Joseph said
 to him: if you did not admit that you are a servant for us we would kill
 you with carelessness, and when he knew the situation very well he accepted
 that without thinking, so then the caravan's traders said to Joseph: what
 do you say about what they are saying? He said: I am a servant for them,
 then the traders said to the brothers of Joseph: would you then sell him
 to us? They said: yes, and so they bought him from them and decided to
 sell him in Egypt, and they took him for a cheap price, and as attributed
 to Al-Ridhâ (PUH) that the price was twenty coins and it was the
 price of a hunting hound if it experienced some hunting. It is apparent
 that they had him from their father as it had been told in quran and they
 went with him and decided to get him into the well. Then they came to their
 father at night crying, and said: O father, we went to race and left Joseph
 beside our things and the wolf devoured him and you won't believe us even
 if we were truthful, and got his garment with a false blood, and this phrase
 "you won't believe us even if were were truthful" towards their father
 is because they felt that they were in the place of doubt for their father,
 and they know that and they know that their father's intuition about what
 evil they were planning for their brother was not wrong, and their deed
 was not hidden from him and for this when he took the garment from their
 sinful hands and he did not find any tearing in it he said to them: how
 merciful is this wolf that devoured my son Joseph without touching his
 garment. He said that for his sorrow for Joseph and for mocking at them
 and their lies, and when he knew clearly their situation he said: Nay,
 but your minds have beguiled you into something. (My course is) comely
 patience. And Allah it is Whose help is to be sought in that (predicament)
 which ye describe(Yousof:18).</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">As attributed to Al-Bâqir
 (PUH) in general about the interpretation of God's saying: And they came
 with false blood on his shirt(Yousof:18), is that they slain a ram over
 his shirt and polluted it with blood and said to each other: we shall say
 to our father that the wolf devoured him, and when they did so, Levi said
 to them: O people, do you think that God hide such tidings away from his
 prophet Jacob? So they said: what to do? He said: we shall go and wash
 up and pray together and ask God to hide this from his prophets for He
 is Generous, and so they did, and the regulations of Abraham and Isaac
 and Jacob was to pray as a group only if there are eleven men to do so,
 and so one stand up as a leader and ten behind him to pray, so then they
 said: what to do now and we do not have a leader? Because all of them were
 ten only, then said Levi: we shall make God our leader, and then they prayed
 and weeped and asked God to never tell his prophet Jacob about what they
 did, and then they came to their father weeping with his shirt polluted
 with blood and said: O our father! We went racing one with another, and
 left Joseph by our things...etc, so then their father Jacob said: how mad
 was that wolf over Joseph and how merciful it was for his shirt, for he
 devoured Joseph and did not tear his shirt.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Then the caravan that took Joseph
 carried him back to Egypt and sold him to a noble man of Egypt and he was
 called Al-Rayyân ben Al-Waleed as been told, so he who bought him
 said to his wife: Receive him honourably. Perchance he may prove useful
 to us or we may adopt him as a son, for they did not have children and
 so they took care of him and educated him so fine, and so when he grew
 up, the wife of the noble loved him so much, and it said that no man cna
 look at him without liking him, and no woman would look at him without
 loving him for his face was like a full moon, and then the wife of the
 noble tried to have a relation with him as it had been told by God saying:
 And she, in whose house he was, asked of him an evil act(Yousof:23), then
 they said that she kept on trying to get him until happened what was mentioned
 in quran: She verily desired him, and he would have desired her if it had
 not been that he saw the argument of his Lord(Yousof:14), then the wife
 of the noble closed all the doors and went to an idol in her house and
 covered it with a cloth and said: so it won't see us for I am shy of him.
 Then said said Joseph: you are shy of an idol that hears not and sees not,
 and I shall not be shy of my Lord? Then he jumped off and ran and she ran
 after him, and he wants to get away from the door, and then the noble appeared
 from the door and saw their situation and it was as God said: And they
 raced with one another to the door, and she tore his shirt from behind,
 and they met her lord and master at the door(Yousof:25), and then the wife
 of the noble said: What shall be his reward, who wisheth evil to thy folk,
 save prison or a painful doom ?(Yousof:25), then Joseph said: She it was
 who asked of me an evil act, and some say that God inspired unto Joseph
 to say to the king (noble): ask this child that still in cradle then he
 will testify that she was the one who started, then the noble asked the
 boy about what he saw, so then God made the child speak and testify for
 Joseph, and the child said: If his shirt is torn from before, then she
 speaketh truth and he is of the liars. And if his shirt is torn from behind,
 then she hath lied and he is of the truthful, So when he saw his shirt
 torn from behind, he said: Lo! this is of the guile of you women. Lo! the
 guile of you is very great(Yousof:26-28), and then the noble said to Joseph:
 O Joseph! Turn away from this, and thou, (O woman), ask forgiveness for
 thy sin. Lo! thou art of the faulty(Yousof: 29). It is then mentioned that
 when her tidings and conditions reached everyone in the city and the women
 of the nobles started to blame and talk about Zelikhâ' the wife of
 the noble as been told by the quran: And women in the city said: The ruler's
 wife is asking of her slave-boy an ill- deed(Yousof:30) , and she understood
 and knew what is the situation and the gossip in the city, and so she gathered
 them all and they sat on the place that was prepared for them, and then
 she gave each one of them a knife, a citron and a lemon and she ordered
 them to cut and eat, and then she said to Joseph: get out for them, and
 then when they saw him they became amazed and their hearts loved him and
 said: O God this is not a human but an angel, and they started cutting
 their hands without feeling it for they were busy with looking at him and
 his beauty, and for this they said this is not a human, and then the wife
 of the noble said: This is he on whose account ye blamed me. I asked of
 him an evil act, but he proved continent, but if he do not my behest he
 verily shall be imprisoned(Yousof:32).</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">It is mentioned in tidings that
 after this event, every woman that saw him sent to him want him beside
 her, so he got much pain for that, and said: O my Lord! Prison is more
 dear than that unto which they urge me, and if Thou fend not off their
 wiles from me I shall incline unto them and become of the foolish(Yousof:33),
 and so God answered his prays and fended off their wiles. Then the wife
 of the noble ordered for him to be imprisoned, and it is mentioned about
 the interpretations of God's saying: And it seemed good to them (the men-folk)
 after they had seen the signs (of his innocence) to imprison him for a
 time(Yousof:35), and the signs were the testimony of the child and he was
 Zalikhâ's sister's son and he was three months old and he was in
 the cradle and Joseph used his testimony to prove his innocence, and the
 shirt the was tornfrom behind and Zalikhâ torn it for her love to
 Joseph when they raced to the door until that her husband heard her trials
 to get him and he was avoiding her, and when he refused, she did not leave
 him alone until she ordered for him to be imprisoned. Then two young men
 went with him into the jail, some say that they were servants for the king,
 one was the bread maker and the other was the cupbearer and they were imprisoned
 for someone told the king that they were trying to poison him, and some
 say that the king appointed these two men to protect him, and when Joseph
 went into the jail they asked him: what is your craft? He answered: interpret
 dreams, and then one of them dreamt what was mentioned in quran as: I dreamed
 that I was pressing wine(Yousof:36), and then Joseph said to him: you will
 be out of prison and manage the drink of the king and you will have a high
 place in his court, and the other said: dreamed that I was carrying upon
 my head bread whereof the birds were eating, but he actually did not see
 a dream, but he was lying only. Then Joseph said: you will kill and the
 king will kill you and crucify you and the birds will eat from your brain,
 so he said then: I did not see a thing, then Joseph said: Thus is the case
 judged concerning which ye did inquire, and when the cupbearer wanted to
 go out of jail and he was the one that was saved, Joseph said to him: mention
 me in the court of your lord but the devil made him forget about him as
 it was mentioned in quran and he stayed some more years.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Some historians say: Joseph was
 for his master, before the event with the wife of the noble took place,
 he was the owner of commands and the head of his servants and also the
 one that used to control his house and no one in the house has a higher
 place than him except for his master and his wife, and God guided Joseph
 and educated him, and taught him great knowledgement, and God appointed
 that by saying: Thus we established Joseph in the land that We might teach
 him the interpretation of events. And Allah was predominant in His career,
 but most of mankind know not. And when he reached his prime We gave him
 wisdom and knowledge. Thus We reward the good(Yousof:21-22).</font>
 <p><font face="Times New Roman,Times"><hr>
 </font></p><center>
 <a href="jj04.htm">Next: Gifts Are in Troubles</a></center>
 </div></div></body>