<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="jj08.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="qar00.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <center><font face="Times New Roman,Times"><font size="+3">Lot of Sermons
 in The Josephite Virtues</font></font></center>
 <font face="Times New Roman,Times">Since his youth, Joseph faced many problems,
 his father loved him and that caused him the great trouble of his life,
 and her aunt loved him and he was with her by a permission from his father,
 and when his father wanted to take him back she made him wear her girdle
 and claimed that he stole it, and the law at that time was to enslave the
 thief, and she searched him and took it out from under his clothes and
 he did not know that it was there, and so apparently he was like a slave
 for her, then she hugged him and asked to be with her for more time. The
 extreme love of his father to him was a reason for the envy of his brothers
 which made them take him away from his father and scared him with terror
 acts and then they took his shirt and threw him in the well. He saw many
 sad events at one time, and when the caravan came and took him out of the
 well and took him as to sell him, they sold him to the noble of Egypt Al-Rayyân
 ben Al-Waleed for few coins, and they sold him in a cheap price.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">These situations of humilation and
 weakness make the hair of the body stand, then Joseph was a slave for the
 noble for a while until his place was raisen for the noble, and it was
 known how Joseph has many characteristics that made him preferred more
 than anyone else like his wisdom as well as his beauty, and so he was appointed
 as the chief of the servants in the house of the noble, and he had the
 complete control of them for he was sincere and wise and also honorable.
 Zalikhâ the wife of the noble loved him and things started to oppose
 him and he got back to a trouble that was greater than before, and Zalikhâ
 started to ask for the evil-act and flirt with him and he did not even
 look at her until it became so hard on her and she started to lose her
 senses and do not estimate the consequences, and because she was his lady
 and the wife of his master she started to call him to her and he refused
 and she insisted but he refused as well, and she caught his shirt but he
 ran away and caught the principles of virtues and faith, and been cautious
 for the shame and whatever that breaks the laws of his faith and also cautious
 for preserving his master, the one who made hospitality towards him and
 made him like a son, so how come he face such gifts with such evil attitude,
 and this is something that he was never educated for, nor his family did,
 but Zalikhâ is not listening to any advice, and all of that would
 tell how Joseph had such a faithful soul and a pure one and a strong will
 that blocks every evil although he is a young man that got such high places
 for his master with many riches that he used to enjoy and with him his
 lady that was the prettiest woman at her time. Joseph (PUH) was tested
 for what was going on with him and he was extremely patient catching up
 with his virtues and kept hisself away from what his soul hate, and he
 was a true example for God's saying: and the patient in tribulation and
 adversity and time of stress. Such are they who are sincere. Such are the
 Allah-fearing(Al-Baqarah:177).</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Joseph (PUH) gave an extreme example
 for all the people about many types of patience, and he was not afraid
 but he made everything for his Lord to do and kept being patient, and been
 patient for the transgression of his brothers and taking his shirt by them
 and also for throwing him in the well, he kept being patient for selling
 him as a slave with the cheapest price, he kept being patient and kept
 his anger although he had been in troubles and been put in jail with the
 criminals while he is a leader for faithful people, but he promised to
 be patient, then he got out of the jail and God made him rule the land
 and made people under his command all over Egypt. As some historians said:
 The of death has between his lips either the good life or death, and his
 (Joseph) brothers came to him and they are to take revenge of them for
 what they did to him, and they came to buy some food with their hardness,
 but he did not face their evil with a similar manner, but he forgave and
 kept patient.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">When they said: Is it indeed thou
 who art Joseph? He said: I am Joseph and this is my brother. God hath shown
 us favour. Lo! he who wardeth off (evil) and endureth (findeth favour);
 for lo! God loseth not the wages of the kindly. Then they showed their
 regret and admitted their sin saying: By God, verily God hath preferred
 thee above us, and we were indeed sinful, and he forgave them for their
 transgression and said to them: Have no fear this day! May God forgive
 you, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy. How beautiful
 forgiveness and how complete virtue it is dropping with passion, and how
 beautiful sermons and benefits and honorable manners: and he unto whom
 wisdom is given, he truly hath received abundant good. But none remember
 except men of understanding(Al-Baqarah:269).</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Some of those who talk about the
 conditions of prophets said: while Joseph was with his father, honored
 and beloved, suddenly he became at the hands of his brothers and their
 transgression and then they threw him into the well without regret. In
 that condition, he then smells the scent of freedom but as a slave, and
 then he moved to a slavery that almost seemed like freedom when he became
 the chief of servants in his master's house.Then while he is in such high
 condition that many free people would envy him for, he then founded himself
 suddenly in jail for no crime he did, and there he turned to be a religious
 missionary calling people to worship God and blocking people from worshipping
 other gods and religions, and then he came to interpret the hidden things,
 and then he became the one who interpreted the dream of the king which
 was an alert for him for dry years after fertile ones all over the lands,
 and then he became the principle over the granaries on the lands and the
 king made him closer to him and shared the rule with him and made a living
 for the Egyptian kingdom and the near by lands, and in that condition he
 only missed the view of his parents, and suddenly then his brothers were
 trapped within his trap and so he tricked them a beautiful trick with seriousness,
 and tricked them all over to bring his brother from his own mother, and
 then they brought all his family together, and in all conditions he was
 always holding the virtues and beautiful manners.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">No story is as beautiful as the
 story of Joseph with its sermons, and not every reader can understand its
 core, but it is as God said: In their history verily there is a lesson
 for men of understanding(Yousof:111). Joseph depended on God for every
 trouble and problem he faced, when the Egyptian women when they saw Joseph
 and been captivated by his beauty after the blamed the wife of the noble,
 and when the wife of the noble warned him saying: but if he do not my behest
 he verily shall be imprisoned, and verily shall be of those brought low(Yousof:32),
 he take refuge in God and said: O my Lord! Prison is more dear than that
 unto which they urge me, and if Thou fend not off their wiles from me I
 shall incline unto them and become of the foolish(Yousof:33), and so God
 then released him from their wiles and he went to the prison and it is
 the best of the two troubles for Joseph for he chose it by praying to God,
 and when he was to be released from the jail he denied going out but after
 proving his innocence, so he sent a messanger to the king asking him about
 the reason for keeping him in prison and asking him to re-investigate about
 the reasons for putting him into the jail, so when the king did that and
 his innocence showed up, he accepted then going out of the jail with honor.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">Then when his father with his wife
 and his children came to him while he was sitting on the throne and the
 crown upon his head, when they saw him, they fell prostrating before him
 to thank God for this great gift, and then Joseph said to his father: O
 my father! This is the interpretation of my dream of old. My Lord hath
 made it true, and He hath shown me kindness, since He took me out of the
 prison and made me the master of the lands stores and granaries and I have
 the command in my hand, and hath brought you from the desert after Satan
 had made strife between me and my brethren. Lo! my Lord is tender unto
 whom He will. He is the Knower, the Wise. After facing the big troubles
 that might make the stone melt down, such as the transgression of his brother
 and throwing him into the well, alone there by day and night, how his condition
 might be that time, and after selling him by the caravan as a slave in
 Egypt to a disbeliever tyrant, and after his trouble with the wife of the
 noble and her wiles, and after that long time in prison, after all of that
 happened and he is still holding the virtues and honor with dignity and
 kept on praying to God.</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">These are brilliant situations and
 great virtues that bring pride for everyone that has a relation to him,
 and this is the right target for the faithful people for this is the honor
 and faith, so sanctified is Who made him special for all of that. His release
 from the jail and ruling the lands and the arrival of his brothers seeking
 his help without knowing him and tricking them and the arrival of his father
 after being blind for him and his brother Benjamin, and his cure by throwing
 the shirt of Joseph on him, and then the prostration of his father and
 mother and his brothers for him, all of that passed in the imagination
 of Joseph and he announced the gifts of God and thanked Him for His gifts
 as well as His troubles, and said: O my Lord! Thou hast given me (something)
 of sovereignty and hast taught me (something) of the interpretation of
 events - Creator of the heavens and the earth! Thou art my Protecting Guardian
 in the world and the Hereafter. Make me to die muslim (unto Thee), and
 join me to the righteous(Yousof:101).</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">This story is a rich source for
 people who want to get the righteous manners and its effect into the souls
 of the faithful is not hidden, and it is a subject to be studied deeply
 by psychology, and the psychologist will not be exaggerating if he made
 a book about psychology and manners all from the chapter of Yousof (Joseph).</font>
 <br><font face="Times New Roman,Times">This is the last thing we did like
 to mention about this great man, and thanks be to God at the beginning
 and at the end, and peace be upon the best of his creation, Muhammad the
 chosen and his Household the virtuous, and upon the best of his companions.</font>
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 <p></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="qar00.htm">Next: Some Conditions of Ðul-Qarnain</a></center>
 </body>