<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Tagore</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="cm07.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="cm09.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">SLEEP-STEALER</h3>
 <p>Who stole sleep from baby's eyes? I must know.</p>
 <p>Clasping her pitcher to her waist mother went to fetch water from the village near by.</p>
 <p>It was noon. The children's playtime was over; the ducks in the pond were silent.</p>
 <p>The shepherd boy lay asleep under the shadow of the <i>banyan</i> tree.</p>
 <p>The crane stood grave and still in the swamp near the mango grove.</p>
 <p>In the meanwhile the Sleep-stealer came and, snatching sleep from baby's eyes, flew away.</p>
 <p>When mother came back she found baby travelling the room over on all fours.</p>
 <p>Who stole sleep from our baby's eyes? I must know. I must find her and chain her up.</p>
 <p>I must look into that dark cave, where, through boulders and scowling stones, trickles a tiny stream.</p>
 <p>I must search in the drowsy shade of the <i>bakula</i> grove, where pigeons coo in their corner, and fairies' anklets tinkle in the stillness of starry nights.</p>
 <p>In the evening I will peep into the whispering silence of the bamboo forest, where fireflies squander their light, and will ask every creature I meet, "Can anybody tell me where the Sleep-stealer lives?"</p>
 <p>Who stole sleep from baby's eyes? I must know.</p>
 <p>Shouldn't I give her a good lesson if I could only catch her!</p>
 <p>I would raid her nest and see where she hoards all her stolen sleep.</p>
 <p>I would plunder it all, and carry it home.</p>
 <p>I would bind her two wings securely, set her on the bank of the river, and then let her play at fishing with a reed among the rushes and water-lilies.</p>
 <p>When the marketing is over in the evening, and the village children sit in their mothers' laps, then the night birds will mockingly din her ears with:</p>
 <p>"Whose sleep will you steal now?"</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="cm09.htm">Next: The Beginning</a></center>
 </body>