<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Tagore</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="cm31.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="cm33.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">THE WICKED POSTMAN</h3>
 <p>Why do you sit there on the floor so quiet and silent, tell me, mother dear?</p>
 <p>The rain is coming in through the open window, making you all wet, and you don't mind it.</p>
 <p>Do you hear the gong striking four? It is time for my brother to come home from school.</p>
 <p>What has happened to you that you look so strange?</p>
 <p>Haven't you got a letter from father to-day?</p>
 <p>I saw the postman bringing letters in his bag for almost everybody in the town.</p>
 <p>Only, father's letters he keeps to read himself. I am sure the postman is a wicked man.</p>
 <p>But don't be unhappy about that, mother dear.</p>
 <p>To-morrow is market day in the next village. You ask your maid to buy some pens and papers.</p>
 <p>I myself will write all father's letters; you will not find a single mistake.</p>
 <p>I shall write from A right up to K.</p>
 <p>But, mother, why do you smile?</p>
 <p>You don't believe that I can write as nicely as father does!</p>
 <p>But I shall rule my paper carefully, and write all the letters beautifully big.</p>
 <p>When I finish my writing, do you think I shall be so foolish as father and drop it into the horrid postman's bag?</p>
 <p>I shall bring it to you myself without waiting, and letter by letter help you to read my writing.</p>
 <p>I know the postman does not like to give you the really nice letters.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="cm33.htm">Next: The Hero</a></center>
 </body>