<body><p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Asia</a><br><a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="cm23.htm">Previous</a> <a href="cm25.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">2. Pintail-Duck Incantation (Valo´k-ê´wġan, Yelke´kin ê´wġan).<a name="page_127_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_127_note_1"><font size="1">1</font></a><br> (A Middle-Anadyr Incantation.)</h3>
 
 <p> This is to call game. I call every game, every living thing, from the very first limit of creation. A young pintail-duck I use for my leader, it is (so clever) [in hiding] in hiding from everybody, not to be seen.</p>
 
 <p> I call an old pintail-duck to be my leader. The lone reindeer-buck I make to wade into the water. Oh, let us try to adopt it (for the leader)! Let the leader give his call (before the reindeer)!<a name="page_127_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_127_note_2"><font size="1">2</font></a> This is finished.</p>
 
 <p> Now, again I sing, "Just so, just so, oh, who are you?" I use the distance (of game) of yesterday, (I use) the distance of to-day. I make them appear before me. I cover my face with soot. To every species, to every kind of game, I become unknown; to every species (of animal) I become unrecognizable. Only the soot on my face, appears (to their eyes).</p>
 
 <p> Taking off my breeches, I stand on
 
 <!------------------------page 128------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_128"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 128</font></a>
 
 the ground without any precautions. My buttocks have three eyes, and they keep watch for me. They see every hidden ke´lẹ, and they make the ke´lẹ close his eyes.</p>
 
 <p> The foremost reindeer I make very slow, using the two legs of the small pintail-duck, forked in two (from its buttocks). Everything difficult to scent (I am using) all the time. Without any precaution I enter (the confines of) every place, I may sleep without care. All kinds of game have a liking for me, every kind of game has a great love for me.</p>
 
 <p> Thus I have almost acquired a good careless sleep, The thing lying under my pillow I have for my leader. Blowing over it, I make it rebound (backwards), I make it scatter (backwards). That is all.</p>
 
 <p align="right"><small>Told by Nikon Taġra´tịrġịn, a Middle Anadyr Chukchee man, in the village of Chikayeva, November, 1900.</small></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="cm25.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 127------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_127"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 127</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_127_note_1"></a><a href="#page_127_fr_1">1</a> Compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 497, No. 2.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_127_note_2"></a><a href="#page_127_fr_2">2</a> The Chukchee of the Middle Anadyr live chiefly by hunting wild reindeer on the river. So this incantation refers to the hnnting of wild reindeer.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>