<body><p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Asia</a><br><a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="cm24.htm">Previous</a> <a href="cm26.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">3. Incantation for taming Wild Reindeer (Qaalva´t-ê´wġan).<a name="page_128_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_128_note_1"><font size="1">1</font></a></h3>
 
 <p> When a wild reindeer-buck that has just shed his hair joins a domesticated herd, [the man] the owner [of the herd] says, "Let us try and make of him a tame reindeer! Let him create offspring for us!"</p>
 
 <p> He goes to the herd and utters [there among the herd] an incantation. (He talks) to the Being of Zenith: "Oh, You, there above! I am in great need. This one wants to go away, and he is the first of his kind that I have seen here.</p>
 
 <p> "Give me your wooden stake! I
 
 <!------------------------page 129------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_129"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 129</font></a>
 
 will stick it into his foot, I will thrust it between his antlers. I will pierce his lower jaw, and bring it down to the level of the ground. With what else shall I pin (to the ground) this fleet-(footed) reindeer-buck?</p>
 
 <p> (I will gather) bowlders from all sides, and pile them up between his antlers. How will he move (his head)? I will wrap his ears with sod. [As to his nose,] I will gather withered sedge-grass and use it to cover his nose. Let all bad odors from every (part of the earth) enter into his nose!</p>
 
 <p> I make him into a fawn newly born. O (Good) Being! do not despise my (demand)! Let me get possession of him! I will give you in exchange (something) equally worthy to be desired."</p>
 
 <p> Then he spits, and with that the incantation becomes fastened. After that he says, "Bring the herd (to the house)." They bring it to the house. They make a fire in the house. They drive the herd windward, so that he (the reindeer-buck) will smell the smoke. But he can't run away, because he has become heavy. That is all.</p>
 
 <p align="right"><small>Told by Ke<sup>ɛ</sup>ute´ġịn, a Reindeer Chukchee man, on the O´nmịlịn tundra, June, 1901.</small></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="cm26.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 128------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_128"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 128</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_128_note_1"></a><a href="#page_128_fr_1">1</a> Compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 497, No. 1, <i>b</i>.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>