<body><p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Asia</a><br><a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="cm53.htm">Previous</a> <a href="cm55.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">2. (Qolênto´.)</h3>
 
 <p> A man lived at the village of Kiġi´ni. He had two sons. The Sun-Chief (Tirk-e´rem<a name="page_183_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_183_note_1"><font size="1">1</font></a>) sent his men to this country. The people came to the man, and said, "The Sun-Chief wants one of your sons in his employ." He had him for a while; then he became displeased with him, and caused his head to be cut off. Two years passed, and then a third year. The elder son does not come back; and of course he could not come, since his head had been cut off. The younger brother grew to manhood. All the time he was exercising, — running and jumping up with a load upon his shoulders. So he became quite strong, and made a spear for himself. Its point was as long as the blade of a paddle. The shaft was as thick as a tent-pole. In the spring other people came, sent by the Sun-Chief, and said to the old man, "The Sun-Chief wants your other son in his service." — "I will not give him. I am quite old, and have no other children. And where is my first son? He does not appear anymore." They went away. The son said, "Why have you refused their request? Since my elder brother took this road, let me take it also. Why have you refused? Better send me along with them." In due time they came again. "The Sun-Chief wants to have your other son, at least as his guest." — "All right! take him!" They went away.</p>
 
 <p> On the road there lived another Sun-Chief, nearer than the first one. They came to him. He had a large house, strongly fortified. His daughter came out and immediately returned home. "A guest has come!" The father came out and said, "Well, now, show us your skill in fencing!" Qolênto´ began to brandish his spear. He brandished it, and made various passes and side-strokes. The sun was on the left hand, then it came over to the right hand,
 
 <!------------------------page 184------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_184"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 184</font></a>
 
 and then was near setting. He still brandished his spear. "Oh," said the Sun-Chief, "you are quite good! I want to take you for my son-in-law." He was quite kind to him. So in the night he lay down with the girl and made her his wife. The next morning he departed, and took along the spear of his father-in-law, since the shaft of his own became too pliable from mere exercise. They came to the first Sun-Chief. He was lying on his back and snoring lustily. His arms and legs were spread wide apart. Near his penis was a small dog attached to a tying-stick. It was small and slender, but for all that watchful. Its ears pricked up at every noise, howsoever slight. Qolênto´ opened a window and crept through it. The dog attacked him; but he jumped upward, and the dog missed and fell down. He began to trample upon the dog, intending to kill it.</p>
 
 <p> Then the dog spoke in the manner of men, "Do not trample upon me! I am ready to serve you henceforward as my master." — "All right! then you must awaken this one." — "Oh, oh!" It sprang towards the sleeping man and bit his right hand. The man said, "How strange! This dog is biting his own master." Then he saw the visitor. "Oh, it is you? Why did you come when I was sleeping? Did you want to attack me in my sleep? Come, now!" They came out. Near the houses there were a number of driving-sledges piled up quite high one on another. They jumped upon the pile and began to fight. They fought the whole day with their spears. The Sun-Chief grew tired. His eyes became white, and on the corners of his mouth there was thin foam. Then at last the young man caught him on the spear-point between his legs and hurled him off. He jumped after him from behind, and kicked him with all his might. Then he ran after him and jumped over him. The Sun-Chief fell down and swooned. As soon as he came to consciousness, he filled a pipe with tobacco and had a smoke. "Oh, my! but why do you deride me? Cut off my head, since you are the victor!" — "I will not." — "Oh, oh!" He smoked another pipe. "Enough of this! Kill me!" — "I will not!" — "This house of mine, and all the wealth in this trading-hut (i. e., storehouse) of mine, you may take it all." — "I do not want all this." — "Oh, well, hurry up! Enough of your derision! Despatch me quick!" — "Oh, oh! All right!" He struck him twice with his spear and put his eyes out. "There, you have it!"</p>
 
 <p> All around upon staffs human heads were elevated, all of them Chukchee. He took them all and went away. He took along also the dog and his newly married wife. He led away a long train of pack-horses and of driving-reindeer. All were loaded with tea, tobacco, sugar, rifles, lead, ammunition, etc. He took all this home. They lived. The end.</p>
 
 <p align="right"><small>Told by Nuten·qeu´, a Maritime Chukchee man from the village of Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun, in the village of Uñi´sak, at Indian Point, May, 1900.</small></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="cm55.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 183------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_183"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 183</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_183_note_1"></a><a href="#page_183_fr_1">1</a> The Czar (cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 292).</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>