<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn009.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn011.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. The truth lies in the Consideration that the Couplement
 subsists by virtue of the Soul's presence.
 
 </p><p>This, however, is not to say that the Soul gives itself as it is
 in itself to form either the Couplement or the body.
 
 </p><p>No; from the organized body and something else, let us say a
 light, which the Soul gives forth from itself, it forms a distinct
 Principle, the Animate; and in this Principle are vested
 Sense-Perception and all the other experiences found to belong to
 the Animate.
 
 </p><p>But the "We"? How have We Sense-Perception?
 
 </p><p>By the fact that We are not separate from the Animate so
 constituted, even though certainly other and nobler elements go to
 make up the entire many-sided nature of Man.
 
 </p><p>The faculty of perception in the Soul cannot act by the
 immediate grasping of sensible objects, but only by the discerning
 of impressions printed upon the Animate by sensation: these
 impressions are already Intelligibles while the outer sensation is a
 mere phantom of the other [of that in the Soul] which is nearer to
 Authentic-Existence as being an impassive reading of Ideal-Forms.
 
 </p><p>And by means of these Ideal-Forms, by which the Soul 
 wields single
 lordship over the Animate, we have Discursive-Reasoning,
 Sense-Knowledge and Intellection. From this moment we have
 peculiarly the We: before this there was only the "Ours"; but at
 this stage stands the WE [the authentic Human-Principle] loftily
 presiding over the Animate.
 
 </p><p>There is no reason why the entire compound entity should not be
 described as the Animate or Living-Being- mingled in a lower phase,
 but above that point the beginning of the veritable man, 
 distinct from
 all that is kin to the lion, all that is of the order of the
 multiple brute. And since The Man, so understood, is essentially the
 associate of the reasoning Soul, in our reasoning it is this 
 "We" that
 reasons, in that the use and act of reason is a characteristic Act
 of the Soul.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn011.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>