<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn064.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn066.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. These Lovers, then, lovers of the beauty outside of 
 sense, must
 be made to declare themselves.
 
 </p><p>What do you feel in presence of the grace you discern in
 actions, in manners, in sound morality, in all the works and 
 fruits of
 virtue, in the beauty of souls? When you see that you yourselves are
 beautiful within, what do you feel? What is this Dionysiac
 exultation that thrills through your being, this straining upwards
 of all your Soul, this longing to break away from the body and live
 sunken within the veritable self?
 
 </p><p>These are no other than the emotions of Souls under the spell of
 love.
 
 </p><p>But what is it that awakens all this passion? No shape, 
 no colour,
 no grandeur of mass: all is for a Soul, something whose beauty rests
 upon no colour, for the moral wisdom the Soul enshrines and all the
 other hueless splendour of the virtues. It is that you find in
 yourself, or admire in another, loftiness of spirit; righteousness
 of life; disciplined purity; courage of the majestic face; gravity;
 modesty that goes fearless and tranquil and passionless; and,
 shining down upon all, the light of god-like Intellection.
 
 </p><p>All these noble qualities are to be reverenced and loved, no
 doubt, but what entitles them to be called beautiful?
 
 </p><p>They exist: they manifest themselves to us: anyone that sees
 them must admit that they have reality of Being; and is not
 Real-Being, really beautiful?
 
 </p><p>But we have not yet shown by what property in them they have
 wrought the Soul to loveliness: what is this grace, this splendour
 as of Light, resting upon all the virtues?
 
 </p><p>Let us take the contrary, the ugliness of the Soul, and set that
 against its beauty: to understand, at once, what this ugliness is
 and how it comes to appear in the Soul will certainly open our way
 before us.
 
 </p><p>Let us then suppose an ugly Soul, dissolute, unrighteous:
 teeming with all the lusts; torn by internal discord; beset by the
 fears of its cowardice and the envies of its pettiness; thinking, in
 the little thought it has, only of the perish able and the base;
 perverse in all its the friend of unclean pleasures; living the life
 of abandonment to bodily sensation and delighting in its deformity.
 
 </p><p>What must we think but that all this shame is something that has
 gathered about the Soul, some foreign bane outraging it, soiling it,
 so that, encumbered with all manner of turpitude, it has no longer a
 clean activity or a clean sensation, but commands only a life
 smouldering dully under the crust of evil; that, sunk in manifold
 death, it no longer sees what a Soul should see, may no 
 longer rest in
 its own being, dragged ever as it is towards the outer, the 
 lower, the
 dark?
 
 </p><p>An unclean thing, I dare to say; flickering hither and thither
 at the call of objects of sense, deeply infected with the taint of
 body, occupied always in Matter, and absorbing Matter into itself;
 in its commerce with the Ignoble it has trafficked away for an alien
 nature its own essential Idea.
 
 </p><p>If a man has been immersed in filth or daubed with mud his
 native comeliness disappears and all that is seen is the foul stuff
 besmearing him: his ugly condition is due to alien matter that has
 encrusted him, and if he is to win back his grace it must be his
 business to scour and purify himself and make himself what he was.
 
 </p><p>So, we may justly say, a Soul becomes ugly- by something foisted
 upon it, by sinking itself into the alien, by a fall, a descent into
 body, into Matter. The dishonour of the Soul is in its ceasing to be
 clean and apart. Gold is degraded when it is mixed with earthy
 particles; if these be worked out, the gold is left and is
 beautiful, isolated from all that is foreign, gold with gold alone.
 And so the Soul; let it be but cleared of the desires that 
 come by its
 too intimate converse with the body, emancipated from all the
 passions, purged of all that embodiment has thrust upon it, 
 withdrawn,
 a solitary, to itself again- in that moment the ugliness that came
 only from the alien is stripped away.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn066.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>