<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn091.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn093.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. We have to ask, that is, how Matter, this entity of ceaseless
 flux constituting the physical mass of the universe, could serve
 towards the immortality of the Kosmos.
 
 </p><p>And our answer is "Because the flux is not outgoing": where
 there is motion within but not outwards and the total remains
 unchanged, there is neither growth nor decline, and thus the Kosmos
 never ages.
 
 </p><p>We have a parallel in our earth, constant from eternity 
 to pattern
 and to mass; the air, too, never fails; and there is always 
 water: all
 the changes of these elements leave unchanged the Principle of the
 total living thing, our world. In our own constitution, again, there
 is a ceaseless shifting of particles- and that with outgoing 
 loss- and
 yet the individual persists for a long time: where there is no
 question of an outside region, the body-principle cannot clash with
 soul as against the identity and endless duration of the 
 living thing.
 
 </p><p>Of these material elements- for example- fire, the keen 
 and swift,
 cooperates by its upward tendency as earth by its lingering 
 below; for
 we must not imagine that the fire, once it finds itself at the point
 where its ascent must stop, settles down as in its appropriate
 place, no longer seeking, like all the rest, to expand in both
 directions. No: but higher is not possible; lower is repugnant to
 its Kind; all that remains for it is to be tractable and, 
 answering to
 a need of its nature, to be drawn by the Soul to the 
 activity of life,
 and so to move to in a glorious place, in the Soul. Anyone 
 that dreads
 its falling may take heart; the circuit of the Soul provides against
 any declination, embracing, sustaining; and since fire has of itself
 no downward tendency it accepts that guiding without resistance. The
 partial elements constituting our persons do not suffice for 
 their own
 cohesion; once they are brought to human shape, they must borrow
 elsewhere if the organism is to be maintained: but in the upper
 spheres since there can be no loss by flux no such replenishment is
 needed.
 
 </p><p>Suppose such loss, suppose fire extinguished there, then a new
 fire must be kindled; so also if such loss by flux could 
 occur in some
 of the superiors from which the celestial fire depends, that too
 must be replaced: but with such transmutations, while there might be
 something continuously similar, there would be, no longer, a Living
 All abidingly self-identical.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn093.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>