<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn070.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn072.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. We can scarcely conceive that for any entity the Good can be
 other than the natural Act expressing its life-force, or in the case
 of an entity made up of parts the Act, appropriate, natural and
 complete, expressive of that in it which is best.
 
 </p><p>For the Soul, then, the Good is its own natural Act.
 
 </p><p>But the Soul itself is natively a "Best"; if, further, its act
 be directed towards the Best, the achievement is not merely the
 "Soul's good" but "The Good" without qualification.
 
 </p><p>Now, given an Existent which- as being itself the best of
 existences and even transcending the existences- directs its Act
 towards no other, but is the object to which the Act of all else is
 directed, it is clear that this must be at once the Good and 
 the means
 through which all else may participate in Good.
 
 </p><p>This Absolute Good other entities may possess in two ways- by
 becoming like to It and by directing the Act of their being towards
 It.
 
 </p><p>Now, if all aspiration and Act whatsoever are directed 
 towards the
 Good, it follows that the Essential-Good neither need nor can look
 outside itself or aspire to anything other than itself: it can but
 remain unmoved, as being, in the constitution of things, the
 wellspring and firstcause of all Act: whatsoever in other entities
 is of the nature of Good cannot be due to any Act of the
 Essential-Good upon them; it is for them on the contrary to act
 towards their source and cause. The Good must, then, be the Good not
 by any Act, not even by virtue of its Intellection, but by its very
 rest within Itself.
 
 </p><p>Existing beyond and above Being, it must be beyond and above the
 Intellectual-Principle and all Intellection.
 
 </p><p>For, again, that only can be named the Good to which all is
 bound and itself to none: for only thus is it veritably the object
 of all aspiration. It must be unmoved, while all circles 
 around it, as
 a circumference around a centre from which all the radii proceed.
 Another example would be the sun, central to the light which streams
 from it and is yet linked to it, or at least is always about it,
 irremoveably; try all you will to separate the light from the sun,
 or the sun from its light, for ever the light is in the sun.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn072.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>