<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn007.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn009.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. Now this Animate might be merely the body as having life: it
 might be the Couplement of Soul and body: it might be a third and
 different entity formed from both.
 
 </p><p>The Soul in turn- apart from the nature of the Animate- must be
 either impassive, merely causing Sense-Perception in its
 yoke-fellow, or sympathetic; and, if sympathetic, it may have
 identical experiences with its fellow or merely correspondent
 experiences: desire for example in the Animate may be something
 quite distinct from the accompanying movement or state in 
 the desiring
 faculty.
 
 </p><p>The body, the live-body as we know it, we will consider later.
 
 </p><p>Let us take first the Couplement of body and Soul. How could
 suffering, for example, be seated in this Couplement?
 
 </p><p>It may be suggested that some unwelcome state of the 
 body produces
 a distress which reaches to a Sensitive-Faculty which in turn merges
 into Soul. But this account still leaves the origin of the sensation
 unexplained.
 
 </p><p>Another suggestion might be that all is due to an opinion or
 judgement: some evil seems to have befallen the man or his
 belongings and this conviction sets up a state of trouble in the
 body and in the entire Animate. But this account leaves still a
 question as to the source and seat of the judgement: does it 
 belong to
 the Soul or to the Couplement? Besides, the judgement that evil is
 present does not involve the feeling of grief: the judgement might
 very well arise and the grief by no means follow: one may think
 oneself slighted and yet not be angry; and the appetite is not
 necessarily excited by the thought of a pleasure. We are, thus, no
 nearer than before to any warrant for assigning these affections to
 the Couplement.
 
 </p><p>Is it any explanation to say that desire is vested in a
 Faculty-of-desire and anger in the Irascible-Faculty and,
 collectively, that all tendency is seated in the Appetitive-Faculty?
 Such a statement of the facts does not help towards making the
 affections common to the Couplement; they might still be 
 seated either
 in the Soul alone or in the body alone. On the one hand if the
 appetite is to be stirred, as in the carnal passion, there must be a
 heating of the blood and the bile, a well-defined state of the body;
 on the other hand, the impulse towards The Good cannot be a joint
 affection, but, like certain others too, it would belong necessarily
 to the Soul alone.
 
 </p><p>Reason, then, does not permit us to assign all the affections to
 the Couplement.
 
 </p><p>In the case of carnal desire, it will certainly be the Man that
 desires, and yet, on the other hand, there must be desire in the
 Desiring-Faculty as well. How can this be? Are we to suppose that,
 when the man originates the desire, the Desiring-Faculty moves to
 the order? How could the Man have come to desire at all 
 unless through
 a prior activity in the Desiring-Faculty? Then it is the
 Desiring-Faculty that takes the lead? Yet how, unless the body be
 first in the appropriate condition?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn009.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>