<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn074.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn076.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Those enquiring whence Evil enters into beings, or rather
 into a certain order of beings, would be making the best beginning
 if they established, first of all, what precisely Evil is, what
 constitutes its Nature. At once we should know whence it comes,
 where it has its native seat and where it is present merely as an
 accident; and there would be no further question as to whether it
 has Authentic-Existence.
 
 </p><p>But a difficulty arises. By what faculty in us could we possibly
 know Evil?
 
 </p><p>All knowing comes by likeness. The Intellectual-Principle and
 the Soul, being Ideal-Forms, would know Ideal-Forms and would have a
 natural tendency towards them; but who could imagine Evil to be an
 Ideal-Form, seeing that it manifests itself as the very absence of
 Good?
 
 </p><p>If the solution is that the one act of knowing covers
 contraries, and that as Evil is the contrary to Good the one 
 act would
 grasp Good and Evil together, then to know Evil there must be first
 a clear perception and understanding of Good, since the nobler
 existences precede the baser and are Ideal-Forms while the less good
 hold no such standing, are nearer to Non-Being.
 
 </p><p>No doubt there is a question in what precise way Good is
 contrary to Evil- whether it is as First-Principle to last of things
 or as Ideal-Form to utter Lack: but this subject we postpone.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn076.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>