<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn098.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn100.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. But whence that circular movement?
 
 </p><p>In imitation of the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>And does this movement belong to the material part or to 
 the Soul?
 Can we account for it on the ground that the Soul has itself at once
 for centre and for the goal to which it must be ceaselessly 
 moving; or
 that, being self-centred it is not of unlimited extension [and
 consequently must move ceaselessly to be omnipresent], and that its
 revolution carries the material mass with it?
 
 </p><p>If the Soul had been the moving power [by any such semi-physical
 action] it would be so no longer; it would have accomplished the act
 of moving and have brought the universe to rest; there would 
 be an end
 of this endless revolution.
 
 </p><p>In fact the Soul must be in repose or at least cannot 
 have spatial
 movement; how then, having itself a movement of quite another order,
 could it communicate spatial movement?
 
 </p><p>But perhaps the circular movement [of the Kosmos as soul 
 and body]
 is not spatial or is spatial not primarily but only incidentally.
 
 </p><p>What, by this explanation, would be the essential movement of
 the kosmic soul?
 
 </p><p>A movement towards itself, the movement of self-awareness, of
 self-intellection, of the living of its life, the movement of its
 reaching to all things so that nothing shall lie outside of it,
 nothing anywhere but within its scope.
 
 </p><p>The dominant in a living thing is what compasses it entirely and
 makes it a unity.
 
 </p><p>If the Soul has no motion of any kind, it would not vitally
 compass the Kosmos nor would the Kosmos, a thing of body, keep its
 content alive, for the life of body is movement.
 
 </p><p>Any spatial motion there is will be limited; it will be not that
 of Soul untrammelled but that of a material frame ensouled, an
 animated organism; the movement will be partly of body, partly of
 Soul, the body tending to the straight line which its nature
 imposes, the Soul restraining it; the resultant will be the 
 compromise
 movement of a thing at once carried forward and at rest.
 
 </p><p>But supposing that the circular movement is to be attributed to
 the body, how is it to be explained, since all body, including fire
 [which constitutes the heavens] has straightforward motion?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that forthright movement is maintained only
 pending arrival at the place for which the moving thing is destined:
 where a thing is ordained to be, there it seeks, of its nature, to
 come for its rest; its motion is its tendence to its appointed place.
 
 </p><p>Then, since the fire of the sidereal system has attained 
 its goal,
 why does it not stay at rest?
 
 </p><p>Evidently because the very nature of fire is to be mobile: if it
 did not take the curve, its straight line would finally fling it
 outside the universe: the circular course, then, is imperative.
 
 </p><p>But this would imply an act of providence?
 
 </p><p>Not quite: rather its own act under providence; attaining to
 that realm, it must still take the circular course by its indwelling
 nature; for it seeks the straight path onwards but finds no further
 space and is driven back so that it recoils on the only 
 course left to
 it: there is nothing beyond; it has reached the ultimate; it runs
 its course in the regions it occupies, itself its own sphere, not
 destined to come to rest there, existing to move.
 
 </p><p>Further, the centre of a circle [and therefore of the Kosmos] is
 distinctively a point of rest: if the circumference outside were not
 in motion, the universe would be no more than one vast centre. And
 movement around the centre is all the more to be expected in the
 case of a living thing whose nature binds it within a body. Such
 motion alone can constitute its impulse towards its centre: it
 cannot coincide with the centre, for then there would be no circle;
 since this may not be, it whirls about it; so only can it indulge
 its tendence.
 
 </p><p>If, on the other hand, the Kosmic circuit is due to the Soul, we
 are not to think of a painful driving [wearing it down at last]; the
 soul does not use violence or in any way thwart nature, for "Nature"
 is no other than the custom the All-Soul has established.
 Omnipresent in its entirety, incapable of division, the Soul of the
 universe communicates that quality of universal presence to the
 heavens, too, in their degree, the degree, that is, of pursuing
 universality and advancing towards it.
 
 </p><p>If the Soul halted anywhere, there the Kosmos, too, brought so
 far, would halt: but the Soul encompasses all, and so the Kosmos
 moves, seeking everything.
 
 </p><p>Yet never to attain?
 
 </p><p>On the contrary this very motion is its eternal attainment.
 
 </p><p>Or, better; the Soul is ceaselessly leading the Kosmos towards
 itself: the continuous attraction communicates a continuous
 movement- not to some outside space but towards the Soul and in the
 one sphere with it, not in the straight line [which would ultimately
 bring the moving body outside and below the Soul], but in the
 curving course in which the moving body at every stage possesses the
 Soul that is attracting it and bestowing itself upon it.
 
 </p><p>If the soul were stationary, that is if [instead of 
 presiding over
 a Kosmos] it dwelt wholly and solely in the realm in which every
 member is at rest, motion would be unknown; but, since the 
 Soul is not
 fixed in some one station There, the Kosmos must travel to 
 every point
 in quest of it, and never outside it: in a circle, therefore.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn100.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>