<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn094.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn096.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. We may now consider the question whether fire is the sole
 element existing in that celestial realm and whether there is any
 outgoing thence with the consequent need of renewal.
 
 </p><p>Timaeus pronounced the material frame of the All to consist
 primarily of earth and fire for visibility, earth for solidity- and
 deduced that the stars must be mainly composed of fire, but 
 not solely
 since there is no doubt they are solid.
 
 </p><p>And this is probably a true account. Plato accepts it as 
 indicated
 by all the appearances. And, in fact, to all our perception- 
 as we see
 them and derive from them the impression of illumination- the stars
 appear to be mostly, if not exclusively, fire: but on reasoning into
 the matter we judge that since solidity cannot exist apart from
 earth-matter, they must contain earth as well.
 
 </p><p>But what place could there be for the other elements? It is
 impossible to imagine water amid so vast a conflagration; and if air
 were present it would be continually changing into fire.
 
 </p><p>Admitting [with Timaeus; as a logical truth] that two
 self-contained entities, standing as extremes to each other need for
 their coherence two intermediaries; we may still question 
 whether this
 holds good with regard to physical bodies. Certainly water and earth
 can be mixed without any such intermediate. It might seem valid to
 object that the intermediates are already present in the 
 earth and the
 water; but a possible answer would be, "Yes, but not as agents whose
 meeting is necessary to the coherence of those extremes."
 
 </p><p>None the less we will take it that the coherence of extremes is
 produced by virtue of each possessing all the intermediates. It is
 still not proven that fire is necessary to the visibility of 
 earth and
 earth to the solidarity of fire.
 
 </p><p>On this principle, nothing possesses an essential-nature of its
 very own; every several thing is a blend, and its name is merely an
 indication of the dominant constituent.
 
 </p><p>Thus we are told that earth cannot have concrete 
 existence without
 the help of some moist element- the moisture in water being the
 necessary adhesive- but admitting that we so find it, there 
 is still a
 contradiction in pretending that any one element has a being of its
 own and in the same breath denying its self-coherence, making its
 subsistence depend upon others, and so, in reality, reducing the
 specific element to nothing. How can we talk of the existence of the
 definite Kind, earth- earth essential- if there exists no single
 particle of earth which actually is earth without any need 
 of water to
 secure its self-cohesion? What has such an adhesive to act upon if
 there is absolutely no given magnitude of real earth to which it may
 bind particle after particle in its business of producing the
 continuous mass? If there is any such given magnitude, large 
 or small,
 of pure earth, then earth can exist in its own nature, independently
 of water: if there is no such primary particle of pure earth, then
 there is nothing whatever for the water to bind. As for air- air
 unchanged, retaining its distinctive quality- how could it conduce
 to the subsistence of a dense material like earth?
 
 </p><p>Similarly with fire. No doubt Timaeus speaks of it as necessary
 not to the existence but to the visibility of earth and the other
 elements; and certainly light is essential to all visibility- we
 cannot say that we see darkness, which implies, precisely, that
 nothing is seen, as silence means nothing being heard.
 
 </p><p>But all this does not assure us that the earth to be visible
 must contain fire: light is sufficient: snow, for example, and other
 extremely cold substances gleam without the presence of fire- though
 of course it might be said that fire was once there and communicated
 colour before disappearing.
 
 </p><p>As to the composition of water, we must leave it an open
 question whether there can be such a thing as water without a
 certain proportion of earth.
 
 </p><p>But how can air, the yielding element, contain earth?
 
 </p><p>Fire, again: is earth perhaps necessary there since fire 
 is by its
 own nature devoid of continuity and not a thing of three dimensions?
 
 </p><p>Supposing it does not possess the solidity of the three
 dimensions, it has that of its thrust; now, cannot this belong to it
 by the mere right and fact of its being one of the corporeal
 entities in nature? Hardness is another matter, a property 
 confined to
 earth-stuff. Remember that gold- which is water- becomes dense by
 the accession not of earth but of denseness or consolidation: in the
 same way fire, with Soul present within it, may consolidate itself
 upon the power of the Soul; and there are living beings of fire
 among the Celestials.
 
 </p><p>But, in sum, do we abandon the teaching that all the elements
 enter into the composition of every living thing?
 
 </p><p>For this sphere, no; but to lift clay into the heavens is
 against nature, contrary to the laws of her ordaining: it is
 difficult, too, to think of that swiftest of circuits bearing along
 earthly bodies in its course nor could such material conduce to the
 splendour and white glint of the celestial fire.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn096.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>