<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn025.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn027.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. What art is there, what method, what discipline to bring us
 there where we must go?
 
 </p><p>The Term at which we must arrive we may take as agreed: we have
 established elsewhere, by many considerations, that our journey is
 to the Good, to the Primal-Principle; and, indeed, the very
 reasoning which discovered the Term was itself something like an
 initiation.
 
 </p><p>But what order of beings will attain the Term?
 
 </p><p>Surely, as we read, those that have already seen all or most
 things, those who at their first birth have entered into the 
 life-germ
 from which is to spring a metaphysician, a musician or a born lover,
 the metaphysician taking to the path by instinct, the 
 musician and the
 nature peculiarly susceptible to love needing outside guidance.
 
 </p><p>But how lies the course? Is it alike for all, or is there a
 distinct method for each class of temperament?
 
 </p><p>For all there are two stages of the path, as they are making
 upwards or have already gained the upper sphere.
 
 </p><p>The first degree is the conversion from the lower life; the
 second- held by those that have already made their way to the sphere
 of the Intelligibles, have set as it were a footprint there but must
 still advance within the realm- lasts until they reach the extreme
 hold of the place, the Term attained when the topmost peak of the
 Intellectual realm is won.
 
 </p><p>But this highest degree must bide its time: let us first try to
 speak of the initial process of conversion.
 
 </p><p>We must begin by distinguishing the three types. Let us take the
 musician first and indicate his temperamental equipment for the task.
 
 </p><p>The musician we may think of as being exceedingly quick 
 to beauty,
 drawn in a very rapture to it: somewhat slow to stir of his own
 impulse, he answers at once to the outer stimulus: as the timid are
 sensitive to noise so he to tones and the beauty they 
 convey; all that
 offends against unison or harmony in melodies and rhythms repels
 him; he longs for measure and shapely pattern.
 
 </p><p>This natural tendency must be made the starting-point to such a
 man; he must be drawn by the tone, rhythm and design in things of
 sense: he must learn to distinguish the material forms from the
 Authentic-Existent which is the source of all these correspondences
 and of the entire reasoned scheme in the work of art: he must be led
 to the Beauty that manifests itself through these forms; he must be
 shown that what ravished him was no other than the Harmony of the
 Intellectual world and the Beauty in that sphere, not some one shape
 of beauty but the All-Beauty, the Absolute Beauty; and the truths of
 philosophy must be implanted in him to lead him to faith in that
 which, unknowing it, he possesses within himself. What these truths
 are we will show later.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn027.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>