<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn086.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn088.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">NINTH TRACTATE.
 </h3>
 
 <p>"THE REASONED DISMISSAL".
 
 
 </p><p>"You will not dismiss your Soul lest it go forth..." [taking
 something with it].
 
 </p><p>For wheresoever it go, it will be in some definite condition,
 and its going forth is to some new place. The Soul will wait for the
 body to be completely severed from it; then it makes no departure;
 it simply finds itself free.
 
 </p><p>But how does the body come to be separated?
 
 </p><p>The separation takes place when nothing of Soul remains bound up
 with it: the harmony within the body, by virtue of which the Soul
 was retained, is broken and it can no longer hold its guest.
 
 </p><p>But when a man contrives the dissolution of the body, it is he
 that has used violence and torn himself away, not the body that has
 let the Soul slip from it. And in loosing the bond he has not been
 without passion; there has been revolt or grief or anger, movements
 which it is unlawful to indulge.
 
 </p><p>But if a man feel himself to be losing his reason?
 
 </p><p>That is not likely in the Sage, but if it should occur, 
 it must be
 classed with the inevitable, to be welcome at the bidding of the
 fact though not for its own sake. To call upon drugs to the 
 release of
 the Soul seems a strange way of assisting its purposes.
 
 </p><p>And if there be a period allotted to all by fate, to anticipate
 the hour could not be a happy act, unless, as we have 
 indicated, under
 stern necessity.
 
 </p><p>If everyone is to hold in the other world a standing 
 determined by
 the state in which he quitted this, there must be no withdrawal as
 long as there is any hope of progress.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn088.htm">Next: THE SECOND ENNEAD</a></center>
 </body>