<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn055.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn057.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. But if we are to consider only the present and may not call
 in the past to make the total, why do we not reckon so in the case
 of time itself, where, in fact, we do not hesitate to add the past
 to the present and call the total greater? Why not suppose a
 quantity of happiness equivalent to a quantity of time? This would
 be no more than taking it lap by lap to correspond with time-laps
 instead of choosing to consider it as an indivisible, measurable
 only by the content of a given instant.
 
 </p><p>There is no absurdity in taking count of time which has ceased
 to be: we are merely counting what is past and finished, as we might
 count the dead: but to treat past happiness as actually existent and
 as outweighing present happiness, that is an absurdity. For
 Happiness must be an achieved and existent state, whereas any time
 over and apart from the present is nonexistent: all progress of time
 means the extinction of all the time that has been.
 
 </p><p>Hence time is aptly described as a mimic of eternity 
 that seeks to
 break up in its fragmentary flight the permanence of its exemplar.
 Thus whatever time seizes and seals to itself of what stands 
 permanent
 in eternity is annihilated- saved only in so far as in some degree
 it still belongs to eternity, but wholly destroyed if it be
 unreservedly absorbed into time.
 
 </p><p>If Happiness demands the possession of the good of life, it
 clearly has to do with the life of Authentic-Existence for that life
 is the Best. Now the life of Authentic-Existence is measurable not
 by time but by eternity; and eternity is not a more or a less or a
 thing of any magnitude but is the unchangeable, the indivisible, is
 timeless Being.
 
 </p><p>We must not muddle together Being and Non-Being, time and
 eternity, not even everlasting time with the eternal; we cannot make
 laps and stages of an absolute unity; all must be taken together,
 wheresoever and howsoever we handle it; and it must be taken at
 that, not even as an undivided block of time but as the Life of
 Eternity, a stretch not made up of periods but completely rounded,
 outside of all notion of time.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn057.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>