<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn040.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn042.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. But when he is out of himself, reason quenched by sickness or
 by magic arts?
 
 </p><p>If it be allowed that in this state, resting as it were in a
 slumber, he remains a Sage, why should he not equally remain 
 happy? No
 one rules him out of felicity in the hours of sleep; no one counts
 up that time and so denies that he has been happy all his life.
 
 </p><p>If they say that, failing consciousness, he is no longer 
 the Sage,
 then they are no longer reasoning about the Sage: but we do suppose
 a Sage, and are enquiring whether, as long as he is the 
 Sage, he is in
 the state of felicity.
 
 </p><p>"Well, a Sage let him remain," they say, "still, having no
 sensation and not expressing his virtue in act, how can he be happy?"
 
 </p><p>But a man unconscious of his health may be, none the less,
 healthy: a man may not be aware of his personal attraction, but he
 remains handsome none the less: if he has no sense of his wisdom,
 shall he be any the less wise?
 
 </p><p>It may perhaps be urged that sensation and consciousness are
 essential to wisdom and that happiness is only wisdom brought to act.
 
 </p><p>Now, this argument might have weight if prudence, wisdom, were
 something fetched in from outside: but this is not so: wisdom is, in
 its essential nature, an Authentic-Existence, or rather is The
 Authentic-Existent- and this Existent does not perish in one asleep
 or, to take the particular case presented to us, in the man 
 out of his
 mind: the Act of this Existent is continuous within him; and is a
 sleepless activity: the Sage, therefore, even unconscious, is still
 the Sage in Act.
 
 </p><p>This activity is screened not from the man entire but merely
 from one part of him: we have here a parallel to what happens in the
 activity of the physical or vegetative life in us which is not made
 known by the sensitive faculty to the rest of the man: if 
 our physical
 life really constituted the "We," its Act would be our Act: but, in
 the fact, this physical life is not the "We"; the "We" is 
 the activity
 of the Intellectual-Principle so that when the Intellective is in
 Act we are in Act.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn042.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>