<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn060.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn062.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Beauty addresses itself chiefly to sight; but there 
 is a beauty
 for the hearing too, as in certain combinations of words and in all
 kinds of music, for melodies and cadences are beautiful; and minds
 that lift themselves above the realm of sense to a higher order are
 aware of beauty in the conduct of life, in actions, in character, in
 the pursuits of the intellect; and there is the beauty of 
 the virtues.
 What loftier beauty there may be, yet, our argument will bring to
 light.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is it that gives comeliness to material forms and
 draws the ear to the sweetness perceived in sounds, and what is the
 secret of the beauty there is in all that derives from Soul?
 
 </p><p>Is there some One Principle from which all take their 
 grace, or is
 there a beauty peculiar to the embodied and another for the
 bodiless? Finally, one or many, what would such a Principle be?
 
 </p><p>Consider that some things, material shapes for instance, are
 gracious not by anything inherent but by something 
 communicated, while
 others are lovely of themselves, as, for example, Virtue.
 
 </p><p>The same bodies appear sometimes beautiful, sometimes 
 not; so that
 there is a good deal between being body and being beautiful.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is this something that shows itself in certain
 material forms? This is the natural beginning of our enquiry.
 
 </p><p>What is it that attracts the eyes of those to whom a beautiful
 object is presented, and calls them, lures them, towards it, 
 and fills
 them with joy at the sight? If we possess ourselves of this, we have
 at once a standpoint for the wider survey.
 
 </p><p>Almost everyone declares that the symmetry of parts towards each
 other and towards a whole, with, besides, a certain charm of colour,
 constitutes the beauty recognized by the eye, that in visible
 things, as indeed in all else, universally, the beautiful thing is
 essentially symmetrical, patterned.
 
 </p><p>But think what this means.
 
 </p><p>Only a compound can be beautiful, never anything devoid of
 parts; and only a whole; the several parts will have beauty, not in
 themselves, but only as working together to give a comely total. Yet
 beauty in an aggregate demands beauty in details; it cannot be
 constructed out of ugliness; its law must run throughout.
 
 </p><p>All the loveliness of colour and even the light of the sun,
 being devoid of parts and so not beautiful by symmetry, must be
 ruled out of the realm of beauty. And how comes gold to be a 
 beautiful
 thing? And lightning by night, and the stars, why are these so fair?
 
 </p><p>In sounds also the simple must be proscribed, though often in a
 whole noble composition each several tone is delicious in itself.
 
 </p><p>Again since the one face, constant in symmetry, appears
 sometimes fair and sometimes not, can we doubt that beauty is
 something more than symmetry, that symmetry itself owes its beauty
 to a remoter principle?
 
 </p><p>Turn to what is attractive in methods of life or in the 
 expression
 of thought; are we to call in symmetry here? What symmetry is to be
 found in noble conduct, or excellent laws, in any form of mental
 pursuit?
 
 </p><p>What symmetry can there be in points of abstract thought?
 
 </p><p>The symmetry of being accordant with each other? But there may
 be accordance or entire identity where there is nothing but
 ugliness: the proposition that honesty is merely a generous
 artlessness chimes in the most perfect harmony with the proposition
 that morality means weakness of will; the accordance is complete.
 
 </p><p>Then again, all the virtues are a beauty of the soul, a beauty
 authentic beyond any of these others; but how does symmetry enter
 here? The soul, it is true, is not a simple unity, but still its
 virtue cannot have the symmetry of size or of number: what 
 standard of
 measurement could preside over the compromise or the coalescence of
 the soul's faculties or purposes?
 
 </p><p>Finally, how by this theory would there be beauty in the
 Intellectual-Principle, essentially the solitary?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn062.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>