<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn077.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn079.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. The bodily Kind, in that it partakes of Matter is an evil
 thing. What form is in bodies is an untrue-form: they are without
 life: by their own natural disorderly movement they make away with
 each other; they are hindrances to the soul in its proper Act; in
 their ceaseless flux they are always slipping away from Being.
 
 </p><p>Soul, on the contrary, since not every Soul is evil, is not an
 evil Kind.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is the evil Soul?
 
 </p><p>It is, we read, the Soul that has entered into the 
 service of that
 in which soul-evil is implanted by nature, in whose service the
 unreasoning phase of the Soul accepts evil- unmeasure, excess and
 shortcoming, which bring forth licentiousness, cowardice and 
 all other
 flaws of the Soul, all the states, foreign to the true nature, which
 set up false judgements, so that the Soul comes to name 
 things good or
 evil not by their true value but by the mere test of like 
 and dislike.
 
 </p><p>But what is the root of this evil state? how can it be brought
 under the causing principle indicated?
 
 </p><p>Firstly, such a Soul is not apart from Matter, is not purely
 itself. That is to say, it is touched with Unmeasure, it is shut out
 from the Forming-Idea that orders and brings to measure, and this
 because it is merged into a body made of Matter.
 
 </p><p>Then if the Reasoning-Faculty too has taken hurt, the Soul's
 seeing is baulked by the passions and by the darkening that Matter
 brings to it, by its decline into Matter, by its very attention no
 longer to Essence but to Process- whose principle or source 
 is, again,
 Matter, the Kind so evil as to saturate with its own  pravity even
 that which is not in it but merely looks towards it.
 
 </p><p>For, wholly without part in Good, the negation of Good,
 unmingled Lack, this Matter-Kind makes over to its own likeness
 whatsoever comes in touch with it.
 
 </p><p>The Soul wrought to perfection, addressed towards the
 Intellectual-Principle, is steadfastly pure: it has turned away from
 Matter; all that is undetermined, that is outside of measure, that
 is evil, it neither sees nor draws near; it endures in its purity,
 only, and wholly, determined by the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>The Soul that breaks away from this source of its reality to the
 non-perfect and non-primal is, as it were, a secondary, an image, to
 the loyal Soul. By its falling-away- and to the extent of 
 the fall- it
 is stripped of Determination, becomes wholly indeterminate, sees
 darkness. Looking to what repels vision, as we look when we are said
 to see darkness, it has taken Matter into itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn079.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>