<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn078.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn080.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. But, it will be objected, if this seeing and 
 frequenting of the
 darkness is due to the lack of good, the Soul's evil has its 
 source in
 that very lack; the darkness will be merely a secondary cause- and
 at once the Principle of Evil is removed from Matter, is 
 made anterior
 to Matter.
 
 </p><p>No: Evil is not in any and every lack; it is in absolute lack.
 What falls in some degree short of the Good is not Evil; 
 considered in
 its own kind it might even be perfect, but where there is utter
 dearth, there we have Essential Evil, void of all share in Good;
 this is the case with Matter.
 
 </p><p>Matter has not even existence whereby to have some part in Good:
 Being is attributed to it by an accident of words: the truth would
 be that it has Non-Being.
 
 </p><p>Mere lack brings merely Not-Goodness: Evil demands the absolute
 lack- though, of course, any very considerable shortcoming makes the
 ultimate fall possible and is already, in itself, an evil.
 
 </p><p>In fine we are not to think of Evil as some particular bad
 thing- injustice, for example, or any other ugly trait- but as a
 principle distinct from any of the particular forms in which, by the
 addition of certain elements, it becomes manifest. Thus there may be
 wickedness in the Soul; the forms this general wickedness is to take
 will be determined by the environing Matter, by the faculties of the
 Soul that operate and by the nature of their operation, whether
 seeing, acting, or merely admitting impression.
 
 </p><p>But supposing things external to the Soul are to be counted
 Evil- sickness, poverty and so forth- how can they be referred to
 the principle we have described?
 
 </p><p>Well, sickness is excess or defect in the body, which as a
 material organism rebels against order and measure; ugliness is but
 matter not mastered by Ideal-Form; poverty consists in our need and
 lack of goods made necessary to us by our association with Matter
 whose very nature is to be one long want.
 
 </p><p>If all this be true, we cannot be, ourselves, the source of
 Evil, we are not evil in ourselves; Evil was before we came 
 to be; the
 Evil which holds men down binds them against their will; and 
 for those
 that have the strength- not found in all men, it is true- there is a
 deliverance from the evils that have found lodgement in the soul.
 
 </p><p>In a word since Matter belongs only to the sensible 
 world, vice in
 men is not the Absolute Evil; not all men are vicious; some overcome
 vice, some, the better sort, are never attacked by it; and those who
 master it win by means of that in them which is not material.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn080.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>