<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn032.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn034.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Are we to make True Happiness one and the same thing with
 Welfare or Prosperity and therefore within the reach of the other
 living beings as well as ourselves?
 
 </p><p>There is certainly no reason to deny well-being to any of them
 as long as their lot allows them to flourish unhindered after their
 kind.
 
 </p><p>Whether we make Welfare consist in pleasant conditions 
 of life, or
 in the accomplishment of some appropriate task, by either account it
 may fall to them as to us. For certainly they may at once be
 pleasantly placed and engaged about some function that lies in their
 nature: take for an instance such living beings as have the gift of
 music; finding themselves well-off in other ways, they sing, too, as
 their nature is, and so their day is pleasant to them.
 
 </p><p>And if, even, we set Happiness in some ultimate Term pursued by
 inborn tendency, then on this head, too, we must allow it to animals
 from the moment of their attaining this Ultimate: the nature in them
 comes to a halt, having fulfilled its vital course from a 
 beginning to
 an end.
 
 </p><p>It may be a distasteful notion, this bringing-down of 
 happiness so
 low as to the animal world- making it over, as then we must, even to
 the vilest of them and not withholding it even from the 
 plants, living
 they too and having a life unfolding to a Term.
 
 </p><p>But, to begin with, it is surely unsound to deny that 
 good of life
 to animals only because they do not appear to man to be of great
 account. And as for plants, we need not necessarily allow to 
 them what
 we accord to the other forms of life, since they have no feeling. It
 is true people might be found to declare prosperity possible to the
 very plants: they have life, and life may bring good or evil; the
 plants may thrive or wither, bear or be barren.
 
 </p><p>No: if Pleasure be the Term, if here be the good of life, it is
 impossible to deny the good of life to any order of living things;
 if the Term be inner-peace, equally impossible; impossible, too, if
 the good of life be to live in accordance with the purpose of nature.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn034.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>