<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn065.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn067.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. For, as the ancient teaching was, moral-discipline and
 courage and every virtue, not even excepting Wisdom itself, all is
 purification.
 
 </p><p>Hence the Mysteries with good reason adumbrate the immersion of
 the unpurified in filth, even in the Nether-World, since the unclean
 loves filth for its very filthiness, and swine foul of body 
 find their
 joy in foulness.
 
 </p><p>What else is Sophrosyne, rightly so-called, but to take 
 no part in
 the pleasures of the body, to break away from them as unclean and
 unworthy of the clean? So too, Courage is but being fearless of the
 death which is but the parting of the Soul from the body, an event
 which no one can dread whose delight is to be his unmingled self.
 And Magnanimity is but disregard for the lure of things here. And
 Wisdom is but the Act of the Intellectual-Principle 
 withdrawn from the
 lower places and leading the Soul to the Above.
 
 </p><p>The Soul thus cleansed is all Idea and Reason, wholly free of
 body, intellective, entirely of that divine order from which the
 wellspring of Beauty rises and all the race of Beauty.
 
 </p><p>Hence the Soul heightened to the Intellectual-Principle is
 beautiful to all its power. For Intellection and all that proceeds
 from Intellection are the Soul's beauty, a graciousness native to it
 and not foreign, for only with these is it truly Soul. And it is
 just to say that in the Soul's becoming a good and beautiful thing
 is its becoming like to God, for from the Divine comes all the
 Beauty and all the Good in beings.
 
 </p><p>We may even say that Beauty is the Authentic-Existents and
 Ugliness is the Principle contrary to Existence: and the Ugly is
 also the primal evil; therefore its contrary is at once good and
 beautiful, or is Good and Beauty: and hence the one method will
 discover to us the Beauty-Good and the Ugliness-Evil.
 
 </p><p>And Beauty, this Beauty which is also The Good, must be posed as
 The First: directly deriving from this First is the
 Intellectual-Principle which is pre-eminently the manifestation of
 Beauty; through the Intellectual-Principle Soul is beautiful. The
 beauty in things of a lower order-actions and pursuits for instance-
 comes by operation of the shaping Soul which is also the 
 author of the
 beauty found in the world of sense. For the Soul, a divine thing, a
 fragment as it were of the Primal Beauty, makes beautiful to the
 fulness of their capacity all things whatsoever that it grasps and
 moulds.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn067.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>