<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn076.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn078.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. If such be the Nature of Beings and of That which transcends
 all the realm of Being, Evil cannot have place among Beings or in
 the Beyond-Being; these are good.
 
 </p><p>There remains, only, if Evil exist at all, that it be situate in
 the realm of Non-Being, that it be some mode, as it were, of the
 Non-Being, that it have its seat in something in touch with
 Non-Being or to a certain degree communicate in Non-Being.
 
 </p><p>By this Non-Being, of course, we are not to understand something
 that simply does not exist, but only something of an utterly 
 different
 order from Authentic-Being: there is no question here of movement or
 position with regard to Being; the Non-Being we are thinking of is,
 rather, an image of Being or perhaps something still further removed
 than even an image.
 
 </p><p>Now this [the required faint image of Being] might be 
 the sensible
 universe with all the impressions it engenders, or it might be
 something of even later derivation, accidental to the realm of
 sense, or again, it might be the source of the sense-world or
 something of the same order entering into it to complete it.
 
 </p><p>Some conception of it would be reached by thinking of
 measurelessness as opposed to measure, of the unbounded 
 against bound,
 the unshaped against a principle of shape, the ever-needy against
 the self-sufficing: think of the ever-undefined, the never at rest,
 the all-accepting but never sated, utter dearth; and make all this
 character not mere accident in it but its equivalent for
 essential-being, so that, whatsoever fragment of it be taken, that
 part is all lawless void, while whatever participates in it and
 resembles it becomes evil, though not of course to the point 
 of being,
 as itself is, Evil-Absolute.
 
 </p><p>In what substantial-form [hypostasis] then is all this to be
 found- not as accident but as the very substance itself?
 
 </p><p>For if Evil can enter into other things, it must have in 
 a certain
 sense a prior existence, even though it may not be an essence. As
 there is Good, the Absolute, as well as Good, the quality, so,
 together with the derived evil entering into something not itself,
 there must be the Absolute Evil.
 
 </p><p>But how? Can there be Unmeasure apart from an unmeasured object?
 
 </p><p>Does not Measure exist apart from unmeasured things? Precisely
 as there is Measure apart from anything measured, so there is
 Unmeasure apart from the unmeasured. If Unmeasure could not exist
 independently, it must exist either in an unmeasured object or in
 something measured; but the unmeasured could not need Unmeasure and
 the measured could not contain it.
 
 </p><p>There must, then, be some Undetermination-Absolute, some
 Absolute Formlessness; all the qualities cited as characterizing the
 Nature of Evil must be summed under an Absolute Evil; and every evil
 thing outside of this must either contain this Absolute by
 saturation or have taken the character of evil and become a cause of
 evil by consecration to this Absolute.
 
 </p><p>What will this be?
 
 </p><p>That Kind whose place is below all the patterns, forms, shapes,
 measurements and limits, that which has no trace of good by any
 title of its own, but [at best] takes order and grace from some
 Principle outside itself, a mere image as regards Absolute-Being but
 the Authentic Essence of Evil- in so far as Evil can have Authentic
 Being. In such a Kind, Reason recognizes the Primal Evil, Evil
 Absolute.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn078.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>