<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn083.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn085.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. But if Matter is devoid of quality how can it be evil?
 
 </p><p>It is described as being devoid of quality in the sense only
 that it does not essentially possess any of the qualities which it
 admits and which enter into it as into a substratum. No one says
 that it has no nature; and if it has any nature at all, why may not
 that nature be evil though not in the sense of quality?
 
 </p><p>Quality qualifies something not itself: it is therefore an
 accidental; it resides in some other object. Matter does not exist
 in some other object but is the substratum in which the accidental
 resides. Matter, then, is said to be devoid of Quality in 
 that it does
 not in itself possess this thing which is by nature an 
 accidental. If,
 moreover, Quality itself be devoid of Quality, how can Matter, which
 is the unqualified, be said to have it?
 
 </p><p>Thus, it is quite correct to say at once that Matter is without
 Quality and that it is evil: it is Evil not in the sense of having
 Quality but, precisely, in not having it; give it Quality and in its
 very Evil it would almost be a Form, whereas in Truth it is a Kind
 contrary to Form.
 
 </p><p>"But," it may be said, "the Kind opposed to all Form is
 Privation or Negation, and this necessarily refers to something
 other than itself, it is no Substantial-Existence: therefore if Evil
 is Privation or Negation it must be lodged in some Negation of Form:
 there will be no Self-Existent Evil."
 
 </p><p>This objection may be answered by applying the principle to the
 case of Evil in the Soul; the Evil, the Vice, will be a Negation and
 not anything having a separate existence; we come to the doctrine
 which denies Matter or, admitting it, denies its Evil; we need not
 seek elsewhere; we may at once place Evil in the Soul, recognising
 it as the mere absence of Good. But if the negation is the 
 negation of
 something that ought to become present, if it is a denial of the
 Good by the Soul, then the Soul produces vice within itself by the
 operation of its own Nature, and is devoid of good and, therefore,
 Soul though it be, devoid of life: the Soul, if it has no life, is
 soulless; the Soul is no Soul.
 
 </p><p>No; the Soul has life by its own nature and therefore 
 does not, of
 its own nature, contain this negation of The Good: it has 
 much good in
 it; it carries a happy trace of the Intellectual-Principle and is
 not essentially evil: neither is it  primally evil nor is that
 Primal Evil present in it even as an accidental, for the Soul is not
 wholly apart from the Good.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps Vice and Evil as in the Soul should be described 
 not as an
 entire, but as a partial, negation of good.
 
 </p><p>But if this were so, part of the Soul must possess The Good,
 part be without it; the Soul will have a mingled nature and the Evil
 within it will not be unblended: we have not yet lighted on the
 Primal, Unmingled Evil. The Soul would possess the Good as its
 Essence, the Evil as an Accidental.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps Evil is merely an impediment to the Soul like something
 affecting the eye and so hindering sight.
 
 </p><p>But such an evil in the eyes is no more than an occasion of
 evil, the Absolute Evil is something quite different. If then Vice
 is an impediment to the Soul, Vice is an occasion of evil but not
 Evil-Absolute. Virtue is not the Absolute Good, but a 
 co-operator with
 it; and if Virtue is not the Absolute Good neither is Vice the
 Absolute Evil. Virtue is not the Absolute Beauty or the 
 Absolute Good;
 neither, therefore, is Vice the Essential Ugliness or the Essential
 Evil.
 
 </p><p>We teach that Virtue is not the Absolute Good and Beauty,
 because we know that These are earlier than Virtue and transcend it,
 and that it is good and beautiful by some participation in them. Now
 as, going upward from virtue, we come to the Beautiful and to the
 Good, so, going downward from Vice, we reach Essential Evil: 
 from Vice
 as the starting-point we come to vision of Evil, as far as 
 such vision
 is possible, and we become evil to the extent of our participation
 in it. We are become dwellers in the Place of Unlikeness, where,
 fallen from all our resemblance to the Divine, we lie in gloom and
 mud: for if the Soul abandons itself unreservedly to the extreme of
 viciousness, it is no longer a vicious Soul merely, for mere vice is
 still human, still carries some trace of good: it has taken to
 itself another nature, the Evil, and as far as Soul can die it is
 dead. And the death of Soul is twofold: while still sunk in body to
 lie down in Matter and drench itself with it; when it has left the
 body, to lie in the other world until, somehow, it stirs again and
 lifts its sight from the mud: and this is our "going down to 
 Hades and
 slumbering there."
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn085.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>