<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn034.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn036.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Now if we draw no distinction as to kinds of life, everything
 that lives will be capable of happiness, and those will be 
 effectively
 happy who possess that one common gift of which every living thing
 is by nature receptive. We could not deny it to the irrational
 whilst allowing it to the rational. If happiness were inherent in
 the bare being-alive, the common ground in which the cause of
 happiness could always take root would be simply life.
 
 </p><p>Those, then, that set happiness not in the mere living but in
 the reasoning life seem to overlook the fact that they are not
 really making it depend upon life at all: they admit that this
 reasoning faculty, round which they centre happiness, is a property
 [not the subject of a property]: the subject, to them, must be the
 Reasoning-Life since it is in this double term that they find the
 basis of the happiness: so that they are making it consist 
 not in life
 but in a particular kind of life- not, of course, a species formally
 opposite but, in terminology, standing as an "earlier" to a 
 "later" in
 the one Kind.
 
 </p><p>Now in common use this word "Life" embraces many forms 
 which shade
 down from primal to secondary and so on, all massed under the common
 term- life of plant and life of animal- each phase brighter or
 dimmer than its next: and so it evidently must be with the
 Good-of-Life. And if thing is ever the image of thing, so every Good
 must always be the image of a higher Good.
 
 </p><p>If mere Being is insufficient, if happiness demands fulness of
 life, and exists, therefore, where nothing is lacking of all that
 belongs to the idea of life, then happiness can exist only in a
 being that lives fully.
 
 </p><p>And such a one will possess not merely the good, but the Supreme
 Good if, that is to say, in the realm of existents the Supreme Good
 can be no other than the authentically living, no other than Life in
 its greatest plenitude, life in which the good is present as 
 something
 essential not as something brought from without, a life needing no
 foreign substance called in from a foreign realm, to establish it in
 good.
 
 </p><p>For what could be added to the fullest life to make it the best
 life? If anyone should answer, "The nature of Good" [The Good, as a
 Divine Hypostasis], the reply would certainly be near our 
 thought, but
 we are not seeking the Cause but the main constituent.
 
 </p><p>It has been said more than once that the perfect life 
 and the true
 life, the essential life, is in the Intellectual Nature beyond this
 sphere, and that all other forms of life are incomplete, are
 phantoms of life, imperfect, not pure, not more truly life than they
 are its contrary: here let it be said succinctly that since 
 all living
 things proceed from the one principle but possess life in different
 degrees, this principle must be the first life and the most complete.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn036.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>