<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn019.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn021.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. We come now to that other mode of Likeness which, we read, is
 the fruit of the loftier virtues: discussing this we shall penetrate
 more deeply into the essence of the Civic Virtue and be able 
 to define
 the nature of the higher kind whose existence we shall establish
 beyond doubt.
 
 </p><p>To Plato, unmistakably, there are two distinct orders of virtue,
 and the civic does not suffice for Likeness: "Likeness to God," he
 says, "is a flight from this world's ways and things": in 
 dealing with
 the qualities of good citizenship he does not use the simple term
 Virtue but adds the distinguishing word civic: and elsewhere he
 declares all the virtues without exception to be purifications.
 
 </p><p>But in what sense can we call the virtues purifications, and how
 does purification issue in Likeness?
 
 </p><p>As the Soul is evil by being interfused with the body, and by
 coming to share the body's states and to think the body's 
 thoughts, so
 it would be good, it would be possessed of virtue, if it 
 threw off the
 body's moods and devoted itself to its own Act- the state of
 Intellection and Wisdom- never allowed the passions of the body to
 affect it- the virtue of Sophrosyne- knew no fear at the parting
 from the body- the virtue of Fortitude- and if reason and the
 Intellectual-Principle ruled- in which state is Righteousness. Such
 a disposition in the Soul, become thus intellective and immune to
 passion, it would not be wrong to call Likeness to God; for the
 Divine, too, is pure and the Divine-Act is such that 
 Likeness to it is
 Wisdom.
 
 </p><p>But would not this make virtue a state of the Divine also?
 
 </p><p>No: the Divine has no states; the state is in the Soul. 
 The Act of
 Intellection in the Soul is not the same as in the Divine: of things
 in the Supreme, Soul grasps some after a mode of its own, some not
 at all.
 
 </p><p>Then yet again, the one word Intellection covers two distinct
 Acts?
 
 </p><p>Rather there is primal Intellection and there is Intellection
 deriving from the Primal and of other scope.
 
 </p><p>As speech is the echo of the thought in the Soul, so thought in
 the Soul is an echo from elsewhere: that is to say, as the uttered
 thought is an image of the soul-thought, so the soul-thought images
 a thought above itself and is the interpreter of the higher sphere.
 
 </p><p>Virtue, in the same way, is a thing of the Soul: it does not
 belong to the Intellectual-Principle or to the Transcendence.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn021.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>