<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn080.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn082.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. But why does the existence of the Principle of Good 
 necessarily
 comport the existence of a Principle of Evil? Is it because the All
 necessarily comports the existence of Matter? Yes: for necessarily
 this All is made up of contraries: it could not exist if Matter did
 not. The Nature of this Kosmos is, therefore, a blend; it is blended
 from the Intellectual-Principle and Necessity: what comes 
 into it from
 God is good; evil is from the Ancient Kind which, we read, is the
 underlying Matter not yet brought to order by the Ideal-Form.
 
 </p><p>But, since the expression "this place" must be taken to mean the
 All, how explain the words "mortal nature"?
 
 </p><p>The answer is in the passage [in which the Father of Gods
 addresses the Divinities of the lower sphere], "Since you 
 possess only
 a derivative being, you are not immortals... but by my power 
 you shall
 escape dissolution."
 
 </p><p>The escape, we read, is not a matter of place, but of acquiring
 virtue, of disengaging the self from the body; this is the 
 escape from
 Matter. Plato explains somewhere how a man frees himself and how he
 remains bound; and the phrase "to live among the gods" means to live
 among the Intelligible-Existents, for these are the Immortals.
 
 </p><p>There is another consideration establishing the necessary
 existence of Evil.
 
 </p><p>Given that The Good is not the only existent thing, it is
 inevitable that, by the outgoing from it or, if the phrase be
 preferred, the continuous down-going or away-going from it, there
 should be produced a Last, something after which nothing more can be
 produced: this will be Evil.
 
 </p><p>As necessarily as there is Something after the First, so
 necessarily there is a Last: this Last is Matter, the thing which
 has no residue of good in it: here is the necessity of Evil.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn082.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>