<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn014.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn016.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. But if Soul is sinless, how come the expiations? Here surely
 is a contradiction; on the one side the Soul is above all guilt; on
 the other, we hear of its sin, its purification, its expiation; it
 is doomed to the lower world, it passes from body to body.
 
 </p><p>We may take either view at will: they are easily reconciled.
 
 </p><p>When we tell of the sinless Soul, we make Soul and
 Essential-Soul one and the same: it is the simple unbroken Unity.
 
 </p><p>By the Soul subject to sin we indicate a groupment, we include
 that other, that phase of the Soul which knows all the states and
 passions: the Soul in this sense is compound, all-inclusive: it
 falls under the conditions of the entire living experience: this
 compound it is that sins; it is this, and not the other, that pays
 penalty.
 
 </p><p>It is in this sense that we read of the Soul: "We saw it as
 those others saw the sea-god Glaukos." "And," reading on, "if we
 mean to discern the nature of the Soul we must strip it free of all
 that has gathered about it, must see into the philosophy of it,
 examine with what Existences it has touch and by kinship to what
 Existences it is what it is."
 
 </p><p>Thus the Life is one thing, the Act is another and the Expiator
 yet another. The retreat and sundering, then, must be not from this
 body only, but from every alien accruement. Such accruement takes
 place at birth; or rather birth is the coming-into-being of 
 that other
 [lower] phase of the Soul. For the meaning of birth has been 
 indicated
 elsewhere; it is brought about by a descent of the Soul, something
 being given off by the Soul other than that actually coming down in
 the declension.
 
 </p><p>Then the Soul has let this image fall? And this declension is it
 not certainly sin?
 
 </p><p>If the declension is no more than the illuminating of an object
 beneath, it constitutes no sin: the shadow is to be attributed not
 to the luminary but to the object illuminated; if the object were
 not there, the light could cause no shadow.
 
 </p><p>And the Soul is said to go down, to decline, only in that the
 object it illuminates lives by its life. And it lets the image fall
 only if there be nothing near to take it up; and it lets it fall,
 not as a thing cut off, but as a thing that ceases to be: the image
 has no further being when the whole Soul is looking toward the
 Supreme.
 
 </p><p>The poet, too, in the story of Hercules, seems to give this
 image separate existence; he puts the shade of Hercules in the lower
 world and Hercules himself among the gods: treating the hero as
 existing in the two realms at once, he gives us a twofold Hercules.
 
 </p><p>It is not difficult to explain this distinction. Hercules was a
 hero of practical virtue. By his noble serviceableness he was worthy
 to be a God. On the other hand, his merit was action and not the
 Contemplation which would place him unreservedly in the higher
 realm. Therefore while he has place above, something of him remains
 below.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn016.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>