<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn090.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn092.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Supposing we accept this view and hold that, while 
 things below
 the moon's orb have merely type-persistence, the celestial realm and
 all its several members possess individual eternity; it remains to
 show how this strict permanence of the individual identity- 
 the actual
 item eternally unchangeable- can belong to what is certainly
 corporeal, seeing that bodily substance is characteristically a
 thing of flux.
 
 </p><p>The theory of bodily flux is held by Plato no less than by the
 other philosophers who have dealt with physical matters, and is
 applied not only to ordinary bodies but to those, also, of the
 heavenly sphere.
 
 </p><p>"How," he asks, "can these corporeal and visible 
 entities continue
 eternally unchanged in identity?"- evidently agreeing, in this
 matter also, with Herakleitos who maintained that even the sun is
 perpetually coming anew into being. To Aristotle there would be no
 problem; it is only accepting his theories of a fifth-substance.
 
 </p><p>But to those who reject Aristotle's Quintessence and hold the
 material mass of the heavens to consist of the elements 
 underlying the
 living things of this sphere, how is individual permanence possible?
 And the difficulty is still greater for the parts, for the 
 sun and the
 heavenly bodies.
 
 </p><p>Every living thing is a combination of soul and body-kind: the
 celestial sphere, therefore, if it is to be everlasting as an
 individual entity must be so in virtue either of both these
 constituents or of one of them, by the combination of soul 
 and body or
 by soul only or by body only.
 
 </p><p>Of course anyone that holds body to be incorruptible secures the
 desired permanence at once; no need, then, to call on a soul 
 or on any
 perdurable conjunction to account for the continued maintenance of a
 living being.
 
 </p><p>But the case is different when one holds that body is, of
 itself, perishable and that Soul is the principle of permanence:
 this view obliges us to the proof that the character of body 
 is not in
 itself fatal either to the coherence or to the lasting 
 stability which
 are imperative: it must be shown that the two elements of the union
 envisaged are not inevitably hostile, but that on the 
 contrary [in the
 heavens] even Matter must conduce to the scheme of the standing
 result.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn092.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>