<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn030.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn032.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. Philosophy has other provinces, but Dialectic is its precious
 part: in its study of the laws of the universe, Philosophy draws on
 Dialectic much as other studies and crafts use Arithmetic, though,
 of course, the alliance between Philosophy and Dialectic is closer.
 
 </p><p>And in Morals, too, Philosophy uses Dialectic: by Dialectic it
 comes to contemplation, though it originates of itself the 
 moral state
 or rather the discipline from which the moral state develops.
 
 </p><p>Our reasoning faculties employ the data of Dialectic almost as
 their proper possession for they are mainly concerned about Matter
 [whose place and worth Dialectic establishes].
 
 </p><p>And while the other virtues bring the reason to bear upon
 particular experiences and acts, the virtue of Wisdom [i.e., the
 virtue peculiarly induced by Dialectic] is a certain super-reasoning
 much closer to the Universal; for it deals with correspondence and
 sequence, the choice of time for action and inaction, the adoption
 of this course, the rejection of that other: Wisdom and 
 Dialectic have
 the task of presenting all things as Universals and stripped 
 of matter
 for treatment by the Understanding.
 
 </p><p>But can these inferior kinds of virtue exist without 
 Dialectic and
 philosophy?
 
 </p><p>Yes- but imperfectly, inadequately.
 
 </p><p>And is it possible to be a Sage, Master in Dialectic, without
 these lower virtues?
 
 </p><p>It would not happen: the lower will spring either before or
 together with the higher. And it is likely that everyone normally
 possesses the natural virtues from which, when Wisdom steps in, the
 perfected virtue develops. After the natural virtues, then, Wisdom
 and, so the perfecting of the moral nature. Once the natural virtues
 exist, both orders, the natural and the higher, ripen side by side
 to their final excellence: or as the one advances it carries forward
 the other towards perfection.
 
 </p><p>But, ever, the natural virtue is imperfect in vision and in
 strength- and to both orders of virtue the essential matter is from
 what principles we derive them.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn032.htm">Next: FOURTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>