<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn047.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn049.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. Those that refuse to place the Sage aloft in the
 Intellectual Realm but drag him down to the accidental, dreading
 accident for him, have substituted for the Sage we have in mind
 another person altogether; they offer us a tolerable sort of man and
 they assign to him a life of mingled good and ill, a case, after
 all, not easy to conceive. But admitting the possibility of such a
 mixed state, it could not be deserved to be called a life of
 happiness; it misses the Great, both in the dignity of Wisdom and in
 the integrity of Good. The life of true happiness is not a thing of
 mixture. And Plato rightly taught that he who is to be wise and to
 possess happiness draws his good from the Supreme, fixing his gaze
 on That, becoming like to That, living by That.
 
 </p><p>He can care for no other Term than That: all else he will attend
 to only as he might change his residence, not in expectation of any
 increase to his settled felicity, but simply in a reasonable 
 attention
 to the differing conditions surrounding him as he lives here 
 or there.
 
 </p><p>He will give to the body all that he sees to be useful and
 possible, but he himself remains a member of another order, not
 prevented from abandoning the body, necessarily leaving it 
 at nature's
 hour, he himself always the master to decide in its regard.
 
 </p><p>Thus some part of his life considers exclusively the Soul's
 satisfaction; the rest is not immediately for the Term's sake and
 not for his own sake, but for the thing bound up with him, the thing
 which he tends and bears with as the musician cares for his lyre, as
 long as it can serve him: when the lyre fails him, he will change
 it, or will give up lyre and lyring, as having another craft now,
 one that needs no lyre, and then he will let it rest 
 unregarded at his
 side while he sings on without an instrument. But it was not 
 idly that
 the instrument was given him in the beginning: he has found it
 useful until now, many a time.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn049.htm">Next: FIFTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>