<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn198.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn200.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. And we must not despise the familiar observation 
 that there is
 something more to be considered than the present. There are the
 periods of the past and, again, those in the future; and these have
 everything to do with fixing worth of place.
 
 </p><p>Thus a man, once a ruler, will be made a slave because he abused
 his power and because the fall is to his future good. Those that
 have money will be made poor- and to the good poverty is no 
 hindrance.
 Those that have unjustly killed, are killed in turn, unjustly as
 regards the murderer but justly as regards the victim, and those
 that are to suffer are thrown into the path of those that administer
 the merited treatment.
 
 </p><p>It is not an accident that makes a man a slave; no one is a
 prisoner by chance; every bodily outrage has its due cause. The man
 once did what he now suffers. A man that murders his mother will
 become a woman and be murdered by a son; a man that wrongs a woman
 will become a woman, to be wronged.
 
 </p><p>Hence arises that awesome word "Adrasteia" [the Inevadable
 Retribution]; for in very truth this ordinance is an Adrasteia,
 justice itself and a wonderful wisdom.
 
 </p><p>We cannot but recognize from what we observe in this 
 universe that
 some such principle of order prevails throughout the entire of
 existence- the minutest of things a tributary to the vast total; the
 marvellous art shown not merely in the mightiest works and sublimest
 members of the All, but even amid such littleness as one would think
 Providence must disdain: the varied workmanship of wonder in any and
 every animal form; the world of vegetation, too; the grace of fruits
 and even of leaves, the lavishness, the delicacy, the diversity of
 exquisite bloom; and all this not issuing once, and then to die out,
 but made ever and ever anew as the Transcendent Beings move
 variously over this earth.
 
 </p><p>In all the changing, there is no change by chance: there is no
 taking of new forms but to desirable ends and in ways worthy 
 of Divine
 Powers. All that is Divine executes the Act of its quality; its
 quality is the expression of its essential Being: and this essential
 Being in the Divine is the Being whose activities produce as 
 one thing
 the desirable and the just- for if the good and the just are not
 produced there, where, then, have they their being?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn200.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>