<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn179.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn181.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. But perhaps the explanation of every particular act 
 or event is
 rather that they are determined by the spheric movement- the Phora-
 and by the changing position of the heavenly bodies as these stand
 at setting or rising or in mid-course and in various aspects 
 with each
 other.
 
 </p><p>Augury, it is urged, is able from these indications to foretell
 what is to happen not merely to the universe as a whole, but even to
 individuals, and this not merely as regards external conditions of
 fortune but even as to the events of the mind. We observe, too, how
 growth or check in other orders of beings- animals and Plants- is
 determined by their sympathetic relations with the heavenly 
 bodies and
 how widely they are influenced by them, how, for example, the
 various countries show a different produce according to their
 situation on the earth and especially their lie towards the sun. And
 the effect of place is not limited to plants and animals; it rules
 human beings too, determining their appearance, their height and
 colour, their mentality and their desires, their pursuits and their
 moral habit. Thus the universal circuit would seem to be the monarch
 of the All.
 
 </p><p>Now a first answer to this theory is that its advocates have
 merely devised another shift to immolate to the heavenly bodies all
 that is ours, our acts of will and our states, all the evil 
 in us, our
 entire personality; nothing is allowed to us; we are left to 
 be stones
 set rolling, not men, not beings whose nature implies a task.
 
 </p><p>But we must be allowed our own- with the understanding that to
 what is primarily ours, our personal holding, there is added some
 influx from the All- the distinction must be made between our
 individual act and what is thrust upon us: we are not to be
 immolated to the stars.
 
 </p><p>Place and climate, no doubt, produce constitutions warmer or
 colder; and the parents tell on the offspring, as is seen in the
 resemblance between them, very general in personal appearance and
 noted also in some of the unreflecting states of the mind.
 
 </p><p>None the less, in spite of physical resemblance and similar
 environment, we observe the greatest difference in temperament and
 in ideas: this side of the human being, then, derives from some
 quite other Principle [than any external causation or destiny]. A
 further confirmation is found in the efforts we make to correct both
 bodily constitution and mental aspirations.
 
 </p><p>If the stars are held to be causing principles on the ground of
 the possibility of foretelling individual fate or fortune from
 observation of their positions, then the birds and all the other
 things which the soothsayer observes for divination must equally be
 taken as causing what they indicate.
 
 </p><p>Some further considerations will help to clarify this matter:
 
 </p><p>The heavens are observed at the moment of a birth and the
 individual fate is thence predicted in the idea that the stars are
 no mere indications, but active causes, of the future events.
 Sometimes the Astrologers tell of noble birth; "the child is born of
 highly placed parents"; yet how is it possible to make out the stars
 to be causes of a condition which existed in the father and mother
 previously to that star pattern on which the prediction is based?
 
 </p><p>And consider still further:
 
 </p><p>They are really announcing the fortunes of parents from the
 birth of children; the character and career of children are included
 in the predictions as to the parents- they predict for the yet
 unborn!- in the lot of one brother they are foretelling the death of
 another; a girl's fate includes that of a future husband, a 
 boy's that
 of a wife.
 
 </p><p>Now, can we think that the star-grouping over any 
 particular birth
 can be the cause of what stands already announced in the facts about
 the parents? Either the previous star-groupings were the
 determinants of the child's future career or, if they were not, then
 neither is the immediate grouping. And notice further that physical
 likeness to the parents- the Astrologers hold- is of purely domestic
 origin: this implies that ugliness and beauty are so caused 
 and not by
 astral movements.
 
 </p><p>Again, there must at one and the same time be a widespread
 coming to birth- men, and the most varied forms of animal life at
 the same moment- and these should all be under the one destiny since
 the one pattern rules at the moment; how explain that identical
 star-groupings give here the human form, there the animal?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn181.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>