<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn131.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn133.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. "But, given Magnitude and the properties we know, what else
 can be necessary to the existence of body?"
 
 </p><p>Some base to be the container of all the rest.
 
 </p><p>"A certain mass then; and if mass, then Magnitude? Obviously if
 your Base has no Magnitude it offers no footing to any entrant. And
 suppose it sizeless; then, what end does it serve? It never helped
 Idea or quality; now it ceases to account for differentiation or for
 magnitude, though the last, wheresoever it resides, seems to find
 its way into embodied entities by way of Matter."
 
 </p><p>"Or, taking a larger view, observe that actions, productive
 operations, periods of time, movements, none of these have any such
 substratum and yet are real things; in the same way the most
 elementary body has no need of Matter; things may be, all, what they
 are, each after its own kind, in their great variety, deriving the
 coherence of their being from the blending of the various 
 Ideal-Forms.
 This Matter with its sizelessness seems, then, to be a name without
 a content."
 
 </p><p>Now, to begin with: extension is not an imperative condition of
 being a recipient; it is necessary only where it happens to be a
 property inherent to the recipient's peculiar mode of being. 
 The Soul,
 for example, contains all things but holds them all in an unextended
 unity; if magnitude were one of its attributes it would 
 contain things
 in extension. Matter does actually contain in spatial extension what
 it takes in; but this is because itself is a potential recipient of
 spatial extension: animals and plants, in the same way, as they
 increase in size, take quality in parallel development with
 quantity, and they lose in the one as the other lessens.
 
 </p><p>No doubt in the case of things as we know them there is a
 certain mass lying ready beforehand to the shaping power: but that
 is no reason for expecting bulk in Matter strictly so called; for in
 such cases Matter is not the absolute; it is that of some definite
 object; the Absolute Matter must take its magnitude, as every other
 property, from outside itself.
 
 </p><p>A thing then need not have magnitude in order to receive form:
 it may receive mass with everything else that comes to it at the
 moment of becoming what it is to be: a phantasm of mass is enough, a
 primary aptness for extension, a magnitude of no content- whence the
 identification that has been made of Matter with The Void.
 
 </p><p>But I prefer to use the word phantasm as hinting the
 indefiniteness into which the Soul spills itself when it seeks to
 communicate with Matter, finding no possibility of delimiting it,
 neither encompassing it nor able to penetrate to any fixed point of
 it, either of which achievements would be an act of delimitation.
 
 </p><p>In other words, we have something which is to be described not
 as small or great but as the great-and-small: for it is at 
 once a mass
 and a thing without magnitude, in the sense that it is the Matter on
 which Mass is based and that, as it changes from great to small and
 small to great, it traverses magnitude. Its very undeterminateness
 is a mass in the same sense that of being a recipient of Magnitude-
 though of course only in the visible object.
 
 </p><p>In the order of things without Mass, all that is Ideal-Principle
 possesses delimitation, each entity for itself, so that the 
 conception
 of Mass has no place in them: Matter, not delimited, having 
 in its own
 nature no stability, swept into any or every form by turns, ready to
 go here, there and everywhere, becomes a thing of 
 multiplicity: driven
 into all shapes, becoming all things, it has that much of the
 character of mass.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn133.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>