<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn106.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn108.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. When they tell us that a certain cold star is more benevolent
 to us in proportion as it is further away, they clearly make its
 harmful influence depend upon the coldness of its nature; and yet it
 ought to be beneficent to us when it is in the opposed Zodiacal
 figures.
 
 </p><p>When the cold planet, we are told, is in opposition to the cold,
 both become meanacing: but the natural effect would be a compromise.
 
 </p><p>And we are asked to believe that one of them is happy by day and
 grows kindly under the warmth, while another, of a fiery nature, is
 most cheerful by night- as if it were not always day to 
 them, light to
 them, and as if the first one could be darkened by night at 
 that great
 distance above the earth's shadow.
 
 </p><p>Then there is the notion that the moon, in conjunction with a
 certain star, is softened at her full but is malignant in the same
 conjunction when her light has waned; yet, if anything of this order
 could be admitted, the very opposite would be the case. For when she
 is full to us she must be dark on the further hemisphere, that is to
 that star which stands above her; and when dark to us she is full to
 that other star, upon which only then, on the contrary, does she
 look with her light. To the moon itself, in fact, it can make no
 difference in what aspect she stands, for she is always lit on the
 upper or on the under half: to the other star, the warmth from the
 moon, of which they speak, might make a difference; but that warmth
 would reach it precisely when the moon is without light to us; at
 its darkest to us it is full to that other, and therefore
 beneficent. The darkness of the moon to us is of moment to the
 earth, but brings no trouble to the planet above. That planet, it is
 alleged, can give no help on account of its remoteness and therefore
 seems less well disposed; but the moon at its full suffices to the
 lower realm so that the distance of the other is of no importance.
 When the moon, though dark to us, is in aspect with the 
 Fiery Star she
 is held to be favourable: the reason alleged is that the 
 force of Mars
 is all-sufficient since it contains more fire than it needs.
 
 </p><p>The truth is that while the material emanations from the living
 beings of the heavenly system are of various degrees of 
 warmth- planet
 differing from planet in this respect- no cold comes from them: the
 nature of the space in which they have their being is voucher for
 that.
 
 </p><p>The star known as Jupiter includes a due measure of fire [and
 warmth], in this resembling the Morning-star and therefore seeming
 to be in alliance with it. In aspect with what is known as the Fiery
 Star, Jupiter is beneficent by virtue of the mixing of influences:
 in aspect with Saturn unfriendly by dint of distance. Mercury, it
 would seem, is indifferent whatever stars it be in aspect 
 with; for it
 adopts any and every character.
 
 </p><p>But all the stars are serviceable to the Universe, and therefore
 can stand to each other only as the service of the Universe demands,
 in a harmony like that observed in the members of any one 
 animal form.
 They exist essentially for the purpose of the Universe, just as the
 gall exists for the purposes of the body as a whole not less than
 for its own immediate function: it is to be the inciter of the
 animal spirits but without allowing the entire organism and its own
 especial region to run riot. Some such balance of function was
 indispensable in the All- bitter with sweet. There must be
 differentiation- eyes and so forth- but all the members will be in
 sympathy with the entire animal frame to which they belong. Only so
 can there be a unity and a total harmony.
 
 </p><p>And in such a total, analogy will make every part a Sign.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn108.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>