<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn157.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn159.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Ever illuminated, receiving light unfailing, the All-Soul
 imparts it to the entire series of later Being which by this light
 is sustained and fostered and endowed with the fullest 
 measure of life
 that each can absorb. It may be compared with a central fire warming
 every receptive body within range.
 
 </p><p>Our fire, however, is a thing of limited scope: given powers
 that have no limitation and are never cut off from the Authentic
 Existences, how imagine anything existing and yet failing to receive
 from them?
 
 </p><p>It is of the essence of things that each gives of its being to
 another: without this communication, The Good would not be Good, nor
 the Intellectual-Principle an Intellective Principle, nor would Soul
 itself be what it is: the law is, "some life after the Primal Life,
 a second where there is a first; all linked in one unbroken 
 chain; all
 eternal; divergent types being engendered only in the sense of being
 secondary."
 
 </p><p>In other words, things commonly described as generated have
 never known a beginning: all has been and will be. Nor can anything
 disappear unless where a later form is possible: without 
 such a future
 there can be no dissolution.
 
 </p><p>If we are told that there is always Matter as a possible term,
 we ask why then should not Matter itself come to nothingness. If we
 are told it may, then we ask why it should ever have been generated.
 If the answer comes that it had its necessary place as the 
 ultimate of
 the series, we return that the necessity still holds.
 
 </p><p>With Matter left aside as wholly isolated, the Divine Beings are
 not everywhere but in some bounded place, walled off, so to speak;
 if that is not possible, Matter itself must receive the Divine light
 [and so cannot be annihilated].
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn159.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>