<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn104.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn106.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Possibly, however, they act not by choice but under stress of
 their several positions and collective figures?
 
 </p><p>But if position and figure determined their action each several
 one would necessarily cause identical effects with every other on
 entering any given place or pattern.
 
 </p><p>And that raises the question what effect for good or bad can be
 produced upon any one of them by its transit in the parallel of this
 or that section of the Zodiac circle- for they are not in 
 the Zodiacal
 figure itself but considerably beneath it especially since, whatever
 point they touch, they are always in the heavens.
 
 </p><p>It is absurd to think that the particular grouping under which a
 star passes can modify either its character or its earthward
 influences. And can we imagine it altered by its own 
 progression as it
 rises, stands at centre, declines? Exultant when at centre; dejected
 or enfeebled in declension; some raging as they rise and growing
 benignant as they set, while declension brings out the best in one
 among them; surely this cannot be?
 
 </p><p>We must not forget that invariably every star, considered in
 itself, is at centre with regard to some one given group and in
 decline with regard to another and vice versa; and, very 
 certainly, it
 is not at once happy and sad, angry and kindly. There is no 
 reasonable
 escape in representing some of them as glad in their setting, others
 in their rising: they would still be grieving and glad at one and
 the same time.
 
 </p><p>Further, why should any distress of theirs work harm to us?
 
 </p><p>No: we cannot think of them as grieving at all or as being
 cheerful upon occasions: they must be continuously serene, happy in
 the good they enjoy and the Vision before them. Each lives its own
 free life; each finds its Good in its own Act; and this Act is not
 directed towards us.
 
 </p><p>Like the birds of augury, the living beings of the 
 heavens, having
 no lot or part with us, may serve incidentally to foreshow 
 the future,
 but they have absolutely no main function in our regard.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn106.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>