<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn118.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn120.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. But these Reason-Principles, contained in the Soul, are they
 Thoughts?
 
 </p><p>And if so, by what process does the Soul create in 
 accordance with
 these Thoughts?
 
 </p><p>It is upon Matter that this act of the Reason is exercised; and
 what acts physically is not an intellectual operation or a 
 vision, but
 a power modifying matter, not conscious of it but merely acting upon
 it: the Reason-Principle, in other words, acts much like a force
 producing a figure or pattern upon water- that of a circle, suppose,
 where the formation of the ring is conditioned by something distinct
 from that force itself.
 
 </p><p>If this is so, the prior puissance of the Soul [that 
 which conveys
 the Reason-Principles] must act by manipulating the other Soul, that
 which is united with Matter and has the generative function.
 
 </p><p>But is this handling the result of calculation?
 
 </p><p>Calculation implies reference. Reference, then, to something
 outside or to something contained within itself? If to its own
 content, there is no need of reasoning, which could not 
 itself perform
 the act of creation; creation is the operation of that phase of the
 Soul which contains Ideal-Principles; for that is its stronger
 puissance, its creative part.
 
 </p><p>It creates, then, on the model of the Ideas; for, what it has
 received from the Intellectual-Principle it must pass on in turn.
 
 </p><p>In sum, then, the Intellectual-Principle gives from itself to
 the Soul of the All which follows immediately upon it: this again
 gives forth from itself to its next, illuminated and imprinted by
 it; and that secondary Soul at once begins to create, as under
 order, unhindered in some of its creations, striving in 
 others against
 the repugnance of Matter.
 
 </p><p>It has a creative power, derived; it is stored with
 Reason-Principles not the very originals: therefore it creates, but
 not in full accordance with the Principles from which it has been
 endowed: something enters from itself; and, plainly, this is 
 inferior.
 The issue then is something living, yes; but imperfect, hindering
 its own life, something very poor and reluctant and crude, 
 formed in a
 Matter that is the fallen sediment of the Higher Order, bitter and
 embittering. This is the Soul's contribution to the All.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn120.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>