<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn141.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn143.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. Now, in general anything that has a potentiality is actually
 something else, and this potentiality of the future mode of being is
 an existing mode.
 
 </p><p>But what we think of as Matter, what we assert to be the
 potentiality of all things, cannot be said to be actually any one
 being among beings: if it were of itself any definite being, it
 could not be potentially all.
 
 </p><p>If, then, it is not among existences, it must necessarily be
 without existence.
 
 </p><p>How, therefore, can it be actually anything?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that while Matter can not be any of the 
 things which
 are founded upon it, it may quite well be something else, admitting
 that all existences are not rooted in Matter.
 
 </p><p>But once more, if it is excluded from the entities 
 founded upon it
 and all these are Beings, it must itself be a Non-Being.
 
 </p><p>It is, further, by definition, formless and therefore 
 not an Idea:
 it cannot then be classed among things of the Intellectual Realm,
 and so is, once more, a Non-Being. Falling, as regards both worlds,
 under Non-Being, it is all the more decidedly the Non-Being.
 
 </p><p>It has eluded the Nature of the Authentic Existences; it has
 even failed to come up with the things to which a spurious existence
 can be attributed- for it is not even a phantasm of Reason as these
 are- how is it possible to include it under any mode of Being?
 
 </p><p>And if it falls under no mode of Being, what can it actually be?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn143.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>