<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn134.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn136.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. But is Absence this privation itself, or something in which
 this Privation is lodged?
 
 </p><p>Anyone maintaining that Matter and Privation are one and the
 same in substratum but stand separable in reason cannot be excused
 from assigning to each the precise principle which 
 distinguishes it in
 reason from the other: that which defines Matter must be kept quite
 apart from that defining the Privation and vice versa.
 
 </p><p>There are three possibilities: Matter is not in Privation and
 Privation is not in Matter; or each is in each; or each is in itself
 alone.
 
 </p><p>Now if they should stand quite apart, neither calling for the
 other, they are two distinct things: Matter is something other than
 Privation even though Privation always goes with it: into the
 principle of the one, the other cannot enter even potentially.
 
 </p><p>If their relation to each other is that of a snubnose to 
 snubness,
 here also there is a double concept; we have two things.
 
 </p><p>If they stand to each other as fire to heat- heat in fire, but
 fire not included in the concept of heat- if Matter is Privation in
 the way in which fire is heat, then the Privation is a form under
 which Matter appears but there remains a base distinct from the
 Privation and this base must be the Matter. Here, too, they are not
 one thing.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps the identity in substance with differentiation in reason
 will be defended on the ground that Privation does not point to
 something present but precisely to an absence, to something 
 absent, to
 the negation or lack of Real-being: the case would be like 
 that of the
 affirmation of non-existence, where there is no real predication but
 simply a denial.
 
 </p><p>Is, then, this Privation simply a non-existence?
 
 </p><p>If a non-existence in the sense that it is not a thing of
 Real-being, but belongs to some other Kind of existent, we have
 still two Principles, one referring directly to the substratum, the
 other merely exhibiting the relation of the Privation to 
 other things.
 
 </p><p>Or we might say that the one concept defines the relation of
 substratum to what is not substratum, while that of Privation, in
 bringing out the indeterminateness of Matter, applies to the 
 Matter in
 itself: but this still makes Privation and Matter two in 
 reason though
 one in substratum.
 
 </p><p>Now if Matter possesses an identity- though only the identity of
 being indeterminate, unfixed and without quality- how can we bring
 it so under two principles?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn136.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>