<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn162.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn164.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. To ask why the Soul has created the Kosmos, is to ask 
 why there
 is a Soul and why a Creator creates. The question, also, implies a
 beginning in the eternal and, further, represents creation as the
 act of a changeful Being who turns from this to that.
 
 </p><p>Those that so think must be instructed- if they would but bear
 with correction- in the nature of the Supernals, and brought 
 to desist
 from that blasphemy of majestic powers which comes so easily to
 them, where all should be reverent scruple.
 
 </p><p>Even in the administration of the Universe there is no ground
 for such attack, for it affords manifest proof of the 
 greatness of the
 Intellectual Kind.
 
 </p><p>This All that has emerged into life is no amorphous structure-
 like those lesser forms within it which are born night and day out
 of the lavishness of its vitality- the Universe is a life organized,
 effective, complex, all-comprehensive, displaying an unfathomable
 wisdom. How, then, can anyone deny that it is a clear image,
 beautifully formed, of the Intellectual Divinities? No doubt it is
 copy, not original; but that is its very nature; it cannot be at
 once symbol and reality. But to say that it is an inadequate copy is
 false; nothing has been left out which a beautiful representation
 within the physical order could include.
 
 </p><p>Such a reproduction there must necessarily be- though not by
 deliberation and contrivance- for the Intellectual could not be the
 last of things, but must have a double Act, one within itself and
 one outgoing; there must, then, be something later than the Divine;
 for only the thing with which all power ends fails to pass downwards
 something of itself. In the Supreme there flourishes a marvellous
 vigour, and therefore it produces.
 
 </p><p>Since there is no Universe nobler than this, is it not clear
 what this must be? A representation carrying down the features of
 the Intellectual Realm is necessary; there is no other Kosmos than
 this; therefore this is such a representation.
 
 </p><p>This earth of ours is full of varied life-forms and of immortal
 beings; to the very heavens it is crowded. And the stars, 
 those of the
 upper and the under spheres, moving in their ordered path,
 fellow-travellers with the universe, how can they be less than gods?
 Surely they must be morally good: what could prevent them? All that
 occasions vice here below is unknown there evil of body, 
 perturbed and
 perturbing.
 
 </p><p>Knowledge, too; in their unbroken peace, what hinders them from
 the intellectual grasp of the God-Head and the Intellectual 
 Gods? What
 can be imagined to give us a wisdom higher than belongs to the
 Supernals? Could anyone, not fallen to utter folly, bear with such
 an idea?
 
 </p><p>Admitting that human Souls have descended under constraint of
 the All-Soul, are we to think the constrained the nobler? 
 Among Souls,
 what commands must be higher than what obeys. And if the coming was
 unconstrained, why find fault with a world you have chosen and can
 quit if you dislike it?
 
 </p><p>And further, if the order of this Universe is such that we are
 able, within it, to practise wisdom and to live our earthly course
 by the Supernal, does not that prove it a dependency of the Divine?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn164.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>