<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn126.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn128.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. We are led thus to the question of receptivity in things of
 body.
 
 </p><p>An additional proof that bodies must have some substratum
 different from themselves is found in the changing of the
 basic-constituents into one another. Notice that the destruction of
 the elements passing over is not complete- if it were we would have
 a Principle of Being wrecked in Non-being- nor does an engendered
 thing pass from utter non-being into Being: what happens is 
 that a new
 form takes the place of an old. There is, then, a stable 
 element, that
 which puts off one form to receive the form of the incoming entity.
 
 </p><p>The same fact is clearly established by decay, a process
 implying a compound object; where there is decay there is a
 distinction between Matter and Form.
 
 </p><p>And the reasoning which shows the destructible to be a 
 compound is
 borne out by practical examples of reduction: a drinking vessel is
 reduced to its gold, the gold to liquid; analogy forces us to
 believe that the liquid too is reducible.
 
 </p><p>The basic-constituents of things must be either their 
 Form-Idea or
 that Primal Matter [of the Intelligible] or a compound of 
 the Form and
 Matter.
 
 </p><p>Form-Idea, pure and simple, they cannot be: for without 
 Matter how
 could things stand in their mass and magnitude?
 
 </p><p>Neither can they be that Primal Matter, for they are not
 indestructible.
 
 </p><p>They must, therefore, consist of Matter and Form-Idea- Form for
 quality and shape, Matter for the base, indeterminate as being other
 than Idea.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn128.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>