<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn193.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn195.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. Thus we come to our enquiry as to the degree of excellence
 found in things of this Sphere, and how far they belong to an
 ordered system or in what degree they are, at least, not evil.
 
 </p><p>Now in every living being the upper parts- head, face- are the
 most beautiful, the mid and lower members inferior. In the Universe
 the middle and lower members are human beings; above them, 
 the Heavens
 and the Gods that dwell there; these Gods with the entire circling
 expanse of the heavens constitute the greater part of the Kosmos:
 the earth is but a central point, and may be considered as simply
 one among the stars. Yet human wrong-doing is made a matter 
 of wonder;
 we are evidently asked to take humanity as the choice member of the
 Universe, nothing wiser existent!
 
 </p><p>But humanity, in reality, is poised midway between gods and
 beasts, and inclines now to the one order, now to the other; some
 men grow like to the divine, others to the brute, the greater number
 stand neutral. But those that are corrupted to the point of
 approximating to irrational animals and wild beasts pull the
 mid-folk about and inflict wrong upon them; the victims are no doubt
 better than the wrongdoers, but are at the mercy of their 
 inferiors in
 the field in which they themselves are inferior, where, that is,
 they cannot be classed among the good since they have not trained
 themselves in self-defence.
 
 </p><p>A gang of lads, morally neglected, and in that respect 
 inferior to
 the intermediate class, but in good physical training, attack and
 throw another set, trained neither physically nor morally, and make
 off with their food and their dainty clothes. What more is called
 for than a laugh?
 
 </p><p>And surely even the lawgiver would be right in allowing 
 the second
 group to suffer this treatment, the penalty of their sloth and
 self-indulgence: the gymnasium lies there before them, and they, in
 laziness and luxury and listlessness, have allowed themselves to
 fall like fat-loaded sheep, a prey to the wolves.
 
 </p><p>But the evil-doers also have their punishment: first they pay in
 that very wolfishness, in the disaster to their human quality: and
 next there is laid up for them the due of their Kind: living 
 ill here,
 they will not get off by death; on every precedent through all the
 line there waits its sequent, reasonable and natural- worse to the
 bad, better to the good.
 
 </p><p>This at once brings us outside the gymnasium with its fun for
 boys; they must grow up, both kinds, amid their childishness and
 both one day stand girt and armed. Then there is a finer spectacle
 than is ever seen by those that train in the ring. But at this stage
 some have not armed themselves- and the duly armed win the day.
 
 </p><p>Not even a God would have the right to deal a blow for the
 unwarlike: the law decrees that to come safe out of battle is for
 fighting men, not for those that pray. The harvest comes home not
 for praying but for tilling; healthy days are not for those that
 neglect their health: we have no right to complain of the ignoble
 getting the richer harvest if they are the only workers in 
 the fields,
 or the best.
 
 </p><p>Again: it is childish, while we carry on all the affairs of our
 life to our own taste and not as the Gods would have us, to expect
 them to keep all well for us in spite of a life that is lived
 without regard to the conditions which the Gods have prescribed for
 our well-being. Yet death would be better for us than to go on
 living lives condemned by the laws of the Universe. If 
 things took the
 contrary course, if all the modes of folly and wickedness brought no
 trouble in life- then indeed we might complain of the indifference
 of a Providence leaving the victory to evil.
 
 </p><p>Bad men rule by the feebleness of the ruled: and this is 
 just; the
 triumph of weaklings would not be just.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn195.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>