<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn171.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn173.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. Perhaps the hate of this school for the corporeal is due to
 their reading of Plato who inveighs against body as a grave
 hindrance to Soul and pronounces the corporeal to be
 characteristically the inferior.
 
 </p><p>Then let them for the moment pass over the corporeal element in
 the Universe and study all that still remains.
 
 </p><p>They will think of the Intellectual Sphere which includes within
 itself the Ideal-Form realized in the Kosmos. They will think of the
 Souls, in their ordered rank, that produce incorporeal magnitude and
 lead the Intelligible out towards spatial extension, so that finally
 the thing of process becomes, by its magnitude, as adequate a
 representation as possible of the principle void of parts 
 which is its
 model- the greatness of power there being translated here into
 greatness of bulk. Then whether they think of the Kosmic Sphere [the
 All-Soul] as already in movement under the guidance of that power of
 God which holds it through and through, beginning and middle and
 end, or whether they consider it as in rest and exercising as yet no
 outer governance: either approach will lead to a true appreciation
 of the Soul that conducts this Universe.
 
 </p><p>Now let them set body within it- not in the sense that Soul
 suffers any change but that, since "In the Gods there can be no
 grudging," it gives to its inferior all that any partial thing has
 strength to receive and at once their conception of the 
 Kosmos must be
 revised; they cannot deny that the Soul of the Kosmos has exercised
 such a weight of power as to have brought the corporeal-principle,
 in itself unlovely, to partake of good and beauty to the 
 utmost of its
 receptivity- and to a pitch which stirs Souls, beings of the divine
 order.
 
 </p><p>These people may no doubt say that they themselves feel no such
 stirring, and that they see no difference between beautiful and ugly
 forms of body; but, at that, they can make no distinction between
 the ugly and the beautiful in conduct; sciences can have no beauty;
 there can be none in thought; and none, therefore, in God. This
 world descends from the Firsts: if this world has no beauty, neither
 has its Source; springing thence, this world, too, must have its
 beautiful things. And while they proclaim their contempt for earthly
 beauty, they would do well to ignore that of youths and women so as
 not to be overcome by incontinence.
 
 </p><p>In fine, we must consider that their self-satisfaction could not
 turn upon a contempt for anything indisputably base; theirs is the
 perverse pride of despising what was once admired.
 
 </p><p>We must always keep in mind that the beauty in a partial thing
 cannot be identical with that in a whole; nor can any several
 objects be as stately as the total.
 
 </p><p>And we must recognize, that, even in the world of sense and
 part, there are things of a loveliness comparable to that of the
 Celestials- forms whose beauty must fill us with veneration for
 their creator and convince us of their origin in the divine, forms
 which show how ineffable is the beauty of the Supreme since they
 cannot hold us but we must, though in all admiration, leave these
 for those. Further, wherever there is interior beauty, we may be
 sure that inner and outer correspond; where the interior is vile,
 all is brought low by that flaw in the dominants.
 
 </p><p>Nothing base within can be beautiful without- at least 
 not with an
 authentic beauty, for there are examples of a good exterior 
 not sprung
 from a beauty dominant within; people passing as handsome but
 essentially base have that, a spurious and superficial beauty: if
 anyone tells me he has seen people really fine-looking but
 interiorly vile, I can only deny it; we have here simply a false
 notion of personal beauty; unless, indeed, the inner vileness were
 an accident in a nature essentially fine; in this Sphere there are
 many obstacles to self-realization.
 
 </p><p>In any case the All is beautiful, and there can be no obstacle
 to its inner goodness: where the nature of a thing does not comport
 perfection from the beginning, there may be a failure in complete
 expression; there may even be a fall to vileness, but the All never
 knew a childlike immaturity; it never experienced a progress
 bringing novelty into it; it never had bodily growth: there was
 nowhere from whence it could take such increment; it was always the
 All-Container.
 
 </p><p>And even for its Soul no one could imagine any such a path of
 process: or, if this were conceded, certainly it could not be
 towards evil.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn173.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>