<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn189.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn191.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. That water extinguishes fire and fire consumes other things
 should not astonish us. The thing destroyed derived its being from
 outside itself: this is no case of a self-originating substance
 being annihilated by an external; it rose on the ruin of something
 else, and thus in its own ruin it suffers nothing strange; and for
 every fire quenched, another is kindled.
 
 </p><p>In the immaterial heaven every member is unchangeably itself for
 ever; in the heavens of our universe, while the whole has life
 eternally and so too all the nobler and lordlier components, 
 the Souls
 pass from body to body entering into varied forms- and, when 
 it may, a
 Soul will rise outside of the realm of birth and dwell with the one
 Soul of all. For the embodied lives by virtue of a Form or Idea:
 individual or partial things exist by virtue of Universals; 
 from these
 priors they derive their life and maintenance, for life here is a
 thing of change; only in that prior realm is it unmoving. From that
 unchangingness, change had to emerge, and from that self-cloistered
 Life its derivative, this which breathes and stirs, the 
 respiration of
 the still life of the divine.
 
 </p><p>The conflict and destruction that reign among living beings are
 inevitable, since things here are derived, brought into existence
 because the Divine Reason which contains all of them in the upper
 Heavens- how could they come here unless they were There?- must
 outflow over the whole extent of Matter.
 
 </p><p>Similarly, the very wronging of man by man may be derived from
 an effort towards the Good; foiled, in their weakness, of their true
 desire, they turn against each other: still, when they do wrong,
 they pay the penalty- that of having hurt their Souls by their evil
 conduct and of degradation to a lower place- for nothing can ever
 escape what stands decreed in the law of the Universe.
 
 </p><p>This is not to accept the idea, sometimes urged, that order is
 an outcome of disorder and law of lawlessness, as if evil were a
 necessary preliminary to their existence or their manifestation: on
 the contrary order is the original and enters this sphere as imposed
 from without: it is because order, law and reason exist that 
 there can
 be disorder; breach of law and unreason exist because Reason exists-
 not that these better things are directly the causes of the bad but
 simply that what ought to absorb the Best is prevented by its own
 nature, or by some accident, or by foreign interference. An entity
 which must look outside itself for a law, may be foiled of 
 its purpose
 by either an internal or an external cause; there will be 
 some flaw in
 its own nature, or it will be hurt by some alien influence, for
 often harm follows, unintended, upon the action of others in the
 pursuit of quite unrelated aims. Such living beings, on the other
 hand, as have freedom of motion under their own will sometimes take
 the right turn, sometimes the wrong.
 
 </p><p>Why the wrong course is followed is scarcely worth enquiring: a
 slight deviation at the beginning develops with every advance into a
 continuously wider and graver error- especially since there is the
 attached body with its inevitable concomitant of desire- and 
 the first
 step, the hasty movement not previously considered and not 
 immediately
 corrected, ends by establishing a set habit where there was at first
 only a fall.
 
 </p><p>Punishment naturally follows: there is no injustice in a man
 suffering what belongs to the condition in which he is; nor 
 can we ask
 to be happy when our actions have not earned us happiness; the good,
 only, are happy; divine beings are happy only because they are good.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn191.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>