<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn130.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn132.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. But how can I form the conception of the sizelessness of
 Matter?
 
 </p><p>How do you form the concept of any absence of quality? 
 What is the
 Act of the Intellect, what is the mental approach, in such a case?
 
 </p><p>The secret is Indetermination.
 
 </p><p>Likeness knows its like: the indeterminate knows the
 indeterminate. Around this indefinite a definite conception will be
 realized, but the way lies through indefiniteness.
 
 </p><p>All knowledge comes by Reason and the Intellectual Act; in this
 case Reason conveys information in any account it gives, but the act
 which aims at being intellectual is, here, not intellection 
 but rather
 its failure: therefore the representation of Matter must be
 spurious, unreal, something sprung of the Alien, of the unreal, and
 bound up with the alien reason.
 
 </p><p>This is Plato's meaning where he says that Matter is apprehended
 by a sort of spurious reasoning.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is this indetermination in the Soul? Does it 
 amount to
 an utter absence of Knowledge, as if the Soul or Mind had withdrawn?
 
 </p><p>No: the indeterminate has some footing in the sphere of
 affirmation. The eye is aware of darkness as a base capable of
 receiving any colour not yet seen against it: so the Mind, putting
 aside all attributes perceptible to sense- all that corresponds to
 light- comes upon a residuum which it cannot bring under
 determination: it is thus in the state of the eye which, 
 when directed
 towards darkness, has become in some way identical with the object
 of its spurious vision.
 
 </p><p>There is vision, then, in this approach of the Mind towards
 Matter?
 
 </p><p>Some vision, yes; of shapelessness, of colourlessness, of the
 unlit, and therefore of the sizeless. More than this would mean that
 the Soul is already bestowing Form.
 
 </p><p>But is not such a void precisely what the Soul 
 experiences when it
 has no intellection whatever?
 
 </p><p>No: in that case it affirms nothing, or rather has no
 experience: but in knowing Matter, it has an experience, what may be
 described as the impact of the shapeless; for in its very
 consciousness of objects that have taken shape and size it knows
 them as compounds [i.e., as possessing with these forms a formless
 base] for they appear as things that have accepted colour and other
 quality.
 
 </p><p>It knows, therefore, a whole which includes two 
 components; it has
 a clear Knowledge or perception of the overlie [the Ideas] but only
 a dim awareness of the underlie, the shapeless which is not an
 Ideal-Principle.
 
 </p><p>With what is perceptible to it there is presented something
 else: what it can directly apprehend it sets on one side as its own;
 but the something else which Reason rejects, this, the dim, it knows
 dimly, this, the dark, it knows darkly, this it knows in a sort of
 non-knowing.
 
 </p><p>And just as even Matter itself is not stably shapeless but, in
 things, is always shaped, the Soul also is eager to throw over it
 the thing-form; for the Soul recoils from the indefinite, dreads,
 almost, to be outside of reality, does not endure to linger about
 Non-Being.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn132.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>