<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn123.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn125.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Now it may be observed, first of all, that we cannot hold
 utterly cheap either the indeterminate, or even a Kind whose 
 very idea
 implies absence of form, provided only that it offer itself to its
 Priors and [through them] to the Highest Beings. We have the
 parallel of the Soul itself in its relation to the
 Intellectual-Principle and the Divine Reason, taking shape by these
 and led so to a nobler principle of form.
 
 </p><p>Further, a compound in the Intellectual order is not to be
 confounded with a compound in the realm of Matter; the Divine
 Reasons are compounds and their Act is to produce a compound, namely
 that [lower] Nature which works towards Idea. And there is not only
 a difference of function; there is a still more notable difference
 of source. Then, too, the Matter of the realm of process ceaselessly
 changes its form: in the eternal, Matter is immutably one and the
 same, so that the two are diametrically opposites. The Matter of
 this realm is all things in turn, a new entity in every 
 separate case,
 so that nothing is permanent and one thing ceaselessly pushes
 another out of being: Matter has no identity here. In the 
 Intellectual
 it is all things at once: and therefore has nothing to 
 change into: it
 already and ever contains all. This means that not even in its own
 Sphere is the Matter there at any moment shapeless: no doubt that is
 true of the Matter here as well; but shape is held by a very 
 different
 right in the two orders of Matter.
 
 </p><p>As to whether Matter is eternal or a thing of process, this will
 be clear when we are sure of its precise nature.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn125.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>