<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn167.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn169.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. Those, then, that censure the constitution of the Kosmos do
 not understand what they are doing or where this audacity leads
 them. They do not understand that there is a successive order of
 Primals, Secondaries, Tertiaries and so on continuously to the
 Ultimates; that nothing is to be blamed for being inferior to the
 First; that we can but accept, meekly, the constitution of the
 total, and make our best way towards the Primals, 
 withdrawing from the
 tragic spectacle, as they see it, of the Kosmic spheres- which in
 reality are all suave graciousness.
 
 </p><p>And what, after all, is there so terrible in these Spheres with
 which it is sought to frighten people unaccustomed to thinking,
 never trained in an instructive and coherent gnosis?
 
 </p><p>Even the fact that their material frame is of fire does not make
 them dreadful; their Movements are in keeping with the All and with
 the Earth: but what we must consider in them is the Soul, that on
 which these people base their own title to honour.
 
 </p><p>And, yet, again, their material frames are pre-eminent 
 in vastness
 and beauty, as they cooperate in act and in influence with the
 entire order of Nature, and can never cease to exist as long as the
 Primals stand; they enter into the completion of the All of 
 which they
 are major Parts.
 
 </p><p>If men rank highly among other living Beings, much more do
 these, whose office in the All is not to play the tyrant but to
 serve towards beauty and order. The action attributed to them must
 be understood as a foretelling of coming events, while the causing
 of all the variety is due, in part to diverse destinies- for there
 cannot be one lot for the entire body of men- in part to the birth
 moment, in part to wide divergencies of place, in part to states of
 the Souls.
 
 </p><p>Once more, we have no right to ask that all men shall be good,
 or to rush into censure because such universal virtue is not 
 possible:
 this would be repeating the error of confusing our sphere with the
 Supreme and treating evil as a nearly negligible failure in 
 wisdom- as
 good lessened and dwindling continuously, a continuous fading out;
 it would be like calling the Nature-Principle evil because it is not
 Sense-Perception and the thing of sense evil for not being a
 Reason-Principle. If evil is no more than that, we will be obliged
 to admit evil in the Supreme also, for there, too, Soul is less
 exalted than the Intellectual-Principle, and That too has its
 Superior.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn169.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>