<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn125.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn127.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. It may be objected that the Intellectual-Principle possesses
 its content in an eternal conjunction so that the two make a perfect
 unity, and that thus there is no Matter there.
 
 </p><p>But that argument would equally cancel the Matter present in the
 bodily forms of this realm: body without shape has never existed,
 always body achieved and yet always the two constituents. We
 discover these two- Matter and Idea- by sheer force of our reasoning
 which distinguishes continually in pursuit of the simplex, the
 irreducible, working on, until it can go no further, towards the
 ultimate in the subject of enquiry. And the ultimate of every
 partial-thing is its Matter, which, therefore, must be all darkness
 since light is a Reason-Principle. The Mind, too, as also a
 Reason-Principle, sees only in each particular object the
 Reason-Principle lodging there; anything lying below that it
 declares to lie below the light, to be therefore a thing of
 darkness, just as the eye, a thing of light, seeks light and colours
 which are modes of light, and dismisses all that is below the
 colours and hidden by them, as belonging to the order of the 
 darkness,
 which is the order of Matter.
 
 </p><p>The dark element in the Intelligible, however, differs from that
 in the sense-world: so therefore does the Matter- as much as the
 forming-Idea presiding in each of the two realms. The Divine Matter,
 though it is the object of determination has, of its own nature, a
 life defined and intellectual; the Matter of this sphere 
 while it does
 accept determination is not living or intellective, but a dead thing
 decorated: any shape it takes is an image, exactly as the Base is an
 image. There on the contrary the shape is a real-existent as is the
 Base. Those that ascribe Real Being to Matter must be admitted to be
 right as long as they keep to the Matter of the Intelligible Realm:
 for the Base there is Being, or even, taken as an entirety with the
 higher that accompanies it, is illuminated Being.
 
 </p><p>But does this Base, of the Intellectual Realm, possess eternal
 existence?
 
 </p><p>The solution of that question is the same as for the Ideas.
 
 </p><p>Both are engendered, in the sense that they have had a
 beginning, but unengendered in that this beginning is not in Time:
 they have a derived being but by an eternal derivation: they are
 not, like the Kosmos, always in process but, in the character of the
 Supernal, have their Being permanently. For that differentiation
 within the Intelligible which produces Matter has always existed and
 it is this cleavage which produces the Matter there: it is the first
 movement; and movement and differentiation are convertible 
 terms since
 the two things arose as one: this motion, this cleavage, 
 away from the
 first is indetermination [= Matter], needing The First to its
 determination which it achieves by its Return, remaining, until
 then, an Alienism, still lacking good; unlit by the Supernal. It is
 from the Divine that all light comes, and, until this be absorbed,
 no light in any recipient of light can be authentic; any light from
 elsewhere is of another order than the true.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn127.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>