<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn136.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn138.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. Then Matter is simply Alienism [the Principle of Difference]?
 
 </p><p>No: it is merely that part of Alienism which stands in
 contradiction with the Authentic Existents which are
 Reason-Principles. So understood, this non-existent has a certain
 measure of existence; for it is identical with Privation, which also
 is a thing standing in opposition to the things that exist in Reason.
 
 </p><p>But must not Privation cease to have existence, when 
 what has been
 lacking is present at last?
 
 </p><p>By no means: the recipient of a state or character is not a
 state but the Privation of the state; and that into which
 determination enters is neither a determined object nor
 determination itself, but simply the wholly or partly undetermined.
 
 </p><p>Still, must not the nature of this Undetermined be 
 annulled by the
 entry of Determination, especially where this is no mere attribute?
 
 </p><p>No doubt to introduce quantitative determination into an
 undetermined object would annul the original state; but in the
 particular case, the introduction of determination only confirms the
 original state, bringing it into actuality, into full effect, as
 sowing brings out the natural quality of land or as a female
 organism impregnated by the male is not defeminized but becomes more
 decidedly of its sex; the thing becomes more emphatically itself.
 
 </p><p>But on this reasoning must not Matter owe its evil to having in
 some degree participated in good?
 
 </p><p>No: its evil is in its first lack: it was not a 
 possessor (of some
 specific character).
 
 </p><p>To lack one thing and to possess another, in something like
 equal proportions, is to hold a middle state of good and evil: but
 whatsoever possesses nothing and so is in destitution- and
 especially what is essentially destitution- must be evil in its own
 Kind.
 
 </p><p>For in Matter we have no mere absence of means or of strength;
 it is utter destitution- of sense, of virtue, of beauty, of pattern,
 of Ideal principle, of quality. This is surely ugliness, utter
 disgracefulness, unredeemed evil.
 
 </p><p>The Matter in the Intellectual Realm is an Existent, for there
 is nothing previous to it except the Beyond-Existence; but what
 precedes the Matter of this sphere is Existence; by its alienism in
 regard to the beauty and good of Existence, Matter is therefore a
 non-existent.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn138.htm">Next: FIFTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>