<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn139.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn141.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Then the question rises whether Matter- potentially what it
 becomes by receiving shape- is actually something else or whether it
 has no actuality at all. In general terms: When a potentiality has
 taken a definite form, does it retain its being? Is the
 potentiality, itself, in actualization? The alternative is that,
 when we speak of the "Actual Statue" and of the "Potential Statue,"
 the Actuality is not predicated of the same subject as the
 "Potentiality." If we have really two different subjects, then the
 potential does not really become the actual: all that happens is
 that an actual entity takes the place of a potential.
 
 </p><p>The actualized entity is not the Matter [the 
 Potentiality, merely]
 but a combination, including the Form-Idea upon the Matter.
 
 </p><p>This is certainly the case when a quite different thing results
 from the actualization-statue, for example, the combination, is
 distinctly different from the bronze, the base; where the 
 resultant is
 something quite new, the Potentiality has clearly not, itself,
 become what is now actualized. But take the case where a 
 person with a
 capacity for education becomes in fact educated: is not
 potentiality, here, identical with actualization? Is not the
 potentially wise Socrates the same man as the Socrates actually wise?
 
 </p><p>But is an ignorant man a being of knowledge because he is so
 potentially? Is he, in virtue of his non-essential ignorance,
 potentially an instructed being?
 
 </p><p>It is not because of his accidental ignorance that he is a being
 of Knowledge: it is because, ignorant though he be by accident, his
 mind, apt to knowledge, is the potentiality through which he may
 become so. Thus, in the case of the potentially instructed who have
 become so in fact, the potentiality is taken up into the actual; or,
 if we prefer to put it so, there is on the one side the potentiality
 while, on the other, there is the power in actual possession of the
 form.
 
 </p><p>If, then, the Potentiality is the Substratum while the thing in
 actualization- the Statue for example a combination, how are we to
 describe the form that has entered the bronze?
 
 </p><p>There will be nothing unsound in describing this shape, this
 Form which has brought the entity from potentiality to actuality, as
 the actualization; but of course as the actualization of the
 definite particular entity, not as Actuality the abstract: 
 we must not
 confuse it with the other actualization, strictly so called, that
 which is contrasted with the power producing actualization. The
 potential is led out into realization by something other than
 itself; power accomplishes, of itself, what is within its scope, but
 by virtue of Actuality [the abstract]: the relation is that existing
 between a temperament and its expression in act, between courage and
 courageous conduct. So far so good:
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn141.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>