<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn142.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn144.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. How can we talk of it? How can it be the Matter of 
 real things?
 
 </p><p>It is talked of, and it serves, precisely, as a Potentiality.
 
 </p><p>And, as being a Potentiality, it is not of the order of the
 thing it is to become: its existence is no more than an announcement
 of a future, as it were a thrust forward to what is to come into
 existence.
 
 </p><p>As Potentiality then, it is not any definite thing but the
 potentiality of everything: being nothing in itself- beyond 
 what being
 Matter amounts to- it is not in actualization. For if it 
 were actually
 something, that actualized something would not be Matter, or at
 least not Matter out and out, but merely Matter in the limited sense
 in which bronze is the matter of the statue.
 
 </p><p>And its Non-Being must be no mere difference from Being.
 
 </p><p>Motion, for example, is different from Being, but plays about
 it, springing from it and living within it: Matter is, so to speak,
 the outcast of Being, it is utterly removed, irredeemably what it
 was from the beginning: in origin it was Non-Being and so it remains.
 
 </p><p>Nor are we to imagine that, standing away at the very beginning
 from the universal circle of Beings, it was thus necessarily 
 an active
 Something or that it became a Something. It has never been able to
 annex for itself even a visible outline from all the forms 
 under which
 it has sought to creep: it has always pursued something other than
 itself; it was never more than a Potentiality towards its next:
 where all the circle of Being ends, there only is it manifest;
 discerned underneath things produced after it, it is remoter [from
 Real-Being] even than they.
 
 </p><p>Grasped, then, as an underlie in each order of Being, it 
 can be no
 actualization of either: all that is allowed to it is to be a
 Potentiality, a weak and blurred phantasm, a thing incapable of a
 Shape of its own.
 
 </p><p>Its actuality is that of being a phantasm, the actuality of
 being a falsity; and the false in actualization is the veritably
 false, which again is Authentic Non-Existence.
 
 </p><p>So that Matter, as the Actualization of Non-Being, is 
 all the more
 decidedly Non-Being, is Authentic Non-Existence.
 
 </p><p>Thus, since the very reality of its Nature is situated in
 Non-Being, it is in no degree the Actualization of any 
 definite Being.
 
 </p><p>If it is to be present at all, it cannot be an Actualization,
 for then it would not be the stray from Authentic Being which it is,
 the thing having its Being in Non-Beingness: for, note, in 
 the case of
 things whose Being is a falsity, to take away the falsity is to take
 away what Being they have, and if we introduce actualization into
 things whose Being and Essence is Potentiality, we destroy the
 foundation of their nature since their Being is Potentiality.
 
 </p><p>If Matter is to be kept as the unchanging substratum, we 
 must keep
 it as Matter: that means- does it not?- that we must define it as a
 Potentiality and nothing more- or refute these considerations.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn144.htm">Next: SIXTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>