<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn249.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn251.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 19</h4>
 
 <p>19. The Ideal Principles entering into Matter as to a Mother [to
 be "born into the Universe"] affect it neither for better nor for
 worse.
 
 </p><p>Their action is not upon Matter but upon each other; these
 powers conflict with their opponent principles, not with their
 substrata- which it would be foolish to confuse with the entrant
 forms- Heat [the Principle] annuls Cold, and Blackness annuls
 Whiteness; or, the opponents blend to form an intermediate quality.
 Only that is affected which enters into combinations: being affected
 is losing something of self-identity.
 
 </p><p>In beings of soul and body, the affection occurs in the body,
 modified according to the qualities and powers presiding at 
 the act of
 change: in all such dissolution of constituent parts, in the new
 combinations, in all variation from the original structure, the
 affection is bodily, the Soul or Mind having no more than an
 accompanying knowledge of the more drastic changes, or perhaps not
 even that. [Body is modified: Mind knows] but the Matter concerned
 remains unaffected; heat enters, cold leaves it, and it is unchanged
 because neither Principle is associated with it as friend or enemy.
 
 </p><p>So the appellation "Recipient and Nurse" is the better
 description: Matter is the mother only in the sense indicated; it
 has no begetting power. But probably the term Mother is used by
 those who think of a Mother as Matter to the offspring, as a 
 container
 only, giving nothing to them, the entire bodily frame of the child
 being formed out of food. But if this Mother does give 
 anything to the
 offspring it does so not in its quality as Matter but as being an
 Ideal-Form; for only the Idea is generative; the contrary Kind is
 sterile.
 
 </p><p>This, I think, is why the doctors of old, teaching 
 through symbols
 and mystic representations, exhibit the ancient Hermes with the
 generative organ always in active posture; this is to convey that
 the generator of things of sense is the Intellectual Reason 
 Principle:
 the sterility of Matter, eternally unmoved, is indicated by the
 eunuchs surrounding it in its representation as the All-Mother.
 
 </p><p>This too exalting title is conferred upon it in order to
 indicate that it is the source of things in the sense of being their
 underlie: it is an approximate name chosen for a general conception;
 there is no intention of suggesting a complete parallel with
 motherhood to those not satisfied with a surface impression but
 needing a precisely true presentment; by a remote symbolism, the
 nearest they could find, they indicate that Matter is sterile, not
 female to full effect, female in receptivity only, not in pregnancy:
 this they accomplish by exhibiting Matter as approached by what is
 neither female nor effectively male, but castrated of that
 impregnating power which belongs only to the unchangeably masculine.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn251.htm">Next: SEVENTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>