<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn244.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn246.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. But would this mean that if there were no Matter 
 nothing would
 exist?
 
 </p><p>Precisely as in the absence of a mirror, or something of similar
 power, there would be no reflection.
 
 </p><p>A thing whose very nature is to be lodged in something 
 else cannot
 exist where the base is lacking- and it is the character of a
 reflection to appear in something not itself.
 
 </p><p>Of course supposing anything to desert from the Authentic
 Beings, this would not need an alien base: but these Beings are not
 subject to flux, and therefore any outside manifestation of them
 implies something other than themselves, something offering a base
 to what never enters, something which by its presence, in its
 insistence, by its cry for help, in its beggardom, strives as it
 were by violence to acquire and is always disappointed, so that its
 poverty is enduring, its cry unceasing.
 
 </p><p>This alien base exists and the myth represents it as a pauper to
 exhibit its nature, to show that Matter is destitute of The Good.
 The claimant does not ask for all the Giver's store, but it welcomes
 whatever it can get; in other words, what appears in Matter is not
 Reality.
 
 </p><p>The name, too [Poverty], conveys that Matter's need is never
 met. The union with Poros, Possession, is designed to show 
 that Matter
 does not attain to Reality, to Plenitude, but to some bare
 sufficiency- in point of fact to imaging skill.
 
 </p><p>It is, of course, impossible that an outside thing belonging in
 any degree to Real-Being- whose Nature is to engender Real-Beings-
 should utterly fail of participation in Reality: but here we have
 something perplexing; we are dealing with utter Non-Being,
 absolutely without part in Reality; what is this participation by
 the non-participant, and how does mere neighbouring confer 
 anything on
 that which by its own nature is precluded from any association?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that all that impinges upon this Non-Being is
 flung back as from a repelling substance; we may think of an Echo
 returned from a repercussive plane surface; it is precisely 
 because of
 the lack of retention that the phenomenon is supposed to belong to
 that particular place and even to arise there.
 
 </p><p>If Matter were participant and received Reality to the extent
 which we are apt to imagine, it would be penetrated by a Reality
 thus sucked into its constitution. But we know that the 
 Entrant is not
 thus absorbed: Matter remains as it was, taking nothing to itself:
 it is the check to the forthwelling of Authentic Existence; it is a
 ground that repels; it is a mere receptacle to the Realities as they
 take their common path and here meet and mingle. It resembles those
 reflecting vessels, filled with water, which are often set 
 against the
 sun to produce fire: the heat rays- prevented, by their contrary
 within, from being absorbed- are flung out as one mass.
 
 </p><p>It is in this sense and way that Matter becomes the cause of the
 generated realm; the combinations within it hold together only after
 some such reflective mode.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn246.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>