<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn220.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn222.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. What is Love? A God, a Celestial Spirit, a state of 
 mind? Or is
 it, perhaps, sometimes to be thought of as a God or Spirit and
 sometimes merely as an experience? And what is it essentially in
 each of these respects?
 
 </p><p>These important questions make it desirable to review prevailing
 opinions on the matter, the philosophical treatment it has received
 and, especially, the theories of the great Plato who has 
 many passages
 dealing with Love, from a point of view entirely his own.
 
 </p><p>Plato does not treat of it as simply a state observed in 
 Souls; he
 also makes it a Spirit-being so that we read of the birth of Eros,
 under definite circumstances and by a certain parentage.
 
 </p><p>Now everyone recognizes that the emotional state for 
 which we make
 this "Love" responsible rises in souls aspiring to be knit in the
 closest union with some beautiful object, and that this aspiration
 takes two forms, that of the good whose devotion is for 
 beauty itself,
 and that other which seeks its consummation in some vile 
 act. But this
 generally admitted distinction opens a new question: we need a
 philosophical investigation into the origin of the two phases.
 
 </p><p>It is sound, I think, to find the primal source of Love in a
 tendency of the Soul towards pure beauty, in a recognition, in a
 kinship, in an unreasoned consciousness of friendly 
 relation. The vile
 and ugly is in clash, at once, with Nature and with God: Nature
 produces by looking to the Good, for it looks towards Order- 
 which has
 its being in the consistent total of the good, while the unordered
 is ugly, a member of the system of evil- and besides Nature itself,
 clearly, springs from the divine realm, from Good and 
 Beauty; and when
 anything brings delight and the sense of kinship, its very image
 attracts.
 
 </p><p>Reject this explanation, and no one can tell how the mental
 state rises and where are its causes: it is the explanation of even
 copulative love which is the will to beget in beauty; Nature seeks
 to produce the beautiful and therefore by all reason cannot desire
 to procreate in the ugly.
 
 </p><p>Those that desire earthly procreation are satisfied with the
 beauty found on earth, the beauty of image and of body; it is
 because they are strangers to the Archetype, the source of even the
 attraction they feel towards what is lovely here. There are Souls to
 whom earthly beauty is a leading to the memory of that in the higher
 realm and these love the earthly as an image; those that have not
 attained to this memory do not understand what is happening within
 them, and take the image for the reality. Once there is perfect
 self-control, it is no fault to enjoy the beauty of earth; where
 appreciation degenerates into carnality, there is sin.
 
 </p><p>Pure Love seeks the beauty alone, whether there is 
 Reminiscence or
 not; but there are those that feel, also, a desire of such 
 immortality
 as lies within mortal reach; and these are seeking Beauty in their
 demand for perpetuity, the desire of the eternal; Nature teaches
 them to sow the seed and to beget in beauty, to sow towards
 eternity, but in beauty through their own kinship with the
 beautiful. And indeed the eternal is of the one stock with the
 beautiful, the Eternal-Nature is the first shaping of beauty 
 and makes
 beautiful all that rises from it.
 
 </p><p>The less the desire for procreation, the greater is the
 contentment with beauty alone, yet procreation aims at the 
 engendering
 of beauty; it is the expression of a lack; the subject is 
 conscious of
 insufficiency and, wishing to produce beauty, feels that the 
 way is to
 beget in a beautiful form. Where the procreative desire is lawless
 or against the purposes of nature, the first inspiration has been
 natural, but they have diverged from the way, they have slipped and
 fallen, and they grovel; they neither understand whither Love sought
 to lead them nor have they any instinct to production; they have not
 mastered the right use of the images of beauty; they do not know
 what the Authentic Beauty is.
 
 </p><p>Those that love beauty of person without carnal desire love for
 beauty's sake; those that have- for women, of course- the copulative
 love, have the further purpose of self-perpetuation: as long as they
 are led by these motives, both are on the right path, though 
 the first
 have taken the nobler way. But, even in the right, there is the
 difference that the one set, worshipping the beauty of earth, look
 no further, while the others, those of recollection, 
 venerate also the
 beauty of the other world while they, still, have no 
 contempt for this
 in which they recognize, as it were, a last outgrowth, an
 attenuation of the higher. These, in sum, are innocent frequenters
 of beauty, not to be confused with the class to whom it becomes an
 occasion of fall into the ugly- for the aspiration towards a good
 degenerates into an evil often.
 
 </p><p>So much for love, the state.
 
 </p><p>Now we have to consider Love, the God.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn222.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>