<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn227.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn229.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. But what are we to understand by this Zeus with the 
 garden into
 which, we are told, Poros or Wealth entered? And what is the garden?
 
 </p><p>We have seen that the Aphrodite of the Myth is the Soul and that
 Poros, Wealth, is the Reason-Principle of the Universe: we have
 still to explain Zeus and his garden.
 
 </p><p>We cannot take Zeus to be the Soul, which we have agreed is
 represented by Aphrodite.
 
 </p><p>Plato, who must be our guide in this question, speaks in the
 Phaedrus of this God, Zeus, as the Great Leader- though elsewhere he
 seems to rank him as one of three- but in the Philebus he speaks
 more plainly when he says that there is in Zeus not only a 
 royal Soul,
 but also a royal Intellect.
 
 </p><p>As a mighty Intellect and Soul, he must be a principle of Cause;
 he must be the highest for several reasons but especially because to
 be King and Leader is to be the chief cause: Zeus then is the
 Intellectual Principle. Aphrodite, his daughter, issue of him,
 dwelling with him, will be Soul, her very name Aphrodite [= 
 the habra,
 delicate] indicating the beauty and gleam and innocence and delicate
 grace of the Soul.
 
 </p><p>And if we take the male gods to represent the Intellectual
 Powers and the female gods to be their souls- to every Intellectual
 Principle its companion Soul- we are forced, thus also, to make
 Aphrodite the Soul of Zeus; and the identification is confirmed by
 Priests and Theologians who consider Aphrodite and Hera one and the
 same and call Aphrodite's star the star of Hera.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn229.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>