<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn246.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn248.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. An Ideal-Principle approaches and leads Matter towards some
 desired dimension, investing this non-existent underlie with a
 magnitude from itself which never becomes incorporate- for Matter,
 if it really incorporated magnitude, would be a mass.
 
 </p><p>Eliminate this Ideal-Form and the substratum ceases to be a
 thing of magnitude, or to appear so: the mass produced by the Idea
 was, let us suppose, a man or a horse; the horse-magnitude came upon
 the Matter when a horse was produced upon it; when the horse 
 ceases to
 exist upon the Matter, the magnitude of the horse departs also. If
 we are told that the horse implies a certain determined bulk and
 that this bulk is a permanent thing, we answer that what is
 permanent in this case is not the magnitude of the horse but the
 magnitude of mass in general. That same Magnitude might be fire or
 earth; on their disappearance their particular magnitudes would
 disappear with them. Matter, then, can never take to itself either
 pattern or magnitude; if it did, it would no longer be able to turn
 from being fire, let us say, into being something else; it would
 become and be fire once for all.
 
 </p><p>In a word, though Matter is far extended- so vastly as to appear
 co-extensive with all this sense-known Universe- yet if the Heavens
 and their content came to an end, all magnitude would simultaneously
 pass from Matter with, beyond a doubt, all its other properties; it
 would be abandoned to its own Kind, retaining nothing of all that
 which, in its own peculiar mode, it had hitherto exhibited.
 
 </p><p>Where an entrant force can effect modification it will
 inevitably leave some trace upon its withdrawal; but where there can
 be no modification, nothing can be retained; light comes and 
 goes, and
 the air is as it always was.
 
 </p><p>That a thing essentially devoid of magnitude should come to a
 certain size is no more astonishing than that a thing essentially
 devoid of heat should become warm: Matter's essential existence is
 quite separate from its existing in bulk, since, of course,
 magnitude is an immaterial principle as pattern is. Besides, 
 if we are
 not to reduce Matter to nothing, it must be all things by way of
 participation, and Magnitude is one of those all things.
 
 </p><p>In bodies, necessarily compounds, Magnitude though not a
 determined Magnitude must be present as one of the 
 constituents; it is
 implied in the very notion of body; but Matter- not a Body- excludes
 even undetermined Magnitude.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn248.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>