<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn274.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn276.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. And what will such a Principle essentially be?
 
 </p><p>The potentiality of the Universe: the potentiality whose
 non-existence would mean the non-existence of all the Universe and
 even of the Intellectual-Principle which is the primal Life and all
 Life.
 
 </p><p>This Principle on the thither side of Life is the cause of Life-
 for that Manifestation of Life which is the Universe of things is
 not the First Activity; it is itself poured forth, so to speak, like
 water from a spring.
 
 </p><p>Imagine a spring that has no source outside itself; it gives
 itself to all the rivers, yet is never exhausted by what they take,
 but remains always integrally as it was; the tides that proceed from
 it are at one within it before they run their several ways, yet all,
 in some sense, know beforehand down what channels they will 
 pour their
 streams.
 
 </p><p>Or: think of the Life coursing throughout some mighty tree while
 yet it is the stationary Principle of the whole, in no sense 
 scattered
 over all that extent but, as it were, vested in the root: it is the
 giver of the entire and manifold life of the tree, but 
 remains unmoved
 itself, not manifold but the Principle of that manifold life.
 
 </p><p>And this surprises no one: though it is in fact astonishing how
 all that varied vitality springs from the unvarying, and how 
 that very
 manifoldness could not be unless before the multiplicity there were
 something all singleness; for, the Principle is not broken into
 parts to make the total; on the contrary, such partition 
 would destroy
 both; nothing would come into being if its cause, thus broken up,
 changed character.
 
 </p><p>Thus we are always brought back to The One.
 
 </p><p>Every particular thing has a One of its own to which it may be
 traced; the All has its One, its Prior but not yet the Absolute One;
 through this we reach that Absolute One, where all such reference
 comes to an end.
 
 </p><p>Now when we reach a One- the stationary Principle- in 
 the tree, in
 the animal, in Soul, in the All- we have in every case the most
 powerful, the precious element: when we come to the One in the
 Authentically Existent Beings- their Principle and source and
 potentiality- shall we lose confidence and suspect it of
 being-nothing?
 
 </p><p>Certainly this Absolute is none of the things of which it is the
 source- its nature is that nothing can be affirmed of it- not
 existence, not essence, not life- since it is That which transcends
 all these. But possess yourself of it by the very 
 elimination of Being
 and you hold a marvel. Thrusting forward to This, attaining, and
 resting in its content, seek to grasp it more and more-
 understanding it by that intuitive thrust alone, but knowing its
 greatness by the Beings that follow upon it and exist by its power.
 
 </p><p>Another approach:
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle is a Seeing, and a Seeing which
 itself sees; therefore it is a potentiality which has become
 effective.
 
 </p><p>This implies the distinction of Matter and Form in it- as there
 must be in all actual seeing- the Matter in this case being the
 Intelligibles which the Intellectual-Principle contains and sees.
 All actual seeing implies duality; before the seeing takes 
 place there
 is the pure unity [of the power of seeing]. That unity [of
 principle] acquires duality [in the act of seeing], and the 
 duality is
 [always to be traced back to] a unity.
 
 </p><p>Now as our sight requires the world of sense for its
 satisfaction and realization, so the vision in the
 Intellectual-Principle demands, for its completion, The Good.
 
 </p><p>It cannot be, itself, The Good, since then it would not need to
 see or to perform any other Act; for The Good is the centre of all
 else, and it is by means of The Good that every thing has Act, while
 the Good is in need of nothing and therefore possesses nothing
 beyond itself.
 
 </p><p>Once you have uttered "The Good," add no further thought: by any
 addition, and in proportion to that addition, you introduce a
 deficiency.
 
 </p><p>Do not even say that it has Intellection; you would be dividing
 it; it would become a duality, Intellect and the Good. The 
 Good has no
 need of the Intellectual-Principle which, on the contrary, needs it,
 and, attaining it, is shaped into Goodness and becomes perfect by
 it: the Form thus received, sprung from the Good, brings it to
 likeness with the Good.
 
 </p><p>Thus the traces of the Good discerned upon it must be taken as
 indication of the nature of that Archetype: we form a conception of
 its Authentic Being from its image playing upon the
 Intellectual-Principle. This image of itself, it has communicated to
 the Intellect that contemplates it: thus all the striving is on the
 side of the Intellect, which is the eternal striver and eternally
 the attainer. The Being beyond neither strives, since it feels no
 lack, nor attains, since it has no striving. And this marks it off
 from the Intellectual-Principle, to which characteristically belongs
 the striving, the concentrated strain towards its Form.
 
 </p><p>Yet: The Intellectual-Principle; beautiful; the most beautiful
 of all; lying lapped in pure light and in clear radiance;
 circumscribing the Nature of the Authentic Existents; the original
 of which this beautiful world is a shadow and an image; tranquil in
 the fullness of glory since in it there is nothing devoid of
 intellect, nothing dark or out of rule; a living thing in a life of
 blessedness: this, too, must overwhelm with awe any that has seen
 it, and penetrated it, to become a unit of its Being.
 
 </p><p>But: As one that looks up to the heavens and sees the 
 splendour of
 the stars thinks of the Maker and searches, so whoever has
 contemplated the Intellectual Universe and known it and wondered for
 it must search after its Maker too. What Being has raised so noble a
 fabric? And where? And how? Who has begotten such a child, this
 Intellectual-Principle, this lovely abundance so abundantly endowed?
 
 </p><p>The Source of all this cannot be an Intellect; nor can it be an
 abundant power: it must have been before Intellect and 
 abundance were;
 these are later and things of lack; abundance had to be made
 abundant and Intellection needed to know.
 
 </p><p>These are very near to the un-needing, to that which has no
 need of Knowing, they have abundance and intellection authentically,
 as being the first to possess. But, there is that before them which
 neither needs nor possesses anything, since, needing or possessing
 anything else, it would not be what it is- the Good.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn276.htm">Next: NINTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>