<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn238.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn240.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. It is a general principle that, to be modified, an object
 must be opposed in faculty, and in quality to the forces that enter
 and act upon it.
 
 </p><p>Thus where heat is present, the change comes by something that
 chills, where damp by some drying agency: we say a subject 
 is modified
 when from warm it becomes cold, from dry wet.
 
 </p><p>A further evidence is in our speaking of a fire being burned
 out, when it has passed over into another element; we do not say
 that the Matter has been burned out: in other words, modification
 affects what is subject to dissolution; the acceptance of 
 modification
 is the path towards dissolution; susceptibility to modification and
 susceptibility to dissolution go necessarily together. But Matter
 can never be dissolved. What into? By what process?
 
 </p><p>Still: Matter harbours heat, cold, qualities beyond all count;
 by these it is differentiated; it holds them as if they were of its
 very substance and they blend within it- since no quality is found
 isolated to itself- Matter lies there as the meeting ground of all
 these qualities with their changes as they act and react in 
 the blend:
 how, then, can it fail to be modified in keeping? The only escape
 would be to declare Matter utterly and for ever apart from the
 qualities it exhibits; but the very notion of Substance implies that
 any and every thing present in it has some action upon it.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn240.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>