<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn253.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn255.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. What, then, can this be, this something in virtue of which we
 declare the entire divine Realm to be Eternal, everlasting? We must
 come to some understanding of this perpetuity with which Eternity is
 either identical or in conformity.
 
 </p><p>It must at once, be at once something in the nature of unity and
 yet a notion compact of diversity, or a Kind, a Nature, that waits
 upon the Existents of that Other World, either associated 
 with them or
 known in and upon them, they collectively being this Nature which,
 with all its unity, is yet diverse in power and essence. Considering
 this multifarious power, we declare it to be Essence in its relation
 to this sphere which is substratum or underlie to it; where we see
 life we think of it as Movement; where all is unvaried self-identity
 we call it Repose; and we know it as, at once, Difference 
 and Identity
 when we recognize that all is unity with variety.
 
 </p><p>Then we reconstruct; we sum all into a collected unity once
 more, a sole Life in the Supreme; we concentrate Diversity 
 and all the
 endless production of act: thus we know Identity, a concept or,
 rather, a Life never varying, not becoming what previously 
 it was not,
 the thing immutably itself, broken by no interval; and knowing this,
 we know Eternity.
 
 </p><p>We know it as a Life changelessly motionless and ever holding
 the Universal content [time, space, and phenomena] in actual 
 presence;
 not this now and now that other, but always all; not existing now in
 one mode and now in another, but a consummation without part or
 interval. All its content is in immediate concentration as at one
 point; nothing in it ever knows development: all remains identical
 within itself, knowing nothing of change, for ever in a Now since
 nothing of it has passed away or will come into being, but what it
 is now, that it is ever.
 
 </p><p>Eternity, therefore- while not the Substratum [not the essential
 foundation of the Divine or Intellectual Principle]- may be 
 considered
 as the radiation of this Substratum: it exists as the announcement
 of the Identity in the Divine, of that state- of being thus and not
 otherwise- which characterizes what has no futurity but eternally is.
 
 </p><p>What future, in fact, could bring to that Being anything which
 it now does not possess; and could it come to be anything which it
 is not once for all?
 
 </p><p>There exists no source or ground from which anything could make
 its way into that standing present; any imagined entrant 
 will prove to
 be not alien but already integral. And as it can never come to be
 anything at present outside it, so, necessarily, it cannot 
 include any
 past; what can there be that once was in it and now is gone? 
 Futurity,
 similarly, is banned; nothing could be yet to come to it. Thus no
 ground is left for its existence but that it be what it is.
 
 </p><p>That which neither has been nor will be, but simply possesses
 being; that which enjoys stable existence as neither in process of
 change nor having ever changed- that is Eternity. Thus we come to
 the definition: the Life- instantaneously entire, complete, at no
 point broken into period or part- which belongs to the Authentic
 Existent by its very existence, this is the thing we were 
 probing for-
 this is Eternity.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn255.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>