<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn270.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn272.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. Action, thus, is set towards contemplation and an object of
 contemplation, so that even those whose life is in doing have seeing
 as their object; what they have not been able to achieve by 
 the direct
 path, they hope to come at by the circuit.
 
 </p><p>Further: suppose they succeed; they desired a certain thing to
 come about, not in order to be unaware of it but to know it, 
 to see it
 present before the mind: their success is the laying up of a vision.
 We act for the sake of some good; this means not for something to
 remain outside ourselves, not in order that we possess nothing but
 that we may hold the good of the action. And hold it, where? 
 Where but
 in the mind?
 
 </p><p>Thus once more, action is brought back to contemplation: 
 for [mind
 or] Soul is a Reason-Principle and anything that one lays up in the
 Soul can be no other than a Reason-Principle, a silent 
 thing, the more
 certainly such a principle as the impression made is the deeper.
 
 </p><p>This vision achieved, the acting instinct pauses; the mind is
 satisfied and seeks nothing further; the contemplation, in one so
 conditioned, remains absorbed within as having acquired certainty to
 rest upon. The brighter the certainty, the more tranquil is the
 contemplation as having acquired the more perfect unity; and- for
 now we come to the serious treatment of the subject-
 
 </p><p>In proportion to the truth with which the knowing faculty knows,
 it comes to identification with the object of its knowledge.
 
 </p><p>As long as duality persists, the two lie apart, parallel as it
 were to each other; there is a pair in which the two elements remain
 strange to one another, as when Ideal-Principles laid up in the mind
 or Soul remain idle.
 
 </p><p>Hence the Idea must not be left to lie outside but must be made
 one identical thing with the soul of the novice so that he finds it
 really his own.
 
 </p><p>The Soul, once domiciled within that Idea and brought to
 likeness with it, becomes productive, active; what it always held by
 its primary nature it now grasps with knowledge and applies in deed,
 so becoming, as it were, a new thing and, informed as it now 
 is by the
 purely intellectual, it sees [in its outgoing act] as a stranger
 looking upon a strange world. It was, no doubt, essentially a
 Reason-Principle, even an Intellectual Principle; but its function
 is to see a [lower] realm which these do not see.
 
 </p><p>For, it is a not a complete thing: it has a lack; it is 
 incomplete
 in regard to its Prior; yet it, also, has a tranquil vision 
 of what it
 produces. What it has once brought into being it produces no 
 more, for
 all its productiveness is determined by this lack: it 
 produces for the
 purpose of Contemplation, in the desire of knowing all its content:
 when there is question of practical things it adapts its content to
 the outside order.
 
 </p><p>The Soul has a greater content than Nature has and 
 therefore it is
 more tranquil; it is more nearly complete and therefore more
 contemplative. It is, however, not perfect, and is all the more
 eager to penetrate the object of contemplation, and it seeks the
 vision that comes by observation. It leaves its native realm and
 busies itself elsewhere; then it returns, and it possesses its
 vision by means of that phase of itself from which it had parted.
 The self-indwelling Soul inclines less to such experiences.
 
 </p><p>The Sage, then, is the man made over into a Reason-Principle: to
 others he shows his act but in himself he is Vision: such a man is
 already set, not merely in regard to exterior things but also within
 himself, towards what is one and at rest: all his faculty 
 and life are
 inward-bent.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn272.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>