<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn261.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn263.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. To this end we must go back to the state we affirmed of
 Eternity, unwavering Life, undivided totality, limitless, knowing no
 divagation, at rest in unity and intent upon it. Time was not yet:
 or at least it did not exist for the Eternal Beings, though its
 being was implicit in the Idea and Principle of progressive
 derivation.
 
 </p><p>But from the Divine Beings thus at rest within 
 themselves, how did
 this Time first emerge?
 
 </p><p>We can scarcely call upon the Muses to recount its origin since
 they were not in existence then- perhaps not even if they had been.
 The engendered thing, Time, itself, can best tell us how it rose and
 became manifest; something thus its story would run:
 
 </p><p>Time at first- in reality before that "first" was produced by
 desire of succession- Time lay, self-concentrated, at rest within
 the Authentic Existent: it was not yet Time; it was merged in the
 Authentic and motionless with it. But there was an active principle
 there, one set on governing itself and realizing itself [= the
 All-Soul], and it chose to aim at something more than its present:
 it stirred from its rest, and Time stirred with it. And we, stirring
 to a ceaseless succession, to a next, to the discrimination of
 identity and the establishment of ever-new difference, traversed a
 portion of the outgoing path and produced an image of Eternity,
 produced Time.
 
 </p><p>For the Soul contained an unquiet faculty, always desirous of
 translating elsewhere what it saw in the Authentic Realm, 
 and it could
 not bear to retain within itself all the dense fullness of its
 possession.
 
 </p><p>A Seed is at rest; the nature-principle within, uncoiling
 outwards, makes way towards what seems to it a large life; 
 but by that
 partition it loses; it was a unity self-gathered, and now, in going
 forth from itself, it fritters its unity away; it advances into a
 weaker greatness. It is so with this faculty of the Soul, when it
 produces the Kosmos known to sense- the mimic of the Divine Sphere,
 moving not in the very movement of the Divine but in its similitude,
 in an effort to reproduce that of the Divine. To bring this Kosmos
 into being, the Soul first laid aside its eternity and clothed
 itself with Time; this world of its fashioning it then gave 
 over to be
 a servant to Time, making it at every point a thing of Time, setting
 all its progressions within the bournes of Time. For the Kosmos
 moves only in Soul- the only Space within the range of the 
 All open to
 it to move in- and therefore its Movement has always been in the
 Time which inheres in Soul.
 
 </p><p>Putting forth its energy in act after act, in a constant
 progress of novelty, the Soul produces succession as well as act;
 taking up new purposes added to the old it brings thus into 
 being what
 had not existed in that former period when its purpose was still
 dormant and its life was not as it since became: the life is changed
 and that change carries with it a change of Time. Time, then, is
 contained in differentiation of Life; the ceaseless forward movement
 of Life brings with it unending Time; and Life as it achieves its
 stages constitutes past Time.
 
 </p><p>Would it, then, be sound to define Time as the Life of 
 the Soul in
 movement as it passes from one stage of act or experience to another?
 
 </p><p>Yes; for Eternity, we have said, is Life in repose, unchanging,
 self-identical, always endlessly complete; and there is to 
 be an image
 of Eternity-Time- such an image as this lower All presents of the
 Higher Sphere. Therefore over against that higher life there must be
 another life, known by the same name as the more veritable 
 life of the
 Soul; over against that movement of the Intellectual Soul there must
 be the movement of some partial phase; over against that identity,
 unchangeableness and stability there must be that which is not
 constant in the one hold but puts forth multitudinous acts; over
 against that oneness without extent or interval there must 
 be an image
 of oneness, a unity of link and succession; over against the
 immediately infinite and all-comprehending, that which tends, yes,
 to infinity but by tending to a perpetual futurity; over against the
 Whole in concentration, there must be that which is to be a Whole by
 stages never final. The lesser must always be working towards the
 increase of its Being, this will be its imitation of what is
 immediately complete, self-realized, endless without stage: only
 thus can its Being reproduce that of the Higher.
 
 </p><p>Time, however, is not to be conceived as outside of 
 Soul; Eternity
 is not outside of the Authentic Existent: nor is it to be taken as a
 sequence or succession to Soul, any more than Eternity is to the
 Divine. It is a thing seen upon Soul, inherent, coeval to it, as
 Eternity to the Intellectual Realm.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn263.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>