<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn226.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn228.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. This is the significance of Plato's account of the birth of
 Love.
 
 </p><p>The drunkenness of the father Poros or Possession is caused by
 Nectar, "wine yet not existing"; Love is born before the realm of
 sense has come into being: Penia had participation in the 
 Intellectual
 before the lower image of that divine Realm had appeared; 
 she dwelt in
 that Sphere, but as a mingled being consisting partly of Form but
 partly also of that indetermination which belongs to the Soul before
 she attains the Good and when all her knowledge of Reality is a
 fore-intimation veiled by the indeterminate and unordered: in this
 state Poverty brings forth the Hypostasis, Love.
 
 </p><p>This, then, is a union of Reason with something that is 
 not Reason
 but a mere indeterminate striving in a being not yet illuminated:
 the offspring Love, therefore, is not perfect, not self-sufficient,
 but unfinished, bearing the signs of its parentage, the undirected
 striving and the self-sufficient Reason. This offspring is a
 Reason-Principle but not purely so; for it includes within itself an
 aspiration ill-defined, unreasoned, unlimited- it can never be sated
 as long as it contains within itself that element of the
 Indeterminate. Love, then, clings to the Soul, from which it 
 sprung as
 from the principle of its Being, but it is lessened by including an
 element of the Reason-Principle which did not remain 
 self-concentrated
 but blended with the indeterminate, not, it is true, by immediate
 contact but through its emanation. Love, therefore, is like 
 a goad; it
 is without resource in itself; even winning its end, it is 
 poor again.
 
 </p><p>It cannot be satisfied because a thing of mixture never 
 can be so:
 true satisfaction is only for what has its plenitude in its 
 own being;
 where craving is due to an inborn deficiency, there may be
 satisfaction at some given moment but it does not last. Love, then,
 has on the one side the powerlessness of its native 
 inadequacy, on the
 other the resource inherited from the Reason-Kind.
 
 </p><p>Such must be the nature and such the origin of the entire Spirit
 Order, each- like its fellow, Love- has its appointed sphere, is
 powerful there, and wholly devoted to it, and, like Love, 
 none is ever
 complete of itself but always straining towards some good which it
 sees in things of the partial sphere.
 
 </p><p>We understand, now, why good men have no other Love other Eros
 of life- than that for the Absolute and Authentic Good, and never
 follow the random attractions known to those ranged under the lower
 Spirit Kind.
 
 </p><p>Each human being is set under his own Spirit-Guides, but this is
 mere blank possession when they ignore their own and live by some
 other spirit adopted by them as more closely attuned to the
 operative part of the Soul in them. Those that go after evil are
 natures that have merged all the Love-Principles within them in the
 evil desires springing in their hearts and allowed the right reason,
 which belongs to our kind, to fall under the spell of false 
 ideas from
 another source.
 
 </p><p>All the natural Loves, all that serve the ends of Nature, are
 good; in a lesser Soul, inferior in rank and in scope; in the
 greater Soul, superior; but all belong to the order of Being. Those
 forms of Love that do not serve the purposes of Nature are merely
 accidents attending on perversion: in no sense are they 
 Real-Beings or
 even manifestations of any Reality; for they are no true issue of
 Soul; they are merely accompaniments of a spiritual flaw which the
 Soul automatically exhibits in the total of disposition and conduct.
 
 </p><p>In a word; all that is truly good in a Soul acting to 
 the purposes
 of nature and within its appointed order, all this is Real-Being:
 anything else is alien, no act of the Soul, but merely something
 that happens to it: a parallel may be found in false mentation,
 notions behind which there is no reality as there is in the case of
 authentic ideas, the eternal, the strictly defined, in which there
 is at once an act of true knowing, a truly knowable object and
 authentic existence- and this not merely in the Absolute, but also
 in the particular being that is occupied by the 
 authentically knowable
 and by the Intellectual-Principle manifest in every several form.
 
 </p><p>In each particular human being we must admit the existence of
 the authentic Intellective Act and of the authentically knowable
 object- though not as wholly merged into our being, since we are not
 these in the absolute and not exclusively these- and hence 
 our longing
 for absolute things: it is the expression of our intellective
 activities: if we sometimes care for the partial, that affection is
 not direct but accidental, like our knowledge that a given
 triangular figure is made up of two right angles because the
 absolute triangle is so.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn228.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>