<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn214.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn216.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. It is of this Soul especially that we read "All Soul has care
 for the Soulless"- though the several Souls thus care in their own
 degree and way. The passage continues- "Soul passes through 
 the entire
 heavens in forms varying with the variety of place"- the sensitive
 form, the reasoning form, even the vegetative form- and this means
 that in each "place" the phase of the soul there dominant carries
 out its own ends while the rest, not present there, is idle.
 
 </p><p>Now, in humanity the lower is not supreme; it is an 
 accompaniment;
 but neither does the better rule unfailingly; the lower element also
 has a footing, and Man, therefore, lives in part under sensation,
 for he has the organs of sensation, and in large part even by the
 merely vegetative principle, for the body grows and propagates: all
 the graded phases are in a collaboration, but the entire form, man,
 takes rank by the dominant, and when the life-principle leaves the
 body it is what it is, what it most intensely lived.
 
 </p><p>This is why we must break away towards the High: we dare not
 keep ourselves set towards the sensuous principle, following the
 images of sense, or towards the merely vegetative, intent upon the
 gratifications of eating and procreation; our life must be pointed
 towards the Intellective, towards the Intellectual-Principle,
 towards God.
 
 </p><p>Those that have maintained the human level are men once more.
 Those that have lived wholly to sense become animals- 
 corresponding in
 species to the particular temper of the life- ferocious animals
 where the sensuality has been accompanied by a certain measure of
 spirit, gluttonous and lascivious animals where all has been
 appetite and satiation of appetite. Those who in their pleasures
 have not even lived by sensation, but have gone their way in a
 torpid grossness become mere growing things, for this lethargy is
 the entire act of the vegetative, and such men have been busy
 be-treeing themselves. Those, we read, that, otherwise untainted,
 have loved song become vocal animals; kings ruling unreasonably but
 with no other vice are eagles; futile and flighty visionaries ever
 soaring skyward, become highflying birds; observance of civic and
 secular virtue makes man again, or where the merit is less 
 marked, one
 of the animals of communal tendency, a bee or the like.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn216.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>