<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn273.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn275.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. Clearly a Being of this nature is not the primal existent;
 there must exist that which transcends it, that Being [the
 Absolute], to which all our discussion has been leading.
 
 </p><p>In the first place, Plurality is later than Unity. The
 Intellectual-Principle is a number [= the expression of a
 plurality]; and number derives from unity: the source of a 
 number such
 as this must be the authentically One. Further, it is the sum of an
 Intellectual-Being with the object of its Intellection, so that it
 is a duality; and, given this duality, we must find what 
 exists before
 it.
 
 </p><p>What is this?
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle taken separately, perhaps?
 
 </p><p>No: an Intellect is always inseparable from an intelligible
 object; eliminate the intelligible, and the Intellectual-Principle
 disappears with it. If, then, what we are seeking cannot be the
 Intellectual-Principle but must be something that rejects the
 duality there present, then the Prior demanded by that 
 duality must be
 something on the further side of the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>But might it not be the Intelligible object itself?
 
 </p><p>No: for the Intelligible makes an equally inseparable 
 duality with
 the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>If, then, neither the Intellectual-Principle nor the
 Intelligible Object can be the First Existent, what is?
 
 </p><p>Our answer can only be:
 
 </p><p>The source of both.
 
 </p><p>What will This be; under what character can we picture It?
 
 </p><p>It must be either Intellective or without Intellection: if
 Intellective it is the Intellectual-Principle; if not, it will be
 without even knowledge of itself- so that, either way, what is there
 so august about it?
 
 </p><p>If we define it as The Good and the wholly simplex, we will, no
 doubt, be telling the truth, but we will not be giving any 
 certain and
 lucid account of it as long as we have in mind no entity in which to
 lodge the conception by which we define it.
 
 </p><p>Yet: our knowledge of everything else comes by way of our
 intelligence; our power is that of knowing the intelligible by means
 of the intelligence: but this Entity transcends all of the
 intellectual nature; by what direct intuition, then, can it 
 be brought
 within our grasp?
 
 </p><p>To this question the answer is that we can know it only in the
 degree of human faculty: we indicate it by virtue of what in 
 ourselves
 is like it.
 
 </p><p>For in us, also, there is something of that Being; nay, nothing,
 ripe for that participation, can be void of it.
 
 </p><p>Wherever you be, you have only to range over against this
 omnipresent Being that in you which is capable of drawing 
 from It, and
 you have your share in it: imagine a voice sounding over a vast
 waste of land, and not only over the emptiness alone but over human
 beings; wherever you be in that great space you have but to 
 listen and
 you take the voice entire- entire though yet with a difference.
 
 </p><p>And what do we take when we thus point the Intelligence?
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle in us must mount to its origins:
 essentially a thing facing two ways, it must deliver itself over to
 those powers within it which tend upward; if it seeks the vision of
 that Being, it must become something more than Intellect.
 
 </p><p>For the Intellectual-Principle is the earliest form of 
 Life: it is
 the Activity presiding over the outflowing of the universal 
 Order- the
 outflow, that is, of the first moment, not that of the continuous
 process.
 
 </p><p>In its character as Life, as emanation, as containing all things
 in their precise forms and not merely in the agglomerate mass- for
 this would be to contain them imperfectly and inarticulately- it
 must of necessity derive from some other Being, from one 
 that does not
 emanate but is the Principle of Emanation, of Life, of Intellect and
 of the Universe.
 
 </p><p>For the Universe is not a Principle and Source: it springs from
 a source, and that source cannot be the All or anything belonging to
 the All, since it is to generate the All, and must be not a
 plurality but the Source of plurality, since universally a begetting
 power is less complex than the begotten. Thus the Being that has
 engendered the Intellectual-Principle must be more simplex than the
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>We may be told that this engendering Principle is the 
 One-and-All.
 
 </p><p>But, at that, it must be either each separate entity from among
 all or it will be all things in the one mass.
 
 </p><p>Now if it were the massed total of all, it must be of 
 later origin
 than any of the things of which it is the sum; if it precedes the
 total, it differs from the things that make up the total and 
 they from
 it: if it and the total of things constitute a co-existence, 
 it is not
 a Source. But what we are probing for must be a Source; it must
 exist before all, that all may be fashioned as sequel to it.
 
 </p><p>As for the notion that it may be each separate entity of the
 All, this would make a self-Identity into a what you like, where you
 like, indifferently, and would, besides, abolish all distinction in
 things themselves.
 
 </p><p>Once more we see that this can be no thing among things but must
 be prior to all things.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn275.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>