<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn232.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn234.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Let us begin with virtue and vice in the Soul. What has
 really occurred when, as we say, vice is present? In speaking of
 extirpating evil and implanting goodness, of introducing order and
 beauty to replace a former ugliness, we talk in terms of real things
 in the Soul.
 
 </p><p>Now when we make virtue a harmony, and vice a breach of harmony,
 we accept an opinion approved by the ancients; and the 
 theory helps us
 decidedly to our solution. For if virtue is simply a natural
 concordance among the phases of the Soul, and vice simply a discord,
 then there is no further question of any foreign presence; harmony
 would be the result of every distinct phase or faculty joining in,
 true to itself; discord would mean that not all chimed in at their
 best and truest. Consider, for example, the performers in a choral
 dance; they sing together though each one has his particular 
 part, and
 sometimes one voice is heard while the others are silent; and each
 brings to the chorus something of his own; it is not enough that all
 lift their voices together; each must sing, choicely, his own part
 to the music set for him. Exactly so in the case of the Soul; there
 will be harmony when each faculty performs its appropriate part.
 
 </p><p>Yes: but this very harmony constituting the virtue of the Soul
 must depend upon a previous virtue, that of each several faculty
 within itself; and before there can be the vice of discord there
 must be the vice of the single parts, and these can be bad 
 only by the
 actual presence of vice as they can be good only by the presence of
 virtue. It is true that no presence is affirmed when vice is
 identified with ignorance in the reasoning faculty of the Soul;
 ignorance is not a positive thing; but in the presence of false
 judgements- the main cause of vice- must it not be admitted that
 something positive has entered into the Soul, something 
 perverting the
 reasoning faculty? So, the initiative faculty; is it not, itself,
 altered as one varies between timidity and boldness? And the
 desiring faculty, similarly, as it runs wild or accepts control?
 
 </p><p>Our teaching is that when the particular faculty is sound it
 performs the reasonable act of its essential nature, obeying the
 reasoning faculty in it which derives from the Intellectual
 Principle and communicates to the rest. And this following of reason
 is not the acceptance of an imposed shape; it is like using the
 eyes; the Soul sees by its act, that of looking towards reason. The
 faculty of sight in the performance of its act is essentially what
 it was when it lay latent; its act is not a change in it, but simply
 its entering into the relation that belongs to its essential
 character; it knows- that is, sees- without suffering any change:
 so, precisely, the reasoning phase of the Soul stands towards the
 Intellectual Principle; this it sees by its very essence; this
 vision is its knowing faculty; it takes in no stamp, no impression;
 all that enters it is the object of vision- possessed, once more,
 without possession; it possesses by the fact of knowing but "without
 possession" in the sense that there is no incorporation of anything
 left behind by the object of vision, like the impression of the seal
 on sealing-wax.
 
 </p><p>And note that we do not appeal to stored-up impressions 
 to account
 for memory: we think of the mind awakening its powers in 
 such a way as
 to possess something not present to it.
 
 </p><p>Very good: but is it not different before and after acquiring
 the memory?
 
 </p><p>Be it so; but it has suffered no change- unless we are 
 to think of
 the mere progress from latency to actuality as change- nothing has
 been introduced into the mind; it has simply achieved the 
 Act dictated
 by its nature.
 
 </p><p>It is universally true that the characteristic Act of immaterial
 entities is performed without any change in them- otherwise 
 they would
 at last be worn away- theirs is the Act of the unmoving; where act
 means suffering change, there is Matter: an immaterial Being would
 have no ground of permanence if its very Act changed it.
 
 </p><p>Thus in the case of Sight, the seeing faculty is in act but the
 material organ alone suffers change: judgements are similar to
 visual experiences.
 
 </p><p>But how explain the alternation of timidity and daring in the
 initiative faculty?
 
 </p><p>Timidity would come by the failure to look towards the
 Reason-Principle or by looking towards some inferior phase 
 of it or by
 some defect in the organs of action- some lack or flaw in the bodily
 equipment- or by outside prevention of the natural act or by the
 mere absence of adequate stimulus: boldness would arise from the
 reverse conditions: neither implies any change, or even any
 experience, in the Soul.
 
 </p><p>So with the faculty of desire: what we call loose living 
 is caused
 by its acting unaccompanied; it has done all of itself; the other
 faculties, whose business it is to make their presence felt 
 in control
 and to point the right way, have lain in abeyance; the Seer in the
 Soul was occupied elsewhere, for, though not always at least
 sometimes, it has leisure for a certain degree of contemplation of
 other concerns.
 
 </p><p>Often, moreover, the vice of the desiring faculty will be merely
 some ill condition of the body, and its virtue, bodily 
 soundness; thus
 there would again be no question of anything imported into the Soul.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn234.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>