<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn259.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn261.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. "A Number, a Measure, belonging to Movement?"
 
 </p><p>This, at least, is plausible since Movement is a continuous
 thin; but let us consider.
 
 </p><p>To begin with, we have the doubt which met us when we probed its
 identification with extent of Movement: is Time the measure 
 of any and
 every Movement?
 
 </p><p>Have we any means of calculating disconnected and lawless
 Movement? What number or measure would apply? What would be the
 principle of such a Measure?
 
 </p><p>One Measure for movement slow and fast, for any and every
 movement: then that number and measure would be like the decade, by
 which we reckon horses and cows, or like some common standard for
 liquids and solids. If Time is this Kind of Measure, we learn, no
 doubt, of what objects it is a Measure- of Movements- but we are no
 nearer understanding what it is in itself.
 
 </p><p>Or: we may take the decade and think of it, apart from the
 horses or cows, as a pure number; this gives us a measure which,
 even though not actually applied, has a definite nature. Is Time,
 perhaps, a Measure in this sense?
 
 </p><p>No: to tell us no more of Time in itself than that it is such a
 number is merely to bring us back to the decade we have already
 rejected, or to some similar collective figure.
 
 </p><p>If, on the other hand, Time is [not such an abstraction but] a
 Measure possessing a continuous extent of its own, it must have
 quantity, like a foot-rule; it must have magnitude: it will,
 clearly, be in the nature of a line traversing the path of Movement.
 But, itself thus sharing in the movement, how can it be a Measure of
 Movement? Why should the one of the two be the measure 
 rather than the
 other? Besides an accompanying measure is more plausibly 
 considered as
 a measure of the particular movement it accompanies than of Movement
 in general. Further, this entire discussion assumes continuous
 movement, since the accompanying principle; Time, is itself unbroken
 [but a full explanation implies justification of Time in repose].
 
 </p><p>The fact is that we are not to think of a measure outside and
 apart, but of a combined thing, a measured Movement, and we are to
 discover what measures it.
 
 </p><p>Given a Movement measured, are we to suppose the measure to be a
 magnitude?
 
 </p><p>If so, which of these two would be Time, the measured movement
 or the measuring magnitude? For Time [as measure] must be either the
 movement measured by magnitude, or the measuring magnitude itself or
 something using the magnitude like a yard-stick to appraise the
 movement. In all three cases, as we have indicated, the 
 application is
 scarcely plausible except where continuous movement is 
 assumed: unless
 the Movement proceeds smoothly, and even unintermittently and as
 embracing the entire content of the moving object, great
 difficulties arise in the identification of Time with any kind of
 measure.
 
 </p><p>Let us, then, suppose Time to be this "measured Movement,"
 measured by quantity. Now the Movement if it is to be measured
 requires a measure outside itself; this was the only reason for
 raising the question of the accompanying measure. In exactly the
 same way the measuring magnitude, in turn, will require a measure,
 because only when the standard shows such and such an extension can
 the degree of movement be appraised. Time then will be, not the
 magnitude accompanying the Movement, but that numerical 
 value by which
 the magnitude accompanying the Movement is estimated. But that
 number can be only the abstract figure which represents the 
 magnitude,
 and it is difficult to see how an abstract figure can perform the
 act of measuring.
 
 </p><p>And, supposing that we discover a way in which it can, we still
 have not Time, the measure, but a particular quantity of Time, not
 at all the same thing: Time means something very different from any
 definite period: before all question as to quantity is the 
 question as
 to the thing of which a certain quantity is present.
 
 </p><p>Time, we are told, is the number outside Movement and measuring
 it, like the tens applied to the reckoning of the horses and cows
 but not inherent in them: we are not told what this Number is; yet,
 applied or not, it must, like that decade, have some nature of its
 own.
 
 </p><p>Or "it is that which accompanies a Movement and measures 
 it by its
 successive stages"; but we are still left asking what this thing
 recording the stages may be.
 
 </p><p>In any case, once a thing- whether by point or standard or any
 other means- measures succession, it must measure according to time:
 this number appraising movement degree by degree must, therefore, if
 it is to serve as a measure at all, be something dependent upon time
 and in contact with it: for, either, degree is spatial, merely- the
 beginning and end of the Stadium, for example- or in the only
 alternative, it is a pure matter of Time: the succession of early
 and late is stage of Time, Time ending upon a certain Now or Time
 beginning from a Now.
 
 </p><p>Time, therefore, is something other than the mere number 
 measuring
 Movement, whether Movement in general or any particular tract of
 Movement.
 
 </p><p>Further: Why should the mere presence of a number give us Time-
 a number measuring or measured; for the same number may be either-
 if Time is not given us by the fact of Movement itself, the Movement
 which inevitably contains in itself a succession of stages? To make
 the number essential to Time is like saying that magnitude 
 has not its
 full quantity unless we can estimate that quantity.
 
 </p><p>Again, if Time is, admittedly, endless, how can number apply to
 it?
 
 </p><p>Are we to take some portion of Time and find its numerical
 statement? That simply means that Time existed before number was
 applied to it.
 
 </p><p>We may, therefore, very well think that it existed 
 before the Soul
 or Mind that estimates it- if, indeed, it is not to be 
 thought to take
 its origin from the Soul- for no measurement by anything is
 necessary to its existence; measured or not, it has the full 
 extent of
 its being.
 
 </p><p>And suppose it to be true that the Soul is the appraiser, using
 Magnitude as the measuring standard, how does this help us to the
 conception of Time?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn261.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>