<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn203.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn205.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. Souls vary in worth; and the difference is due, among other
 causes, to an almost initial inequality; it is in reason that,
 standing to the Reason-Principle, as parts, they should be unequal
 by the fact of becoming separate.
 
 </p><p>We must also remember that every Soul has its second 
 grade and its
 third, and that, therefore, its expression may take any one of three
 main forms. But this point must be dealt with here again: the matter
 requires all possible elucidation.
 
 </p><p>We may perhaps think of actors having the right to add something
 to the poet's words: the drama as it stands is not perfectly filled
 in, and they are to supply where the Author has left blank 
 spaces here
 and there; the actors are to be something else as well; they become
 parts of the poet, who on his side has a foreknowledge of the word
 they will add, and so is able to bind into one story what the actors
 bring in and what is to follow.
 
 </p><p>For, in the All, the sequences, including what follows upon
 wickedness, become Reason-Principles, and therefore in right reason.
 Thus: from adultery and the violation of prisoners the process of
 nature will produce fine children, to grow, perhaps, into fine men;
 and where wicked violence has destroyed cities, other and nobler
 cities may rise in their place.
 
 </p><p>But does not this make it absurd to introduce Souls as 
 responsible
 causes, some acting for good and some for evil? If we thus exonerate
 the Reason-Principle from any part in wickedness do we not 
 also cancel
 its credit for the good? Why not simply take the doings of these
 actors for representative parts of the Reason-Principle as the
 doings of stage-actors are representative parts of the stage-drama?
 Why not admit that the Reason-Principle itself includes evil 
 action as
 much as good action, and inspires the precise conduct of all its
 representatives? Would not this be all the more Plausible in that
 the universal drama is the completer creation and that the
 Reason-Principle is the source of all that exists?
 
 </p><p>But this raises the question: "What motive could lead 
 the Logos to
 produce evil?"
 
 </p><p>The explanation, also, would take away all power in the Universe
 from Souls, even those nearest to the divine; they would all be mere
 parts of a Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>And, further- unless all Reason-Principles are Souls- why should
 some be souls and others exclusively Reason-Principles when 
 the All is
 itself a Soul?
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn205.htm">Next: THIRD TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>