<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn297.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn299.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. The souls of men, seeing their images in the mirror of
 Dionysus as it were, have entered into that realm in a leap downward
 from the Supreme: yet even they are not cut off from their origin,
 from the divine Intellect; it is not that they have come bringing
 the Intellectual Principle down in their fall; it is that though
 they have descended even to earth, yet their higher part holds for
 ever above the heavens.
 
 </p><p>Their initial descent is deepened since that mid-part of 
 theirs is
 compelled to labour in care of the care-needing thing into which
 they have entered. But Zeus, the father, takes pity on their 
 toils and
 makes the bonds in which they labour soluble by death and gives
 respite in due time, freeing them from the body, that they too may
 come to dwell there where the Universal Soul, unconcerned 
 with earthly
 needs, has ever dwelt.
 
 </p><p>For the container of the total of things must be a
 self-sufficing entity and remain so: in its periods it is wrought
 out to purpose under its Reason-Principles which are 
 perdurably valid;
 by these periods it reverts unfailingly, in the measured stages of
 defined life-duration, to its established character; it is 
 leading the
 things of this realm to be of one voice and plan with the 
 Supreme. And
 thus the kosmic content is carried forward to its purpose,
 everything in its co-ordinate place, under one only Reason-Principle
 operating alike in the descent and return of souls and to every
 purpose of the system.
 
 </p><p>We may know this also by the concordance of the Souls with the
 ordered scheme of the kosmos; they are not independent, but, by
 their descent, they have put themselves in contact, and they stand
 henceforth in harmonious association with kosmic circuit- to the
 extent that their fortunes, their life experiences, their 
 choosing and
 refusing, are announced by the patterns of the stars- and out of
 this concordance rises as it were one musical utterance: the music,
 the harmony, by which all is described is the best witness to this
 truth.
 
 </p><p>Such a consonance can have been procured in one only way:
 
 </p><p>The All must, in every detail of act and experience, be an
 expression of the Supreme, which must dominate alike its periods and
 its stable ordering and the life-careers varying with the movement
 of the souls as they are sometimes absorbed in that highest, 
 sometimes
 in the heavens, sometimes turned to the things and places of our
 earth. All that is Divine Intellect will rest eternally above, and
 could never fall from its sphere but, poised entire in its own high
 place, will communicate to things here through the channel of Soul.
 Soul in virtue of neighbourhood is more closely modelled 
 upon the Idea
 uttered by the Divine Intellect, and thus is able to produce order
 in the movement of the lower realm, one phase [the World-Soul]
 maintaining the unvarying march [of the kosmic circuit] the 
 other [the
 soul of the Individual] adopting itself to times and season.
 
 </p><p>The depth of the descent, also, will differ- sometimes lower,
 sometimes less low- and this even in its entry into any given Kind:
 all that is fixed is that each several soul descends to a recipient
 indicated by affinity of condition; it moves towards the thing which
 it There resembled, and enters, accordingly, into the body of man or
 animal.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn299.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>