<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn208.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn210.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. If man were all of one piece- I mean, if he were nothing more
 than a made thing, acting and acted upon according to a fixed
 nature- he could be no more subject to reproach and punishment than
 the mere animals. But as the scheme holds, man is singled out for
 condemnation when he does evil; and this with justice. For he is no
 mere thing made to rigid plan; his nature contains a Principle apart
 and free.
 
 </p><p>This does not, however, stand outside of Providence or of the
 Reason of the All; the Over-World cannot be dependent upon the World
 of Sense. The higher shines down upon the lower, and this 
 illumination
 is Providence in its highest aspect: The Reason-Principle has two
 phases, one which creates the things of process and another which
 links them with the higher beings: these higher beings constitute
 the over-providence on which depends that lower providence which is
 the secondary Reason-Principle inseparably united with its 
 primal: the
 two- the Major and Minor Providence- acting together produce the
 universal woof, the one all-comprehensive Providence.
 
 </p><p>Men possess, then, a distinctive Principle: but not all men turn
 to account all that is in their Nature; there are men that 
 live by one
 Principle and men that live by another or, rather, by several
 others, the least noble. For all these Principles are present even
 when not acting upon the man- though we cannot think of them as
 lying idle; everything performs its function.
 
 </p><p>"But," it will be said, "what reason can there be for their not
 acting upon the man once they are present; inaction must mean
 absence?"
 
 </p><p>We maintain their presence always, nothing void of them.
 
 </p><p>But surely not where they exercise no action? If they
 necessarily reside in all men, surely they must be operative in all-
 this Principle of free action, especially.
 
 </p><p>First of all, this free Principle is not an absolute 
 possession of
 the animal Kinds and is not even an absolute possession to all men.
 
 </p><p>So this Principle is not the only effective force in all men?
 
 </p><p>There is no reason why it should not be. There are men in whom
 it alone acts, giving its character to the life while all else is
 but Necessity [and therefore outside of blame].
 
 </p><p>For [in the case of an evil life] whether it is that the
 constitution of the man is such as to drive him down the troubled
 paths or whether [the fault is mental or spiritual in that] the
 desires have gained control, we are compelled to attribute the guilt
 to the substratum [something inferior to the highest principle in
 Man]. We would be naturally inclined to say that this substratum
 [the responsible source of evil] must be Matter and not, as our
 argument implies, the Reason-Principle; it would appear that not the
 Reason-Principle but Matter were the dominant, crude Matter at the
 extreme and then Matter as shaped in the realized man: but we must
 remember that to this free Principle in man [which is a phase of the
 All Soul] the Substratum [the direct inferior to be moulded] is [not
 Matter but] the Reason-Principle itself with whatever that produces
 and moulds to its own form, so that neither crude Matter nor Matter
 organized in our human total is sovereign within us.
 
 </p><p>The quality now manifested may be probably referred to 
 the conduct
 of a former life; we may suppose that previous actions have made the
 Reason-Principle now governing within us inferior in radiance to
 that which ruled before; the Soul which later will shine out again
 is for the present at a feebler power.
 
 </p><p>And any Reason-Principle may be said to include within itself
 the Reason-Principle of Matter which therefore it is able to 
 elaborate
 to its own purposes, either finding it consonant with itself or
 bestowing upon it the quality which makes it so. The
 Reason-Principle of an ox does not occur except in 
 connection with the
 Matter appropriate to the ox-Kind. It must be by such a process that
 the transmigration, of which we read takes place; the Soul must lose
 its nature, the Reason-Principle be transformed; thus there comes
 the ox-soul which once was Man.
 
 </p><p>The degradation, then, is just.
 
 </p><p>Still, how did the inferior Principle ever come into being, and
 how does the higher fall to it?
 
 </p><p>Once more- not all things are Firsts; there are Secondaries and
 Tertiaries, of a nature inferior to that of their Priors; 
 and a slight
 tilt is enough to determine the departure from the straight course.
 Further, the linking of any one being with any other amounts to a
 blending such as to produce a distinct entity, a compound of the
 two; it is not that the greater and prior suffers any diminution of
 its own nature; the lesser and secondary is such from its very
 beginning; it is in its own nature the lesser thing it 
 becomes, and if
 it suffers the consequences, such suffering is merited: all our
 reasonings on these questions must take account of previous living
 as the source from which the present takes its rise.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn210.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>