<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn294.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn296.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. But we must examine how soul comes to inhabit the body- the
 manner and the process- a question certainly of no minor interest.
 
 </p><p>The entry of soul into body takes place under two forms.
 
 </p><p>Firstly, there is the entry- metensomatosis- of a soul present
 in body by change from one [wholly material] frame to another or the
 entry- not known as metensomatosis, since the nature of the earlier
 habitacle is not certainly definable- of a soul leaving an aerial
 or fiery body for one of earth.
 
 </p><p>Secondly, there is the entry from the wholly bodiless into any
 kind of body; this is the earliest form of any dealing between body
 and soul, and this entry especially demands investigation.
 
 </p><p>What then can be thought to have happened when soul, 
 utterly clean
 from body, first comes into commerce with the bodily nature?
 
 </p><p>It is reasonable, necessary even, to begin with the Soul of the
 All. Notice that if we are to explain and to be clear, we are
 obliged to use such words as "entry" and "ensoulment," though never
 was this All unensouled, never did body subsist with soul away,
 never was there Matter unelaborate; we separate, the better to
 understand; there is nothing illegitimate in the verbal and mental
 sundering of things which must in fact be co-existent.
 
 </p><p>The true doctrine may be stated as follows:
 
 </p><p>In the absence of body, soul could not have gone forth, since
 there is no other place to which its nature would allow it 
 to descend.
 Since go forth it must, it will generate a place for itself; at once
 body, also, exists.
 
 </p><p>While the Soul [as an eternal, a Divine Being] is at 
 rest- in rest
 firmly based on Repose, the Absolute- yet, as we may put it, 
 that huge
 illumination of the Supreme pouring outwards comes at last to the
 extreme bourne of its light and dwindles to darkness; this darkness,
 now lying there beneath, the soul sees and by seeing brings to
 shape; for in the law of things this ultimate depth, 
 neighbouring with
 soul, may not go void of whatsoever degree of that 
 Reason-Principle it
 can absorb, the dimmed reason of reality at its faintest.
 
 </p><p>Imagine that a stately and varied mansion has been built; it has
 never been abandoned by its Architect, who, yet, is not tied down to
 it; he has judged it worthy in all its length and breadth of all the
 care that can serve to its Being- as far as it can share in Being-
 or to its beauty, but a care without burden to its director, 
 who never
 descends, but presides over it from above: this gives the degree in
 which the kosmos is ensouled, not by a soul belonging to it, but by
 one present to it; it is mastered not master; not possessor but
 possessed. The soul bears it up, and it lies within, no 
 fragment of it
 unsharing.
 
 </p><p>The kosmos is like a net which takes all its life, as far as
 ever it stretches, from being wet in the water, and has no act of
 its own; the sea rolls away and the net with it, precisely 
 to the full
 of its scope, for no mesh of it can strain beyond its set place: the
 soul is of so far-reaching a nature- a thing unbounded- as to
 embrace the entire body of the All in the one extension; so 
 far as the
 universe extends, there soul is; and if the universe had no 
 existence,
 the extent of soul would be the same; it is eternally what it is.
 The universe spreads as broad as the presence of soul; the bound of
 its expansion is the point at which, in its downward egression from
 the Supreme, it still has soul to bind it in one: it is a shadow as
 broad as the Reason-Principle proceeding from soul; and that
 Reason-Principle is of scope to generate a kosmic bulk as vast as
 lay in the purposes of the Idea [the Divine forming power] which it
 conveys.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn296.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>