<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn217.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn219.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. But if the presiding Spirit and the conditions of life are
 chosen by the Soul in the overworld, how can anything be left to
 our independent action here?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that very choice in the over-world is merely an
 allegorical statement of the Soul's tendency and temperament, a
 total character which it must express wherever it operates.
 
 </p><p>But if the tendency of the Soul is the master-force and, in the
 Soul, the dominant is that phase which has been brought to 
 the fore by
 a previous history, then the body stands acquitted of any bad
 influence upon it? The Soul's quality exists before any bodily life;
 it has exactly what it chose to have; and, we read, it never changes
 its chosen spirit; therefore neither the good man nor the bad is the
 product of this life?
 
 </p><p>Is the solution, perhaps, that man is potentially both good and
 bad but becomes the one or the other by force of act?
 
 </p><p>But what if a man temperamentally good happens to enter a
 disordered body, or if a perfect body falls to a man naturally
 vicious?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that the Soul, to whichever side it 
 inclines, has in
 some varying degree the power of working the forms of body 
 over to its
 own temper, since outlying and accidental circumstances cannot
 overrule the entire decision of a Soul. Where we read that, after
 the casting of lots, the sample lives are exhibited with the casual
 circumstances attending them and that the choice is made upon
 vision, in accordance with the individual temperament, we 
 are given to
 understand that the real determination lies with the Souls, who
 adapt the allotted conditions to their own particular quality.
 
 </p><p>The Timaeus indicates the relation of this guiding spirit to
 ourselves: it is not entirely outside of ourselves; is not bound up
 with our nature; is not the agent in our action; it belongs to us as
 belonging to our Soul, but not in so far as we are particular human
 beings living a life to which it is superior: take the 
 passage in this
 sense and it is consistent; understand this Spirit otherwise 
 and there
 is contradiction. And the description of the Spirit, 
 moreover, as "the
 power which consummates the chosen life," is, also, in agreement
 with this interpretation; for while its presidency saves us from
 falling much deeper into evil, the only direct agent within 
 us is some
 thing neither above it nor equal to it but under it: Man cannot
 cease to be characteristically Man.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn219.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>