<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn235.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn237.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. But why have we to call in Philosophy to make the Soul immune
 if it is thus immune from the beginning?
 
 </p><p>Because representations attack it at what we call the affective
 phase and cause a resulting experience, a disturbance, to which
 disturbance is joined the image of threatened evil: this 
 amounts to an
 affection and Reason seeks to extinguish it, to ban it as
 destructive to the well-being of the Soul which by the mere 
 absence of
 such a condition is immune, the one possible cause of affection not
 being present.
 
 </p><p>Take it that some such affections have engendered appearances
 presented before the Soul or Mind from without but taken [for
 practical purposes] to be actual experiences within it- then
 Philosophy's task is like that of a man who wishes to throw off the
 shapes presented in dreams, and to this end recalls to waking
 condition the mind that is breeding them.
 
 </p><p>But what can be meant by the purification of a Soul that 
 has never
 been stained and by the separation of the Soul from a body 
 to which it
 is essentially a stranger?
 
 </p><p>The purification of the Soul is simply to allow it to be 
 alone; it
 is pure when it keeps no company; when it looks to nothing without
 itself; when it entertains no alien thoughts- be the mode or 
 origin of
 such notions or affections what they may, a subject on which we have
 already touched- when it no longer sees in the world of image, much
 less elaborates images into veritable affections. Is it not a true
 purification to turn away towards the exact contrary of earthly
 things?
 
 </p><p>Separation, in the same way, is the condition of a soul no
 longer entering into the body to lie at its mercy; it is to 
 stand as a
 light, set in the midst of trouble but unperturbed through all.
 
 </p><p>In the particular case of the affective phase of the Soul,
 purification is its awakening from the baseless visions which beset
 it, the refusal to see them; its separation consists in limiting its
 descent towards the lower and accepting no picture thence, and of
 course in the banning for its part too of all which the higher Soul
 ignores when it has arisen from the trouble storm and is no longer
 bound to the flesh by the chains of sensuality and of 
 multiplicity but
 has subdued to itself the body and its entire surrounding so that it
 holds sovereignty, tranquilly, over all.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn237.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>