<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn271.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn273.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Certain Principles, then, we may take to be established- some
 self-evident, others brought out by our treatment above:
 
 </p><p>All the forms of Authentic Existence spring from vision and are
 a vision. Everything that springs from these Authentic Existences in
 their vision is an object of vision-manifest to sensation or to true
 knowledge or to surface-awareness. All act aims at this knowing; all
 impulse is towards knowledge, all that springs from vision exists to
 produce Ideal-Form, that is a fresh object of vision, so that
 universally, as images of their engendering principles, they all
 produce objects of vision, Ideal-forms. In the engendering of these
 sub-existences, imitations of the Authentic, it is made manifest
 that the creating powers operate not for the sake of creation and
 action but in order to produce an object of vision. This same vision
 is the ultimate purpose of all the acts of the mind and, even
 further downward, of all sensation, since sensation also is an
 effort towards knowledge; lower still, Nature, producing 
 similarly its
 subsequent principle, brings into being the vision and Idea that we
 know in it. It is certain, also, that as the Firsts exist in vision
 all other things must be straining towards the same condition; the
 starting point is, universally, the goal.
 
 </p><p>When living things reproduce their Kind, it is that the
 Reason-Principles within stir them; the procreative act is the
 expression of a contemplation, a travail towards the creation of
 many forms, many objects of contemplation, so that the 
 universe may be
 filled full with Reason-Principles and that contemplation may be, as
 nearly as possible, endless: to bring anything into being is to
 produce an Idea-Form and that again is to enrich the universe with
 contemplation: all the failures, alike in being and in doing, are
 but the swerving of visionaries from the object of vision: in the
 end the sorriest craftsman is still a maker of forms, 
 ungracefully. So
 Love, too, is vision with the pursuit of Ideal-Form.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn273.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>