<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn369.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn371.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. But some doubt arises when we consider the phenomena of
 hearing.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps we are to understand the process thus: the air 
 is modified
 by the first movement; layer by layer it is successively 
 acted upon by
 the object causing the sound: it finally impinges in that modified
 form upon the sense, the entire progression being governed 
 by the fact
 that all the air from starting point to hearing point is similarly
 affected.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps, on the other hand, the intervenient is modified only by
 the accident of its midway position, so that, failing any
 intervenient, whatsoever sound two bodies in clash might make would
 impinge without medium upon our sense?
 
 </p><p>Still air is necessary; there could be no sound in the absence
 of the air set vibrating in the first movement, however different be
 the case with the intervenient from that onwards to the perception
 point.
 
 </p><p>The air would thus appear to be the dominant in the production
 of sound: two bodies would clash without even an incipient sound,
 but that the air, struck in their rapid meeting and hurled outward,
 passes on the movement successively till it reaches the ears and the
 sense of hearing.
 
 </p><p>But if the determinant is the air, and the impression is 
 simply of
 air-movements, what accounts for the differences among voices and
 other sounds? The sound of bronze against bronze is different from
 that of bronze against some other substance: and so on; the air and
 its vibration remain the one thing, yet the difference in sounds is
 much more than a matter of greater or less intensity.
 
 </p><p>If we decide that sound is caused by a percussion upon the air,
 then obviously nothing turning upon the distinctive nature of air is
 in question: it sounds at a moment in which it is simply a 
 solid body,
 until [by its distinctive character] it is sent pulsing 
 outwards: thus
 air in itself is not essential to the production of sound; 
 all is done
 by clashing solids as they meet and that percussion, reaching the
 sense, is the sound. This is shown also by the sounds formed within
 living beings not in air but by the friction of parts; for example,
 the grinding of teeth and the crunching of bones against 
 each other in
 the bending of the body, cases in which the air does not intervene.
 
 </p><p>But all this may now be left over; we are brought to the same
 conclusion as in the case of sight; the phenomena of hearing arise
 similarly in a certain co-sensitiveness inherent in a living whole.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn371.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>