<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn385.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn387.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. It can be shown also that the intellectual act would
 similarly be impossible if the soul were any form of body.
 
 </p><p>If sensation is apprehension by means of the soul's employment
 of the body, intellection cannot be a similar use of the body or it
 would be identical with sensation. If then intellection is
 apprehension apart from body, much more must there be a distinction
 between the body and the intellective principle: sensation 
 for objects
 of sense, intellection for the intellectual object. And even if this
 be rejected, it must still be admitted that there do exist
 intellections of intellectual objects and perceptions of objects not
 possessing magnitude: how, we may then ask, can a thing of magnitude
 know a thing that has no magnitude, or how can the partless be known
 by means of what has parts? We will be told "By some partless part."
 But, at this, the intellective will not be body: for contact does
 not need a whole; one point suffices. If then it be conceded- and it
 cannot be denied- that the primal intellections deal with objects
 completely incorporeal, the principle of intellection itself 
 must know
 by virtue of being, or becoming, free from body. Even if they hold
 that all intellection deals with the ideal forms in Matter, still it
 always takes place by abstraction from the bodies [in which these
 forms appear] and the separating agent is the
 Intellectual-Principle. For assuredly the process by which 
 we abstract
 circle, triangle, line or point, is not carried through by the aid
 of flesh or Matter of any kind; in all such acts the soul or 
 mind must
 separate itself from the material: at once we see that it cannot be
 itself material. Similarly it will be agreed that, as beauty and
 justice are things without magnitude, so must be the intellective
 act that grasps them.
 
 </p><p>When such non-magnitudes come before the soul, it 
 receives them by
 means of its partless phase and they will take position there in
 partless wise.
 
 </p><p>Again: if the Soul is a body, how can we account for its
 virtues- moral excellence [Sophrosyne], justice, courage and 
 so forth?
 All these could be only some kind of rarefied body [pneuma], or
 blood in some form; or we might see courage as a certain resisting
 power in that pneuma; moral quality would be its happy blending;
 beauty would lie wholly in the agreeable form of impressions 
 received,
 such comeliness as leads us to describe people as attractive and
 beautiful from their bodily appearance. No doubt strength 
 and grace of
 form go well enough with the idea of rarefied body; but what can
 this rarefied body want with moral excellence? On the contrary its
 interest would lie in being comfortable in its environments and
 contacts, in being warmed or pleasantly cool, in bringing everything
 smooth and caressing and soft around it: what could it care about a
 just distribution?
 
 </p><p>Then consider the objects of the soul's contemplation, virtue
 and the other Intellectual forms with which it is occupied; are
 these eternal or are we to think that virtue rises here or there,
 helps, then perishes? These things must have an author and a source
 and there, again, we are confronted by something perdurable: the
 soul's contemplation, then, must be of the eternal and unchanging,
 like the concepts of geometry: if eternal and unchanging, these
 objects are not bodies: and that which is to receive them must be of
 equivalent nature: it cannot therefore be body, since all
 body-nature lacks permanence, is a thing of flux.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn387.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>