<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn341.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn343.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 23</h4>
 
 <p>23. A first principle is that the knowing of sensible objects is
 an act of the soul, or of the living conjoint, becoming aware of the
 quality of certain corporeal entities, and appropriating the ideas
 present in them.
 
 </p><p>This apprehension must belong either to the soul isolated,
 self-acting, or to soul in conjunction with some other entity.
 
 </p><p>Isolated, self-acting, how is it possible? Self-acting, it has
 knowledge of its own content, and this is not perception but
 intellection: if it is also to know things outside itself it 
 can grasp
 them only in one of two ways: either it must assimilate itself to
 the external objects, or it must enter into relations with something
 that has been so assimilated.
 
 </p><p>Now as long as it remains self-centred it cannot assimilate: a
 single point cannot assimilate itself to an external line: even line
 cannot adapt itself to line in another order, line of the 
 intellectual
 to line of the sensible, just as fire of the intellectual and man of
 the intellectual remain distinct from fire and man of the sensible.
 Even Nature, the soul-phase which brings man into being, 
 does not come
 to identity with the man it shapes and informs: it has the faculty
 of dealing with the sensible, but it remains isolated, and, its task
 done, ignores all but the intellectual as it is itself ignored by
 the sensible and utterly without means of grasping it.
 
 </p><p>Suppose something visible lying at a distance: the soul sees it;
 now, admitting to the full that at first only the pure idea of the
 thing is seized- a total without discerned part- yet in the end it
 becomes to the seeing soul an object whose complete detail of colour
 and form is known: this shows that there is something more here than
 the outlying thing and the soul; for the soul is immune from
 experience; there must be a third, something not thus exempt; and it
 is this intermediate that accepts the impressions of shape and the
 like.
 
 </p><p>This intermediate must be able to assume the modifications of
 the material object so as to be an exact reproduction of its states,
 and it must be of the one elemental-stuff: it, thus, will exhibit
 the condition which the higher principle is to perceive; and the
 condition must be such as to preserve something of the originating
 object, and yet not be identical with it: the essential vehicle of
 knowledge is an intermediary which, as it stands between the soul
 and the originating object, will, similarly, present a condition
 midway between the two spheres, of sense and the
 intellectual-linking the extremes, receiving from one side to
 exhibit to the other, in virtue of being able to assimilate itself
 to each. As an instrument by which something is to receive
 knowledge, it cannot be identical with either the knower or 
 the known:
 but it must be apt to likeness with both- akin to the external
 object by its power of being affected, and to the internal, the
 knower, by the fact that the modification it takes becomes an idea.
 
 </p><p>If this theory of ours is sound, bodily organs are necessary to
 sense-perception, as is further indicated by the reflection that the
 soul entirely freed of body can apprehend nothing in the order of
 sense.
 
 </p><p>The organ must be either the body entire or some member set
 apart for a particular function; thus touch for one, vision for
 another. The tools of craftsmanship will be seen to be
 intermediaries between the judging worker and the judged object,
 disclosing to the experimenter the particular character of the
 matter under investigation: thus a ruler, representing at once the
 straightness which is in the mind and the straightness of a plank,
 is used as an intermediary by which the operator proves his work.
 
 </p><p>Some questions of detail remain for consideration 
 elsewhere: Is it
 necessary that the object upon which judgement or perception is to
 take place should be in contact with the organ of perception, or can
 the process occur across space upon an object at a distance? Thus,
 is the heat of a fire really at a distance from the flesh it warms,
 the intermediate space remaining unmodified; is it possible to see
 colour over a sheer blank intervening between the colour and the
 eye, the organ of vision reaching to its object by its own power?
 
 </p><p>For the moment we have one certainty, that perception of 
 things of
 sense belongs to the embodied soul and takes place through the body.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn343.htm">Next: Section 24</a></center>
 </body>