<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn320.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn322.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Enough on that point: we come now to the question of memory
 of the personality?
 
 </p><p>There will not even be memory of the personality; no thought
 that the contemplator is the self- Socrates, for example- or that it
 is Intellect or Soul. In this connection it should be borne in mind
 that, in contemplative vision, especially when it is vivid, 
 we are not
 at the time aware of our own personality; we are in possession of
 ourselves but the activity is towards the object of vision with
 which the thinker becomes identified; he has made himself over as
 matter to be shaped; he takes ideal form under the action of the
 vision while remaining, potentially, himself. This means that he is
 actively himself when he has intellection of nothing.
 
 </p><p>Or, if he is himself [pure and simple], he is empty of 
 all: if, on
 the contrary, he is himself [by the self-possession of
 contemplation] in such a way as to be identified with what is all,
 then by the act of self-intellection he has the simultaneous
 intellection of all: in such a case self-intuition by personal
 activity brings the intellection, not merely of the self, but also
 of the total therein embraced; and similarly the intuition of the
 total of things brings that of the personal self as included among
 all.
 
 </p><p>But such a process would appear to introduce into the 
 Intellectual
 that element of change against which we ourselves have only now been
 protesting?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that, while unchangeable identity is essential to
 the Intellectual-Principle, the soul, lying so to speak on 
 the borders
 of the Intellectual Realm, is amenable to change; it has, 
 for example,
 its inward advance, and obviously anything that attains position
 near to something motionless does so by a change directed 
 towards that
 unchanging goal and is not itself motionless in the same degree. Nor
 is it really change to turn from the self to the constituents of
 self or from those constituents to the self; and in this case the
 contemplator is the total; the duality has become unity.
 
 </p><p>None the less the soul, even in the Intellectual Realm, is under
 the dispensation of a variety confronting it and a content 
 of its own?
 
 </p><p>No: once pure in the Intellectual, it too possesses that same
 unchangeableness: for it possesses identity of essence; when it is
 in that region it must of necessity enter into oneness with the
 Intellectual-Principle by the sheer fact of its self-orientation,
 for by that intention all interval disappears; the soul advances and
 is taken into unison, and in that association becomes one with the
 Intellectual-Principle- but not to its own destruction: the two are
 one, and two. In such a state there is no question of stage and
 change: the soul, without motion [but by right of its 
 essential being]
 would be intent upon its intellectual act, and in possession,
 simultaneously, of its self-awareness; for it has become one
 simultaneous existence with the Supreme.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn322.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>