<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn331.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn333.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. But what is the difference between the Wisdom thus
 conducting the universe and the principle known as Nature?
 
 </p><p>This Wisdom is a first [within the All-Soul] while Nature is a
 last: for Nature is an image of that Wisdom, and, as a last in the
 soul, possesses only the last of the Reason-Principle: we may
 imagine a thick waxen seal, in which the imprint has 
 penetrated to the
 very uttermost film so as to show on both sides, sharp cut on the
 upper surface, faint on the under. Nature, thus, does not know, it
 merely produces: what it holds it passes, automatically, to its
 next; and this transmission to the corporeal and material
 constitutes its making power: it acts as a thing warmed, 
 communicating
 to what lies in next contact to it the principle of which it is the
 vehicle so as to make that also warm in some less degree.
 
 </p><p>Nature, being thus a mere communicator, does not possess even
 the imaging act. There is [within the Soul] intellection, superior
 to imagination; and there is imagination standing midway between
 that intellection and the impression of which alone Nature 
 is capable.
 For Nature has no perception or consciousness of anything; 
 imagination
 [the imaging faculty] has consciousness of the external, for it
 enables that which entertains the image to have knowledge of the
 experience encountered, while Nature's function is to engender- of
 itself though in an act derived from the active principle [of the
 soul].
 
 </p><p>Thus the Intellectual-Principle possesses: the Soul of the All
 eternally receives from it; this is the soul's life; its 
 consciousness
 is its intellection of what is thus eternally present to it; what
 proceeds from it into Matter and is manifested there is Nature, with
 which- or even a little before it- the series of real being comes to
 an end, for all in this order are the ultimates of the intellectual
 order and the beginnings of the imitative.
 
 </p><p>There is also the decided difference that Nature operates toward
 soul, and receives from it: soul, near to Nature but superior,
 operates towards Nature but without receiving in turn; and there is
 the still higher phase [the purely Intellectual] with no action
 whatever upon body or upon Matter.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn333.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>