<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn347.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn349.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 29</h4>
 
 <p>29. But- keeping to our illustration, by which the body is
 warmed by soul and not merely illuminated by it- how is it that when
 the higher soul withdraws there is no further trace of the vital
 principle?
 
 </p><p>For a brief space there is; and, precisely, it begins to 
 fade away
 immediately upon the withdrawal of the other, as in the case 
 of warmed
 objects when the fire is no longer near them: similarly hair 
 and nails
 still grow on the dead; animals cut to pieces wriggle for a good
 time after; these are signs of a life force still indwelling.
 
 </p><p>Besides, simultaneous withdrawal would not prove the identity of
 the higher and lower phases: when the sun withdraws there 
 goes with it
 not merely the light emanating from it, guided by it, attached to
 it, but also at once that light seen upon obliquely situated
 objects, a light secondary to the sun's and cast upon things outside
 of its path [reflected light showing as colour]; the two are not
 identical and yet they disappear together.
 
 </p><p>But is this simultaneous withdrawal or frank obliteration?
 
 </p><p>The question applies equally to this secondary light and to the
 corporeal life, that life which we think of as being completely sunk
 into body.
 
 </p><p>No light whatever remains in the objects once illuminated; that
 much is certain; but we have to ask whether it has sunk back into
 its source or is simply no longer in existence.
 
 </p><p>How could it pass out of being, a thing that once has been?
 
 </p><p>But what really was it? We must remember that what we know as
 colour belongs to bodies by the fact that they throw off light, yet
 when corruptible bodies are transformed the colour disappears and we
 no more ask where the colour of a burned-out fire is than where its
 shape is.
 
 </p><p>Still: the shape is merely a configuration, like the lie of the
 hands clenched or spread; the colour is no such accidental 
 but is more
 like, for example, sweetness: when a material substance 
 breaks up, the
 sweetness of what was sweet in it, and the fragrance of what was
 fragrant, may very well not be annihilated, but enter into some
 other substance, passing unobserved there because the new habitat is
 not such that the entrant qualities now offer anything solid to
 perception.
 
 </p><p>May we not think that, similarly, the light belonging to bodies
 that have been dissolved remains in being while the solid total,
 made up of all that is characteristic, disappears?
 
 </p><p>It might be said that the seeing is merely the sequel to some
 law [of our own nature], so that what we call qualities do not
 actually exist in the substances.
 
 </p><p>But this is to make the qualities indestructible and not 
 dependent
 upon the composition of the body; it would no longer be the
 Reason-Principles within the sperm that produce, for instance, the
 colours of a bird's variegated plumage; these principles would
 merely blend and place them, or if they produced them would draw
 also on the full store of colours in the sky, producing in the
 sense, mainly, of showing in the formed bodies something very
 different from what appears in the heavens.
 
 </p><p>But whatever we may think on this doubtful point, if, as long as
 the bodies remain unaltered, the light is constant and 
 unsevered, then
 it would seem natural that, on the dissolution of the body, 
 the light-
 both that in immediate contact and any other attached to that-
 should pass away at the same moment, unseen in the going as in the
 coming.
 
 </p><p>But in the case of the soul it is a question whether the 
 secondary
 phases follow their priors- the derivatives their sources- or
 whether every phase is self-governing, isolated from its
 predecessors and able to stand alone; in a word, whether no part of
 the soul is sundered from the total, but all the souls are
 simultaneously one soul and many, and, if so, by what mode; this
 question, however, is treated elsewhere.
 
 </p><p>Here we have to enquire into the nature and being of that
 vestige of the soul actually present in the living body: if there is
 truly a soul, then, as a thing never cut off from its total, it will
 go with soul as soul must: if it is rather to be thought of as
 belonging to the body, as the life of the body, we have the same
 question that rose in the case of the vestige of light; we must
 examine whether life can exist without the presence of soul, 
 except of
 course in the sense of soul living above and acting upon the remote
 object.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn349.htm">Next: Section 30</a></center>
 </body>