<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn358.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn360.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 40</h4>
 
 <p>40. But magic spells; how can their efficacy be explained?
 
 </p><p>By the reigning sympathy and by the fact in Nature that there is
 an agreement of like forces and an opposition of unlike, and by the
 diversity of those multitudinous powers which converge in the one
 living universe.
 
 </p><p>There is much drawing and spell-binding dependent on no
 interfering machination; the true magic is internal to the All, its
 attractions and, not less, its repulsions. Here is the primal mage
 and sorcerer- discovered by men who thenceforth turn those same
 ensorcellations and magic arts upon one another.
 
 </p><p>Love is given in Nature; the qualities inducing love 
 induce mutual
 approach: hence there has arisen an art of magic love-drawing whose
 practitioners, by the force of contact implant in others a new
 temperament, one favouring union as being informed with love; they
 knit soul to soul as they might train two separate trees towards
 each other. The magician too draws on these patterns of power, and
 by ranging himself also into the pattern is able tranquilly 
 to possess
 himself of these forces with whose nature and purpose he has become
 identified. Supposing the mage to stand outside the All, his
 evocations and invocations would no longer avail to draw up 
 or to call
 down; but as things are he operates from no outside standground, he
 pulls knowing the pull of everything towards any other thing in the
 living system.
 
 </p><p>The tune of an incantation, a significant cry, the mien of the
 operator, these too have a natural leading power over the soul upon
 which they are directed, drawing it with the force of mournful
 patterns or tragic sounds- for it is the reasonless soul, 
 not the will
 or wisdom, that is beguiled by music, a form of sorcery which raises
 no question, whose enchantment, indeed, is welcomed, 
 exacted, from the
 performers. Similarly with regard to prayers; there is no question
 of a will that grants; the powers that answer to incantations do not
 act by will; a human being fascinated by a snake has neither
 perception nor sensation of what is happening; he knows only after
 he has been caught, and his highest mind is never caught. In other
 words, some influence falls from the being addressed upon the
 petitioner- or upon someone else- but that being itself, sun or
 star, perceives nothing of it all.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn360.htm">Next: Section 41</a></center>
 </body>