<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn301.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn303.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. The punishment justly overtaking the wicked must therefore
 be ascribed to the kosmic order which leads all in 
 accordance with the
 right.
 
 </p><p>But what of chastisements, poverty, illness, falling 
 upon the good
 outside of all justice? These events, we will be told, are equally
 interwoven into the world order and fall under prediction, and must
 consequently have a cause in the general reason: are they 
 therefore to
 be charged to past misdoing?
 
 </p><p>No: such misfortunes do not answer to reasons established in the
 nature of things; they are not laid up in the master-facts of the
 universe, but were merely accidental sequents: a house falls, and
 anyone that chances to be underneath is killed, no matter 
 what sort of
 man he be: two objects are moving in perfect order- or one if you
 like- but anything getting in the way is wounded or trampled down.
 Or we may reason that the undeserved stroke can be no evil to the
 sufferer in view of the beneficent interweaving of the All or again,
 no doubt, that nothing is unjust that finds justification in a past
 history.
 
 </p><p>We may not think of some things being fitted into a system with
 others abandoned to the capricious; if things must happen by 
 cause, by
 natural sequences, under one Reason-Principle and a single 
 set scheme,
 we must admit that the minor equally with the major is fitted into
 that order and pattern.
 
 </p><p>Wrong-doing from man to man is wrong in the doer and must be
 imputed, but, as belonging to the established order of the 
 universe is
 not a wrong even as regards the innocent sufferer; it is a thing
 that had to be, and, if the sufferer is good, the issue is to his
 gain. For we cannot think that this ordered combination proceeds
 without God and justice; we must take it to be precise in the
 distribution of due, while, yet, the reasons of things elude us, and
 to our ignorance the scheme presents matter of censure.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn303.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>