<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn390.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn392.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. E. (13) We come to the doctrine of the Entelechy, and must
 enquire how it is applied to soul.
 
 </p><p>It is thought that in the Conjoint of body and soul the 
 soul holds
 the rank of Form to the Matter which here is the ensouled body- not,
 then, Form to every example of body or to body as merely such, but
 to a natural organic body having the potentiality of life.
 
 </p><p>Now; if the soul has been so injected as to be assimilated into
 the body as the design of a statue is worked into the bronze, it
 will follow that, upon any dividing of the body, the soul is divided
 with it, and if any part of the body is cut away a fragment of soul
 must go with it. Since an Entelechy must be inseparable from the
 being of which it is the accomplished actuality, the 
 withdrawal of the
 soul in sleep cannot occur; in fact sleep itself cannot occur.
 Moreover if the soul is an Entelechy, there is an end to the
 resistance offered by reason to the desires; the total [of body and
 Entelechy-Soul] must have one-uniform experience throughout, and be
 aware of no internal contradiction. Sense-perception might occur;
 but intellection would be impossible. The very upholders of the
 Entelechy are thus compelled to introduce another soul, the
 Intellect, to which they ascribe immortality. The reasoning soul,
 then, must be an Entelechy- if the word is to be used at all- in some
 other mode.
 
 </p><p>Even the sense-perceiving soul, in its possession of the
 impressions of absent objects, must hold these without aid from the
 body; for otherwise the impression must be present in it like shape
 and images, and that would mean that it could not take in fresh
 impressions; the perceptive soul, then, cannot be described as this
 Entelechy inseparable from the body. Similarly the desiring
 principle, dealing not only with food and drink but with things
 quite apart from body; this also is no inseparable Entelechy.
 
 </p><p>There remains the vegetal principle which might seem to suggest
 the possibility that, in this phase, the soul may be the inseparable
 Entelechy of the doctrine. But it is not so. The principle of every
 growth lies at the root; in many plants the new springing takes
 place at the root or just above it: it is clear that the
 life-principle, the vegetal soul, has abandoned the upper portions
 to concentrate itself at that one spot: it was therefore not present
 in the whole as an inseparable Entelechy. Again, before the plant's
 development the life-principle is situated in that small beginning:
 if, thus, it passes from large growth to small and from the small to
 the entire growth, why should it not pass outside altogether?
 
 </p><p>An Entelechy is not a thing of parts; how then could it be
 present partwise in the partible body?
 
 </p><p>An identical soul is now the soul of one living being now of
 another: how could the soul of the first become the soul of 
 the latter
 if soul were the Entelechy of one particular being? Yet that this
 transference does occur is evident from the facts of animal
 metasomatosis.
 
 </p><p>The substantial existence of the soul, then, does not depend
 upon serving as Form to anything: it is an Essence which 
 does not come
 into being by finding a seat in body; it exists before it 
 becomes also
 the soul of some particular, for example, of a living being, whose
 body would by this doctrine be the author of its soul.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is the soul's Being? If it is neither body 
 nor a state
 or experience of body, but is act and creation: if it holds much and
 gives much, and is an existence outside of body; of what order and
 character must it be? Clearly it is what we describe as Veritable
 Essence. The other order, the entire corporeal Kind, is process; it
 appears and it perishes; in reality it never possesses Being, but is
 merely protected, in so far as it has the capacity, by participating
 in what authentically is.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn392.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>