<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn386.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn388.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. A. [sometimes appearing as 9] There are those who 
 insist on the
 activities observed in bodies- warming, chilling, thrusting, 
 pressing-
 and class soul with body, as it were to assure its efficacy. This
 ignores the double fact that the very bodies themselves exercise
 such efficiency by means of the incorporeal powers operating in
 them, and that these are not the powers we attribute to soul:
 intellection, perception, reasoning, desire, wise and 
 effective action
 in all regards, these point to a very different form of being.
 
 </p><p>In transferring to bodies the powers of the unembodied, this
 school leaves nothing to that higher order. And yet that it is
 precisely in virtue of bodiless powers that bodies possess their
 efficiency is clear from certain reflections:
 
 </p><p>It will be admitted that quality and quantity are two different
 things, that body is always a thing of quantity but not 
 always a thing
 of quality: matter is not qualified. This admitted, it will not be
 denied that quality, being a different thing from quantity, is a
 different thing from body. Obviously quality could not be 
 body when it
 has not quantity as all body must; and, again, as we have said,
 body, any thing of mass, on being reduced to fragments, ceases to be
 what it was, but the quality it possessed remains intact in every
 particle- for instance the sweetness of honey is still sweetness in
 each speck- this shows that sweetness and all other qualities are
 not body.
 
 </p><p>Further: if the powers in question were bodies, then necessarily
 the stronger powers would be large masses and those less efficient
 small masses: but if there are large masses with small while 
 not a few
 of the smaller masses manifest great powers, then the efficiency
 must be vested in something other than magnitude; efficacy, thus,
 belongs to non-magnitude. Again; Matter, they tell us, remains
 unchanged as long as it is body, but produces variety upon accepting
 qualities; is not this proof enough that the entrants [with whose
 arrival the changes happen] are Reason-Principles and not of the
 bodily order?
 
 </p><p>They must not remind us that when pneuma and blood are no longer
 present, animals die: these are necessary no doubt to life, 
 but so are
 many other things of which none could possibly be soul: and neither
 pneuma nor blood is present throughout the entire being; but soul is.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn388.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>