<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn362.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn364.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 44</h4>
 
 <p>44. Contemplation alone stands untouched by magic; no man
 self-gathered falls to a spell; for he is one, and that unity is all
 he perceives, so that his reason is not beguiled but holds the due
 course, fashioning its own career and accomplishing its task.
 
 </p><p>In the other way of life, it is not the essential man that gives
 the impulse; it is not the reason; the unreasoning also acts as a
 principle, and this is the first condition of the misfortune. Caring
 for children, planning marriage- everything that works as 
 bait, taking
 value by dint of desire- these all tug obviously: so it is with our
 action, sometimes stirred, not reasonably, by a certain spirited
 temperament, sometimes as foolishly by greed; political 
 interests, the
 siege of office, all betray a forth-summoning lust of power; action
 for security springs from fear; action for gain, from desire; action
 undertaken for the sake of sheer necessities- that is, for supplying
 the insufficiency of nature- indicates, manifestly, the 
 cajoling force
 of nature to the safeguarding of life.
 
 </p><p>We may be told that no such magic underlies good action, 
 since, at
 that, Contemplation itself, certainly a good action, implies a magic
 attraction.
 
 </p><p>The answer is that there is no magic when actions recognized as
 good are performed upon sheer necessity with the 
 recollection that the
 veritable good is elsewhere; this is simply knowledge of need; it is
 not a bewitchment binding the life to this sphere or to any thing
 alien; all is permissible under duress of human nature, and in the
 spirit of adaptation to the needs of existence in general- or even
 to the needs of the individual existence, since it certainly seems
 reasonable to fit oneself into life rather than to withdraw from it.
 
 </p><p>When, on the contrary, the agent falls in love with what is good
 in those actions, and, cheated by the mere track and trace of the
 Authentic Good makes them his own, then, in his pursuit of a lower
 good, he is the victim of magic. For all dalliance with what 
 wears the
 mask of the authentic, all attraction towards that mere semblance,
 tells of a mind misled by the spell of forces pulling towards
 unreality.
 
 </p><p>The sorcery of Nature is at work in this; to pursue the non-good
 as a good, drawn in unreasoning impulse by its specious 
 appearance: it
 is to be led unknowing down paths unchosen; and what can we call
 that but magic.
 
 </p><p>Alone in immunity from magic is he who, though drawn by the
 alien parts of his total being, withholds his assent to their
 standards of worth, recognizing the good only where his 
 authentic self
 sees and knows it, neither drawn nor pursuing, but tranquilly
 possessing and so never charmed away.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn364.htm">Next: Section 45</a></center>
 </body>