<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn370.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn372.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. We return, then, to the question whether there could be light
 if there were no air, the sun illuminating corporeal surfaces across
 an intermediate void which, as things are, takes the light
 accidentally by the mere fact of being in the path. Supposing air to
 be the cause of the rest of things being thus affected, the
 substantial existence of light is due to the air; light becomes a
 modification of the air, and of course if the thing to be 
 modified did
 not exist neither could be modification.
 
 </p><p>The fact is that primarily light is no appanage of air, and does
 not depend upon the existence of air: it belongs to every fiery and
 shining body, it constitutes even the gleaming surface of certain
 stones.
 
 </p><p>Now if, thus, it enters into other substances from something
 gleaming, could it exist in the absence of its container?
 
 </p><p>There is a distinction to be made: if it is a quality, some
 quality of some substance, then light, equally with other qualities,
 will need a body in which to lodge: if, on the contrary, it is an
 activity rising from something else, we can surely conceive it
 existing, though there be no neighbouring body but, if that is
 possible, a blank void which it will overleap and so appear on the
 further side: it is powerful, and may very well pass over 
 unhelped. If
 it were of a nature to fall, nothing would keep it up, certainly not
 the air or anything that takes its light; there is no reason why
 they should draw the light from its source and speed it onwards.
 
 </p><p>Light is not an accidental to something else, requiring
 therefore to be lodged in a base; nor is it a modification,
 demanding a base in which the modification occurs: if this 
 were so, it
 would vanish when the object or substance disappeared; but it does
 not; it strikes onward; so, too [requiring neither air nor object]
 it would always have its movement.
 
 </p><p>But movement, where?
 
 </p><p>Is space, pure and simple, all that is necessary?
 
 </p><p>With unchecked motion of the light outward, the material sun
 will be losing its energy, for the light is its expression.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps; and [from this untenable consequence] we may gather
 that the light never was an appanage of anything, but is the
 expressive Act proceeding from a base [the sun] but not seeking to
 enter into a base, though having some operation upon any 
 base that may
 be present.
 
 </p><p>Life is also an Act, the Act of the soul, and it remains so when
 anything- the human body, for instance- comes in its path to be
 affected by it; and it is equally an Act though there be nothing for
 it to modify: surely this may be true of light, one of the Acts of
 whatever luminary source there be [i.e., light, affecting things,
 may be quite independent of them and require no medium, air 
 or other].
 Certainly light is not brought into being by the dark thing, air,
 which on the contrary tends to gloom it over with some touch of
 earth so that it is no longer the brilliant reality: as reasonable
 to talk of some substance being sweet because it is mixed with
 something bitter.
 
 </p><p>If we are told that light is a mode of the air, we answer that
 this would necessarily imply that the air itself is changed 
 to produce
 the new mode; in other words, its characteristic darkness must
 change into non-darkness; but we know that the air maintains its
 character, in no wise affected: the modification of a thing is an
 experience within that thing itself: light therefore is not a
 modification of the air, but a self-existent in whose path the air
 happens to be present.
 
 </p><p>On this point we need dwell no longer; but there remains still a
 question.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn372.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>