<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn309.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn311.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 24</h4>
 
 <p>24. Now comes the question of the soul leaving the body; where
 does it go?
 
 </p><p>It cannot remain in this world where there is no natural 
 recipient
 for it; and it cannot remain attached to anything not of a character
 to hold it: it can be held here when only it is less than wise,
 containing within itself something of that which lures it.
 
 </p><p>If it does contain any such alien element it gives itself, with
 increasing attachment, to the sphere to which that element naturally
 belongs and tends.
 
 </p><p>The space open to the soul's resort is vast and diverse; the
 difference will come by the double force of the individual condition
 and of the justice reigning in things. No one can ever escape the
 suffering entailed by ill deeds done: the divine law is ineluctable,
 carrying bound up, as one with it, the fore-ordained execution of
 its doom. The sufferer, all unaware, is swept onward towards his
 due, hurried always by the restless driving of his errors, until at
 last wearied out by that against which he struggled, he 
 falls into his
 fit place and, by self-chosen movement, is brought to the 
 lot he never
 chose. And the law decrees, also, the intensity and the duration of
 the suffering while it carries with it, too, the lifting of
 chastisement and the faculty of rising from those places of pain-
 all by power of the harmony that maintains the universal scheme.
 
 </p><p>Souls, body-bound, are apt to body-punishment; clean souls no
 longer drawing to themselves at any point any vestige of body are,
 by their very being, outside the bodily sphere; body-free,
 containing nothing of body- there where Essence is, and 
 Being, and the
 Divine within the Divinity, among Those, within That, such a 
 soul must
 be.
 
 </p><p>If you still ask Where, you must ask where those Beings are- and
 in your seeking, seek otherwise than with the sight, and not as one
 seeking for body.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn311.htm">Next: Section 25</a></center>
 </body>