<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn307.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn309.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 22</h4>
 
 <p>22. May we think that the mode of the soul's presence to body is
 that of the presence of light to the air?
 
 </p><p>This certainly is presence with distinction: the light
 penetrates through and through, but nowhere coalesces; the light is
 the stable thing, the air flows in and out; when the air 
 passes beyond
 the lit area it is dark; under the light it is lit: we have a true
 parallel to what we have been saying of body and soul, for the air
 is in the light quite as much as the light in the air.
 
 </p><p>Plato therefore is wise when, in treating of the All, he puts
 the body in its soul, and not its soul in the body, and says that,
 while there is a region of that soul which contains body, there is
 another region to which body does not enter- certain powers, that
 is, with which body has no concern. And what is true of the All-Soul
 is true of the others.
 
 </p><p>There are, therefore, certain soul-powers whose presence to body
 must be denied.
 
 </p><p>The phases present are those which the nature of body demands:
 they are present without being resident- either in any parts of the
 body or in the body as a whole.
 
 </p><p>For the purposes of sensation the sensitive phase of the soul is
 present to the entire sensitive being: for the purposes of act,
 differentiation begins; every soul phase operates at a point
 peculiar to itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn309.htm">Next: Section 23</a></center>
 </body>