<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn328.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn330.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. The ordering principle is twofold; there is the principle
 known to us as the Demiurge and there is the Soul of the 
 All; we apply
 the appellation "Zeus" sometimes to the Demiurge and sometimes to
 the principle conducting the universe.
 
 </p><p>When under the name of Zeus we are considering the Demiurge we
 must leave out all notions of stage and progress, and recognize one
 unchanging and timeless life.
 
 </p><p>But the life in the kosmos, the life which carries the leading
 principle of the universe, still needs elucidation; does it operate
 without calculation, without searching into what ought to be done?
 
 </p><p>Yes: for what must be stands shaped before the kosmos, and is
 ordered without any setting in order: the ordered things are merely
 the things that come to be; and the principle that brings them into
 being is Order itself; this production is an act of a soul 
 linked with
 an unchangeably established wisdom whose reflection in that soul is
 Order. It is an unchanging wisdom, and there can therefore be no
 changing in the soul which mirrors it, not sometimes turned towards
 it, and sometimes away from it- and in doubt because it has turned
 away- but an unremitting soul performing an unvarying task.
 
 </p><p>The leading principle of the universe is a unity- and one that
 is sovereign without break, not sometimes dominant and sometimes
 dominated. What source is there for any such multiplicity of leading
 principles as might result in contest and hesitation? And this
 governing unity must always desire the one thing: what could bring
 it to wish now for this and now for that, to its own greater
 perplexing? But observe: no perplexity need follow upon any
 development of this soul essentially a unity. The All stands a
 multiple thing no doubt, having parts, and parts dashing with parts,
 but that does not imply that it need be in doubt as to its conduct:
 that soul does not take its essence from its ultimates or from its
 parts, but from the Primals; it has its source in the First and
 thence, along an unhindered path, it flows into a total of things,
 conferring grace, and, because it remains one same thing occupied in
 one task, dominating. To suppose it pursuing one new object after
 another is to raise the question whence that novelty comes 
 into being;
 the soul, besides, would be in doubt as to its action; its very
 work, the kosmos, would be the less well done by reason of the
 hesitancy which such calculations would entail.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn330.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>