<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn371.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn373.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Our investigation may be furthered by enquiring: Whether
 light finally perishes or simply returns to its source.
 
 </p><p>If it be a thing requiring to be caught and kept, 
 domiciled within
 a recipient, we might think of it finally passing out of 
 existence: if
 it be an Act not flowing out and away- but in circuit, with 
 more of it
 within than is in outward progress from the luminary of which it is
 the Act- then it will not cease to exist as long as that centre is
 in being. And as the luminary moves, the light will reach new
 points- not in virtue of any change of course in or out or 
 around, but
 simply because the act of the luminary exists and where there is no
 impediment is effective. Even if the distance of the sun from us
 were far greater than it is, the light would be continuous all that
 further way, as long as nothing checked or blocked it in the 
 interval.
 
 </p><p>We distinguish two forms of activity; one is gathered within the
 luminary and is comparable to the life of the shining body; this is
 the vaster and is, as it were, the foundation or wellspring 
 of all the
 act; the other lies next to the surface, the outer image of the
 inner content, a secondary activity though inseparable from the
 former. For every existent has an Act which is in its likeness: as
 long as the one exists, so does the other; yet while the original is
 stationary the activity reaches forth, in some things over a wide
 range, in others less far. There are weak and faint activities, and
 there are some, even, that do not appear; but there are also things
 whose activities are great and far-going; in the case of these the
 activity must be thought of as being lodged, both in the active and
 powerful source and in the point at which it settles. This may be
 observed in the case of an animal's eyes where the pupils gleam:
 they have a light which shows outside the orbs. Again there 
 are living
 things which have an inner fire that in darkness shines out when
 they expand themselves and ceases to ray outward when they contract:
 the fire has not perished; it is a mere matter of it being rayed out
 or not.
 
 </p><p>But has the light gone inward?
 
 </p><p>No: it is simply no longer on the outside because the fire [of
 which it is the activity] is no longer outward going but has 
 withdrawn
 towards the centre.
 
 </p><p>But surely the light has gone inward too?
 
 </p><p>No: only the fire, and when that goes inward the surface
 consists only of the non-luminous body; the fire can no longer act
 towards the outer.
 
 </p><p>The light, then, raying from bodies is an outgoing activity of a
 luminous body; the light within luminous bodies- understand; such as
 are primarily luminous- is the essential being embraced 
 under the idea
 of that body. When such a body is brought into association with
 Matter, its activity produces colour: when there is no such
 association, it does not give colour- it gives merely an incipient
 on which colour might be formed- for it belongs to another being
 [primal light] with which it retains its link, unable to desert from
 it, or from its [inner] activity.
 
 </p><p>And light is incorporeal even when it is the light of a body;
 there is therefore no question, strictly speaking, of its withdrawal
 or of its being present- these terms do not apply to its modes- and
 its essential existence is to be an activity. As an example: 
 the image
 upon a mirror may be described as an activity exercised by the
 reflected object upon the potential recipient: there is no outgoing
 from the object [or ingoing into the reflecting body]; it is simply
 that, as long as the object stands there, the image also is visible,
 in the form of colour shaped to a certain pattern, and when 
 the object
 is not there, the reflecting surface no longer holds what it 
 held when
 the conditions were favourable.
 
 </p><p>So it is with the soul considered as the activity of another and
 prior soul: as long as that prior retains its place, its next, which
 is its activity, abides.
 
 </p><p>But what of a soul which is not an activity but the derivative
 of an activity- as we maintained the life-principle domiciled in the
 body to be- is its presence similar to that of the light caught and
 held in material things?
 
 </p><p>No; for in those things the colour is due to an actual
 intermixture of the active element [the light being alloyed with
 Matter]; whereas the life-principle of the body is something that
 holds from another soul closely present to it.
 
 </p><p>But when the body perishes- by the fact that nothing without
 part in soul can continue in being- when the body is perishing, no
 longer supported by that primal life-giving soul, or by the presence
 of any secondary phase of it, it is clear that the life-principle
 can no longer remain; but does this mean that the life perishes?
 
 </p><p>No; not even it; for it, too, is an image of that first
 out-shining; it is merely no longer where it was.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn373.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>