<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn460.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn462.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. Everything brought into being under some principle not itself
 is contained either within its maker or, if there is any 
 intermediate,
 within that: having a prior essential to its being, it needs that
 prior always, otherwise it would not be contained at all. It is the
 order of nature: The last in the immediately preceding lasts, things
 of the order of the Firsts within their prior-firsts, and so thing
 within thing up to the very pinnacle of source.
 
 </p><p>That Source, having no prior, cannot be contained: uncontained
 by any of those other forms of being, each held within the series of
 priors, it is orbed round all, but so as not to be pointed 
 off to hold
 them part for part; it possesses but is not possessed. Holding all-
 though itself nowhere held- it is omnipresent, for where its
 presence failed something would elude its hold. At the same time, in
 the sense that it is nowhere held, it is not present: thus it is
 both present and not present; not present as not being circumscribed
 by anything; yet, as being utterly unattached, not inhibited from
 presence at any point. That inhibition would mean that the First was
 determined by some other being; the later series, then, would be
 without part in the Supreme; God has His limit and is no longer
 self-governed but mastered by inferiors.
 
 </p><p>While the contained must be where its container is, what is
 uncontained by place is not debarred from any: for, imagine a place
 where it is not and evidently some other place retains it; at once
 it is contained and there is an end of its placelessness.
 
 </p><p>But if the "nowhere" is to stand and the ascription of a
 "where," implying station in the extern, is to fall, then nothing
 can be left void; and at once- nothing void, yet no point
 containing- God is sovereignly present through all. We 
 cannot think of
 something of God here and something else there, nor of all God
 gathered at some one spot: there is an instantaneous presence
 everywhere, nothing containing and nothing left void, everything
 therefore fully held by the divine.
 
 </p><p>Consider our universe. There is none before it and 
 therefore it is
 not, itself, in a universe or in any place- what place was there
 before the universe came to be?- its linked members form and occupy
 the whole. But Soul is not in the universe, on the contrary the
 universe is in the Soul; bodily substance is not a place to the
 Soul; Soul is contained in Intellectual-Principle and is the 
 container
 of body. The Intellectual-Principle in turn is contained in
 something else; but that prior principle has nothing in which to be:
 the First is therefore in nothing, and, therefore, nowhere. But all
 the rest must be somewhere; and where but in the First?
 
 </p><p>This can mean only that the First is neither remote from things
 nor directly within them; there is nothing containing it; it
 contains all. It is The Good to the universe if only in this 
 way, that
 towards it all things have their being, all dependent upon 
 it, each in
 its mode, so that thing rises above thing in goodness 
 according to its
 fuller possession of authentic being.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn462.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>