<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn458.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn460.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Consider the act of ocular vision:
 
 </p><p>There are two elements here; there is the form perceptible to
 the sense and there is the medium by which the eye sees that form.
 This medium is itself perceptible to the eye, distinct from the form
 to be seen, but the cause of the seeing; it is perceived at the one
 stroke in that form and on it and, hence, is not distinguished from
 it, the eye being held entirely by the illuminated object. 
 When on the
 contrary this medium presents itself alone it is seen 
 directly- though
 even then actual sight demands some solid base; there must be
 something besides the medium which, unless embracing some object,
 eludes perception; thus the light inherent to the sun would not be
 perceived but for the solidity of the mass. If it is 
 objected that the
 sun is light entire, this would only be a proof of our assertion: no
 other visible form will contain light which must, then, have no
 other property than that of visibility, and in fact all other
 visible objects are something more than light alone.
 
 </p><p>So it is with the act of vision in the Intellectual Principle.
 
 </p><p>This vision sees, by another light, the objects 
 illuminated by the
 First Principle: setting itself among them, it sees veritably;
 declining towards the lower Nature, that upon which the light from
 above rests, it has less of that vision. Passing over the visible
 and looking to the medium by which it sees, then it holds the Light
 and the source of Light.
 
 </p><p>But since the Intellectual-Principle is not to see this light as
 something external we return to our analogy; the eye is not wholly
 dependent upon an outside and alien light; there is an earlier light
 within itself, a more brilliant, which it sees sometimes in a
 momentary flash. At night in the darkness a gleam leaps from within
 the eye: or again we make no effort to see anything; the eyelids
 close; yet a light flashes before us; or we rub the eye and it sees
 the light it contains. This is sight without the act, but it is the
 truest seeing, for it sees light whereas its other objects were the
 lit not the light.
 
 </p><p>It is certainly thus that the Intellectual-Principle, hiding
 itself from all the outer, withdrawing to the inmost, seeing
 nothing, must have its vision- not of some other light in some other
 thing but of the light within itself, unmingled, pure, suddenly
 gleaming before it;
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn460.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>