<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn462.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn464.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. It is infinite also by right of being a pure unity with
 nothing towards which to direct any partial content. Absolutely One,
 it has never known measure and stands outside of number, and so is
 under no limit either in regard to any extern or within itself; for
 any such determination would bring something of the dual into it.
 And having no constituent parts it accepts no pattern, forms 
 no shape.
 
 </p><p>Reason recognising it as such a nature, you may not hope 
 to see it
 with mortal eyes, nor in any way that would be imagined by those who
 make sense the test of reality and so annul the supremely real. For
 what passes for the most truly existent is most truly non-existent-
 the thing of extension least real of all- while this unseen First is
 the source and principle of Being and sovereign over Reality.
 
 </p><p>You must turn appearances about or you will be left void of God.
 You will be like those at the festivals who in their gluttony cram
 themselves with things which none going to the gods may touch; they
 hold these goods to be more real than the vision of the God who is
 to be honoured and they go away having had no share in the
 sanctities of the shrine.
 
 </p><p>In these celebrations of which we speak, the unseen god leaves
 those in doubt of his existence who think nothing patent but what
 may be known to the flesh: it happens as if a man slept a 
 life through
 and took the dream world in perfect trust; wake him, and he would
 refuse belief to the report of his open eyes and settle down to
 sleep again.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn464.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>