<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn489.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn491.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. The God fettered [as in the Kronos Myth] to an unchanging
 identity leaves the ordering of this universe to his son (to Zeus),
 for it could not be in his character to neglect his rule within the
 divine sphere, and, as though sated with the Authentic-Beauty, seek
 a lordship too recent and too poor for his might. Ignoring this
 lower world, Kronos [Intellectual-Principle] claims for his 
 own father
 [Ouranoo, the Absolute, or One] with all the upward-tending between
 them: and he counts all that tends to the inferior, 
 beginning from his
 son [Zeus, the All-Soul], as ranking beneath him. Thus he holds a
 mid position determined on the one side by the 
 differentiation implied
 in the severance from the very highest and, on the other, by that
 which keeps him apart from the link between himself and the lower:
 he stands between a greater father and an inferior son. But 
 since that
 father is too lofty to be thought of under the name of Beauty, the
 second God remains the primally beautiful.
 
 </p><p>Soul also has beauty, but is less beautiful than Intellect as
 being its image and therefore, though beautiful in nature, taking
 increase of beauty by looking to that original. Since then the
 All-Soul- to use the more familiar term- since Aphrodite 
 herself is so
 beautiful, what name can we give to that other? If Soul is so lovely
 in its own right, of what quality must that prior be? And since its
 being is derived, what must that power be from which the Soul takes
 the double beauty, the borrowed and the inherent?
 
 </p><p>We ourselves possess beauty when we are true to our own 
 being; our
 ugliness is in going over to another order; our self-knowledge, that
 is to say, is our beauty; in self-ignorance we are ugly.
 
 </p><p>Thus beauty is of the Divine and comes Thence only.
 
 </p><p>Do these considerations suffice to a clear understanding of the
 Intellectual Sphere, or must we make yet another attempt by another
 road?
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn491.htm">Next: NINTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>