<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn469.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn471.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. Another consideration is that if The Good [and First] is
 simplex and without need, it can neither need the 
 intellective act nor
 possess what it does not need: it will therefore not have
 intellection. (Interpolation or corruption: It is without 
 intellection
 because, also, it contains no duality.)
 
 </p><p>Again; an Intellectual-Principle is distinct from The Good and
 takes a certain goodness only by its intellection of The Good.
 
 </p><p>Yet again: In any dual object there is the unity [the 
 principle of
 identity] side by side with the rest of the thing; an associated
 member cannot be the unity of the two and there must be a
 self-standing unity [within the duality] before this unity of
 members can exist: by the same reasoning there must be also the
 supreme unity entering into no association whatever, something which
 is unity-simplex by its very being, utterly devoid of all 
 that belongs
 to the thing capable of association.
 
 </p><p>How could anything be present in anything else unless in 
 virtue of
 a source existing independently of association? The simplex [or
 absolute] requires no derivation; but any manifold, or any dual,
 must be dependent.
 
 </p><p>We may use the figure of, first, light; then, following it, the
 sun; as a third, the orb of the moon taking its light from the sun:
 Soul carries the Intellectual-Principle as something imparted and
 lending the light which makes it essentially intellective;
 Intellectual-Principle carries the light as its own though it is not
 purely the light but is the being into whose very essence the light
 has been received; highest is That which, giving forth the light to
 its sequent, is no other than the pure light itself by whose 
 power the
 Intellectual-Principle takes character.
 
 </p><p>How can this highest have need of any other? It is not to be
 identified with any of the things that enter into association; the
 self-standing is of a very different order.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn471.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>