<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn457.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn459.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. All this, however, we may leave to individual judgement: to
 proceed:
 
 </p><p>This produced reality is an Ideal form- for certainly nothing
 springing from the Supreme can be less- and it is not a particular
 form but the form of all, beside which there is no other; it follows
 that The First must be without form, and, if without form, then it
 is no Being; Being must have some definition and therefore 
 be limited;
 but the First cannot be thought of as having definition and 
 limit, for
 thus it would be not the Source but the particular item indicated by
 the definition assigned to it. If all things belong to the produced,
 which of them can be thought of as the Supreme? Not included among
 them, this can be described only as transcending them: but they are
 Being and the Beings; it therefore transcends Being.
 
 </p><p>Note that the phrase transcending Being assigns no character,
 makes no assertion, allots no name, carries only the denial of
 particular being; and in this there is no attempt to circumscribe
 it: to seek to throw a line about that illimitable Nature would be
 folly, and anyone thinking to do so cuts himself off from any
 slightest and most momentary approach to its least vestige.
 
 </p><p>As one wishing to contemplate the Intellectual Nature will lay
 aside all the representations of sense and so may see what
 transcends the sense-realm, in the same way one wishing to 
 contemplate
 what transcends the Intellectual attains by putting away all that is
 of the intellect, taught by the intellect, no doubt, that the
 Transcendent exists but never seeking to define it.
 
 </p><p>Its definition, in fact, could be only "the indefinable": what
 is not a thing is not some definite thing. We are in agony for a
 true expression; we are talking of the untellable; we name, only to
 indicate for our own use as best we may. And this name, The One,
 contains really no more than the negation of plurality: 
 under the same
 pressure the Pythagoreans found their indication in the symbol
 "Apollo" [a= not; pollon= of many] with its repudiation of the
 multiple. If we are led to think positively of The One, name and
 thing, there would be more truth in silence: the designation, a mere
 aid to enquiry, was never intended for more than a preliminary
 affirmation of absolute simplicity to be followed by the rejection
 of even that statement: it was the best that offered, but remains
 inadequate to express the Nature indicated. For this is a principle
 not to be conveyed by any sound; it cannot be known on any hearing
 but, if at all, by vision; and to hope in that vision to see 
 a form is
 to fail of even that.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn459.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>