<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn424.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn426.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. We have shown the inevitability of certain convictions as to
 the scheme of things:
 
 </p><p>There exists a Principle which transcends Being; this is The
 One, whose nature we have sought to establish in so far as such
 matters lend themselves to proof. Upon The One follows 
 immediately the
 Principle which is at once Being and the 
 Intellectual-Principle. Third
 comes the Principle, Soul.
 
 </p><p>Now just as these three exist for the system of Nature, so, we
 must hold, they exist for ourselves. I am not speaking of 
 the material
 order- all that is separable- but of what lies beyond the sense realm
 in the same way as the Primals are beyond all the heavens; I mean the
 corresponding aspect of man, what Plato calls the Interior Man.
 
 </p><p>Thus our soul, too, is a divine thing, belonging to another
 order than sense; such is all that holds the rank of soul, but
 [above the life-principle] there is the soul perfected as containing
 Intellectual-Principle with its double phase, reasoning and 
 giving the
 power to reason. The reasoning phase of the soul, needing no bodily
 organ for its thinking but maintaining, in purity, its 
 distinctive Act
 that its thought may be uncontaminated- this we cannot err 
 in placing,
 separate and not mingled into body, within the first Intellectual.
 We may not seek any point of space in which to seat it; it 
 must be set
 outside of all space: its distinct quality, its separateness, its
 immateriality, demand that it be a thing alone, untouched by all of
 the bodily order. This is why we read of the universe that the
 Demiurge cast the soul around it from without- understand that phase
 of soul which is permanently seated in the Intellectual- and of
 ourselves that the charioteer's head reaches upwards towards the
 heights.
 
 </p><p>The admonition to sever soul from body is not, of course, to be
 understood spatially- that separation stands made in Nature- the
 reference is to holding our rank, to use of our thinking, to an
 attitude of alienation from the body in the effort to lead up and
 attach to the over-world, equally with the other, that phase of soul
 seated here and, alone, having to do with body, creating, moulding,
 spending its care upon it.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn426.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>