<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn428.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn430.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. The One is all things and no one of them; the source of all
 things is not all things; all things are its possession- 
 running back,
 so to speak, to it- or, more correctly, not yet so, they will be.
 
 </p><p>But a universe from an unbroken unity, in which there appears no
 diversity, not even duality?
 
 </p><p>It is precisely because that is nothing within the One that all
 things are from it: in order that Being may be brought about, the
 source must be no Being but Being's generator, in what is to be
 thought of as the primal act of generation. Seeking nothing,
 possessing nothing, lacking nothing, the One is perfect and, in our
 metaphor, has overflowed, and its exuberance has produced the new:
 this product has turned again to its begetter and been filled and
 has become its contemplator and so an Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>That station towards the one [the fact that something exists in
 presence of the One] establishes Being; that vision directed upon
 the One establishes the Intellectual-Principle; standing towards the
 One to the end of vision, it is simultaneously
 Intellectual-Principle and Being; and, attaining resemblance 
 in virtue
 of this vision, it repeats the act of the One in pouring forth a
 vast power.
 
 </p><p>This second outflow is a Form or Idea representing the Divine
 Intellect as the Divine Intellect represented its own prior, The One.
 
 </p><p>This active power sprung from essence [from the
 Intellectual-Principle considered as Being] is Soul.
 
 </p><p>Soul arises as the idea and act of the motionless
 Intellectual-Principle- which itself sprang from its own motionless
 prior- but the soul's operation is not similarly motionless; 
 its image
 is generated from its movement. It takes fulness by looking to its
 source; but it generates its image by adopting another, a downward,
 movement.
 
 </p><p>This image of Soul is Sense and Nature, the vegetal principle.
 
 </p><p>Nothing, however, is completely severed from its prior. Thus the
 human Soul appears to reach away as far down as to the vegetal
 order: in some sense it does, since the life of growing things is
 within its province; but it is not present entire; when it 
 has reached
 the vegetal order it is there in the sense that having moved thus
 far downwards it produces- by its outgoing and its tendency towards
 the less good- another hypostasis or form of being just as its prior
 (the loftier phase of the Soul) is produced from the
 Intellectual-Principle which yet remains in untroubled
 self-possession.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn430.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>