<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn474.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn476.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. But individuals are brought into being by the union of the
 Reason-Principles of the parents, male and female: this seems to do
 away with a definite Reason-Principle for each of the offspring: one
 of the parents- the male let us say- is the source; and the
 offspring is determined not by Reason-Principles differing from
 child to child but by one only, the father's or that of the father's
 father.
 
 </p><p>No: a distinct Reason-Principle may be the determinant for the
 child since the parent contains all: they would become effective at
 different times.
 
 </p><p>And so of the differences among children of the same parents: it
 is a matter of varying dominance: either the offspring- whether it
 so appears or not- has been mainly determined by, now, the male,
 now, the female or, while each principle has given itself entire and
 lies there within, yet it effectively moulds one portion of 
 the bodily
 substance rather than another.
 
 </p><p>And how [by the theory of a divine archetype of each individual]
 are the differences caused by place to be explained?
 
 </p><p>Is the differentiating element to be found in the varying
 resistance of the material of the body?
 
 </p><p>No: if this were so, all men with the exception of one only
 would be untrue to nature.
 
 </p><p>Difference everywhere is a good, and so there must be differing
 archetypes, though only to evil could be attribute any power 
 in Matter
 to thwart nature by overmastering the perfect Reason-Principles,
 hidden but given, all.
 
 </p><p>Still, admitting the diversity of the Reason-principles, why
 need there by as many as there are men born in each Period, 
 once it is
 granted that different beings may take external manifestation under
 the presence of the same principles?
 
 </p><p>Under the presence of all; agreed: but with the dominance of the
 very same? That is still open to question.
 
 </p><p>May we not take it that there may be identical reproduction from
 one Period to another but not in the same Period?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn476.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>