<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn431.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn433.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Are we to think that a being knowing itself must contain
 diversity, that self-knowledge can be affirmed only when some one
 phase of the self perceives other phases, and that therefore an
 absolutely simplex entity would be equally incapable of introversion
 and of self-awareness?
 
 </p><p>No: a being that has no parts or phases may have this
 consciousness; in fact there would be no real self-knowing in an
 entity presented as knowing itself in virtue of being a 
 compound- some
 single element in it perceiving other elements- as we may 
 know our own
 form and entire bodily organism by sense-perception: such 
 knowing does
 not cover the whole field; the knowing element has not had the
 required cognisance at once of its associates and of itself; this is
 not the self-knower asked for; it is merely something that knows
 something else.
 
 </p><p>Either we must exhibit the self-knowing of an uncompounded
 being- and show how that is possible- or abandon the belief that any
 being can possess veritable self-cognition.
 
 </p><p>To abandon the belief is not possible in view of the many
 absurdities thus entailed.
 
 </p><p>It would be already absurd enough to deny this power to the soul
 or mind, but the very height of absurdity to deny it to the nature
 of the Intellectual-Principle, presented thus as knowing the rest of
 things but not attaining to knowledge, or even awareness, of itself.
 
 </p><p>It is the province of sense and in some degree of understanding
 and judgement, but not of the Intellectual-Principle, to handle the
 external, though whether the Intellectual-Principle holds the
 knowledge of these things is a question to be examined, but it is
 obvious that the Intellectual-Principle must have knowledge of the
 Intellectual objects. Now, can it know those objects alone or must
 it not simultaneously know itself, the being whose function it is to
 know just those things? Can it have self-knowledge in the sense
 [dismissed above as inadequate] of knowing its content while it
 ignores itself? Can it be aware of knowing its members and yet
 remain in ignorance of its own knowing self? Self and content must
 be simultaneously present: the method and degree of this knowledge
 we must now consider.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn433.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>