<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn468.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn470.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. We may be told that nothing prevents an identity being thus
 multiple. But there must be a unity underlying the aggregate: a
 manifold is impossible without a unity for its source or 
 ground, or at
 least, failing some unity, related or unrelated. This unity must be
 numbered as first before all and can be apprehended only as solitary
 and self-existent.
 
 </p><p>When we recognize it, resident among the mass of things, our
 business is to see it for what it is- present to the items but
 essentially distinguished from them- and, while not denying it
 there, to seek this underly of all no longer as it appears in those
 other things but as it stands in its pure identity by itself. The
 identity resident in the rest of things is no doubt close to 
 authentic
 identity but cannot be it; and, if the identity of unity is to be
 displayed beyond itself, it must also exist within itself alone.
 
 </p><p>It may be suggested that its existence takes substantial 
 form only
 by its being resident among outside things: but, at this, it 
 is itself
 no longer simplex nor could any coherence of manifolds occur. On the
 one hand things could take substantial existence only if they were
 in their own virtue simplex. On the other hand, failing a 
 simplex, the
 aggregate of multiples is itself impossible: for the simplex
 individual thing could not exist if there were no simplex unity
 independent of the individual, [a principle of identity] and, not
 existing, much less could it enter into composition with any other
 such: it becomes impossible then for the compound universe, the
 aggregate of all, to exist; it would be the coming together of
 things that are not, things not merely lacking an identity of their
 own but utterly non-existent.
 
 </p><p>Once there is any manifold, there must be a precedent 
 unity: since
 any intellection implies multiplicity in the intellective 
 subject, the
 non-multiple must be without intellection; that non-multiple will be
 the First: intellection and the Intellectual-Principle must be
 characteristic of beings coming later.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn470.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>