<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn433.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn435.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Sense sees a man and transmits the impression to the
 understanding. What does the understanding say? It has nothing to
 say as yet; it accepts and waits; unless, rather, it questions
 within itself "Who is this?"- someone it has met before- and then,
 drawing on memory, says, "Socrates."
 
 </p><p>If it should go on to develop the impression received, it
 distinguishes various elements in what the representative faculty
 has set before it; supposing it to say "Socrates, if the man 
 is good,"
 then, while it has spoken upon information from the senses, its
 total pronouncement is its own; it contains within itself a standard
 of good.
 
 </p><p>But how does it thus contain the good within itself?
 
 </p><p>It is, itself, of the nature of the good and it has been
 strengthened still towards the perception of all that is good by the
 irradiation of the Intellectual-Principle upon it; for this 
 pure phase
 of the soul welcomes to itself the images implanted from its prior.
 
 </p><p>But why may we not distinguish this understanding phase as
 Intellectual-Principle and take soul to consist of the later phases
 from the sensitive downwards?
 
 </p><p>Because all the activities mentioned are within the scope of a
 reasoning faculty, and reasoning is characteristically the 
 function of
 soul.
 
 </p><p>Why not, however, absolve the question by assigning
 self-cognisance to this phase?
 
 </p><p>Because we have allotted to soul the function of dealing- in
 thought and in multiform action- with the external, and we hold that
 observation of self and of the content of self must belong to
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>If any one says, "Still; what precludes the reasoning soul from
 observing its own content by some special faculty?" he is no longer
 posting a principle of understanding or of reasoning but, simply,
 bringing in the Intellectual-Principle unalloyed.
 
 </p><p>But what precludes the Intellectual-Principle from being
 present, unalloyed, within the soul? Nothing, we admit; but are we
 entitled therefore to think of it as a phase of soul?
 
 </p><p>We cannot describe it as belonging to the soul though we do
 describe it as our Intellectual-Principle, something 
 distinct from the
 understanding, advanced above it, and yet ours even though we cannot
 include it among soul-phases: it is ours and not ours; and therefore
 we use it sometimes and sometimes not, whereas we always have use of
 the understanding; the Intellectual-Principle is ours when we act by
 it, not ours when we neglect it.
 
 </p><p>But what is this acting by it? Does it mean that we become the
 Intellectual-Principle so that our utterance is the utterance of the
 Intellectual-Principle, or that we represent it?
 
 </p><p>We are not the Intellectual-Principle; we represent it in virtue
 of that highest reasoning faculty which draws upon it.
 
 </p><p>Still; we perceive by means of the perceptive faculty and are,
 ourselves, the percipients: may we not say the same of the
 intellective act?
 
 </p><p>No: our reasoning is our own; we ourselves think the 
 thoughts that
 occupy the understanding- for this is actually the We- but the
 operation of the Intellectual-Principle enters from above us as that
 of the sensitive faculty from below; the We is the soul at its
 highest, the mid-point between two powers, between the sensitive
 principle, inferior to us, and the intellectual principle 
 superior. We
 think of the perceptive act as integral to ourselves because our
 sense-perception is uninterrupted; we hesitate as to the
 Intellectual-Principle both because we are not always 
 occupied with it
 and because it exists apart, not a principle inclining to us but one
 to which we incline when we choose to look upwards.
 
 </p><p>The sensitive principle is our scout; the Intellectual-Principle
 our King.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn435.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>