<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn466.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn468.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. There is a principle having intellection of the external and
 another having self-intellection and thus further removed from
 duality.
 
 </p><p>Even the first mentioned is not without an effort 
 towards the pure
 unity of which it is not so capable: it does actually contain its
 object, though as something other than itself.
 
 </p><p>In the self-intellective, there is not even this distinction of
 being: self-conversing, the subject is its own object, and thus
 takes the double form while remaining essentially a unity. The
 intellection is the more profound for this internal possession of
 the object.
 
 </p><p>This principle is the primally intellective since there can be
 no intellection without duality in unity. If there is no unity,
 perceiving principle and perceived object will be different, and the
 intellection, therefore, not primal: a principle concerned with
 something external cannot be the primally intellective since it does
 not possess the object as integrally its own or as itself; if it
 does possess the object as itself- the condition of true 
 intellection-
 the two are one. Thus [in order to primal intellection] there must
 be a unity in duality, while a pure unity with no counterbalancing
 duality can have no object for its intellection and ceases to be
 intellective: in other words the primally intellective must 
 be at once
 simplex and something else.
 
 </p><p>But the surest way of realizing that its nature demands this
 combination of unity and duality is to proceed upwards from the
 Soul, where the distinction can be made more dearly since the
 duality is exhibited more obviously.
 
 </p><p>We can imagine the Soul as a double light, a lesser
 corresponding to the soul proper, a purer representing its
 intellective phase; if now we suppose this intellective 
 light equal to
 the light which is to be its object, we no longer distinguish
 between them; the two are recognised as one: we know, indeed, that
 there are two, but as we see them they have become one: this gives
 us the relation between the intellective subject and the object of
 intellection [in the duality and unity required by that primal
 intellection]: in our thought we have made the two into one; but on
 the other hand the one thing has become two, making itself into a
 duality at the moment of intellection, or, to be more exact, being
 dual by the fact of intellection and single by the fact that its
 intellectual object is itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn468.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>