<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn463.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn465.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. Knowing demands the organ fitted to the object; eyes for one
 kind, ears for another: similarly some things, we must 
 believe, are to
 be known by the Intellectual-Principle in us. We must not confuse
 intellection with hearing or seeing; this would be trying to 
 look with
 the ears or denying sound because it is not seen. Certain people, we
 must keep in mind, have forgotten that to which, from the beginning
 onwards, their longing and effort are pointed: for all that exists
 desires and aspires towards the Supreme by a compulsion of nature,
 as if all had received the oracle that without it they cannot be.
 
 </p><p>The perception of Beauty and the awe and the stirring of passion
 towards it are for those already in some degree knowing and
 awakened: but the Good, as possessed long since and setting up a
 natural tendency, is inherently present to even those asleep and
 brings them no wonder when some day they see it, since it is no
 occasional reminiscence but is always with them though in 
 their drowse
 they are not aware of it: the love of Beauty on the contrary sets up
 pain when it appears, for those that have seen it must pursue. This
 love of Beauty then is later than the love of Good and comes with a
 more sophisticated understanding; hence we know that Beauty is a
 secondary: the more primal appetition, not patent to sense, our
 movement towards our good, gives witness that The Good is 
 the earlier,
 the prior.
 
 </p><p>Again; all that have possessed themselves of The Good feel it
 sufficient: they have attained the end: but Beauty not all have
 known and those that have judge it to exist for itself and not for
 them, as in the charm of this world the beauty belongs only to its
 possessor.
 
 </p><p>Then, too, it is thought enough to appear loveable whether one
 is so or not: but no one wants his Good in semblance only. All are
 seeking The First as something ranking before aught else, but they
 struggle venomously for beauty as something secondary like 
 themselves:
 thus some minor personage may perhaps challenge equal honour with
 the King's right-hand man on pretext of similar dependence, 
 forgetting
 that, while both owe their standing to the monarch, the other holds
 the higher rank.
 
 </p><p>The source of the error is that while both The Good and The
 Beautiful participate in the common source, The One precedes 
 both; and
 that, in the Supreme also, The Good has no need of The Beautiful,
 while the Beautiful does need The Good.
 
 </p><p>The Good is gentle and friendly and tender, and we have 
 it present
 when we but will. Beauty is all violence and stupefaction; its
 pleasure is spoiled with pain, and it even draws the thoughtless
 away from The Good as some attraction will lure the child from the
 father's side: these things tell of youth. The Good is the older-
 not in time but by degree of reality- and it has the higher and
 earlier power, all power in fact, for the sequent holds only a power
 subordinate and delegated of which the prior remains sovereign.
 
 </p><p>Not that God has any need of His derivatives: He ignores all
 that produced realm, never necessary to Him, and remains identically
 what He was before He brought it into being. So too, had the 
 secondary
 never existed, He would have been unconcerned, exactly as He 
 would not
 have grudged existence to any other universe that might spring into
 being from Him, were any such possible; of course no other such
 could be since there is nothing that has not existence once the All
 exists.
 
 </p><p>But God never was the All; that would make Him dependent upon
 the universe: transcending all, He was able at once to make 
 all things
 and to leave them to their own being, He above.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn465.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>