<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn423.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn425.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. Anaxagoras, again, in his assertion of a Mind pure 
 and unmixed,
 affirms a simplex First and a sundered One, though writing 
 long ago he
 failed in precision.
 
 </p><p>Heraclitus, with his sense of bodily forms as things of
 ceaseless process and passage, knows the One as eternal and
 intellectual.
 
 </p><p>In Empedocles, similarly, we have a dividing principle,
 "Strife," set against "Friendship"- which is The One and is to him
 bodiless, while the elements represent Matter.
 
 </p><p>Later there is Aristotle; he begins by making the First
 transcendent and intellective but cancels that primacy by 
 supposing it
 to have self-intellection. Further he affirms a multitude of other
 intellective beings- as many indeed as there are orbs in the
 heavens; one such principle as in- over to every orb- and thus his
 account of the Intellectual Realm differs from Plato's and, failing
 reason, he brings in necessity; though whatever reasons he 
 had alleged
 there would always have been the objection that it would be more
 reasonable that all the spheres, as contributory to one 
 system, should
 look to a unity, to the First.
 
 </p><p>We are obliged also to ask whether to Aristotle's mind all
 Intellectual Beings spring from one, and that one their First; or
 whether the Principles in the Intellectual are many.
 
 </p><p>If from one, then clearly the Intellectual system will be
 analogous to that of the universe of sense-sphere encircling sphere,
 with one, the outermost, dominating all- the First [in the
 Intellectual] will envelop the entire scheme and will be an
 Intellectual [or Archetypal] Kosmos; and as in our universe the
 spheres are not empty but the first sphere is thick with stars and
 none without them, so, in the Intellectual Kosmos, those 
 principles of
 Movement will envelop a multitude of Beings, and that world will be
 the realm of the greater reality.
 
 </p><p>If on the contrary each is a principle, then the effective
 powers become a matter of chance; under what compulsion are they to
 hold together and act with one mind towards that work of unity, the
 harmony of the entire heavenly system? Again what can make it
 necessary that the material bodies of the heavenly system be equal
 in number to the Intellectual moving principles, and how can these
 incorporeal Beings be numerically many when there is no Matter to
 serve as the basis of difference?
 
 </p><p>For these reasons the ancient philosophers that ranged
 themselves most closely to the school of Pythagoras and of his later
 followers and to that of Pherekudes, have insisted upon this Nature,
 some developing the subject in their writings while others treated
 of it merely in unwritten discourses, some no doubt ignoring it
 entirely.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn425.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>