<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn450.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn452.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. If the Intellectual-Principle were the engendering 
 Source, then
 the engendered secondary, while less perfect than the
 Intellectual-Principle, would be close to it and similar to it: but
 since the engendering Source is above the Intellectual-Principle,
 the secondary can only be that principle.
 
 </p><p>But why is the Intellectual-Principle not the generating source?
 
 </p><p>Because [it is not a self-sufficing simplex]: the Act of the
 Intellectual-Principle is intellection, which means that, seeing the
 intellectual object towards which it has turned, it is 
 consummated, so
 to speak, by that object, being in itself indeterminate like sight
 [a vague readiness for any and every vision] and determined by the
 intellectual object. This is why it has been said that "out of the
 indeterminate dyad and The One arise the Ideas and the numbers": for
 the dyad is the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>Thus it is not a simplex; it is manifold; it exhibits a certain
 composite quality- within the Intellectual or divine order, 
 of course-
 as the principle that sees the manifold. It is, further, itself
 simultaneously object and agent of intellection and is on that count
 also a duality: and it possesses besides another object of
 intellection in the Order following upon itself.
 
 </p><p>But how can the Intellectual-Principle be a product of the
 Intellectual Object?
 
 </p><p>In this way: the intellectual object is self-gathered
 [self-compact] and is not deficient as the seeing and knowing
 principle must be- deficient, mean, as needing an object- it is
 therefore no unconscious thing: all its content and accompaniment
 are its possession; it is self-distinguishing throughout; it is the
 seat of life as of all things; it is, itself, that self-intellection
 which takes place in eternal repose, that is to say, in a mode other
 than that of the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>But if something comes to being within an entity which in no way
 looks outside itself- and especially within a being which is the sum
 of being- that entity must be the source of the new thing: stable in
 its own identity, it produces; but the product is that of an 
 unchanged
 being: the producer is unchangeably the intellectual object, the
 product is produced as the Intellectual Act, an Act taking
 intellection of its source- the only object that exists for 
 it- and so
 becoming Intellectual-Principle, that is to say, becoming another
 intellectual being, resembling its source, a reproduction 
 and image of
 that.
 
 </p><p>But how from amid perfect rest can an Act arise?
 
 </p><p>There is in everything the Act of the Essence and the Act going
 out from the Essence: the first Act is the thing itself in its
 realized identity, the second Act is an inevitably following outgo
 from the first, an emanation distinct from the thing itself.
 
 </p><p>Thus even in fire there is the warmth comported by its essential
 nature and there is the warmth going instantaneously outward 
 from that
 characterizing heat by the fact that the fire, remaining
 unchangeably fire, utters the Act native to its essential reality.
 
 </p><p>So it is in the divine also: or rather we have there the earlier
 form of the double act: the divine remains in its own unchanging
 being, but from its perfection and from the Act included in 
 its nature
 there emanates the secondary or issuing Act which- as the output of
 a mighty power, the mightiest there is- attains to Real Being as
 second to that which stands above all Being. That 
 transcendent was the
 potentiality of the All; this secondary is the All made actual.
 
 </p><p>And if this is all things, that must be above and outside of
 all, so, must transcend real being. And again, if that secondary is
 all things, and if above its multiplicity there is a unity 
 not ranking
 among those things, once more this unity transcends Real Being and
 therefore transcends the Intellectual-Principle as well. 
 There is thus
 something transcending Intellectual-Principle, for we must remember
 that real being is no corpse, the negation of life and of
 intellection, but is in fact identical with the
 Intellectual-Principle. The Intellectual-Principle is not something
 taking cognisance of things as sensation deals with sense objects
 existing independently of sense: on the contrary, it actually is the
 things it knows: the ideas constituting them it has not borrowed:
 whence could it have taken them? No: it exists here together with
 the things of the universe, identical with them, making a unity with
 them; and the collective knowledge [in the divine mind] of the
 immaterial is the universe of things.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn452.htm">Next: FIFTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>