<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn577.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn579.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. These problems at any rate all serve to show that, while in
 general it is necessary to look for differences by which to separate
 things from each other, to hunt for differences of the differences
 themselves is both futile and irrational. We cannot have 
 substances of
 substances, quantities of quantities, qualities of qualities,
 differences of differences; differences must, where 
 possible, be found
 outside the genus, in creative powers and the like: but where no
 such criteria are present, as in distinguishing dark-green from
 pale-green, both being regarded as derived from white and black,
 what expedient may be suggested?
 
 </p><p>Sense-perception and intelligence may be trusted to indicate
 diversity but not to explain it: explanation is outside the province
 of sense-perception, whose function is merely to produce a variety
 of information; while, as for intelligence, it works exclusively
 with intuitions and never resorts to explanations to justify them;
 there is in the movements of intelligence a diversity which
 separates one object from another, making further differentiation
 unnecessary.
 
 </p><p>Do all qualities constitute differentiae, or not? Granted that
 whiteness and colours in general and the qualities dependent upon
 touch and taste can, even while they remain species [of Quality],
 become differentiae of other things, how can grammar and music
 serve as differentiae? Perhaps in the sense that minds may be
 distinguished as grammatical and musical, especially if the
 qualities are innate, in which case they do become specific
 differentiae.
 
 </p><p>It remains to decide whether there can be any differentia derived
 from the genus to which the differentiated thing belongs, or whether
 it must of necessity belong to another genus? The former alternative
 would produce differentiae of things derived from the same genus as
 the differentiae themselves- for example, qualities of qualities.
 Virtue and vice are two states differing in quality: the states are
 qualities, and their differentiae qualities- unless indeed it be
 maintained that the state undifferentiated is not a quality, that
 the differentia creates the quality.
 
 </p><p>But consider the sweet as beneficial, the bitter as injurious:
 then bitter and sweet are distinguished, not by Quality, but by
 Relation. We might also be disposed to identify the sweet with the
 thick, and the Pungent with the thin: "thick" however hardly reveals
 the essence but merely the cause of sweetness- an argument which
 applies equally to pungency.
 
 </p><p>We must therefore reflect whether it may be taken as an 
 invariable
 rule that Quality is never a differentia of Quality, any more than
 Substance is a differentia of Substance, or Quantity of Quantity.
 
 </p><p>Surely, it may be interposed, five differs from three by two.
 No: it exceeds it by two; we do not say that it differs: how could
 it differ by a "two" in the "three"? We may add that neither can
 Motion differ from Motion by Motion. There is, in short, no parallel
 in any of the other genera.
 
 </p><p>In the case of virtue and vice, whole must be compared 
 with whole,
 and the differentiation conducted on this basis. As for the
 differentia being derived from the same genus as themselves,
 namely, Quality, and from no other genus, if we proceed on the
 principle that virtue is bound up with pleasure, vice with lust,
 virtue again with the acquisition of food, vice with idle
 extravagance, and accept these definitions as satisfactory, then
 clearly we have, here too, differentiae which are not qualities.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn579.htm">Next: Section 19</a></center>
 </body>