<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn595.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn597.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Let us consider once more how it is possible for an 
 identity to
 extend over a universe. This comes to the question how each
 variously placed entity in the multiplicity of the sense order can
 have its share in one identical Principle.
 
 </p><p>The solution is in the reasons given for refusing to distribute
 that principle; we are not to parcel it out among the entities of
 the multiple; on the contrary, we bring the distributed multiples to
 the unity. The unity has not gone forth to them: from their 
 dispersion
 we are led to think of it as broken up to meet them, but this is to
 distribute the controller and container equally over the material
 handled.
 
 </p><p>A hand may very well control an entire mass, a long plank, or
 anything of that sort; the control is effective throughout and yet
 is not distributed, unit for unit, over the object of control: the
 power is felt to reach over the whole area, though the hand is only
 hand-long, not taking the extension of the mass it wields; lengthen
 the object and, provided that the total is within the strength, the
 power handles the new load with no need of distributing itself over
 the increased area. Now let us eliminate the corporeal mass of the
 hand, retaining the power it exerted: is not that power, the
 impartible, present integrally over the entire area of control?
 
 </p><p>Or imagine a small luminous mass serving as centre to a
 transparent sphere, so that the light from within shows upon the
 entire outer surface, otherwise unlit: we surely agree that the
 inner core of light, intact and immobile, reaches over the entire
 outer extension; the single light of that small centre 
 illuminates the
 whole field. The diffused light is not due to any bodily magnitude
 of that central point which illuminates not as body but as body lit,
 that is by another kind of power than corporeal quality: let us then
 abstract the corporeal mass, retaining the light as power: we can no
 longer speak of the light in any particular spot; it is equally
 diffused within and throughout the entire sphere. We can no longer
 even name the spot it occupied so as to say whence it came or how it
 is present; we can but seek and wonder as the search shows us the
 light simultaneously present at each and every point in the 
 sphere. So
 with the sunlight: looking to the corporeal mass you are able to
 name the source of the light shining through all the air, 
 but what you
 see is one identical light in integral omnipresence. Consider too
 the refraction of light by which it is thrown away from the line of
 incidence; yet, direct or refracted, it is one and the same 
 light. And
 supposing, as before, that the sun were simply an unembodied
 illuminant, the light would no longer be fixed to any one definite
 spot: having no starting point, no centre of origin, it would be an
 integral unity omnipresent.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn597.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>