<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn576.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn578.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. This procedure, if approved, will entail a 
 distinction between
 psychic and bodily qualities, the latter belonging specifically to
 body.
 
 </p><p>If we decide to refer all souls to the higher, we are still at
 liberty to perform for Sensible qualities a division founded upon
 the senses themselves- the eyes, the ears, touch, taste, 
 smell; and if
 we are to look for further differences, colours may be subdivided
 according to varieties of vision, sounds according to varieties of
 hearing, and so with the other senses: sounds may also be classified
 qualitatively as sweet, harsh, soft.
 
 </p><p>Here a difficulty may be raised: we divide the varieties of
 Substance and their functions and activities, fair or foul or indeed
 of any kind whatsoever, on the basis of Quality, Quantity rarely, if
 ever, entering into the differences which produce species; Quantity,
 again, we divide in accordance with qualities of its own: 
 how then are
 we to divide Quality itself into species? what differences are we to
 employ, and from what genus shall we take them? To take them from
 Quality itself would be no less absurd than setting up substances as
 differences of substances.
 
 </p><p>How, then, are we to distinguish black from white? how
 differentiate colours in general from tastes and tangible qualities?
 By the variety of sense-organs? Then there will be no difference in
 the objects themselves.
 
 </p><p>But, waiving this objection, how deal with qualities perceived
 by the same sense-organ? We may be told that some colours integrate,
 others disintegrate the vision, that some tastes integrate, others
 disintegrate the tongue: we reply that, first, it is the actual
 experiences [of colour and taste, and not the sense-organs] that we
 are discussing and it is to these that the notions of integration
 and disintegration must be applied; secondly, a means of
 differentiating these experiences has not been offered.
 
 </p><p>It may be suggested that we divide them by their powers, and
 this suggestion is so far reasonable that we may well agree to
 divide the non-sensuous qualities, the sciences for example, on this
 basis; but we see no reason for resorting to their effects for the
 division of qualities sensuous. Even if we divide the sciences by
 their powers, founding our division of their processes upon the
 faculties of the mind, we can only grasp their differences in a
 rational manner if we look not only to their subject-matter but also
 to their Reason-Principles.
 
 </p><p>But, granted that we may divide the arts by their
 Reason-Principles and theorems, this method will hardly apply to
 embodied qualities. Even in the arts themselves an explanation would
 be required for the differences between the Reason-Principles
 themselves. Besides, we have no difficulty in seeing that white
 differs from black; to account for this difference is the purpose of
 our enquiry.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn578.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>