<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn512.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn514.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Now if we do not mean anything by Relation but are victims of
 words, none of the relations mentioned can exist: Relation will be a
 notion void of content.
 
 </p><p>Suppose however that we do possess ourselves of objective truth
 when in comparing two points of time we pronounce one prior, or
 posterior, to the other, that priority does entail something
 distinct from the objects to which it refers; admit an 
 objective truth
 behind the relation of left and right: does this apply also to
 magnitudes, and is the relation exhibiting excess and deficiency
 also something distinct from the quantities involved?
 
 </p><p>Now one thing is double of another quite apart from our speech
 or thought; one thing possesses and another is possessed before we
 notice the fact; equals do not await our comparison but- and this
 applies to Quality as well as Quantity- rest upon an 
 identity existing
 between the objects compared: in all the conditions in which 
 we assert
 Relation the mutual relation exists over and above the objects; we
 perceive it as already existent; our knowledge is directed upon a
 thing, there to be known- a clear testimony to the reality of
 Relation.
 
 </p><p>In these circumstances we can no longer put the question of its
 existence. We have simply to distinguish: sometimes the relation
 subsists while the objects remain unaltered and even apart;
 sometimes it depends upon their combination; sometimes, while they
 remain unchanged, the relation utterly ceases, or, as happens with
 right and near, becomes different. These are the facts which chiefly
 account for the notion that Relation has no reality in such
 circumstances.
 
 </p><p>Our task, thus, is to give full value to this elusive 
 character of
 Relation, and, then to enquire what there is that is constant in all
 these particular cases and whether this constant is generic or
 accidental; and having found this constant, we must discover 
 what sort
 of actuality it possesses.
 
 </p><p>It need hardly be said that we are not to affirm Relation where
 one thing is simply an attribute of another, as a habit is an
 attribute of a soul or of a body; it is not Relation when a soul
 belongs to this individual or dwells in that body. Relation enters
 only when the actuality of the relationships is derived from no
 other source than Relation itself; the actuality must be, not that
 which is characteristic of the substances in question, but that
 which is specifically called relative. Thus double with its
 correlative, half gives actuality neither to two yards' length or
 the number two, nor to one yard's length or the number one; what
 happens is that, when these quantities are viewed in their relation,
 they are found to be not merely two and one respectively, but to
 produce the assertion and to exhibit the fact of standing one to the
 other in the condition of double and half. Out of the objects in a
 certain conjunction this condition of being double and half 
 has issued
 as something distinct from either; double and half have emerged as
 correlatives, and their being is precisely this of mutual
 dependence; the double exists by its superiority over the half, and
 the half by its inferiority; there is no priority to distinguish
 double from half; they arise simultaneously.
 
 </p><p>It is another question whether they endure simultaneously. Take
 the case of father and son, and such relationships; the father dies,
 but the other is still his son, and so with brothers. 
 Moreover, we see
 likeness where one of the like people is dead.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn514.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>