<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn526.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn528.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 21</h4>
 
 <p>21. How, then, are we to recognise Passivity, since clearly it
 is not to be found in the Act from outside which the 
 recipient in turn
 makes his own? Surely we must look for it in cases where the patient
 remains without Act, the passivity pure.
 
 </p><p>Imagine a case where an agent improves, though its Act tends
 towards deterioration. Or, say, a a man's activity is guided by evil
 and is allowed to dominate another's without restraint. In 
 these cases
 the Act is clearly wrong, the Passion blameless.
 
 </p><p>What then is the real distinction between Action and Passion? Is
 it that Action starts from within and is directed upon an outside
 object, while Passion is derived from without and fulfilled within?
 What, then, are we to say of such cases as thought and opinion which
 originate within but are not directed outwards? Again, the Passion
 "being heated" rises within the self, when that self is 
 provoked by an
 opinion to reflection or to anger, without the intervention of any
 external. Still it remains true that Action, whether self-centred or
 with external tendency, is a motion rising in the self.
 
 </p><p>How then do we explain desire and other forms of aspiration?
 Aspiration must be a motion having its origin in the object aspired
 to, though some might disallow "origin" and be content with saying
 that the motion aroused is subsequent to the object; in what
 respect, then, does aspiring differ from taking a blow or being
 borne down by a thrust?
 
 </p><p>Perhaps, however, we should divide aspirations into two classes,
 those which follow intellect being described as Actions, the merely
 impulsive being Passions. Passivity now will not turn on origin,
 without or within- within there can only be deficiency; but 
 whenever a
 thing, without itself assisting in the process, undergoes an
 alteration not directed to the creation of Being but changing the
 thing for the worse or not for the better, such an alteration will
 be regarded as a Passion and as entailing passivity.
 
 </p><p>If however "being heated" means "acquiring heat," and is 
 sometimes
 found to contribute to the production of Being and sometimes not,
 passivity will be identical with impassivity: besides, "being
 heated" must then have a double significance [according as it does
 or does not contribute to Being].
 
 </p><p>The fact is, however, that "being heated," even when it
 contributes to Being, involves the presence of a patient [distinct
 from the being produced]. Take the case of the bronze which has to
 be heated and so is a patient; the being is a statue, which is not
 heated except accidentally [by the accident of being contained in
 the bronze]. If then the bronze becomes more beautiful as a result
 of being heated and in the same proportion, it certainly 
 becomes so by
 passivity; for passivity must, clearly, take two forms: there is the
 passivity which tends to alteration for better or for worse, 
 and there
 is the passivity which has neither tendency.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn528.htm">Next: Section 22</a></center>
 </body>