<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn508.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn510.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. But are we really obliged to posit the existence of such
 genera?
 
 </p><p>Take Substance, for Substance must certainly be our
 starting-point: what are the grounds for regarding Substance as one
 single genus?
 
 </p><p>It has been remarked that Substance cannot be a single entity
 common to both the Intellectual and the Sensible worlds. We may add
 that such community would entail the existence of something prior to
 Intellectual and Sensible Substances alike, something distinct from
 both as predicated of both; and this prior would be neither body nor
 unembodied; for it were one or the other, body would be 
 unembodied, or
 the unembodied would be the body.
 
 </p><p>This conclusion must not however prevent our seeking in 
 the actual
 substance of the Sensible world an element held in common by Matter,
 by Form and by their Composite, all of which are designated as
 substances, though it is not maintained that they are Substance in
 an equal degree; Form is usually held to be Substance in a higher
 degree than Matter, and rightly so, in spite of those who would have
 Matter to be the more truly real.
 
 </p><p>There is further the distinction drawn between what are known as
 First and Second Substances. But what is their common basis, seeing
 that the First are the source from which the Second derive 
 their right
 to be called substances?
 
 </p><p>But, in sum, it is impossible to define Substance: determine its
 property, and still you have not attained to its essence. Even the
 definition, "That which, numerically one and the same, is 
 receptive of
 contraries," will hardly be applicable to all substances alike.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn510.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>