<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn546.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn548.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. In what sense is the particular manifestation of Being a
 unity? Clearly, in so far as it is one thing, it forfeits its unity;
 with "one" and "thing" we have already plurality. No species can be
 a unity in more than an equivocal sense: a species is a plurality,
 so that the "unity" here is that of an army or a chorus. The unity
 of the higher order does not belong to species; unity is, thus,
 ambiguous, not taking the same form in Being and in 
 particular beings.
 
 </p><p>It follows that unity is not a genus. For a genus is such that
 wherever it is affirmed its opposites cannot also be affirmed;
 anything of which unity and its opposites are alike 
 affirmed- and this
 implies the whole of Being- cannot have unity as a genus. 
 Consequently
 unity can be affirmed as a genus neither of the primary genera-
 since the unity of Being is as much a plurality as a unity, and none
 of the other [primary] genera is a unity to the entire exclusion of
 plurality- nor of things posterior to Being, for these most
 certainly are a plurality. In fact, no genus with all its 
 items can be
 a unity; so that unity to become a genus must forfeit its unity. The
 unit is prior to number; yet number it must be, if it is to be a
 genus.
 
 </p><p>Again, the unit is a unit from the point of view of number: if
 it is a unit generically, it will not be a unit in the strict sense.
 
 </p><p>Again, just as the unit, appearing in numbers, not regarded as a
 genus predicated of them, but is thought of as inherent in them, so
 also unity, though present in Being, cannot stand as genus 
 to Being or
 to the other genera or to anything whatever.
 
 </p><p>Further, as the simplex must be the principle of the
 non-simplex, though not its genus- for then the non-simplex too
 would be simplex,- so it stands with unity; if unity is a Principle;
 it cannot be a genus to its subsequents, and therefore cannot be a
 genus of Being or of other things. If it is nevertheless to be a
 genus, everything of which it is a genus must be taken as a unit- a
 notion which implies the separation of unity from substance: it will
 not, therefore, be all-embracing. just as Being is not a genus of
 everything but only of species each of which is a being, so too
 unity will be a genus of species each of which is a unity. But that
 raises the question of what difference there is between one thing
 and another in so far as they are both units, corresponding to the
 difference between one being and another.
 
 </p><p>Unity, it may be suggested, is divided in its conjunction with
 Being and Substance; Being because it is so divided is considered a
 genus- the one genus manifested in many particulars; why then should
 not unity be similarly a genus, inasmuch as its manifestations are
 as many as those of Substance and it is divided into as many
 particulars?
 
 </p><p>In the first place, the mere fact that an entity inheres in many
 things is not enough to make it a genus of those things or 
 of anything
 else: in a word, a common property need not be a genus. The point
 inherent in a line is not a genus of lines, or a genus at all; nor
 again, as we have observed, is the unity latent in numbers a genus
 either of the numbers or of anything else: genus demands that the
 common property of diverse objects involve also differences arising
 out of its own character, that it form species, and that it belong
 to the essence of the objects. But what differences can there be in
 unity? What species does it engender? If it produces the same
 species as we find in connection with Being, it must be 
 identical with
 Being: only the name will differ, and the term Being may 
 well suffice.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn548.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>