<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn589.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn591.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. How are we to explain the omnipresence of the soul? Does it
 depend upon the definite magnitude of the material universe coupled
 with some native tendency in soul to distribute itself over material
 mass, or is it a characteristic of soul apart from body?
 
 </p><p>In the latter case, soul will not appear just where body 
 may bring
 it; body will meet soul awaiting it everywhere; wheresoever 
 body finds
 place, there soul lay before ever body was; the entire material mass
 of the universe has been set into an existent soul.
 
 </p><p>But if soul spread thus wide before material extension existed,
 then as covering all space it would seem to be of itself a thing of
 magnitude, and in what mode could it exist in the All before the All
 was in being, before there was any All? And who can accept a soul
 described as partless and massless and yet, for all that absence of
 extension, extending over a universe? We may perhaps be told that,
 though extended over the corporeal, it does not itself become so:
 but thus to give it magnitude as an accidental attribute leaves the
 problem still unsolved: precisely the same question must in 
 all reason
 arise: How can the soul take magnitude even in the move of accident?
 
 </p><p>We cannot think of soul being diffused as a quality is, say
 sweetness or colour, for while these are actual states of the masses
 affected so that they show that quality at every point, none of them
 has an independent existence; they are attributes of body and known
 only as in body; such quality is necessarily of a definite
 extension. Further, the colour at any point is independent of that
 at any other; no doubt the Form, White, is the same all over, but
 there is not arithmetical identity; in soul there is; it is one soul
 in foot and in hand, as the facts of perception show. And yet in the
 case of qualities the one is observably distributed part for part;
 in the soul the identity is undistributed; what we sometimes call
 distribution is simply omnipresence.
 
 </p><p>Obviously, we must take hold of the question from the very
 beginning in the hope of finding some clear and convincing theory as
 to how soul, immaterial and without magnitude, can be thus
 broad-spread, whether before material masses exist or as enveloping
 them. Of course, should it appear that this omnipresence may occur
 apart from material things, there is no difficulty in accepting its
 occurrence within the material.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn591.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>