<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn591.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn593.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. But are we to think of this Authentic Being as, itself,
 present, or does it remain detached, omnipresent in the sense only
 that powers from it enter everywhere?
 
 </p><p>Under the theory of presence by powers, souls are described as
 rays; the source remains self-locked and these are flung forth to
 impinge upon particular living things.
 
 </p><p>Now, in beings whose unity does not reproduce the entire 
 nature of
 that principle, any presence is presence of an emanant power: even
 this, however, does not mean that the principle is less than
 integrally present; it is not sundered from the power which it has
 uttered; all is offered, but the recipient is able to take only so
 much. But in Beings in which the plenitude of these powers is
 manifested, there clearly the Authentic itself is present, though
 still as remaining distinct; it is distinct in that, becoming the
 informing principle of some definite thing, it would 
 abdicate from its
 standing as the total and from its uttermost self-abiding and would
 belong, in some mode of accident, to another thing as well. Still it
 is not the property of what may seek to join with it; it 
 chooses where
 it will and enters as the participant's power may allow, but it does
 not become a chattel; it remains the quested and so in another sense
 never passes over. There is nothing disquieting in omnipresence
 after this mode where there is no appropriation: in the same
 accidental way, we may reasonably put it, soul concurs with body,
 but it is soul self-holding, not inbound with Matter, free 
 even of the
 body which it has illuminated through and through.
 
 </p><p>Nor does the placelessness of Being make it surprising that it
 be present universally to things of place; on the contrary, 
 the wonder
 would be- the more than wonder, the impossibility- if from a place
 of its own it were present to other things in their place, or if
 having place it were present at all- and, especially present, as we
 assert, integrally.
 
 </p><p>But set it outside of place, and reason tells us that it will be
 present entire where it is present at all and that, present to the
 total, it must be present in the same completeness to every several
 unity; otherwise something of it is here and something there, and at
 once it is fragmentary, it is body.
 
 </p><p>How can we so dispart Being? We cannot break Life into parts; if
 the total was Life, the fragment is not. But we do not thus sunder
 Intelligence, one intelligence in this man, another in that? No;
 such a fragment would not be Intelligence. But the Being of the
 individual? Once more, if the total thing is Being, then a fragment
 could not be. Are we told that in a body, a total of parts, every
 member is also a body? But here we are dividing not body but a
 particular quantity of body, each of those divisions being described
 as body in virtue of possessing the Form or Idea that constitutes
 body; and this Idea has no magnitude, is incapable of magnitude.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn593.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>