<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn581.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn583.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 22</h4>
 
 <p>22. But suppose that we identify alteration with Motion on the
 ground that Motion itself results in difference: how then do we
 proceed to define Motion?
 
 </p><p>It may roughly be characterized as the passage from the
 potentiality to its realization. That is potential which can either
 pass into a Form- for example, the potential statue- or else 
 pass into
 actuality- such as the ability to walk: whenever progress is made
 towards the statue, this progress is Motion; and when the ability to
 walk is actualized in walking, this walking is itself Motion:
 dancing is, similarly, the motion produced by the potential dancer
 taking his steps.
 
 </p><p>In the one type of Motion a new Form comes into existence
 created by the motion; the other constitutes, as it were, the pure
 Form of the potentiality, and leaves nothing behind it when once the
 motion has ceased. Accordingly, the view would not be unreasonable
 which, taking some Forms to be active, others inactive, regarded
 Motion as a dynamic Form in opposition to the other Forms which are
 static, and further as the cause of whatever new Form ensues upon
 it. To proceed to identify this bodily motion with life would
 however be unwarrantable; it must be considered as identical only in
 name with the motions of Intellect and Soul.
 
 </p><p>That Motion is a genus we may be all the more confident in
 virtue of the difficulty- the impossibility even- of confining it
 within a definition.
 
 </p><p>But how can it be a Form in cases where the motion leads to
 deterioration, or is purely passive? Motion, we may suggest, is like
 the heat of the sun causing some things to grow and withering
 others. In so far as Motion is a common property, it is identical in
 both conditions; its apparent difference is due to the objects moved.
 
 </p><p>Is, then, becoming ill identical with becoming well? As motions
 they are identical. In what respect, then, do they differ? In their
 substrates? or is there some other criterion?
 
 </p><p>This question may however be postponed until we come to consider
 alteration: at present we have to discover what is the constant
 element in every motion, for only on this basis can we establish the
 claim of Motion to be a genus.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps the one term covers many meanings; its claim to generic
 status would then correspond to that of Being.
 
 </p><p>As a solution of the problem we may suggest that motions 
 conducing
 to the natural state or functioning in natural conditions should
 perhaps, as we have already asserted, be regarded as being in a
 sense Forms, while those whose direction is contrary to 
 nature must be
 supposed to be assimilated to the results towards which they lead.
 
 </p><p>But what is the constant element in alteration, in growth and
 birth and their opposites, in local change? What is that which makes
 them all motions? Surely it is the fact that in every case the
 object is never in the same state before and after the 
 motion, that it
 cannot remain still and in complete inactivity but, so long as the
 motion is present, is continually urged to take a new 
 condition, never
 acquiescing in Identity but always courting Difference; deprived of
 Difference, Motion perishes.
 
 </p><p>Thus, Difference may be predicated of Motion, not merely in the
 sense that it arises and persists in a difference of conditions, but
 in the sense of being itself perpetual difference. It follows that
 Time, as being created by Motion, also entails perpetual difference:
 Time is the measure of unceasing Motion, accompanying its course
 and, as it were, carried along its stream.
 
 </p><p>In short, the common basis of all Motion is the existence of a
 progression and an urge from potentiality and the potential to
 actuality and the actual: everything which has any kind of motion
 whatsoever derives this motion from a pre-existent 
 potentiality within
 itself of activity or passivity.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn583.htm">Next: Section 23</a></center>
 </body>