<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn507.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn509.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Philosophy at a very early stage investigated the number and
 character of the Existents. Various theories resulted: some declared
 for one Existent, others for a finite number, others again for an
 infinite number, while as regards the nature of the Existents- one,
 numerically finite, or numerically infinite- there was a similar
 disagreement. These theories, in so far as they have been adequately
 examined by later workers, may be passed over here; our 
 attention must
 be directed upon the results of those whose examination has led them
 to posit on their awn account certain well-defined genera.
 
 </p><p>These thinkers rejected pure unity on the ground of the
 plurality observed even in the Intellectual world; they rejected an
 infinite number as not reconcilable with the facts and as defying
 knowledge: considering the foundations of being to be "genera"
 rather than elements strictly so called, they concluded for a finite
 number. Of these "genera" some found ten, others less, 
 others no doubt
 more.
 
 </p><p>But here again there is a divergence of views. To some the
 genera are first-principles; to others they indicate only a generic
 classification of the Existents themselves.
 
 </p><p>Let us begin with the well-known tenfold division of the
 Existents, and consider whether we are to understand ten 
 genera ranged
 under the common name of Being, or ten categories. That the 
 term Being
 has not the same sense in all ten is rightly maintained.
 
 </p><p>But a graver problem confronts us at the outset: Are the 
 ten found
 alike in the Intellectual and in the Sensible realms? Or are 
 all found
 in the Sensible and some only in the Intellectual? All in the
 Intellectual and some in the Sensible is manifestly impossible.
 
 </p><p>At this point it would be natural to investigate which of the
 ten belong to both spheres, and whether the Existents of the
 Intellectual are to be ranged under one and the same genus with the
 Existents in the Sensible, or whether the term "Existence" [or
 Substance] is equivocal as applied to both realms. If the 
 equivocation
 exists, the number of genera will be increased: if there is no
 equivocation, it is strange to find the one same "Existence"
 applying to the primary and to the derivative Existents when there
 is no common genus embracing both primal and secondary.
 
 </p><p>These thinkers are however not considering the Intellectual
 realm in their division, which was not intended to cover all the
 Existents; the Supreme they overlooked.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn509.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>