<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn556.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn558.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 20</h4>
 
 <p>20. We may thus distinguish two phases of Intellect, in one of
 which it may be taken as having no contact whatever with particulars
 and no Act upon anything; thus it is kept apart from being a
 particular intellect. In the same way science is prior to any of its
 constituent species, and the specific science is prior to any of its
 component parts: being none of its particulars, it is the 
 potentiality
 of all; each particular, on the other hand, is actually itself, but
 potentially the sum of all the particulars: and as with the specific
 science, so with science as a whole. The specific sciences lie in
 potentiality in science the total; even in their specific character
 they are potentially the whole; they have the whole 
 predicated of them
 and not merely a part of the whole. At the same time, science must
 exist as a thing in itself, unharmed by its divisions.
 
 </p><p>So with Intellect. Intellect as a whole must be thought of as
 prior to the intellects actualized as individuals; but when 
 we come to
 the particular intellects, we find that what subsists in the
 particulars must be maintained from the totality. The Intellect
 subsisting in the totality is a provider for the particular
 intellects, is the potentiality of them: it involves them as members
 of its universality, while they in turn involve the universal
 Intellect in their particularity, just as the particular science
 involves science the total.
 
 </p><p>The great Intellect, we maintain, exists in itself and the
 particular intellects in themselves; yet the particulars are
 embraced in the whole, and the whole in the particulars. The
 particular intellects exist by themselves and in another, the
 universal by itself and in those. All the particulars exist
 potentially in that self-existent universal, which actually is the
 totality, potentially each isolated member: on the other hand, each
 particular is actually what it is [its individual self], potentially
 the totality. In so far as what is predicated of them is their
 essence, they are actually what is predicated of them; but where the
 predicate is a genus, they are that only potentially. On the other
 hand, the universal in so far as it is a genus is the potentiality
 of all its subordinate species, though none of them in actuality;
 all are latent in it, but because its essential nature exists in
 actuality before the existence of the species, it does not submit to
 be itself particularized. If then the particulars are to exist in
 actuality- to exist, for example, as species- the cause must lie in
 the Act radiating from the universal.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn558.htm">Next: Section 21</a></center>
 </body>