<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn545.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn547.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. The above considerations- to which others, doubtless, might
 be added- suffice to show that these five are primary 
 genera. But that
 they are the only primary genera, that there are no others, 
 how can we
 be confident of this? Why do we not add unity to them? Quantity?
 Quality? Relation, and all else included by our various forerunners?
 
 </p><p>As for unity: If the term is to mean a unity in which 
 nothing else
 is present, neither Soul nor Intellect nor anything else, this can
 be predicated of nothing, and therefore cannot be a genus. If it
 denotes the unity present in Being, in which case we predicate Being
 of unity, this unity is not primal.
 
 </p><p>Besides, unity, containing no differences, cannot 
 produce species,
 and not producing species, cannot be a genus. You cannot so much as
 divide unity: to divide it would be to make it many. Unity, aspiring
 to be a genus, becomes a plurality and annuls itself.
 
 </p><p>Again, you must add to it to divide it into species; for 
 there can
 be no differentiae in unity as there are in Substance. The mind
 accepts differences of Being, but differences within unity there
 cannot be. Every differentia introduces a duality destroying the
 unity; for the addition of any one thing always does away with the
 previous quantity.
 
 </p><p>It may be contended that the unity which is implicit in Being
 and in Motion is common to all other things, and that therefore
 Being and unity are inseparable. But we rejected the idea that Being
 is a genus comprising all things, on the ground that these things
 are not beings in the sense of the Absolute Being, but beings in
 another mode: in the same way, we assert, unity is not a genus, the
 Primary Unity having a character distinct from all other unities.
 
 </p><p>Admitted that not everything suffices to produce a genus, it may
 yet be urged that there is an Absolute or Primary Unity
 corresponding to the other primaries. But if Being and unity are
 identified, then since Being has already been included among the
 genera, it is but a name that is introduced in unity: if, however,
 they are both unity, some principle is implied: if there is anything
 in addition [to this principle], unity is predicated of this added
 thing; if there is nothing added, the reference is again to 
 that unity
 predicated of nothing. If however the unity referred to is that
 which accompanies Being, we have already decided that it is not
 unity in the primary sense.
 
 </p><p>But is there any reason why this less complete unity should not
 still possess Primary Being, seeing that even its posterior 
 we rank as
 Being, and "Being" in the sense of the Primary Being? The reason is
 that the prior of this Being cannot itself be Being- or else, if the
 prior is Being, this is not Primary Being: but the prior is unity;
 [therefore unity is not Being].
 
 </p><p>Furthermore, unity, abstracted from Being, has no differentiae.
 
 </p><p>Again, even taking it as bound up with Being: If it is a
 consequent of Being, then it is a consequent of everything, and
 therefore the latest of things: but the genus takes 
 priority. If it is
 simultaneous with Being, it is simultaneous with everything: but a
 genus is not thus simultaneous. If it is prior to Being, it is of
 the nature of a Principle, and therefore will belong only to Being;
 but if it serves as Principle to Being, it is not its genus: if it
 is not genus to Being, it is equally not a genus of anything 
 else; for
 that would make Being a genus of all other things.
 
 </p><p>In sum, the unity exhibited in Being on the one hand
 approximates to Unity-Absolute and on the other tends to identify
 itself with Being: Being is a unity in relation to the Absolute, is
 Being by virtue of its sequence upon that Absolute: it is indeed
 potentially a plurality, and yet it remains a unity and rejecting
 division refuses thereby to become a genus.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn547.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>