<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn528.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn530.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 23</h4>
 
 <p>23. As for Possession, if the term is used comprehensively, why
 are not all its modes to be brought under one category? Possession,
 thus, would include the quantum as possessing magnitude, the quale
 as possessing colour; it would include fatherhood and the
 complementary relationships, since the father possesses the son and
 the son possesses the father: in short, it would include all
 belongings.
 
 </p><p>If, on the contrary, the category of Possession 
 comprises only the
 things of the body, such as weapons and shoes, we first ask why this
 should be so, and why their possession produces a single category,
 while burning, cutting, burying or casting them out do not give
 another or others. If it is because these things are carried on the
 person, then one's mantle lying on a couch will come under a 
 different
 category from that of the mantle covering the person. If the 
 ownership
 of possession suffices, then clearly one must refer to the one
 category of Possession all objects identified by being possessed,
 every case in which possession can be established; the character of
 the possessed object will make no difference.
 
 </p><p>If however Possession is not to be predicated of Quality because
 Quality stands recognised as a category, nor of Quantity because the
 category of Quantity has been received, nor of parts because 
 they have
 been assigned to the category of Substance, why should we predicate
 Possession of weapons, when they too are comprised in the accepted
 category of Substance? Shoes and weapons are clearly substances.
 
 </p><p>How, further, is "He possesses weapons," signifying as it does
 that the action of arming has been performed by a subject, to be
 regarded as an entirely simple notion, assignable to a single
 category?
 
 </p><p>Again, is Possession to be restricted to an animate possessor,
 or does it hold good even of a statue as possessing the objects
 above mentioned? The animate and inanimate seem to possess in
 different ways, and the term is perhaps equivocal. Similarly,
 "standing" has not the same connotation as applied to the animate
 and the inanimate.
 
 </p><p>Besides, how can it be reasonable for what is found only in a
 limited number of cases to form a distinct generic category?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn530.htm">Next: Section 24</a></center>
 </body>