<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn590.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn592.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Side by side exist the Authentic All and its counterpart, the
 visible universe. The Authentic is contained in nothing, 
 since nothing
 existed before it; of necessity anything coming after it must, as a
 first condition of existence, be contained by this All, especially
 since it depends upon the Authentic and without that could have
 neither stability nor movement.
 
 </p><p>We may be reminded that the universe cannot be contained in the
 Authentic as in a place, where place would mean the 
 boundaries of some
 surrounding extension considered as an envelope, or some space
 formerly a part of the Void and still remaining unoccupied even
 after the emergence of the universe, that it can only support
 itself, as it were, upon the Authentic and rest in the embrace of
 its omnipresence; but this objection is merely verbal and will
 disappear if our meaning is grasped; we mention it for another
 purpose; it goes to enforce our real assertion that the 
 Authentic All,
 at once primal and veritable, needs no place and is in no way
 contained. The All, as being an integral, cannot fall short 
 of itself;
 it must ever have fulfilled its own totality, ever reached to its
 own equivalence; as far as the sum of entities extends, 
 there this is;
 for this is the All.
 
 </p><p>Inevitably, also, anything other than this All that may be
 stationed therein must have part in the All, merge into it, and hold
 by its strength; it is not that the thing detaches a portion of the
 All but that within itself it finds the All which has entered into
 it while still unbrokenly self-abiding, since Being cannot lodge in
 non-Being, but, if anything, non-Being within Being.
 
 </p><p>Being, then, is present to all Being; an identity cannot tear
 itself asunder; the omnipresence asserted of it must be presence
 within the realm of Being; that is, it must be a 
 self-presence. And it
 is in no way strange that the omnipresence should be at once
 self-abiding and universal; this is merely saying omnipresence
 within a unity.
 
 </p><p>It is our way to limit Being to the sense-known and therefore to
 think of omnipresence in terms of the concrete; in our 
 overestimate of
 the sensible, we question how that other Nature can reach over such
 vastness; but our great is small, and this, small to us, is great;
 it reaches integrally to every point of our universe- or, better,
 our universe, moving from every side and in all its members towards
 this, meets it everywhere as the omnipresent All ever stretching
 beyond.
 
 </p><p>The universe in all its reach can attain nothing further- that
 would mean overpassing the total of Being- and therefore is 
 content to
 circle about it; not able to encompass or even to fill the All, it
 is content to accept place and subordination, for thus it preserves
 itself in neighbouring the higher present to it- present and yet
 absent; self-holding, whatever may seek its presence.
 
 </p><p>Wherever the body of the universe may touch, there it finds this
 All; it strives for no further advance, willing to revolve 
 in that one
 circle, since to it that is the All and in that movement its every
 part embraces the All.
 
 </p><p>If that higher were itself in place there would be the need of
 seeking that precise place by a certain right path; part of seeker
 must touch part of sought, and there would be far and near. But
 since there is no far and near there must be, if presence at all,
 presence entire. And presence there indubitably is; this highest is
 present to every being of those that, free of far and near, are of
 power to receive.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn592.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>