<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn573.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn575.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. How are we to classify the straight line? Shall we deny that
 it is a magnitude?
 
 </p><p>The suggestion may be made that it is a qualified magnitude. May
 we not, then, consider straightness as a differentia of "line"? We at
 any rate draw on Quality for differentiae of Substance.
 
 </p><p>The straight line is, thus, a quantity plus a differentia; but it
 is not on that account a composite made up of straightness and line:
 if it be a composite, the composite possesses a differentiae of its
 own.
 
 </p><p>But [if the line is a quantity] why is not the product of three
 lines included in Quantity? The answer is that a triangle 
 consists not
 merely of three lines but of three lines in a particular
 disposition, a quadrilateral of four lines in a particular
 disposition: even the straight line involves disposition as well as
 quantity.
 
 </p><p>Holding that the straight line is not mere quantity, we should
 naturally proceed to assert that the line as limited is not mere
 quantity, but for the fact that the limit of a line is a point,
 which is in the same category, Quantity. Similarly, the limited
 surface will be a quantity, since lines, which have a far 
 better right
 than itself to this category, constitute its limits. With the
 introduction of the limited surface- rectangle, hexagon, 
 polygon- into
 the category of Quantity, this category will be brought to include
 every figure whatsoever.
 
 </p><p>If however by classing the triangle and the rectangle as 
 qualia we
 propose to bring figures under Quality, we are not thereby precluded
 from assigning the same object to more categories than one: in so
 far as it is a magnitude- a magnitude of such and such a 
 size- it will
 belong to Quantity; in so far as it presents a particular shape, to
 Quality.
 
 </p><p>It may be urged that the triangle is essentially a particular
 shape. Then what prevents our ranking the sphere also as a quality?
 
 </p><p>To proceed on these lines would lead us to the conclusion that
 geometry is concerned not with magnitudes but with Quality. But this
 conclusion is untenable; geometry is the study of magnitudes. The
 differences of magnitudes do not eliminate the existence of 
 magnitudes
 as such, any more than the differences of substances annihilate the
 substances themselves.
 
 </p><p>Moreover, every surface is limited; it is impossible for any
 surface to be infinite in extent.
 
 </p><p>Again, when I find Quality bound up with Substance, I 
 regard it as
 substantial quality: I am not less, but far more, disposed to see in
 figures or shapes [qualitative] varieties of Quantity. Besides, if
 we are not to regard them as varieties of magnitude, to what 
 genus are
 we to assign them?
 
 </p><p>Suppose, then, that we allow differences of magnitude; we commit
 ourselves to a specific classification of the magnitudes so
 differentiated.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn575.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>