<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn500.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn502.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. All, then, that is present in the sense realm as Idea comes
 from the Supreme. But what is not present as Idea, does not. Thus of
 things conflicting with nature, none is There: the inartistic is not
 contained in the arts; lameness is not in the seed; for a lame leg
 is either inborn through some thwarting of the Reason-principle or
 is a marring of the achieved form by accident. To that Intellectual
 Kosmos belong qualities, accordant with Nature, and 
 quantities; number
 and mass; origins and conditions; all actions and experiences not
 against nature; movement and repose, both the universals and the
 particulars: but There time is replaced by eternity and space by its
 intellectual equivalent, mutual inclusiveness.
 
 </p><p>In that Intellectual Kosmos, where all is one total, every
 entity that can be singled out is an intellective essence and a
 participant in life: thus, identity and difference, movement and
 rest with the object resting or moving, essence and quality, all
 have essential existence. For every real being must be in actuality
 not merely in potentiality and therefore the nature of each 
 essence is
 inherent in it.
 
 </p><p>This suggests the question whether the Intellectual Kosmos
 contains the forms only of the things of sense or of other existents
 as well. But first we will consider how it stands with artistic
 creations: there is no question of an ideal archetype of evil: the
 evil of this world is begotten of need, privation, deficiency, and
 is a condition peculiar to Matter distressed and to what has 
 come into
 likeness with Matter.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn502.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>