<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn513.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn515.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. But we are digressing: we must resume our enquiry into the
 cause of dissimilarity among relations. Yet we must first be
 informed what reality, common to all cases, is possessed by this
 Existence derived from mutual conditions.
 
 </p><p>Now the common principle in question cannot be a body. The only
 alternative is that, if it does exist, it be something bodiless,
 either in the objects thus brought together or outside of them.
 
 </p><p>Further, if Relation always takes the same form, the term is
 univocal [and specific differentiation is impossible]; if 
 not, that is
 if it differs from case to case, the term is equivocal, and the same
 reality will not necessarily be implied by the mere use of the term
 Relation.
 
 </p><p>How then shall we distinguish relations? We may observe that
 some things have an inactive or dormant relation, with which their
 actuality is entirely simultaneous; others, combining power and
 function with their relation, have the relation in some mode always
 even though the mode be merely that of potentiality, but attain to
 actual being only in contact with their correlatives. Or perhaps all
 distinctions may be reduced to that between producer and product,
 where the product merely gives a name to the producer of its
 actuality: an example of this is the relation of father to 
 son, though
 here both producer and product have a sort of actuality, 
 which we call
 life.
 
 </p><p>Are we thus, then, to divide Relation, and thereby reject the
 notion of an identical common element in the different kinds of
 Relation, making it a universal rule that the relation takes a
 different character in either correlative? We must in this case
 recognise that in our distinction between productive and
 non-productive relations we are overlooking the equivocation
 involved in making the terms cover both action and passion, as
 though these two were one, and ignoring the fact that 
 production takes
 a different form in the two correlatives. Take the case of equality,
 producing equals: nothing is equal without equality, nothing 
 identical
 without identity. Greatness and smallness both entail a presence-
 the presence of greatness and smallness respectively. When we come
 to greater and smaller, the participants in these relations are
 greater and smaller only when greatness and smallness are actually
 observed in them.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn515.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>