<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn586.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn588.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 27</h4>
 
 <p>27. What view are we to take of that which is opposed to Motion,
 whether it be Stability or Rest? Are we to consider it as a distinct
 genus, or to refer it to one of the genera already established? We
 should, no doubt, be well advised to assign Stability to the
 Intellectual, and to look in the lower sphere for Rest alone.
 
 </p><p>First, then, we have to discover the precise nature of this
 Rest. If it presents itself as identical with Stability, we have no
 right to expect to find it in the sphere where nothing is stable and
 the apparently stable has merely a less strenuous motion.
 
 </p><p>Suppose the contrary: we decide that Rest is different from
 Stability inasmuch as Stability belongs to the utterly immobile,
 Rest to the stationary which, though of a nature to move, does not
 move. Now, if Rest means coming to rest, it must be regarded as a
 motion which has not yet ceased but still continues; but if 
 we suppose
 it to be incompatible with Motion, we have first to ask whether
 there is in the Sensible world anything without motion.
 
 </p><p>Yet nothing can experience every type of motion; certain motions
 must be ruled out in order that we may speak of the moving object as
 existing: may we not, then, say of that which has no 
 locomotion and is
 at rest as far as pertains to that specific type of motion, simply
 that it does not move?
 
 </p><p>Rest, accordingly, is the negation of Motion: in other words, it
 has no generic status. It is in fact related only to one type of
 motion, namely, locomotion; it is therefore the negation of this
 motion that is meant.
 
 </p><p>But, it may be asked, why not regard Motion as the negation of
 Stability? We reply that Motion does not appear alone; it is
 accompanied by a force which actualizes its object, forcing it on,
 as it were, giving it a thousand forms and destroying them all:
 Rest, on the contrary, comports nothing but the object itself, and
 signifies merely that the object has no motion.
 
 </p><p>Why, then, did we not in discussing the Intellectual realm
 assert that Stability was the negation of Motion? Because it is not
 indeed possible to consider Stability as an annulling of Motion, for
 when Motion ceases Stability does not exist, but requires for its
 own existence the simultaneous existence of Motion; and what is of a
 nature to move is not stationary because Stability of that realm is
 motionless, but because Stability has taken hold of it; in so far as
 it has Motion, it will never cease to move: thus, it is stationary
 under the influence of Stability, and moves under the influence of
 Motion. In the lower realm, too, a thing moves in virtue of Motion,
 but its Rest is caused by a deficiency; it has been deprived of its
 due motion.
 
 </p><p>What we have to observe is the essential character of this
 Sensible counterpart of Stability.
 
 </p><p>Consider sickness and health. The convalescent moves in the
 sense that he passes from sickness to health. What species 
 of rest are
 we to oppose to this convalescence? If we oppose the condition from
 which he departs, that condition is sickness, not Stability; if that
 into which he passes, it is health, again not the same as Stability.
 
 </p><p>It may be declared that health or sickness is indeed some form
 of Stability: we are to suppose, then, that Stability is the genus
 of which health and sickness are species; which is absurd.
 
 </p><p>Stability may, again, be regarded as an attribute of health:
 according to this view, health will not be health before possessing
 Stability.
 
 </p><p>These questions may however be left to the judgement of the
 individual.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn588.htm">Next: Section 28</a></center>
 </body>