<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn580.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn582.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 21</h4>
 
 <p>21. The claim of Motion to be established as a genus will depend
 upon three conditions: first, that it cannot rightly be referred to
 any other genus; second, that nothing higher than itself can be
 predicated of it in respect of its essence; third, that by assuming
 differences it will produce species. These conditions satisfied, we
 may consider the nature of the genus to which we shall refer it.
 
 </p><p>Clearly it cannot be identified with either the Substance or the
 Quality of the things which possess it. It cannot, further, be
 consigned to Action, for Passivity also comprises a variety of
 motions; nor again to Passivity itself, because many motions are
 actions: on the contrary, actions and passions are to be referred to
 Motion.
 
 </p><p>Furthermore, it cannot lay claim to the category of Relation on
 the mere ground that it has an attributive and not a self-centred
 existence: on this ground, Quality too would find itself in that
 same category; for Quality is an attribute and contained in an
 external: and the same is true of Quantity.
 
 </p><p>If we are agreed that Quality and Quantity, though attributive,
 are real entities, and on the basis of this reality 
 distinguishable as
 Quality and Quantity respectively: then, on the same principle,
 since Motion, though an attribute has a reality prior to its
 attribution, it is incumbent upon us to discover the intrinsic
 nature of this reality. We must never be content to regard as a
 relative something which exists prior to its attribution, but only
 that which is engendered by Relation and has no existence apart from
 the relation to which it owes its name: the double, strictly so
 called, takes birth and actuality in juxtaposition with a yard's
 length, and by this very process of being juxtaposed with a
 correlative acquires the name and exhibits the fact of being double.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is that entity, called Motion, which, though
 attributive, has an independent reality, which makes its attribution
 possible- the entity corresponding to Quality, Quantity and 
 Substance?
 
 </p><p>But first, perhaps, we should make sure that there is nothing
 prior to Motion and predicated of it as its genus.
 
 </p><p>Change may be suggested as a prior. But, in the first place,
 either it is identical with Motion, or else, if change be 
 claimed as a
 genus, it will stand distinct from the genera so far considered:
 secondly, Motion will evidently take rank as a species and have some
 other species opposed to it- becoming, say- which will be regarded
 as a change but not as a motion.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is the ground for denying that becoming is a motion?
 The fact, perhaps, that what comes to be does not yet exist, whereas
 Motion has no dealings with the non-existent. But, on that ground,
 becoming will not be a change either. If however it be alleged that
 becoming is merely a type of alteration or growth since it 
 takes place
 when things alter and grow, the antecedents of becoming are being
 confused with becoming itself. Yet becoming, entailing as it does
 these antecedents, must necessarily be a distinct species; for the
 event and process of becoming cannot be identified with 
 merely passive
 alteration, like turning hot or white: it is possible for the
 antecedents to take place without becoming as such being 
 accomplished,
 except in so far as the actual alteration [implied in the 
 antecedents]
 has "come to be"; where, however, an animal or a vegetal life is
 concerned, becoming [or birth] takes place only upon its acquisition
 of a Form.
 
 </p><p>The contrary might be maintained: that change is more plausibly
 ranked as a species than is Motion, because change signifies merely
 the substitution of one thing for another, whereas Motion involves
 also the removal of a thing from the place to which it belongs, as
 is shown by locomotion. Even rejecting this distinction, we must
 accept as types of Motion knowledge and musical performance- 
 in short,
 changes of condition: thus, alteration will come to be regarded as a
 species of Motion- namely, motion displacing.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn582.htm">Next: Section 22</a></center>
 </body>