<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn597.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn599.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. If in such a partition of the unity, that which entered into
 each participant were an entire- always identical with the first-
 then, in the progressive severance, the firsts would become
 numerous, each particular becoming a first: and then what prevents
 these many firsts from reconstituting the collective unity?
 Certainly not the bodies they have entered, for those firsts 
 cannot be
 present in the material masses as their Forms if they are to remain
 identical with the First from which they come. On the other hand,
 taking the part conceived as present in the multiple to be simply a
 power [emanating from the First], at once such a part ceases 
 to be the
 unity; we have then to ask how these powers come to be cut off, to
 have abandoned their origin; they certainly have not moved away with
 no purpose in their movement.
 
 </p><p>Again, are those powers, entering the universe of sense, still
 within the First or not?
 
 </p><p>If they are not, we have the absurdity that the First has been
 lessened, disempowered, stripped of power originally possessed.
 Besides, how could powers thus cut off subsist apart from the
 foundations of their being? Suppose these powers to be at once
 within the First and elsewhere; then the universe of sense contains
 either the entire powers or parts of them; if parts of powers, the
 other parts are There; if entires, then either the powers There are
 present here also undivided- and this brings us back to an identity
 omnipresent in integral identity- or they are each an entire 
 which has
 taken division into a multiplicity of similars so that attached to
 every essence there is one power only- that particularly
 appropriated to it- the other powers remaining powers unattached:
 yet power apart from Being is as impossible as Being apart 
 from power;
 for There power is Being or something greater than Being.
 
 </p><p>Or, again, suppose the powers coming Thence are other than their
 source- lesser, fainter, as a bright light dwindles to a 
 dim- but each
 attached to its essence as a power must always be: such secondary
 powers would be perfectly uniform and at once we are forced to admit
 the omnipresence of the one same power or at the least the presence-
 as in one and the same body- of some undivided identity integral at
 every point.
 
 </p><p>And if this is the case with a particular body, why not with the
 entire universe?
 
 </p><p>If we think of the single power as being endlessly divided, it
 is no longer a power entire; partition means lessening of power;
 and, with part of power for part of body, the conditions of
 consciousness cease.
 
 </p><p>Further, a vestigial cut off from its source disappears- for
 example, a reflected light- and in general an emanant loses its
 quality once it is severed from the original which it 
 reproduces: just
 so the powers derived from that source must vanish if they do not
 remain attached to it.
 
 </p><p>This being so, where these powers appear, their source must be
 present with them; thus, once more, that source must itself be
 omnipresent as an undivided whole.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn599.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>