<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn537.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn539.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. We have examined the proposed "ten genera": we have discussed
 also the theory which gathers the total of things into one genus and
 to this subordinates what may be thought of as its four species. The
 next step is, naturally, to expound our own views and to try to show
 the agreement of our conclusions with those of Plato.
 
 </p><p>Now if we were obliged to consider Being as a unity, the 
 following
 questions would be unnecessary:
 
 </p><p>Is there one genus embracing everything, or are there 
 genera which
 cannot be subsumed under such a unity? Are there 
 first-principles? Are
 first-principles to be identified with genera, or genera with
 first-principles? Or is it perhaps rather the case that while not
 all genera are first-principles, all first-principles are at the
 same time genera? Or is the converse true? Or again, do both classes
 overlap, some principles being also genera, and some genera also
 principles? And do both the sets of categories we have been
 examining imply that only some principles are genera and some genera
 principles? or does one of them presuppose that all that belongs to
 the class of genera belongs also to the class of principles?
 
 </p><p>Since, however, we affirm that Being is not a unity- the reason
 for this affirmation is stated by Plato and others- these questions
 become imperative, once we are satisfied as to the number of 
 genera to
 be posited and the grounds for our choice.
 
 </p><p>The subject of our enquiry, then, is the Existent or Existents,
 and it presents immediately two problems demanding separate analysis:
 
 </p><p>What do we mean by the Existent? This is naturally the first
 question to be examined.
 
 </p><p>What is that which, often taken for Being [for the Existent], is
 in our view Becoming and never really Being? Note however that these
 concepts are not to be taken as distinguished from each other in the
 sense of belonging to a genus, Something, divided into Being and
 Becoming; and we must not suppose that Plato took this view. It
 would be absurd to assign Being to the same genus as non-Being: this
 would be to make one genus of Socrates and his portrait. The
 division here [between what has Being and what is in 
 Becoming] means a
 definite marking-off, a setting asunder, leading to the 
 assertion that
 what takes the appearance of Being is not Being and implying that
 the nature of True Being has been quite misapprehended. Being, we
 are taught, must have the attribute of eternity, must be so
 constituted as never to belie its own nature.
 
 </p><p>This, then, is the Being of which we shall treat, and in our
 investigation we shall assume that it is not a unity: subsequently
 we ask leave to say something on the nature of Becoming and 
 on what it
 is that comes to be, that is, on the nature of the world of Sense.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn539.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>