<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn517.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn519.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. If then we do not propose to divide Quality in this 
 [fourfold]
 manner, what basis of division have we?
 
 </p><p>We must examine whether qualities may not prove to be 
 divisible on
 the principle that some belong to the body and others to the soul.
 Those of the body would be subdivided according to the senses, some
 being attributed to sight, others to hearing and taste, others to
 smell and touch. Those of the soul would presumably be allotted to
 appetite, emotion, reason; though, again, they may be 
 distinguished by
 the differences of the activities they condition, in so far as
 activities are engendered by these qualities; or according 
 as they are
 beneficial or injurious, the benefits and injuries being duly
 classified. This last is applicable also to the classification of
 bodily qualities, which also produce differences of benefit and
 injury: these differences must be regarded as distinctively
 qualitative; for either the benefit and injury are held to be
 derived from Quality and the quale, or else some other explanation
 must be found for them.
 
 </p><p>A point for consideration is how the quale, as conditioned by
 Quality, can belong to the same category: obviously there can be no
 single genus embracing both.
 
 </p><p>Further, if "boxer" is in the category of Quality, why 
 not "agent"
 as well? And with agent goes "active." Thus "active" need not go
 into the category of Relation; nor again need "passive," if
 "patient" is a quale. Moreover, agent" is perhaps better assigned to
 the category of Quality for the reason that the term implies power,
 and power is Quality. But if power as such were determined by
 Substance [and not by Quality], the agent, though ceasing to be a
 quale, would not necessarily become a relative. Besides, "active" is
 not like "greater": the greater, to be the greater, demands a less,
 whereas "active" stands complete by the mere possession of its
 specific character.
 
 </p><p>It may however be urged that while the possession of that
 character makes it a quale, it is a relative in so far as it directs
 upon an external object the power indicated by its name. 
 Why, then, is
 not "boxer" a relative, and "boxing" as well? Boxing is entirely
 related to an external object; its whole theory pre-supposes this
 external. And in the case of the other arts- or most of them-
 investigation would probably warrant the assertion that in so far as
 they affect the soul they are qualities, while in so far as they
 look outward they are active and as being directed to an external
 object are relatives. They are relatives in the other sense also
 that they are thought of as habits.
 
 </p><p>Can it then be held that there is any distinct reality implied
 in activity, seeing that the active is something distinct only
 according as it is a quale? It may perhaps be held that the tendency
 towards action of living beings, and especially of those having
 freewill, implies a reality of activity [as well as a reality of
 Quality].
 
 </p><p>But what is the function of the active in connection with those
 non-living powers which we have classed as qualities? Doubtless to
 recruit any object it encounters, making the object a participant in
 its content.
 
 </p><p>But if one same object both acts and is acted upon, how 
 do we then
 explain the active? Observe also that the greater- in itself 
 perhaps a
 fixed three yards' length- will present itself as both greater and
 less according to its external contacts.
 
 </p><p>It will be objected that greater and less are due to 
 participation
 in greatness and smallness; and it might be inferred that a thing is
 active or passive by participation in activity or passivity.
 
 </p><p>This is the place for enquiring also whether the qualities of
 the Sensible and Intellectual realms can be included under 
 one head- a
 question intended only for those who ascribe qualities to the higher
 realm as well as the lower. And even if Ideal Forms of qualities are
 not posited, yet once the term "habit" is used in reference to
 Intellect, the question arises whether there is anything common to
 that habit and the habit we know in the lower.
 
 </p><p>Wisdom too is generally admitted to exist There. Obviously, if
 it shares only its name with our wisdom, it is not to be reckoned
 among things of this sphere; if, however, the import is in both
 cases the same, then Quality is common to both realms- unless, of
 course, it be maintained that everything There, including even
 intellection, is Substance.
 
 </p><p>This question, however, applies to all the categories: 
 are the two
 spheres irreconcilable, or can they be co-ordinated with a unity?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn519.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>