<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn692.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn694.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. Yet, is not God what He is? Can He, then, be master of being
 what He is or master to stand above Being? The mind utterly
 reluctant returns to its doubt: some further considerations,
 therefore, must be offered:
 
 </p><p>In us the individual, viewed as body, is far from 
 reality; by soul
 which especially constitutes the being we participate in reality,
 are in some degree real. This is a compound state, a mingling of
 Reality and Difference, not, therefore reality in the 
 strictest sense,
 not reality pure. Thus far we are not masters of our being; in some
 sense the reality in us is one thing and we another. We are not
 masters of our being; the real in us is the master, since that is
 the principle establishing our characteristic difference; yet we are
 again in some sense that which is sovereign in us and so even on
 this level might in spite of all be described as self-disposing.
 
 </p><p>But in That which is wholly what it is- self-existing reality,
 without distinction between the total thing and its essence- 
 the being
 is a unit and is sovereign over itself; neither the being nor the
 essence is to be referred to any extern. Besides, the very 
 question as
 to self. disposal falls in the case of what is First in 
 reality; if it
 can be raised at all, we must declare that there can be no
 subjection whatever in That to which reality owes its 
 freedom, That in
 whose nature the conferring of freedom must clearly be vested,
 preeminently to be known as the liberator.
 
 </p><p>Still, is not this Principle subject to its essential Being? On
 the contrary, it is the source of freedom to Being.
 
 </p><p>Even if there be Act in the Supreme- an Act with which 
 it is to be
 identified- this is not enough to set up a duality within it and
 prevent it being entirely master of that self from which the Act
 springs; for the Act is not distinct from that self. If we utterly
 deny Act in it- holding that Act begins with others moving about it-
 we are all the less able to allow either self-mastery or 
 subjection in
 it: even self-mastery is absent here, not that anything else 
 is master
 over it but that self-mastery begins with Being while the Supreme is
 to be set in a higher order.
 
 </p><p>But what can there be higher than that which is its own master?
 
 </p><p>Where we speak of self-mastery there is a certain duality, Act
 against essence; from the exercise of the Act arises the 
 conception of
 the mastering principle- though one identical with the essence-
 hence arises the separate idea of mastery, and the being concerned
 is said to possess self-mastery. Where there is no such duality
 joining to unity but solely a unity pure- either because the Act is
 the whole being or because there is no Act at all- then we cannot
 strictly say that the being has this mastery of self.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn694.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>