<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn654.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn656.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. But in what mode are these secondaries, and
 Intellectual-Principle itself, within the First? They are not in the
 Filling Principle; they are not in the filled since before 
 that moment
 it did not contain them.
 
 </p><p>Giving need not comport possessing; in this order we are to
 think of a giver as a greater and of a gift as a lower; this is the
 meaning of origin among real Beings. First there must be an 
 actualized
 thing; its laters must be potentially their own priors; a first must
 transcend its derivatives; the giver transcends the given, as a
 superior. If therefore there is a prior to actuality, that prior
 transcends Activity and so transcends Life. Our sphere containing
 life, there is a Giver of Life, a principle of greater good, of
 greater worth than Life; this possessed Life and had no need to look
 for it to any giver in possession of Life's variety.
 
 </p><p>But the Life was a vestige of that Primal not a life lived by
 it; Life, then, as it looked towards That was undetermined; having
 looked it had determination though That had none. Life looks to
 unity and is determined by it, taking bound, limit, form. But this
 form is in the shaped, the shaper had none; the limit was 
 not external
 as something drawn about a magnitude; the limit was that of the
 multiplicity of the Life There, limitless itself as radiated from
 its great Prior; the Life itself was not that of some determined
 being, or it would be no more than the life of an individual. Yet it
 is defined; it must then have been defined as the Life of a unity
 including multiplicity; certainly too each item of the 
 multiplicity is
 determined, determined as multiple by the multiplicity of Life but
 as a unity by the fact of limit.
 
 </p><p>As what, then, is its unity determined?
 
 </p><p>As Intellectual-Principle: determined Life is
 Intellectual-Principle. And the multiplicity?
 
 </p><p>As the multiplicity of Intellectual-Principles: all its
 multiplicity resolves itself into Intellectual-Principles- on the
 one hand the collective Principle, on the other the particular
 Principles.
 
 </p><p>But does this collective Intellectual-Principle include each of
 the particular Principles as identical with itself?
 
 </p><p>No: it would be thus the container of only the one thing; since
 there are many Intellectual-Principles within the collective, there
 must be differentiation.
 
 </p><p>Once more, how does the particular Intellect come to this
 differentiation?
 
 </p><p>It takes its characteristic difference by becoming entirely a
 unity within the collective whose totality could not be 
 identical with
 any particular.
 
 </p><p>Thus the Life in the Supreme was the collectivity of power; the
 vision taking place There was the potentiality of all;
 Intellectual-Principle, thus arising, is manifested as this universe
 of Being. It stands over the Beings not as itself requiring base but
 that it may serve as base to the Form of the Firsts, the Formless
 Form. And it takes position towards the soul, becoming a light to
 the soul as itself finds its light in the First; whenever
 Intellectual-Principle becomes the determinant of soul it shapes it
 into Reasoning Soul, by communicating a trace of what itself has
 come to possess.
 
 </p><p>Thus Intellectual-Principle is a vestige of the Supreme; 
 but since
 the vestige is a Form going out into extension, into plurality, that
 Prior, as the source of Form, must be itself without shape and Form:
 if the Prior were a Form, the Intellectual-Principle itself could be
 only a Reason-Principle. It was necessary that The First be utterly
 without multiplicity, for otherwise it must be again referred to a
 prior.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn656.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>