<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn604.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn606.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. But if that Principle can never fall to evil and we 
 have given
 a true account of the soul's entry or presence to body, what 
 are we to
 say of the periodic Descents and Returns, the punishments, the
 banishment into animal forms? That teaching we have inherited from
 those ancient philosophers who have best probed into soul and we
 must try to show that our own doctrine is accordant with it, or at
 least not conflicting.
 
 </p><p>We have seen that the participation of things here in that
 higher means not that the soul has gone outside of itself to 
 enter the
 corporeal, but that the corporeal has approached soul and is now
 participant in it; the coming affirmed by the ancients can be only
 that approach of the body to the higher by which it partakes of life
 and of soul; this has nothing to do with local entry but is some
 form of communion; by the descent and embodiment of current phrasing
 must be understood not that soul becomes an appanage of body but
 that it gives out to it something of itself; similarly, the soul's
 departure is the complete cessation of that communion.
 
 </p><p>The various rankings of the universe will determine various
 degrees of the communion; soul, ultimate of the Intellectual, will
 give forth freely to body as being more nearly of the one power and
 standing closer, as distance holds in that order.
 
 </p><p>The soul's evil will be this association, its good the release.
 Why? Because, even unmerged, a soul in any way to be described as
 attached to this universe is in some degree fallen from the 
 All into a
 state of partition; essentially belonging to the All, it no longer
 directs its act Thither: thus, a man's knowledge is one whole, but
 he may guide himself by no more than some single item of it, 
 where his
 good would lie in living not by some such fragment but by 
 the total of
 his knowing.
 
 </p><p>That One Soul- member of the Intellectual kosmos and 
 there merging
 what it has of partial into the total- has broken away, so to speak,
 from the All to the part and to that devotes itself becoming partial
 with it: thus fire that might consume everything may be set 
 to ply its
 all-power upon some trifle. So long as the soul remains utterly
 unattached it is soul not singled out; when it has accepted
 separation- not that of place but that of act determining
 individualities- it is a part, no longer the soul entire, or at
 least not entire in the first sense; when, on the contrary, it
 exercises no such outward control it is perfectly the All-Soul, the
 partial in it latent.
 
 </p><p>As for the entry into the World of the Shades, if this means
 into the unseen, that is its release; if into some lower place,
 there is nothing strange in that, since even here the soul 
 is taken to
 be where the body is, in place with the body.
 
 </p><p>But on the dissolution of the body?
 
 </p><p>So long as the image-soul has not been discarded, clearly the
 higher will be where that is; if, on the contrary, the 
 higher has been
 completely emancipated by philosophic discipline, the image-soul may
 very well go alone to that lower place, the authentic passing
 uncontaminated into the Intellectual, separated from that image but
 nonetheless the soul entire.
 
 </p><p>Let the image-offspring of the individuality- fare as it may,
 the true soul when it turns its light upon itself, chooses the
 higher and by that choice blends into the All, neither acting now
 nor extinct.
 
 </p><p>But it is time to return to our main theme:
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn606.htm">Next: FIFTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>