<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn599.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn601.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. Still, this integral omnipresence admitted, why do not all
 things participate in the Intellectual Order in its entirety? Why
 has it a first participant, a second, and so on?
 
 </p><p>We can but see that presence is determined by the fitness of the
 participant so that, while Being is omnipresent to the realm 
 of Being,
 never falling short of itself, yet only the competent possess
 themselves of that presence which depends not upon situation but
 upon adequacy; the transparent object and the opaque answer very
 differently to the light. These firsts, seconds, thirds, of
 participance are determined by rank, by power, not by place but by
 differentiation; and difference is no bar to coexistence, 
 witness soul
 and Intellectual-Principle: similarly our own knowledge, the trivial
 next the gravest; one and the same object yields colour to our
 sight, fragrance to smell, to every sense a particular 
 experience, all
 presented simultaneously.
 
 </p><p>But would not this indicate that the Authentic is diverse,
 multiple?
 
 </p><p>That diversity is simplex still; that multiple is one; 
 for it is a
 Reason-Principle, which is to say a unity in variety: all Being is
 one; the differing being is still included in Being; the
 differentiation is within Being, obviously not within 
 non-Being. Being
 is bound up with the unity which is never apart from it; wheresoever
 Being appears, there appears its unity; and the unity of Being is
 self-standing, for presence in the sensible does not abrogate
 independence: things of sense are present to the Intellectual- where
 this occurs- otherwise than as the Intellectual is present within
 itself; so, too, body's presence to soul differs from that of
 knowledge to soul; one item of knowledge is present in a 
 different way
 than another; a body's presence to body is, again, another form of
 relation.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn601.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>