<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn675.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn677.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 38</h4>
 
 <p>38. And yet this "He Is" does not truly apply: the Supreme has
 no need of Being: even "He is good" does not apply since it
 indicates Being: the "is" should not suggest something predicated of
 another thing; it is to state identity. The word "good" used 
 of him is
 not a predicate asserting his possession of goodness; it conveys an
 identification. It is not that we think it exact to call him either
 good or The Good: it is that sheer negation does not indicate; we
 use the term The Good to assert identity without the affirmation of
 Being.
 
 </p><p>But how admit a Principle void of self-knowledge,
 self-awareness; surely the First must be able to say "I possess
 Being?"
 
 </p><p>But he does not possess Being.
 
 </p><p>Then, at least he must say "I am good?"
 
 </p><p>No: once more, that would be an affirmation of Being.
 
 </p><p>But surely he may affirm merely the goodness, adding nothing:
 the goodness would be taken without the being and all 
 duality avoided?
 
 </p><p>No: such self-awareness as good must inevitably carry the
 affirmation "I am the Good"; otherwise there would be merely the
 unattached conception of goodness with no recognition of 
 identity; any
 such intellection would inevitably include the affirmation "I am."
 
 </p><p>If that intellection were the Good, then the intellection would
 not be self-intellection but intellection of the Good; not 
 the Supreme
 but that intellection would be the Good: if on the contrary that
 intellection of the Good is distinct from the Good, at once the Good
 exists before its knowing; all-sufficiently good in itself, it needs
 none of that knowing of its own nature.
 
 </p><p>Thus the Supreme does not know itself as Good.
 
 </p><p>As what then?
 
 </p><p>No such foreign matter is present to it: it can have only an
 immediate intuition self-directed.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn677.htm">Next: Section 39</a></center>
 </body>