<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn629.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn631.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. It may be suggested that the decad is nothing more than so
 many henads; admitting the one henad why should we reject the ten?
 As the one is a real existence why not the rest? We are certainly
 not compelled to attach that one henad to some one thing and so
 deprive all the rest of the means to unity: since every existent
 must be one thing, the unity is obviously common to all. This means
 one principle applying to many, the principle whose existence within
 itself we affirmed to be presupposed by its manifestation outside.
 
 </p><p>But if a henad exists in some given object and further 
 is observed
 in something else, then that first henad being real, there cannot be
 only one henad in existence; there must be a multiplicity of henads.
 
 </p><p>Supposing that first henad alone to exist, it must obviously be
 lodged either in the thing of completest Being or at all 
 events in the
 thing most completely a unity. If in the thing of completest Being,
 then the other henads are but nominal and cannot be ranked with the
 first henad, or else Number becomes a collection of unlike monads
 and there are differences among monads [an impossibility]. If that
 first henad is to be taken as lodged in the thing of 
 completest unity,
 there is the question why that most perfect unity should require the
 first henad to give it unity.
 
 </p><p>Since all this is impossible, then, before any particular can be
 thought of as a unit, there must exist a unity bare, 
 unrelated by very
 essence. If in that realm also there must be a unity apart from
 anything that can be called one thing, why should there not exist
 another unity as well?
 
 </p><p>Each particular, considered in itself, would be a manifold of
 monads, totalling to a collective unity. If however Nature produces
 continuously- or rather has produced once for all- not halting at
 the first production but bringing a sort of continuous unity into
 being, then it produces the minor numbers by the sheer fact 
 of setting
 an early limit to its advance: outgoing to a greater extent- not in
 the sense of moving from point to point but in its inner changes- it
 would produce the larger numbers; to each number so emerging it
 would attach the due quantities and the appropriate thing, knowing
 that without this adaptation to Number the thing could not exist or
 would be a stray, something outside, at once, of both Number and
 Reason.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn631.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>