<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn664.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn666.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 27</h4>
 
 <p>27. But what is that whose entry supplies every such need?
 
 </p><p>Some Idea, we maintain. There is a Form to which Matter aspires:
 to soul, moral excellence is this Form.
 
 </p><p>But is this Form a good to the thing as being apt to it, does
 the striving aim at the apt?
 
 </p><p>No: the aptest would be the most resemblant to the thing
 itself, but that, however sought and welcomed, does not suffice for
 the good: the good must be something more: to be a good to another a
 thing must have something beyond aptness; that only can be adopted
 as the good which represents the apt in its better form and 
 is best to
 what is best in the quester's self, to that which the quester tends
 potentially to be.
 
 </p><p>A thing is potentially that to which its nature looks; this,
 obviously, it lacks; what it lacks, of its better, is its 
 good. Matter
 is of all that most in need; its next is the lowest Form; Form at
 lowest is just one grade higher than Matter. If a thing is a good to
 itself, much more must its perfection, its Form, its better, 
 be a good
 to it; this better, good in its own nature, must be good also to the
 quester whose good it procures.
 
 </p><p>But why should the Form which makes a thing good be a 
 good to that
 thing? As being most appropriate?
 
 </p><p>No: but because it is, itself, a portion of the Good. This is
 why the least alloyed and nearest to the good are most at 
 peace within
 themselves.
 
 </p><p>It is surely out of place to ask why a thing good in its own
 nature should be a good; we can hardly suppose it dissatisfied with
 its own goodness so that it must strain outside its essential
 quality to the good which it effectually is.
 
 </p><p>There remains the question with regard to the Simplex: 
 where there
 is utter absence of distinction does this self-aptness constitute
 the good to that Simplex?
 
 </p><p>If thus far we have been right, the striving of the lower
 possesses itself of the good as of a thing resident in a 
 certain Kind,
 and it is not the striving that constitutes the good but the 
 good that
 calls out the striving: where the good is attained something is
 acquired and on this acquisition there follows pleasure. But 
 the thing
 must be chosen even though no pleasure ensued; it must be desirable
 for its own sake.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn666.htm">Next: Section 28</a></center>
 </body>