<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn670.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn672.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 33</h4>
 
 <p>33. When therefore we name beauty, all such shape must be
 dismissed; nothing visible is to be conceived, or at once we descend
 from beauty to what but bears the name in virtue of some faint
 participation. This formless Form is beautiful as Form, beautiful in
 proportion as we strip away all shape even that given in thought to
 mark difference, as for instance the difference between Justice and
 Sophrosyne, beautiful in their difference.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle is the less for seeing things as
 distinct even in its act of grasping in unity the multiple content
 of its Intellectual realm; in its knowing of the particular it
 possesses itself of one Intellectual shape; but, even thus, in this
 dealing with variety as unity, it leaves us still with the question
 how we are to envisage that which stands beyond this all-lovely,
 beyond this principle at once multiple and above multiplicity, the
 Supreme for which the soul hungers though unable to tell why such a
 being should stir its longing-reason, however, urging that This at
 last is the Authentic Term because the Nature best and most to be
 loved may be found there only where there is no least touch of Form.
 Bring something under Form and present it so before the mind;
 immediately we ask what Beyond imposed that shape; reason 
 answers that
 while there exists the giver having shape to give- a giver that is
 shape, idea, an entirely measured thing- yet this is not 
 alone, is not
 adequate in itself, is not beautiful in its own right but is 
 a mingled
 thing. Shape and idea and measure will always be beautiful, but the
 Authentic Beauty and the Beyond-Beauty cannot be under measure and
 therefore cannot have admitted shape or be Idea: the primal
 existent, The First, must be without Form; the beauty in it must be,
 simply, the Nature of the Intellectual Good.
 
 </p><p>Take an example from love: so long as the attention is upon the
 visible form, love has not entered: when from that outward form the
 lover elaborates within himself, in his own partless soul, an
 immaterial image, then it is that love is born, then the lover longs
 for the sight of the beloved to make that fading image live again.
 If he could but learn to look elsewhere, to the more nearly
 formless, his longing would be for that: his first experience was
 loving a great luminary by way of some thin gleam from it.
 
 </p><p>Shape is an impress from the unshaped; it is the unshaped that
 produces shape, not shape the unshaped; and Matter is needed for the
 producing; Matter, in the nature of things, is the furthest away,
 since of itself it has not even the lowest degree of shape. Thus
 lovableness does not belong to Matter but to that which draws upon
 Form: the Form upon Matter comes by way of soul; soul is more nearly
 Form and therefore more lovable; Intellectual-Principle, 
 nearer still,
 is even more to be loved: by these steps we are led to know that the
 First Principle, principle of Beauty, must be formless.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn672.htm">Next: Section 34</a></center>
 </body>