<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn645.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn647.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. So much for the thing of sense; but it would appear that the
 prototype There of the living form, the universal horse, must look
 deliberately towards this sphere; and, that being so, the idea of
 horse must have been worked out in order there be a horse here?
 
 </p><p>Yet what was that there to present the idea of the horse it was
 desired to produce? Obviously the idea of horse must exist before
 there was any planning to make a horse; it could not be thought of
 in order to be made; there must have been horse unproduced 
 before that
 which was later to come into being. If, then, the thing 
 existed before
 it was produced- if it cannot have been thought of in order to its
 production- the Being that held the horse as There held it 
 in presence
 without any looking to this sphere; it was not with intent to set
 horse and the rest in being here that they were contained 
 There; it is
 that, the universal existing, the reproduction followed of necessity
 since the total of things was not to halt at the 
 Intellectual. Who was
 there to call a halt to a power capable at once of
 self-concentration and of outflow?
 
 </p><p>But how come these animals of earth to be There? What 
 have they to
 do within God? Reasoning beings, all very well; but this host of the
 unreasoning, what is there august in them? Surely the very contrary?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that obviously the unity of our universe must be
 that of a manifold since it is subsequent to that unity-absolute;
 otherwise it would be not next to that but the very same thing. As a
 next it could not hold the higher rank of being more perfectly a
 unity; it must fall short: since the best is a unity, 
 inevitably there
 must be something more than unity, for deficiency involves plurality.
 
 </p><p>But why should it not be simply a dyad?
 
 </p><p>Because neither of the constituents could ever be a pure unity,
 but at the very least a duality and so progressively [in an endless
 dualization]. Besides, in that first duality of the hypothesis there
 would be also movement and rest, Intellect and the life included in
 Intellect, all-embracing Intellect and life complete. That means
 that it could not be one Intellect; it must be Intellect agglomerate
 including all the particular intellects, a thing therefore 
 as multiple
 as all the Intellects and more so; and the life in it would nat be
 that of one soul but of all the souls with the further power of
 producing the single souls: it would be the entire living universe
 containing much besides man; for if it contained only man, man would
 be alone here.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn647.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>