<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn696.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn698.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. We maintain, and it is evident truth, that the Supreme is
 everywhere and yet nowhere; keeping this constantly in mind 
 let us see
 how it bears on our present enquiry.
 
 </p><p>If God is nowhere, then not anywhere has He "happened to be"; as
 also everywhere, He is everywhere in entirety: at once, He is that
 everywhere and everywise: He is not in the everywhere but is the
 everywhere as well as the giver to the rest of things of their being
 in that everywhere. Holding the supreme place- or rather no 
 holder but
 Himself the Supreme- all lies subject to Him; they have not brought
 Him to be but happen, all, to Him- or rather they stand there before
 Him looking upon Him, not He upon them. He is borne, so to speak, to
 the inmost of Himself in love of that pure radiance which He is, He
 Himself being that which He. loves. That is to say, as self-dwelling
 Act and Intellectual-Principle, the most to be loved, He has given
 Himself existence. Intellectual-Principle is the issue of Act: God
 therefore is issue of Act, but, since no other has generated Him, He
 is what He made Himself: He is not, therefore, "as He happened to
 be" but as He acted Himself into being.
 
 </p><p>Again; if He preeminently is because He holds firmly, so 
 to speak,
 towards Himself, looking towards Himself, so that what we must call
 his being is this self-looking, He must again, since the word is
 inevitable, make Himself: thus, not "as He happens to be" is 
 He but as
 He Himself wills to be. Nor is this will a hazard, a something
 happening; the will adopting the Best is not a thing of chance.
 
 </p><p>That his being is constituted by this self-originating
 self-tendence- at once Act and repose- becomes clear if we 
 imagine the
 contrary; inclining towards something outside of Himself, He would
 destroy the identity of his being. This self-directed Act is,
 therefore, his peculiar being, one with Himself. If, then, his act
 never came to be but is eternal- a waking without an awakener, an
 eternal wakening and a supra-Intellection- He is as He waked Himself
 to be. This awakening is before being, before
 Intellectual-Principle, before rational life, though He is these; He
 is thus an Act before Intellectual-Principle and consciousness and
 life; these come from Him and no other; his being, then, is a
 self-presence, issuing from Himself. Thus not "as He happened to be"
 is He but as He willed to be.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn698.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>