<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn657.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn659.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 20</h4>
 
 <p>20. Since we are not entitled to make desire the test by which
 to decide on the nature and quality of the good, we may perhaps have
 recourse to judgement.
 
 </p><p>We would apply the opposition of things- order, disorder;
 symmetry, irregularity; health, illness; form, shapelessness;
 real-being, decay: in a word continuity against dissolution. 
 The first
 in each pair, no one could doubt, belong to the concept of good and
 therefore whatever tends to produce them must be ranged on the good
 side.
 
 </p><p>Thus virtue and Intellectual-Principle and life and soul-
 reasoning soul, at least- belong to the idea of good and so
 therefore does all that a reasoned life aims at.
 
 </p><p>Why not halt, then- it will be asked- at Intellectual-Principle
 and make that The Good? Soul and life are traces of
 Intellectual-Principle; that principle is the Term of Soul which on
 judgement sets itself towards Intellectual-Principle, pronouncing
 right preferable to wrong and virtue in every form to vice, and thus
 ranking by its choosing.
 
 </p><p>The soul aiming only at that Principle would need a further
 lessoning; it must be taught that Intellectual-Principle is not the
 ultimate, that not all things look to that while all do look to the
 good. Not all that is outside of Intellectual-Principle seeks to
 attain it; what has attained it does not halt there but looks still
 towards good. Besides, Intellectual-Principle is sought upon motives
 of reasoning, the good before all reason. And in any striving
 towards life and continuity of existence and activity, the object is
 aimed at not as Intellectual-Principle but as good, as rising from
 good and leading to it: life itself is desirable only in 
 view of good.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn659.htm">Next: Section 21</a></center>
 </body>