<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn640.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn642.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. What then is there to prevent man having been the object of
 planning There?
 
 </p><p>No: all stands in that likeness, nothing to be added or taken
 away; this planning and reasoning is based only on an assumption;
 things are taken to be in process and this suggests planning and
 reasoning; insist on the eternity of the process and 
 planning falls to
 the ground. There can be no planning over the eternal; that would
 imply forgetfulness of a first state; further, if the second state
 were better, things stood ill at first; if they stood well, so they
 must remain.
 
 </p><p>Only in conjunction with their causes are things good; even in
 this sphere a thing is good in virtue of being complete; form means
 that the thing is complete, the Matter duly controlled; this control
 means that nothing has been left crude; but something is so left if
 anything belonging to the shape be missing-eye, or other 
 part. Thus to
 state cause is to state the thing complete. Why eyes or eyebrows?
 For completion: if you say "For preservation," you affirm an
 indwelling safeguard of the essence, something contributory to the
 being: the essence, then, preceded the safeguard and the cause was
 inbound with the essence; distinct, this cause is in its 
 nature a part
 of the essence.
 
 </p><p>All parts, thus, exist in regard to each other: the essence is
 all-embracing, complete, entire; the excellency is inbound with the
 cause and embraced by it; the being, the essence, the cause, all are
 one.
 
 </p><p>But, at this, sense-perception- even in its particular modes- is
 involved in the Idea by eternal necessity, in virtue of the
 completeness of the Idea; Intellectual-Principle, as all-inclusive,
 contains in itself all by which we are brought, later, to recognise
 this perfection in its nature; the cause, There, was one total,
 all-inclusive; thus Man in the Intellectual was not purely
 intellect, sense-perception being an addition made upon his 
 entry into
 birth: all this would seem to imply a tendance in that great 
 Principle
 towards the lower, towards this sphere.
 
 </p><p>But how could that Principle have such perception, be aware of
 things of sense? Surely it is untenable on the one hand that
 sense-perception should exist There, from eternity, and on the other
 that only upon the debasement of the soul should there be
 sense-perception here and the accomplishment in this realm of the
 Act of what was always a power in that?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn642.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>