<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn694.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn696.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. Another approach: Everything to which existence may be
 attributed is either one with its essence or distinct from it. Thus
 any given man is distinct from essential man though belonging to the
 order Man: a soul and a soul's essence are the same- that is, in
 case of soul pure and unmingled- Man as type is the same as man's
 essence; where the thing, man, and the essence are different, the
 particular man may be considered as accidental; but man, the
 essence, cannot be so; the type, Man, has Real Being. Now if the
 essence of man is real, not chanced or accidental, how can we think
 That to be accidental which transcends the order man, author of the
 type, source of all being, a principle more nearly simplex than
 man's being or being of any kind? As we approach the 
 simplex, accident
 recedes; what is utterly simplex accident never touches at all.
 
 </p><p>Further we must remember what has been already said, that where
 there is true being, where things have been brought to 
 reality by that
 Principle- and this is true of whatsoever has determined condition
 within the order of sense- all that reality is brought about 
 in virtue
 of something emanating from the divine. By things of determined
 condition I mean such as contain, inbound with their essence, the
 reason of their being as they are, so that, later, an observer can
 state the use for each of the constituent parts- why the 
 eye, why feet
 of such and such a kind to such and such a being- and can recognise
 that the reason for the production of each organ is inherent in that
 particular being and that the parts exist for each other. Why feet
 of a certain length? Because another member is as it is: because the
 face is as it is, therefore the feet are what they are: in a word
 the mutual determinant is mutual adaptation and the reason of each
 of the several forms is that such is the plan of man.
 
 </p><p>Thus the essence and its reason are one and the same. The
 constituent parts arise from the one source not because that source
 has so conceived each separately but because it has produced
 simultaneously the plan of the thing and its existence. This 
 therefore
 is author at once of the existence of things and of their reasons,
 both produced at the one stroke. It is in correspondence with the
 things of process but far more nearly archetypal and authentic and
 in a closer relation with the Better, their source, than they can be.
 
 </p><p>Of things carrying their causes within, none arises at hazard or
 without purpose; this "So it happened to be" is applicable to none.
 All that they have comes from The Good; the Supreme itself, then, as
 author of reason, of causation, and of causing essence- all
 certainly lying far outside of chance- must be the Principle 
 and as it
 were the examplar of things, thus independent of hazard: it is, the
 First, the Authentic, immune from chance, from blind effect and
 happening: God is cause of Himself; for Himself and of Himself He is
 what He is, the first self, transcendently The Self.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn696.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>