<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn602.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn604.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. But, admitting this one soul at every point, how is there a
 particular soul of the individual and how the good soul and the bad?
 
 </p><p>The one soul reaches to the individual but nonetheless contains
 all souls and all intelligences; this, because it is at once a unity
 and an infinity; it holds all its content as one yet with each item
 distinct, though not to the point of separation. Except by thus
 holding all its content as one-life entire, soul entire, all
 intelligence- it could not be infinite; since the individualities
 are not fenced off from each other, it remains still one 
 thing. It was
 to hold life not single but infinite and yet one life, one in the
 sense not of an aggregate built up but of the retention of the unity
 in which all rose. Strictly, of course, it is a matter not of the
 rising of the individuals but of their being eternally what they
 are; in that order, as there is no beginning, so there is no
 apportioning except as an interpretation by the recipient. What is
 of that realm is the ancient and primal; the relation to it of the
 thing of process must be that of approach and apparent merging with
 always dependence.
 
 </p><p>But we ourselves, what are We?
 
 </p><p>Are we that higher or the participant newcomer, the thing of
 beginnings in time?
 
 </p><p>Before we had our becoming Here we existed There, men other than
 now, some of us gods: we were pure souls, Intelligence inbound with
 the entire of reality, members of the Intellectual, not fenced off,
 not cut away, integral to that All. Even now, it is true, we are not
 put apart; but upon that primal Man there has intruded another, a
 man seeking to come into being and finding us there, for we were not
 outside of the universe. This other has wound himself about us,
 foisting himself upon the Man that each of us was at first. Then it
 was as if one voice sounded, one word was uttered, and from 
 every side
 an ear attended and received and there was an effective hearing,
 possessed through and through of what was present and active upon
 it: now we have lost that first simplicity; we are become the dual
 thing, sometimes indeed no more than that later foisting, with the
 primal nature dormant and in a sense no longer present.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn604.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>