<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn695.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn697.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. Lovable, very love, the Supreme is also self-love in that He
 is lovely no otherwise than from Himself and in Himself. 
 Self-presence
 can hold only in the identity of associated with associating; since,
 in the Supreme, associated and associating are one, seeker and
 sought one the sought serving as Hypostasis and substrate of the
 seeker- once more God's being and his seeking are identical: once
 more, then, the Supreme is the self-producing, sovereign of Himself,
 not happening to be as some extern willed but existing as He 
 wills it.
 
 </p><p>And when we say that neither does He absorb anything nor
 anything absorb Him, thus again we are setting Him outside of all
 happening- not only because we declare Him unique and 
 untouched by all
 but in another way also. Suppose we found such a nature in
 ourselves; we are untouched by all that has gathered round us
 subjecting us to happening and chance; all that accruement was of
 the servile and lay exposed to chance: by this new state alone we
 acquire self-disposal and free act, the freedom of that light
 which belongs to the order of the good and is good in actuality,
 greater than anything Intellectual-Principle has to give, an 
 actuality
 whose advantage over Intellection is no adventitious superiority.
 When we attain to this state and become This alone, what can we say
 but that we are more than free, more than self-disposing? 
 And who then
 could link us to chance, hazard, happening, when thus we are become
 veritable Life, entered into That which contains no alloy but is
 purely itself?
 
 </p><p>Isolate anything else and the being is inadequate; the Supreme
 in isolation is still what it was. The First cannot be in 
 the soulless
 or in an unreasoning life; such a life is too feeble in being; it is
 reason dissipated, it is indetermination; only in the measure of
 approach towards reason is there liberation from happening; the
 rational is above chance. Ascending we come upon the Supreme, not as
 reason but as reason's better: thus God is far removed from all
 happening: the root of reason is self-springing.
 
 </p><p>The Supreme is the Term of all; it is like the principle and
 ground of some vast tree of rational life; itself 
 unchanging, it gives
 reasoned being to the growth into which it enters.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn697.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>