<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn643.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn645.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. But how can that higher soul have sense-perception?
 
 </p><p>It is the perception of what falls under perception There,
 sensation in the mode of that realm: it is the source of the soul's
 perception of the sense-realm in its correspondence with the
 Intellectual. Man as sense-percipient becomes aware of that
 correspondence and accommodates the sense-realm to the lowest
 extremity of its counterpart There, proceeding from the fire
 Intellectual to the fire here which becomes perceptible by 
 its analogy
 with that of the higher sphere. If material things existed There,
 the soul would perceive them; Man in the Intellectual, Man as
 Intellectual soul, would be aware of the terrestrial. This is how
 the secondary Man, copy of Man in the Intellectual, contains the
 Reason-Principles in copy; and Man in the Intellectual-Principle
 contained the Man that existed before any man. The diviner shines
 out upon the secondary and the secondary upon the tertiary; and even
 the latest possesses them all- not in the sense of actually living
 by them all but as standing in under-parallel to them. Some of us
 act by this lowest; in another rank there is a double activity, a
 trace of the higher being included; in yet another there is 
 a blending
 of the third grade with the others: each is that Man by which he
 acts while each too contains all the grades, though in some sense
 not so. On the separation of the third life and third Man from the
 body, then if the second also departs- of course not losing hold on
 the Above- the two, as we are told, will occupy the same place. No
 doubt it seems strange that a soul which has been the 
 Reason-Principle
 of a man should come to occupy the body of an animal: but 
 the soul has
 always been all, and will at different times be this and that.
 
 </p><p>Pure, not yet fallen to evil, the soul chooses man and 
 is man, for
 this is the higher, and it produces the higher. It produces also the
 still loftier beings, the Celestials [Daimons], who are of one Form
 with the soul that makes Man: higher still stands that Man more
 entirely of the Celestial rank, almost a god, reproducing God, a
 Celestial closely bound to God as a man is to Man. For that 
 Being into
 which man develops is not to be called a god; there remains the
 difference which distinguishes souls, all of the same race 
 though they
 be. This is taking "Celestial" ["Daimon"] in the sense of Plato.
 
 </p><p>When a soul which in the human state has been thus attached
 chooses animal nature and descends to that, it is giving forth the
 Reason-Principle- necessarily in it- of that particular animal: this
 lower it contained and the activity has been to the lower.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn645.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>