<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn678.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn680.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 41</h4>
 
 <p>41. Intellection seems to have been given as an aid to 
 the diviner
 but weaker beings, an eye to the blind. But the eye itself need not
 see Being since it is itself the light; what must take the light
 through the eye needs the light because of its darkness. If, then,
 intellection is the light and light does not need the light, surely
 that brilliance (The First) which does not need light can 
 have no need
 of intellection, will not add this to its nature.
 
 </p><p>What could it do with intellection? What could even intellection
 need and add to itself for the purpose of its act? It has no
 self-awareness; there is no need. It is no duality but, rather, a
 manifold, consisting of itself, its intellective act, distinct from
 itself, and the inevitable third, the object of 
 intellection. No doubt
 since knower, knowing, and known, are identical, all merges into a
 unity: but the distinction has existed and, once more, such a unity
 cannot be the First; we must put away all otherness from the Supreme
 which can need no such support; anything we add is so much lessening
 of what lacks nothing.
 
 </p><p>To us intellection is a boon since the soul needs it; to the
 Intellectual-Principle it is appropriate as being one thing with the
 very essence of the principle constituted by the intellectual Act so
 that principle and act coincide in a continuous self-consciousness
 carrying the assurance of identity, of the unity of the two. But
 pure unity must be independent, in need of no such assurance.
 
 </p><p>"Know yourself" is a precept for those who, being manifold, have
 the task of appraising themselves so as to become aware of the
 number and nature of their constituents, some or all of which they
 ignore as they ignore their very principle and their manner of
 being. The First on the contrary if it have content must exist in a
 way too great to have any knowledge, intellection, perception of it.
 To itself it is nothing; accepting nothing, self-sufficing, it is
 not even a good to itself: to others it is good for they have need
 of it; but it could not lack itself: it would be absurd to 
 suppose The
 Good standing in need of goodness.
 
 </p><p>It does not see itself: seeing aims at acquisition: all this it
 abandons to the subsequent: in fact nothing found elsewhere can be
 There; even Being cannot be There. Nor therefore has it intellection
 which is a thing of the lower sphere where the first 
 intellection, the
 only true, is identical with Being. Reason, perception,
 intelligence, none of these can have place in that Principle in
 which no presence can be affirmed.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn680.htm">Next: Section 42</a></center>
 </body>