<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn632.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn634.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. To the argument touching relation we have an answer surely
 legitimate:
 
 </p><p>The Unity is not of a nature to lose its own manner of being
 only because something else stands in a state which it does 
 not itself
 share; to stray from its unity it must itself suffer division into
 duality or the still wider plurality.
 
 </p><p>If by division the one identical mass can become a 
 duality without
 loss of quantity, clearly the unity it possessed and by this
 destructive division lost was something distinct. What may be
 alternatively present and absent to the same subject must be classed
 among Real-Beings, regardless of position; an accidental 
 elsewhere, it
 must have reality in itself whether it be manifested in things of
 sense or in the Intellectual- an accidental in the Laters but
 self-existent in the higher, especially in the First in its aspect
 of Unity developing into Being. We may be told that Unity may lose
 that character without change in itself, becoming duality by
 association with something else; but this is not true; unity does
 not become two things; neither the added nor what takes the addition
 becomes two; each remains the one thing it was; the duality is
 predicable of the group only, the unity remaining unchanged 
 in each of
 those unchanged constituents.
 
 </p><p>Two and the Dyad are not essentially relative: if the only
 condition to the construction of duality were meeting and
 association such a relation might perhaps constitute Twoness and
 Duality; but in fact we see Duality produced by the very opposite
 process, by the splitting apart of a unity. This shows that duality-
 or any other such numerical form- is no relation produced either by
 scission or association. If one configuration produces a certain
 thing it is impossible that the opposite should produce the same so
 that the thing may be identified with the relation.
 
 </p><p>What then is the actual cause?
 
 </p><p>Unity is due to the presence of Unity; duality to that 
 of Duality;
 it is precisely as things are white by Whiteness, just by Justice,
 beautiful by Beauty. Otherwise we must reject these universals and
 call in relation here also: justice would arise from a certain
 attitude in a given situation, Beauty from a certain pattern of the
 person with nothing present able to produce the beauty, 
 nothing coming
 from without to effect that agreeable appearance.
 
 </p><p>You see something which you pronounce to be a unity; that thing
 possesses also size, form, and a host of other characteristics you
 might name; size, bulk, sweetness, bitterness and other Ideas are
 actually present in the thing; it surely cannot be thought 
 that, while
 every conceivable quality has Real-Being, quantity [Number] has not
 and that while continuous quantity exists, discrete quantity does
 not and this though continuous quantity is measured by the discrete.
 No: as size by the presence of Magnitude, and Oneness by the
 presence of Unity, so with Duality and all the other numerical modes.
 
 </p><p>As to the How of participation, the enquiry is that of all
 participation in Ideal Forms; we must note, however, that 
 the presence
 of the Decad in the looser totals is different from its presence in
 the continuous; there is difference again in its presence within
 many powers where multiplicity is concentred in unity; arrived at
 the Intellectuals, there too we discover Number, the 
 Authentic Number,
 no longer entering the alien, Decad-Absolute not Decad of some
 particular Intellectual group.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn634.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>