<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn661.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn663.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 24</h4>
 
 <p>24. But ourselves- how does it touch us?
 
 </p><p>We may recall what we have said of the nature of the 
 light shining
 from it into Intellectual-Principle and so by participation into the
 soul. But for the moment let us leave that aside and put another
 question:
 
 </p><p>Does The Good hold that nature and name because some 
 outside thing
 finds it desirable? May we put it that a thing desirable to one is
 good to that one and that what is desirable to all is to be 
 recognised
 as The Good?
 
 </p><p>No doubt this universal questing would make the goodness evident
 but still there must be in the nature something to earn that name.
 
 </p><p>Further, is the questing determined by the hope of some
 acquisition or by sheer delight? If there is acquisition, what is
 it? If it is a matter of delight, why here rather than in something
 else?
 
 </p><p>The question comes to this: Is goodness in the appropriate or in
 something apart, and is The Good good as regards itself also or good
 only as possessed?
 
 </p><p>Any good is such, necessarily, not for itself but for something
 outside.
 
 </p><p>But to what nature is This good? There is a nature to which
 nothing is good.
 
 </p><p>And we must not overlook what some surly critic will surely
 bring up against us:
 
 </p><p>What's all this: you scatter praises here, there and everywhere:
 Life is good, Intellectual-Principle is good: and yet The Good is
 above them; how then can Intellectual-Principle itself be good? Or
 what do we gain by seeing the Ideas themselves if we see only a
 particular Idea and nothing else [nothing "substantial"]? If we are
 happy here we may be deceived into thinking life a good when it is
 merely pleasant; but suppose our lot unhappy, why should we speak of
 good? Is mere personal existence good? What profit is there in it?
 What is the advantage in existence over utter non-existence- unless
 goodness is to be founded upon our love of self? It is the deception
 rooted in the nature of things and our dread of dissolution that
 lead to all the "goods" of your positing.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn663.htm">Next: Section 25</a></center>
 </body>