<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn679.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn681.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 42</h4>
 
 <p>42. Faced by the difficulty of placing these powers, you must in
 reason allocate to the secondaries what you count august:
 secondaries must not be foisted upon the First, or 
 tertiaries upon the
 secondaries. Secondaries are to be ranged under the First,
 tertiaries under the secondaries: this is giving everything 
 its place,
 the later dependent on their priors, those priors free.
 
 </p><p>This is included in that true saying "About the King of All, all
 has being and in view of Him all is": we are to understand from the
 attribution of all things to Him, and from, the words "in 
 view of Him"
 that He is their cause and they reach to Him as to something 
 differing
 from them all and containing nothing that they contain: for
 certainly His very nature requires that nothing of the later be in
 Him.
 
 </p><p>Thus, Intellectual-Principle, finding place in the universe,
 cannot have place in Him. Where we read that He is the cause of all
 beauty we are clearly to understand that beauty depends upon the
 Forms, He being set above all that is beautiful here. The 
 Forms are in
 that passage secondaries, their sequels being attached to them as
 dependent thirds: it is clear thus that by "the products of the
 thirds" is meant this world, dependent upon soul.
 
 </p><p>Soul dependent upon Intellectual-Principle and
 Intellectual-Principle upon the Good, all is linked to the Supreme
 by intermediaries, some close, some nearing those of the closer
 attachment, while the order of sense stands remotest, dependent upon
 soul.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn681.htm">Next: EIGHTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>