<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn676.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn678.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 39</h4>
 
 <p>39. Since the Supreme has no interval, no self-differentiation
 what can have this intuitional approach to it but itself? 
 Therefore it
 quite naturally assumes difference at the point where
 Intellectual-Principle and Being are differentiated.
 
 </p><p>Intellect, to act at all, must inevitably comport difference
 with identity; otherwise it could not distinguish itself from its
 object by standing apart from it, nor could it ever be aware of the
 realm of things whose existence demands otherness, nor could there
 be so much as a duality.
 
 </p><p>Again, if the Supreme is to have intellection it cannot know
 only itself; that would not be intellection, for, if it did know
 itself, nothing could prevent it knowing all things; but this is
 impossible. With self-intellection it would no longer be simplex;
 any intellection, even in the Supreme, must be aware of something
 distinct; as we have been saying, the inability to see the self as
 external is the negation of intellection. That act requires a
 manifold-agent, object, movement and all the other conditions of a
 thinking principle. Further we must remember what has been indicated
 elsewhere that, since every intellectual act in order to be what it
 must be requires variety, every movement simple and the same
 throughout, though it may comport some form of contact, is devoid of
 the intellective.
 
 </p><p>It follows that the Supreme will know neither itself nor
 anything else but will hold an august repose. All the rest is later;
 before them all, This was what This was; any awareness of that other
 would be acquired, the shifting knowledge of the instable. Even in
 knowing the stable he would be manifold, for it is not possible
 that, while in the act of knowing the laters possess themselves of
 their object, the Supreme should know only in some unpossessing
 observation.
 
 </p><p>As regards Providence, that is sufficiently saved by the 
 fact that
 This is the source from which all proceeds; the dependent he cannot
 know when he has no knowledge of himself but keeps that 
 august repose.
 Plato dealing with essential Being allows it intellection 
 but not this
 august repose: intellection then belongs to Essential Being; this
 august repose to the Principle in which there is no intellection.
 Repose, of course, is used here for want of a fitter word; we are to
 understand that the most august, the truly so, is That which
 transcends [the movement of] Intellection.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn678.htm">Next: Section 40</a></center>
 </body>