<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn647.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn649.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. But failure There? What can defensive horns serve to 
 There? To
 sufficiency as living form, to completeness. That principle must be
 complete as living form, complete as Intellect, complete as life, so
 that if it is not to be one thing it may be another. Its
 characteristic difference is in this power of being now this, now
 that, so that, summing all, it may be the completest life-form,
 Intelligence complete, life in greatest fulness with each of the
 particulars complete in its degree while yet, over all that
 multiplicity, unity reigns.
 
 </p><p>If all were one identity, the total could not contain 
 this variety
 of forms; there would be nothing but a self-sufficing unity. Like
 every compound it must consist of things progressively differing in
 form and safeguarded in that form. This is in the very 
 nature of shape
 and Reason-Principle; a shape, that of man let us suppose, must
 include a certain number of differences of part but all 
 dominated by a
 unity; there will be the noble and the inferior, eye and finger, but
 all within a unity; the part will be inferior in comparison with the
 total but best in its place. The Reason-Principle, too, is 
 at once the
 living form and something else, something distinct from the being of
 that form. It is so with virtue also; it contains at once the
 universal and the particular; and the total is good because the
 universal is not differentiated.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn649.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>