<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn623.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn625.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. What then is the veritable nature of Number?
 
 </p><p>Is it an accompaniment upon each substance, something seen in
 the things as in a man we see one man, in a being one being 
 and in the
 total of presentations the total of number?
 
 </p><p>But how explain the dyad and triad? How comes the total to be
 unitary and any particular number to be brought under unity? The
 theory offers a multiplicity of units, and no number is reducible to
 unity but the simple "one." It might be suggested that a dyad is
 that thing- or rather what is observed upon that thing- which has
 two powers combined, a compound thing related to a unity: or numbers
 might be what the Pythagoreans seem to hold them in their symbolic
 system in which Justice, for example, is a Tetrad: but this is
 rather to add the number, a number of manifold unity like the
 decad, to the multiplicity of the thing which yet is one thing. Now
 it is not so that we treat the ten things; we bring them together
 and apply the figure ten to the several items. Or rather in that
 case we say ten, but when the several items form a unity we say
 decad. This would apply in the Intellectual as in the sensible.
 
 </p><p>But how then can number, observed upon things, rank among Real
 Beings?
 
 </p><p>One answer might be that whiteness is similarly observed upon
 things and yet is real, just as movement is observed upon things and
 there is still a real existence of movement. But movement is not on
 a par with number: it is because movement is an entity that unity
 can be observed upon it. Besides, the kind of real existence thus
 implied annuls the reality of number, making it no more than an
 attribute; but that cannot be since an attribute must exist before
 it can be attributed; it may be inseparable from the subject 
 but still
 must in itself be something, some entity as whiteness is; to be a
 predicate it must be that which is to be predicated. Thus if unity
 is observed in every subject, and "one man" says more than "man's
 oneness being different from the manness and common to all things-
 then this oneness must be something prior to man and to all the
 rest: only so can the unity come to apply to each and to all: it
 must therefore be prior also to even movement, prior to Being, since
 without unity these could not be each one thing: of course what is
 here meant is not the unity postulated as transcending Being but the
 unity predicable of the Ideas which constitute each several thing.
 So too there is a decad prior to the subject in which we affirm it;
 this prior would be the decad absolute, for certainly the thing in
 which the decad is observed is not that absolute.
 
 </p><p>Is this unity, then, connate and coexistent to the 
 Beings? Suppose
 it coexistent merely as an accidental, like health in man, it still
 must exist of itself; suppose it present as an element in a
 compound, there must first exist unity and the unity 
 absolute that can
 thus enter into composition; moreover if it were compounded with an
 object brought into being by its agency it would make that 
 object only
 spuriously a unity; its entry would produce a duality.
 
 </p><p>But what of the decad? Where lies the need of decad to a thing
 which, by totalling to that power, is decad already?
 
 </p><p>The need may be like that of Form to Matter; ten and decad may
 exist by its virtue; and, once more, the decad must previously
 exist of its own existence, decad unattached.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn625.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>