<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn641.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn643.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. To meet the difficulty we must make a close examination of
 the nature of Man in the Intellectual; perhaps, though, it is better
 to begin with the man of this plane lest we be reasoning to Man
 There from a misconception of Man here. There may even be some who
 deny the difference.
 
 </p><p>We ask first whether man as here is a Reason-Principle different
 to that soul which produces him as here and gives him life and
 thought; or is he that very soul or, again, the [yet lower] 
 soul using
 the human body?
 
 </p><p>Now if man is a reasonable living being and by "living being" is
 meant a conjoint of soul and body, the Reason-Principle of man is
 not identical with soul. But if the conjoint of soul and body is the
 reason-principle of man, how can man be an eternal reality, seeing
 that it is only when soul and body have come together that the
 Reason-Principle so constituted appears?
 
 </p><p>The Reason-Principle will be the foreteller of the man to be,
 not the Man Absolute with which we are dealing but more like his
 definition, and not at that indicating his nature since what is
 indicated is not the Idea that is to enter Matter but only 
 that of the
 known thing, the conjoint. We have not yet found the Man we are
 seeking, the equivalent of the Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>But- it may be said- the Reason-Principle of such beings must be
 some conjoint, one element in another.
 
 </p><p>This does not define the principle of either. If we are to state
 with entire accuracy the Reason-Principles of the Forms in Matter
 and associated with Matter, we cannot pass over the generative
 Reason-Principle, in this case that of Man, especially since we hold
 that a complete definition must cover the essential manner of being.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is this essential of Man? What is the indwelling,
 inseparable something which constitutes Man as here? Is the
 Reason-Principle itself a reasoning living being or merely a maker
 of that reasoning life-form? and what is it apart from that act of
 making?
 
 </p><p>The living being corresponds to a reasoning life in the
 Reason-Principle; man therefore is a reasoning life: but there is no
 life without soul; either, then, the soul supplies the 
 reasoning life-
 and man therefore is not an essence but simply an activity of the
 soul- or the soul is the man.
 
 </p><p>But if reasoning soul is the man, why does it not constitute man
 upon its entry into some other animal form?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn643.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>