<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn659.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn661.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 22</h4>
 
 <p>22. That light known, then indeed we are stirred towards those
 Beings in longing and rejoicing over the radiance about them, just
 as earthly love is not for the material form but for the Beauty
 manifested upon it. Every one of those Beings exists for itself but
 becomes an object of desire by the colour cast upon it from The
 Good, source of those graces and of the love they evoke. The soul
 taking that outflow from the divine is stirred; seized with a
 Bacchic passion, goaded by these goads, it becomes Love. Before
 that, even Intellectual-Principle with all its loveliness 
 did not stir
 the soul; for that beauty is dead until it take the light of 
 The Good,
 and the soul lies supine, cold to all, unquickened even to
 Intellectual-Principle there before it. But when there enters into
 it a glow from the divine, it gathers strength, awakens, spreads
 true wings, and however urged by its nearer environing, speeds its
 buoyant way elsewhere, to something greater to its memory: so long
 as there exists anything loftier than the near, its very nature
 bears it upwards, lifted by the giver of that love. Beyond
 Intellectual-Principle it passes but beyond The Good it cannot, for
 nothing stands above That. Let it remain in 
 Intellectual-Principle and
 it sees the lovely and august, but it is not there possessed 
 of all it
 sought; the face it sees is beautiful no doubt but not of power to
 hold its gaze because lacking in the radiant grace which is the
 bloom upon beauty.
 
 </p><p>Even here we have to recognise that beauty is that which
 irradiates symmetry rather than symmetry itself and is that which
 truly calls out our love.
 
 </p><p>Why else is there more of the glory of beauty upon the living
 and only some faint trace of it upon the dead, though the face yet
 retains all its fulness and symmetry? Why are the most living
 portraits the most beautiful, even though the others happen 
 to be more
 symmetric? Why is the living ugly more attractive than the
 sculptured handsome? It is that the one is more nearly what we are
 looking for, and this because there is soul there, because there is
 more of the Idea of The Good, because there is some glow of the
 light of The Good and this illumination awakens and lifts 
 the soul and
 all that goes with it so that the whole man is won over to goodness,
 and in the fullest measure stirred to life.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn661.htm">Next: Section 23</a></center>
 </body>