<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn628.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn630.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. When it takes lot with multiplicity, Being becomes Number by
 the fact of awakening to manifoldness;- before, it was a
 preparation, so to speak, of the Beings, their fore-promise, a total
 of henads offering a stay for what was to be based upon them.
 
 </p><p>Here with us a man will say "I wish I had such and such 
 a quantity
 of gold"- or "such and such a number of houses." Gold is one thing:
 the wish is not to bring the numerical quantity into gold 
 but to bring
 the gold to quantity; the quantity, already present in the 
 mind, is to
 be passed on to the gold so that it acquire that numerical value.
 
 </p><p>If the Beings preceded the number and this were discerned upon
 them at the stirring, to such and such a total, of the numbering
 principle, then the actual number of the Beings would be a chance
 not a choice; since that total is not a matter of chance, Number is
 a causing principle preceding that determined total.
 
 </p><p>Number then pre-exists and is the cause by which produced things
 participate in quantity.
 
 </p><p>The single thing derives its unity by participation in
 Unity-Absolute; its being it derives from Being-Absolute, which
 holds its Being from itself alone; a unity is a unity in virtue of
 Being; the particular unity- where the unity is a multiple unity- is
 one thing only as the Triad is; the collective Being is a unity of
 this kind, the unity not of the monad but of the myriad or any such
 collective number.
 
 </p><p>Take a man affirming the presence of ten thousand 
 things; it is he
 that produces the number; he does not tell us that the ten thousand
 have uttered it; they merely exhibit their several forms; the
 enumerator's mind supplies the total which would never be 
 known if the
 mind kept still.
 
 </p><p>How does the mind pronounce?
 
 </p><p>By being able to enumerate; that is by knowing Number: but in
 order to this, Number must be in existence, and that that Principle
 should not know its own total content is absurd, impossible.
 
 </p><p>It is with Number as with Good. When we pronounce things to be
 good either we mean that they are in their own nature so or we
 affirm goodness as an accidental in them. Dealing with the primals,
 the goodness we have in mind is that First Hypostasis; where the
 goodness is an accidental we imply the existence of a Principle of
 Good as a necessary condition of the accidental presence; there must
 be some source of that good which is observed elsewhere, whether
 this source be an Absolute Good or something that of its own nature
 produces the good. Similarly with number; in attributing the decad to
 things we affirm either the truly existent decad or, where the
 decadhood is accidental, we necessarily posit the self-subsistent
 decad, decad not associated; if things are to be described as
 forming a decad, then either they must be of themselves the decad or
 be preceded by that which has no other being than that of decadhood.
 
 </p><p>It must be urged as a general truth that anything affirmed of a
 subject not itself either found its way in from outside or is the
 characteristic Act of that subject; and supposing the predicated
 attribute to show no variation of presence and absence but to be
 always present, then, if the subject is a Real Being so also is the
 accidental in an equal degree; or, failing Real Being, it at least
 belongs to the existents, it exists. In the case when the subject
 can be thought of as remaining without its Act, yet that Act is
 inbound with it even though to our minds it appears as a later; when
 on the contrary the subject cannot be conceived without the
 attribute-man, for example, without unity- then the attribute is
 either not later but concomitant or, being essential to the 
 existence,
 is precedent. In our view, Unity and Number are precedent.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn630.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>