<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn684.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn686.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. It will be asked how act rising from desire can be voluntary,
 since desire pulls outward and implies need; to desire is still to
 be drawn, even though towards the good.
 
 </p><p>Intellectual-Principle itself comes under the doubt; having a
 certain nature and acting by that nature can it be said to have
 freedom and self-disposal- in an act which it cannot leave
 unenacted? It may be asked, also, whether freedom may strictly be
 affirmed of such beings as are not engaged in action.
 
 </p><p>However that may be, where there is such act there is compulsion
 from without, since, failing motive, act will not be performed.
 These higher beings, too, obey their own nature; where then is their
 freedom?
 
 </p><p>But, on the other hand, can there be talk of constraint where
 there is no compulsion to obey an extern; and how can any movement
 towards a good be counted compulsion? Effort is free once it is
 towards a fully recognised good; the involuntary is, 
 precisely, motion
 away from a good and towards the enforced, towards something not
 recognised as a good; servitude lies in being powerless to move
 towards one's good, being debarred from the preferred path 
 in a menial
 obedience. Hence the shame of slavedom is incurred not when one is
 held from the hurtful but when the personal good must be yielded in
 favour of another's.
 
 </p><p>Further, this objected obedience to the characteristic nature
 would imply a duality, master and mastered; but an undivided
 Principle, a simplex Activity, where there can be no difference of
 potentiality and act, must be free; there can be no thought 
 of "action
 according to the nature," in the sense of any distinction between
 the being and its efficiency, there where being and act are 
 identical.
 Where act is performed neither because of another nor at another's
 will, there surely is freedom. Freedom may of course be an
 inappropriate term: there is something greater here: it is
 self-disposal in the sense, only, that there is no disposal by the
 extern, no outside master over the act.
 
 </p><p>In a principle, act and essence must be free. No doubt
 Intellectual-Principle itself is to be referred to a yet higher; but
 this higher is not extern to it; Intellectual-Principle is within
 the Good; possessing its own good in virtue of that indwelling, much
 more will it possess freedom and self-disposal which are sought only
 for the sake of the good. Acting towards the good, it must all the
 more possess self-disposal for by that Act it is directed towards
 the Principle from which it proceeds, and this its act is 
 self-centred
 and must entail its very greatest good.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn686.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>