<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn672.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn674.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 35</h4>
 
 <p>35. Such in this union is the soul's temper that even the act of
 Intellect, once so intimately loved, she now dismisses; Intellection
 is movement and she has no wish to move; she has nothing to say of
 this very Intellectual-Principle by means of which she has attained
 the vision, herself made over into Intellectual-Principle 
 and becoming
 that principle so as to be able to take stand in that Intellectual
 space. Entered there and making herself over to that, she at first
 contemplates that realm, but once she sees that higher still she
 leaves all else aside. Thus when a man enters a house rich in beauty
 he might gaze about and admire the varied splendour before the
 master appears; but, face to face with that great person- no thing
 of ornament but calling for the truest attention- he would ignore
 everything else and look only to the master. In this state 
 of absorbed
 contemplation there is no longer question of holding an object: the
 vision is continuous so that seeing and seen are one thing; 
 object and
 act of vision have become identical; of all that until then 
 filled the
 eye no memory remains. And our comparison would be closer if instead
 of a man appearing to the visitor who had been admiring the house it
 were a god, and not a god manifesting to the eyes but one filling
 the soul.
 
 </p><p>Intellectual-Principle, thus, has two powers, first that of
 grasping intellectively its own content, the second that of an
 advancing and receiving whereby to know its transcendent; at first
 it sees, later by that seeing it takes possession of
 Intellectual-Principle, becoming one only thing with that: the first
 seeing is that of Intellect knowing, the second that of Intellect
 loving; stripped of its wisdom in the intoxication of the nectar, it
 comes to love; by this excess it is made simplex and is happy; and
 to be drunken is better for it than to be too staid for these revels.
 
 </p><p>But is its vision parcelwise, thing here and thing there?
 
 </p><p>No: reason unravelling gives process; Intellectual-Principle has
 unbroken knowledge and has, moreover, an Act unattended by knowing,
 a vision by another approach. In this seeing of the Supreme 
 it becomes
 pregnant and at once knows what has come to be within it; its
 knowledge of its content is what is designated by its Intellection;
 its knowing of the Supreme is the virtue of that power within it by
 which, in a later [lower] stage it is to become "Intellective."
 
 </p><p>As for soul, it attains that vision by- so to speak- confounding
 and annulling the Intellectual-Principle within it; or rather that
 Principle immanent in soul sees first and thence the vision 
 penetrates
 to soul and the two visions become one.
 
 </p><p>The Good spreading out above them and adapting itself to that
 union which it hastens to confirm is present to them as giver of a
 blessed sense and sight; so high it lifts them that they are 
 no longer
 in space or in that realm of difference where everything is 
 root,ed in
 some other thing; for The Good is not in place but is the 
 container of
 the Intellectual place; The Good is in nothing but itself.
 
 </p><p>The soul now knows no movement since the Supreme knows 
 none; it is
 now not even soul since the Supreme is not in life but above life;
 it is no longer Intellectual-Principle, for the Supreme has not
 Intellection and the likeness must be perfect; this grasping is not
 even by Intellection, for the Supreme is not known Intellectively.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn674.htm">Next: Section 36</a></center>
 </body>