<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn627.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn629.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. It remains then to consider whether Being by its distinction
 produced Number or Number produced that distinction. It is certain
 that either Number was the cause of Being, movement, rest, identity
 and difference, or these the cause of Number.
 
 </p><p>The first question is whether Number can exist in and of 
 itself or
 is dependent upon things- Two being something observed in two
 things, Three in three; and so of the arithmetical One, for if this
 could exist apart from numbered objects it could exist also 
 before the
 divisions of Being.
 
 </p><p>But could it precede Being itself?
 
 </p><p>For the present we must take it that Being precedes 
 Number, is its
 source. But if One means one being and the duality two beings, then
 unity precedes Being, and Number precedes the Beings.
 
 </p><p>Mentally, to our approach? Yes: and in reality of existence as
 well.
 
 </p><p>Let us consider: When we think of the existence and the fine
 appearance of a man as forming one thing, that unity is certainly
 thought of as subsequent to a precedent duality; when we 
 group a horse
 with a dog, the duality is obviously the subsequent. But 
 think of that
 which brings man or horse or dog into being or produces them, with
 full intention, from where they lie latent within itself: 
 the producer
 must say "I begin with a first, I pass on to a second; that 
 makes two;
 counting myself there are three." Of course there was no such
 numbering even of Beings for their production, since the due number
 was known from the very beginning; but this consideration serves to
 show that all Number precedes the very Beings themselves.
 
 </p><p>But if Number thus preceded the Beings, then it is not included
 among them?
 
 </p><p>The truth is that it existed within the Authentic Being 
 but not as
 applying to it, for Being was still unparted; the potentiality of
 Number existed and so produced the division within Being, put in
 travail with multiplicity; Number must be either the substance of
 Being or its Activity; the Life-Form as such and the
 Intellectual-Principle must be Number. Clearly Being is to 
 be, thought
 of as Number Collective, while the Beings are Number unfolded: the
 Intellectual-Principle is Number moving within itself, while the
 Living-Form is Number container of the universe. Even Being is the
 outcome of the Unity, and, since the prior is unity, the secondary
 must be Number.
 
 </p><p>Hence it is that the Forms have been described as Henads and
 Numbers. This is the authentic Number; the other, the 
 "monadic" is its
 image. The Authentic is that made manifest in the Forms and 
 helping to
 bring them to be; primally it is the Number in the Authentic Being,
 inherent to it and preceding the Beings, serving to them as root,
 fount, first principle.
 
 </p><p>For the Unity is source to Being; Being's Being is 
 stayed upon the
 Unity as its safeguard from dissolution; the Unity cannot rest upon
 Being which at that would be a unity before possessing unity; and so
 with the decad before possessing decadhood.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn629.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>