<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn711.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn713.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. In this choiring, the soul looks upon the wellspring of Life,
 wellspring also of Intellect, beginning of Being, fount of Good,
 root of Soul. It is not that these are poured out from the Supreme
 lessening it as if it were a thing of mass. At that the 
 emanants would
 be perishable; but they are eternal; they spring from an eternal
 principle, which produces them not by its fragmentation but in
 virtue of its intact identity: therefore they too hold firm; so long
 as the sun shines, so long there will be light.
 
 </p><p>We have not been cut away; we are not separate, what though the
 body-nature has closed about us to press us to itself; we breathe
 and hold our ground because the Supreme does not give and pass but
 gives on for ever, so long as it remains what it is.
 
 </p><p>Our being is the fuller for our turning Thither; this is our
 prosperity; to hold aloof is loneliness and lessening. Here is the
 soul's peace, outside of evil, refuge taken in the place clean of
 wrong; here it has its Act, its true knowing; here it is immune.
 Here is living, the true; that of to-day, all living apart from Him,
 is but a shadow, a mimicry. Life in the Supreme is the 
 native activity
 of Intellect; in virtue of that converse it brings forth gods,
 brings forth beauty, brings forth righteousness, brings forth all
 moral good; for of all these the soul is pregnant when it has been
 filled with God. This state is its first and its final, because from
 God it comes, its good lies There, and, once turned to God again, it
 is what it was. Life here, with the things of earth, is a sinking, a
 defeat, a failing of the wing.
 
 </p><p>That our good is There is shown by the very love inborn with the
 soul; hence the constant linking of the Love-God with the Psyches in
 story and picture; the soul, other than God but sprung of Him, must
 needs love. So long as it is There, it holds the heavenly love; here
 its love is the baser; There the soul is Aphrodite of the heavens;
 here, turned harlot, Aphrodite of the public ways: yet the soul is
 always an Aphrodite. This is the intention of the myth which tells
 of Aphrodite's birth and Eros born with her.
 
 </p><p>The soul in its nature loves God and longs to be at one with Him
 in the noble love of a daughter for a noble father; but coming to
 human birth and lured by the courtships of this sphere, she takes up
 with another love, a mortal, leaves her father and falls.
 
 </p><p>But one day coming to hate her shame, she puts away the evil of
 earth, once more seeks the father, and finds her peace.
 
 </p><p>Those to whom all this experience is strange may 
 understand by way
 of our earthly longings and the joy we have in winning to 
 what we most
 desire- remembering always that here what we love is perishable,
 hurtful, that our loving is of mimicries and turns awry because all
 was a mistake, our good was not here, this was not what we sought;
 There only is our veritable love and There we may hold it and be
 with it, possess it in its verity no longer submerged in alien
 flesh. Any that have seen know what I have in mind: the soul takes
 another life as it approaches God; thus restored it feels that the
 dispenser of true life is There to see, that now we have nothing to
 look for but, far otherwise, that we must put aside all else and
 rest in This alone, This become, This alone, all the earthly
 environment done away, in haste to be free, impatient of any bond
 holding us to the baser, so that with our being entire we may cling
 about This, no part in us remaining but through it we have touch
 with God.
 
 </p><p>Thus we have all the vision that may be of Him and of ourselves;
 but it is of a self-wrought to splendour, brimmed with the
 Intellectual light, become that very light, pure, buoyant, 
 unburdened,
 raised to Godhood or, better, knowing its Godhood, all aflame then-
 but crushed out once more if it should take up the discarded burden.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn713.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>