<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn713.htm">Previous</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. This is the purport of that rule of our Mysteries: Nothing
 Divulged to the Uninitiate: the Supreme is not to be made a common
 story, the holy things may not be uncovered to the stranger, to any
 that has not himself attained to see. There were not two; 
 beholder was
 one with beheld; it was not a vision compassed but a unity
 apprehended. The man formed by this mingling with the 
 Supreme must- if
 he only remember- carry its image impressed upon him: he is 
 become the
 Unity, nothing within him or without inducing any diversity; no
 movement now, no passion, no outlooking desire, once this ascent is
 achieved; reasoning is in abeyance and all Intellection and even, to
 dare the word, the very self; caught away, filled with God, he has
 in perfect stillness attained isolation; all the being calmed, he
 turns neither to this side nor to that, not even inwards to himself;
 utterly resting he has become very rest. He belongs no longer to the
 order of the beautiful; he has risen beyond beauty; he has
 overpassed even the choir of the virtues; he is like one who, having
 penetrated the inner sanctuary, leaves the temple images behind him-
 though these become once more first objects of regard when he leaves
 the holies; for There his converse was not with image, not 
 with trace,
 but with the very Truth in the view of which all the rest is but of
 secondary concern.
 
 </p><p>There, indeed, it was scarcely vision, unless of a mode unknown;
 it was a going forth from the self, a simplifying, a renunciation, a
 reach towards contact and at the same time a repose, a meditation
 towards adjustment. This is the only seeing of what lies within the
 holies: to look otherwise is to fail.
 
 </p><p>Things here are signs; they show therefore to the wiser teachers
 how the supreme God is known; the instructed priest reading the sign
 may enter the holy place and make real the vision of the 
 inaccessible.
 
 </p><p>Even those that have never found entry must admit the 
 existence of
 that invisible; they will know their source and Principle since by
 principle they see principle and are linked with it, by like 
 they have
 contact with like and so they grasp all of the divine that 
 lies within
 the scope of mind. Until the seeing comes they are still craving
 something, that which only the vision can give; this Term, attained
 only by those that have overpassed all, is the All-Transcending.
 
 </p><p>It is not in the soul's nature to touch utter nothingness; the
 lowest descent is into evil and, so far, into non-being: but to
 utter nothing, never. When the soul begins again to mount, it comes
 not to something alien but to its very self; thus detached, it is
 not in nothingness but in itself; self-gathered it is no 
 longer in the
 order of being; it is in the Supreme.
 
 </p><p>There is thus a converse in virtue of which the essential man
 outgrows Being, becomes identical with the Transcendent of Being.
 The self thus lifted, we are in the likeness of the Supreme: if from
 that heightened self we pass still higher- image to 
 archetype- we have
 won the Term of all our journeying. Fallen back again, we awaken the
 virtue within until we know ourselves all order once more; once more
 we are lightened of the burden and move by virtue towards
 Intellectual-Principle and through the Wisdom in That to the Supreme.
 
 </p><p>This is the life of gods and of the godlike and blessed 
 among men,
 liberation from the alien that besets us here, a life taking no
 pleasure in the things of earth, the passing of solitary to solitary.
 
 
 
 </p><p>THE END
 .
 
 
 </p></body>