<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn707.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn709.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. Those to whom existence comes about by chance and automatic
 action and is held together by material forces have drifted far from
 God and from the concept of unity; we are not here 
 addressing them but
 only such as accept another nature than body and have some
 conception of soul.
 
 </p><p>Soul must be sounded to the depths, understood as an emanation
 from Intellectual-Principle and as holding its value by a
 Reason-Principle thence infused. Next this Intellect must be
 apprehended, an Intellect other than the reasoning faculty known as
 the rational principle; with reasoning we are already in the 
 region of
 separation and movement: our sciences are Reason-Principles lodged
 in soul or mind, having manifestly acquired their character by the
 presence in the soul of Intellectual-Principle, source of 
 all knowing.
 
 </p><p>Thus we come to see Intellectual-Principle almost as an object
 of sense: the Intellectual Kosmos is perceptible as standing above
 soul, father to soul: we know Intellectual-Principle as the
 motionless, not subject to change, containing, we must think, all
 things; a multiple but at once indivisible and comporting
 difference. It is not discriminate as are the 
 Reason-Principles, which
 can in fact be known one by one: yet its content is not a confusion;
 every item stands forth distinctly, just as in a science the entire
 content holds as an indivisible and yet each item is a self-standing
 verity.
 
 </p><p>Now a plurality thus concentrated like the Intellectual Kosmos
 is close upon The First- and reason certifies its existence as
 surely as that of soul- yet, though of higher sovereignty than soul,
 it is not The First since it is not a unity, not simplex as unity,
 principle over all multiplicity, must be.
 
 </p><p>Before it there is That which must transcend the noblest of the
 things of Being: there must be a prior to this Principle which
 aiming towards unity is yet not unity but a thing in unity's 
 likeness.
 From this highest it is not sundered; it too is 
 self-present: so close
 to the unity, it cannot be articulated: and yet it is a principle
 which in some measure has dared secession.
 
 </p><p>That awesome Prior, The Unity, is not a being, for so its unity
 would be vested in something else: strictly no name is apt to it,
 but since name it we must there is a certain rough fitness in
 designating it as unity with the understanding that it is not the
 unity of some other thing.
 
 </p><p>Thus it eludes our knowledge, so that the nearer 
 approach to it is
 through its offspring, Being: we know it as cause of existence to
 Intellectual-Principle, as fount of all that is best, as the
 efficacy which, self-perduring and undiminishing, generates 
 all beings
 and is not to be counted among these its derivatives, to all of
 which it must be prior.
 
 </p><p>This we can but name The Unity, indicating it to each other by a
 designation that points to the concept of its partlessness while we
 are in reality striving to bring our own minds to unity. We 
 are not to
 think of such unity and partlessness as belong to point or monad;
 the veritable unity is the source of all such quantity which 
 could not
 exist unless first there existed Being and Being's Prior: we are
 not, then, to think in the order of point and monad but to use
 these- in their rejection of magnitude and partition- as symbols for
 the higher concept.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn709.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>