<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="twp03.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="twp05.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <a name="page_6"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 6</font></a><h1 align="CENTER">II. THE BEGINNINGS OF THE WITCH-PERSECUTIONS.</h1>
 <h3 align="CENTER">1. WITCH-PERSECUTION IN THE EARLIER FIFTEENTH CENTURY.</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">Nider, Formicarius, ed. of Augsburg, ca. 1476, lib. v, cap. 3. Latin.</p>
 <p>One of the earliest books which throws light upon the methods of the persecutions is the <i>Formicarius</i>, or "Ant-Hill," of the Dominican theological professor, Johannes Nider, written, in its final form, about 1437. The work is an edifying dialogue between a theologian and a doubter as to sundry topics difficult to faith; and its fifth and final book is devoted to "witches and their deceptions." The sources and the nature of Nider's knowledge may be gathered from the following answer of the theologian to the doubter's request for information as to the injuries inflicted by witches upon the human beings.</p>
 </font><p>I will relate to you some examples, which I have gained in part from the teachers of our faculty, in part from the experience of a certain upright secular judge, worthy of all faith, who from the torture and confession of witches and from his experiences in public and private has learned many things of this sort--a man with whom I have often discussed this subject broadly and deeply--to wit, Peter, a citizen of Bern, in the diocese of Lausanne, who has burned many Witches of both sexes, and has driven others out of the territory of the Bernese. <a name="fr_3"></a><a href="#fn_3"><font size="1">1</font></a> I have moreover conferred with one Benedict, a monk of the Benedictine order, who, although now a very devout cleric in a reformed monastery at Vienna, was a decade ago, while still in the world, a necromancer, juggler, buffoon, and strolling player, well-known as an expert among the secular nobility. I have likewise beard certain of the following things from the Inquisitor of Heretical Pravity <a name="fr_4"></a><a href="#fn_4"><font size="1">2</font></a> at Autun, who was a devoted reformer of our order in the convent at Lyons, and has convicted many of witchcraft in the diocese of Autun.</p>
 <font size="2"><p>Relating then two or three anecdotes derived from these sources, the theologian closes his answer with this one:</p>
 </font><p>The same procedure was more clearly described by another young man, arrested and burned as a witch, although, as I believe, truly, penitent,</p>
 <p><a name="page_7"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 7</font></a></p>
 <p>who had earlier, together with his wife, a witch invincible to persuasion, <a name="fr_5"></a><a href="#fn_5"><font size="1">1</font></a> escaped the clutches of the aforesaid judge, Peter. The aforesaid youth, being again indicted at Bern, with his wife, and placed in a different prison from hers, declared: "If I can obtain absolution for my sins, I will freely lay bare all I know about witchcraft, for I see that I have death to expect." And when he bad been assured by the scholars that, if he should truly repent, he would certainly be able to gain absolution for his sins, then be gladly offered himself to death, and disclosed the methods of the primeval infection.</p>
 <p>The ceremony, he said, of my seduction was as follows: First, on a Sunday, before the holy water is consecrated, the future disciple with his masters must go into the church, and there in their presence must renounce Christ and his faith, baptism, and the church universal. Then he must do homage to the <i>magisterulus</i>, that is, to the little master (for so, and not otherwise, they call the Devil). Afterward he drinks from the aforesaid flask; <a name="fr_6"></a><a href="#fn_6"><font size="1">2</font></a> and, this done, he forthwith feels himself to conceive and hold within himself an image of our art and the chief rites of this sect. After this fashion was I seduced; and my wife also, whom I believe of so great pertinacity that she will endure the flames rather than confess the least whit of the truth; but, alas, we are both guilty. What the young man had said was found in all respects the truth. For, after confession, the young man was seen to die in great contrition. His wife, however, though convicted by the testimony of witnesses, would not confess the truth even under the torture or in death; but, when the fire was prepared for her by the executioner, uttered in most evil words a curse upon him, and so was burned.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">2. THE WITCH-BULL OF 1484.</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>Bullarium Romanum (Taurinensis editio), sub anno 1484. Latin. The bull is also printed in full at the head of the <i>Malleus maleficarum</i>, described below.</p>
 <p>Despite the efforts of the Dominicans, it was with much difficulty that the new terror of witchcraft and the persecution based on it were spread throughout Europe. In Germany, especially, the Inquisitors charged with the task found themselves hampered by skepticism. In 1484, therefore, they turned their steps toward Rome for help, and on December 5th they won from the new Pope, Innocent VIII, a bull which once for all closed the mouths of doubters and compelled the coöperation of</p>
 <p><a name="page_8"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 8</font></a></p>
 <font size="2"><p>the German authorities, both ecclesiastical and lay. This bull, known from its first words as <i>Summis desiderantes</i>, runs as follows:</p>
 <i></i><p>Innocentius, episcopus, servus servorum Dei. Ad futuram rei memoriam.</p>
 </font><p>Desiring with supreme ardor, as pastoral solicitude requires, that the catholic faith in our days everywhere grow and flourish as much as possible, and that all heretical pravity be put far from the territories of the faithful, we freely declare and anew decree this by which our pious desire may be fulfilled, and, all errors being rooted out by our toil as with the hoe of a wise laborer, zeal and devotion to this faith may take deeper hold on the hearts of the faithful themselves.</p>
 <p>It. has recently come to our ears, not without great pain to us, that in some parts of upper Germany, as well as in the provinces, cities, territories, regions, and dioceses of Mainz, Köln, Trier, Salzburg, and Bremen, many persons of both sexes, heedless of their own salvation and forsaking the catholic faith, give themselves over to devils male and female, and by their incantations, charms, and conjurings, and by other abominable superstitions and sortileges, offences, crimes, and misdeeds, ruin and cause to perish the offspring of women, the foal of animals, the products of the earth, the grapes of vines, and the fruits of trees, as well as men and women, cattle and flocks and herds and animals of every kind, vineyards also and orchards, meadows, pastures, harvests, grains and other fruits of the earth; that they afflict and torture with dire pains and anguish, both internal and external, these men, women, cattle, flocks, herds, and animals, and hinder men from begetting and women from conceiving, and prevent all consummation of marriage; that, moreover, they deny with sacrilegious lips the faith they received in holy baptism; and that, at the instigation of the enemy of mankind, they do not fear to commit and perpetrate many other abominable offences and crimes, at the risk of their own souls, to the insult of the divine majesty and to the pernicious example and scandal of multitudes. And, although our beloved sons Henricus Institoris and Jacobus Sprenger, of the order of Friars Preachers, professors of theology, have been and still are deputed by our apostolic letters as inquisitors of heretical pravity, the former in the aforesaid parts of upper Germany, including the provinces, cities, territories, dioceses, and other places as above, and the latter throughout certain parts of the course of the Rhine; Nevertheless certain of the clergy and of the laity of those parts, seeking to be wise above what is fitting, because in the said letter of deputation the</p>
 <p><a name="page_9"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 9</font></a></p>
 <p>aforesaid provinces, cities, dioceses, territories, and other places, and the persons and offences in question were not individually and specifically named, do not blush obstinately to assert that these are not at all included in the said parts and that therefore it is illicit for the aforesaid inquisitors to exercise their office of inquisition in the provinces, cities, dioceses, territories, and other places aforesaid, and that they ought not to be permitted to proceed to the punishment, imprisonment, and correction of the aforesaid persons for the offences and crimes above named. Wherefore in the provinces, cities, dioceses, territories, and places aforesaid such offences and crimes, not without evident damage to their souls and risk of eternal salvation, go unpunished.</p>
 <p>We therefore, desiring, as is our duty, to remove all impediments by which in any way the said inquisitors are hindered in the exercise of their office, and to prevent the taint of heretical pravity and of other like evils from spreading their infection to the ruin of others who are innocent, the zeal of religion especially impelling us, in order that the provinces, cities, dioceses, territories, and places aforesaid in the said parts of upper Germany may not be deprived of the office of inquisition which is their due, do hereby decree, by virtue of our apostolic authority, that it shall be permitted to the said inquisitors in these regions to exercise their office of inquisition and to proceed to the correction, imprisonment, and punishment of the aforesaid persons for their said offences and crimes, in all respects and altogether precisely as if the provinces, cities, territories, places, persons, and offences aforesaid were expressly named in the said letter. And, for the greater sureness, extending the said letter and deputation to the provinces, cities, dioceses, territories, places, persons, and crimes aforesaid, we grant to the said inquisitors that they or either of them, joining with them our beloved son Johannes Gremper, cleric of the diocese of Constance, master of arts, their present notary, or any other notary public who by them or by either of them shall have been temporarily delegated in the provinces, cities, dioceses, territories, and places aforesaid, may exercise against all persons, of whatsoever condition and rank, the said office of inquisition, correcting, imprisoning, punishing, and chastising, according to their deserts, those persons whom they shall find guilty as aforesaid.</p>
 <p>And they shall also have full and entire liberty to propound and preach to the faithful the word of God, as often as it shall seem to them fitting and proper, in each and all of the parish churches in the said provinces, and to do all things necessary and suitable under the aforesaid circumstances, and likewise freely and fully to carry them out.</p>
 <p><a name="page_10"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 10</font></a></p>
 <p>And moreover we enjoin by apostolic writ on our venerable brother, the Bishop of Strasburg, that, either in his own person or through some other or others solemnly publishing the foregoing wherever, whenever, and how often soever he may deem expedient or by these inquisitors or either of them may be legitimately required, he permit them not to be molested or hindered in any manner whatsoever by any authority whatsoever in the matter of the aforesaid and of this present letter, threatening all opposers, hinderers, contradicters, and rebels, of whatever rank, state, decree, eminence, nobility, excellence, or condition they may be, and whatever privilege of exemption they may enjoy, with excommunication, suspension, interdict, and other still more terrible sentences, censures, and penalties, as may be expedient, and this without appeal and with power after due process of law of aggravating and reaggravating these penalties, by our authority, as often as may be necessary, to this end calling in the aid, if need be, of the secular arm.</p>
 <p>And this, all other apostolic decrees and earlier decisions to the contrary notwithstanding; or if to any, jointly or severally, there has been granted by this apostolic see exemption from interdict, suspension, or excommunication, by apostolic letters not making entire, express, and literal mention of the said grant of exemption; or if there exist any other indulgence whatsoever, general or special, of whatsoever tenor, by failure to name which or to insert it bodily in the present letter the carrying out of this privilege could be hindered or in any way put off, or any of whose whole tenor special mention must be made in our letters. Let no man, therefore, dare to infringe this page of our declaration, extension, grant, and mandate, or with rash hardihood to contradict it. If any presume to attempt this, let him know that he incurs the wrath of almighty God and of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul. <a name="fr_7"></a><a href="#fn_7"><font size="1">1</font></a></p>
 <p>Given in Rome, at St. Peter's, in the year of Our Lord's incarnation 1484, on the nones of December, in the first year of our pontificate.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">3. THE WITCH-HAMMER.</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>Even when armed with the papal bull, the German Inquisitors found their preparation incomplete. Soon after their return from Rome they set themselves at the compilation of a hand-book which should leave no judge an excuse for laxity--an exposition of witchcraft and a code of procedure for the detection and punishment of witches. This, completed in 1486, they called Malleus Maleficarum, "The Witch-Hammer." As a specimen may serve a part of its</p>
 <p><a name="page_11"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 11</font></a></p>
 <i><font size="2"><p align="CENTER">Directions for the Torture of a Witch</p></font></i>.
 <p align="CENTER">Malleus Maleficarum, pars iii, quæstio 14. Latin. Editions are many.</p>
 </font><p>The method of beginning an examination by torture is as follows: First, the jailers prepare the implements of torture, then they strip the prisoner (if it be a woman, she has already been stripped by other women, upright and of good report). <a name="fr_8"></a><a href="#fn_8"><font size="1">1</font></a> This stripping is lest some means of witchcraft may have been sewed into the clothing--such as often, taught by the Devil, they prepare from the bodies of unbaptized infants, [murdered] that they may forfeit salvation. And when the implements of torture have been prepared, the judge, both in person and through other good men zealous in the faith, tries to persuade the prisoner to confess the truth freely; but, if he will not confess, he bids attendants make the prisoner fast to the strappado or some other implement of torture. The attendants obey forthwith, yet with feigned agitation. Then, at the prayer of some of those present, the prisoner is loosed again and is taken aside and once more persuaded to confess, being led to believe that be will in that case not be put to death.</p>
 <p>Here it may be asked whether the judge, in the case of a prisoner much defamed, convicted both by witnesses and by proofs, nothing being lacking but his own confession, can properly lead him to hope that his life will be spared--when, even if he confess his crime, he will be punished with death.</p>
 <p>It must be answered that opinions vary. Some hold that even a witch of very ill repute, against whom the evidence justifies violent suspicion, and who, as a ringleader of the witches, is accounted very dangerous, may be assured her life, and condemned instead to perpetual imprisonment on bread and water, in case she will give sure and convincing testimony against other witches; yet this penalty of perpetual imprisonment must not be announced to her, but only that her life will be spared, and that she will be punished in some other fashion, perhaps by exile. And doubtless such notorious witches, especially those who prepare witch-potions or who by magical methods cure those bewitched, would be peculiarly suited to be thus preserved, in order to aid the bewitched or to accuse other witches, were it not that their accusations cannot be trusted, since the Devil is a liar, unless confirmed by proof and witnesses.</p>
 <p><a name="page_12"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 12</font></a></p>
 <p>Others hold, as to this point, that for a time the promise made to the witch sentenced to imprisonment is to be kept, but that after a time she should be burned.</p>
 <p>A third view is, that the judge may safely promise witches to spare their lives, if only he will later excuse himself from pronouncing the sentence and will let another do this in his place. . . .</p>
 <p>But if, neither by threats nor by promises such as these, the witch can be induced to speak the truth, then the jailers must carry out the sentence, and torture the prisoner according to the accepted methods, with more or less of severity as the delinquent's crime may demand. And, while he is being tortured, he must be questioned on the articles of accusation, and this frequently and persistently, beginning with the lighter charges--for he will more readily confess the lighter than the heavier. And, while this is being done, the notary must write down everything in his record of the trial--how the prisoner is tortured, on what points he is questioned, and how he answers.</p>
 <p>And note that, if he confesses under the torture, he must afterward be conducted to another place, that he may confirm it and certify that it was not due alone to the force of the torture.</p>
 <p>But, if the prisoner will not confess the truth satisfactorily, other sorts of tortures must be placed before him, with the statement that, unless he will confess the truth, he must endure these also. But, if not even thus be can be brought into terror and to the truth, then the next day or the next but one is to be set for a <i>continuation</i> of the torture--not a repetition, <a name="fr_9"></a><a href="#fn_9"><font size="1">1</font></a> for they must not be repeated unless new evidences be produced.</p>
 <p>The judge must then address to the prisoners the following sentence: We, the judge, etc., do assign to you,------, such and such a day for the continuation of the tortures, that from your own mouth the truth may be heard, and that the whole may be recorded by the notary.</p>
 <p>And during the interval, before the day assigned, the judge, in person or through approved men, must in the manner above described try to persuade the prisoner to confess, promising her <a name="fr_10"></a><a href="#fn_10"><font size="1">2</font></a> (if there is aught to be gained by this promise) that her life shall be spared.</p>
 <p>The judge shall see to it, morever, that throughout this interval</p>
 <p><a name="page_13"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 13</font></a></p>
 <p>guards are constantly with the prisoner, so that she may not be left alone; because she will be visited by the Devil and tempted into suicide.</p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_3"></a><a href="twp04.htm#fr_3">6:1</a> This Peter has been shown to be Peter of Gruyères, Bernese castellan in the Simmenthal, 1392-1406.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_4"></a><a href="twp04.htm#fr_4">6:2</a> Such was the official title of a representative of the Holy inquisition.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_5"></a><a href="twp04.htm#fr_5">7:1</a> This means, of course, only that she could not be persuaded to confess.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_6"></a><a href="twp04.htm#fr_6">7:2</a> A flask described in a preceding anecdote as filled with a liquid made from murdered infants.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_7"></a><a href="twp04.htm#fr_7">10:1</a> These "final clauses" are those found at this period in all bulls of the class known as <i>tituli</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_8"></a><a href="twp04.htm#fr_8">11:1</a> Sometimes, in place of the prisoner's clothing, a garment furnished by the court was now supplied, to be worn during the torture.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_9"></a><a href="twp04.htm#fr_9">12:1</a> This was, of course, a legal fiction, to avoid the merciful restriction put by law upon the repetition of torture.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_10"></a><a href="twp04.htm#fr_10">12:2</a> This change in the gender of the pronoun is a faithful following of the original.</p>
 <hr>
 </font><center>
 <a href="twp05.htm">Next: III. The Witch-Persecution at Trier.</a></center>
 </body>