<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="twp09.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="twp11.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <a name="page_30"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 30</font></a><h1 align="CENTER">VIII. THE METHODS OF THE WITCH-PERSECUTIONS.</h1>
 <font size="2"><p>It was at this very time, and probably at Würzburg during the persecution just above described, that the noble Jesuit poet, Friedrich Spee, was made the confessor of those sentenced to death for witchcraft and was thus inspired to write (though anonymously) the book whose eloquent protest gave the persecution throughout Europe its first effective check. Not till long afterward did the philosopher Leibnitz reveal its authorship, on the authority of his friend Johann Philipp von Schönborn, Archbishop of Mainz, who in his youth at Würzburg had known and loved Father Spee and had learned from him the whole story in answer to a question as to the young father's whitened hair. The last of the fifty-one doubts into which Spee's <i>Cautio criminalis</i> (Rinteln, 1631) is divided runs thus (pp. 378-392):</p>
 </font><p>What, now, is the outline and method of the trials against witches to-day in general use?--a thing worthy Germany's consideration.</p>
 <p>I answer: . . .</p>
 <p>1. Incredible among us Germans and especially (I blush to say it) among Catholics are the popular superstition, envy, calumnies, backbitings, insinuations, and the like, which, being neither punished by the magistrates nor refuted by the pulpit, first stir up suspicion of witchcraft. All the divine judgements which God has threatened in Holy Writ are now ascribed to witches. No longer do God or nature do aught, but witches everything.</p>
 <p>2. Hence it comes that all at once everybody is clamoring that the magistrates proceed against the witches--those witches whom only their own clamor has made seem so many.</p>
 <p>3. Princes, therefore, bid their judges and counselors to begin proceedings against the witches.</p>
 <p>4. These at first do not know where to begin, since they have no testimony or proofs, and since their conscience clearly tells them that they ought not to proceed in this rashly.</p>
 <p>5. Meanwhile they are a second time and a third admonished to proceed. The multitude clamors that there is something suspicious in this delay; and the same suspicion is, by one busybody or another, instilled into the ear of the princes.</p>
 <p>6. To offend these, however, and not to defer at once to their wishes, is in Germany a serious matter: most men, and even clergymen, approve with zeal whatever is but pleasing to the princes, not heeding by whom these (however good by nature) are often instigated.</p>
 <p>7. At last, therefore, the Judges yield to their wishes, and in some way contrive at length a starting-point for the trials.</p>
 <p><a name="page_31"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 31</font></a></p>
 <p>8. Or, if they still hold out and dread to touch the ticklish matter, there is sent to them a commissioner [<i>Inquisitor</i>] specially deputed for this. And, even if he brings to his task something of inexperience or of haste, as is wont to happen in things human, this takes on in this field another color and name, and is counted only zeal for justice. This zeal for justice is no whit diminished by the prospect of gain, especially in the case of a commissioner of slender means and avaricious, with a large family, when there is granted him as salary so many dollars per head for each witch burned, besides the fees and assessments which he is allowed to extort at will from the peasants.</p>
 <p>9. If now some utterance of a demoniac <a name="fr_33"></a><a href="#fn_33"><font size="1">1</font></a> or some malign and idle rumor then current (for proof of the scandal is never asked) points especially to some poor and helpless Gaia, <a name="fr_34"></a><a href="#fn_34"><font size="1">2</font></a> she is the first to suffer.</p>
 <p>10. And yet, lest it appear that she is indicted on the basis of rumor alone, without other proofs, as the phrase goes, lo a certain presumption is at once obtained against her by posing the following dilemma: Either Gaia has led a bad and improper life, or she has led a good proper one. If a bad one, then, say they, the proof is cogent against her; for from malice to malice the presumption is strong. If, however, she has led a good one, this also is none the less a proof; for thus, they say, are witches wont to cloak themselves and try to seem especially proper.</p>
 <p>11. Therefore it is ordered that Gaia be haled away to prison. And lo now a new proof is gained against her by this other dilemma: Either she then shows fear or she does not show it. If she does show it (hearing forsooth of the grievous tortures wont to be used in this matter), this is of itself a proof; for conscience, they say, accuses her. If she does not show it (trusting forsooth in her innocence), this too is a proof; for it is most characteristic of witches, they say, to pretend themselves peculiarly innocent and wear a bold front.</p>
 <p>12. Lest, however, further proofs against her should be lacking, the Commissioner has his own creatures, often depraved and notorious, who question into all her past life. This, of course, cannot be done without coming upon some saying or doing of hers which evil-minded men can easily twist or distort into ground for suspicion of witchcraft.</p>
 <p><a name="page_32"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 32</font></a></p>
 <p>If, too, there are any who have borne her ill will, these, having now a fine opportunity to do her harm, bring against her such charges as it may please them to devise; and on every side there is a clamor that the evidence is heavy against her.</p>
 <p>14. And so, as soon as possible, she is hurried to the torture, if indeed she be not subjected to it on the very day of her arrest, as often happens.</p>
 <p>15. For in these trials there is granted to nobody an advocate or any means of fair defense, for the cry is that the crime is an excepted one, <a name="fr_35"></a><a href="#fn_35"><font size="1">1</font></a> and whoever ventures to defend the prisoner is brought into suspicion of the crime--as are all those who dare to utter a protest in these cases and to urge the judges to caution; for they are forthwith dubbed patrons of the witches. Thus all mouths are closed and all pens blunted, lest they speak or write.</p>
 <p>16. In general, however, that it may not seem that no opportunity of defense has been given to Gaia, she is brought out and the proofs are first read before her and examined--if examine it can be called.</p>
 <p>17. But, even though she then denies these and satisfactorily makes answer to each, this is neither paid attention to nor even noted down: all the proofs retain their force and value, however perfect her answer to them. She is only ordered back into prison, there to bethink herself more carefully whether she will persist in her obstinacy--for, since she has denied her guilt, she is obstinate.</p>
 <p>18. When she has bethought herself, she is next day brought out again, and there is read to her the sentence of torture--just as if she had before answered nothing to the charges, and refuted nothing.</p>
 <p>19. Before she is tortured, however, she is led aside by the executioner, and, lest she may by magical means have fortified herself against pain, she is searched, her whole body being shaved, although up to this time nothing of the sort was ever found.</p>
 <p>21. Then, when Gaia has thus been searched and shaved, she is tortured that she may confess the truth, that is to say, that she may</p>
 <p><a name="page_33"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 33</font></a></p>
 <p>simply declare herself guilty; for whatever else she may say will not be the truth and cannot be.</p>
 <p>22. She is, however, tortured with the torture of the first degree, i. e., the less severe. This is to be understood thus: that, although in itself it is exceeding severe, yet, compared with others to follow, it is lighter. Wherefore, if she confesses, they say and noise it abroad that she has confessed without torture.</p>
 <p>23. Now, what prince or other dignitary who bears this can doubt that she is most certainly guilty who thus voluntarily without torture confesses her guilt?</p>
 <p>24. Without any scruples, therefore, after this confession she s executed. Yet she would have been executed, nevertheless, even though she had not confessed; for, when once a beginning has been made with the torture, the die is already cast--she cannot escape, she must die.</p>
 <p>25. So, whether she confesses or does not confess, the result is the same. If she confesses, the thing is clear, for, as I have said and as is self-evident, she is executed: all recantation is in vain, as I have shown above. If she does not confess, the torture is repeated-twice, thrice, four times: anything one pleases is permissible, for in an excepted crime <a name="fr_36"></a><a href="#fn_36"><font size="1">1</font></a> there is no limit of duration or severity or repetition of the tortures. As to this, think the judges, no sin is possible which can be brought up before the tribunal of conscience. <a name="fr_37"></a><a href="#fn_37"><font size="1">2</font></a></p>
 <p>26. If now Gaia, no matter how many times tortured, has not yet broken silence if she contorts her features under the pain, if she loses consciousness, or the like, then they cry that she is laughing or has bewitched herself into taciturnity, <a name="fr_38"></a><a href="#fn_38"><font size="1">3</font></a> and hence deserves to be burned alive, as lately has been done to some who though several times tortured would not confess.</p>
 <p>27. And then they say--even clergymen and confessors--that she died obstinate and impenitent, that she would not be converted or desert her paramour, <a name="fr_39"></a><a href="#fn_39"><font size="1">4</font></a> but kept rather her faith with him.</p>
 <p>28. If, however, it chances that under so many tortures one dies,</p>
 <p><a name="page_34"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 34</font></a></p>
 <p>they say that her neck has been broken by the Devil.</p>
 <p>29. Wherefore justly, forsooth, the corpse is dragged out by the executioner and buried under the gallows.</p>
 <p>30. But if, on the other hand, Gaia does not die and some exceptionally scrupulous judge hesitates to torture her further without fresh proofs or to burn her without a confession, she is kept in prison and more harshly fettered, and there lies for perhaps an entire year to rot until she is subdued.</p>
 <p>31. For it is never possible to clear herself by withstanding and thus to wash away the aspersion of crime, as is the intention of the laws. It would be a disgrace to her examiners if when once arrested she should thus go free. Guilty must she be, by fair means or foul, whom they have once but thrown into bonds.</p>
 <p>32. Meanwhile, both then and earlier, they send to her ignorant and headstrong priests, more importunate than the executioners themselves. It is the business of these to harass in every wise the wretched creature to such a degree that, whether truly or not, she will at last confess herself guilty; unless she does so, they declare, she simply cannot be saved, nor share in the sacraments.</p>
 <p>33. The greatest care is taken lest there be admitted to her priests more thoughtful and learned, who have aught of insight or kindliness; as also that nobody visits her prison who might give her counsel or inform the ruling princes. For there is nothing so much dreaded by any of them as that in some way the innocence of any of the accused should be brought to light. . . .</p>
 <p>34. In the meantime, while Gaia, as I have said, is still held in prison, and is tormented by those whom it least behooves, there are not wanting to her industrious judges clever devices by which they not only find new proofs against Gaia, but by which moreover they so convict her to her face (an 't please the gods!) that by the advice of some university faculty <a name="fr_40"></a><a href="#fn_40"><font size="1">1</font></a> she is then at last pronounced to deserve burning alive. . . .</p>
 <p>35. Some, however, to leave no stone unturned, order Gaia to be exorcised and transferred to a new place, and then to be tortured again, in the hope that by this exorcism and change of place the bewitchment</p>
 <p><a name="page_35"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 35</font></a></p>
 <p>of taciturnity may perhaps be broken. But, if not even this succeeds, then at last they commit her alive to the flames. Now, in Heaven's name, I would like to know, since both she who confesses and she who does not perish alike, what way of escape is there for any, however innocent? O unhappy Gaia, why hast thou rashly hoped? why hast thou not, at first entering prison, declared thyself guilty? why, O foolish woman and mad, wilt thou die so many times when thou mightst die but once? Follow my counsel, and before all pain declare thyself guilty and die. Thou wilt not escape; for this were a disgrace to the zeal of Germany.</p>
 <p>36. If, now, any under stress of pain has once falsely declared herself guilty, her wretched plight beggars description. For not only is there in general no door for her escape, but she is also compelled to accuse others, of whom she knows no ill, and whose names are not seldom suggested to her by her examiners or by the executioner, or of whom she has heard as suspected or accused or already once arrested and released. These in their turn are forced to accuse others, and these still others, and so it goes on: who can help seeing that it must go on without end?</p>
 <p>37. Wherefore the judges themselves are obliged at last either to break off the trials and so condemn their own work or else to burn their own folk, aye themselves and everybody: for on all soon or late false accusations fall, and, if only followed by the torture, all are proved guilty.</p>
 <p>38. And so at last those are brought into question who at the outset most loudly clamored for the constant feeding of the flames; for they rashly failed to foresee that their turn, too, must inevitably come--and by a just verdict of Heaven, since with their pestilent tongues they created us so many witches and sent so many innocent to the flames,</p>
 <p>39. But now gradually many of the wiser and more learned begin to take notice of it, and, as if aroused from deep sleep, to open their eyes and slowly and cautiously to bestir themselves. . . .</p>
 <p>46. From all which there follows this corollary, worthy to be noted in red ink: that, if only the trials be steadily pushed on with, there is nobody in our day, of whatsoever sex, fortune, rank, or dignity, who is safe, if he have but an enemy and slanderer to bring him into suspicion of witchcraft. . . .</p>
 <p><a name="page_36"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 36</font></a></p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_33"></a><a href="twp10.htm#fr_33">31:1</a> i. e., of course, an insane person.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_34"></a><a href="twp10.htm#fr_34">31:2</a> i. e., woman. Gaia was the name used for a female culprit by the Roman law--like the John Doe or Richard Roe of our own legal parlance.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_35"></a><a href="twp10.htm#fr_35">32:1</a> <i>Crimina excepta</i> were those in which, by reason of their enormity, all restraints upon procedure were suspended. Such were treason, and, by analogy, treason against heaven--heresy, that is, and especially witchcraft. In dealing with the latter an added ground for severity was found in the belief that the Devil might aid supernaturally his allies.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_36"></a><a href="twp10.htm#fr_36">33:1</a> See note on page 32.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_37"></a><a href="twp10.htm#fr_37">33:2</a> i. e., which can be inquired into by the priest in the confessional.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_38"></a><a href="twp10.htm#fr_38">33:3</a> <i>Uti maleficio tacturnitatis</i>, i. e., by witchcraft makes herself incapable of confession.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_39"></a><a href="twp10.htm#fr_39">33:4</a> i. e., of course, the Devil.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_40"></a><a href="twp10.htm#fr_40">34:1</a> It was sometimes the juristic, sometimes the theologic, faculty of a university which was called on for such advice, the crime of witchcraft being subject to both secular and ecclesiastical jurisdiction.</p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="twp11.htm">Next: IX. Select Bibliography.</a></center>
 </body>