<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="9.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="11.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 10
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And Peleg the son of Eber died in those days, in the forty-eighth year of the life of Abram
 son of Terah, and all the days of Peleg were two hundred and thirty-nine years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And when the Lord had scattered the sons of men on account of their sin at the tower,
 behold they spread forth into many divisions, and all the sons of men were dispersed into the
 four corners of the earth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And all the families became each according to its language, its land, or its city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the sons of men built many cities according to their families, in all the places where
 they went, and throughout the earth where the Lord had scattered them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And some of them built cities in places from which they were afterward extirpated, and they
 called these cities after their own names, or the names of their children, or after their
 particular occurrences.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And the sons of Japheth the son of Noah went and built themselves cities in the places
 where they were scattered, and they called all their cities after their names, and the sons of
 Japheth were divided upon the face of the earth into many divisions and languages.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And these are the sons of Japheth according to their families, Gomer, Magog, Medai,
 Javan, Tubal, Meshech and Tiras; these are the children of Japheth according to their
 generations.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the children of Gomer, according to their cities, were the Francum, who dwell in the
 land of Franza, by the river Franza, by the river Senah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the children of Rephath are the Bartonim, who dwell in the land of Bartonia by the river
 Ledah, which empties its waters in the great sea Gihon, that is, oceanus.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And the children of Tugarma are ten families, and these are their names: Buzar,
 Parzunac, Balgar, Elicanum, Ragbib, Tarki, Bid, Zebuc, Ongal and Tilmaz; all these spread
 and rested in the north and built themselves cities.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And they called their cities after their own names, those are they who abide by the rivers
 Hithlah and Italac unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 But the families of Angoli, Balgar and Parzunac, they dwell by the great river Dubnee; and
 the names of their cities are also according to their own names.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the children of Javan are the Javanim who dwell in the land of Makdonia, and the
 children of Medaiare are the Orelum that dwell in the land of Curson, and the children of Tubal are those that
 dwell in the land of Tuskanah by the river Pashiah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the children of Meshech are the Shibashni and the children of Tiras are Rushash,
 Cushni, and Ongolis; all these went and built themselves cities; those are the cities that are
 situate by the sea Jabus by the river Cura, which empties itself in the river Tragan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the children of Elishah are the Almanim, and they also went and built themselves
 cities; those are the cities situate between the mountains of Job and Shibathmo; and of them
 were the people of Lumbardi who dwell opposite the mountains of Job and Shibathmo, and
 they conquered the land of Italia and remained there unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And the children of Chittim are the Romim who dwell in the valley of Canopia by the river
 Tibreu.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the children of Dudonim are those who dwell in the cities of the sea Gihon, in the land
 of Bordna.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 These are the families of the children of Japheth according to their cities and languages,
 when they were scattered after the tower, and they called their cities after their names and
 occurrences; and these are the names of all their cities according to their families, which they
 built in those days after the tower.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the children of Ham were Cush, Mitzraim, Phut and Canaan according to their
 generation and cities.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 All these went and built themselves cities as they found fit places for them, and they called
 their cities after the names of their fathers Cush, Mitzraim, Phut and Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the children of Mitzraim are the Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuchim, Pathrusim,
 Casluchim and Caphturim, seven families.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 All these dwell by the river Sihor, that is the brook of Egypt, and they built themselves
 cities and called them after their own names.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the children of Pathros and Casloch intermarried together, and from them went forth
 the Pelishtim, the Azathim, and the Gerarim, the Githim and the Ekronim, in all five families;
 these also built themselves cities, and they called their cities after the names of their fathers
 unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the children of Canaan also built themselves cities, and they called their cities after
 their names, eleven cities and others without number.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And four men from the family of Ham went to the land of the plain; these are the names of
 the four men, Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboyim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And these men built themselves four cities in the land of the plain, and they called the
 names of their cities after their own names.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And they and their children and all belonging to them dwelt in those cities, and they were
 fruitful and multiplied greatly and dwelt peaceably.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Seir the son of Hur, son of Hivi, son of Canaan, went and found a valley opposite to
 Mount Paran, and he built a city there, and he and his seven sons and his household dwelt
 there, and he called the city which he built Seir, according to his name; that is the land of Seir
 unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 These are the families of the children of Ham, according to their languages and cities,
 when they were scattered to their countries after the tower.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And some of the children of Shem son of Noah, father of all the children of Eber, also went
 and built themselves cities in the places wherein they were scattered, and they called their cities after their names.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And the sons of Shem were Elam, Ashur, Arpachshad, Lud and Aram, and they built
 themselves cities and called the names of all their cities after their names.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Ashur son of Shem and his children and household went forth at that time, a very
 large body of them, and they went to a distant land that they found, and they met with a very
 extensive valley in the land that they went to, and they built themselves four cities, and they
 called them after their own names and occurrences.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And these are the names of the cities which the children of Ashur built, Ninevah, Resen,
 Calach and Rehobother; and the children of Ashur dwell there unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And the children of Aram also went and built themselves a city, and they called the name
 of the city Uz after their eldest brother, and they dwell therein; that is the land of Uz to this
 day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And in the second year after the tower a man from the house of Ashur, whose name was
 Bela, went from the land of Ninevah to sojourn with his household wherever he could find a
 place; and they came until opposite the cities of the plain against Sodom, and they dwelt
 there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And the man rose up and built there a small city, and called its name Bela, after his name;
 that is the land of Zoar unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And these are the families of the children of Shem according to their language and cities,
 after they were scattered upon the earth after the tower.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And every kingdom, city, and family of the families of the children of Noah built themselves
 many cities after this.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And they established governments in all their cities, in order to be regulated by their
 orders; so did all the families of the children of Noah forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="11.htm">Next: Chapter 11</a>
 </p></body>