<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="11.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="13.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 12
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And when the king heard the words of Abram he ordered him to be put into prison; and
 Abram was ten days in prison.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And at the end of those days the king ordered that all the kings, princes and governors of
 different provinces and the sages should come before him, and they sat before him, and
 Abram was still in the house of confinement.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the king said to the princes and sages, Have you heard what Abram, the son of Terah,
 has done to his father? Thus has he done to him, and I ordered him to be brought before me,
 and thus has he spoken; his heart did not misgive him, neither did he stir in my presence, and
 behold now he is confined in the prison.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And therefore decide what judgment is due to this man who reviled the king; who spoke and
 did all the things that you heard.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And they all answered the king saying, The man who revileth the king should be hanged
 upon a tree; but having done all the things that he said, and having despised our gods, he
 must therefore be burned to death, for this is the law in this matter.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 If it pleaseth the king to do this, let him order his servants to kindle a fire both night and day
 in thy brick furnace, and then we will cast this man into it. And the king did so, and he commanded his servants that they should prepare a fire for three
 days and three nights in the king's furnace, that is in Casdim; and the king ordered them to
 take Abram from prison and bring him out to be burned.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And all the king's servants, princes, lords, governors, and judges, and all the inhabitants of
 the land, about nine hundred thousand men, stood opposite the furnace to see Abram.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And all the women and little ones crowded upon the roofs and towers to see what was
 doing with Abram, and they all stood together at a distance; and there was not a man left that
 did not come on that day to behold the scene.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And when Abram was come, the conjurors of the king and the sages saw Abram, and they
 cried out to the king, saying, Our sovereign lord, surely this is the man whom we know to
 have been the child at whose birth the great star swallowed the four stars, which we declared
 to the king now fifty years since.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And behold now his father has also transgressed thy commands, and mocked thee by
 bringing thee another child, which thou didst kill.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And when the king heard their words, he was exceedingly wroth, and he ordered Terah to
 be brought before him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the king said, Hast thou heard what the conjurors have spoken? Now tell me truly,
 how didst thou; and if thou shalt speak truth thou shalt be acquitted.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And seeing that the king's anger was so much kindled, Terah said to the king, My lord and
 king, thou hast heard the truth, and what the sages have spoken is right. And the king said,
 How couldst thou do this thing, to transgress my orders and to give me a child that thou didst
 not beget, and to take value for him?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And Terah answered the king, Because my tender feelings were excited for my son, at that
 time, and I took a son of my handmaid, and I brought him to the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the king said Who advised thee to this? Tell me, do not hide aught from me, and then
 thou shalt not die.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Terah was greatly terrified in the king's presence, and he said to the king, It was
 Haran my eldest son who advised me to this; and Haran was in those days that Abram was
 born, two and thirty years old.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 But Haran did not advise his father to anything, for Terah said this to the king in order to
 deliver his soul from the king, for he feared greatly; and the king said to Terah, Haran thy son
 who advised thee to this shall die through fire with Abram; for the sentence of death is upon
 him for having rebelled against the king's desire in doing this thing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Haran at that time felt inclined to follow the ways of Abram, but he kept it within
 himself.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Haran said in his heart, Behold now the king has seized Abram on account of these
 things which Abram did, and it shall come to pass, that if Abram prevail over the king I will
 follow him, but if the king prevail I will go after the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And when Terah had spoken this to the king concerning Haran his son, the king ordered
 Haran to be seized with Abram.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And they brought them both, Abram and Haran his brother, to cast them into the fire; and
 all the inhabitants of the land and the king's servants and princes and all the women and little
 ones were there, standing that day over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And the king's servants took Abram and his brother, and they stripped them of all their
 clothes excepting their lower garments which were upon them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And they bound their hands and feet with linen cords, and the servants of the king lifted
 them up and cast them both into the furnace.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the Lord loved Abram and he had compassion over him, and the Lord came down
 and delivered Abram from the fire and he was not burned.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 But all the cords with which they bound him were burned, while Abram remained and
 walked about in the fire.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Haran died when they had cast him into the fire, and he was burned to ashes, for his
 heart was not perfect with the Lord; and those men who cast him into the fire, the flame of the
 fire spread over them, and they were burned, and twelve men of them died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Abram walked in the midst of the fire three days and three nights, and all the servants
 of the king saw him walking in the fire, and they came and told the king, saying, Behold we
 have seen Abram walking about in the midst of the fire, and even the lower garments which
 are upon him are not burned, but the cord with which he was bound is burned.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And when the king heard their words his heart fainted and he would not believe them; so
 he sent other faithful princes to see this matter, and they went and saw it and told it to the
 king; and the king rose to go and see it, and he saw Abram walking to and fro in the midst of
 the fire, and he saw Haran's body burned, and the king wondered greatly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And the king ordered Abram to be taken out from the fire; and his servants approached to
 take him out and they could not, for the fire was round about and the flame ascending toward
 them from the furnace.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And the king's servants fled from it, and the king rebuked them, saying, Make haste and
 bring Abram out of the fire that you shall not die.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And the servants of the king again approached to bring Abram out, and the flames came
 upon them and burned their faces so that eight of them died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And when the king saw that his servants could not approach the fire lest they should be
 burned, the king called to Abram, O servant of the God who is in heaven, go forth from amidst
 the fire and come hither before me; and Abram hearkened to the voice of the king, and he
 went forth from the fire and came and stood before the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And when Abram came out the king and all his servants saw Abram coming before the
 king, with his lower garments upon him, for they were not burned, but the cord with which he
 was bound was burned.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And the king said to Abram, How is it that thou wast not burned in the fire?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And Abram said to the king, The God of heaven and earth in whom I trust and who has all
 in his power, he delivered me from the fire into which thou didst cast me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Haran the brother of Abram was burned to ashes, and they sought for his body, and
 they found it consumed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Haran was eighty-two years old when he died in the fire of Casdim. And the king,
 princes, and inhabitants of the land, seeing that Abram was delivered from the fire, they came and bowed down to Abram.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And Abram said to them, Do not bow down to me, but bow down to the God of the world
 who made you, and serve him, and go in his ways for it is he who delivered me from out of
 this fire, and it is he who created the souls and spirits of all men, and formed man in his
 mother's womb, and brought him forth into the world, and it is he who will deliver those who
 trust in him from all pain.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And this thing seemed very wonderful in the eyes of the king and princes, that Abram was
 saved from the fire and that Haran was burned; and the king gave Abram many presents and
 he gave him his two head servants from the king's house; the name of one was Oni and the
 name of the other was Eliezer.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And all the kings, princes and servants gave Abram many gifts of silver and gold and
 pearl, and the king and his princes sent him away, and he went in peace.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And Abram went forth from the king in peace, and many of the king's servants followed
 him, and about three hundred men joined him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And Abram returned on that day and went to his father's house, he and the men that
 followed him, and Abram served the Lord his God all the days of his life, and he walked in his
 ways and followed his law.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And from that day forward Abram inclined the hearts of the sons of men to serve the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And at that time Nahor and Abram took unto themselves wives, the daughters of their
 brother Haran; the wife of Nahor was Milca and the name of Abram's wife was Sarai. And
 Sarai, wife of Abram, was barren; she had no offspring in those days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And at the expiration of two years from Abram's going out of the fire, that is in the
 fifty-second year of his life, behold king Nimrod sat in Babel upon the throne, and the king fell
 asleep and dreamed that he was standing with his troops and hosts in a valley opposite the
 king's furnace.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And he lifted up his eyes and saw a man in the likeness of Abram coming forth from the
 furnace, and that he came and stood before the king with his drawn sword, and then sprang
 to the king with his sword, when the king fled from the man, for he was afraid; and while he
 was running, the man threw an egg upon the king's head, and the egg became a great river.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And the king dreamed that all his troops sank in that river and died, and the king took flight
 with three men who were before him and he escaped.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And the king looked at these men and they were clothed in princely dresses as the
 garments of kings, and had the appearance and majesty of kings.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And while they were running, the river again turned to an egg before the king, and there
 came forth from the egg a young bird which came before the king, and flew at his head and
 plucked out the king's eye.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And the king was grieved at the sight, and he awoke out of his sleep and his spirit was
 agitated; and he felt a great terror.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And in the morning the king rose from his couch in fear, and he ordered all the wise men
 and magicians to come before him, when the king related his dream to them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And a wise servant of the king, whose name was Anuki, answered the king, saying, This is
 nothing else but the evil of Abram and his seed which will spring up against my Lord and king in the latter days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And behold the day will come when Abram and his seed and the children of his household
 will war with my king, and they will smite all the king's hosts and his troops.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And as to what thou hast said concerning three men which thou didst see like unto thyself,
 and which did escape, this means that only thou wilt escape with three kings from the kings of
 the earth who will be with thee in battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 And that which thou sawest of the river which turned to an egg as at first, and the young
 bird plucking out thine eye, this means nothing else but the seed of Abram which will slay the
 king in latter days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>56 This is my king's dream, and this is its interpretation, and the dream is true, and the
 interpretation which thy servant has given thee is right.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>57 Now therefore my king, surely thou knowest that it is now fifty-two years since thy sages
 saw this at the birth of Abram, and if my king will suffer Abram to live in the earth it will be to
 the injury of my lord and king, for all the days that Abram liveth neither thou nor thy kingdom
 will be established, for this was known formerly at his birth; and why will not my king slay him,
 that his evil may be kept from thee in latter days?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>58 And Nimrod hearkened to the voice of Anuki, and he sent some of his servants in secret to
 go and seize Abram, and bring him before the king to suffer death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>59 And Eliezer, Abram's servant whom the king had given him, was at that time in the
 presence of the king, and he heard what Anuki had advised the king, and what the king had
 said to cause Abram's death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>60 And Eliezer said to Abram, Hasten, rise up and save thy soul, that thou mayest not die
 through the hands of the king, for thus did he see in a dream concerning thee, and thus did
 Anuki interpret it, and thus also did Anuki advise the king concerning thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>61 And Abram hearkened to the voice of Eliezer, and Abram hastened and ran for safety to
 the house of Noah and his son Shem, and he concealed himself there and found a place of
 safety; and the king's servants came to Abram's house to seek him, but they could not find
 him, and they searched through out the country and he was not to be found, and they went
 and searched in every direction and he was not to be met with.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>62 And when the king's servants could not find Abram they returned to the king, but the king's
 anger against Abram was stilled, as they did not find him, and the king drove from his mind
 this matter concerning Abram.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>63 And Abram was concealed in Noah's house for one month, until the king had forgotten this
 matter, but Abram was still afraid of the king; and Terah came to see Abram his son secretly
 in the house of Noah, and Terah was very great in the eyes of the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>64 And Abram said to his father, Dost thou not know that the king thinketh to slay me, and to
 annihilate my name from the earth by the advice of his wicked counsellors?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>65 Now whom hast thou here and what hast thou in this land? Arise, let us go together to the
 land of Canaan, that we may be delivered from his hand, lest thou perish also through him in
 the latter days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>66 Dost thou not know or hast thou not heard, that it is not through love that Nimrod giveth thee all this honor, but it is only for his benefit that he bestoweth all
 this good upon thee?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>67 And if he do unto thee greater good than this, surely these are only vanities of the world,
 for wealth and riches cannot avail in the day of wrath and anger.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>68 Now therefore hearken to my voice, and let us arise and go to the land of Canaan, out of
 the reach of injury from Nimrod; and serve thou the Lord who created thee in the earth and it
 will be well with thee; and cast away all the vain things which thou pursuest.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>69 And Abram ceased to speak, when Noah and his son Shem answered Terah, saying, True
 is the word which Abram hath said unto thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>70 And Terah hearkened to the voice of his son Abram, and Terah did all that Abram said, for
 this was from the Lord, that the king should not cause Abram's death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="13.htm">Next: Chapter 13</a>
 </p></body>