<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="12.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="14.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 13
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And Terah took his son Abram and his grandson Lot, the son of Haran, and Sarai his
 daughter-in-law, the wife of his son Abram, and all the souls of his household and went with
 them from Ur Casdim to go to the land of Canaan. And when they came as far as the land of
 Haran they remained there, for it was exceedingly good land for pasture, and of sufficient
 extent for those who accompanied them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And the people of the land of Haran saw that Abram was good and upright with God and
 men, and that the Lord his God was with him, and some of the people of the land of Haran
 came and joined Abram, and he taught them the instruction of the Lord and his ways; and
 these men remained with Abram in his house and they adhered to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Abram remained in the land three years, and at the expiration of three years the Lord
 appeared to Abram and said to him; I am the Lord who brought thee forth from Ur Casdim,
 and delivered thee from the hands of all thine enemies.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And now therefore if thou wilt hearken to my voice and keep my commandments, my
 statutes and my laws, then will I cause thy enemies to fall before thee, and I will multiply thy
 seed like the stars of heaven, and I will send my blessing upon all the works of thy hands, and
 thou shalt lack nothing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 Arise now, take thy wife and all belonging to thee and go to the land of Canaan and remain
 there, and I will there be unto thee for a God, and I will bless thee. And Abram rose and took
 his wife and all belonging to him, and he went to the land of Canaan as the Lord had told him;
 and Abram was fifty years old when he went from Haran.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Abram came to the land of Canaan and dwelt in the midst of the city, and he there
 pitched his tent amongst the children of Canaan, inhabitants of the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the Lord appeared to Abram when he came to the land of Canaan, and said to him,
 This is the land which I gave unto thee and to thy seed after thee forever, and I will make thy
 seed like the stars of heaven, and I will give unto thy seed for an inheritance all the lands
 which thou seest.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Abram built an altar in the place where God had spoken to him, and Abram there
 called upon the name of the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 At that time, at the end of three years of Abram's dwelling in the land of Canaan, in that year
 Noah died, which was the fifty-eighth year of the life of Abram; and all the days that Noah
 lived were nine hundred and fifty years and he died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan, he, his wife, and all belonging to him, and all
 those that accompanied him, together with those that joined him from the people of the land;
 but Nahor, Abram's brother, and Terah his father, and Lot the son of Haran and all belonging
 to them dwelt in Haran.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 In the fifth year of Abram's dwelling in the land of Canaan the people of Sodom and
 Gomorrah and all the cities of the plain revolted from the power of Chedorlaomer, king of
 Elam; for all the kings of the cities of the plain had served Chedorlaomer for twelve years, and
 given him a yearly tax, but in those days in the thirteenth year, they rebelled against him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And in the tenth year of Abram's dwelling in the land of Canaan there was war between
 Nimrod king of Shinar and Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Nimrod came to fight with
 Chedorlaomer and to subdue him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 For Chedorlaomer was at that time one of the princes of the hosts of Nimrod, and when all
 the people at the tower were dispersed and those that remained were also scattered upon the
 face of the earth, Chedorlaomer went to the land of Elam and reigned over it and rebelled
 against his lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And in those days when Nimrod saw that the cities of the plain had rebelled, he came with
 pride and anger to war with Chedorlaomer, and Nimrod assembled all his princes and
 subjects, about seven hundred thousand men, and went against Chedorlaomer, and
 Chedorlaomer went out to meet him with five thousand men, and they prepared for battle in
 the valley of Babel which is between Elam and Shinar.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And all those kings fought there, and Nimrod and his people were smitten before the
 people of Chedorlaomer, and there fell from Nimrod's men about six hundred thousand, and
 Mardon the king's son fell amongst them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Nimrod fled and returned in shame and disgrace to his land, and he was under
 subjection to Chedorlaomer for a long time, and Chedorlaomer returned to his land and sent
 princes of his host to the kings that dwelt around him, to Arioch king of Elasar, and to Tidal
 king of Goyim, and made a covenant with them, and they were all obedient to his commands.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And it was in the fifteenth year of Abram's dwelling in the land of Canaan, which is the
 seventieth year of the life of Abram, and the Lord appeared to Abram in that year and he said
 to him, I am the Lord who brought thee out from Ur Casdim to give thee this land for an
 inheritance.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 Now therefore walk before me and be perfect and keep my commands, for to thee and to
 thy seed I will give this land for an inheritance, from the river Mitzraim unto the great river
 Euphrates.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And thou shalt come to thy fathers in peace and in good age, and the fourth generation
 shall return here in this land and shall inherit it forever; and Abram built an altar, and he called
 upon the name of the Lord who appeared to him, and he brought up sacrifices upon the altar
 to the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 At that time Abram returned and went to Haran to see his father and mother, and his father's household, and Abram and his wife and
 all belonging to him returned to Haran, and Abram dwelt in Haran five years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And many of the people of Haran, about seventy-two men, followed Abram and Abram
 taught them the instruction of the Lord and his ways, and he taught them to know the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 In those days the Lord appeared to Abram in Haran, and he said to him, Behold, I spoke
 unto thee these twenty years back saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 Go forth from thy land, from thy birth-place and from thy father's house, to the land which I
 have shown thee to give it to thee and to thy children, for there in that land will I bless thee,
 and make thee a great nation, and make thy name great, and in thee shall the families of the
 earth be blessed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 Now therefore arise, go forth from this place, thou, thy wife, and all belonging to thee, also
 every one born in thy house and all the souls thou hast made in Haran, and bring them out
 with thee from here, and rise to return to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And Abram arose and took his wife Sarai and all belonging to him and all that were born to
 him in his house and the souls which they had made in Haran, and they came out to go to the
 land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Abram went and returned to the land of Canaan, according to the word of the Lord.
 And Lot the son of his brother Haran went with him, and Abram was seventy-five years old
 when he went forth from Haran to return to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And he came to the land of Canaan according to the word of the Lord to Abram, and he
 pitched his tent and he dwelt in the plain of Mamre, and with him was Lot his brother's son,
 and all belonging to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And the Lord again appeared to Abram and said, To thy seed will I give this land; and he
 there built an altar to the Lord who appeared to him, which is still to this day in the plains of
 Mamre.
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="14.htm">Next: Chapter 14</a>
 </p></body>