<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="17.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="19.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 18
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And Abraham rose and did all that God had ordered him, and he took the men of his
 household and those bought with his money, and he circumcised them as the Lord had
 commanded him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And there was not one left whom he did not circumcise, and Abraham and his son Ishmael
 were circumcised in the flesh of their foreskin; thirteen years old was Ishmael when he was
 circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And in the third day Abraham went out of his tent and sat at the door to enjoy the heat of the
 sun, during the pain of his flesh.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the Lord appeared to him in the plain of Mamre, and sent three of his ministering
 angels to visit him, and he was sitting at the door of the tent, and he lifted his eyes and saw,
 and lo three men were coming from a distance, and he rose up and ran to meet them, and he
 bowed down to them and brought them into his house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And he said to them, If now I have found favor in your sight, turn in and eat a morsel of
 bread; and he pressed them, and they turned in and he gave them water and they washed
 their feet, and he placed them under a tree at the door of the tent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Abraham ran and took a calf, tender and good, and he hastened to kill it, and gave it to
 his servant Eliezer to dress.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Abraham came to Sarah into the tent, and he said to her, Make ready quickly three
 measures of fine meal, knead it and make cakes to cover the pot containing the meat, and
 she did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Abraham hastened and brought before them butter and milk, beef and mutton, and
 gave it before them to eat before the flesh of the calf was sufficiently done, and they did eat.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And when they had done eating one of them said to him, I will return to thee according to
 the time of life, and Sarah thy wife shall have a son.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And the men afterward departed and went their ways, to the places to which they were
 sent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 In those days all the people of Sodom and Gomorrah, and of the whole five cities, were
 exceedingly wicked and sinful against the Lord and they provoked the Lord with their
 abominations, and they strengthened in aging abominably and scornfully before the Lord, and
 their wickedness and crimes were in those days great before the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And they had in their land a very extensive valley, about half a day's walk, and in it there
 were fountains of water and a great deal of herbage surrounding the water.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And all the people of Sodom and Gomorrah went there four times in the year, with their
 wives and children and all belonging to them, and they rejoiced there with timbrels and
 dances.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And in the time of rejoicing they would all rise and lay hold of their neighbor's wives, and
 some, the virgin daughters of their neighbors, and they enjoyed them, and each man saw his
 wife and daughter in the hands of his neighbor and did not say a word.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And they did so from morning to night, and they afterward returned home each man to his
 house and each woman to her tent; so they always did four times in the year.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 Also when a stranger came into their cities and brought goods which he had purchased
 with a view to dispose of there, the people of these cities would assemble, men, women and
 children, young and old, and go to the man and take his goods by force, giving a little to each
 man until there was an end to all the goods of the owner which he had brought into the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And if the owner of the goods quarreled with them, saying, What is this work which you
 have done to me, then they would approach to him one by one, and each would show him the
 little which he took and taunt him, saying, I only took that little which thou didst give me; and
 when he heard this from them all, he would arise and go from them in sorrow and bitterness
 of soul, when they would all arise and go after him, and drive him out of the city with great
 noise and tumult.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And there was a man from the country of Elam who was leisurely going on the road,
 seated upon his ass, which carried a fine mantle of divers colors, and the mantle was bound
 with a cord upon the ass.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the man was on his journey passing through the street of Sodom when the sun set in
 the evening, and he remained there in order to abide during the night, but no one would let
 him into his house; and at that time there was in Sodom a wicked and mischievous man, one
 skillful to do evil, and his name was Hedad.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And he lifted up his eyes and saw the traveler in the street of the city, and he came to him
 and said, Whence comest thou and whither dost thou go?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the man said to him, I am traveling from Hebron to Elam where I belong, and as I
 passed the sun set and no one would suffer me to enter his house, though I had bread and
 water and also straw and provender for my ass, and am short of nothing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Hedad answered and said to him, All that thou shalt want shall be supplied by me, but
 in the street thou shalt not abide all night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And Hedad brought him to his house, and he took off the mantle from the ass with the
 cord, and brought them to his house, and he gave the ass straw and provender whilst the
 traveler ate and drank in Hedad's house, and he abode there that night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And in the morning the traveler rose up early to continue his journey, when Hedad said to
 him, Wait, comfort thy heart with a morsel of bread and then go, and the man did so; and he
 remained with him, and they both ate and drank together during the day, when the man rose
 up to go.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And Hedad said to him, Behold now the day is declining, thou hadst better remain all night
 that thy heart may be comforted; and he pressed him so that he tarried there all night, and on
 the second day he rose up early to go away, when Hedad pressed him, saying, Comfort thy
 heart with a morsel of bread and then go, and he remained and ate with him also the second
 day, and then the man rose up to continue his journey.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Hedad said to him, Behold now the day is declining, remain with me to comfort thy
 heart and in the morning rise up early and go thy way.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And the man would not remain, but rose and saddled his ass, and whilst he was saddling
 his ass the wife of Hedad said to her husband, Behold this man has remained with us for two
 days eating and drinking and he has given us nothing, and now shall he go away from us
 without giving anything? and Hedad said to her, Be silent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And the man saddled his ass to go, and he asked Hedad to give him the cord and mantle
 to tie it upon the ass.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And Hedad said to him, What sayest thou? And he said to him, That thou my lord shalt
 give me the cord and the mantle made with divers colors which thou didst conceal with thee
 in thy house to take care of it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Hedad answered the man, saying, This is the interpretation of thy dream, the cord
 which thou didst see, means that thy life will be lengthened out like a cord, and having seen
 the mantle colored with all sorts of colors, means that thou shalt have a vineyard in which
 thou wilt plant trees of all fruits.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And the traveler answered, saying, Not so my lord, for I was awake when I gave thee the
 cord and also a mantle woven with different colors, which thou didst take off the ass to put
 them by for me; and Hedad answered and said, Surely I have told thee the interpretation of
 thy dream and it is a good dream, and this is the interpretation thereof.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 Now the sons of men give me four pieces of silver, which is my charge for interpreting
 dreams, and of thee only I require three pieces of silver.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And the man was provoked at the words of Hedad, and he cried bitterly, and he brought
 Hedad to Serak judge of Sodom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And the man laid his cause before Serak the judge, when Hedad replied, saying, It is not
 so, but thus the matter stands; and the judge said to the traveler, This man Hedad telleth thee
 truth, for he is famed in the cities for the accurate interpretation of dreams.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And the man cried at the word of the judge, and he said, Not so my Lord, for it was in the
 day that I gave him the cord and mantle which was upon the ass, in order to put them by in
 his house; and they both disputed before the judge, the one saying, Thus the matter was, and the other declaring otherwise.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Hedad said to the man, Give me four pieces of silver that I charge for my
 interpretations of dreams; I will not make any allowance; and give me the expense of the four
 meals that thou didst eat in my house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And the man said to Hedad, Truly I will pay thee for what I ate in thy house, only give me
 the cord and mantle which thou didst conceal in thy house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And Hedad replied before the judge and said to the man, Did I not tell thee the
 interpretation of thy dream? the cord means that thy days shall be prolonged like a cord, and
 the mantle, that thou wilt have a vineyard in which thou wilt plant all kinds of fruit trees.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 This is the proper interpretation of thy dream, now give me the four pieces of silver that I
 require as a compensation, for I will make thee no allowance.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And the man cried at the words of Hedad and they both quarreled before the judge, and
 the judge gave orders to his servants, who drove them rashly from the house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And they went away quarreling from the judge, when the people of Sodom heard them,
 and they gathered about them and they exclaimed against the stranger, and they drove him
 rashly from the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And the man continued his journey upon his ass with bitterness of soul, lamenting and
 weeping.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And whilst he was going along he wept at what had happened to him in the corrupt city of
 Sodom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="19.htm">Next: Chapter 19</a>
 </p></body>