<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="20.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="22.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 21
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And it was at that time at the end of a year and four months of Abraham's dwelling in the
 land of the Philistines in Gerar, that God visited Sarah, and the Lord remembered her, and
 she conceived and bare a son to Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Abraham called the name of the son which was born to him, which Sarah bare to him,
 Isaac.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac at eight days old, as God had commanded
 Abraham to do unto his seed after him; and Abraham was one hundred, and Sarah ninety
 years old, when Isaac was born to them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the child grew up and he was weaned, and Abraham made a great feast upon the day
 that Isaac was weaned.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Shem and Eber and all the great people of the land, and Abimelech king of the
 Philistines, and his servants, and Phicol, the captain of his host, came to eat and drink and
 rejoice at the feast which Abraham made upon the day of his son Isaac's being weaned.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 Also Terah, the father of Abraham, and Nahor his brother, came from Haran, they and all
 belonging to them, for they greatly rejoiced on hearing that a son had been born to Sarah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And they came to Abraham, and they ate and drank at the feast which Abraham made upon
 the day of Isaac's being weaned.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Terah and Nahor rejoiced with Abraham, and they remained with him many days in the
 land of the Philistines.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 At that time Serug the son of Reu died, in the first year of the birth of Isaac son of Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And all the days of Serug were two hundred and thirty-nine years, and he died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Ishmael the son of Abraham was grown up in those days; he was fourteen years old
 when Sarah bare Isaac to Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And God was with Ishmael the son of Abraham, and he grew up, and he learned to use
 the bow and became an archer.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And when Isaac was five years old he was sitting with Ishmael at the door of the tent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And Ishmael came to Isaac and seated himself opposite to him, and he took the bow and
 drew it and put the arrow in it, and intended to slay Isaac.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Sarah saw the act which Ishmael desired to do to her son Isaac, and it grieved her
 exceedingly on account of her son, and she sent for Abraham, and said to him, Cast out this
 bondwoman and her son, for her son shall not be heir with my son, for thus did he seek to do
 unto him this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Abraham hearkened to the voice of Sarah, and he rose up early in the morning, and
 he took twelve loaves and a bottle of water which he gave to Hagar, and sent her away with
 her son, and Hagar went with her son to the wilderness, and they dwelt in the wilderness of
 Paran with the inhabitants of the wilderness, and Ishmael was an archer, and he dwelt in the
 wilderness a long time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And he and his mother afterward went to the land of Egypt, and they dwelt there, and
 Hagar took a wife for her son from Egypt, and her name was Meribah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the wife of Ishmael conceived and bare four sons and two daughters, and Ishmael
 and his mother and his wife and children afterward went and returned to the wilderness.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And they made themselves tents in the wilderness, in which they dwelt, and they
 continued to travel and then to rest monthly and yearly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And God gave Ishmael flocks and herds and tents on account of Abraham his father, and
 the man increased in cattle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And Ishmael dwelt in deserts and in tents, traveling and resting for a long time, and he did
 not see the face of his father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And in some time after, Abraham said to Sarah his wife, I will go and see my son Ishmael,
 for I have a desire to see him, for I have not seen him for a long time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And Abraham rode upon one of his camels to the wilderness to seek his son Ishmael, for
 he heard that he was dwelling in a tent in the wilderness with all belonging to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And Abraham went to the wilderness, and he reached the tent of Ishmael about noon, and
 he asked after Ishmael, and he found the wife of Ishmael sitting in the tent with her children,
 and Ishmael her husband and his mother were not with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And Abraham asked the wife of Ishmael, saying, Where has Ishmael gone? and she said,
 He has gone to the field to hunt, and Abraham was still mounted upon the camel, for he
 would not get off to the ground as he had sworn to his wife Sarah that he would not get off
 from the camel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Abraham said to Ishmael's wife, My daughter, give me a little water that I may drink,
 for I am fatigued from the journey.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Ishmael's wife answered and said to Abraham, We have neither water nor bread, and
 she continued sitting in the tent and did not notice Abraham, neither did she ask him who he
 was.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 But she was beating her children in the tent, and she was cursing them, and she also
 cursed her husband Ishmael and reproached him, and Abraham heard the words of Ishmael's
 wife to her children, and he was very angry and displeased.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And Abraham called to the woman to come out to him from the tent, and the woman came
 and stood opposite to Abraham, for Abraham was still mounted upon the camel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Abraham said to Ishmael's wife, When thy husband Ishmael returneth home say
 these words to him,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 A very old man from the land of the Philistines came hither to seek thee, and thus was his
 appearance and figure; I did not ask him who he was, and seeing thou wast not here he
 spoke unto me and said, When Ishmael thy husband returneth tell him thus did this man say,
 When thou comest home put away this nail of the tent which thou hast placed here, and place
 another nail in its stead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Abraham finished his instructions to the woman, and he turned and went off on the
 camel homeward.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And after that Ishmael came from the chase he and his mother, and returned to the tent,
 and his wife spoke these words to him,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 A very old man from the land of the Philistines came to seek thee, and thus was his
 appearance and figure; I did not ask him who he was, and seeing thou wast not at home he said to me, When thy
 husband cometh home tell him, thus saith the old man, Put away the nail of the tent which
 thou hast placed here and place another nail in its stead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And Ishmael heard the words of his wife, and he knew that it was his father, and that his
 wife did not honor him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Ishmael understood his father's words that he had spoken to his wife, and Ishmael
 hearkened to the voice of his father, and Ishmael cast off that woman and she went away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Ishmael afterward went to the land of Canaan, and he took another wife and he
 brought her to his tent to the place where he then dwelt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And at the end of three years Abraham said, I will go again and see Ishmael my son, for I
 have not seen him for a long time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And he rode upon his camel and went to the wilderness, and he reached the tent of
 Ishmael about noon.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And he asked after Ishmael, and his wife came out of the tent and she said, He is not here
 my lord, for he has gone to hunt in the fields, and to feed the camels, and the woman said to
 Abraham, Turn in my lord into the tent, and eat a morsel of bread, for thy soul must be
 wearied on account of the journey.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And Abraham said to her, I will not stop for I am in haste to continue my journey, but give
 me a little water to drink, for I have thirst; and the woman hastened and ran into the tent and
 she brought out water and bread to Abraham, which she placed before him and she urged
 him to eat, and he ate and drank and his heart was comforted and he blessed his son
 Ishmael.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And he finished his meal and he blessed the Lord, and he said to Ishmael's wife, When
 Ishmael cometh home say these words to him,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 A very old man from the land of the Philistines came hither and asked after thee, and thou
 wast not here; and I brought him out bread and water and he ate and drank and his heart was
 comforted.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And he spoke these words to me: When Ishmael thy husband cometh home, say unto him,
 The nail of the tent which thou hast is very good, do not put it away from the tent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And Abraham finished commanding the woman, and he rode off to his home to the land of
 the Philistines; and when Ishmael came to his tent his wife went forth to meet him with joy and
 a cheerful heart.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And she said to him, An old man came here from the land of the Philistines and thus was
 his appearance, and he asked after thee and thou wast not here, so I brought out bread and
 water, and he ate and drank and his heart was comforted.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And he spoke these words to me, When Ishmael thy husband cometh home say to him,
 The nail of the tent which thou hast is very good, do not put it away from the tent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And Ishmael knew that it was his father, and that his wife had honored him, and the Lord
 blessed Ishmael.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="22.htm">Next: Chapter 22</a>
 </p></body>