<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="21.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="23.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 22
 </h1>
 
 
 
 
 <p>1 And Ishmael then rose up and took his wife and his children and his cattle and all belonging
 to him, and he journeyed from there and he went to his father in the land of the Philistines.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Abraham related to Ishmael his son the transaction with the first wife that Ishmael took,
 according to what she did.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Ishmael and his children dwelt with Abraham many days in that land, and Abraham
 dwelt in the land of the Philistines a long time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the days increased and reached twenty six years, and after that Abraham with his
 servants and all belonging to him went from the land of the Philistines and removed to a great
 distance, and they came near to Hebron, and they remained there, and the servants of
 Abraham dug wells of water, and Abraham and all belonging to him dwelt by the water, and
 the servants of Abimelech king of the Philistines heard the report that Abraham's servants
 had dug wells of water in the borders of the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And they came and quarreled with the servants of Abraham, and they robbed them of the
 great well which they had dug.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Abimelech king of the Philistines heard of this affair, and he with Phicol the captain of
 his host and twenty of his men came to Abraham, and Abimelech spoke to Abraham
 concerning his servants, and Abraham rebuked Abimelech concerning the well of which his
 servants had robbed him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Abimelech said to Abraham, As the Lord liveth who created the whole earth, I did not
 hear of the act which my servants did unto thy servants until this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Abraham took seven ewe lambs and gave them to Abimelech, saying, Take these, I
 pray thee, from my hands that it may be a testimony for me that I dug this well.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Abimelech took the seven ewe lambs which Abraham had given to him, for he had also
 given him cattle and herds in abundance, and Abimelech swore to Abraham concerning the
 well, therefore he called that well Beersheba, for there they both swore concerning it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And they both made a covenant in Beersheba, and Abimelech rose up with Phicol the
 captain of his host and all his men, and they returned to the land of the Philistines, and
 Abraham and all belonging to him dwelt in Beersheba and he was in that land a long time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Abraham planted a large grove in Beersheba, and he made to it four gates facing the
 four sides of the earth, and he planted a vineyard in it, so that if a traveler came to Abraham
 he entered any gate which was in his road, and remained there and ate and drank and
 satisfied himself and then departed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 For the house of Abraham was always open to the sons of men that passed and repassed,
 who came daily to eat and drink in the house of Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And any man who had hunger and came to Abraham's house, Abraham would give him
 bread that he might eat and drink and be satisfied, and any one that came naked to his house
 he would clothe with garments as he might choose, and give him silver and gold and make
 known to him the Lord who had created him in the earth; this did Abraham all his life.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And Abraham and his children and all belonging to him dwelt in Beersheba, and he
 pitched his tent as far as Hebron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Abraham's brother Nahor and his father and all belonging to them dwelt in Haran, for
 they did not come with Abraham to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And children were born to Nahor which Milca the daughter of Haran, and sister to Sarah,
 Abraham's wife, bare to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And these are the names of those that were born to him, Uz, Buz,  Kemuel, Kesed, Chazo, Pildash, Tidlaf, and Bethuel, being eight sons, these are the children
 of Milca which she bare to Nahor, Abraham's brother.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Nahor had a concubine and her name was Reumah, and she also bare to Nahor,
 Zebach, Gachash, Tachash and Maacha, being four sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the children that were born to Nahor were twelve sons besides his daughters, and
 they also had children born to them in Haran.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the children of Uz the first born of Nahor were Abi, Cheref, Gadin, Melus, and
 Deborah their sister.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the sons of Buz were Berachel, Naamath, Sheva, and Madonu.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And the sons of Kemuel were Aram and Rechob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the sons of Kesed were Anamlech, Meshai, Benon and Yifi; and the sons of Chazo
 were Pildash, Mechi and Opher.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the sons of Pildash were Arud, Chamum, Mered and Moloch.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the sons of Tidlaf were Mushan, Cushan and Mutzi.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And the children of Bethuel were Sechar, Laban and their sister Rebecca.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 These are the families of the children of Nahor, that were born to them in Haran; and Aram
 the son of Kemuel and Rechob his brother went away from Haran, and they found a valley in
 the land by the river Euphrates.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And they built a city there, and they called the name of the city after the name of Pethor
 the son of Aram, that is Aram Naherayim unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And the children of Kesed also went to dwell where they could find a place, and they went
 and they found a valley opposite to the land of Shinar, and they dwelt there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And they there built themselves a city, and they called the name at the city Kesed after the
 name of their father, that is the land Kasdim unto this day, and the Kasdim dwelt in that land
 and they were fruitful and multiplied exceedingly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Terah, father of Nahor and Abraham, went and took another wife in his old age, and
 her name was Pelilah, and she conceived and bare him a son and he called his name Zoba.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Terah lived twenty-five years after he begat Zoba.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And Terah died in that year, that is in the thirty-fifth year of the birth of Isaac son of
 Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years, and he was buried in Haran.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And Zoba the son of Terah lived thirty years and he begat Aram, Achlis and Merik.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Aram son of Zoba son of Terah, had three wives and he begat twelve sons and three
 daughters; and the Lord gave to Aram the son of Zoba, riches and possessions, and
 abundance of cattle, and flocks and herds, and the man increased greatly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Aram the son of Zoba and his brother and all his household journeyed from Haran,
 and they went to dwell where they should find a place, for their property was too great to
 remain in Haran; for they could not stop in Haran together with their brethren the children of
 Nahor.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And Aram the son of Zoba went with his brethren, and they found a valley at a distance
 toward the eastern country and they dwelt there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And they also built a city there, and they called the name thereof Aram, after the name of
 their eldest brother; that is Aram Zoba to this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And Isaac the son of Abraham was growing up in those days, and Abraham his father taught him the way of the Lord to know the Lord, and the Lord was with
 him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And when Isaac was thirty-seven years old, Ishmael his brother was going about with him
 in the tent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And Ishmael boasted of himself to Isaac, saying, I was thirteen years old when the Lord
 spoke to my father to circumcise us, and I did according to the word of the Lord which he
 spoke to my father, and I gave my soul unto the Lord, and I did not transgress his word which
 he commanded my father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And Isaac answered Ishmael, saying, Why dost thou boast to me about this, about a little
 bit of thy flesh which thou didst take from thy body, concerning which the Lord commanded
 thee?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 As the Lord liveth, the God of my father Abraham, if the Lord should say unto my father,
 Take now thy son Isaac and bring him up an offering before me, I would not refrain but I
 would joyfully accede to it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And the Lord heard the word that Isaac spoke to Ishmael, and it seemed good in the sight
 of the Lord, and he thought to try Abraham in this matter.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And the day arrived when the sons of God came and placed themselves before the Lord,
 and Satan also came with the sons of God before the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And the Lord said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? and Satan answered the Lord and
 said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And the Lord said to Satan, What is thy word to me concerning all the children of the
 earth? and Satan answered the Lord and said, I have seen all the children of the earth who
 serve thee and remember thee when they require anything from thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And when thou givest them the thing which they require from thee, they sit at their ease,
 and forsake thee and they remember thee no more.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 Hast thou seen Abraham the son of Terah, who at first had no children, and he served
 thee and erected altars to thee wherever he came, and he brought up offerings upon them,
 and he proclaimed thy name continually to all the children of the earth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And now that his son Isaac is born to him, he has forsaken thee, he has made a great
 feast for all the inhabitants of the land, and the Lord he has forgotten.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 For amidst all that he has done he brought thee no offering; neither burnt offering nor
 peace offering, neither ox, lamb nor goat of all that he killed on the day that his son was
 weaned.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 Even from the time of his son's birth till now, being thirty-seven years, he built no altar
 before thee, nor brought any offering to thee, for he saw that thou didst give what he
 requested before thee, and he therefore forsook thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And the Lord said to Satan, Hast thou thus considered my servant Abraham? for there is
 none like him upon earth, a perfect and an upright man before me, one that feareth God and
 avoideth evil; as I live, were I to say unto him, Bring up Isaac thy son before me, he would not
 withhold him from me, much more if I told him to bring up a burnt offering before me from his
 flock or herds.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 And Satan answered the Lord and said, Speak then now unto Abraham as thou hast said,
 and thou wilt see whether he will not this day transgress and cast aside thy words.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="23.htm">Next: Chapter 23</a>
 </p></body>