<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="27.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="29.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 28
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And in those days, after the death of Abraham, in that year the Lord brought a heavy famine
 in the land, and whilst the famine was raging in the land of Canaan, Isaac rose up to go down
 to Egypt on account of the famine, as his father Abraham had done.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And the Lord appeared that night to Isaac and he said to him, Do not go down to Egypt but
 rise and go to Gerar, to Abimelech king of the Philistines, and remain there till the famine
 shall cease.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Isaac rose up and went to Gerar, as the Lord commanded him, and he remained there
 a full year.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And when Isaac came to Gerar, the people of the land saw that Rebecca his wife was of a
 beautiful appearance, and the people of Gerar asked Isaac concerning his wife, and he said,
 She is my sister, for he was afraid to say she was his wife lest the people of the land should
 slay him on account of her.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the princes of Abimelech went and praised the woman to the king, but he answered
 them not, neither did he attend to their words.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 But he heard them say that Isaac declared her to be his sister, so the king reserved this
 within himself.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And when Isaac had remained three months in the land, Abimelech looked out at the
 window, and he saw, and behold Isaac was sporting with Rebecca his wife, for Isaac dwelt in
 the outer house belonging to the king, so that the house of Isaac was opposite the house of
 the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the king said unto Isaac, What is this thou hast done to us in saying of thy wife, She is
 my sister? how easily might one of the great men of the people have lain with her, and thou
 wouldst then have brought guilt upon us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Isaac said unto Abimelech, Because I was afraid lest I die on account of my wife,
 therefore I said, She is my sister.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 At that time Abimelech gave orders to all his princes and great men, and they took Isaac
 and Rebecca his wife and brought them before the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And the king commanded that they should dress them in princely garments, and make
 them ride through the streets of the city, and proclaim before them throughout the land,
 saying, This is the man and this is his wife; whoever toucheth this man or his wife shall surely
 die. And Isaac returned with his wife to the king's house, and the Lord was with Isaac and he
 continued to wax great and lacked nothing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the Lord caused Isaac to find favor in the sight of Abimelech, and in the sight of all his
 subjects, and Abimelech acted well with Isaac, for Abimelech remembered the oath and the
 covenant that existed between his father and Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Behold the whole earth is before thee; dwell wherever it
 may seem good in thy sight until thou shalt return to thy land; and Abimelech gave Isaac
 fields and vineyards and the best part of the land of Gerar, to sow and reap and eat the fruits
 of the ground until the days of the famine should have passed by.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And Isaac sowed in that land, and received a hundred-fold in the same year, and the Lord
 blessed him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the man waxed great, and he had possession of flocks and possession of herds and
 great store of servants.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And when the days of the famine had passed away the Lord appeared to Isaac and said
 unto him, Rise up, go forth from this place and return to thy land, to the land of Canaan; and
 Isaac rose up and returned to Hebron which is in the land of Canaan, he and all belonging to
 him as the Lord commanded him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And after this Shelach the son at Arpachshad died in that year, which is the eighteenth
 year of the lives of Jacob and Esau; and all the days that Shelach lived were four hundred
 and thirty-three years and he died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 At that time Isaac sent his younger son Jacob to the house of Shem and Eber, and he
 learned the instructions of the Lord, and Jacob remained in the house of Shem and Eber for
 thirty-two years, and Esau his brother did not go, for he was not willing to go, and he
 remained in his father's house in the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Esau was continually hunting in the fields to bring home what he could get, so did
 Esau all the days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And Esau was a designing and deceitful man, one who hunted after the hearts of men and
 inveigled them, and Esau was a valiant man in the field, and in the course of time went as
 usual to hunt; and he came as far as the field of Seir, the same is Edom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And he remained in the land of Seir hunting in the field a year and four months.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Esau there saw in the land of Seir the daughter of a man of Canaan, and her name
 was Jehudith, the daughter of Beeri, son of Epher, from the families of Heth the son of
 Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And Esau took her for a wife, and he came unto her; forty years old was Esau when he
 took her, and he brought her to Hebron, the land of his father's dwelling place, and he dwelt
 there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And it came to pass in those days, in the hundred and tenth year of the life of Isaac, that is
 in the fiftieth year of the life of Jacob, in that year died Shem the son of Noah; Shem was six
 hundred years old at his death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And when Shem died Jacob returned to his father to Hebron which is in the land of
 Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And in the fifty-sixth year of the life of Jacob, people came from Haran, and Rebecca was
 told concerning her brother Laban the son of Bethuel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 For the wife of Laban was barren in those days, and bare no children, and also all his
 handmaids bare none to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And the Lord afterward remembered Adinah the wife of Laban, and she conceived and
 bare twin daughters, and Laban called the names of his daughters, the name of the elder
 Leah, and the name of the younger Rachel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And those people came and told these things to Rebecca, and Rebecca rejoiced greatly
 that the Lord had visited her brother and that he had got children.</p><p>
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="29.htm">Next: Chapter 29</a>
 </p></body>