<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="36.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="38.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 37
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And in the one hundred and fifth year of the life of Jacob, that is the ninth year of Jacob's
 dwelling with his children in the land of Canaan, he came from Padan-aram.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And in those days Jacob journeyed with his children from Hebron, and they went and
 returned to the city of Shechem, they and all belonging to them, and they dwelt there, for the
 children of Jacob obtained good and fat pasture land for their cattle in the city of Shechem,
 the city of Shechem having then been rebuilt, and there were in it about three hundred men
 and women.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Jacob and his children and all belonging to him dwelt in the part of the field which
 Jacob had bought from Hamor the father of Shechem, when he came from Padan-aram
 before Simeon and Levi had smitten the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And all those kings of the Canaanites and Amorites that surrounded the city of Shechem,
 heard that the sons of Jacob had again come to Shechem and dwelt there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And they said, Shall the sons of Jacob the Hebrew again come to the city and dwell therein,
 after that they have smitten its inhabitants and driven them out? shall they now return and
 also drive out those who are dwelling in the city or slay them?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And all the kings of Canaan again assembled, and they came together to make war with
 Jacob and his sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Jashub king of Tapnach sent also to all his neighboring kings, to Elan king of Gaash,
 and to Ihuri king of Shiloh, and to Parathon king of Chazar, and to Susi king of Sarton, and to
 Laban king of Bethchoran, and to Shabir king of Othnay-mah, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 Come up to me and assist me, and let us smite Jacob the Hebrew and his sons, and all
 belonging to him, for they are again come to Shechem to possess it and to slay its inhabitants
 as before.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And all these kings assembled together and came with all their camps, a people
 exceedingly plentiful like the sand upon the sea shore, and they were all opposite to Tapnach.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Jashub king of Tapnach went forth to them with all his army, and he encamped with
 them opposite to Tapnach without the city, and all these kings they divided into seven
 divisions, being seven camps against the sons of Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And they sent a declaration to Jacob and his son, saying, Come you all forth to us that we
 may have an interview together in the plain, and revenge the cause of the men of Shechem
 whom you slew in their city, and you will now again return to the city of Shechem and dwell
 therein, and slay its inhabitants as before.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the sons of Jacob heard this and their anger was kindled exceedingly at the words of
 the kings of Canaan, and ten of the sons of Jacob hastened and rose up, and each of them
 girt on his weapons of war; and there were one hundred and two of their servants with them
 equipped in battle array.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And all these men, the sons of Jacob with their servants, went toward these kings, and
 Jacob their father was with them, and they all stood upon the heap of Shechem.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And Jacob prayed to the Lord for his sons, and he spread forth his hands to the Lord, and
 he said, O God, thou art an Almighty God, thou art our father, thou didst form us and we are
 the works of thine hands; I pray thee deliver my sons through thy mercy from the hand of their
 enemies, who are this day coming to fight with them and save them from their hand, for in thy
 hand is power and might, to save the few from the many.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And give unto my sons, thy servants, strength of heart and might to fight with their
 enemies, to subdue them, and make their enemies fall before them, and let not my sons and
 their servants die through the hands of the children of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 But if it seemeth good in thine eyes to take away the lives of my sons and their servants,
 take them in thy great mercy through the hands of thy ministers, that they may not perish this
 day by the hands of the kings of the Amorites.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And when Jacob ceased praying to the Lord the earth shook from its place, and the sun
 darkened, and all these kings were terrified and a great consternation seized them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the Lord hearkened to the prayer of Jacob, and the Lord impressed the hearts of all
 the kings and their hosts with the terror and awe of the sons of Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 For the Lord caused them to hear the voice of chariots, and the voice of mighty horses
 from the sons of Jacob, and the voice of a great army accompanying them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And these kings were seized with great terror at the sons of Jacob, and whilst they were
 standing in their quarters, behold the sons of Jacob advanced upon them, with one hundred
 and twelve men, with a great and tremendous shouting.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And when the kings saw the sons of Jacob advancing toward them, they were still more
 panic struck, and they were inclined to retreat from before the sons of Jacob as at first, and
 not to fight with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 But they did not retreat, saying, It would be a disgrace to us thus twice to retreat from
 before the Hebrews.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the sons of Jacob came near and advanced against all these kings and their armies,
 and they saw, and behold it was a very mighty people, numerous as the sand of the sea.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the sons of Jacob called  unto the Lord and said, Help us O Lord, help us and answer us, for we trust in thee, and let us
 not die by the hands of these uncircumcised men, who this day have come against us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the sons of Jacob girt on their weapons of war, and they took in their hands each man
 his shield and his javelin, and they approached to battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Judah, the son of Jacob, ran first before his brethren, and ten of his servants with him,
 and he went toward these kings.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Jashub, king of Tapnach, also came forth first with his army before Judah, and Judah
 saw Jashub and his army coming toward him, and Judah's wrath was kindled, and his anger
 burned within him, and he approached to battle in which Judah ventured his life.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Jashub and all his army were advancing toward Judah, and he was riding upon a very
 strong and powerful horse, and Jashub was a very valiant man, and covered with iron and
 brass from head to foot.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And whilst he was upon the horse, he shot arrows with both hands from before and
 behind, as was his manner in all his battles, and he never missed the place to which he
 aimed his arrows.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And when Jashub came to fight with Judah, and was darting many arrows against Judah,
 the Lord bound the hand of Jashub, and all the arrows that he shot rebounded upon his own
 men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And notwithstanding this, Jashub kept advancing toward Judah, to challenge him with the
 arrows, but the distance between them was about thirty cubits, and when Judah saw Jashub
 darting forth his arrows against him, he ran to him with his wrath-excited might.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Judah took up a large stone from the ground, and its weight was sixty shekels, and
 Judah ran toward Jashub, and with the stone struck him on his shield, that Jashub was
 stunned with the blow, and fell off from his horse to the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And the shield burst asunder out of the hand of Jashub, and through the force of the blow
 sprang to the distance of about fifteen cubits, and the shield fell before the second camp.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And the kings that came with Jashub saw at a distance the strength of Judah, the son of
 Jacob, and what he had done to Jashub, and they were terribly afraid of Judah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And they assembled near Jashub's camp, seeing his confusion, and Judah drew his sword
 and smote forty-two men of the camp of Jashub, and the whole of Jashub's camp fled before
 Judah, and no man stood against him, and they left Jashub and fled from him, and Jashub
 was still prostrate upon the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Jashub seeing that all the men of his camp had fled from him, hastened and rose up
 with terror against Judah, and stood upon his legs opposite Judah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Jashub had a single combat with Judah, placing shield toward shield, and Jashub's
 men all fled, for they were greatly afraid of Judah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And Jashub took his spear in his hand to strike Judah upon his head, but Judah had
 quickly placed his shield to his head against Jashub's spear, so that the shield of Judah
 received the blow from Jashub's spear, and the shield was split in too.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And when Judah saw that his shield was split, he hastily drew his  sword and smote Jashub at his ankles, and cut off his feet that Jashub fell upon the ground,
 and the spear fell from his hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And Judah hastily picked up Jashub's spear, with which he severed his head and cast it
 next to his feet.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And when the sons of Jacob saw what Judah had done to Jashub, they all ran into the
 ranks of the other kings, and the sons of Jacob fought with the army of Jashub, and the
 armies of all the kings that were there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And the sons of Jacob caused fifteen thousand of their men to fall, and they smote them
 as if smiting at gourds, and the rest fled for their lives.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And Judah was still standing by the body of Jashub, and stripped Jashub of his coat of
 mail.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Judah also took off the iron and brass that was about Jashub, and behold nine men of
 the captains of Jashub came along to fight against Judah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And Judah hastened and took up a stone from the ground, and with it smote one of them
 upon the head, and his skull was fractured, and the body also fell from the horse to the
 ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And the eight captains that remained, seeing the strength of Judah, were greatly afraid
 and they fled, and Judah with his ten men pursued them, and they overtook them and slew
 them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And the sons of Jacob were still smiting the armies of the kings, and they slew many of
 them, but those kings daringly kept their stand with their captains, and did not retreat from
 their places, and they exclaimed against those of their armies that fled from before the sons
 of Jacob, but none would listen to them, for they were afraid of their lives lest they should die.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And all the sons of Jacob, after having smitten the armies of the kings, returned and came
 before Judah, and Judah was still slaying the eight captains of Jashub, and stripping off their
 garments.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And Levi saw Elon, king of Gaash, advancing toward him, with his fourteen captains to
 smite him, but Levi did not know it for certain.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And Elon with his captains approached nearer, and Levi looked back and saw that battle
 was given him in the rear, and Levi ran with twelve of his servants, and they went and slew
 Elon and his captains with the edge of the sword.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="38.htm">Next: Chapter 38</a>
 </p></body>