<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="37.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="39.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 38
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And Ihuri king of Shiloh came up to assist Elon, and he approached Jacob, when Jacob
 drew his bow that was in his hand and with an arrow struck Ihuri which caused his death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And when Ihuri king of Shiloh was dead, the four remaining kings fled from their station with
 the rest of the captains, and they endeavored to retreat, saying, We have no more strength
 with the Hebrews after their having killed the three kings and their captains who were more
 powerful than we are.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And when the sons of Jacob saw that the remaining kings had removed from their station,
 they pursued them, and Jacob also came from the heap of Shechem from the place where he
 was standing, and they went after the kings and they approached them with their servants.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the kings and the captains with the rest of their armies, seeing that the sons of Jacob approached them, were afraid of their lives and fled till they reached
 the city of Chazar.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the sons of Jacob pursued them to the gate of the city of Chazar, and they smote a
 great smiting amongst the kings and their armies, about four thousand men, and whilst they
 were smiting the army of the kings, Jacob was occupied with his bow confining himself to
 smiting the kings, and he slew them all.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And he slew Parathon king of Chazar at the gate of the city of Chazar, and he afterward
 smote Susi king of Sarton, and Laban king of Bethchorin, and Shabir king of Machnaymah,
 and he slew them all with arrows, an arrow to each of them, and they died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the sons of Jacob seeing that all the kings were dead and that they were broken up
 and retreating, continued to carry on the battle with the armies of the kings opposite the gate
 of Chazar, and they still smote about four hundred of their men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And three men of the servants of Jacob fell in that battle, and when Judah saw that three of
 his servants had died, it grieved him greatly, and his anger burned within him against the
 Amorites.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And all the men that remained of the armies of the kings were greatly afraid of their lives,
 and they ran and broke the gate of the walls of the city of Chazar, and they all entered the city
 for safety.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And they concealed themselves in the midst of the city of Chazar, for the city of Chazar
 was very large and extensive, and when all these armies had entered the city, the sons of
 Jacob ran after them to the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And four mighty men, experienced in battle, went forth from the city and stood against the
 entrance of the city, with drawn swords and spears in their hands, and they placed
 themselves opposite the sons of Jacob, and would not suffer them to enter the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And Naphtali ran and came between them and with his sword smote two of them, and cut
 off their heads at one stroke.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And he turned to the other two, and behold they had fled, and he pursued them, overtook
 them, smote them and slew them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the sons of Jacob came to the city and saw, and behold there was another wall to the
 city, and they sought for the gate of the wall and could not find it, and Judah sprang upon the
 top of the wall, and Simeon and Levi followed him, and they all three descended from the wall
 into the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Simeon and Levi slew all the men who ran for safety into the city, and also the
 inhabitants of the city with their wives and little ones, they slew with the edge of the sword,
 and the cries of the city ascended up to heaven.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Dan and Naphtali sprang upon the wall to see what caused the noise of lamentation,
 for the sons of Jacob felt anxious about their brothers, and they heard the inhabitants of the
 city speaking with weeping and supplications, saying, Take all that we possess in the city and
 go away, only do not put us to death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And when Judah, Simeon, and Levi had ceased smiting the inhabitants of the city, they
 ascended the wall and called to Dan and Naphtali, who were upon the wall, and to the rest of
 their brothers, and Simeon and Levi informed them of the entrance into the city, and all the sons of Jacob came to fetch the spoil.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the sons of Jacob took the spoil of the city of Chazar, the flocks and herds, and the
 property, and they took all that could be captured, and went away that day from the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And on the next day the sons of Jacob went to Sarton, for they heard that the men of
 Sarton who had remained in the city were assembling to fight with them for having slain their
 king, and Sarton was a very high and fortified city, and it had a deep rampart surrounding the
 city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the pillar of the rampart was about fifty cubits and its breadth forty cubits, and there
 was no place for a man to enter the city on account of the rampart, and the sons of Jacob
 saw the rampart of the city, and they sought an entrance in it but could not find it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 For the entrance to the city was at the rear, and every man that wished to come into the
 city came by that road and went around the whole city, and he afterwards entered the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And the sons of Jacob seeing they could not find the way into the city, their anger was
 kindled greatly, and the inhabitants of the city seeing that the sons of Jacob were coming to
 them were greatly afraid of them, for they had heard of their strength and what they had done
 to Chazar.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the inhabitants of the city of Sarton could not go out toward the sons of Jacob after
 having assembled in the city to fight against them, lest they might thereby get into the city, but
 when they saw that they were coming toward them, they were greatly afraid of them, for they
 had heard of their strength and what they had done to Chazar.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 So the inhabitants of Sarton speedily took away the bridge of the road of the city, from its
 place, before the sons of Jacob came, and they brought it into the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the sons of Jacob came and sought the way into the city, and could not find it and the
 inhabitants of the city went up to the top of the wall, and saw, and behold the sons of Jacob
 were seeking an entrance into the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And the inhabitants of the city reproached the sons of Jacob from the top of the wall, and
 they cursed them, and the sons of Jacob heard the reproaches, and they were greatly
 incensed, and their anger burned within them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And the sons of Jacob were provoked at them, and they all rose and sprang over the
 rampart with the force of their strength, and through their might passed the forty cubits'
 breadth of the rampart.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And when they had passed the rampart they stood under the wall of the city, and they
 found all the gates of the city enclosed with iron doors.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And the sons of Jacob came near to break open the doors of the gates of the city, and the
 inhabitants did not let them, for from the top of the wall they were casting stones and arrows
 upon them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And the number of the people that were upon the wall was about four hundred men, and
 when the sons of Jacob saw that the men of the city would not let them open the gates of the
 city, they sprang and ascended the top of the wall, and Judah went up first to the east part of
 the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Gad and Asher went up after him to the west corner of the city, and Simeon and Levi
 to the north, and Dan and Reuben to the south.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And the men who were on the top of the wall, the inhabitants of the city, seeing that the
 sons of Jacob were coming up to them, they all fled from the wall, descended into the city,
 and concealed themselves in the midst of the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And Issachar and Naphtali that remained under the wall approached and broke the gates
 of the city, and kindled a fire at the gates of the city, that the iron melted, and all the sons of
 Jacob came into the city, they and all their men, and they fought with the inhabitants of the
 city of Sarton, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and no man stood up before them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And about two hundred men fled from the city, and they all went and hid themselves in a
 certain tower in the city, and Judah pursued them to the tower and he broke down the tower,
 which fell upon the men, and they all died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And the sons of Jacob went up the road of the roof of that tower, and they saw, and behold
 there was another strong and high tower at a distance in the city, and the top of it reached to
 heaven, and the sons of Jacob hastened and descended, and went with all their men to that
 tower, and found it filled with about three hundred men, women and little ones.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And the sons of Jacob smote a great smiting amongst those men in the tower and they ran
 away and fled from them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Simeon and Levi pursued them, when twelve mighty and valiant men came out to
 them from the place where they had concealed themselves.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And those twelve men maintained a strong battle against Simeon and Levi, and Simeon
 and Levi could not prevail over them, and those valiant men broke the shields of Simeon and
 Levi, and one of them struck at Levi's head with his sword, when Levi hastily placed his hand
 to his head, for he was afraid of the sword, and the sword struck Levi's hand, and it wanted
 but little to the hand of Levi being cut off.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And Levi seized the sword of the valiant man in his hand, and took it forcibly from the man,
 and with it he struck at the head of the powerful man, and he severed his head.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And eleven men approached to fight with Levi, for they saw that one of them was killed,
 and the sons of Jacob fought, but the sons of Jacob could not prevail over them, for those
 men were very powerful.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And the sons of Jacob seeing that they could not prevail over them, Simeon gave a loud
 and tremendous shriek, and the eleven powerful men were stunned at the voice of Simeon's
 shrieking.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And Judah at a distance knew the voice of Simeon's shouting, and Naphtali and Judah ran
 with their shields to Simeon and Levi, and found them fighting with those powerful men,
 unable to prevail over them as their shields were broken.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And Naphtali saw that the shields of Simeon and Levi were broken, and he took two
 shields from his servants and brought them to Simeon and Levi.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Simeon, Levi and Judah on that day fought all three against the eleven mighty men
 until the time of sunset, but they could not prevail over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And this was told unto Jacob, and he was sorely grieved, and he prayed unto the Lord,
 and he and Naphtali his son went against these mighty men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And Jacob approached and drew  his bow, and came nigh unto the mighty men, and slew three of their men with the bow, and
 the remaining eight turned back, and behold, the war waged against them in the front and
 rear, and they were greatly afraid of their lives, and could not stand before the sons of Jacob,
 and they fled from before them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And in their flight they met Dan and Asher coming toward them, and they suddenly fell
 upon them, and fought with them, and slew two of them, and Judah and his brothers pursued
 them, and smote the remainder of them, and slew them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And all the sons of Jacob returned and walked about the city, searching if they could find
 any men, and they found about twenty young men in a cave in the city, and Gad and Asher
 smote them all, and Dan and Naphtali lighted upon the rest of the men who had fled and
 escaped from the second tower, and they smote them all.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And the sons of Jacob smote all the inhabitants of the city of Sarton, but the women and
 little ones they left in the city and did not slay them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And all the inhabitants of the city of Sarton were powerful men, one of them would pursue
 a thousand, and two of them would not flee from ten thousand of the rest of men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And the sons of Jacob slew all the inhabitants of the city of Sarton with the edge of the
 sword, that no man stood up against them, and they left the women in the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And the sons of Jacob took all the spoil of the city, and captured what they desired, and
 they took flocks and herds and property from the city, and the sons of Jacob did unto Sarton
 and its inhabitants as they had done to Chazar and its inhabitants, and they turned and went
 away.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="39.htm">Next: Chapter 39</a>
 </p></body>