<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="40.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="42.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 41
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And at the revolution of the year the sons of Jacob journeyed from Shechem, and they
 came to Hebron, to their father Isaac, and they dwelt there, but their flocks and herds they fed
 daily in Shechem, for there was there in those days good and fat pasture, and Jacob and his
 sons and all their household dwelt in the valley of Hebron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And it was in those days, in that year, being the hundred and sixth year of the life of Jacob,
 in the tenth year of Jacob's coming from Padan-aram, that Leah the wife of Jacob died; she
 was fifty-one years old when she died in Hebron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Jacob and his sons buried her in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which is in
 Hebron, which Abraham had bought from the children of Heth, for the possession of a burial
 place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the sons of Jacob dwelt with their father in the valley of Hebron, and all the inhabitants
 of the land knew their strength and their fame went throughout the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Joseph the son of Jacob, and his brother Benjamin, the sons of Rachel, the wife of
 Jacob, were yet young in those days, and did not go out with their brethren during their battles
 in all the cities of the Amorites.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And when Joseph saw the strength of his brethren, and their greatness, he praised them
 and extolled them, but he ranked himself greater than them, and extolled himself above them;
 and Jacob, his father, also loved him more than any of his sons, for he was a son of his old
 age, and through his love toward him, he made him a coat of many colors.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And when Joseph saw that his father loved him more than his brethren, he continued to
 exalt himself above his brethren, and he brought unto his father evil reports concerning them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the sons of Jacob seeing the whole of Joseph's conduct toward them, and that their
 father loved him more than any of them, they hated him and could not speak peaceably to
 him all the days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Joseph was seventeen years old, and he was still magnifying himself above his
 brethren, and thought of raising himself above them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 At that time he dreamed a dream, and he came unto his brothers and told them his dream,
 and he said unto them, I dreamed a dream, and behold we were all binding sheaves in the
 field, and my sheaf rose and placed itself upon the ground and your sheaves surrounded it
 and bowed down to it.</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>11 And his brethren answered him and said unto him, What meaneth this dream that thou
 didst dream? dost thou imagine in thy heart to reign or rule over us?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And he still came, and told the thing to his father Jacob, and Jacob kissed Joseph when
 he heard these words from his mouth, and Jacob blessed Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And when the sons of Jacob saw that their father had blessed Joseph and had kissed him,
 and that he loved him exceedingly, they became jealous of him and hated him the more.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And after this Joseph dreamed another dream and related the dream to his father in the
 presence of his brethren, and Joseph said unto his father and brethren, Behold I have again
 dreamed a dream, and behold the sun and the moon and the eleven stars bowed down to
 me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And his father heard the words of Joseph and his dream, and seeing that his brethren
 hated Joseph on account of this matter, Jacob therefore rebuked Joseph before his brethren
 on account of this thing, saying, What meaneth this dream which thou hast dreamed, and this
 magnifying thyself before thy brethren who are older than thou art?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 Dost thou imagine in thy heart that I and thy mother and thy eleven brethren will come and
 bow down to thee, that thou speakest these things?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And his brethren were jealous of him on account of his words and dreams, and they
 continued to hate him, and Jacob reserved the dreams in his heart.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the sons of Jacob went one day to feed their father's flock in Shechem, for they were
 still herdsmen in those days; and whilst the sons of Jacob were that day feeding in Shechem
 they delayed, and the time of gathering in the cattle was passed, and they had not arrived.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Jacob saw that his sons were delayed in Shechem, and Jacob said within himself,
 Peradventure the people of Shechem have risen up to fight against them, therefore they have
 delayed coming this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And Jacob called Joseph his son and commanded him, saying, Behold thy brethren are
 feeding in Shechem this day, and behold they have not yet come back; go now therefore and
 see where they are, and bring me word back concerning the welfare of thy brethren and the
 welfare of the flock.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And Jacob sent his son Joseph to the valley of Hebron, and Joseph came for his brothers
 to Shechem, and could not find them, and Joseph went about the field which was near
 Shechem, to see where his brothers had turned, and he missed his road in the wilderness,
 and knew not which way he should go.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And an angel of the Lord found him wandering in the road toward the field, and Joseph
 said unto the angel of the Lord, I seek my brethren; hast thou not heard where they are
 feeding? and the angel of the Lord said unto Joseph, I saw thy brethren feeding here, and I
 heard them say they would go to feed in Dothan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And Joseph hearkened to the voice of the angel of the Lord, and he went to his brethren in
 Dothan and he found them in Dothan feeding the flock.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And Joseph advanced to his brethren, and before he had come nigh unto them, they had
 resolved to slay him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And Simeon said to his brethren, Behold the man of dreams is coming unto us this day,
 and now  therefore come and let us kill him and cast him in one of the pits that are in the wilderness,
 and when his father shall seek him from us, we will say an evil beast has devoured him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Reuben heard the words of his brethren concerning Joseph, and he said unto them,
 You should not do this thing, for how can we look up to our father Jacob? Cast him into this
 pit to die there, but stretch not forth a hand upon him to spill his blood; and Reuben said this
 in order to deliver him from their hand, to bring him back to his father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And when Joseph came to his brethren he sat before them, and they rose upon him and
 seized him and smote him to the earth, and stripped the coat of many colors which he had on.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And they took him and cast him into a pit, and in the pit there was no water, but serpents
 and scorpions. And Joseph was afraid of the serpents and scorpions that were in the pit. And
 Joseph cried out with a loud voice, and the Lord hid the serpents and scorpions in the sides
 of the pit, and they did no harm unto Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And Joseph called out from the pit to his brethren, and said unto them, What have I done
 unto you, and in what have I sinned? why do you not fear the Lord concerning me? am I not
 of your bones and flesh, and is not Jacob your father, my father? why do you do this thing
 unto me this day, and how will you be able to look up to our father Jacob?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And he continued to cry out and call unto his brethren from the pit, and he said, O Judah,
 Simeon, and Levi, my brethren, lift me up from the place of darkness in which you have
 placed me, and come this day to have compassion on me, ye children of the Lord, and sons
 of Jacob my father. And if I have sinned unto you, are you not the sons of Abraham, Isaac,
 and Jacob? if they saw an orphan they had compassion over him, or one that was hungry,
 they gave him bread to eat, or one that was thirsty, they gave him water to drink, or one that
 was naked, they covered him with garments!</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And how then will you withhold your pity from your brother, for I am of your flesh and
 bones, and if I have sinned unto you, surely you will do this on account of my father!</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Joseph spoke these words from the pit, and his brethren could not listen to him, nor
 incline their ears to the words of Joseph, and Joseph was crying and weeping in the pit.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And Joseph said, O that my father knew, this day, the act which my brothers have done
 unto me, and the words which they have this day spoken unto me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And all his brethren heard his cries and weeping in the pit, and his brethren went and
 removed themselves from the pit, so that they might not hear the cries of Joseph and his
 weeping in the pit.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="42.htm">Next: Chapter 42</a>
 </p></body>