<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="41.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="43.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 42
 </h1>
 
 
 
 
 <p>1 And they went and sat on the opposite side, about the distance of a bow-shot, and they sat
 there to eat bread, and whilst they were eating, they held counsel together what was to be
 done with him, whether to slay him or to bring him back to his father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 They were holding the counsel, when they lifted up their eyes, and saw, and behold there
 was a company of Ishmaelites coming at a distance by the road of Gilead, going down to
 Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Judah said unto them, What gain will it be to us if we slay our brother? peradventure
 God will require him from us; this then is the counsel proposed concerning him, which you
 shall do unto him: Behold this company of Ishmaelites going down to Egypt,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 Now therefore, come let us dispose of him to them, and let not our hand be upon him, and
 they will lead him along with them, and he will be lost amongst the people of the land, and we
 will not put him to death with our own hands. And the proposal pleased his brethren and they
 did according to the word of Judah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And whilst they were discoursing about this matter, and before the company of Ishmaelites
 had come up to them, seven trading men of Midian passed by them, and as they passed they
 were thirsty, and they lifted up their eyes and saw the pit in which Joseph was immured, and
 they looked, and behold every species of bird was upon him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And these Midianites ran to the pit to drink water, for they thought that it contained water,
 and on coming before the pit they heard the voice of Joseph crying and weeping in the pit,
 and they looked down into the pit, and they saw and behold there was a youth of comely
 appearance and well favored.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And they called unto him and said, Who art thou and who brought thee hither, and who
 placed thee in this pit, in the wilderness? and they all assisted to raise up Joseph and they
 drew him out, and brought him up from the pit, and took him and went away on their journey
 and passed by his brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And these said unto them, Why do you do this, to take our servant from us and to go away?
 surely we placed this youth in the pit because he rebelled against us, and you come and bring
 him up and lead him away; now then give us back our servant.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the Midianites answered and said unto the sons of Jacob, Is this your servant, or does
 this man attend you? peradventure you are all his servants, for he is more comely and well
 favored than any of you, and why do you all speak falsely unto us?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 Now therefore we will not listen to your words, nor attend to you, for we found the youth in
 the pit in the wilderness, and we took him; we will therefore go on.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And all the sons of Jacob approached them and rose up to them and said unto them, Give
 us back our servant, and why will you all die by the edge of the sword? And the Midianites
 cried out against them, and they drew their swords, and approached to fight with the sons of
 Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And behold Simeon rose up from his seat against them, and sprang upon the ground and
 drew his sword and approached the Midianites and he gave a terrible shout before them, so
 that his shouting was heard at a distance, and the earth shook at Simeon's shouting.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the Midianites were terrified on account of Simeon and the noise of his shouting, and
 they fell upon their faces, and were excessively alarmed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And Simeon said unto them, Verily I am Simeon, the son of Jacob the Hebrew, who have,
 only with my brother, destroyed the city of Shechem and the cities of the Amorites; so shall
 God moreover do unto me, that if all your brethren the people of Midian, and also the kings of
 Canaan, were to come with you, they could not fight against me.</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>15 Now therefore give us back the youth whom you have taken, lest I give your flesh to the
 birds of the skies and the beasts of the earth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And the Midianites were more afraid of Simeon, and they approached the sons of Jacob
 with terror and fright, and with pathetic words, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 Surely you have said that the young man is your servant, and that he rebelled against you,
 and therefore you placed him in the pit; what then will you do with a servant who rebels
 against his master? Now therefore sell him unto us, and we will give you all that you require
 for him; and the Lord was pleased to do this in order that the sons of Jacob should not slay
 their brother.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the Midianites saw that Joseph was of a comely appearance and well-favored; they
 desired him in their hearts and were urgent to purchase him from his brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the sons of Jacob hearkened to the Midianites and they sold their brother Joseph to
 them for twenty pieces of silver, and Reuben their brother was not with them, and the
 Midianites took Joseph and continued their journey to Gilead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 They were going along the road, and the Midianites repented of what they had done, in
 having purchased the young man, and one said to the other, What is this thing that we have
 done, in taking this youth from the Hebrews, who is of comely appearance and well favored.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 Perhaps this youth is stolen from the land of the Hebrews, and why then have we done
 this thing? and if he should be sought for and found in our hands we shall die through him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 Now surely hardy and powerful men have sold him to us, the strength of one of whom you
 saw this day; perhaps they stole him from his land with their might and with their powerful
 arm, and have therefore sold him to us for the small value which we gave unto them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And whilst they were thus discoursing together, they looked, and behold the company of
 Ishmaelites which was coming at first, and which the sons of Jacob saw, was advancing
 toward the Midianites, and the Midianites said to each other, Come let us sell this youth to the
 company of Ishmaelites who are coming toward us, and we will take for him the little that we
 gave for him, and we will be delivered from his evil.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And they did so, and they reached the Ishmaelites, and the Midianites sold Joseph to the
 Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver which they had given for him to his brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the Midianites went on their road to Gilead, and the Ishmaelites took Joseph and they
 let him ride upon one of the camels, and they were leading him to Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Joseph heard that the Ishmaelites were proceeding to Egypt, and Joseph lamented
 and wept at this thing that he was to be so far removed from the land of Canaan, from his
 father, and he wept bitterly whilst he was riding upon the camel, and one of their men
 observed him, and made him go down from the camel and walk on foot, and notwithstanding
 this Joseph continued to cry and weep, and he said, O my father, my father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And one of the Ishmaelites rose up and smote Joseph upon the cheek, and still he
 continued to weep; and Joseph was fatigued in the  road, and was unable to proceed on account of the bitterness of his soul, and they all smote
 him and afflicted him in the road, and they terrified him in order that he might cease from
 weeping.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And the Lord saw the ambition of Joseph and his trouble, and the Lord brought down upon
 those men darkness and confusion, and the hand of every one that smote him became
 withered.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And they said to each other, What is this thing that God has done to us in the road? and
 they knew not that this befell them on account of Joseph. And the men proceeded on the
 road, and they passed along the road of Ephrath where Rachel was buried.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Joseph reached his mother's grave, and Joseph hastened and ran to his mother's
 grave, and fell upon the grave and wept.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Joseph cried aloud upon his mother's grave, and he said, O my mother, my mother, O
 thou who didst give me birth, awake now, and rise and see thy son, how he has been sold for
 a slave, and no one to pity him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 O rise and see thy son, weep with me on account of my troubles, and see the heart of my
 brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 Arouse my mother, arouse, awake from thy sleep for me, and direct thy battles against my
 brethren. O how have they stripped me of my coat, and sold me already twice for a slave, and
 separated me from my father, and there is no one to pity me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 Arouse and lay thy cause against them before God, and see whom God will justify in the
 judgment, and whom he will condemn.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 Rise, O my mother, rise, awake from thy sleep and see my father how his soul is with me
 this day, and comfort him and ease his heart.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Joseph continued to speak these words, and Joseph cried aloud and wept bitterly
 upon his mother's grave; and he ceased speaking, and from bitterness of heart he became
 still as a stone upon the grave.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Joseph heard a voice speaking to him from beneath the ground, which answered him
 with bitterness of heart, and with a voice of weeping and praying in these words:</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 My son, my son Joseph, I have heard the voice of thy weeping and the voice of thy
 lamentation; I have seen thy tears; I know thy troubles, my son, and it grieves me for thy sake,
 and abundant grief is added to my grief.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 Now therefore my son, Joseph my son, hope to the Lord, and wait for him and do not fear,
 for the Lord is with thee, he will deliver thee from all trouble.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 Rise my son, go down unto Egypt with thy masters, and do not fear, for the Lord is with
 thee, my son. And she continued to speak like unto these words unto Joseph, and she was
 still.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And Joseph heard this, and he wondered greatly at this, and he continued to weep; and
 after this one of the Ishmaelites observed him crying and weeping upon the grave, and his
 anger was kindled against him, and he drove him from there, and he smote him and cursed
 him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And Joseph said unto the men, May I find grace in your sight to take me back to my
 father's house, and he will give you abundance of riches.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And they answered him, saying, Art thou not a slave, and where is thy father? and if thou
 hadst a father thou wouldst not already twice have been sold for a slave for so little value; and
 their anger was still roused against him, and they continued to smite him and to chastise him,
 and Joseph wept bitterly.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><p>44 And the Lord saw Joseph's affliction, and Lord again smote these men, and chastised
 them, and the Lord caused darkness to envelope them upon the earth, and the lightning
 flashed and the thunder roared, and the earth shook at the voice of the thunder and of the
 mighty wind, and the men were terrified and knew not where they should go.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And the beasts and camels stood still, and they led them, but they would not go, they
 smote them, and they crouched upon the ground; and the men said to each other, What is
 this that God has done to us? what are our transgressions, and what are our sins that this
 thing has thus befallen us?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And one of them answered and said unto them, Perhaps on account of the sin of afflicting
 this slave has this thing happened this day to us; now therefore implore him strongly to
 forgive us, and then we shall know on whose account this evil befalleth us, and if God shall
 have compassion over us, then we shall know that all this cometh to us on account of the sin
 of afflicting this slave.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And the men did so, and they supplicated Joseph and pressed him to forgive them; and
 they said, We have sinned to the Lord and to thee, now therefore vouchsafe to request of thy
 God that he shall put away this death from amongst us, for we have sinned to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And Joseph did according to their words, and the Lord hearkened to Joseph, and the Lord
 put away the plague which he had inflicted upon those men on account of Joseph, and the
 beasts rose up from the ground and they conducted them, and they went on, and the raging
 storm abated and the earth became tranquilized, and the men proceeded on their journey to
 go down to Egypt, and the men knew that this evil had befallen them on account of Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And they said to each other, Behold we know that it was on account of his affliction that
 this evil befell us; now therefore why shall we bring this death upon our souls? Let us hold
 counsel what to do to this slave.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And one answered and said, Surely he told us to bring him back to his father; now
 therefore come, let us take him back and we will go to the place that he will tell us, and take
 from his family the price that we gave for him and we will then go away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And one answered again and said, Behold this counsel is very good, but we cannot do so
 for the way is very far from us, and we cannot go out of our road.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And one more answered and said unto them, This is the counsel to be adopted, we will not
 swerve from it; behold we are this day going to Egypt, and when we shall have come to
 Egypt, we will sell him there at a high price, and we will be delivered from his evil.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And this thing pleased the men and they did so, and they continued their journey to Egypt
 with Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="43.htm">Next: Chapter 43</a>
 </p></body>