<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="49.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="51.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 50
 </h1>
 
  
 
 
 <p>1 At that time the children of Tarshish came against the sons of Ishmael, and made war with
 them, and the children of Tarshish spoiled the Ishmaelites for a long time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And the children of Ishmael were small in number in those days, and they could not prevail
 over the children of Tarshish, and they were sorely oppressed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the old men of the Ishmaelites sent a record to the king of Egypt, saying, Send I pray
 thee unto thy servants officers and hosts to help us to fight against the children of Tarshish,
 for we have been consuming away for a long time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And Pharaoh sent Joseph with the mighty men and host which were with him, and also his
 mighty men from the king's house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And they went to the land of Havilah to the children of Ishmael, to assist them against the
 children of Tarshish, and the children of Ishmael fought with the children of Tarshish, and
 Joseph smote the Tarshishites and he subdued all their land, and the children of Ishmael
 dwell therein unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And when the land of Tarshish was subdued, all the Tarshishites ran away, and came on
 the border of their brethren the children of Javan, and Joseph with all his mighty men and
 host returned to Egypt, not one man of them missing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And at the revolution of the year, in the second year of Joseph's reigning over Egypt, the
 Lord gave great plenty throughout the land for seven years as Joseph had spoken, for the
 Lord blessed all the produce of the earth in those days for seven years, and they ate and
 were greatly satisfied.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Joseph at that time had officers under him, and they collected all the food of the good
 years, and heaped corn year by year, and they placed it in the treasuries of Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And at any time when they gathered the food Joseph commanded that they should bring
 the corn in the ears, and also bring with it some of the soil of the field, that it should not spoil.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Joseph did according to this year by year, and he heaped up corn like the sand of the
 sea for abundance, for his stores were immense and could not be numbered for abundance.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And also all the inhabitants of Egypt gathered all sorts of food in their stores in great
 abundance during the seven good years, but they did not do unto it as Joseph did.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And all the food which Joseph and the Egyptians had gathered during the seven years of
 plenty, was secured for the land in stores for the seven years of famine, for the support of the
 whole land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the inhabitants of Egypt filled each man his store and his concealed place with corn,
 to be for support during the famine.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And Joseph placed all the food that he had gathered in all the cities of Egypt, and he
 closed all the stores and placed sentinels over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Joseph's wife Osnath  the daughter of Potiphera bare him two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, and Joseph was
 thirty-four years old when he begat them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And the lads grew up and they went in his ways and in his instructions, they did not
 deviate from the way which their father taught them, either to the right or left.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the Lord was with the lads, and they grew up and had understanding and skill in all
 wisdom and in all the affairs of government, and all the king's officers and his great men of
 the inhabitants of Egypt exalted the lads, and they were brought up amongst the king's
 children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the seven years of plenty that were throughout the land were at an end, and the
 seven years of famine came after them as Joseph had spoken, and the famine was
 throughout the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And all the people of Egypt saw that the famine had commenced in the land of Egypt, and
 all the people of Egypt opened their stores of corn for the famine prevailed over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And they found all the food that was in their stores, full of vermin and not fit to eat, and the
 famine prevailed throughout the land, and all the inhabitants of Egypt came and cried before
 Pharaoh, for the famine was heavy upon them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And they said unto Pharaoh, Give food unto thy servants, and wherefore shall we die
 through hunger before thy eyes, even we and our little ones?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Pharaoh answered them, saying, And wherefore do you cry unto me? did not Joseph
 command that the corn should be laid up during the seven years of plenty for the years of
 famine? and wherefore did you not hearken to his voice?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the people of Egypt answered the king, saying, As thy soul liveth, our lord, thy
 servants have done all that Joseph ordered, for thy servants also gathered in all the produce
 of their fields during the seven years of plenty and laid it in the stores unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And when the famine prevailed over thy servants we opened our stores, and behold all our
 produce was filled with vermin and was not fit for food.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And when the king heard all that had befallen the inhabitants of Egypt, the king was
 greatly afraid on account of the famine, and he was much terrified; and the king answered the
 people of Egypt, saying, Since all this has happened unto you, go unto Joseph, do whatever
 he shall say unto you, transgress not his commands.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And all the people of Egypt went forth and came unto Joseph, and said unto him, Give
 unto us food, and wherefore shall we die before thee through hunger? for we gathered in our
 produce during the seven years as thou didst command, and we put it in store, and thus has it
 befallen us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And when Joseph heard all the words of the people of Egypt and what had befallen them,
 Joseph opened all his stores of the produce and he sold it unto the people of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And the famine prevailed throughout the land, and the famine was in all countries, but in
 the land of Egypt there was produce for sale.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And all the inhabitants of Egypt came unto Joseph to buy corn, for the famine prevailed
 over them, and all their corn was spoiled, and Joseph daily sold it to all the people of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And all the inhabitants of the land of Canaan and the Philistines, and those beyond the
 Jordan, and the  children of the east and all the cities of the lands far and nigh heard that there was corn in
 Egypt, and they all came to Egypt to buy corn, for the famine prevailed over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Joseph opened the stores of corn and placed officers over them, and they daily stood
 and sold to all that came.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Joseph knew that his brethren also would come to Egypt to buy corn, for the famine
 prevailed throughout the earth. And Joseph commanded all his people that they should cause
 it to be proclaimed throughout the land of Egypt, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 It is the pleasure of the king, of his second and of their great men, that any person who
 wishes to buy corn in Egypt shall not send his servants to Egypt to purchase, but his sons,
 and also any Egyptian or Canaanite, who shall come from any of the stores from buying corn
 in Egypt, and shall go and sell it throughout the land, he shall die, for no one shall buy but for
 the support of his household.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And any man leading two or three beasts shall die, for a man shall only lead his own
 beast.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And Joseph placed sentinels at the gates of Egypt, and commanded them, saying, Any
 person who may come to buy corn, suffer him not to enter until his name, and the name of his
 father, and the name of his father's father be written down, and whatever is written by day,
 send their names unto me in the evening that I may know their names.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Joseph placed officers throughout the land of Egypt, and he commanded them to do
 all these things.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Joseph did all these things, and made these statutes, in order that he might know
 when his brethren should come to Egypt to buy corn; and Joseph's people caused it daily to
 be proclaimed in Egypt according to these words and statutes which Joseph had
 commanded.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And all the inhabitants of the east and west country, and of all the earth, heard of the
 statutes and regulations which Joseph had enacted in Egypt, and the inhabitants of the
 extreme parts of the earth came and they bought corn in Egypt day after day, and then went
 away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And all the officers of Egypt did as Joseph had commanded, and all that came to Egypt to
 buy corn, the gate keepers would write their names, and their fathers' names, and daily bring
 them in the evening before Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="51.htm">Next: Chapter 51</a>
 </p></body>