<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="57.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="59.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 58
 </h1>
 
  
 
 <p>1 And it came to pass in the thirty-second year of the Israelites going down to Egypt, that is in
 the seventy-first year of the life of Joseph, in that year died Pharaoh king of Egypt, and
 Magron his son reigned in his stead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Pharaoh commanded Joseph before his death to be a father to his son, Magron, and
 that Magron should be under the care of Joseph and under his counsel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And all Egypt consented to this thing that Joseph should be king over them, for all the
 Egyptians loved Joseph as of heretofore, only Magron the son of Pharaoh sat upon, his
 father's throne, and he became king in those days in his father's stead.</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>4 Magron was forty-one years old when he began to reign, and forty years he reigned in
 Egypt, and all Egypt called his name Pharaoh after the name of his father, as it was their
 custom to do in Egypt to every king that reigned over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And it came to pass when Pharaoh reigned in his father's stead, he placed the laws of
 Egypt and all the affairs of government in the hand of Joseph, as his father had commanded
 him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Joseph became king over Egypt, for he superintended over all Egypt, and all Egypt
 was under his care and under his counsel, for all Egypt inclined to Joseph after the death of
 Pharaoh, and they loved him exceedingly to reign over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 But there were some people amongst them, who did not like him, saying, No stranger shall
 reign over us; still the whole government of Egypt devolved in those days upon Joseph, after
 the death of Pharaoh, he being the regulator, doing as he liked throughout the land without
 any one interfering.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And all Egypt was under the care of Joseph, and Joseph made war with all his surrounding
 enemies, and he subdued them; also all the land and all the Philistines, unto the borders of
 Canaan, did Joseph subdue, and they were all under his power and they gave a yearly tax
 unto Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Pharaoh king of Egypt sat upon his throne in his father's stead, but he was under the
 control and counsel of Joseph, as he was at first under the control of his father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 Neither did he reign but in the land of Egypt only, under the counsel of Joseph, but Joseph
 reigned over the whole country at that time, from Egypt unto the great river Perath.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Joseph was successful in all his ways, and the Lord was with him, and the Lord gave
 Joseph additional wisdom, and honor, and glory, and love toward him in the hearts of the
 Egyptians and throughout the land, and Joseph reigned over the whole country forty years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And all the countries of the Philistines and Canaan and Zidon, and on the other side of
 Jordan, brought presents unto Joseph all his days, and the whole country was in the hand of
 Joseph, and they brought unto him a yearly tribute as it was regulated, for Joseph had fought
 against all his surrounding enemies and subdued them, and the whole country was in the
 hand of Joseph, and Joseph sat securely upon his throne in Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And also all his brethren the sons of Jacob dwelt securely in the land, all the days of
 Joseph, and they were fruitful and multiplied exceedingly in the land, and they served the
 Lord all their days, as their father Jacob had commanded them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And it came to pass at the end of many days and years, when the children of Esau were
 dwelling quietly in their land with Bela their king, that the children of Esau were fruitful and
 multiplied in the land, and they resolved to go and fight with the sons of Jacob and all Egypt,
 and to deliver their brother Zepho, the son of Eliphaz, and his men, for they were yet in those
 days slaves to Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the children of Esau sent unto all the children of the east, and they made peace with
 them, and all the children of the east came unto them to go with the children of Esau to Egypt
 to battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And there came also unto them of the people of Angeas, king of Dinhabah, and they also
 sent unto the children of Ishmael and they also came unto them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And all this people assembled and came unto Seir to assist the children of Esau in their
 battle, and this camp was very large and heavy with people, numerous as the sand of the
 sea, about eight hundred thousand men, infantry and cavalry, and all these troops went down
 to Egypt to fight with the sons of Jacob, and they encamped by Rameses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Joseph went forth with his brethren with the mighty men of Egypt, about six hundred
 men, and they fought with them in the land of Rameses; and the sons of Jacob at that time
 again fought with the children of Esau, in the fiftieth year of the sons of Jacob going down to
 Egypt, that is the thirtieth year of the reign of Bela over the children of Esau in Seir.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the Lord gave all the mighty men of Esau and the children of the east into the hand of
 Joseph and his brethren, and the people of the children of Esau and the children of the east
 were smitten before Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And of the people of Esau and the children of the east that were slain, there fell before the
 sons of Jacob about two hundred thousand men, and their king Bela the son of Beor fell with
 them in the battle, and when the children of Esau saw that their king had fallen in battle and
 was dead, their hands became weak in the combat.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And Joseph and his brethren and all Egypt were still smiting the people of the house of
 Esau, and all Esau's people were afraid of the sons of Jacob and fled from before them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Joseph and his brethren and all Egypt pursued them a day's journey, and they slew
 yet from them about three hundred men, continuing to smite them in the road; and they
 afterward turned back from them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And Joseph and all his brethren returned to Egypt, not one man was missing from them,
 but of the Egyptians there fell twelve men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And when Joseph returned to Egypt he ordered Zepho and his men to be additionally
 bound, and they bound them in irons and they increased their grief.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And all the people of the children of Esau, and the children of the east, returned in shame
 each unto his city, for all the mighty men that were with them had fallen in battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And when the children of Esau saw that their king had died in battle they hastened and
 took a man from the people of the children of the east; his name was Jobab the son of
 Zarach, from the land of Botzrah, and they caused him to reign over them instead of Bela
 their king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Jobab sat upon the throne of Bela as king in his stead, and Jobab reigned in Edom
 over all the children of Esau ten years, and the children of Esau went no more to fight with the
 sons of Jacob from that day forward, for the sons of Esau knew the valor of the sons of
 Jacob, and they were greatly afraid of them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 But from that day forward the children of Esau hated the sons of Jacob, and the hatred
 and enmity were very strong between them all the days, unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And it came to pass after this, at the end of ten years, Jobab, the son of Zarach, from
 Botzrah, died, and the children of Esau took a man whose name was Chusham, from the land
 of Teman, and they made him king over them instead of Jobab, and Chusham reigned in
 Edom over all the children of Esau for twenty years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Joseph, king of Egypt, and his brethren, and all the children of Israel dwelt securely in
 Egypt in those days, together with all the children of Joseph and his brethren, having no
 hindrance or evil accident and the land of Egypt was at that time at rest from war in the days
 of Joseph and his brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="59.htm">Next: Chapter 59</a>
 </p></body>