<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="58.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="60.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 59
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And these are the names of the sons of Israel who dwelt in Egypt, who had come with
 Jacob, all the sons of Jacob came unto Egypt, every man with his household.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 The children of Leah were Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar and Zebulun, and their
 sister Dinah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the sons of Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the sons of Zilpah, the handmaid of Leah, were Gad and Asher.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the sons of Bilhah, the handmaid of Rachel, were Dan and Naphtali.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And these were their offspring that were born unto them in the land of Canaan, before they
 came unto Egypt with their father Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 The sons of Reuben were Chanoch, Pallu, Chetzron and Carmi.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the sons of Simeon were Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zochar and Saul, the son of
 the Canaanitish woman.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the children of Levi were Gershon, Kehath and Merari, and their sister Jochebed, who
 was born unto them in their going down to Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And the sons of Judah were Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez and Zarach.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan; and the sons of Perez were Chezron and
 Chamul.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the sons of Issachar were Tola, Puvah, Job and Shomron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the sons of Zebulun were Sered, Elon and Jachleel, and the son of Dan was
 Chushim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the sons of Naphtali were Jachzeel, Guni, Jetzer and Shilam.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the sons of Gad were Ziphion, Chaggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi and Areli.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And the children of Asher were Jimnah, Jishvah, Jishvi, Beriah and their sister Serach;
 and the sons of Beriah were Cheber and Malchiel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the sons of Benjamin were Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Achi, Rosh, Mupim,
 Chupim and Ord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the sons of Joseph, that were born unto him in Egypt, were Manasseh and Ephraim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And all the souls that went forth from the loins of Jacob, were seventy souls; these are
 they who came with Jacob their father unto Egypt to dwell there: and Joseph and all his
 brethren dwelt securely in Egypt, and they ate of the best of Egypt all the days of the life of
 Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And Joseph lived in the land of Egypt ninety-three years, and Joseph reigned over all
 Egypt eighty years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And when the days of Joseph drew nigh that he should die, he sent and called for his
 brethren and all his father's household, and they all came together and sat before him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Joseph said unto his brethren and unto the whole of his father's household, Behold I
 die, and God will surely visit you and bring you up from this land to the land which he swore to
 your fathers to give unto them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And it shall be when God shall visit you to bring you up from here to the land of your
 fathers, then bring up my bones with you from here.</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>24 And Joseph made the sons of Israel to swear for their seed after them, saying, God will
 surely visit you and you shall bring up my bones with you from here.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And it came to pass after this that Joseph died in that year, the seventy-first year of the
 Israelites going down to Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Joseph was one hundred and ten years old when he died in the land of Egypt, and all
 his brethren and all his servants rose up and they embalmed Joseph, as was their custom,
 and his brethren and all Egypt mourned over him for seventy days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And they put Joseph in a coffin filled with spices and all sorts of perfume, and they buried
 him by the side of the river, that is Sihor, and his sons and all his brethren, and the whole of
 his father's household made a seven day's mourning for him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And it came to pass after the death of Joseph, all the Egyptians began in those days to
 rule over the children of Israel, and Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who reigned in his father's stead,
 took all the laws of Egypt and conducted the whole government of Egypt under his counsel,
 and he reigned securely over his people.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="60.htm">Next: Chapter 60</a>
 </p></body>