<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="61.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="63.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 62
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 In that year, being the seventy-ninth year of the Israelites going down to Egypt, died
 Reuben the son of Jacob, in the land of Egypt; Reuben was a hundred and twenty-five years
 old when he died, and they put him into a coffin, and he was given into the hands of his
 children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And in the eightieth year died his brother Dan; he was a hundred and twenty years at his
 death, and he was also put into a coffin and given into the hands of his children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And in that year died Chusham king of Edom, and after him reigned Hadad the son of
 Bedad, for thirty-five years; and in the eighty-first year died Issachar the son of Jacob, in
 Egypt, and Issachar was a hundred and twenty-two years old at his death, and he was put
 into a coffin in Egypt, and given into the hands of his children.</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>4 And in the eighty-second year died Asher his brother, he was a hundred and twenty-three
 years old at his death, and he was placed in a coffin in Egypt, and given into the hands of his
 children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And in the eighty-third year died Gad, he was a hundred and twenty-five years old at his
 death, and he was put into a coffin in Egypt, and given into the hands of his children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And it came to pass in the eighty-fourth year, that is the fiftieth year of the reign of Hadad,
 son of Bedad, king of Edom, that Hadad assembled all the children of Esau, and he got his
 whole army in readiness, about four hundred thousand men, and he directed his way to the
 land of Moab, and he went to fight with Moab and to make them tributary to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the children of Moab heard this thing, and they were very much afraid, and they sent to
 the children of Midian to assist them in fighting with Hadad, son of Bedad, king of Edom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Hadad came unto the land of Moab, and Moab and the children of Midian went out to
 meet him, and they placed themselves in battle array against him in the field of Moab.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Hadad fought with Moab, and there fell of the children of Moab and the children of
 Midian many slain ones, about two hundred thousand men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And the battle was very severe upon Moab, and when the children of Moab saw that the
 battle was sore upon them, they weakened their hands and turned their backs, and left the
 children of Midian to carry on the battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And the children of Midian knew not the intentions of Moab, but they strengthened
 themselves in battle and fought with Hadad and all his host, and all Midian fell before him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And Hadad smote all Midian with a heavy smiting, and he slew them with the edge of the
 sword, he left none remaining of those who came to assist Moab.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And when all the children of Midian had perished in battle, and the children at Moab had
 escaped, Hadad made all Moab at that time tributary to him, and they became under his
 hand, and they gave a yearly tax as it was ordered, and Hadad turned and went back to his
 land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And at the revolution of the year, when the rest of the people of Midian that were in the
 land heard that all their brethren had fallen in battle with Hadad for the sake of Moab,
 because the children of Moab had turned their backs in battle and left Midian to fight, then
 five of the princes of Midian resolved with the rest of their brethren who remained in their
 land, to fight with Moab to avenge the cause of their brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the children of Midian sent to all their brethren the children of the east, and all their
 brethren, all the children of Keturah came to assist Midian to fight with Moab.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And the children of Moab heard this thing, and they were greatly afraid that all the children
 of the east had assembled together against them for battle, and they the children of Moab
 sent a memorial to the land of Edom to Hadad the son of Bedad, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 Come now unto us and assist us and we will smite Midian, for they all assembled together
 and have come against us with all their brethren the children of the east to battle, to avenge
 the cause of Midian that fell in battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Hadad, son of Bedad, king of Edom, went forth with his whole army and went to the
 land of Moab to fight with Midian, and Midian and the  children of the east fought with Moab in the field of Moab, and the battle was very fierce
 between them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Hadad smote all the children of Midian and the children of the east with the edge of
 the sword, and Hadad at that time delivered Moab from the hand of Midian, and those that
 remained of Midian and of the children of the east fled before Hadad and his army, and
 Hadad pursued them to their land, and smote them with a very heavy slaughter, and the slain
 fell in the road.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And Hadad delivered Moab from the hand of Midian, for all the children of Midian had
 fallen by the edge of the sword, and Hadad turned and went back to his land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And from that day forth, the children of Midian hated the children of Moab, because they
 had fallen in battle for their sake, and there was a great and mighty enmity between them all
 the days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And all that were found of Midian in the road of the land of Moab perished by the sword of
 Moab, and all that were found of Moab in the road of the land of Midian, perished by the
 sword of Midian; thus did Midian unto Moab and Moab unto Midian for many days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And it came to pass at that time that Judah the son of Jacob died in Egypt, in the
 eighty-sixth year of Jacob's going down to Egypt, and Judah was a hundred and twenty-nine
 years old at his death, and they embalmed him and put him into a coffin, and he was given
 into the hands of his children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And in the eighty-ninth year died Naphtali, he was a hundred and thirty-two years old, and
 he was put into a coffin and given into the hands of his children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And it came to pass in the ninety-first year of the Israelites going down to Egypt, that is in
 the thirtieth year of the reign of Zepho the son of Eliphaz, the son of Esau, over the children of
 Chittim, the children of Africa came upon the children of Chittim to plunder them as usual, but
 they had not come upon them for these thirteen years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And they came to them in that year, and Zepho the son of Eliphaz went out to them with
 some of his men and smote them desperately, and the troops of Africa fled from before
 Zepho and the slain fell before him, and Zepho and his men pursued them, going on and
 smiting them until they were near unto Africa.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Angeas king of Africa heard the thing which Zepho had done, and it vexed him
 exceedingly, and Angeas was afraid of Zepho all the days.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="63.htm">Next: Chapter 63</a>
 </p></body>