<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="65.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="67.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 66
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 At that time died Hadad the son of Bedad king of Edom, and Samlah from Mesrekah, from
 the country of the children of the east, reigned in his place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 In the thirteenth year of the reign of Pharaoh king of Egypt, which was the hundred and
 twenty-fifth year of the Israelites going down into Egypt, Samlah had reigned over Edom
 eighteen years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And when he reigned, he drew forth his hosts to go and fight against Zepho the son of
 Eliphaz and the children of Chittim, because they had made war against Angeas king of
 Africa, and they destroyed his whole army.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 But he did not engage with him, for the children of Esau prevented him, saying, He was
 their brother, so Samlah listened to the voice of the children of Esau, and turned back with all
 his forces to the land of Edom, and did not proceed to fight against Zepho the son of Eliphaz.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Pharaoh king of Egypt heard this thing, saying, Samlah king of Edom has resolved to
 fight the children of Chittim, and afterward he will come to fight against Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And when the Egyptians heard this matter, they increased the labor upon the children of
 Israel, lest the Israelites should do unto them as they did unto them in their war with the
 children of Esau in the days of Hadad.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 So the Egyptians said unto the children of Israel, Hasten and do your work, and finish your
 task, and strengthen the land, lest the children of Esau your brethren should come to fight
 against us, for on your account will they come against us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the children of Israel did the work of the men of Egypt day by day, and the Egyptians
 afflicted the children of Israel in order to lessen them in the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 But as the Egyptians increased the labor upon the children of Israel, so did the children of
 Israel increase and multiply, and all Egypt was filled with the children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And in the hundred and twenty-fifth year of Israel's going down into Egypt, all the
 Egyptians saw that their counsel did not succeed against Israel, but that they increased and
 grew, and the land of Egypt and the land of Goshen were filled with the children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 So all the elders of Egypt and its wise men came before the king and bowed down to him
 and sat before him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And all the elders of Egypt and the wise men thereof said unto the king, May the king live
 forever; thou didst counsel us the counsel against the children of Israel, and we did unto them
 according to the word of the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 But in proportion to the increase of the labor so do they increase and grow in the land, and
 behold the whole country is filled with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 Now therefore our lord and king, the eyes of all Egypt are upon thee to give them advice
 with thy wisdom, by which they may prevail over Israel to destroy them, or to diminish them
 from the land; and the king answered them saying, Give you counsel in this matter that we
 may know what to do unto them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And an officer, one of the king's counsellors, whose name was Job, from Mesopotamia, in
 the land of Uz, answered the king, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 If it please the king, let him hear the counsel of his servant; and the king said unto him,
 Speak.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And Job spoke before the king, the princes, and before all the elders of Egypt, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 Behold the counsel of the king which he advised formerly respecting the labor of the
 children of Israel is very good, and you must not remove from them that labor forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 But this is the advice counselled by which you may lessen them, if it seems good to the
 king to afflict them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 Behold we have feared war for a long time, and we said, When Israel becomes fruitful in
 the land, they will drive us from the land if a war should take place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 If it please the king, let a royal decree go forth, and let it be written  in the laws of Egypt which shall not be revoked, that every male child born to the Israelites,
 his blood shall be spilled upon the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And by your doing this, when all the male children of Israel shall have died, the evil of their
 wars will cease; let the king do so and send for all the Hebrew midwives and order them in
 this matter to execute it; so the thing pleased the king and the princes, and the king did
 according to the word of Job.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the king sent for the Hebrew midwives to be called, of which the name of one was
 Shephrah, and the name of the other Puah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the midwives came before the king, and stood in his presence.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the king said unto them, When you do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women,
 and see them upon the stools, if it be a son, then you shall kill him, but if it be a daughter,
 then she shall live.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 But if you will not do this thing, then will I burn you up and all your houses with fire.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 But the midwives feared God and did not hearken to the king of Egypt nor to his words,
 and when the Hebrew women brought forth to the midwife son or daughter, then did the
 midwife do all that was necessary to the child and let it live; thus did the midwives all the
 days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And this thing was told to the king, and he sent and called for the midwives and he said to
 them, Why have you done this thing and have saved the children alive?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And the midwives answered and spoke together before the king, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 Let not the king think that the Hebrew women are as the Egyptian women, for all the
 children of Israel are hale, and before the midwife comes to them they are delivered, and as
 for us thy handmaids, for many days no Hebrew woman has brought forth upon us, for all the
 Hebrew women are their own midwives, because they are hale.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Pharaoh heard their words and believed them in this matter, and the midwives went
 away from the king, and God dealt well with them, and the people multiplied and waxed
 exceedingly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="67.htm">Next: Chapter 67</a>
 </p></body>