<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="73.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="75.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 74
 </h1>
  
 
 
 <p>1 In the end of years died Saul king of Edom, and Baal Chanan the son of Achbor reigned in
 his place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 In the sixteenth year of the reign of Moses over Cush, Baal Chanan the son of Achbor
 reigned in the land of Edom over all the children of Edom for thirty-eight years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 In his days Moab rebelled against the power of Edom, having been under Edom since the
 days of Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote them and Midian, and brought Moab under
 subjection to Edom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And when Baal Chanan the son of Achbor reigned over Edom, all the children of Moab
 withdrew their allegiance from Edom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Angeas king of Africa died in those days, and Azdrubal his son reigned in his stead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And in those days died Janeas king of the children of Chittim, and they buried him in his
 temple which he had built for himself in the plain of Canopia for a residence, and Latinus
 reigned in his stead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 In the twenty-second year of the reign of Moses over the children of Cush, Latinus reigned
 over the children of Chittim forty-five years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And he also built for himself a great and mighty tower, and he built therein an elegant
 temple for his residence, to conduct his government, as was the custom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 In the third year of his reign he caused a proclamation to be made to all his skilful men, who
 made many ships for him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Latinus assembled all his forces, and they came in ships, and went therein to fight
 with Azdrubal son of Angeas king of Africa, and they came to Africa and engaged in battle
 with Azdrubal and his army.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Latinus prevailed over Azdrubal, and Latinus took from Azdrubal the aqueduct which
 his father had brought from the children of Chittim, when he took Janiah the daughter of Uzi
 for a wife, so Latinus overthrew the bridge of the aqueduct, and smote the whole army of
 Azdrubal a severe blow.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the remaining strong men of Azdrubal strengthened themselves, and their hearts
 were filled with envy, and they courted death, and again engaged in battle with Latinus king of
 Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the battle was severe upon all the men of Africa, and they all fell wounded before
 Latinus and his people, and Azdrubal the king also fell in that battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the king Azdrubal had a very beautiful daughter, whose name was Ushpezena, and
 all the men of Africa embroidered her likeness on their garments, on account of her great
 beauty and comely appearance.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the men of Latinus saw Ushpezena, the daughter of Azdrubal, and praised her unto
 Latinus their king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Latinus ordered her to be brought to him, and Latinus took Ushpezena for a wife, and
 he turned back on his way to Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And it was after the death of Azdrubal son of Angeas, when Latinus had turned back to his
 land from the battle, that all the inhabitants of Africa rose up and took Anibal the son of
 Angeas, the younger brother of Azdrubal, and made him king instead at his brother over the
 whole land at Africa.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And when he reigned, he resolved to go to Chittim to fight with the children of Chittim, to
 avenge the cause of Azdrubal his brother, and the cause of the inhabitants of Africa, and he
 did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And he made many ships, and he came therein with his whole army, and he went to
 Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 So Anibal fought with the children of Chittim, and the children of Chittim fell wounded
 before Anibal and his army, and Anibal avenged his brother's cause.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And Anibal continued the war for eighteen years with the children of Chittim, and Anibal
 dwelt in the land of Chittim and encamped there for a long time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Anibal smote the children of Chittim very severely, and he slew their great men and
 princes, and of the rest of the people he smote about eighty thousand men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And at the end of days and years, Anibal returned to his land of Africa, and he reigned
 securely in the place of Azdrubal his brother.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="75.htm">Next: Chapter 75</a>
 </p></body>