<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="74.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="76.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 75
 </h1>
 
 
 <p>1 At that time, in the hundred and eightieth year of the Israelites going down into Egypt, there
 went forth from Egypt valiant men, thirty thousand on foot, from the children of Israel, who
 were all of the tribe of Joseph, of the children of Ephraim the son of Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 For they said the period was completed which the Lord had appointed to the children of
 Israel in the times of old, which he had spoken to Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And these men girded themselves, and they put each man his sword at his side, and every
 man his armor upon him, and they trusted to their strength, and they went out together from
 Egypt with a mighty hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 But they brought no provision for the road, only silver and gold, not even bread for that day
 did they bring in their hands, for they thought of getting their provision for pay from the
 Philistines, and if not they would take it by force.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And these men were very mighty and valiant men, one man could pursue a thousand and
 two could rout ten thousand, so they trusted to their strength and went together as they were.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And they directed their course toward the land of Gath, and they went down and found the
 shepherds of Gath feeding the cattle of the children of Gath.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And they said to the shepherds, Give us some of the sheep for pay, that we may eat, for we
 are hungry, for we have eaten no bread this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the shepherds said, Are they our sheep or cattle that we should give them to you even
 for pay? so the children of Ephraim approached to take them by force.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the shepherds of Gath shouted over them that their cry was heard at a distance, so all
 the children of Gath went out to them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And when the children of Gath saw the evil doings of the children of Ephraim, they
 returned and assembled the men of Gath, and they put on each man his armor, and came
 forth to the children of Ephraim for battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And they engaged with them in the valley of Gath, and the battle was severe, and they
 smote from each other a great many on that day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And on the second day the children of Gath sent to all the cities of the Philistines that they
 should come to their help, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 Come up unto us and help us, that we may smite the children of Ephraim who have come
 forth from Egypt to take our cattle, and to fight against us without cause.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 Now the souls of the children of Ephraim were exhausted with hunger and thirst, for they
 had eaten no bread for three days. And forty thousand men went forth from the cities of the
 Philistines to the assistance of the men of Gath.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And these men were engaged in battle with the children of Ephraim, and the Lord
 delivered the children of Ephraim into the hands of the Philistines.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And they smote all the children of Ephraim, all who had gone forth from Egypt, none were
 remaining but ten men who had run away from the engagement.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 For this evil was from the Lord against the children of Ephraim, for they transgressed the
 word of the Lord in going forth from Egypt, before the period had arrived which the Lord in the
 days of old had appointed to Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And of the Philistines also there fell a great many, about twenty thousand men, and their
 brethren carried them and buried them in their cities.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the slain of the children of Ephraim remained forsaken in the valley of Gath for many
 days and years, and were not brought to burial, and the valley was filled with men's bones.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the men who had escaped from the battle came to Egypt, and told all the children of
 Israel all that had befallen them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And their father Ephraim mourned over them for many days, and his brethren came to
 console him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And he came unto his wife and she bare a son, and he called his name Beriah, for she
 was unfortunate in his house.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="76.htm">Next: Chapter 76</a>
 </p></body>