<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="78.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="80.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 79
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And in those days Moses was feeding the flock of Reuel the Midianite his father-in-law,
 beyond the wilderness of Sin, and the stick which he took from his father-in-law was in his
 hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And it came to pass one day that a kid of goats strayed from the flock, and Moses pursued
 it and it came to the mountain of God to Horeb.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And when he came to Horeb, the Lord appeared there unto him in the bush, and he found
 the bush burning with fire, but the fire had no power over the bush to consume it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And Moses was greatly astonished at this sight, wherefore the bush was not consumed,
 and he approached to see this mighty thing, and the Lord called unto Moses out of the fire
 and commanded him to go down to Egypt, to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to send the children of
 Israel from his service.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, return to Egypt, for all those men who sought thy life are
 dead, and thou shalt speak unto Pharaoh to send forth the children of Israel from his land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And the Lord showed him to do signs and wonders in Egypt before the eyes of Pharaoh and
 the eyes of his subjects, in order that they might believe that the Lord had sent him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Moses hearkened to all that the Lord had commanded him, and he returned to his
 father-in-law and told him the thing, and Reuel said to him, Go in peace.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Moses rose up to go to Egypt, and he took his wife and sons with him, and he was at
 an inn in the road, and an angel of God came down, and sought an occasion against him.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>9 And he wished to kill him on account of his first born son, because he had not circumcised
 him, and had transgressed the covenant which the Lord had made with Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 For Moses had hearkened to the words of his father-in-law which he had spoken to him,
 not to circumcise his first born son, therefore he circumcised him not.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Zipporah saw the angel of the Lord seeking an occasion against Moses, and she
 knew that this thing was owing to his not having circumcised her son Gershom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And Zipporah hastened and took of the sharp rock stones that were there, and she
 circumcised her son, and delivered her husband and her son from the hand of the angel of
 the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And Aaron the son of Amram, the brother of Moses, was in Egypt walking at the river side
 on that day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the Lord appeared to him in that place, and he said to him, Go now toward Moses in
 the wilderness, and he went and met him in the mountain of God, and he kissed him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Aaron lifted up his eyes, and saw Zipporah the wife of Moses and her children, and he
 said unto Moses, Who are these unto thee?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Moses said unto him, They are my wife and sons, which God gave to me in Midian;
 and the thing grieved Aaron on account of the woman and her children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And Aaron said to Moses, Send away the woman and her children that they may go to her
 father's house, and Moses hearkened to the words of Aaron, and did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Zipporah returned with her children, and they went to the house of Reuel, and
 remained there until the time arrived when the Lord had visited his people, and brought them
 forth from Egypt from the hand at Pharaoh.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Moses and Aaron came to Egypt to the community of the children of Israel, and they
 spoke to them all the words of the Lord, and the people rejoiced an exceeding great rejoicing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And Moses and Aaron rose up early on the next day, and they went to the house of
 Pharaoh, and they took in their hands the stick of God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And when they came to the king's gate, two young lions were confined there with iron
 instruments, and no person went out or came in from before them, unless those whom the
 king ordered to come, when the conjurors came and withdrew the lions by their incantations,
 and this brought them to the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Moses hastened and lifted up the stick upon the lions, and he loosed them, and
 Moses and Aaron came into the king's house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 The lions also came with them in joy, and they followed them and rejoiced as a dog
 rejoices over his master when he comes from the field.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And when Pharaoh saw this thing he was astonished at it, and he was greatly terrified at
 the report, for their appearance was like the appearance of the children of God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And Pharaoh said to Moses, What do you require? and they answered him, saying, The
 Lord God of the Hebrews has sent us to thee, to say, Send forth my people that they may
 serve me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And when Pharaoh heard their words he was greatly terrified before them, and he said to
 them, Go today and come back to me tomorrow, and they did according to the word of the
 king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And when they had gone Pharaoh sent for Balaam the magician and to Jannes and
 Jambres his sons, and to all the magicians and conjurors and counsellors which belonged to
 the king, and they all came and sat before the king.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>28 And the king told them all the words which Moses and his brother Aaron had spoken to
 him, and the magicians said to the king, But how came the men to thee, on account of the
 lions which were confined at the gate?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And the king said, Because they lifted up their rod against the lions and loosed them, and
 came to me, and the lions also rejoiced at them as a dog rejoices to meet his master.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Balaam the son of Beor the magician answered the king, saying, These are none else
 than magicians like ourselves.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 Now therefore send for them, and let them come and we will try them, and the king did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And in the morning Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron to come before the king, and they
 took the rod of God, and came to the king and spoke to him, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 Thus said the Lord God of the Hebrews, Send my people that they may serve me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And the king said to them, But who will believe you that you are the messengers of God
 and that you come to me by his order?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 Now therefore give a wonder or sign in this matter, and then the words which you speak
 will be believed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Aaron hastened and threw the rod out of his hand before Pharaoh and before his
 servants, and the rod turned into a serpent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And the sorcerers saw this and they cast each man his rod upon the ground and they
 became serpents.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And the serpent of Aaron's rod lifted up its head and opened its mouth to swallow the rods
 of the magicians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And Balaam the magician answered and said, This thing has been from the days of old,
 that a serpent should swallow its fellow, and that living things devour each other.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 Now therefore restore it to a rod as it was at first, and we will also restore our rods as they
 were at first, and if thy rod shall swallow our rods, then shall we know that the spirit of God is
 in thee, and if not, thou art only an artificer like unto ourselves.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And Aaron hastened and stretched forth his hand and caught hold of the serpent's tail and
 it became a rod in his hand, and the sorcerers did the like with their rods, and they got hold,
 each man of the tail of his serpent, and they became rods as at first.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And when they were restored to rods, the rod of Aaron swallowed up their rods.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And when the king saw this thing, he ordered the book of records that related to the kings
 of Egypt, to be brought, and they brought the book of records, the chronicles of the kings of
 Egypt, in which all the idols of Egypt were inscribed, for they thought of finding therein the
 name of Jehovah, but they found it not.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Pharaoh said to Moses and Aaron, Behold I have not found the name of your God
 written in this book, and his name I know not.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And the counsellors and wise men answered the king, We have heard that the God of the
 Hebrews is a son of the wise, the son of ancient kings.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And Pharaoh turned to Moses  and Aaron and said to them, I know not the Lord whom you have declared, neither will I send
 his people.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And they answered and said to the king, The Lord God of Gods is his name, and he
 proclaimed his name over us from the days of our ancestors, and sent us, saying, Go to
 Pharaoh and say unto him, Send my people that they may serve me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 Now therefore send us, that we may take a journey for three days in the wilderness, and
 there may sacrifice to him, for from the days of our going down to Egypt, he has not taken
 from our hands either burnt offering, oblation or sacrifice, and if thou wilt not send us, his
 anger will be kindled against thee, and he will smite Egypt either with the plague or with the
 sword.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And Pharaoh said to them, Tell me now his power and his might; and they said to him, He
 created the heaven and the earth, the seas and all their fishes, he formed the light, created
 the darkness, caused rain upon the earth and watered it, and made the herbage and grass to
 sprout, he created man and beast and the animals of the forest, the birds of the air and the
 fish of the sea, and by his mouth they live and die.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 Surely he created thee in thy mother's womb, and put into thee the breath of life, and
 reared thee and placed thee upon the royal throne of Egypt, and he will take thy breath and
 soul from thee, and return thee to the ground whence thou wast taken.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And the anger of the king was kindled at their words, and he said to them, But who
 amongst all the Gods of nations can do this? my river is mine own, and I have made it for
 myself.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And he drove them from him, and he ordered the labor upon Israel to be more severe than
 it was yesterday and before.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And Moses and Aaron went out from the king's presence, and they saw the children of
 Israel in an evil condition for the task-masters had made their labor exceedingly heavy.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And Moses returned to the Lord and said, Why hast thou ill treated thy people? for since I
 came to speak to Pharaoh what thou didst send me for, he has exceedingly ill used the
 children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 And the Lord said to Moses, Behold thou wilt see that with an outstretched hand and
 heavy plagues, Pharaoh will send the children of Israel from his land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>56 And Moses and Aaron dwelt amongst their brethren the children of Israel in Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>57 And as for the children of Israel the Egyptians embittered their lives, with the heavy work
 which they imposed upon them.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="80.htm">Next: Chapter 80</a>
 </p></body>