<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="7.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="9.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 8
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And it was in the night that Abram was born, that all the servants of Terah, and all the wise
 men of Nimrod, and his conjurors came and ate and drank in the house of Terah, and they
 rejoiced with him on that night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And when all the wise men and conjurors went out from the house of Terah, they lifted up
 their eyes toward heaven that night to look at the stars, and they saw, and behold one very
 large star came from the east and ran in the heavens, and he swallowed up the four stars
 from the four sides of the heavens.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And all the wise men of the king and his conjurors were astonished at the sight, and the
 sages understood this matter, and they knew its import.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And they said to each other, This only betokens the child that has been born to Terah this
 night, who will grow up and be fruitful, and multiply, and possess all the earth, he and his
 children for ever, and he and his seed will slay great kings, and inherit their lands.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the wise men and conjurors went home that night, and in the morning all these wise
 men and conjurors rose up early, and assembled in an appointed house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And they spoke and said to each other, Behold the sight that we saw last night is hidden
 from the king, it has not been made known to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And should this thing get known to the king in the latter days, he will say to us, Why have
 you concealed this matter from me, and then we shall all suffer death; therefore, now let us
 go and tell the king the sight which we saw, and the interpretation thereof, and we shall then
 remain clear.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And they did so, and they all went to the king and bowed down to him to the ground, and
 they said, May the king live, may the king live.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 We heard that a son was born to Terah the son of Nahor, the prince of thy host, and we
 yesternight came to his house, and we ate and drank and rejoiced with him that night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And when thy servants went out from the house of Terah, to go to our respective homes to
 abide there for the night, we lifted up our eyes to heaven, and we saw a great star coming
 from the east, and the same star ran with great speed, and swallowed up four great stars,
 from the four sides of the heavens.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And thy servants were astonished at the sight which we saw, and were greatly terrified,
 and we made our judgment upon the sight, and knew by our wisdom the proper interpretation
 thereof, that this thing applies to the child that is born to Terah, who will grow up and multiply
 greatly, and become powerful, and kill all the kings of the earth, and inherit all their lands, he
 and his seed forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And now our lord and king, behold we have truly acquainted thee with what we have seen
 concerning this child.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 If it seemeth good to the king to give his father value for this child, we will slay him before
 he shall grow up and increase in the land, and his evil increase against us, that we and our children perish through his evil.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the king heard their words and they seemed good in his sight, and he sent and called
 for Terah, and Terah came before the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the king said to Terah, I have been told that a son was yesternight born to thee, and
 after this manner was observed in the heavens at his birth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And now therefore give me the child, that we may slay him before his evil springs up
 against us, and I will give thee for his value, thy house full of silver and gold.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And Terah answered the king and said to him: My Lord and king, I have heard thy words,
 and thy servant shall do all that his king desireth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 But my lord and king, I will tell thee what happened to me yesternight, that I may see what
 advice the king will give his servant, and then I will answer the king upon what he has just
 spoken; and the king said, Speak.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Terah said to the king, Ayon, son of Mored, came to me yesternight, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 Give unto me the great and beautiful horse that the king gave thee, and I will give thee
 silver and gold, and straw and provender for its value; and I said to him, Wait till I see the king
 concerning thy words, and behold whatever the king saith, that will I do.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And now my lord and king, behold I have made this thing known to thee, and the advice
 which my king will give unto his servant, that will I follow.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And the king heard the words of Terah, and his anger was kindled and he considered him
 in the light of a fool.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the king answered Terah, and he said to him, Art thou so silly, ignorant, or deficient in
 understanding, to do this thing, to give thy beautiful horse for silver and gold or even for straw
 and provender?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 Art thou so short of silver and gold, that thou shouldst do this thing, because thou canst
 not obtain straw and provender to feed thy horse? and what is silver and gold to thee, or
 straw and provender, that thou shouldst give away that fine horse which I gave thee, like
 which there is none to be had on the whole earth?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the king left off speaking, and Terah answered the king, saying, Like unto this has the
 king spoken to his servant;</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 I beseech thee, my lord and king, what is this which thou didst say unto me, saying, Give
 thy son that we may slay him, and I will give thee silver and gold for his value; what shall I do
 with silver and gold after the death of my son? who shall inherit me? surely then at my death,
 the silver and gold will return to my king who gave it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And when the king heard the words of Terah, and the parable which he brought
 concerning the king, it grieved him greatly and he was vexed at this thing, and his anger
 burned within him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Terah saw that the anger of the king was kindled against him, and he answered the
 king, saying, All that I have is in the king's power; whatever the king desireth to do to his
 servant, that let him do, yea, even my son, he is in the king's power, without value in
 exchange, he and his two brothers that are older than he.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And the king said to Terah, No, but I will purchase thy younger son for a price.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Terah answered the king, saying, I beseech thee my lord and king to let thy servant
 speak a word before thee, and let the king hear the word of his servant, and Terah said, Let my king give me three days' time till I consider
 this matter within myself, and consult with my family concerning the words of my king; and he
 pressed the king greatly to agree to this.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And the king hearkened to Terah, and he did so and he gave him three days' time, and
 Terah went out from the king's presence, and he came home to his family and spoke to them
 all the words of the king; and the people were greatly afraid.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And it was in the third day that the king sent to Terah, saying, Send me thy son for a price
 as I spoke to thee; and shouldst thou not do this, I will send and slay all thou hast in thy
 house, so that thou shalt not even have a dog remaining.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And Terah hastened, (as the thing was urgent from the king), and he took a child from one
 of his servants, which his handmaid had born to him that day, and Terah brought the child to
 the king and received value for him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And the Lord was with Terah in this matter, that Nimrod might not cause Abram's death,
 and the king took the child from Terah and with all his might dashed his head to the ground,
 for he thought it had been Abram; and this was concealed from him from that day, and it was
 forgotten by the king, as it was the will of Providence not to suffer Abram's death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And Terah took Abram his son secretly, together with his mother and nurse, and he
 concealed them in a cave, and he brought them their provisions monthly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And the Lord was with Abram in the cave and he grew up, and Abram was in the cave ten
 years, and the king and his princes, soothsayers and sages, thought that the king had killed
 Abram.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="9.htm">Next: Chapter 9</a>
 </p></body>