<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="79.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="81.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 80
 </h1>
  
 
 <p>1 And at the end of two years, the Lord again sent Moses to Pharaoh to bring forth the
 children of Israel, and to send them out of the land of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Moses went and came to the house of Pharaoh, and he spoke to him the words of the
 Lord who had sent him, but Pharaoh would not hearken to the voice of the Lord, and God
 roused his might in Egypt upon Pharaoh and his subjects, and God smote Pharaoh and his
 people with very great and sore plagues.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the Lord sent by the hand of Aaron and turned all the waters of Egypt into blood, with
 all their streams and rivers.</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>4 And when an Egyptian came to drink and draw water, he looked into his pitcher, and behold
 all the water was turned into blood; and when he came to drink from his cup the water in the
 cup became blood.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And when a woman kneaded her dough and cooked her victuals, their appearance was
 turned to that of blood.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And the Lord sent again and caused all their waters to bring forth frogs, and all the frogs
 came into the houses of the Egyptians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And when the Egyptians drank, their bellies were filled with frogs and they danced in their
 bellies as they dance when in the river.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And all their drinking water and cooking water turned to frogs, also when they lay in their
 beds their perspiration bred frogs.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 Notwithstanding all this the anger of the Lord did not turn from them, and his hand was
 stretched out against all the Egyptians to smite them with every heavy plague.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And he sent and smote their dust to lice, and the lice became in Egypt to the height of two
 cubits upon the earth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 The lice were also very numerous, in the flesh of man and beast, in all the inhabitants of
 Egypt, also upon the king and queen the Lord sent the lice, and it grieved Egypt exceedingly
 on account of the lice.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 Notwithstanding this, the anger of the Lord did not turn away, and his hand was still
 stretched out over Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the Lord sent all kinds of beasts of the field into Egypt, and they came and destroyed
 all Egypt, man and beast, and trees, and all things that were in Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the Lord sent fiery serpents, scorpions, mice, weasels, toads, together with others
 creeping in dust.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 Flies, hornets, fleas, bugs and gnats, each swarm according to its kind.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And all reptiles and winged animals according to their kind came to Egypt and grieved the
 Egyptians exceedingly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the fleas and flies came into the eyes and ears of the Egyptians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the hornet came upon them and drove them away, and they removed from it into their
 inner rooms, and it pursued them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And when the Egyptians hid themselves on account of the swarm of animals, they locked
 their doors after them, and God ordered the Sulanuth which was in the sea, to come up and
 go into Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And she had long arms, ten cubits in length of the cubit of a man.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And she went upon the roofs and uncovered the raftering and flooring and cut them, and
 stretched forth her arm into the house and removed the lock and the bolt, and opened the
 houses of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 Afterward came the swarm of animals into the houses of Egypt, and the swarm of animals
 destroyed the Egyptians, and it grieved them exceedingly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 Notwithstanding this the anger of the Lord did not turn away from the Egyptians, and his
 hand was yet stretched forth against them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And God sent the pestilence, and the pestilence pervaded Egypt, in the horses and asses,
 and in the camels, in herds of oxen and sheep and in man.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And when the Egyptians rose up early in the morning to take their cattle to pasture they
 found all their cattle dead.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><p>26 And there remained of the cattle of the Egyptians only one in ten, and of the cattle
 belonging to Israel in Goshen not one died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And God sent a burning inflammation in the flesh of the Egyptians, which burst their skins,
 and it became a severe itch in all the Egyptians from the soles of their feet to the crowns of
 their heads.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And many boils were in their flesh, that their flesh wasted away until they became rotten
 and putrid.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 Notwithstanding this the anger of the Lord did not turn away, and his hand was still
 stretched out over all Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And the Lord sent a very heavy hail, which smote their vines and broke their fruit trees and
 dried them up that they fell upon them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 Also every green herb became dry and perished, for a mingling fire descended amidst the
 hail, therefore the hail and the fire consumed all things.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 Also men and beasts that were found abroad perished of the flames of fire and of the hail,
 and all the young lions were exhausted.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And the Lord sent and brought numerous locusts into Egypt, the Chasel, Salom, Chargol,
 and Chagole, locusts each of its kind, which devoured all that the hail had left remaining.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 Then the Egyptians rejoiced at the locusts, although they consumed the produce of the
 field, and they caught them in abundance and salted them for food.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And the Lord turned a mighty wind of the sea which took away all the locusts, even those
 that were salted, and thrust them into the Red Sea; not one locust remained within the
 boundaries of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And God sent darkness upon Egypt, that the whole land of Egypt and Pathros became
 dark for three days, so that a man could not see his hand when he lifted it to his mouth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 At that time died many of the people of Israel who had rebelled against the Lord and who
 would not hearken to Moses and Aaron, and believed not in them that God had sent them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And who had said, We will not go forth from Egypt lest we perish with hunger in a desolate
 wilderness, and who would not hearken to the voice of Moses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And the Lord plagued them in the three days of darkness, and the Israelites buried them in
 those days, without the Egyptians knowing of them or rejoicing over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And the darkness was very great in Egypt for three days, and any person who was
 standing when the darkness came, remained standing in his place, and he that was sitting
 remained sitting, and he that was lying continued lying in the same state, and he that was
 walking remained sitting upon the ground in the same spot; and this thing happened to all the
 Egyptians, until the darkness had passed away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And the days of darkness passed away, and the Lord sent Moses and Aaron to the
 children of Israel, saying, Celebrate your feast and make your Passover, for behold I come in
 the midst of the night amongst all the Egyptians, and I will smite all their first born, from the
 first born of a man to the first born of a beast, and when I see your Passover, I will pass over
 you.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord had commanded Moses and
 Aaron, thus did they in that night.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>43 And it came to pass in the middle of the night, that the Lord went forth in the midst of
 Egypt, and smote all the first born of the Egyptians, from the first born of man to the first born
 of beast.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all his servants and all the Egyptians, and there
 was a great cry throughout Egypt in that night, for there was not a house in which there was
 not a corpse.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 Also the likenesses of the first born of Egypt, which were carved in the walls at their
 houses, were destroyed and fell to the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 Even the bones of their first born who had died before this and whom they had buried in
 their houses, were raked up by the dogs of Egypt on that night and dragged before the
 Egyptians and cast before them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And all the Egyptians saw this evil which had suddenly come upon them, and all the
 Egyptians cried out with a loud voice.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And all the families of Egypt wept upon that night, each man for his son and each man for
 his daughter, being the first born, and the tumult of Egypt was heard at a distance on that
 night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And Bathia the daughter of Pharaoh went forth with the king on that night to seek Moses
 and Aaron in their houses, and they found them in their houses, eating and drinking and
 rejoicing with all Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And Bathia said to Moses, Is this the reward for the good which I have done to thee, who
 have reared thee and stretched thee out, and thou hast brought this evil upon me and my
 father's house?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And Moses said to her, Surely ten plagues did the Lord bring upon Egypt; did any evil
 accrue to thee from any of them? did one of them affect thee? and she said, No.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And Moses said to her, Although thou art the first born to thy mother, thou shalt not die,
 and no evil shall reach thee in the midst of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And she said, What advantage is it to me, when I see the king, my brother, and all his
 household and subjects in this evil, whose first born perish with all the first born of Egypt?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And Moses said to her, Surely thy brother and his household, and subjects, the families of
 Egypt, would not hearken to the words of the Lord, therefore did this evil come upon them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 And Pharaoh king of Egypt approached Moses and Aaron, and some of the children of
 Israel who were with them in that place, and he prayed to them, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>56 Rise up and take your brethren, all the children of Israel who are in the land, with their
 sheep and oxen, and all belonging to them, they shall leave nothing remaining, only pray for
 me to the Lord your God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>57 And Moses said to Pharaoh, Behold though thou art thy mother's first born, yet fear not, for
 thou wilt not die, for the Lord has commanded that thou shalt live, in order to show thee his
 great might and strong stretched out arm.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>58 And Pharaoh ordered the children of Israel to be sent away, and all the Egyptians
 strengthened themselves to send them, for they said, We are all perishing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>59 And all the Egyptians sent the Israelites forth, with great riches, sheep and oxen and
 precious things,  according to the oath of the Lord between him and our Father Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>60 And the children of Israel delayed going forth at night, and when the Egyptians came to
 them to bring them out, they said to them, Are we thieves, that we should go forth at night?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>61 And the children of Israel asked of the Egyptians, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold,
 and garments, and the children of Israel stripped the Egyptians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>62 And Moses hastened and rose up and went to the river of Egypt, and brought up from
 thence the coffin of Joseph and took it with him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>63 The children of Israel also brought up, each man his father's coffin with him, and each man
 the coffins of his tribe.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="81.htm">Next: Chapter 81</a>
 </p></body>