<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="85.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="87.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 86
 </h1>
  
 
 
 <p>1 At that time after the pestilence, the Lord said to Moses, and to Elazer the son of Aaron the
 priest, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 Number the heads of the whole community of the children of Israel, from twenty years old
 and upward, all that went forth in the army.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Moses and Elazer numbered the children of Israel after their families, and the number
 of all Israel was seven hundred thousand, seven hundred and thirty.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the number of the children of Levi, from one month old and upward, was twenty-three
 thousand, and amongst these there was not a man of those numbered by Moses and Aaron
 in the wilderness of Sinai.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 For the Lord had told them that they would die in the wilderness, so they all died, and not
 one had been left of them excepting Caleb the son of Jephuneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And it was after this that the Lord said to Moses, Say unto the children of Israel to avenge
 upon Midian the cause of their brethren the children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Moses did so, and the children of Israel chose from amongst them twelve thousand
 men, being one thousand to a tribe, and they went to Midian.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the children of Israel warred against Midian, and they slew every male, also the five
 princes of Midian, and Balaam the son of Beor did they slay with the sword.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the children of Israel took the wives of Midian captive, with their little ones and their
 cattle, and all belonging to them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And they took all the spoil and all the prey, and they brought it to Moses and to Elazer to
 the plains of Moab.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Moses and Elazer and all the princes of the congregation went forth to meet them
 with joy.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And they divided all the spoil of Midian, and the children of Israel had been revenged upon
 Midian for the cause of their brethren the children of Israel.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="87.htm">Next: Chapter 87</a>
 </p></body>