<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="86.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="88.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 87
 </h1>
  
 
 <p>1 At that time the Lord said to Moses, Behold thy days are approaching to an end, take now
 Joshua the son of Nun thy servant and place him in the tabernacle, and I will command him,
 and Moses did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And the Lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of cloud, and the pillar of cloud stood at
 the entrance of the tabernacle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the Lord commanded Joshua the son of Nun and said unto him, Be strong and
 courageous, for thou shalt bring the children of Israel to the land which I swore to give them,
 and I will be with thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And Moses said to Joshua, Be strong and courageous, for thou wilt make the children of
 Israel inherit the land, and the Lord will be with thee, he will not leave thee nor forsake thee,
 be not afraid nor disheartened.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Moses called to all the children of Israel and said to them, You have seen all the good
 which the Lord your God has done for you in the wilderness.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 Now therefore observe all the words of this law, and walk in the way of the Lord your God,
 turn not from the way which the Lord has commanded you, either to the right or to the left.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Moses taught the children of Israel statutes and judgments and laws to do in the land
 as the Lord had commanded him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And he taught them the way of the Lord and his laws; behold they are written upon the book
 of the law of God which he gave to the children of Israel by the hand of Moses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Moses finished commanding the children of Israel, and the Lord said to him, saying,
 Go up to the Mount Abarim and die there, and be gathered unto thy people as Aaron thy
 brother was gathered.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Moses went up as the Lord had commanded him, and he died there in the land of
 Moab by the order of the Lord, in the fortieth year from the Israelites going forth from the land
 of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab for thirty days, and the
 days of weeping and mourning for Moses were completed.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="88.htm">Next: Chapter 88</a>
 </p></body>