<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="89.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="91.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 90
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 At that time in the fifth year after the children of Israel had passed over Jordan, after the
 children of Israel had rested from their war with the Canaanites, at that time great and severe
 battles arose between Edom and the children of Chittim, and the children of Chittim fought
 against Edom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Abianus king of Chittim went forth in that year, that is in the thirty-first year of his reign,
 and a great force with him of the mighty men of the children of Chittim, and he went to Seir to
 fight against the children of Esau.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Hadad the king of Edom heard of his report, and he went forth to meet him with a
 heavy people and strong force, and engaged in battle with him in the field of Edom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the hand of Chittim prevailed over the children of Esau, and the children of Chittim slew
 of the children of Esau, two and twenty thousand men, and all the children of Esau fled from
 before them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the children of Chittim pursued them and they reached Hadad king of Edom, who was
 running before them and they caught him alive, and brought him to Abianus king of Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Abianus ordered him to be slain, and Hadad king of Edom died in the forty-eighth year
 of his reign.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the children of Chittim continued their pursuit of Edom, and they smote them with a
 great  slaughter and Edom became subject to the children of Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the children of Chittim ruled over Edom, and Edom became under the hand of the
 children of Chittim and became one kingdom from that day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And from that time they could no more lift up their heads, and their kingdom became one
 with the children of Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Abianus placed officers in Edom and all the children of Edom became subject and
 tributary to Abianus, and Abianus turned back to his own land, Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And when he returned he renewed his government and built for himself a spacious and
 fortified palace for a royal residence, and reigned securely over the children of Chittim and
 over Edom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 In those days, after the children of Israel had driven away all the Canaanites and the
 Amorites, Joshua was old and advanced in years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the Lord said to Joshua, Thou art old, advanced in life, and a great part of the land
 remains to be possessed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance to the nine tribes and to the half tribe of
 Manasseh, and Joshua rose up and did as the Lord had spoken to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And he divided the whole land to the tribes of Israel as an inheritance according to their
 divisions.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 But to the tribe at Levi he gave no inheritance, the offerings of the Lord are their
 inheritance as the Lord had spoken of them by the hand of Moses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And Joshua gave Mount Hebron to Caleb the son of Jephuneh, one portion above his
 brethren, as the Lord had spoken through Moses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 Therefore Hebron became an inheritance to Caleb and his children unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Joshua divided the whole land by lots to all Israel for an inheritance, as the Lord had
 commanded him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the children of Israel gave cities to the Levites from their own inheritance, and
 suburbs for their cattle, and property, as the Lord had commanded Moses so did the children
 of Israel, and they divided the land by lot whether great or small.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And they went to inherit the land according to their boundaries, and the children of Israel
 gave to Joshua the son of Nun an inheritance amongst them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 By the word of the Lord did they give to him the city which he required, Timnath-serach in
 Mount Ephraim, and he built the city and dwelt therein.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 These are the inheritances which Elazer the priest and Joshua the son of Nun and the
 heads of the fathers of the tribes portioned out to the children of Israel by lot in Shiloh, before
 the Lord, at the door of the tabernacle, and they left off dividing the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the Lord gave the land to the Israelites, and they possessed it as the Lord had spoken
 to them, and as the Lord had sworn to their ancestors.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the Lord gave to the Israelites rest from all their enemies around them, and no man
 stood up against them, and the Lord delivered all their enemies into their hands, and not one
 thing failed of all the good which the Lord had spoken to the children of Israel, yea the Lord
 performed every thing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Joshua called to all the children of Israel and he blessed them, and commanded them
 to serve the Lord, and he afterward sent them away, and they went each man to his city, and each
 man to his inheritance.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And the children of Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and the Lord gave them
 rest from all around them, and they dwelt securely in their cities.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And it came to pass in those days, that Abianus king of Chittim died, in the thirty-eighth
 year of his reign, that is the seventh year of his reign over Edom, and they buried him in his
 place which he had built for himself, and Latinus reigned in his stead fifty years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And during his reign he brought forth an army, and he went and fought against the
 inhabitants of Britannia and Kernania, the children of Elisha son of Javan, and he prevailed
 over them and made them tributary.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 He then heard that Edom had revolted from under the hand of Chittim, and Latinus went to
 them and smote them and subdued them, and placed them under the hand of the children of
 Chittim, and Edom became one kingdom with the children of Chittim all the days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And for many years there was no king in Edom, and their government was with the
 children of Chittim and their king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And it was in the twenty-sixth year after the children of Israel had passed the Jordan, that
 is the sixty-sixth year after the children of Israel had departed from Egypt, that Joshua was
 old, advanced in years, being one hundred and eight years old in those days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And Joshua called to all Israel, to their elders, their judges and officers, after the Lord had
 given to all the Israelites rest from all their enemies round about, and Joshua said to the
 elders of Israel, and to their judges, Behold I am old, advanced in years, and you have seen
 what the Lord has done to all the nations whom he has driven away from before you, for it is
 the Lord who has fought for you.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 Now therefore strengthen yourselves to keep and to do all the words of the law of Moses,
 not to deviate from it to the right or to the left, and not to come amongst those nations who
 are left in the land; neither shall you make mention of the name of their gods, but you shall
 cleave to the Lord your God, as you have done to this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And Joshua greatly exhorted the children of Israel to serve the Lord all their days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And all the Israelites said, We will serve the Lord our God all our days, we and our
 children, and our children's children, and our seed for ever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Joshua made a covenant with the people on that day, and he sent away the children
 of Israel, and they went each man to his inheritance and to his city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And it was in those days, when the children of Israel were dwelling securely in their cities,
 that they buried the coffins of the tribes of their ancestors, which they had brought up from
 Egypt, each man in the inheritance of his children, the twelve sons of Jacob did the children
 of Israel bury, each man in the possession of his children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And these are the names of the cities wherein they buried the twelve sons of Jacob, whom
 the children of Israel had brought up from Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And they buried Reuben and Gad on this side Jordan, in Romia, which Moses had given
 to their children.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>41 And Simeon and Levi they buried in the city Mauda, which he had given to the children of
 Simeon, and the suburb of the city was for the children of Levi.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And Judah they buried in the city of Benjamin opposite Bethlehem.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And the bones of Issachar and Zebulun they buried in Zidon, in the portion which fell to
 their children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Dan was buried in the city of his children in Eshtael, and Naphtali and Asher they
 buried in Kadesh-naphtali, each man in his place which he had given to his children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And the bones of Joseph they buried in Shechem, in the part of the field which Jacob had
 purchased from Hamor, and which became to Joseph for an inheritance.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And they buried Benjamin in Jerusalem opposite the Jebusite, which was given to the
 children of Benjamin; the children of Israel buried their fathers each man in the city of his
 children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And at the end of two years, Joshua the son of Nun died, one hundred and ten years old,
 and the time which Joshua judged Israel was twenty-eight years, and Israel served the Lord
 all the days of his life.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And the other affairs of Joshua and his battles and his reproofs with which he reproved
 Israel, and all which he had commanded them, and the names of the cities which the children
 of Israel possessed in his days, behold they are written in the book of the words of Joshua to
 the children of Israel, and in the book of the wars of the Lord, which Moses and Joshua and
 the children of Israel had written.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And the children of Israel buried Joshua in the border of his inheritance, in
 Timnath-serach, which was given to him in Mount Ephraim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And Elazer the son of Aaron died in those days, and they buried him in a hill belonging to
 Phineas his son, which was given him in Mount Ephraim.</p><p>
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="91.htm">Next: Chapter 91</a>
 </p></body>