<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="90.htm">Previous</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 91
 </h1>
 
 
 <p>1 At that time, after the death of Joshua, the children of the Canaanites were still in the land,
 and the Israelites resolved to drive them out.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And the children of Israel asked of the Lord, saying, Who shall first go up for us to the
 Canaanites to fight against them? and the Lord said, Judah shall go up.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the children of Judah said to Simeon, Go up with us into our lot, and we will fight
 against the Canaanites and we likewise will go up with you, in your lot, so the children of
 Simeon went with the children of Judah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the children of Judah went up and fought against the Canaanites, so the Lord delivered
 the Canaanites into the hands of the children of Judah, and they smote them in Bezek, ten
 thousand men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And they fought with Adonibezek in Bezek, and he fled from before them, and they pursued
 him and caught him, and they took hold of him and cut off his thumbs and great toes.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Adonibezek said, Three score and ten kings having their thumbs and great toes cut off,
 gathered their meat under my table, as I have done, so God has requited me, and they
 brought him to Jerusalem and he died there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the children of Simeon went with the children of Judah, and they smote the Canaanites
 with the edge of the sword.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the Lord was with the children of Judah, and they possessed the mountain, and the
 children of Joseph went up to Bethel, the same is Luz, and the Lord was with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the children of Joseph spied out Bethel, and the watchmen saw a man going forth from
 the city, and they caught him and said unto him, Show us now the entrance of the city and we
 will show kindness to thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And that man showed them the entrance of the city, and the children of Joseph came and
 smote the City with the edge of the sword.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And the man with his family they sent away, and he went to the Hittites and he built a city,
 and he called the name thereof Luz, so all the Israelites dwelt in their cities, and the children
 at Israel dwelt in their cities, and the children of Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua,
 and all the days of the elders, who had lengthened their days after Joshua, and saw the great
 work of the Lord, which he had performed for Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the elders judged Israel after the death of Joshua for seventeen years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And all the elders also fought the battles of Israel against the Canaanites and the Lord
 drove the Canaanites from before the children of Israel, in order to place the Israelites in their
 land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And he accomplished all the words which he had spoken to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
 and the oath which he had sworn, to give to them and to their children, the land of the
 Canaanites.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the Lord gave to the children of Israel the whole land of Canaan, as he had sworn to
 their ancestors, and the Lord gave them rest from those around them, and the children of
 Israel dwelt securely in their cities.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 Blessed be the Lord for ever, amen, and amen.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 Strengthen yourselves, and let the hearts of all you that trust in the Lord be of good
 courage.</p><p>
 THE END</p><p>
 </p></body>