<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah113.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah115.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter III</h3>
 <p>1. FOR two years the migrants tarried in the countries they visited; going much about, showing themselves, and relating a history of the country whence they came.</p>
 <p>2. Thence spake the Lord to the migrants in their respective places, saying: Behold, the time is come for your departure. Gather together, O my beloved, and return to your own country, and there relate all the glories that your God hath shown you.</p>
 <p>3. So they departed, and returned to their own respective places. And, behold, it took four years to accomplish the journey.</p>
 <p>4. Now during the travel of the migrants the Lord spake to them every day; through the I'hin priests spake the Lord unto them.</p>
 <p>5. The Lord said: Keep together, O my beloved. I will lead you; ye shall not be lost.</p>
 <p>6. Nevertheless, the journey was so long that many lost faith, and were not heedful of the words of God. And some of them strayed off amongst the I'huans, the barbarians, and were lost.</p>
 <p>7. Of the six thousand migrants, there were lost ten tribes; in all, three hundred and eighty-six people, men and women. Some were lost in one place and some in another.</p>
 <p>8. God said: Sing ye songs of lamentations to my chosen who are lost, the Faithists in Jehovih. For this also shall become a matter of record to the end of the world.</p>
 <p>9. Nevertheless, a time shall come when the Lord your God shall reveal the mystery of this day.</p>
 <p>10. So, when the people had returned to their respective places, behold they all sang songs of lamentation <a name="fr_29"></a><a href="#fn_29"><font size="1">3</font></a> for the tribes that were lost.</p>
 <p>11. God said: I have shown you the <a name="page_134b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 134b</font></a> far-off people; I have marked out the road. Keep the road open; keep the travel open between the great countries I have shown you.</p>
 <p>12. Every eleven years shall one expedition start to the far-off countries. And, if perchance ye find my chosen, bring them home.</p>
 <p>13. And on all the camping places of your journey shall ye build an altar to the Lord your God. In a circle shall ye build it; and the congregation shall sit in the circle thereof, but the priest shall sit in the midst. And, behold, I will speak in the mouth of my priest words of wisdom and comfort.</p>
 <p>14. But, in all your journeys, keep aloof from the I'huans, the barbarians, the man-eaters. For they kept not my commandments; nor preserved they their seed through the circumcision.</p>
 <p>15. But they mixed with the Druks (ground people) and went down in darkness (barbarism).</p>
 <p>16. Keep ye away from them, O my beloved; carry with you, on all your expeditions, I'hin priests, the sacred people, the mound-builders.</p>
 <p>17. In your journeys ye shall encounter your brethren coming and going, who dwell in the far-off countries. That ye may distinguish them, keep secret the sacred password <a name="fr_30"></a><a href="#fn_30"><font size="1">4</font></a> and the rites of my chavah (order).</p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_29"></a><a href="oah114.htm#fr_29">133b:3</a> In all these countries, to wit, China, India, Egypt, and Persia, there is still in existence a legend that, long ago, the chosen of God went on a long journey in search of their ancient brethren, and then ten tribes were lost in the wilderness. A similar record is in the Ezra Bible, calling the lost tribes Jews, who were in fact FAITHISTS IN THE GREAT SPIRIT. Further on in this work it is shown how Ezra obtained his version from the Egyptian and Persian records. In this work it is also related what became of the lost tribes, who became the Persians (Parsa'yans) in fact, whence sprang the great Zarathustra (Zoroaster).</p>
 <p><a name="fn_30"></a><a href="oah114.htm#fr_30">134b:4</a> E-O-IH, or Je-ho-vih, was the master's word amongst the ancient Jews. The Chinese said Che-hih-no, in their ceremonies, being the same phonetic word. The Algonquins (North American Indians) said U-he-no-win, accented on the second and fourth syllables. The Chinese word is accented on the first syllable. The Algonquin "U" is, most likely, without any signification. The word Git-che-ma-ne-to of the Algonquins means servant to the Great Spirit, as the English word Lord means Land God, or and underling of Jehovih.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah115.htm">Next: Chapter IV</a></center>
 </body>