<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah151.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah153.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XVII</h3>
 <p>1. ON the way to Zeredho, Fragapatti and his hosts in the avalanza were joined by a ship of a thousand million explorers from the north regions, a thousand times farther than the north star, of the seventh magnitude of light, even three higher than Fragapatti. Ctu, the Chief in command of the expedition, greeted in the sign, JEHOVIH'S NAME, the which Fragapatti answered; and by certain signals the ships approached and made fast, the es'enaurs of the twain singing and playing the same anthem, five millions of voices, and half as many trumpeters.</p>
 <p>2. Then Ctu came near to Fragapatti, saluting, and the hosts stood in line, so they might hear what was said. So, after due ceremonies, and acquainting each other who they were, whence they came, and such like, then spake to Ctu, saying: I see thou hast thy ship ballasted with a north magnet?</p>
 <p>3. Fragapatti said: This is but a five years' dawn, and I teach my hosts how to ballast that they may the better read the maps and roadways and stars and suns. Of these, my hosts, five hundred millions, have become capable of being delivered into etherea, save in cosmogony. I am providing them, that when they shall have ascended, they may not be lost in the etherean worlds, or be dependent on others.</p>
 <p>4. Ctu said: What is the length of this serpent? Fragapatti said: Seven and one-eighth Hoitumu. And he asked Ctu what distance he had come from his home; and Ctu said: One million four hundred and twelve thousand eight hundred and thirty and two Hoitumu!</p>
 <p>5. What time hath thy journey yet before thee? Ctu said: Five hundred thousand years! Then Fragapatti inquired how many star-worlds Ctu had so far passed on his journey, and Ctu said: Twenty thousand star-worlds we have passed, some smaller than this red star, and some ten thousand times <a name="page_220a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 220a</font></a> larger. Some of them yet liquid balls of fire, some newly crusted over, some with atmosphere and water and earth and minerals not yet separated, but boiling, seething, whirling; some firm and just entering the age of se'mu; and some old and worn out. And one we passed which had become barren as to living creatures; and the God, through whose pastures it passed, dissolved and dissipated it before us, having invited thousands of millions of guests to witness the scene.</p>
 <p>6. Of atmospherean worlds we have passed more than ninety thousand; some of them larger than the vortex of this red star, and capable of giving homes to a million times a million of inhabitants; and yet, on many of them, there were no people.</p>
 <p>7. Thus they discoursed on the size and wonder of Jehovih's kingdoms; but their numbers and descriptions only the Gods themselves could comprehend, they were so vast; and when they had about concluded, Ctu remarked:</p>
 <p>8. The mortal desireth to become a spirit; then his ambition is to become an etherean; next, an Orian; next, a Nirvanian; next, an Oo'tan, and then to travel in the surveys of magnitudes. But those ahead still call to us to hasten, because the glories ahead are still more surpassing in magnificence! Who, then, can approach the Unapproachable, All Highest! He Who fashioned the plan of all creations! Who is there that is not swallowed up with devotion and awe of Him Who is Ever Present, that extendeth beyond all limit, our Father, Jehovih!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah153.htm">Next: Chapter XVIII</a></center>
 </body>