<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah111.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah113.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_128b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 128b</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">The Lords' Fourth Book</h1>
 <font size="2"><p>BEING COTEMPORANEOUS WITH THE BOOK OF THOR, CYCLE OF THOR, SON OF JEHOVIH. AS THE LATTER BOOK IS OF THE HIGHER AND LOWER HEAVENS, SO IS THE LORDS' BOOK OF THE LOWER HEAVENS AND THE EARTH, BOTH BOOKS BEING FOR THE SAME PERIOD OF TIME</p></font>.
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <p>1. BY altars and temples, and by idols and images, and by painted signs and engraved words, God foresaw that the knowledge of one generation could be handed down to the next. And though all these things are false in fact, as a written word is not a word, but an image of an idea which hath been spoken, so by symbols conveyed God the living truth.</p>
 <p>2. God said: Behold, with my sacred people have I established myself in written words. Now hath it come to pass that all the races of men on earth shall be made to know me.</p>
 <p>3. God commanded man to make stone and wooden images, and engravings also, of everything upon the earth; and man so made them according to his own knowledge.</p>
 <p>4. God said: As every living creature hath a name, so shall the image thereof and the engraving thereof have the same name. And even so shall it be with all things on the earth, and in the waters thereof, and in the air above the earth; the image and the engravings shall have the same names, even as the real things themselves.</p>
 <p>5. And God sent his angels down to man, to inspire him in the workmanship of images and engravings, and <a name="page_129b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 129b</font></a> man thus accomplished the commandments of God.</p>
 <p>6. And these were the first writings since the flood, other than such as were kept secret amongst the I'hins. And of this manner were the writings, to wit:</p>
 <p>7. A picture of a man was a man; a picture of a tree was a tree; a picture of a bird was a bird; and even so was everything represented by its own name and image.</p>
 <p>8. Then God said: When thou hast made the picture of a spear, behold it is a spear. And when thou desirest to show which way a man goeth, thou shalt add to the graven image the likeness of a spear; and the way it pointeth, shall show the way man goeth. Even so shalt thou express the going of everything on earth and in heaven.</p>
 <p>9. Thus man made a written language, and in every region of the earth. By many men were these things done; according to the light of God upon them, so accomplished they the written languages of thousands of tribes of men.</p>
 <p>10. God said: This shall be called the Panic language (Ah-ce-o-ga) <a name="fr_26"></a><a href="#fn_26"><font size="1">*</font></a>, because it is made of earthly images. And, in after ages, whoever desireth to find the first written words of man, shall have recourse to the pictures of all things on earth, and in the waters, and in the air above the earth.</p>
 <p>11. God said: As in the olden time man named all things according to their own spoken words and sounds uttered, so in the days of Thor came the written words of everything on earth and in heaven.</p>
 <p>12. When man had written the name of all things, ONE only had he not written, even the name of his Creator.</p>
 <p>13. God said: Even that also shalt thou write. Then man inquired: O Lord, how can I find a word to express the Creator?</p>
 <p>14. God said: Many tribes have I raised upon the earth, and, behold, they have all written the names of all things, save only the Creator. Go to, therefore, and write thou His name also.</p>
 <p>15. Man said: Alas, O my God! I know no name, save the names I have already made. If I could hear the Creator, or see Him, then could I write His name.</p>
 <p><a name="page_130b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 130b</font></a></p>
 <p>16. God said: Thou hast named the wind (wh-sh!), which thou hast not seen. Name thou thy Creator. And His name shall comprehend all things, far and near, seen and unseen.</p>
 <p>17. Then man drew a circle and called it O, for it represented that which was without beginning or end, and which contained all within it. Then man drew a line cutting through the circle from east to west, to represent the light of the east traveling to the west. Then man drew a line from below upward, cutting the circle at right angles with the horizontal, to represent the one road of all things, from the bottom upward forever. The first line man called E, for it was the same as the wind speaketh in the leaves. But the second line he called IH, for it represented that unseen shaft that cutteth all things in twain.</p>
 <p>18. And when man had completed the engraving, he called it E-O-IH!</p>
 <p>19. God said: In this, thy symbol, thou hast found the way of a true square (true cross) and the four quarters of the world. <a name="fr_27"></a><a href="#fn_27"><font size="1">1</font></a></p>
 <p>20. Keep thou His name and the image thereof a secret betwixt the rab'bahs and thy God. Neither shalt thou utter it aloud, for it is sacred upon the earth.</p>
 <p>21. Betwixt thee and thy Creator standeth thy God, who is Lord of heaven and earth. Behold, I am the key of life and death; through me, thy Lord, shalt thou unlock all the mysteries of heaven and earth.</p>
 <p>22. Neither shall my rab'bah, nor my prophets, call on the name of any spirit, save the Lord, who is God. The words I give corporeally I have recorded in heaven; neither can man alter my records and make them accord with that which is written above. But in the lapse of time I provide seers and prophets, to whom I can reveal to mortals the things of heaven.</p>
 <p>23. This have I spoken to Jehovih for thee: Man shall measure Thy hand upon him; remember Thy eye upon him; seek for Thy wisdom within him; and be thankful for Thy good things before him; to consider the little good of them that deny Thee; the conceit of them that claim to be self-made; and the folly of uttering other glories than Thine, and yet to mention them not; for these are the attaining of wisdom.</p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_26"></a><a href="oah112.htm#fr_26">129b:*</a> Earth Language</p>
 <p><a name="fn_27"></a><a href="oah112.htm#fr_27">130b:1</a> See tablet Se'moin, Book of Saphah.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah113.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>