<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah175.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah177.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XLI</h3>
 <p>1. THE close of dawn was near at hand. Fragapatti returned to Mouru, the heavenly kingdom of Haraiti, in atmospherea, richly stored with a knowledge of the earth and her heavens. The capital was illuminated, and the decorum of the higher heavens prevailed.</p>
 <p>2. Already were there assembled more than four thousand million angels prepared for the third resurrection. Fragapatti sent word to his Lord Gods, and to his Lords and Gods, and to Samati, God in inherent right up to the end of dawn. And he notified all of them of the day and hour when he should accomplish the resurrection.</p>
 <p>3. And then Fragapatti called his swift messengers, whose labor is with the thrones of Jehovih in etherea. He said: Behold, the dawn of dan is near the close. The Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih will number ten thousand million souls. Two divisions will I make of grades fifty-five and seventy, for the forests and plains of Goomatchala. This ye shall communicate to Hoseis, Goddess of Alawatcha, on the road of Affolkistan, saluting in Jehovih's name, and of His Son, Fragapatti, Chief.</p>
 <p>4. The swift messengers saluted, and then departed. Next he called the messengers for the kingdoms below, and of these messengers there were twenty thousand, divided into twelve groups, and they had been previously apportioned to certain divisions of heaven and earth.</p>
 <p>5. To them Fragapatti said: To the Lord God of each division, and to the Lords and Gods, and through them to the officers under them, greeting, in the name of Jehovih! Appoint and annoint the successors in Jehovih's name; and when your kingdom is in order, appear ye at the throne of Mouru, for the resurrection of my hosts is near at hand. Provide ye ships and such vessels as are suitable, and bring, as visitors, from your kingdoms and most holy places, as many atmosphereans as desire to come, that they may witness the ceremonies and the ascent of Jehovih's Sons and Daughters.</p>
 <p>6. And these commandments were carried unto all the divisions of the corporeal earth and her heavens. Fragapatti then said unto Athrava: Thou shalt receive the Brides and Bridegrooms. As for myself, I will go down to the earth and receive God and Zarathustra, and they shall be borne in mine own ship even unto this place, and thence to etherea.</p>
 <p><a name="page_272"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 272</font></a></p>
 <p>7. In all places on earth and in heaven the spirit inhabitants were stirred to the utmost. In Haraiti there were already more than four thousand colonies, and every one had thousands and thousands eligible to the third resurrection, who would depart in the coming ascension. Of these there were persons of every occupation, and they were perfect in their order, belonging to groups and series of groups. And now the captains and generals were re-organizing them into phalanxes; and the Gods again organizing the phalanxes into kingdoms.</p>
 <p>8. Zeredho sent her contributions to Haraiti, four hundred million souls. The Lord Gods were making their groups in their own several divisions, to be further organized after arriving at Mouru, the place whence the final ascension would take place. Some of these had a thousand millions of their own resurrection, including whom they had previously sent to Haraiti.</p>
 <p>9. Fragapatti sent special messengers to God, Samati, to learn the day appointed for Zarathustra's death; and he further allotted to Zarathustra three days in hada, in which to preach to mortals by the inspiration of God, and appointed the fourth day thereafter as the time of his ascension from the earth.</p>
 <p>10. And now, when all these matters had been put in shape, Fragapatti ordered the assembling of the sacred circle of the Holy Council, Sons and Daughters of the Most High. The lights were raised, and only Gods and Goddesses could remain in sight of, or near the throne of Jehovih. Fragapatti commanded Hoab to stand in the midst of the circle, facing the judgment seat.</p>
 <p>11. Fragapatti said: Hear the words of thy Creator, O Hoab. I called thee up out of the ground, and with Mine Own spirit quickened I thee into life. From thy youth up I have followed thee day by day. I have called out to thee from My holy hill; with a woman's tenderness came I after thee. When thou didst try to run away from me, I followed after. Yea, I called My Son, high raised in My everlasting kingdoms, and I said unto him: O My Son, run thou quickly, for Hoab, My well-beloved, runneth away from Me. Go thou and bring him; for he is my Chosen.</p>
 <p>12. He shall be My God of the red star; her heavens shall bow down before him. I will raise him up and anoint him with My holy fire; his countenance shall shine like a sun in My firmament.</p>
 <p>13. And Fragapatti, My Son, overtook thee in thy flight; with great cunning he captured thee unto My labors. And thou hast raised up thy voice and glorified Me; thine arms have been bared to the harvest; thy fruit is a song of glory.</p>
 <p>14. Have I not given thee experience in all things? Even to the precipice of hell made I thee to walk and fall not. The darkness of everlasting death I made to encompass thee; in the hour of thy despair I came to thee and raised thee up.</p>
 <p>15. Have I not great profit in thee, My Son? My countless millions cry out in all places; they behold Me not; they know not of Me and My heavenly places. Like a troubled sea that knoweth no rest, the voices of mortals and angels forever cry out: There is no light!</p>
 <p>16. Wherefore, then, was I not wise in thee, O Hoab? I made thee of strong limb, and with arms that reach far; thy judgment I fashioned for the great multitudes.</p>
 <p>17. I say to the bird, the young bird with feathers: Fly! And it goeth away. I say to man: Go forth, in My name! But he looketh around. Again I say to him: Go forth! But he turneth to his neighbor for his opinion. Again I speak, calling: Come to Me! But he standeth wondering. Again I say: Come! But he saith: By and by. Again I say: Come! He replieth: I have not all light! Again I call, and he saith: Alas, there is nothing!</p>
 <p>18. And he goeth down in darkness; he curseth Me and accuseth Me of errors! He preacheth My shortness, but in his words cutteth himself off from Me. In the foul-smelling place of his darkness, My holy angels cannot come; he burroweth himself in stubbornness that is blind and deaf.</p>
 <p>19. But I blow My breath upon the earth and the stars; I drive them into new roads in the firmament of heaven. Into the dwelling-places of My high Gods I drive them as chaff before the wind. And when the light of My heavens hath cleared away the darkness, I send My Gods with great power.</p>
 <p>20. To this end have I raised thee up, O Hoab. My shield is upon thee; thou shalt wear the triangle of the red star; two hundred years shalt thou hold dominion over the earth and her heavens. In My name speak, O Hoab!</p>
 <p>21. Then spake Hoab, saying: Thy Voice is upon me, O Father! My limbs are weak; my hands tremble like an old man that is palsied. Behold, I have sought in vain to find anything perfect in me; I am as a trumpet that is bruised and split; there is no harmony or power within me.</p>
 <p><a name="page_273"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 273</font></a></p>
 <p>22. Thou first gavest me a wife and sons and daughters to rule over and to raise up for Thy glory, but I failed utterly. My wife saw not with my eyes, nor heard with my ears, nor judged with my judgment; we were like two instruments, broken and out of tune. As for my sons, they went astray, like sheep without a herdsman; my advice was as weak to them as the shadow is to the tree. And my daughters went away from my love, and chose young men, even before my eyes.</p>
 <p>23. Then I cried out unto Thee, saying: O Jehovih, why gavest Thou me a kingdom? Behold, it is scattered and gone! Then I went down into the grave in sorrow. But Thy hand raised up my soul in heaven; and Thou gavest me another kingdom. But my people would not see through my eyes nor hear through my ears. Then I sought to know if my eyes were not wrong, and my ears wrong, and my judgment wrong.</p>
 <p>24. And I turned about, like one who is lost in a forest, and shutteth his eyes as to the direction of the sun, going by the sound of a multitude of tongues. And my kingdom drew a boundary around itself, and shut out all light. But Thy Son came and delivered me and my people.</p>
 <p>25. Behold, I was as weak as a child; in my weakness Thy light came upon me. Never more shall I desire others to see through my eyes, or hear through my ears, or judge by my judgment. Thou hast healed me of my infirmity, O Jehovih. Only by one Eye can things be seen through; by one Ear can things be heard through; by one Judgment can things be judged.</p>
 <p>26. Thou hast said: Go forth in My name! I will go, O Father! Thou hast said: Thou shalt have dominion over the earth and her heavens! This will I accomplish also, by Thy Light and Power, O Jehovih!</p>
 <p>27. Then spake Jehovih through Fragapatti, saying: Accept the earth, O Hoab, My Son, My God! It is thine to keep and to rule over! Accept atmospherea, O Hoab, My Son, My God! It is thine to keep and to rule over!</p>
 <p>28. Hoab said: I will be Thy Son, O Jehovih! I will be Thy God, O Jehovih! From Thee I accept the earth to keep and to rule over! From Thee I accept the earth's heavens, to keep and to rule over! Again Jehovih spake through Fragapatti, saying:</p>
 <p>29. What thou doest henceforth do thou in My name, for it is of Me and is Me in thee!</p>
 <p>30. Hoab said: What I do henceforth do I in Thy name, O Jehovih! For I know it is Thee in me that doeth all glorious things!</p>
 <p>31. Jehovih spake through Fragapatti, saying: With Mine Own hands weave I a crown for thee My Son, My God of the red star! I place it on thy head for the glory of My kingdoms, which are endless in number and full of holiness! Wear thou My Crown, for it is with Wisdom and Power!</p>
 <p>32. Then Fragapatti's hands were waved about by the Great Spirit, and a crown was woven and placed on Hoab's head, and it was brilliant and white, studded with countless millions of gems. Hoab said: Crown from Thy hand, O Father! I accept it and wear it, emblem of Thy kingdoms, endless in number and full of holiness. I know that Thou wilt ever be with me in Wisdom and Power! I will glorify Thee forever! My kingdoms shall glorify Thee forever!</p>
 <p>33. The chief marshal now conducted Hoab to the throne of Jehovih, which had been previously vacated, and Hoab sat in the midst of the throne. In the meantime, the es'enaurs chanted a hymn of glory. Hoab then said: Fragapatti, Son of Jehovih, Orian Chief, come thou and honor my throne in the name of the Father. Then Fragapatti went to the throne and sat thereon. Next Hoab called up Athrava, then Hapacha, and then other Gods and Goddesses.</p>
 <p>34. And now, whilst the Council held, Fragapatti said: Behold, the time of the death of Zarathustra hath come. Be ye here, and I will go quickly down to the earth and receive God and him, and the hosts of God and his Lords.</p>
 <p>35. So Fragapatti departed, and sailed swiftly down to Parsi'e, on the earth, and came to the place of meeting of the corporeans who had charge of the Holy Word. And it was on the morning of the fourth day after Zarathustra's death. For three days and nights his spirit had been preaching to the Faithists, explaining the kingdoms of Jehovih.</p>
 <p>36. So Fragapatti called unto God, saying: Behold, my Son, thy labor is done. In thee have I great delight. Behold, my ship lieth by the river; my lights are raised for the everlasting thrones! God (Samati) said: It is finished! That that thou didst put upon me I have done! Behold, here standeth Zarathustra, my Son.</p>
 <p>37. Zarathustra was then taking leave of his corporeal friends, for his soul was fast becoming illuminated. Yea, he had looked up and beheld the ship of All Light, and he knew now the Voice of the Father.</p>
 <p><a name="page_274"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 274</font></a></p>
 <p>38. So Fragapatti went and took Zarathustra in his arms, saying: Come, my beloved. Thy home is yonder! So, they went into the ship of fire and ascended to Mouru.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah177.htm">Next: Chapter XLII</a></center>
 </body>