<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah105.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah107.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_128a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 128a</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Thor, Son of Jehovih</h1>
 <font size="2"><p>BEING THE RECORDS OF THOR, APOLLO'S SUCCESSOR, ON THE EARTH AND IN HER HEAVENS, FROM THE ARC OF MOS TO THE ARC OF DAE, IN THE ETHEREAN HEAVENS, AND OF THREE THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED YEARS</p></font>.
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <p>1. THOR, Orian Chief of Don'ga, in etherea, God of Palla, Surveyor of Yorretz and Thassa, God of Galeb, Receiver of Saffer and Hoesonya, God of Wartz and Lo and Yisain, Counselor in the ethereal worlds Hituna, Ctaran, Seeing, Sethawan and Hababak, greeting:</p>
 <p>2. In the Holy Council of Gods and Goddesses in Don'ga, the voice of Jehovih came to Thor, saying:</p>
 <p>3. My Son, behold the red star, the earth; she courseth from Mos to Dae, and now draggeth in the swamps of Asath. Behold, thou shalt deliver her through thy dominions, three thousand two hundred years. Even now approacheth the dawn of Ghan. <a name="fr_25"></a><a href="#fn_25"><font size="1">1</font></a></p>
 <p>4. Thor spoke before the Holy Council, on Jehovih's etherean throne, saying: Behold the young world, the earth, cometh our way. For three thousand two hundred years she will journey in the fields of Don'ga.</p>
 <p>5. Then, the Holy Council deliberated on the matters of the earth and her heavens, and all other corporeal worlds that were to pass through Don'ga for three thousand years. And it was found that the dawn of dan would fall upon the earth first of all.</p>
 <p>6. Then called Thor for the swift <a name="page_129a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 129a</font></a> messengers that course the firmament in the regions of Apperwaith, the roadway of the earth's past history. And the swift messengers came and laid their report before the throne of Jehovih, as to what world the earth was, and the harvests of angels she had yielded up to the emancipated heavens.</p>
 <p>7. When their reports were finished and deliberated on by the Holy Council, Thor, Son of Jehovih, said:</p>
 <p>8. For further knowledge as to the present condition of this world, the earth, it is my command that Yathai, God of Gammotto, choose one million volunteers; and, in a airiata, proceed to the earth and her heavens to visit her God and Lords, and ascertain the condition of their angels and mortals, and report back in Don'ga.</p>
 <p>9. So, Yathai, God of Gammotto, in etherea, was appointed for this purpose, and he provided an airiata, and took with him one million ethereans, and proceeded to the earth and her heavens, as commanded.</p>
 <p>10. And Yathai came to the throne of God in Gau, in atmospherea; and God sent to his Lords an invitation to come also. And there came seventy and two of them.</p>
 <p>11. God said to Yathai: Behold, the earth and these atmospherean heavens are full of false Lords and false Gods. Yathai inquired how many there were? God said: More than thirty thousand Gods and one hundred and sixty thousand Lords. Behold, in every great city on earth is there a false God or a false Lord, and he hath a small heavenly kingdom of his own, even on the earth. And the spirits of the dead of that place are his slaves, for his own exaltation.</p>
 <p>12. And in many of these heavenly kingdoms there are wars and anarchy (hells), where the angels torment one another endlessly. Nor will these false Gods and false Lords and their subjects admit that there are higher heavens than their own.</p>
 <p>13. The spirits of the newly dead are captured and kept in ignorance of Jehovih and His vast creations; but made to bow in adoration and worship to the false Lord or false God. And these again, being in contiguity to mortals, inspire them to the same worship. Which fits them in time of death to fall as slaves into the dominion of him whom they worshipped.</p>
 <p>14. The wars in heaven have inspired mortals to wars on earth; so that, all around the world, everlasting battles are going on.</p>
 <p>15. And such as are slain on earth-battlefields are born in spirit in chaos, not knowing they are dead (as to the <a name="page_130a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 130a</font></a> earth), and, so, they linger on the battle-fields, still battling imaginary foes.</p>
 <p>16. All over the earth are these battle-fields covered with spirits in chaos and with the spirits of druks, and druj, and Yaks, and ground people, who know nothing more than the beasts in the field.</p>
 <p>17. Return, therefore, O Yathai, to thy Orian Chief, Thor, Son of Jehovih, and say to him: The God of earth is powerless to rescue her angels and mortals from the great darkness upon them. And beseech him in Jehovih's name to come and deliver me and my kingdoms.</p>
 <p>18. Yathai inquired as to the races of men on earth, and as to the times of their termination.</p>
 <p>19. God said: In twelve thousand four hundred years the I'hin race, the mound builders, will come to an end. And in that day the Ghans will have triumphed over all the lands and waters of the earth.</p>
 <p>20. When Yathai had obtained the required information, and also learned the localities of the divisions of the earth and her heavens, he departed in his airiata, with his companions, and visited all the chief places, and then returned to Don'ga, in etherea, before Thor, Son of Jehovih, to whom he reported all he had learned as to the condition of the earth and her heavens.</p>
 <p>21. Then came the Light of Jehovih to Thor, saying: My Son, take thou a sufficient host of ethereans, and go to the red star and her heavens, and deliver them in My name.</p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_25"></a><a href="oah106.htm#fr_25">128a:1</a> See the Lords' Fourth Book, 1st chap., 11th v.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah107.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>