<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah127.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah129.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIII</h3>
 <p>1. AND thus was finished the dawn of dan, when great Osire had spoken, and to his God and Lords commissioned the harvesting of earth and heaven for another cycle. Order reigned in heaven and on earth, because a man, a God, had spoken. Men and angels had their eyes turned inward, to know of what capacity Jehovih had made them. And the earth and moon, and sun and stars, were shown in a new light to the sense of men; not to be shunned and despised, but glories given by the Great Spirit for useful purposes.</p>
 <p>2. Jehovih had said: Some men I created to reason near at hand; others to speculate in far-off regions, with thoughts diverse and unlike in procedure. Think not, O man, that in high heaven such men become all alike; not so created I them, but to run in their various extremes forever!</p>
 <p>3. Of the first, Osire, My Son, enthroned to give reason practice, came not a random period, but just when I had designed to sow the seed of unbelief broadcast over earth and heaven.</p>
 <p>4. For such appeareth in all peoples under the sun; a season of belief; a season of unbelief. And with the believing is the practice of truth and love; and with the unbelieving is the <a name="page_170"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 170</font></a> practice of great research and learning, with cruelty and disputation.</p>
 <p>5. Osire said: Send for my resurrection, O Jehovih; I have uprooted the evil of idol worship, the extreme that followeth too much belief. To Thy corporeal worlds I have opened man's eyes, and set a mark on man's souls, wherein man shall not come from earth to heaven, saying: Alas, I have no corporeal knowledge!</p>
 <p>6. Jehovih said: To further man's ultimate glory, I have decreed the earth to ji'ay'an fields for three thousand years, in which thy fruit shall have its full growth.</p>
 <p>7. Osire foresaw the times and places in the future road of earth and heaven, and that from his decrees would spring corporeal philosophy, the first of earth, whereto man should look back in after ages, saying: Thence sprang the Osirian system; thence the Asyrian races. Yet he looked further on, when men should become idolators in disbelief of spiritual things, doing worship to the sun, moon and stars; and in very corpor profess to find the cause and foundation of all.</p>
 <p>8. Jehovih said: Man shall search all things in order to find Me; but I gave this labor not to one generation of men, nor to those of a hundred, or a thousand years, but to cycles. For, when I come in kosmon, to found My kingdom on earth, man shall have the testimony of all speculation and philosophies before him, together with the fruits thereof. And he shall judge that which is good by the evidence of past practices.</p>
 <p>9. High in the arc of Se'ing rose Osire's call, where millions waited, knowing the dawn of dan on the red star was near its end. Swift messengers told the story of Jehovih's work, through His Son, Osire; and, measuring the width of His harvest, laid the scheme at the feet of the reigning Goddess, Antwa. And she gave the word, Go, to her legions in waiting, who had moored an obegia, a float, a fire-ship, ready to proceed for the hosts redeemed by Great Osire.</p>
 <p>10. And they cut her loose, amidst music and dancing, the obegia, five million souls aboard, commanded by Eticene, Goddess of Antwa's Garden, an etherean plain, where dwelt ten thousand million souls. A place of rest, for Gods and Goddesses to regale themselves with stories of redemptions of mortals on the countless stars floating in Jehovih's etherean veins.</p>
 <p>11. Off to the red star, the earth, steered the obegia, the pride of Eticene, for the marriage festival of seven thousand million Brides and Bridegrooms, the yield of Osire's harvest for the upper kingdoms.</p>
 <p>12. Meanwhile, Osire and his hosts, prepared in the usual way, waited the signal, the coming of Jehovih's light, within the earth's vortex. For strange it seemeth to Gods and men, everything in the firmament is upward; who leave a star, upward rise; who leave an etherean world for the stars, rise upward also, but call it downward, to suit the understanding of mortals. So pierced the vortex of atmospherea, the obegia, and the hosts of Eticene. The Brides and Bridegrooms shouted with joy.</p>
 <p>13. And the millions of guests, assembled to witness the awe-inspiring ceremonies, joined in applause.</p>
 <p>14. Then down came the ship of fire, broad as a sea, with all her appurtenances in trim, and adorned in majesty, even to the floors of Vibhraj. And from the mantles of light came Eticene, to salute great Osire, in the name of the Great Spirit, and receive his contribution to the unchangeable worlds!</p>
 <p>15. Osire, with his attendants, the archangels of Lowtsin, received Eticene under the Sign of Ormadz, Master Creator of Power, and then presented his delivered sons and daughters, seven thousand millions.</p>
 <p>16. Whereupon, due ceremonies were proclaimed, and the Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih entered the obegia. Osire saluted God, who was ordained to be ruler of heaven and earth for the next two hundred years, and, with sorrow in his soul, departed, going into the obegia, the fire-ship, for a higher heaven, where waited millions of loves, calling to him to come home.</p>
 <p>17. Then upward rose the mighty ship, commanded by the slender Eticene, the young Goddess of Antwa's Garden; her little hands stretched upward to Jehovih, her mighty faith, Commander of the elements.</p>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">END OF BOOK OF OSIRIS</p></font>.
 <p></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah129.htm">Next: Chapter I</a></center>
 </body>