<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah101.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah103.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XV</h3>
 <p>1. SO perfect was the way of heaven, that, at the end of four hundred years, God and his Lords, and his sub-Gods, had ready for the third resurrection, of grade eighty-eight, eight <a name="page_127"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 127</font></a> and a half thousand million souls for Jehovih's harvest.</p>
 <p>2. So Apollo sent Adova, division Goddess of Reth, in Coak, in etherea, down to the lower heaven, to deliver God and his hosts. And they were thus raised up to etherea in a sea of fire, and made one with Jehovih.</p>
 <p>3. In like manner, was the next government in the lower heaven and on the earth; and the next deliverance in dan was ten thousand million souls, of grade sixty-five.</p>
 <p>4. In like manner was the next administration in the lower heaven and on the earth, and the deliverance was ten thousand millions, of grade fifty.</p>
 <p>5. In like manner was the next administration on the earth and in the lower heaven, and the deliverance was ten thousand millions, of grade thirty-eight. So Apollo commanded these to be delivered in the a'ji'an fields of Oth, in Sanak and Orant, for they were unsuited for etherea.</p>
 <p>6. In like manner was the next administration in the lower heaven and on the earth, and the deliverance was sixteen thousand millions; but they were of grade twenty-four. So Apollo commanded them to be delivered in the nebulous straits of Koppawotchiakka, for further development.</p>
 <p>7. In like manner was the next administration in the lower heaven, but not so on the earth. For the kings and queens carried the idolatry too far, and mortals took to destroying ill-formed children and cripples, thus casting the ills of mortality into heaven. So there was no deliverance for the last dan of Apollo's cycle; and Jehovih received no harvest.</p>
 <p>8. Thus ended the cycle of Apollo, being two thousand eight hundred years.</p>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">END OF BOOK OF APOLLO</p></font>.
 <p></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah103.htm">Next: Chapter I</a></center>
 </body>