<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah99.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah101.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIII</h3>
 <p>1. JEHOVIH spake in the light of the throne of God, saying: To the Council of Gau, heaven of My Heaven! Hear ye the words of your Creator, O My beloved: Sing songs to Apollo and his Lords; let my people rejoice; for the Glory of My Son is upon them.</p>
 <p>2. From My kingdom is the Light and the Life; out of My Wisdom Apollo hath come. Sing to him, O ye Lords of heaven; let My angels rejoice in his name, for he shall abide forever.</p>
 <p>3. Created I him for the glory of angels and men; in his idols and images shall My people behold the harmony of My beloved. With Mine Own hands, molded I the ankles and feet, and well-rounded thighs. Behold the arms of My Son, no longer than to the thighs, and with dimples, and small wrists.</p>
 <p>4. His neck is straight and slender, and smooth and round, like the higin on an altar; and his shoulders like hewn stone, polished and tapering, like a woman's, who goeth not to war.</p>
 <p>5. His instep is high; he can spring like a deer, swift as the wind. He sitteth not on his haunches all day, with his hands down, like a Druk that is tired, waiting for food. He fleeth to the plain and the forest on his swift feet.</p>
 <p>6. Proclaim ye Apollo in heaven and on earth. He is risen! Higher than the sun is the Holy Begotten of Jehovih! Out of the Virgin Mi is he come, Holy; in symmetry and music, there is none like Apollo.</p>
 <p>7. She was My betrothed from the foundation of the world; Spouse of your Creator, O God! Her name was Mi, Mother of Mine Holy Begotten Son.</p>
 <p>8. They were without shapeliness before Me; they lolled about on earth; they lolled in heaven; on their haunches waited they hungrily.</p>
 <p>9. The Virgin bowed down; for her first-born was the Redeemer of the world. In stone, and wood, and copper, and gold, and silver, is he stronger than ten cities; and wiser than ten thousand men.</p>
 <p>10. He cometh to the young mother's dream, and shapeth her unborn, with limbs like a racer, and with long hair on the head. He standeth in the idol, and knoweth the Mother's prayer <a name="page_126"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 126</font></a> every day. Who calleth on the name, Apollo, calleth on the Father, Creator of all things.</p>
 <p>11. Blessed are the Lords of Apollo; blessed are the sons and daughters of Apollo; blessed are they that bring forth in shapliness like My Son, Apollo.</p>
 <p>12. This mark have I put up before all women under the sun; the young women before marriage; and before the young men before marriage.</p>
 <p>13. Choose ye of them in the likeness of Apollo; your heirs shall glorify your Creator.</p>
 <p>14. Apollo is My judge; he sitteth on My right hand; swifter than an arrow is his judgment on a woman's first-born.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah101.htm">Next: Chapter XIV</a></center>
 </body>