<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah160.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah162.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXVI</h3>
 <p>1. WHEN Fragapatti entered the Road of Fire with his avalanza, where Athrava had stationed the musicians and groups of furlers, the hosts aboard broke loose from all bounds of propriety, so great was their delight, and they shouted and sang with the trumpeters with most exalted enthusiasm. Many of them entered the Orian state, and not a few, even the Nirvanian. And they became even as Gods and Goddesses by their own entrancement, seeing, hearing and realizing, even to the third rate above the Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih!</p>
 <p>2. These were but spasmodic conditions of light, from which they returned in course of time, being able to give descriptions of their visions. For Jehovih so created man, with spells of clearness far in advance of his growth, the which, he having realized, he returneth to his normal condition, to prepare himself constitutionally.</p>
 <p><a name="page_245a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 245a</font></a></p>
 <p>3. Along the road, on either side, were mottoes and sayings peculiar to the hosts of Hapacha, and to mortals of Guatama. When Hapacha saw these, he said: How is it possible? Whence derived these Gods this information? But the light came to his own soul, saying: The wise and good sayings of men below, are born by Jehovih's swift messengers to realms above. Hoab stood near by, and heard what Hapacha said, and Hoab said: How can men and spirits be inspired to wise and good sayings? Who had thought to erect such signboards on the road to All Light! And yet what darker deeds are done, when the soul of man findeth curses and evil words to vent his awful sins, and walls himself around with horrid imprecations! The which to face in after time and be appalled at the havoc of his own deadly weapons. How few, indeed, comprehend the direful thrust of hateful words, imagining them but wind, to pass away and be seen no more, but which are placarded on the signboard of heaven, as his fruit sent to market! The poison dealt out of his mouth to his brother man! A man throweth a spear, deadly, but it falleth on the earth and lieth there; but words and sayings are more potent, scoring deep in the soul of things. Fair, indeed, is it with thee, O Hapacha, and with thy hosts also, with yonder pure scross to enter Haraiti!</p>
 <p>4. As fast as the ship passed the lights, the etherean musicians came aboard, being anxious to meet Hapacha and his hosts, especially the I'hins, and to congratulate them on being the first harvest from the lowest heaven at the end of a cycle. And strange to say, there were just twice as many as Sethantes had prepared in the first dawn on earth. Fragapatti called the swift messengers belonging to the Roads of Gon, in etherea, and he said unto them: Go ye to Sethantes, whose fields lie in the Roads of Gon, and say unto him: Greeting, in the name of Jehovih! The earth hath reached Obsod and Goomatchala, home of Fragapatti, who sendeth love and joy on behalf of sixty millions, first harvest of h'ak, grade sixty-five.</p>
 <p>5. Of these messengers, four hundred departed, leaving a reserve of eight hundred, who continued on the avalanza.</p>
 <p>6. The drujas, who were arrayed in gaudy attire, withdrew a little from the landing, fearing the light. When the ship drew near the walls, and was made fast, the marshals of Mouru came to the front, two millions, as an escort to conduct all who chose over the ascending stairs.</p>
 <p><a name="page_246a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 246a</font></a></p>
 <p>7. And so great was the faith of Hapacha's hosts, that over fifty millions of them passed within the sea of fire, singing: GLORY BE TO THEE, O JEHOVIH! CREATOR OF WORLDS!</p>
 <p>8. Seeing this great faith in them, Athrava commanded red and blue lights, to favor them; and there was not one of the whole number that quailed, or turned from the light. And now was beholden, to many of them, their first view of the glories and powers of Gods and Goddesses. Mouru was illuminated in every part. The structure of the temple, its extent and magnificence in conception, with its hundreds of thousands of mirrors and lenses, its transparent and opaque crystals, translucent and opaque circles and arches, hundreds of millions, the which, when viewed from any one place, was unlike when viewed from another place, as if each position were striving to outdo the others in beauty and perfection. So that, were a person to walk for a thousand years in the temple, he would every moment see, as it were, a new palace of surpassing grandeur.</p>
 <p>9. And so wonderfully was it arranged that the faces of one thousand millions of people could be seen from any place a person might be; and yet all these people constituted a part and principle in the building, being as jewel stones, created by Jehovih for the ornamentation of His celestial abodes.</p>
 <p>10. Hoab, always quick to speak, said: O that angels and mortals would strive to make of themselves such jewels as these! Hapacha spake not, being overwhelmed with the beauty and magnificence. Yaton'te said: When thou art on the throne, Fragapatti, I will leave for the kingdom of Yaton'te: Here, then, I will take my leave. Fragapatti shook hands with him, saying: Jehovih be with thee!</p>
 <p>11. So Yaton'te remained where he was, but Hoab and Hapacha continued on with Fragapatti. All eyes were turned to them, and especially to Hapacha, whose persistence in faith in Jehovih had won the lower heavens to Wisdom and Love. And as they moved toward the throne, great Athrava rose up, smiling, holding out his hands to receive them. Next, and back of Athrava, were the five Goddesses, Ethro, of Uche and Rok; Guissaya, of Hemitza, of the Valley of M'boid, in etherea; Si'tissaya, of Woh'tabak, the one-time home of Fuevitiv; Ctevi, of Nu, Porte-Auga; and Rinava, of the Swamps of Tholiji, in South Suyarc of Roads, near Zuh'ta and Hitch'ow, in the South etherean vault of Obsod.</p>
 <p><a name="page_247a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 247a</font></a></p>
 <p>12. And the Goddesses also rose up with extended hands; and now, because of the brilliancy of their presence, the throne became a scene of hallowed light, and threads thereof extended to all the Council members, and by these were radiated outward so that every person in the Temple of Jehovih was connected with the throne, which made every spoken word plain to all.</p>
 <p>13. Athrava said: In Jehovih's name, welcome, O Fragapatti! And thy hosts with thee! The Goddesses repeated the same words, and they were echoed by the entire audience. Fragapatti said: In Thy name, O Jehovih, am I delivered to my loves. Be Thou with us, O Father, that we may glorify Thee! Receive ye, O my people, Hapacha, Son of Jehovih, who rose up and stood in the dark all night long, in faith in Jehovih. Behold, I have delivered him in dawn, and his hosts with him.</p>
 <p>14. And now there appeared, rising like a new sun, Jehovih's light beyond the throne, reddish tinged, emblem of the Western Light, in honor of Hapacha. And it rose and stood above Fragapatti's head in great brilliancy. Then spake Jehovih out of the Light, saying:</p>
 <p>15. With My breath create I alive the earth-born child; with My hand quicken I the newborn spirit; and with My Light illume I the soul of My Faithist. Behold, I dwell in the All Highest place, and in the lowest of created things; whoever findeth Me, I find also; whoever proclaimeth Me, I proclaim in return. Hapacha, My Son, Savior of men! of My Light shalt thou be crowned!</p>
 <p>16. The Voice ceased, and now Fragapatti advanced to the midst of the throne, and took of the light and fashioned a crown, and placed it on Hapacha's head, saying: Crown of Thy Crown, O Jehovih, crown I Thy Son! In Thy Light shall he be wise and powerful, with Love to all Thy created beings, henceforth, forever.</p>
 <p>17. The Goddesses then received them, and after due ceremonies they all took their seats, Fragapatti in the midst of the throne. Arthrava resigned at once, during the stay of Fragapatti. The es'enaurs now chanted: GLORY BE TO THEE, O ALL LIGHT; THE PERSON OF EVERY KINGDOM HIGH AND LOW; WHO HATH BROUGHT OUR BROTHERS AND SISTERS HOME!</p>
 <p>18. By natural impulse of thanks, Hapacha's hosts, fifty millions, rose up and responded, singing: TO THEE, O JEHOVIH, HOW SHALL OUR SOULS FIND WORDS! THY SONS' AND DAUGHTERS' <a name="page_248a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 248a</font></a> LOVE, HOW CAN WE RECOMPENSE? MAKE US LIGHT AND CLEAR, O FATHER! SPOTLESS BEFORE THEM AND THEE!</p>
 <p>19. But the anthems were long, and sung with brilliancy, rejoicing and responding, millions to millions, as an opera of high heaven.</p>
 <p>20. When the music ceased, Fragapatti said: With the close of dawn of dan, these hosts shall be received as Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih, and ascend with us to the regions of Goomatchala, in etherea. The apportioners will therefore divide them into groups in Haraiti; with etherean teachers to prepare them. That this may be accomplished, I proclaim one day's recreation, to assemble on the next day in order of business.</p>
 <p>21. The marshals then proclaimed as had been commanded, and the hosts went into recreation, the ethereans rushing to Hapacha's atmosphereans with great glee, every one desiring some of them.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah162.htm">Next: Chapter XXVII</a></center>
 </body>