<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah168.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah170.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXXIV</h3>
 <p>1. ON the arrival of the avalanza, the es'enaurs of Astoreth, and the trumpeters of the colonies, sang and played, being joined by the hosts aboard the vessels. And when they ceased, Thulae, assistant God of Astoreth, commanded the marshals to receive the hosts, foremost of whom were Yima and his attendants, preceded by his traveling marshals and harpers, the latter being five thousand females, led by We'aytris, Goddess of Foes'ana, in etherea. After these came the marshals of Fragapatti, ten thousand; then the swift messengers, ten thousand; then Fragapatti, on whose left was Yaton'te, and on whose right was Hoab. And these were followed by the musicians, and then came the hosts in general.</p>
 <p><a name="page_261"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 261</font></a></p>
 <p>2. Yima ascended the throne at once, but Fragapatti and his hosts halted in the arena, within the circuit of the altar. Next beyond these were the guards of the lights; and still outside of these were the Crescent Members of the Council.</p>
 <p>3. Yima said: In the name of Jehovih, I welcome thee, O Fragapatti, Chief of Obsod and Goomatchala, to the throne of God! In His Wisdom and Power I would have thee honor Astoreth by taking possession, in the Father's name!</p>
 <p>4. Without replying, Fragapatti walked alone to the throne, saluting on the sign of HIGH NOON, which Yima answered IN THE SETTING SUN! Yima stood aside, and Fragapatti ascended and stood in front of the middle of the throne. He said:</p>
 <p>5. Into Thy possession, O Jehovih, receive Thou this, Thy Throne! Hardly had Fragapatti spoken, when a light, bright as the sun, settled above his head, and a Voice came out of the midst of the light, saying:</p>
 <p>6. To thee, My Son, and to thy son, and to thy Gods and Lords, and to all who follow them in My name, do I bequeath this, My Throne, forever! Whosoever becometh one with Me, shall not only hear My Voice and receive My Power, but also inherit that which he createth out of My creation.</p>
 <p>7. Jehovih's Voice continued, saying: Whosoever looketh upon My works and saith: Behold, I cannot cope with these elements! is short in faith and wisdom. For I have not created in vain, that either mortals or spirits cannot control My elements in their respective places. They shall improve the talents I have given them.</p>
 <p>8. I made the earth wide, and filled it with many things; but I gave man a foundation, that he might attain to the mastery of land and water, and minerals, and of all the living. Yea, I gave him a corporeal body to practice with, and as an abiding place for the assistance of his own soul.</p>
 <p>9. And I created atmospherea wider than the earth, and filled it with all manner of spiritual things, and with the substance of plateaux; but I gave also to the spirits of the dead, talents, the which can attain to the mastery of all things in atmospherea.</p>
 <p>10. Whoever hath attained to these things is like a traveling sun: My light is upon him; he prepareth the place, and My Voice cometh out of the Light thereof. Let My Sons and Daughters stir themselves up; where they are gathered together in My name, there am I also. My hand is upon them; My Power becometh one with them, and My Voice is possible in their midst. The Voice ceased.</p>
 <p>11. There were many present who had not previously heard the Voice of All Light, and because of the brilliancy they were blinded for a while, but presently restored. Fragapatti then said: Hoab and Yaton'te, come ye and sit on the throne. And they went up and sat on the throne; and in the same time the es'enaurs chanted, HAIL TO GREAT JEHOVIH'S VOICE! HIS SONS AND DAUGHTERS, OF THOUSANDS OF YEARS, ARE RETURNED ONCE MORE TO THEIR NATIVE RED STAR, TO PROCLAIM HIS BOUNDLESS GLORY!</p>
 <p>12. Fragapatti said: In the Father's name, I proclaim a day of recreation; to resume labor at the sound of the trumpet in the east. And now the hosts mingled together freely, being buoyant with cheerfulness. And during the recreation, millions of ethereans went out into the plateau, visiting the places of learning, the factories and hospitals, and such places as belong to the lower heavens.</p>
 <p>13. On the next day, at the call of the trumpet, the people resumed their places, and after the music, Fragapatti said: To Thee, O Thulae, will I speak in the name of Jehovih. Thou art chosen by the Father to be assistant to Yima, Jehovih's Son, during this dawn, which is near its end, and after that thou shalt be Lord and God of these heavens and of the earth beneath, for two hundred years.</p>
 <p>14. Because thou art wise and good, the Father hath raised thee up, and great is thy glory. That thou mayst have strength and power, thou shalt in thy reign be called Yima, also; for the time hath now come to the earth when mortals must learn to know the Lords and Gods who rule over them.</p>
 <p>15. During two hundred years will the earth be traveling in my Orian field, Goomatchala, and thou shalt be one with me in thy dominions. Whatsoever thou shalt require at my hand, I will send to thee. Thou shalt, therefore, keep thy place in order; and if thou needest a'ji, I will send it; if thou needest dan, I will send it.</p>
 <p>16. Be less concerned about the spirits in thy heavens than about mortals on the earth. Mortals must have sufficient a'ji, that the race become not extinct; they must have a sufficient dan, that they become not as beasts. For which reason, every eleventh year thou shalt number abracadabra (See Book of Saphah) and supply my swift messengers with the lists thereof. And I will bring the <a name="page_262"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 262</font></a> elements of Goomatchala to bear upon thy labor profitably to the Father!</p>
 <p>17. In the next place, be thou careful of too much leniency toward the spirits in the first resurrection. Suffer them not to abide with mortals as teachers. Remember thou that mortals so love their dead kindred, they would even deprive them of heavenly education for the sake of having them around about them. Remember, also, that the spirits of the recent dead, who are entered as es'yans in all good heavens, so love their mortal kindred, that they would seek no higher heaven than to linger around about them on the earth. Which habit groweth upon them, so that in two or three generations they become drujas, worthless to themselves, knowing little of the earth and less of heaven.</p>
 <p>18. Be thou firm, therefore, in holding dominion over the es'yans, permitting them only to return to mortals under guard; and especially preventing them from teaching other than the Ormazdian religion.</p>
 <p>19. After this, thou shalt be circumspect in Astoreth: remembering that it is the part of a God to provide his kingdom for the development of all the talents Jehovih hath created withal. For thou shalt so commingle labor and recreation, and rest and learning, that each and every one is of equal attraction.</p>
 <p>20. And whether thy commandments be for angels or for mortals, thou shalt, first of all, and last of all, inspire them to faith in the Creator, and to follow the little star of light He hath given to every soul. Fragapatti ceased.</p>
 <p>21. Jehovih said: I have drawn My cresent and My altar. Whoever would hear My Voice and heed My commandments, let them hearken to the forms and ceremonies that shape the soul of things. I am Order; I am Stateliness without severity; I am Love without passion; I am Wisdom by suggestion, and without dictation; I am the most Silent, but most Powerful; I am the Least Seen, but Always Present when asked for.</p>
 <p>22. And now, since the people knew Fragapatti was about to depart, the proper officers arranged matters, so that all could pass in front of the throne to receive his blessing. Accordingly, the es'enaurs commenced singing, and the procession began. The master of the lights of the Council lowered them, and Fragapatti lowered his own lights, and came down and stood at the foot of the throne, covered with light drapery, which fell down to his feet.</p>
 <p>23. His hands he held upward, waving gently; and he created drapery and perfume, and wreaths of flowers, and bestowed something upon every soul that passed, of whom there were more than a thousand millions!</p>
 <p>24. And when the procession had all passed, Fragapatti sat down at the foot of the throne. Then came down Yima and took his hand, saying: Son of Jehovih, arise and go thy way, and the Father be with thee! So Fragapatti rose up and departed, and Hoab and Yaton'te and Yima and Thulae with him; and Yima left Hi'etra, Goddess of Me'Loo, on the throne of Astoreth.</p>
 <p>25. So they entered the avalanza, and, with music and rejoicing, departed on their journey. And Yima conducted them throughout his dominions, both in heaven and on earth. For many days Fragapatti thus dwelt with Yima and Thulae; and after he had inspected their labors, and his recorders completed their record, which was to be afterward taken to etherea and deposited in the libraries of Fragapatti's dominions, Yima took leave, and his piedmazr was discharged, and he departed for Astoreth, whither he arrived in due season. But Fragapatti proceeded to the dominions of Ah'oan, Lord God of Jaffeth and her heavens.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah170.htm">Next: Chapter XXXV</a></center>
 </body>