<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah126.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah128.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XII</h3>
 <p>1. OSIRE, through his mathematicians, now furnished the Lords with maps of corporeal stars, and moon, and sun, and the position of the earth, with the sun-belt, and bestowed the names of animals upon them. Showed where the region of Cows was; the place of Bulls; the place of Bears; the place of Horses; the place of Fishes; the place of Scorpions; the place of Sheep; the place of Lions; the place of Crabs; the place of Death; the place of Life; the place of Capricornus; and marked the seasons, and made twelve sections (months) to the year, which was the width of the sun-belt.</p>
 <p>2. And he placed the sun in the midst and made lines thence to the stars, with explanations of the powers of the seasons on all the living.</p>
 <p>3. And he gave the times of Jehovih, the four hundred years of the ancients, and the half-times of dan, the base of prophecy; the variations of thirty-three years; the times of eleven; and the seven and a half times of the vortices of the stars, so that the seasons might be foretold, and famines averted on the earth.</p>
 <p>4. When the tablets were completed and ready to deliver to the Lords, Osire said: Take these and bestow them on mortals, both through the oracles and by inspiration, making them sacred with the prophets, and seers, and priests, and their kings and queens.</p>
 <p>5. And ye shall inspire them to build temples of observation, to study the stars; teaching by the gau and by the travel of the sun north and south, and by Cnest, and by dark chambers, that they may prove the Fichtus of Haak, for nothing shall be left undone or untaught whereby man's corporeal senses shall not prove adequate to a perfect corporeal life.</p>
 <p>6. For this rule followeth on all corporeal worlds; that with the culture of the corporeal senses, man becometh vigorous, strong, and independent; and with the culture of the spiritual senses in corporeans, they become weak, sensitive and dependent.</p>
 <p>7. In the first case, they ultimately become selfish and wicked; in the second case, they become impotent, and unadapted to corporeal life, and thus become extinct.</p>
 <p>8. On all corporeal worlds, Jehovih hath provided these two seasons for every race He created; a season for the development of the corporeal senses, and a season for the development of the spiritual senses. To find the mean between these is to find kosmon, which lieth far in the future.</p>
 <p>9. In this day, therefore, I give the matter into your charge, in the name of Jehovih, that you consider not the spirutual nature of the corporeans in any respect, leaving that matter to God and his sub-Gods, who will receive them at the time of their mortal death.</p>
 <p>10. But ye shall teach them to fear no spirit, nor Lord, nor God; teaching them that by their own wills they can cast out the tetracts which assume to be spirits. Rather inspire ye them to be Gods and Goddesses themselves; and by their aspirations they will become large and powerful, and of fearless disposition.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah128.htm">Next: Chapter XIII</a></center>
 </body>