<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah134.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah136.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VII</h3>
 <p>1. GREAT became the wisdom of man in that day, and his power and glory were greater than had ever been in all the world. He established mighty kingdoms and sub-kingdoms, over the lands of Jaffeth, and Shem, and Parsi'e, and Arabin'ya.</p>
 <p>2. He excelled in building temples and palaces; and in all manner of inventions; in fabrics of linen and silk, and wool and find leather; in writing books and tablets; in mathematics; in laws and reciprocities; in navigation, and in inland travel; in making thermometers and barometers, and magnetic needles, and telescopes and microscopes; in chemistry and botany.</p>
 <p>3. Verily did the philosophers of those days know the mysteries of heaven and earth.</p>
 <p>4. And man became no longer thankful to God and his Lords; but man became conceited, saying:</p>
 <p>5. The Gods are fools! All things are Nature, and of growth. Man had become wise in spite of God and his Lords. All things evolve into higher states; it is the natural order. Neither is there any All Person, Jehovih! He is void, like the wind.</p>
 <p>6. And God saw the conceit of man, and he said: Behold, he that I have raised up, turneth against me. Now, verily will I go away from man for a season, that he may learn wisdom. Behold, man shall also find that many of his fellows whom he raiseth up, turn against himself.</p>
 <p>7. So the Lord departed out of the star chambers; and, lo and behold, the places were filled by the spirits of <a name="page_158b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 158b</font></a> the newly dead, who knew not the heavens above nor the way of the Almighty.</p>
 <p>8. And man inquired of them, thus: Behold, thou art now a spirit! Tell me, is there any God, or Lord, or Jehovih?</p>
 <p>9. And the spirits, desiring to flatter man, and, withal, not knowing the heavenly kingdoms, answered, saying: Nay, there is no God, nor Lord, nor All Person, Jehovih!</p>
 <p>10. So the kings issued edicts, commanding the people to no longer worship God, nor Lord, nor Jehovih!</p>
 <p>11. But woe, for the judgment of kings and queens. Man, having inherent worship in his soul, ceased indeed to worship God and his Lords, and even Jehovih; but, instead, he took to worshipping the stars.</p>
 <p>12. Now, the spirits manifesting in the temples, advised one thing through one seer, and another through another; for they were of little knowledge, and wholly unorganized.</p>
 <p>13. So, presently, the kings took to war against one another. Anarchy ensued, and man fell to destroying all the glories he had made.</p>
 <p>14. Thus again, after three thousand years, man went down in darkness; again fell under the obsession of drujas, and again became a barbarian for three hundred years more.</p>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">END OF THE LORDS' FIFTH BOOK</p></font>.
 <p></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah136.htm">Next: Chapter I</a></center>
 </body>