<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah124.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah126.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter X</h3>
 <p>1. WHEN Osire had completed his instructions to his hosts, he sent messengers to Vibhraj, saluting, in the name of Jehovih, calling for one million more ethereans, who came presently; whereupon, Osire divided them into ten thousand groups, giving each group one or more of his attendants, whom he had instructed what to do. When all of them were in readiness for the work, Osire said:</p>
 <p>2. Experience hath proven that to dispossess familiar spirits in one place, is but to drive them to another. It is wise, therefore, that in the same day ye make the attack in one city or temple, ye shall do so in the principal places all over the earth, giving the familiars no place to fasten upon. Let it be the sign, therefore, of attack, in each and every place, at the beginning of sunrise, on the morrow; and ye shall possess all the temples, and places of the oracles, and the cities, and the kings and queens, and rulers <a name="page_166"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 166</font></a> and leaders of men, driving hence, by strategem or by force, all the false Lords, and all spirits professing the name of Apollo, or any representative spirit in the name of Apollo or Thor.</p>
 <p>3. And immediately will mortals recognize that some change is going on in the unseen world; and they will go to the places of spirit communion, asking for Apollo to explain; and ye shall answer: Apollo is cast out! Hear ye the wisdom of the Great Spirit, Jehovih!</p>
 <p>4. And thereafter, ye shall instruct them as I have commanded.</p>
 <p>5. So it came to pass as Osire had decreed; the ethereans drove out the false Lords of the earth, and they banished the familiars of all the kings and queens and leaders of men. And the ethereans taught in the temples and oracles, and by entrancement, and by inspiration, even as commanded by Jehovih, through His Son, Osire.</p>
 <p>6. But in all places the Great Spirit's name was made a secret; and it was commanded of mortals that His name should only be spoken in whisper, or low breath, because Jehovih speaketh to the soul of man silently. And these things were established; and this was the first universal teaching of the Great Spirit to mortals, save to the sacred people, the I'hins.</p>
 <p>7. And Osire decreed: One Lord shall ye give to every city and oracle; but every Lord shall profess Jehovih, being His Son.</p>
 <p>8. And this was also accomplished; and when the people consulted the oracles as to who the spirit was, the answer was: Jehovih, through His Son, Lord of earth (or God of earth). But it was made lawful to use the names, Lord and God, with audible words; and they were thus used and spoken of by mortals as the substitutive words, permissible in public, in place of the name, JEHOVIH. After this, the names LORD and GOD were worshipful.</p>
 <p>9. Osire said: It is an easy matter to rule over the kings and queens and prophets, and all learned people; but not so easy to rule over the ignorant. Who, having been accustomed to worship Apollo through the idols, will long continue to do so; therefore, ye shall cause the kings to issue edicts prohibiting familiar spirits, and forbidding soothsayers and workers of magic; but teach ye mortals that these things come of satan (the evil disposition of men).</p>
 <p>10. This was also done, according to the commandments; and now there was no place left for familiar spirits to obsess mortals. And these spirits distributed themselves after the manner of spirits of the olden times; some going into swine, and living with them; whereupon, Osire commanded his hosts to inspire the kings and queens to pass laws prohibiting the eating of swine's flesh, lest mortals become bound with fetals. Accordingly, this law was established on the earth. Some of the dispossessed went into the forests to dwell, and some to the fountains and mists in waterfalls; others; who were depraved, dwelt in the fisheries and slaughterhouses; and still others, in the kennels, with dogs and cats. Nevertheless, there were many mortals who were dealers in magic and witchery, and these had an abundance of familiars. And when such mortals would die, the familiars would go to their sons or daughters; whereupon, it was said of them they inherited the gift of magic.</p>
 <p>11. Osire, having overcome the evil spirits, now called a council at We-ont-ka-woh; and there came five hundred thousand angels.</p>
 <p>12. Osire said: In Jehovih's name, will I now deliver them I have cast out; and ye shall labor to this end in conjunction with the Gods of atmospherea. Behold, I have had the familiars enumerated, and there are more than six thousand millions of them on earth. Ye shall go forth, therefore, into all the divisions of the earth, where they inhabit, and proclaim a great festival, to be holden in We-ont-ka-woh, inviting them hither. And ye shall provide them conveyance, bringing them across the seas in suitable vessels. For, when I have them here congregated, I will destroy the ships, and they cannot return.</p>
 <p>13. This was accomplished, and more than five thousand millions of spirits came to the festival, where were provided for them food, and also clothes of fantastic colors, to please the eye of the ignorant; and after they were provided in decency, they were entertained in music and dancing, they themselves being taught to take part. For seventy days the festival lasted, and every day varied from another; and the multitude became so intoxicated with delight, and withal, so broken off from their old habits and associations, that they forgot all about the ships and conveyances.</p>
 <p>14. Osire spake to his Council privily, saying: Provide ye an airiata large enough for all these people. I will show you what shall happen! So, whilst the festival was going on, the proper workmen built the vessel, and <a name="page_167"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 167</font></a> its capacity was sufficient to carry all the multitude of spirits, besides a sufficiency of regimen for them on a long journey.</p>
 <p>15. Now, after the festival had lasted seventy days, Osire proclaimed order, that he might speak to them. He said:</p>
 <p>16. Brothers and sisters, in the name of the Great Spirit, greeting to you all. I am about to depart to a higher world. That ye might hear my voice, I proclaimed order. That ye may rejoice in my words, I speak in love and tenderness. My home is in a world far away. Where there is no suffering; no sorrow. And the spirit of my people is radiant with light. I would tell you of the beauty and glory of my home, but it would not be just to you. Ye would no longer be content to remain here. So I seal up my mouth.</p>
 <p>17. Because ye suffered, and my soul was full of pity, I made this festival. The Great Spirit taught me how to make food and clothes, and to travel far, and be not afraid. All the people where I live can hear the voice of the Great Spirit. They learn all things by first learning to hear Him. His Wisdom supplieth every want.</p>
 <p>18. It will be a long time before I come again; my heart of love will come back to you. The time of the festival is ended; your time is come to return to your old places. These Lords of yours, which you have had so long, may provide you.</p>
 <p>19. Almost at once, when Osire began to speak, the people desired to go whither he would decree, and when he suggested for them to return to their former Lords, who were also present, they answered with a universal shout: Nay, never more with them!</p>
 <p>20. Osire said: I perceive ye desire to go with me and my hosts. I have learned to understand the souls of people. But do ye understand me? I mentioned the great glories in my heavens; but I did not tell you that we worked to make them. Yea, we work every day. The Great Spirit made the tree to get its food and clothes without labor; but, behold, it hath no power to travel. Some things in the world labor not; but man, who hath neither feathers nor hair to cover his body, is provided with talents. Talents are the greatest of all gifts. The air and the ground provide the substance of fruit and foliage to the tree; but the spirit who hath talent can find the substance of fruit and foliage in the air, and gather it.</p>
 <p>21. Lights of various colors were now being set up by the ethereans, and the place enriched with the most enticing perfumes.</p>
 <p>22. Osire proceeded: By the cultivation of talent, all things are possible unto all men and women. With a sufficiency of talent, ye need no Lords or oppressive rulers. I mentioned the great beauties in my etherean home. Ye go to the spray of fountains, and disport yourselves in rainbows; but ye are in a small corner, at best, and the substances of your joys are in perpetual failure. Behold the sprays and bows made by my hosts! Hear the music played in the elements of their handiwork!</p>
 <p>23. The hosts here overcast the entire multitude with the vapor of the air, converted into millions of kaleidoscopic pictures, and filled the place with the music of wind currents trained to tunes.</p>
 <p>24. The hosts were overjoyed beyond measure. Again Osire said: Hear me yet further; the festival must cease. Ye forget, I told you I must go. My marshals will now conduct me and my hosts to my fire-ship. As for ye, my heart is broken. I know the toil and hardship put upon you. But if ye desire these things, they are yours.</p>
 <p>25. The universal shout was: We will go with thee! Take us in your fire-ship. Teach us how to improve our talents!</p>
 <p>26. Osire said: What will the Lords do? Shall they remain without subjects? But the false Lords answered quickly: We will also go with thee, and be servants to do thy bidding!</p>
 <p>27. Osire said: When I am on the ship I will answer. So he departed, and went into the airiata, to the side of which his own fire-ship was made fast; and presently, he commanded all who chose to come aboard; and lo and behold, the whole of them, even more than five thousand millions, went in. Osire at once commanded the ascent; and thus he delivered them high up in atmospherea, where his proper officers had already provided a plateau of habitation for them; and the name of the plateau was Assan, signifying, no escape, for here Osire decreed to have them educated, and purged from evil; nor was it possible for them to return to the earth of their own power and learning.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah126.htm">Next: Chapter XI</a></center>
 </body>