<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah117.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah119.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter III</h3>
 <p>1. OSIRE spake from the throne, saying: Proclaim it in the east and west, and north and south, there is a God in heaven! That which has transpired in Gau, go tell the false Gods and false Lords in hada, adding: Osire hath come!</p>
 <p>2. Messengers started forth for every quarter of the world, inspired by the impetuous utterances of the commanding God. And so, half breathless, and in hastening speed, these young Gods and young Goddesses, the messengers, dropped in upon the Lordly defamers of holiness, and told the tale of the overturned Gau, where proud Utaya fell. And they, in manner and custom, inspired the false rulers to imagine even a worse calamity; and that much had been concealed out of deference to Utaya and other usurpers.</p>
 <p>3. Osire called his Council and appointed new places, with new officers, having nothing in common with all past administrations of the Gods of earth and heaven. So far, these appointments were from his etherean hosts, and, moved by the fire of his own energy, quickly assumed their most honorable duties. Some to build, some to survey and lay out the course of streets, and places of habitations; and yet others to remove the old hospitals and nurseries, and make way for new ones, and for factories, and all requisites for the millions of souls now scattered and lost, or in dire confusion struggling in the outside darkness.</p>
 <p>4. Whence rose a constant wail of fear and torment, strangely wild, compared to the glorious light fast spreading from the rising pillars of fire <a name="page_150a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 150a</font></a> about the throne of God. Osire's hosts, fifty millions, attuned to harmony and precision, were proceeding fast with their labor, not one but knew his part and played close to the text in every motion, were yet in number as nothing compared to the thousand millions scattered in the gloomy darkness, wailing beyond the walls.</p>
 <p>5. Here, a road! Osire would speak; or with his hand, command: An otevan to those hapless slaves! And, as if his hosts his thoughts had fashioned, his etherean workmen rushed to make his will omnipotent. No loss of time or space to inquire how the matter should be done; for heaven's trained workmen have learned the power of knowledge braced to a single point, by which the elements stoop to do their wills. To learn this simple harmony, for all to be as one, what countless millions rise up from the earth, to be hurled back, discordant and powerless, before Jehovih's Sons and Daughters!</p>
 <p>6. Yea, and kings and queens and potentates, high strung in unwarranted conceit, cast down to beg, beseechingly as a child. As a furious lion is tamed, worthless his giant power in the hands of man, whose strength by knowledge triumphs; so the ethereans from high heaven descend to humiliate first, and then to teach the false Gods and false Lords of hada.</p>
 <p>7. Jehovih saith: What more, O man, have I put upon thee than to learn? And strewn thy path with lessons rich in happiness! To learn the elements, and master them; this it is to be a God or Goddess. And wherein one man is weak, let two or more unite; a simple thing, by which even the stars of heaven can be turned from their course.</p>
 <p>8. Jehovih saith: Have I not said: The weakest king is he who hath the most soldiers; and the strongest nation, where none are required. How, then, may the false Gods, by evil deeds, fortify their thrones? Lo, My etherean hosts come unarmed, and by a breath blow away their mighty kingdoms.</p>
 <p>9. And so it was in Gau; only one earth-day had come and gone since Utaya reigned over a hundred million slaves, who daily brought tribute up from the earth, to ornament this crown-like city; and now the dawn of another world stood supreme in the demolished kingdom.</p>
 <p>10. What greater pity, most pitiful sight, than to see the former slaves still loyal to their deposed master, Utaya; coming to him in his banishment, <a name="page_151a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 151a</font></a> fifty millions swearing terrible oaths of fidelity to him forever. For of such like, the Great Spirit created man, to even wed himself to misery, for zeal, in ignorance, to prove a most foolish love. And but for Utaya's guardians, his very slaves had smothered him, in desperate effort to manifest fidelity.</p>
 <p>11. Then spake Yesta to him, saying: Raise thy voice against this unseemly crowd, and be commander still, at least to save thyself. Remember how Jehovih giveth this lesson to mortals, to say to evil: Away! For lo, to suffer first one and then another to fasten upon one's self, is crime great as a debauched passion unchecked. Bid them begone! For love of self, which is thy gift from Great Jehovih, be thou thyself! It will better them also!</p>
 <p>12. Utaya, struggling, said: Alas, fair angel! These were my slaves! The hardest blow of all is their acknowledged love. The fire of the throne of Osire was tame to this. For hundreds of years, I gave these creatures pangs and wretchedness, and now they give me love. Poor idiots! I cannot drive them hence!</p>
 <p>13. And so, sobbing, bowed Utaya his head, for such sudden great truths turned all his judgment into the darkness of his past deeds and wickedness, even whilst, crowding close on every side, the fifty millions kept up their ceaseless assurances of endless love. Nor was there any way open to flight from their ignorant jargon and foul breath. So, when Yesta saw how helplessly Utaya had given up, she raised her hand, saying: What shall I do, O Jehovih?</p>
 <p>14. Whereat, the Light descended, and Jehovih spake through Yesta, saying: Flesh of My flesh created I man: from Mine Own Spirit gave I man a spirit also; and unto all men alike gave I all things in My worlds. But some men are not content with what I gave, but ask for more, even that they may have their fellows for subjects. To these I have given in answer to their prayers. Behold thou, then, O man, why seekest thou to put away today even what, a day since, thou didst pray for? They are as good today as yesterday.</p>
 <p>15. Thou hast said: Man can make himself whatsoever he will! So, thy Creator is worthless to thee. Love is the lightest of all burdens; if thou desirest not to carry their love, how didst thou carry their hate so long? Nevertheless, if thou desirest, thou canst put them away: They are thine; do as thou wilt.</p>
 <p><a name="page_152a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 152a</font></a></p>
 <p>16. Utaya said: How can I put them away? I cannot reason with fifty millions! Nay, before I persuaded a score, the first ones, so ignorant, would forget what I said. Tell me, then, thou Goddess, what shall I do to free myself from this great multitude?</p>
 <p>17. Yesta said: Call not on me, but on thy Creator; and not to be freed for thine own good, but for wisdom to do some good unto them over whom thou hast long been a remorseless tyrant. These are a small curse to thee, compared to thine own judgment, for from thyself thou canst never flee. Thou shalt undo thy selfish deeds, which thou hast practiced so long. So, turn thou at once, and make oath to Him who made thee, that from this time forth thou wilt do good unto others with all thy wisdom and strength.</p>
 <p>18. Utaya said: Alas, thy words are wise and holy, but I have no faith! I have not faith!</p>
 <p>19. Yesta said: Say not this! Thy words are another bondage on thy soul. To say, I have no faith, is to imprison thyself away from All Light. Come, haste, or lo, I leave thee; for if thou profess not faith, why shall I longer labor with thee? Say thou: I have faith in Thee, O Jehovih! I can, I will raise up these I have cast down. Utaya wept, and thus answered: O that I had faith like unto thee! But for long years I taught myself that prayer to Jehovih was not required of one so great and strong as I. Alas, I smothered out the fire. And, amidst his sobs, Utaya fell prostrate at Yesta's feet.</p>
 <p>20. Quickly, now, she raised her slender hand toward high heaven, saying: O Jehovih, by Thy power vested in me, I here encircle this, Thy prostrate child, with adamantine light! Down from above there came phosphorescent flames of light, and Yesta drew a circle round about, at which the multitude stood back and looked on in wonder and fear. But the surging mass beyond pressed forward, shouting: Utaya! Utaya!</p>
 <p>21. Little by little, Yesta extended the light, and her assistants put up a structure to guard the place, so that in a little while it was like a miniature throne in heaven. Yesta then assumed the power, and so took command, placing helpless Utaya by her side. Meanwhile, her assistants sped through the multitude, making roadways, and selecting out the most intelligent of the former slaves, and making guards of them.</p>
 <p>22. Yesta said to Utaya: Now will I give thee a lesson in righteousness; for thou shalt educate and develop all <a name="page_153a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 153a</font></a> this host, thy former slaves, to thine own level, erst thou raise thyself one jot or tittle. Think not it is easy to assume to be a God or a Lord, or even a mortal king. They that make servants of others must also raise them up to be angels of light. Heaven is just, as well as bountiful. To whom Jehovih hath given bountifully, it is commanded he shall give bountifully. For hundreds of years thou hast had the service of these hapless creatures; so shalt thou now serve them by making them intelligent men and women. Yea, till the lowest of them are thine own equals, of whom thou canst be proud, and say before the Father: Behold, my sister! behold my brother!--thou, Utaya, shall not be free!</p>
 <p>23. Utaya said: I perceive thy words are from the All Highest. This is justice! I perceive now that whilst I rated myself supreme judge of right and wrong, I judged with partiality to myself. Yea, without an All Highest, I perceive there can be no justice in heaven or earth. O Thou All Light, how can I approach Thee! I have been feeding myself with an endless poison; my darkness was my fortress. Teach me the way, O thou angel of Light! Whatsoever Jehovih wills, that will I do, from this time onward, with all my wisdom and strength.</p>
 <p>24. So Yesta restored order, and divided the multitude into many parts, and sent officers amongst them to select and assort them, so that as soon as Osire should decree asylums and schools for them, they could be taken to them.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah119.htm">Next: Chapter IV</a></center>
 </body>