<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah289.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah291.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXIV</h3>
 <p align="CENTER">Of the Jaffethan assault.</p>
 <p>1. ANUHASAJ, alias the Lord God, had said to Te-in, the false, to whom he gave in charge Jaffeth and her heavenly places: In the self same time that Osiris and his hosts fall upon the divisions of the earth, even in that day and hour shalt thou and thy hosts fall upon Jaffeth (China), possessing the temples and altars, and places of oracles, where they serve the Great Spirit under the name Ormazd, and thou shalt subdue them to me under the name Joss, who is and ever shall be Ho-Joss of heaven and earth.</p>
 <p>2. So Te-in, the false, with his thousand million warriors sped forth, downward, to the earth, wide spread his army, to cover the whole of Jaffeth, in hope to capture it suddenly. And even as Osiris plunged into the temples and oracle-houses, and about the altars, in the dead of night, to drive away Jehovih's guardian angels, so, like him, and even worse, Te-in was baffled and repulsed, and saw the morning sun arise upon his shame in total failure. And then he, too, with his mighty legions, went stalking about, all day long on the earth, waiting for the next night's assault on sleeping mortals, and to receive new orders from the Lord God, as to the next proceeding.</p>
 <p>3. Then came the second night, and Te-in went in, with his army, furious because of the last night's cowardly failure. And to the sleeping mortals, men, women and children, hied them with oaths and loud boastings, threatening Jehovih's angels with the tortures of hell if they did not instantly resign all unto Ho-Joss, the all highest ruler, dweller in Hored.</p>
 <p>4. But faithful stood the Jehovians; laid their hands on the sleeping mortals, and became all powerful against the terrible odds, and held them in abeyance again, till the sun arose and scattered Te-in's hosts, ashamed and sulky, in most pitiful defeat. Of which news Te-in now, most painfully, sent to his commanding God.</p>
 <p>5. To him, even as to Osiris, De'yus sent word to next attack the houses of the men of learning, the unbelievers; and the ignorant, the superstitious; to abandon, for the present, the arcs, and temples, and oracle-houses, and the Faithists, firmly sworn. De'yus said: Send thou thy numerators and mathematicians; and measure and mark all mortals in Jaffeth, as to the vulnerable points, and map their localities; and when thou hast completed this work, set apart another night for an attack upon them. And thy hosts shall fall not upon the Faithists who are firm in the Great Spirit, Ormazd, but upon the weak and disbelieving, the skeptical and much learned philosophers, who are weak in spirit, and thou shalt not fail.</p>
 <p>6. So Te-in enumerated the Jaffethans, as commanded, marking them as to their vulnerable points, whether in disbelief in spirit, or if given to lust, or to hasty passions, or to telling lies, or to stealing, or to murder, or to hypocrisy, or to desire for leadership. And before the time of battle, Te-in knew the grade of every mortal in Jaffeth. And he called his generals and captains before him in his heavenly place, Che-su-gow, over the Chesain Mountains, twenty miles high, showing them the lists and maps.</p>
 <p>7. Take these, he said, and distribute them before my mighty armies, and ere to-morrow night they shall learn every mortal's place and quality; and in the night my legions shall rush upon the places, laying hands on the sleeping mortals, thus gaining power; and they shall hurl missiles, with terrible noises, through the houses of the sleepers, and so arouse them to awake and behold the war of heaven carried to their homes.</p>
 <p>8. The generals and captains took the lists and maps, and had millions of copies made of them, and then sent them into all the regions of De'yus' <a name="page_403"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 403</font></a> militants; and besides sent proclaimers, millions and millions, with terrible oaths against the Great Spirit, but who extolled the magnificence of De'yus to the utmost; appealing to their love of independence, and to their power to cast off all other rulers forever, save Ho-Joss.</p>
 <p>9. And now, when the night of battle came, the infuriated angel warriors of Te-in marched in lines, millions strong, toward the sleeping mortals. Spread abroad their great armies, covering the land of Jaffeth from east to west and from north to south. Over Glang'e'loe, the CITY OF THE SUN, were sent thirty millions of Te-in's warring angels, sworn to abjugate the people of great learning, alive or dead, and scatter the angels of Jehovih, or bind them and cast them into hell. Over the city of Pen Goo were Te-in's hosts, twenty millions; and over the cities of Tsee, and Wung, and Ha-tzo, and Ne King, and Zoo Wun, each twenty millions of Te-in's angels of war.</p>
 <p>10. Besides these there were millions and millions stationed over the great valley of Wan, and in the mountains of So-Jon. In the plains of Wow Gan were stationed seventy millions. Five millions were allotted to each of the following cities, to wit: Sum Conc, Ah-gee, Ah-sin, Chang-ha, Gee Oooh-young, Gwan Gouk, Na'tji, Yuk Hoh, Ah Tosh, Ah Koan, Chaung, Shon, Nufow, Zow, Lin, Gee Bak, Ow-wa, Tdong, King-do, Ghi Sam, Seung, Chog, Doth, Jawh, Bing-Tah, Gha, Haih, Hung, Wing-tze, Ni Am, Ah Sam and Zow-lin.</p>
 <p>11. In the mountains of Witch How Loo were stationed eighty millions, laying for the Listian breed of men. On the borders of the sea, for sea-faring men, and for their wives and children, were one hundred and ninety millions of Te-in's angel soldiers, ready for the assault. Besides these there were tens of thousands of smaller armies, stationed in the small cities and country places, waiting for the signal.</p>
 <p>12. Now, in this age, Jaffeth had attained to great wisdom in many things, especially save in war, in which her people were as babes. More than half her people were Faithists, followers of Po, worshippers of the Great Spirit. And they practiced peace and dwelt in communities. Even many of the cities were in families of tens, and hundreds, and thousands, but nowhere more than two thousand. And the city families were after this manner, that is to say: The manufacturers of cloth of wool, one family; of cloth of linen, another family; of cloth of silk, another family; of leather, another family; of paper, another family; of transportation, another family; and so on, till all departments were full; and of these combinations there were cities of fity thousand, and a hundred thousand, and two hundred thousand inhabitants. And in the country places there were small cities, whose people tilled the soil and gathered the fruits of the earth, and they exchanged goods with the manufacturers who dwelt in large cities.</p>
 <p>13. The government was by priests, one for each communion family, and the priests, who were called Wa-shon, were the receivers and distributors of goods, and they ministered in the temples and at the altars of worship in the name of the Great Spirit, Ormazd, sometimes called Po-e-tein, and sometimes E'O'lin, and by other names also.</p>
 <p>14. Besides the schools and colleges there were HOUSES OF PHILOSOPHY, and HOUSES OF PROPHECY, and HOUSES OF ASTRONOMY, thousands and thousands.</p>
 <p>15. The Jaffethans were large, being I'huans, with one degree more of the brown people's blood in them than the Parsi'e'ans. Nor in all the world was there, at that time, so strong a people, and clean and jovial, high aspiring, with great gentleness. And because the land was tilled and made to bloom on every side, the angels named it the FLOWERY KINGDOM; and because the people reveled in song, and poetry, and oratory, they were called, LAMBS OF THE GREAT SPIRIT IN THE FLUSH OF SPRING TIME.</p>
 <p>16. And these things were well known to De'yus, and to Te-in, the false, and to hundreds of millions of the assaulting angels, sworn to subdue them to Ho-Joss or to everlasting destruction.</p>
 <p>17. But because of the power of Jehovih with the most faithful of the Faithists, the arcs and temples of worsip had stood unharmed by the satanic raid. Equally so the Te-ins failed to overpower the Great Spirit's guardian angels. So now, after due preparation, the time came for another contest, this time upon the least Jehovih-like of mortals.</p>
 <p>18. On the other hand, the true God, Son of Jehovih, sent word from his throne in Craoshivi to the guardian angels dwelling with these mortals, so unmindful of the Father's care. He said: Come defeat, or disaster, or terrible darkness, overpowering your utmost strength, still struggle ye, in the name of Jehovih. The true Faithist knoweth nothing impracticable, but <a name="page_404"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 404</font></a> doeth his utmost for his highest light, though failure stare him in the face.</p>
 <p>19. For once distrust of weakness entereth the human soul, the man slideth backward down the hill of faith; whilst he who will not consider results, save to serve Jehovih right on, fail or not, riseth, even though his project fail.</p>
 <p>20. With this and no other word from Jehovih, the Faithists stood about their weak and helpless wards on the low earth, waiting for the thousand million Te-ins. But not in any lengthened suspense, for when the sun sood with the widest part of the earth between, the midnight hour, the militants came rushing on, with oaths most hideous, and by their dense flood of numbers reached the sleeping mortals and laid hands on them.</p>
 <p>21. Then, with joy run to madness because of triumph, sent hurling round about appurtenances in the dwellings. And, in many places, with audible speech thus held forth in the dark to the affrighted mortals:</p>
 <p>22. From Sanc-tu I come, to lie in the dust every mortal born that will not bow down in reverence to Ho-Joss, ruler of worlds. Give ear, O man; the anger of heaven's Creator is let loose upon a disobedient race!</p>
 <p>23. And then, to give semblance of truth to the words, the angel intruders let fly such knocks and poundings that they moved many a house on its foundation, and roused the mortals, panic-stricken, to find the cause, or to hasten them quickly to repentance and prayers.</p>
 <p>24. But not all was their victory; for the Jehovians firmly held the power in hundreds of thousands of places. And yet the Te-ins had a wonderful victory.</p>
 <p>25. Te-in quickly sent word to De'yus, exulting, and exaggerating the victories won. And in turn, De'yus congratulated him and his army, his thousand millions, who, now anchored on the earth, and with mortals, frolicked about in all regions.</p>
 <p>26. And in Jaffeth, in course of time, the same questions arose as in Arabin'ya; questions from mortals to the spirits; as to the destination of the soul of man; as to the origin of things; as to the heavenly places? And Te-in in turn sent word on up to De'yus, in Hored, as to what answer should be given. It was thus, that he, too, was summoned to Sanc-tu, in Hored, to meet with Osiris, and Baal, and Ashtaroth, and Sudga, subduer of Vind'yu.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah291.htm">Next: Chapter XXV</a></center>
 </body>