<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah276.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah278.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER"><a name="Deity">Chapter XI</a></h3>
 <font size="2"><p>OF THE DEITY, ALIAS DYAUS, ALIAS DE'YUS, ALIAS DEUS; ORIGIN AND POWER IN THE HEAVENS AND ON EARTH</p></font>.
 <p>1. ANUHASAJ said: I, the Lord, your God, being the All Highest, through your choice, decree, for sake of harmony and concert in our labors, the establishment of a De'yus.</p>
 <p>2. As the Craoshivians have had a Diva (Divinity), so will I have a De'yus. And by virtue of mine own authority I proclaim ye, my Lords and Lordesses, as the holy members thereof.</p>
 <p>3. As the Diva hath been taught in these heavens, so also be the De'yus, whereof I assume the chief head.</p>
 <p>4. As the Diva had laws, so also shall our De'yus; and they shall be promulgated on the earth, and taught to mortals as the laws of De'yus (Deity). Therefore by my own voice I dissolve the Diva of heaven; and it shall not be from this time forth forever. And whosoever of ye being members thereof, shall this day resign the Diva, and send word to the ruler of Craoshivi, for his benefit, and for his kingdom's benefit.</p>
 <p>5. And the ruler of Craoshivi shall continue in his own place and kingdom; for it is his.</p>
 <p>6. And the ruler of Vara-pishanaha, called Ahura, shall continue in his own place and kingdom, for it is his.</p>
 <p>7. First, then, I take unto myself Anubi, the Lord loved by you all, and he shall be my associate, and his title shall be MASTER OF THE SCALES OF HEAVEN, for he shall determine the grades of the spirits and send them to their respective departments. On earth his title shall be SAVIOR OF MEN, SON OF DE'YUS.</p>
 <p>8. Second, thou, Hi-kas, shalt be RULER OVER JAFFETH and its heavenly kingdom; and thy title shall be TE-IN, and of the first rank of GOD OF THE EARTH.</p>
 <p>9. Third, thou, Wotchissij, shall be ruler over Vind'yu, and her heavenly kingdom, and thy title shall be SUDGA, and of the first rank of GOD OF THE EARTH.</p>
 <p>10. Fourth, thou Che-le-mung, shalt be ruler over Arabin'ya, and her heavenly kingdom, and thy title shall be OSIRIS, and of the first rank of GOD OF THE EARTH.</p>
 <p>11. Fifth, thou, Baal shalt be ruler over Heleste and her heavenly kingdom, and thy title shall be BAAL, and of the first rank of GOD OF THE EARTH.</p>
 <p>12. Sixth, thou, Ashtaroth, shalt be ruler over Parsa, and its heavenly kingdom, and thy title shall be ASHTAROTH, of the first rank of GODDESS OF THE EARTH.</p>
 <p>13. Seventh, thou, Fo-ebe, shalt be ruler over Uropa and her heavenly kingdom, and thy title shall be FO-EBE, and of the first rank of GODDESS OF THE EARTH.</p>
 <p>14. Eighth, thou, Ho-jab, shalt be ruler over Japan and her heavenly kingdom, and thy title shall be HO-JAB, and of the first rank of GOD OF THE EARTH.</p>
 <p>15. After that the false God made appointments for the other divisions of the earth and their heavenly places, and after that he said unto them:</p>
 <p>16. All my Gods and Goddesses shall have thrones in their places, and holy councils and attendants as becometh Gods of the first rank. And every one shall have a capital city, with subsidiaries according to the number and place of their spirits and mortal subjects.</p>
 <p>17. And every God and Goddess shall manage his or her own kingdom in his or her own way; but every one shall nevertheless be tributary to my kingdom, according to the exactions I put upon him or them.</p>
 <p>18. That ye may resign the Diva, and choose your assistants, before being crowned, I declare a day of recreation, to assemble at the trumpeter's call.</p>
 <p>19. Hereupon the hosts relaxed from duty and made their resignations of the Diva, and sent them with messengers to God in Craoshivi, but not one of them mentioned the new state of affairs resolved upon. On the next day, at the trumpeter's call, they assembled again; and Anuhasaj said unto them: Come ye with me, and I will show you the place of Hored and its boundaries; for it shall not be my kingdom alone, but yours also, for my kingdom shall be the kingdom of your kingdoms.</p>
 <p>20. And they entered an otevan, and, coming in the fourth belt below meteoris, in the sign of the twelfth arc of Chinvat; and Anuhasaj said: From this time forth this belt shall be called <a name="page_382"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 382</font></a> Hored, and it shall be my place forever. It shall be the central kingdom of all the earth's heavens.</p>
 <p>21. And the multitude said: HAIL, KINGDOM OF HORED, THE HOLY HILL, PLACE OF THE MOST HIGH GOD! And it was known thereafter as the belt of Hored, hill of God. It was a three-quarters belt, and the base thereof was ten thousand miles from the earth, and the summit was fifteen thousand miles high; habitable within and without. And its ascending rank in grades was twenty, that is, it was easily habitable by spirits that attained to that grade; being above the grade of infants and drujas, and above the region of hells and knots, save in cases of great panic. Now, from the first place of Hored, where Anuhasaj crowned himself, which was the eastern base of the hill, to the place for his capital city, he made a roadway and called it Loo-hored, and it was the only opened roadway to the kingdoms below.</p>
 <p>22. So it came to pass Anuhasaj had two capital cities; and the first was called the CITY OF THE GATE OF HEAVEN, that is, Anubi; and the other was called the PLACE OF EVERLASTING REST, that is, Sanc-tu. Anuhasaj said to Anubi: Behold, the City of the Gate of Heaven shall be thy place. And thou shalt determine the rate of all souls who desire to enter the Place of Everlasting Rest. Thou shalt be judge over them. And whosoever is not for me shall not enter, but shall be cast into the kingdoms of hada. And those that are for me, thou shalt send unto me.</p>
 <p>23. And thou shalt have a Holy Council of one hundred thousand; and of examiners thou shalt have one million. And thy capital shall be guarded on every side but one, with pillars of fires, so that none can pass but by the Gate of Heaven. And of guardsmen thou shalt have seven millions, divided into seven watches, one for each day. Of messengers betwixt thy place and mine, thou shalt have ten thousand; but betwixt thee and the Gods and Goddesses of the lower kingdoms, thou shalt have five hundred thousand. But, of thine own choice, shall be the number of es'enaurs, trumpeters and marshals, and thy attendants also.</p>
 <p>24. And all Gods and Goddesses coming to me, or sending messengers to my holy place, shall come through thy city, even through the Gate of Heaven; and they shall come according to certain rites and ceremonies which I will give unto thee. Come, therefore, and receive thy crown.</p>
 <p>25. Thus was crowned Anubi; and after him were crowned the other Gods and Goddesses; and Anuhasaj bequeathed to each one his own kingdom, according to the custom of the ancients. And when these matters were completed, he again spake before them, saying: Behold the example I have made before you; even before I provided myself for mine own kingdom I have given unto every one all things required. It is meet and proper, therefore, that ye contribute unto me and my place workmen and materials, that I may build in great glory also.</p>
 <p>26. For, as I am exalted, and my kingdom made glorious, so have ye whereof to preach gloriously to your inhabitants of the place in store for them. Thus, did Anuhasaj put Gods and Goddesses under obligations to himself, and they acquiesced in his proceedings, saying: Nay, we will not only contribute man and women for this purpose, but we will labor with our own hands for the space of twenty days, helping to build the capital city, and to open roads, in all directions.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah278.htm">Next: Chapter XII</a></center>
 </body>