<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah281.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah283.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XVI</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>HEREIN IS REVEALED THE MANNER IN WHICH THE GODS CARRIED OUT WHAT HAD BEEN PREVIOUSLY STATED</p></font>.
 <p>1. THUS was established the CONFEDERACY OF SELFS; that is, the false Lord God, and his false Gods, were as many kingdoms united into one; yet every god was secretly sworn unto himself, for his own glory.</p>
 <p>2. From the time of the beginning of the revolt until it was completed as a confederacy was sixty and four days, and the number of inhabitants in these heavens at that time was eight thousand millions, men, women and children. And they are well-ordered, in nurseries, and hospitals, and schools, and colleges, and factories, and in building ships, and in surveying and in road-making, and all such other occupations as belong in the lower heavens, objective and subjective. Four thousand million of these were presently sent to Hored, to De'yus.</p>
 <p>3. De'yus at once set about the work laid out, and issued a decree commanding the destruction of all otevans and other vessels plying to the upper plateau, Craoshivi; and commanding the seizing and destroying of fire-ships or other vessels that might come from the upper regions down to the lower. De'yus said: My people shall not ascend to other heavens. I have made the earth and this heaven sufficient unto all happiness and glory. Whosoever buildeth a vessel, saying: I will ascend; or if he say not, but my judges discover him, he shall be cast into the hadan region, prepared for im. And if a man or a woman preach in my heavens, and say: Behold, there is a higher heaven, that person shall be cast into hell, as my son judgeth.</p>
 <p>4. And I, De'yus, command the locking up of all the books in the libraries of my heavens that in any way teach of Jehovih or Ormazd, or of heavenly kingdoms above mine or greater. For I, the Lord God, will have but one kingdom, and I will draw all people into it to abide with me forever.</p>
 <p>5. And my Gods, and my marshals, and generals and captains, shall take their hosts and go around about the regions of Hored, and make a clean roadway, and cut off all connection with the outer kingdoms. And they shall place in the roadway around my heavens a standing army, sufficient to guard my kingdom and my Gods' kingdoms forever. And no man-angel, nor woman-angel shall pass outward beyond my roadway forever.</p>
 <p>6. These things were carried out, save as to the libraries. But there were destroyed four thousand otevans and other ascending ships; and of the places for manufacturing ships for the outer heavens that were destroyed, more than seven hundred. And there were thus thrown out of employment seven hundred millions, men and women! And many of these were compelled to go to Hored, where they were assorted as to grade, and put to work, beautifying the capital and Council house and palace of the Lord God, the false. Others were impressed into the standing army, being allotted seasons and years.</p>
 <p>7. After the outward extreme of hada was thus secured in every way, De'yus turned to the interior. He said: Now will I hide away text-books in my heavenly places, as relate to higher kingdoms and to Jhovih; for from this time forth He is my enemy and I am His. Upon my own self have I sworn it; the name of Jehovih and Ormazd shall be destroyed in heaven and earth; and my name, De'yus, even the Lord God, shall stand above all else.</p>
 <p>8. For sixty days, the armies of destruction traversed the lowest heavens, high and low, far and near; and they hid away many of the records, and books, and maps, relating to the higher atmospherea and to the etherean worlds beyond; and in sixty days the work of destruction was complete in these heavens, and there was nothing left within sight to prove or to teach the higher heavens, or of Jehovih, the Ormazd.</p>
 <p>9. The Lord God, the false, said: Let my name and my place, even Hored, be replaced instead of those destroyed, for I will make the name De'yus to rule in one-half of the world, and the name Lord God to rule in the other half.</p>
 <p>10. The inhabitants of heaven and <a name="page_389"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 389</font></a> earth shall know where to find me, and shall behold my person, and witness the strength of my hands. Yea, they shall know my pleasure and my displeasure, and serve me in fear and trembling.</p>
 <p>11. And the books in the schools and colleges of these heavens were thus made to rate De'yus and the Lord God as the All Highest, Most Sacred, Most Holy.</p>
 <p>12. When these things were established thus far, De'yus gave a great feast, and brought into his companionship all the valorous fighters and destroyers that had proved themselves great in fulfilling his commandments. In the meantime, the laborers and officers in charge had extended and beautified the palace and capital of the Lord God in Hored beyond anything ever seen in these heavens. So that at the time of this feast, the place was already one of magnificence and glory. And the order, and temper, and discipline of the officers and servants, more than one million, who had charge of preparing and conducting the feast, were so great that the assembled Gods and great generals, and governors, and marshals, and captains, for a long while, did nothing but ejaculate applause and astonishment.</p>
 <p>13. Besides these, De'yus had provided receiving hosts, fifty thousand, and of es'enaurs and trumpeters half a million, and proclaiming heralds one hundred thousand; and the latter, when conducting the distinguished visitors into the presence of De'yus, proclaimed them, amidst the applause of the Holy Council, such honor surpassing anything that any of them had ever witnessed.</p>
 <p>14. The substance of the feast, being above grade twenty, which was above the animal region, was, consequently, of vegetable and fruit es'pa from the earth, previously brought by trained shippers and workers, for this especial occasion. But there was no es'pa of flesh or fish present on the tables; but an abundance of the es'pa of wine, and this was called NECTAR (su-be).</p>
 <p>15. The walls of the chamber of the feast were ornamented with sprays of colored fire, and from the floor of the chamber there rose upward innumerable fountains of perfume, which were also es'pa brought up from the earth, and forced up in the fountains by more than one million servants, impressed into service from the regions of shippers, which had been destroyed previously.</p>
 <p>16. At the feast, with the Lord God and his Gods, there were in all one thousand two hundred guests; and the feast lasted one whole day, and the Gods and guests ate and drank to their hearts' content, and there were not a few who felt the intoxication of the rich nectar.</p>
 <p>17. When the feast was ended, De'yus, through his marshals, signified that he would speak before them; and when quiet was restored, he said: What greater joy hath any one in a matter than to make others happy! Because ye served me, doing my commandments, behold, I have served you. My feast hath been your feast; my substance have I given unto you, that ye may rejoice in the glory I have received from your hands.</p>
 <p>18. Yet think not that the Lord, your God, so endeth this proceeding: I will not so end it. I have commanded you here that I may honor those that deserve honor from me, your God. My Gods have also great exaltation in the labor ye have done in my heavens, for my heavens are their heavens, and yours also. Because ye have destroyed the ascension, the most worthless and foolish of things, and cleared away the rubbish of my heavens, ye have also prepared a place for endless glory for yourselves.</p>
 <p>19. For which reason, and in justice to you, I have appointed this time to promote you all, according to your great achievements. Nor shall ye fall back on my promotion, resting in ease; for I have a greater labor for you, as well as greater honor and glory.</p>
 <p>20. Behold, I have commanded the earth and her dominions; and ye, my Gods, shall subjugate her to my name and power. And ye that have proved yourselves most valiant in heaven shall be their chosen officers to go down to the earth in my name, with millions of my heavenly soldiers, to plan and fix the way of mortals unto my hand. As ye have cast out the names Jehovih and Ormazd in heaven, even so shall ye cast them out on the earth.</p>
 <p>21. Remember ye, I am a God of anger; I have declared war against all ungodliness on the earth. Whoever worshippeth the Great Spirit under the name Jehovih, or Ormazd, shall be put to death, both men and women. Only little children shall ye spare, and of them shall ye make slaves and eunuchs and whatsoever else that shall profit my kingdoms.</p>
 <p>22. Whether they have an idol of stone, or of wood, or of gold, or of copper, they shall be destroyed. Neither shall it save them to make an <a name="page_390"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 390</font></a> idol of the Unseen; for such is even more offensive in my sight than the others. For will I leave alive one Faithist on the face of the earth.</p>
 <p>23. To accomplish which, my Gods shall select ye who are of my feast; according to their rank shall they choose; and when ye are thus divided and selected, ye shall receive badges from my hand, and repair with my Gods to the places and service they desire.</p>
 <p>24. And when ye are come down to the earth, ye shall possess yourselves of the oracles and places of worship, driving hence all other angels, and Gods, and Lords, and familiars. And when mortals come to consult the spirits ye shall answer them in your own way in order to carry out my commandments.</p>
 <p>25. And when ye find prophets and seers, who accomplish by the Unseen, who have with them spirits belonging to the kingdom of Craoshivi, ye shall drive away such spirits and obsess the prophet or seer in your own way. But if ye cannot drive hence the Ormazdian angel, then shall ye go to the depths of hell in hada and bring a thousand spirits of darkness, who are foul and well skilled in torment, and ye shall cast them upon that prophet until he is mad. But if it so happen that the prophet or seer be so protected that spirits of darkness cannot reach him, then shall ye send evil spirits in advance of him to the place he frequenteth, and they shall inoculate the place with virus that shall poison him to death.</p>
 <p>26. But if a prophet of Jehovih repent and renounce the Great Spirit, and accept De'yus, or the Lord God, then shall ye drive all evil away from him, and put a guard around about him, for he shall be my subject in time to come.</p>
 <p>27. And whether ye reach a king of the earth by means of the oracles, or through prophets and seers, or by obsession, it mattereth not; but ye shall come to him by some means, either when he lieth asleep or is awake, and ye shall inspire him with the doctrines and the love of the Lord your God. And he shall rise up in great war, and pursue all people who do not profess De'yus, or the Lord your God; for he shall be as an instrument in your hands to do my will.</p>
 <p>28. When De'yus ceased speaking, the Gods immediately made their selections, and the generals and captains were thus allotted to new places. And now the attendants carried away the tables of the feast, and the Gods, each with his captains and generals, faced toward De'yus, and formed twelve rows; whereupon De'yus conferred badges, as previously promised.</p>
 <p>29. De'yus then departed to the Council chamber, and took his seat on the throne. The guests, and Gods, and Councilors, entered the south gate, and went and stood in the midst of the floor of the chamber; whereupon the Lord God saluted them, WARRIORS OF GOD, and they embraced in the SIGN OF TAURUS,signifying, To Enforce Righteousness, for the image of a bull was one of the signs above the throne. (And this was called the EDICT OF THE BULL.)</p>
 <p>30. These, then, are the names of the Gods and Goddesses, with their generals and captains, that were empowered in heaven to go down to the earth to subjugate it unto the Lord God, the false, that is to say:</p>
 <p>31. The Gods were: Anubi; Hikas, now called Te-in; Wotchissij, now called Sudga; Che-le-mung, now called Osiris; Baal, Ashtaroth, Foe-be, Hes-loo, He-loo, Orion, Hebe and Valish.</p>
 <p>32. Their generals were: Hoin, Oo-da, Jah, Knowteth, June, Pluton-ya, Loo-Chiang, Wah-ka, Posee-ya-don, Dosh-to, Eurga-roth, Neuf, Apollo-ya, Suts, Karusa, Myion, Hefa-yis-tie, Petoris, Ban, Ho-jou-ya, Mung-jo, Ura-na, Oke-ya-nos, Egupt, Hi-ram, T'cro-no, Ares, Yube, Feh-tus, Don, Dan, Ali-jah, Sol, Sa-mern, Thu-wowtch, Hua-ya, Afro-dite, Han, Weel, Haing-le, Wang-le, Ar-ti-mis, Ga-song-ya, Lowtha, Pu, Tochin-woh-to-gow, Ben, Aa-ron, Nais-wiche, Gai-ya, Te-sin, Argo, Hadar, Atstsil, E-shong, Daridrat, Udan, Nadar, Bog-wi, She-ug-ga, Brihat, Zeman, Asrig, Oyeb, Chan-lwang, Sishi, Jegat, At-ye-na and Dyu.</p>
 <p>33. Their captains were: Penbu, Josh, Yam-yam, Holee-tsu, Yoth, Gamba, Said, Drat-ta, Yupe-set, Wag, Mar, Luth, Mak-ka, Chutz, Hi-rack-to, Vazenno, Hasuck, Truth, Maidyar, Pathemadyn, Kop, Cpenta-mainyus, Try-sti-ya, Peter, Houab, Vanaiti, Craosha, Visper, Seam, Plow-ya, Yact-ta-roth, Abua, Zaotha, Kacan-cat, Hovain, Myazd-Loo, Haur, Abel, Openista, Isaah, Vazista, Potonas, Kiro, Wiska-dore, Urvash, Ashesnoga, Cavo, Kalamala-hoodon, Lutz-rom, Wab, Daeri, Kus, Tsoo-man-go, and Le-Wiang.</p>
 <p>34. Besides these, were one thousand officers of lower rank; and now, when they were sealed as to rank and place and allotment, they withdrew; and De'yus gave a day of recreation that the Gods with their officers might make the selections from the multitude, as for their private soldiers.</p>
 <p><a name="page_391"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 391</font></a></p>
 <p>35. And in one day's time the armies were made up, two thousand million angels, and they departed down to the earth to destroy the Faithists and the names Jehovih and Ormazd, and establish De'yus, otherwise the Lord God, the false.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah283.htm">Next: Chapter XVII</a></center>
 </body>