<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah266.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah268.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_371"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 371</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Wars Against Jehovih</h1>
 <font size="2"><p>OF GOD'S LABORS IN ATMOSPHEREA.--CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF THE ESTABLISHING ON THE EARTH THE NAMES: LORD GOD, AND DE'YUS, AND DYAUS, AND DEITY, AND TE-IN, AND SUDGA, AND OSIRIS, AND BAAL, AND ASHTAROTH. COVERING A PERIOD OF TWO THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED YEARS; THAT IS, FROM THE TIME OF ABRAHAM, AND BRAHMA, AND PO, AND EAWAHTAH, TO THE TIME OF MOSES, AND CHINE, AND CAPILYA. THIS BOOK OF GOD PERTAINETH TO BOTH, THE EARTH AND LOWER HEAVENS, AND CONTAINETH AN EXPOSITION OF THE LABORS OF THE ABOVE FALSE GODS, AND THEIR FALL AND ENVIRONMENT IN HELLS, ALL SAVE BAAL AND ASHTAROTH</p></font>.
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <p>1. JEHOVIH spake to God on the throne, in Craoshivi, saying: These are My divisions in the cycle of My Daughter, Cpenta-armij: Two hundred years; four hundred years; five hundred years; three hundred years; four hundred years, and six hundred years; after which I shall send dawn. Five successors shalt thou have, and their reign shall be according to the divisions I have made.</p>
 <p>2. Forty years' indulgence in a great light have I allotted to thee, My Son; so thou shalt perfect all the orders of Lords and Lordesses in the lowest lower kingdoms of these My heavens. Neither shall it be dark during my reign; and thy labor shall be productive of a great harvest for My etherean worlds. For which reason thou shalt prepare to reap in fifty years, and again in fifty years, and again in fifty years, and again in fifty years. And for each reaping, behold, My daughter Cpenta-armij will send to thee ships of deliverance for all thou mayst have prepared as Brides and Bridegrooms.</p>
 <p>3. And behold, I give a new law unto thee; which is, that thou shalt cause thy Lords to deliver unto thee for thy kingdoms all whom they have raised to grade fifty, in advance of thy reapings, in divisions of time like unto thine.</p>
 <p>4. And thou shalt call together to thy capital thy Lords from all the divisions of the earth, once every reaping; and ye shall sit in COUNCIL OF DIV for seven days each time, and ye shall constitute MY HOLY ELEVEN; nor shall the Div be larger or smaller than eleven during its life-time. And the Div shall make laws relating to the affairs of each of the heavenly places, to make them harmonious, one with another, and these shall be called DIVAN LAWS.</p>
 <p>5. God inquired concerning the light and darkness of the cycle. Jehovih said: The first division shall rate seventy; the second, fifty; the third, forty; the fourth, eighty; the fifth, thirty; and the sixth, twenty.</p>
 <p>6. God inquired concerning the Lord of the Lord-dom. Jehovih answered him, saying: Because he is not a teacher, he shall not be eligible to the rank of Div. But he shall have the benefit of all the decrees, and all the kingdoms of My other Lords; for he is the earth's body-guard, and a beneficent unto them.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah268.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>