<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah273.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah275.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VIII</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>OF ANUHASAJ; WHO, BY TREACHERY, BECOMETH LORD GOD, SECOND IN RANK TO GOD, SON OF JEHOVIH</p>
 </font><p>1. JEHOVIH spake to God in Craoshivi, his heavenly place, saying: Behold, I have given great light to the earth and her heavens hundreds of years; and My Gods and Lords are becoming conceited in their own power and wisdom to rule in heavenly places.</p>
 <p>2. Now will I try them for a season, by sending them a'ji'an darkness; for My Gods and Lords must learn to master the elements I have created in the firmament.</p>
 <p>3. So Jehovih brought the earth and her heavens into a dark region for a season.</p>
 <p>4. Anuhasaj, a one-time sub-God under Ahura, the false, was cast into hell, and then delivered out of hell, whereupon he repented, and became a Faithist in heaven; serving many years in holy works in Ailkin, a heavenly place of great wisdom.</p>
 <p>5. And it came to pass that Ailkin was raised into a new heavenly place, called Vara-pishanaha; and in the removing, behold, Ahura ordered Anuhasaj from the line because of his inharmony. And Anuhasaj suffered himself to become angered.</p>
 <p>6. Satan (self) said unto Anuhasaj: Who art thou, that one of less wisdom ordereth thee? Anuhasaj said: Alas, I am a fool, and without will to assert myself.</p>
 <p>7. For many years Anuhasaj became a wandering spirit in heaven, going from kingdom to kingdom, doing nothing; and at times descending to the earth, observing the kingdoms of the earth.</p>
 <p>8. Satan came again to him and said: Hear thou my voice, and thou shalt triumph over all other Gods. Anuhasaj said: What shall I do? And satan said: Go thou to Ahura, who offended thee in presence of the Chieftainess, Cpenta-armij, and say to him: O God, I crave thy forgiveness. Thou wert right, and I was wrong. I have repented most bitterly. Now I come to thee, with faith in Jehovih. Him will I serve forever. Turn me not off, O Ahura; remember thine own one-time shortness; and the high Gods above thee accepted thee.</p>
 <p>9. Satan continued: Ahura will delight in thee and take thee at thy word. And thou shalt enter Vara-pishanaha, asking for the lowest of places; practicing humility in all thy behavior. But be thou fruitful in making acquaintances with such as shall serve thee afterward.</p>
 <p>10. Satan continued: And whether it be fifty years, or a hundred, or two hundred, bide thou thy time. But the time shall surely come when thou shalt be exalted; and thou shalt solicit and accept a place in the dominions of the Lord God in the Lord-dom of heaven and earth, Maitraias.</p>
 <p>11. Satan continued: And whether it be one hundred years more, or two hundred years, it mattereth not to thee; but thou shalt finally attain to the Lord-dom, and be duly installed and crowned Lord God of heaven and earth.</p>
 <p>12. And when thou art thus exalted, thou shalt seek to have appointed such Lords to the ten divisions of earth as are thine own special friends. And it shall come to pass that the whole earth and her heavens shall be thine, and thy title shall be Lord God, and all people on earth and in heaven shall be thy servants.</p>
 <p>13. Anuhasaj said: Thou art the wisest of Gods, O satan. All thou hast advised will I do; neither shall any one in heaven or earth know my designs.</p>
 <p>14. And it came to pass in course of another hundred years, Anuhasaj was promoted on the staff of the Lord God, the guardian, where he served the Lord God one hundred and seventy years. So the Lord God named Anuhasaj for his successor.</p>
 <p>15. So God came from Craoshivi and crowned Anuhasaj Lord God of heaven and earth; with great pageantry and display, God gave him a throne and placed him upon it. And from this time forth Anuhasaj was known and saluted as Lord God, which is the first rank below God.</p>
 <p>16. The Lord God said unto satan: Who first shall I bring into my favor? Satan said: Thou shalt first bring into thy favor Anubi, MASTER OF THE SCALES OF HEAVEN, and when thou <a name="page_377"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 377</font></a> hast this to thy liking, thou shalt call him THY SON and SAVIOR OF MEN!</p>
 <p>17. The Lord God said unto satan: Who next shall I bring into my favor? Satan said: Thou shalt next bring into thy favor the ten Lords of the heavenly kingdoms of the earth. And when thou hast them to thy liking, thou shalt exalt the chief one of them to be above the rest; and him that thou exaltest thou shalt call Osiris, for it is a name loved on earth and in heaven.</p>
 <p>18. Satan said: Thou shalt re-establish thy Lord-dom and call it Hored, and it shall be the central kingdom of all the heavens belonging to the earth.</p>
 <p>19. And Anubi shall send the spirits of his department to thy heavens; and Osiris and all the other Lords shall send the spirits of their departments to thy kingdom. And in no case shall any more spirits be sent to Craoshivi; for all people in heaven and earth shall be taught that thy kingdom is the All Highest Place; and that thou art the All Highest God, even the Creator of all things; and all angels and mortals shall be thy servants.</p>
 <p>20. Then went the Lord God to work earnestly, but slowly and surely. The Lords of all the divisions of the earth were his special friends, and of such kind as would willingly do his bidding. And they were learned and of high grade of heavenly experience of more than a thousand years.</p>
 <p>21. And the Lord God told no one in heaven or on the earth of his designs; gave no sign or token in his behavior that would make messengers or swift messengers look at him to read him; and he passed for the meekest and holiest of Gods.</p>
 <p>22. But the time came at last for which the Lord God had labored hundreds of years; and he gave a festival in his heavenly place, inviting the Lords and captains and generals and marshals, whom he knew would willingly do his bidding.</p>
 <p>23. And they came even as the Lord God had planned, and it was a time of great joy. And when the feast was ended, then spake the Lord God before them, spake as one moved in sorrow to do a solemn duty for the sake of Jehovih.</p>
 <p>24. The Lord God said: O my brothers, hear the words of your Lord God! Behold, I have charge of the Lord-dom of heaven and earth, I am as a guardian that standeth by a corn-field to see the corn grow unmolestedly. My experience is not of a year, nor of a hundred years, but of thousands of years.</p>
 <p>25. In Jehovih's name I speak before you; for the love I bear for the souls of men and angels. I belong not to the Diva as do ye Lords; my voice findeth vent in the fullness of the Father in me.</p>
 <p>26. Who is here that hath not seen great decline, during the last hundred years, in these heavens, in the faith of angels in the All Person? Speak then, O ye Lords; and if ye have hearts for more energetic service for the Father and His kingdoms, now let your tongues have full liberty, as becometh Gods.</p>
 <p>27. Anubi said: thou art wise, O Lord God. God of Craoshivi layeth the blame on a'ji.</p>
 <p>28. Then spake Hi-kas, whose heavenly place was over Jaffeth, he said: My Lord God and my Lords, before your wisdom I bow. I am but as a child in heaven, little more than a thousand years. My tongue should be silent before you, my long experienced Lords. Hear me though in my little wisdom, and pity me for it.</p>
 <p>29. To the east or west, or north or south, all things grow, in heaven and on the earth; I have seen no greater wisdom than this. One thing groweth not, the Diva. Behold, the Diva made laws hundreds of years ago, and they were wise laws in the time they were made. Ye and I, all of us, are bound by the old Divan laws. The laws have not grown.</p>
 <p>30. Gods older than I am, and Lords also, tell us that the All Light is a Person and hath Voice; and moreover that long ago He spake to high-raised Gods, saying: These things, shall be thus and so.</p>
 <p>31. I appeal to your judgment, O my Lord God and My Lords, was that not a wise doctrine for the ancients? For on this authority angels and mortals fell down and worshipped Him they saw not. And they were obedient to do the will of their masters and teachers on this self-asserted authority of a Person no one had seen!</p>
 <p>32. Which is to say: It is wiser to worship Him we know not, and cannot comprehend, and is therefore as nothing before us, than to hearken to the words of most wise Gods and Lords.</p>
 <p>33. If to worship that which we are ignorant of is the highest of worship, then the fool is the greatest of worshippers. For he is ignorant of all things. And by virtue of this reason, he who is the wisest must be the poorest of worshippers. And of a truth, is it not so, both in heaven and on earth?</p>
 <p><a name="page_378"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 378</font></a></p>
 <p>34. With the acquisition of knowledge, they all put away the Unknowable; the ignorant are devout worshippers. Shall we hold our tongues, saying: Wh-ce, Wh-ce! The ignorant must not know the truth; the whole truth!</p>
 <p>35. To do this, are we not hypocrites? Some have come to us from far-off regions, saying there are more delightful heavens, much higher! Why, then, shall we not all run away and leave this?</p>
 <p>36. My Lord God, and my Lords, these heavens are good enough, if improved. The earth is good enough, if improved. We want larger kingdoms and more adorned thrones in our heavens and on the earth.</p>
 <p>37. Next spake Che-le-mung, whose heavenly kingdom was over Arabin'ya. He said: My Lord hath spoken soul words. With knowledge, what more need angels or mortals? What value to them is it to say: Beware! The Unseen heareth and seeth? Or, halt and consider the Divan laws?</p>
 <p>38. My Lord God, for the wisest and best and most honest to assume dominion, this I have not seen. Thy kingdom should be the largest and most adorned of all kingdoms. And thou shouldst have, to labor with thee, Lords with kingdoms greater than all Craoshivi. Cannot our Gods and our Lords make these heavens the greatest of all regions in the universe? Shall we and our people forever run off to etherea in search of higher heavens? And not improve our own? To exalt a place by going away from it, who hath seen this done?</p>
 <p>39. Arc-wotchissij spake next: his heavenly kingdom was over Vind'yu. He said: O that I had not struggled so long to put away wisdom like this! All that hath been spoken I have understood. But I curbed my soul; I thought I was alone in such reason. Now, so suddenly, I have not words well schooled. I speak little, lest I trip myself up afterward. It is the joy of my life to listen to such wise arguments. Another time I will say more.</p>
 <p>40. After him spake Baal, whose heavenly kingdom was over Heleste and the south end of Jaffeth to the sea, a young Lord of great promise. He said: How shall one of my inexperience speak before such Gods as are here! But because ye have touched upon a matter dear to my soul, my words will forth. I have seen all these heavens, and even Craoshivi, waning for hundreds of years. Our kingdoms are like old women, resigned to routine, living, but dead.</p>
 <p>41. We have the same rites and ceremonies as the ancients; parades and salutations and anthems sung for thousands of years; and to whom? A figure-head that is void of shape and person and sense. Who is here that hath not deserved honor more than such a being? My Lord God hath labored two thousand years! I have seen him in Vara-pishanaha for more than a hundred years, stooped to the vilest labor, over bad-smelling drujas, teaching them, washing them!</p>
 <p>42. The Lord God should have a kingdom wide as the earth, and a million attendants to do him honorable parade. And when he goeth forth he should have hundreds of thousands of heralds and trumpeters to proclaim he is coming. We need such. We need wider fields and more pomp and glory in our heavens; and kingdoms with great capital cities, and thrones arrayed in splendor.</p>
 <p>43. Then rose Ashtaroth, assistant to Baal, and Lordess of the East Wing of his heavenly place. She said: Here are other Lordesses, can speak wisely. As for me, my words are few. The ancients have taught us to be plain in all things. And we have made our heavens like orchards stript of leaves and blossoms. As fast as angels are made bright and useful, they are persuaded to become Brides and Bridegrooms to Jehovih, and fly off to remote worlds. Our own beloved earth, that brought us forth, together with her heavens, are thus forever stript of the most valuable fruitage and ornaments.</p>
 <p>44. We all know that atmospherea is extensive enough to contain all the angels the earth will bring forth in millions of years! I appeal to thee, my Lord God, and to ye, most wise Lords, are not these Brides and Bridegrooms hoodwinked by the tales of the etherean Gods? And by the parade and pageantry of the marriage ceremony? And by the fire-ships, and pomp and splendor of the marshals, and trumpeters, and music, and the high-raised Gods?</p>
 <p>45. Behold, we have here one who can invent all these glories, even our Lord God. He should have such a heavenly place of splendor that the Brides and Bridegrooms would fly to him instead of the far-off heavens.</p>
 <p>46. After this manner spake the Lords and Lordesses, and when they had all spoken, there rose up Anuhasaj, now lawfully anointed Lord God. He said:</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah275.htm">Next: Chapter IX</a></center>
 </body>