<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah270.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah272.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter V</h3>
 <p>1. AND the harmony of heaven reigned on earth; war ceased amongst men on all the divisions of the earth. And man began to esteem wisdom, and truth, and virtue, and industry. The inspiration of the angels set man to imitating the affairs of heaven. He built schools and colleges, nurseries and hospitals, and factories for silk cloth, and linen cloth, and cotton cloth, and for paper; and factories for making glass, and leather; and factories for smelting iron, and copper, and silver, and gold.</p>
 <p>2. Three great peoples sprang upon the earth within two hundred years; in Jaffeth, in Vind'yu, and in Arabin'ya; and a fourth great people were overspreading Heleste in every quarter. And the kings of Heleste were sending emigrants by thousands and thousands into Uropa.</p>
 <p>3. The Lords sent ashars of great wisdom to dwell with mortals, to teach them by inspiration in regard to all knowledge; to teach them to spin and weave finely; to teach them the seasons, the times of the earth, and moon, and sun, and stars; to observe them with lenses, as had been the case in the cycle of Osiris, but was lost on the earth. Yea, the spirits of thousands of years previous were brought back to the earth, to reveal to mortals the lost arts and sciences.</p>
 <p>4. By night and by day these angels remained in the presence of mortals, and by virtue of their presence spake unto the souls of men, and made them to understand.</p>
 <p>5. And the Lord God of Maitraias restrained the drujas of heaven from coming back to afflict mortals or lead them astray. He guarded the earth around about on all sides, so that, in heaven, the Lords and the Divan hosts, in mirth, styled him THE SAVIOR OF MEN!</p>
 <p>6. Jehovih rebuked them, saying to God: They that sow in mirth oft reap in sorrow. But even the Lords, with all their wisdom, saw not what was in store for their successors.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah272.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a></center>
 </body>