<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah229.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah231.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter V</h3>
 <p>1. WHEN the light fell upon Cpenta-armij, the Voice of Jehovih spake through her, saying:</p>
 <p>2. In thee whom I made God over the earth and her heavens I am well pleased; by My hand hast thou raised them up; through thee have I maintained the Diva even unto this day.</p>
 <p>3. Thou shalt have honor in My exalted heavens because thou art the first in Spe-ta; but thou shalt crown thy glory by descending to the earth and walking with mortals for the term of four years, even with My Son, Brahma. And when thy time is completed, I will come and deliver thee and Brahma.</p>
 <p>4. In My name shalt thou raise thy voice and establish Me amongst men; and I will be with thee in Wisdom and Power. Take thy attendants and proceed to thy labor; in whatsoever thou desirest of Me, call, and I will answer, for I have messengers who shall labor betwixt us.</p>
 <p>5. God then saluted, and withdrew. Next came Yima, and to him Jehovih spake, saying:</p>
 <p>6. Being one with God, thou shalt labor even as he laboreth; and thou shalt descend to the earth, even to My corporeal Son, Po, who hath been prepared in My name, and with him shalt thou walk the earth four years. And thou shalt speak in My name, establishing Me amongst mortals, to the end that My chosen shall be delivered into My kingdoms. For thou shalt lead them away from the mortal kings, and teach them to know Me as their only King.</p>
 <p>7. Take, then, thy attendants and go to thy labor, and at the end of four years I will appoint a successor to thee, and I will deliver thee into My etherean kingdoms.</p>
 <p>8. Yima then saluted and stood aside. Next came Vishnu, renowned <a name="page_325a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 325a</font></a> for his labor in Vind'yu and her heavens. To him Jehovih said:</p>
 <p>9. Being one with God, thou shalt with him fulfill the completion of Spe-ta in My name. To which end thou shalt descend to the corporeal earth, even Arabin'ya, and dwell thereon for the period of four years, with My corporeal Son, Abram. With Abram shalt thou walk and sojourn day and night, speaking and laboring in Me as fully as My very Self. And thou shalt deliver My chosen away from the kings' peoples, teaching them to have no king but Me, their Creator. To Abram shalt thou reveal My name, JEHOVIH, and establish it in secret, with due rites and ceremonies. And at the end of four years will I appoint a successor to thee; and thee will I deliver into My emancipated worlds. Take, then, thy attendants and depart to thy labor, and I will be with thee in wisdom and power. Vishnu then saluted and stood aside.</p>
 <p>10. Next came Os, sent by the etherean regions of Haot-saiti to deliver the kingdoms of Japan and Heleste and their heavens, but who was now relieved by the Divan successor. To Os Jehovih spake, saying:</p>
 <p>11. In honor of thy volunteering in the days of darkness for the relief of God and his kingdoms, I now create thee God of the first Spe-ta of the red star, and crown thee with Mine Own hand.</p>
 <p>12. And, lo and behold, even with these spoken words, a light descended in the form of a crown and settled upon his head. Thereupon Jehovih said: In which I have made thee a lawful Div with corporeal power.</p>
 <p>13. And thou shalt descend to the corporeal earth, even to Guatama, and walk with My Son, Eawahtah, whom the loo'is have bred for My Voice, for the term of four years, sojourning with him day and night, gathering together the remnants of My lost tribes, and establishing them in faith of the Great Spirit, in My name, Egoquim, suitable to the utterance I have created them.</p>
 <p>14. And at the end of four years I will appoint a successor to thee; and thee I will restore into My etherean worlds. Take, then, thy attendants and depart to thy labor, and I will be with thee in wisdom and power.</p>
 <p>15. Then Os saluted and stood aside, and the Voice departed; then Cpenta-armij, on her own account, said: This hour, even now, I dissolve the Diva with honor and glory unto them. The kingdoms ye ruled over shall be my kingdoms during dawn; in the Father's name I assume them and their affairs. <a name="page_326a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 326a</font></a> Peace and love and wisdom and power be with you all, amen.</p>
 <p>16. The four inspiring Gods then departed, and in the outer circuit of Craoshivi they had in waiting, which their attendants had prepared beforehand, each one an otevan fully equipped and ready, into which they embarked, with their attendants, fifty thousand each. The musicians then saluted them, even as they moved off, severally, in direct lines for the earth.</p>
 <p>17. Cpenta-armij then lowered the light a little, and her three visiting companions, Owks, Ha-o-ha and See-wah-Gon, sat near her on the throne, even before her etherean Council, five hundred millions.</p>
 <p>18. Cpenta-armij said: I have visited the earth and her heavens, even her heavens on her very surface. By the power vested in me, I relieve from duty all Lords and Gods, and sub-Gods, and sub-Lords, on the earth and in the heavens of the earth. This my messengers will communicate to them, commanding them, in my love and wisdom, which are one with the Father, to come at once to Craoshivi, that I may honor them and apportion them for the third resurrection, which will occur in four years.</p>
 <p>19. To the Lord-dom, Maitraias, founded by Vishnu, I appoint and allot Yugsaesu Lord, with thirty millions of my etherean hosts, to be chosen by himself. Let Yugsaesu come before me! Yugsaesu then came before Jehovih's throne, and Cpenta-armij said unto him: Repair thou unto Maitraias, taking thy hosts with thee. And when thou art come to the place, possess it in Jehovih's name, and order it after the manner of a Lord-dom, providing sub-kingdoms unto thy place as may be required.</p>
 <p>20. And thou shalt have dominion over all angels that are already with the plateau of Maitraias, or such as may be hereafter sent to thee from the other heavenly divisions and from the earth. And thou shalt provide thy kingdom unto the service of the Father, chiefly to prevent angels returning to the earth to obsess and pollute mortals. For thou shalt find hundreds of millions of them who have no aspiration but destruction. Many of them were slain in wars on the earth, and are still seeking vengeance, and if escaping to the earth, obsess mortals to burn cities, and to murder, and to all manner of wickedness.</p>
 <p>21. Thy labor, O Lord, is not to reform them or teach them, for I shall appoint and allot others to that end; but thou shalt labor wholly and <a name="page_327a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 327a</font></a> entirely to prevent the return of Maitraisans to mortals. And that thou shalt be strong before them, thou shalt draw from all other heavenly kingdoms, which I shall found, a sufficient guard to enforce my commandments.</p>
 <p>22. For four years shalt thou labor in this matter, and thou shalt also raise up one with thy Lord-dom, to be thy successor after thee. Take, then, thy hosts and go to thy labors, and the Father will be with thee in wisdom and power.</p>
 <p>23. Yugsaesu then made his selections from Cpenta-armij's hosts, and they came and passed before Jehovih's throne, saluting, and then withdrew and went into a ship which had, likewise, been prepared for them by the proper persons, whose labor lies in that matter; and, having saluted with music, they departed, Yugaesu and his hosts, rejoicing.</p>
 <p>24. Again Cpenta-armij spake, saying: Behold, the time is now come upon the earth when I will divide and allot unto each of its several great divisions heavenly kingdoms accordingly.</p>
 <p>25. To Japan, because she is a remnant of the submerged continent, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called SUASU.</p>
 <p>26. To Jaffeth, because she has preserved much of the first language, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called HI-JEE-TSE.</p>
 <p>27. To Vind'yu, because she is the most advanced in holiness of all the earth, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called VRI-MIJ.</p>
 <p>28. To Arabin'ya, because she is the foundation of Jehovih's migratory hosts who shall go forth around the earth, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called PARADISE.</p>
 <p>29. To Heleste, because she was rescued from darkness by Os in time to meet this arc, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called SPE-TA.</p>
 <p>30. To Uropa, because she was first founded by a woman, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called HIMMEL.</p>
 <p>31. To South Guatama, because she is the least inhabited of all the great divisions of the earth, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called AHDEN.</p>
 <p>32. To North Guatama, because she is the ground on which the circumscribing of the earth by the different nations shall take place, where the revelations of heaven and earth shall be made to man, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called KOSMON.</p>
 <p><a name="page_328a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 328a</font></a></p>
 <p>33. To all the South Islands, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called FLUE.</p>
 <p>34. To all the North Islands, I establish a heavenly kingdom, and it shall be called SIN-YOT.</p>
 <p>35. Hereupon the light of Jehovih overspread Cpenta-armij, and His voice spake through her, saying: To My ten heavenly kingdoms which I have made through My Daughter, behold, I choose ten Lords, and My ten Lords shall go to the kingdoms I apportion unto them. In My name shall My Lords build unto Me ten heavenly places of delight, for the spirits of the dead that rise up from the earth.</p>
 <p>36. And My Lords shall establish in My kingdoms places of learning and places of labor; places for the sick and helpless angels that arise up from the earth, that My Lords shall raise them up, to know Me and the glory of the worlds I have created for them; inspiring them to perfect themselves in wisdom and purity and power, that they may arise and inherit My etherean heavens.</p>
 <p>37. And My Lords shall appoint ashars unto mortals at the time of their corporeal birth; and the said ashars shall be appointed in watch and watch, that they may relieve one another, having a time of labor and a time of rest. And My Lords shall so appoint My ashars that each and every ashar shall have a hundred changes of labor with a hundred different mortals, in order to learn all the varieties of men and women I have created. And the number of ashars shall be equal to the number of mortals dwelling on the earth.</p>
 <p>38. And My Lords shall appoint asaphs to reside in heaven, sufficient in number to receive the spirits of all who die on the earth, which they shall receive from the ashars in My name. And the asaphs shall take such angels, thus received, and place them in the regions My Lords shall have prepared for them, where there shall be sufficient of teachers and nurses and physicians in My heavenly places to administer unto them.</p>
 <p>39. And My Lords shall provide discipline to the spirits thus received, who shall be trained according to the Divan law which I established through My Gods, which shall extend beyond the es'yan even to the thirtieth grade.</p>
 <p>40. And My Lords shall provide for them that have attained to the thirtieth grade to be sent in suitable ships to this place, Craoshivi, and deliver them to My daughter, Cpenta-armij, <a name="page_329a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 329a</font></a> and to her successor, God or Goddess, who shall have dominion over the whole earth and her heavens.</p>
 <p>41. For behold, it is the nature of man on the earth to go after earthly things instead of heavenly; and it is the nature of the es'yan to strive for the earth instead of My higher heavens. Be ye guarded, therefore, to lay a foundation to prevent angels and mortals from going downward; to provide inspiration to make them desire to ascend to My holy regions.</p>
 <p>42. The Voice now departed, and Cpenta-armij spake on her own account in Jehovih's name, saying:</p>
 <p>43. Whosoever I call, let them come before Jehovih's throne, for they shall be the Lords whom I shall anoint for the heavenly kingdoms I have established:</p>
 <p>44. Le-tzoo, Lord of Suasu, a heavenly place over Japan.</p>
 <p>45. Oe-wah, Lord of Hi-jee-tse, a heavenly place over Jaffeth.</p>
 <p>46. Loo-gam, Lord of Vri-mij, a heavenly place over Vind'yu.</p>
 <p>47. Ha-kappa, Lord of Paradise, a heavenly place over Arabin'ya.</p>
 <p>48. Jes-Sie, Lordess of Spe-ta, a heavenly place over Heleste.</p>
 <p>49. Yo-han, Lord of Himmel, a heavenly place over Uropa.</p>
 <p>50. Hinot-tse, Lordess of Ahden, a heavenly place over South Guatama.</p>
 <p>51. Ami, Lordess of Kosmon, a heavenly place over North Guatama.</p>
 <p>52. Horam, Lord of Flue, a heavenly place over the Southern Islands.</p>
 <p>53. Puetse, Lordess of Sin-Yot, a heavenly place over the Northern Islands.</p>
 <p>54. All the angels named came before Cpenta-armij when called, and they now stood abreast Jehovih's throne, whereupon the All Light overspread the place, and the Father's Voice spake through Cpenta'armij, saying:</p>
 <p>55. Ye are My Lords and Lordesses, by Me raised up and allotted your places. For four years shall ye labor, even to the end of this dawn; and ye shall provide successors to take your places after you. And herein lies your greatest glory and Mine. For they that succeed you shall hold dominion two hundred years. And they in turn shall provide successors after them, and so on, for these successions shall continue till the arc of Bon.</p>
 <p>56. With Mine own hand weave I crowns, and crown you severally for my kingdoms!</p>
 <p>57. When these words were spoken, the now fast gathering light, of a variety of colors, took the shape of ten separate crowns, and descended on <a name="page_330a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 330a</font></a> the heads of the Lords and Lordesses. The Voice ceased, but Cpenta-armij spake on her own account, in Jehovih's name, saying:</p>
 <p>58. My Lords and Lordesses, go to your labors in the love, wisdom and power of the Father, and He will be with you; and ye shall be a glory in His kingdoms. Choose ye, therefore, each and every one ten millions of my hosts, who shall go with you to your places, to be afterward exchanged or divided, as I may direct. That ye may choose in order, he who was first appointed shall choose first; the second next, and so on until ye have your chosen.</p>
 <p>59. All these Lords and Lordesses were of the Higher Light, and knew beforehand, and had in like manner already chosen their attendants, so that at a given signal the multitudes thus chosen rose up and came before the throne, forming ten groups of ten millions each. And they at once formed in line and passed before Jehovih's throne, saluting in the sign, BIRTH OF SPE-TA ON THE EARTH, and Cpenta-Armij answered in the sign, JEHOVIH AND THE LOWER HEAVENS.</p>
 <p>60. Cpenta-armij said: For the glory of this scene, I bequeath a day of rest, that my hosts may witness the departure of the fleets of Jehovih's Lords and Lordesses. At once the hosts joined in a mighty chorus of thanksgiving and praise; and they went without and saw the ships laden with the joyous crews; saw them set their great fleet in motion; sang and shouted to them in Jehovih's love, for the glory of His high heavens.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah231.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a></center>
 </body>