<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah297.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah299.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_416"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 416</font></a></p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXXII</h3>
 <p>1. TE-IN, whose heavenly kingdom contained three thousand million angels, being informed when Osiris and Sudga were gone to Hored, satan said to him: Now is thy time, call thy Council together; proclaim thyself God of heaven and earth, mighty in all regions, the Central Kingdom of the Eternal Heavens! Choose from amongst thy Council the highest grades, and make them Lords under thee. After which thou shalt renew the battles in Jaffeth, on the earth.</p>
 <p>2. Te-in said: Why on the earth? Satan said: Behold, Jaffeth must be subdued to one nation of people, and this shall be thy footstool, and thy heavenly kingdom's head-quarters. After which thy Lords shall proceed to the lands of Parsi'e and Arabin'ya, and inspire the inhabitants thereof to another central kingdom, and when mortals are thus subdued to limited numbers, thou shalt have but few to deal with in order to make thyself God of the whole earth.</p>
 <p>3. Te-in said: Thou art wiser than all Gods. Behold, my way is clear.</p>
 <p>4. So on the day of De'yus' meeting with Osiris and Sudga, even the same day, Te-in severed the bonds betwixt his heavenly kingdom and all others, and he chose twelve of his highest grade in the Holy Council, and made them Lords of the earth; but he allotted no portion of the earth to any one alone. He said:</p>
 <p>5. I will not give them kingdoms; this is the strongest way; to keep every thing in one's own hands.</p>
 <p>6. Te-in, then, through his Lords, whom he sent down to the earth, made Kan Kwan mortal king of Jaffeth, with the title, KING OF THE WORLD, AND SUN, AND MOON, AND STARS! And the Lords caused Kan Kwan to build an oke'spe, where he could receive the commandments of Te-in, the holiest, all highest ruler of heaven, as to what he should do in order to subdue the earth unto himself.</p>
 <p>7. Te-in said: And, my Gods, say ye to Kan Kwan when the earth is subdued unto himself: Behold, I will also come down and dwell in the temples he buildeth for my Lords. And when the king goeth forth and subdueth a place unto himself, he shall immediately build a worshipful temple and dedicate it to me and my Lords, whose names ye shall give alike and like in all places. For I will not confuse mortals with a multiplicity of heavenly Lords. And the king shall show unto the people that there is but one High Ruler in heaven, whether he be called Ho-Joss or Joss, or Po-tein, or Te-in, and that I am the Person. But in no case shall the king suffer the worshippers of the Great Spirit to remain alive upon the earth.</p>
 <p>8. Te-in said: My Lords, take with you, each, one million angels, strong and cunning in war; twelve millions are sufficient, for ye shall not scatter them about, but keep close in the neighborhood of war and of the king. As when a fire burneth, beginning from a spark and spreading outward till a city is consumed, so be ye concentrated and potent. This is the whole art of power. And whilst mortals sleep, your angels shall come upon them and give them dreams and visions of glorious success, make them see themselves in the heat of battle, rushing through the jaws of death unscathed, whilst their manly arms slay about them on every side their enemies by the score in flowing blood. For when these mortals awake and remember their dreams, they will be well whetted up for the valorous work. But as to those that are to be conquered, let your angels go to them whilst they sleep, and give them dreams and visions of horrid deaths; make them see the heat of battle and themselves overpowered on every hand, and, pierced with sword and spear, they fall, dying in great agony. For when such mortals wake up and remember their dreams, they are half conquered already.</p>
 <p>9. Te-in said: My Lords, ye shall inspire the king to be merciful and gentle; and when his soldiers come to a place to subdue it, they shall send truce-men before them, inquiring: Who, say ye, shall be the ruler? And if the people answer: We are Kan Kwan's slaves, they shall not be slain.</p>
 <p>10. Te-in said: My Lords, amongst mortals, what is righteousness? Now one Lord said: Rites and ceremonies. Another said: To worship thee, O Te-in. Another said: To follow the doctrines of the ancients. Another said: To purify one's self. Another said: To do good with all one's might. Another said: To practice truth. Another said: To harm no man.</p>
 <p>11. Te-in said: Not one of you knoweth righteousness. Behold how you stand: The doctrines of the ancients were their own, and they are as dead. <a name="page_417"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 417</font></a> To put on a dead man's clothes, will they make the wearer like the dead was?</p>
 <p>12. Rites and ceremonies are what show-men train their horses with, to run or leap, or lie down, to please their masters.</p>
 <p>13. To purify one's self! What is that? A mortal man's body cannot be purified, for it is rotten at best.</p>
 <p>14. To do good with all one's might! Who knoweth the meaning of that? To cut off a crushed foot to save a man's life: Give him pain in the cutting, even whilst he is suffering. Then it is well that some men's heads be cut off for their own good. Yea, even nations extirpated. Let him that doeth, then, do with all his might. See ye not that in this, that before one attempteth to do good, he is his own judge, judging by his own judgment?</p>
 <p>15. To practice truth! What is that? The Jehovihians say: Jehovih is All Truth. But Jehovih is nothing, scattered as the wind. Then truth is nothing. Who hath found a man but saith: To see as I see, is to see the truth; to see as thou seest, is to see falsely? A man told lies knowngly, and practiced them, and he was all truth to himself, for he was a liar. Therefore, he practiced truth.</p>
 <p>16. To worship me is unrighteousness instead of righteousness. To worship Joss is unrighteousness; to worship the nondescript Jehovih, is unrighteousness, and to worship Po is unrighteousness also. Behold this matter: The large trees in the forest were smothering out the small ones; and the small ones said: We praise you, giant oaks, for the many blessings we have received; be merciful unto us! The large trees laughed at them, and they died. Is this not Jehovih? Is this not the Gods? For all mortals, at best, are but as unhatched eggs; and when they are dead, their souls are as hatched chickens, for the Gods to play with, and to use in their own way.</p>
 <p>17. Te-in said: Teach ye this to mortals; and tell them, moreover, to choose what God they will; and if it be me, then I will labor for them; if it be not me, then am I against them. This, then, is righteousness: Reciprocity betwixt Gods and mortals; reciprocity betwixt mortals themselves; to war for opinion's sake in order to develop in steadfastness; to help the helpless, to feed and clothe the stranger, and to worship the father and mother.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah299.htm">Next: Chapter XXXIII</a></center>
 </body>