<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah282.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah284.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XVII</h3>
 <p>1. GOD, in Craoshivi, bewailed heaven and earth. He said: Great Jehovih, how I have failed in Thy kingdom! Behold, Thou gavest into my keeping the earth and her heavens, and they have gone astray!</p>
 <p>2. Jehovih said: Behold the plan of My government; which is, to come against nothing in heaven or earth; to seize nothing by the head and turn it round by violence to go the other way.</p>
 <p>3. Though I am the power that created them, and am the Ever Present that moveth them along, I gave to them to be Gods, like Myself, with liberty to find their own direction.</p>
 <p>4. I created many trees in My garden, the greatest of which is the tree of happiness. And I called out unto all the living to come and dwell in the shade of that tree, and partake of the fruits and its perfumes. But they run after prickers and they scourge themselves; and then, alas, they fall to cursing Me, and accusing Me of shortness in My government.</p>
 <p>5. I confined them in their mother's womb for a season, showing them there is a time for all things. But they ran forward hurriedly, desiring speedy happiness and wisdom, without halting to observe My glories by the road-side.</p>
 <p>6. I said unto them: Even as I have given liberty unto all My people, so shall ye not impress into your service your brothers and sisters. But the self-assuming Gods make slaves of their fellows; they build roads round about, and station armies of soldiers to prevent My newborn from coming to My most glorious kingdoms.</p>
 <p>7. They go down to the earth and inspire kings and queens, and rich men, to do the same things. And they portion out to their servants, saying to them: Serve ye me, and I will do for you. They little think that their servants will become as thorns, and stones, and chains, and spears against them in the far future. They build up a justice of their own, saying: As much as my servants labor for me, so will I render unto them. But I have said unto them that no man shall serve another but for love, which shall be his only recompense.</p>
 <p>8. The king and the queen of the earth, and the rich man, shut their own eyes against Me, thinking by that means I cannot see them; they flatter themselves that in heaven they will give the slip to their servants. But I sowed a seed of bondage in My garden, and I said: Whosoever bindeth another, shall himself be bound. And behold, when they are risen in heaven, their servants and their soldiers come upon them; their memory is as a troubled dream that will not away from them.</p>
 <p>9. Nevertheless, with these great examples before them, still there are angels in hada that have not profited therein. For they say unto themselves; I will build a great kingdom in heaven; I will become the mightiest of Gods; millions of angels shall serve me; I will shut out the Great Spirit and His far-off heavens; I will wall my place around with an army of soldiers, and with fire and water.</p>
 <p>10. As a libertine stealeth an unsuspicious damsel to abuse her; and, in time, she waketh up to the matter but to curse him, so do the false Gods steal upon the inhabitants of My places and carry them into bondage. But the light of My understanding dwelleth in the souls of My little ones; it waiteth for the spring sun; and it will spring up and grow into a mighty tree to accuse these Gods.</p>
 <p>11. God inquired concerning warfare?</p>
 <p>12. Jehovih said: I answer all things by good. To the good at heart I give good thoughts, desires and holy observations. To the perverse of heart I hold up My glories and the beneficence of virtue and peaceful understanding. To them that practice charity and good works unto others, laboring not for self, I give the highest delight. Though they be pricked in the flesh with poverty and wicked persecutions, yet their souls are as the waters of a smooth-running river. Amongst them that practice evil, and destruction, and war, I send emissaries of benevolence and healing, who have plenteous words of pity.</p>
 <p>13. These are My arrows, and spears, and war-clubs, O God: Pity, gentle words, and the example of tenderness. Soon or late, these shall triumph over all things in heaven and earth.</p>
 <p>14. Behold, these wars in hada and on the earth will continue more than a thousand years. And the inhabitants will go down in darkness, even to the lowest darkness. For which reason, <a name="page_392"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 392</font></a> thou and thy successors shall provide not hastily, as if the matter were to change with the wind. But thou shalt organize a new army of deliverers for My Faithists, and it shall have two branches, one for the earth and one for hada. And the business of thy army shall be to rescue My people from them that seek to destroy them. And as to the spirits of the dead who were Faithists on the earth, provide thou means of transportation and bring them to thy new kingdom, which thou shalt call At-ce-wan, where thou shalt provide a sub-God, and officers, and attendants, hundreds of millions.</p>
 <p>15. And in At-ce-wan, thou shalt provide the sub-God all such places and nurseries, hospitals, factories, schools, colleges and such other houses and places of instructions required, in the kingdoms of My Lords in hada.</p>
 <p>16. And when thou hast this matter in good working order, thou shalt speak before thy Holy Council; in My name shalt thou say to them after this manner: Two hundred thousand hath Jehovih called; by Him am I commanded to find them; and they shall be wise and strong and without fear. For they shall be angel-preachers in Jehovih's name to go down to Hored, the place of De'yus, the Lord God the false, and to the kingdoms of his Gods; and their labor shall be to preach and proclaim the Father and His glories in the etherean worlds.</p>
 <p>17. And my preachers shall not say one word against the Lord God nor his Gods; but rather the other way; by majesty of Jehovih's love, be loving towards them and their officers and subjects. For by this means shall my preachers have peaceful dwelllings in these warring kingdoms; and thus their voices shall have great weight. For the greatest wisdom of a great diplomatist is not to be too opposite or too vehement, but conciliating.</p>
 <p>18. Jehovih said: And thy preachers shall travel constantly in the lowest kingdoms, teaching and explaining My boundless worlds, sowing the seed of aspiration with the wise and with the ignorant, and especially with the enslaved.</p>
 <p>19. And to as many as become converted, and desire to ascend to Craoshivi, thou shalt say: Go ye to the border of your kingdom, whither the Father's laborers have a ship to take ye to His kingdom. But thy preachers shall not go with them to excite suspicion or hate, but continue on preaching and inciting the slaves to ascend to higher and holier heavens.</p>
 <p>20. Then God, of Craoshivi, fell to work to carry out the commandments of Jehovih. And his Council labored with him. At-ce-wan was established and Yotse-hagah was made the sub-God, with a Holy Council of one hundred thousand angels, with a thousand attendants, with fifty thousand messengers. He was provided with a capital, and throne, and with ship-makers and builders of mansions, one million angels.</p>
 <p>21. After that God and the Council of Craoshivi organized all the armies as commanded by Jehovih. And there were in these armies, all told, seventeen hundred millions, and two hundred and eight thousand five hundred and sixty, all of whom were above grade fifty, and some as high as ninety.</p>
 <p>22. And it so turned out that these organizations were completed and in working order two days prior to De'yus and his hosts beginning their war on the earth. But the Faithist angels were distributed mostly in hada and the regions above. So that whilst De'yus' hosts of two thousand millions were gone down to the earth, there were of Faithist angels for the same place but four hundred thousand, save the ashars who were in regular service.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah284.htm">Next: Chapter XVIII</a></center>
 </body>