<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah275.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah277.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter X</h3>
 <p>1. SATAN went to all the Lords and Lordesses in hada, and said unto each and every one: Thine shall be exaltation without labor; because thou art wise, others shall serve thee; and great shall be thy glory. As thou hast witnessed the rites and ceremonies, in Craoshivi, of the high-raised Gods, even so shall it be with thee. Behold, the heavens of the earth shall become the brightest and most glorious of all heavens. Be thou patient, enduring anything, for thou shalt surely, in time to come, be second to none, the highest of Gods!</p>
 <p>2. And thy name shall be sung in the cermonies, and shall be honored even in the far-off heavens. It shall be said of thee, thou art amongst the youngest of Gods, that by thine own self-will mastered all things so suddenly that even the oldest of Gods stood appalled at thy daring.</p>
 <p>3. Be thou patient, and seeming most humble, and bide thou thy time; thou wert born to be a leader even amongst Gods. Be secret; disclosing naught.</p>
 <p>4. Satan said to Anuhasaj, even Lord God: Be thou dignified, and by thy much-professed love, like a father unto all the others. And it shall come to pass that they will thrust these great dominions upon thee.</p>
 <p>5. Now whilst these matters were with these Lords, behold, in far-off Craoshivi Jehovih spake to God on the throne, before the Council of Jehovih's <a name="page_380"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 380</font></a> Son, saying: Because I indulged thy Lords and Lordesses in prosperous places, they are becoming forgetful of Me.</p>
 <p>6. For so I created man, in prosperity he idolizeth himself. He saith: Behold me! What great things I can do: Yea, I am wise; I perceive the nothingness of the Creator! And he buildeth to his own ruin. I created life and death all around him, that he might learn My power ere he quitteth the earth. And hada I made wide, with a place of ascent and a place of descent. Upward I placed My holy lights, saying: Come! Downward, I made darkness, saying: Beware! hell lieth hither! But they plunge into misery headlong.</p>
 <p>7. God said: What have they done, O Jehovih? Jehovih said: They are laying their heads together to rebel against the manner of My everlasting kingdoms. Summon thou the Diva before thee, and bid them speak outright as to what they desire.</p>
 <p>8. God sent messengers into all the divisions of the lowest heavens, to the kingdoms of Jehovih's Lords and Lordesses, as the Father had commanded, summoning them to Craoshivi. On the other hand:</p>
 <p>9. Satan spake to Anuhasaj, the plotter of the mischief, saying: Lest God in Craoshivi get wind of this matter, and so set at naught thy long-laid plans, send thou to him, saying: Greeting, in love to thee, Son of Jehovih, God of the heavens of the earth. From the light before me I am resolved to resign the Lord-dom. Search, therefore, and provide one in my place.</p>
 <p>10. Satan continued, to Anuhasaj: Send thou to thy Lords and Lordesses, saying: Greeting in love to thee, Lord of Jehovih. I foresee that many will desire me to take the place of God of the earth and her heavens. Seek thou to relieve me of this, and choose one less radical, that thou mayst the more fully endorse him. Behold, I am about to resign the Lord-dom, and desire to see thee.</p>
 <p>11. The Lords and Lordesses received the two communications at the same time; and they severally laid the matter before their Holy Councils; and great was the excitement therein. That which had been planned to be in secret was thus made public in all the hadas in a day, before thousands of millions!</p>
 <p>12. At once the Lords and Lordesses hastened to Anuhasaj's capital; and they were each attended by ten thousand attendants.</p>
 <p>13. Now when they were assembled, perceiving that God in Craoshivi knew of the matter, they were by their own shame further incited to disobey the Divan summons, and at once proceed to founding a consolidated kingdom, with Anuhasaj at the head. Anuhasaj made believe he desired not the Godhead, and only agreed to serve provided they installed him with oaths of fidelity. And this they did.</p>
 <p>14. So, after a session of three days, Anuhasaj was elected and enthroned in Hored, a new heavenly place, and crowned OUR GOD of the earth and her heavens, the VERY LORD GOD IN JEHOVIH. Thus he became a false God.</p>
 <p>15. But they crowned him not with the true crown, for that was with God in Craoshivi; but they made one, creating it in the sacred circle. But since he could not be crowned by those beneath him, they were in a quandry how to proceed. Then satan spake to Anuhasaj, saying: Command them to lie on their bellies in token of submission to thee, and say to them: Lay the crown at my feet, and I will stand with my head bare; and when ye have prostrated yourselves, I will command the crown in my own name to rise up and lie upon my head; and if it so rise, then know ye of a truth our work is the highest, best work.</p>
 <p>16. Anuhasaj then repeated this to the Lords and Lordesses, and they laid them down on their bellies, each being anxious to show fidelity, in hope of exaltation. And when they were down and saw not, Anuhasaj, having not power in Light, said: Crown of these most holy, wise Lords and Lordesses of heaven and earth, arise thou and lie on the head of him who shall have dominion on earth and in these heavens!</p>
 <p>17. And thereupon he stooped down on the sly, and with his own hand raised it up and crowned himself, and commanded the Lords to rise up. And lo and behold, some of the Lords and Lordesses said they saw with the second sight of the soul, and that the crown rose of its own accord, being under the will of the circle!</p>
 <p>18. And they clapped their hands, saying: ALL HAIL, OUR GOD! ALL HAIL, OUR GOD! ALL HAIL, OUR GOD! Proclaiming him in the east and west and north and south.</p>
 <p>19. He responded: THE LORD, YOUR GOD, REIGNETH! Peace be unto you. Behold, the heavens and earth are mine; be ye steadfast unto me, and ye shall be glorified in my name. Ye that have been Lords and Lordesses shall be Gods and Goddesses, with great power and with mighty kingdoms. As <a name="page_381"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 381</font></a> I foresaw this, so have I provided for you beforehand. In this very time and place will I crown you and apportion you with great glory. Yet think not that this is the last; it is but the first, and temporary until the new heavens are founded with broader boundaries.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah277.htm">Next: Chapter XI</a></center>
 </body>