<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah277.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah279.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XII</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">ANUHASAJ, THE FALSE GOD, DECLARETH HIMSELF AGAINST JEHOVIH</p></font>.
 <p>1. ANUHASAJ never established the De'yus as projected at first, but took the name De'yus (Dyaus) upon himself, and became known in the heavens by that name. When he had thus established Hored in its entirety, he gave a feast to the Gods and Goddesses; and after it was ended, previous to their departure, he spake before them, saying:</p>
 <p>2. The time of duty is now upon you, and upon me, the Lord your God, also. Be ye then solicitous of these things I speak of, that in the everlasting times we may be brethren, and there shall be no other Gods, but ourselves forever.</p>
 <p>3. Behold, I have given into your hands to manage your own kingdoms in your way; for which reason I can no longer say, do ye this, or do ye thus and so, for my affairs are in mine own kingdom. But wherein I have wisdom I freely impart, and the choice is yours, whether ye will follow my advice or do otherwise, for ye are of equal rank with me. And, moreover, my kingdom is dependent upon you, and not yours upon mine. Hear ye then my words as if I were but one in a Council with wise Gods:</p>
 <p>4. To overturn Jehovih and His <a name="page_383"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 383</font></a> dominions on the earth and in these heavens will be your first labor. And whenever corporeans embrace Him, calling themselves FAITHISTS IN THE GREAT SPIRIT, or FAITHISTS IN JEHOVIH, or FAITHISTS IN ORMAZD, or by any other name signifying the ALL LIGHT, or UNSEEN, or PERSON OF EVER PRESENCE, ye shall pursue them, and destroy them off the face of the earth. To do which ye shall use the oracles, or prophets and seers, or magicians, or inspiration; and ye shall set the kings and queens of the earth to war upon them, and spare them not, man, woman or child.</p>
 <p>5. And of spirits of the dead who fall into your respective kingdoms, being Faithists, bring them before Anubi and his hosts, and he shall send them into regions of darkness, saying to them: Behold, ye have your Jehovih! And Anubi shall place guards over them, and they shall not know where to go, but will cry out in their darkness.</p>
 <p>6. Whereupon they shall be sworn into servitude in Hored to the Lord your God forever, and become slaves within your kingdoms.</p>
 <p>7. And ye shall teach both mortals and spirits that Hored is the All Highest heaven, and that it is the place of the All Highest God, even De'yus. For them to attain which, ye shall exact servitude of them in your heavens accordingly as ye may desire.</p>
 <p>8. In the rites and ceremonies, both in your heavens and on the earth, shall ye enforce the exchanging of words signifying Great Spirit to words signifying Lord God, who is of the form and size of a man, declaring of a truth that I sit on my throne in judgment of the world, for it is mine, and ye are one with me.</p>
 <p>9. And all songs of praise shall be changed; and prayers and beseechings to your God, instead of Jehovih, or Ormazd, or the Great Spirit. For both mortals and angels shall be made to know that He is my enemy, leading my people astray. And as to the prophets and seers on the earth, who will persist in preaching or singing to the Great Spirit, ye shall incite torture and punishment and death unto them.</p>
 <p>10. And whether I be De'yus, or God, or the Lord God, or the All Perfect, me only shall they worship, forever. And my place, Hored, shall be the sacred hill of God forever! And none shall approach me but by crawling on their bellies; for I will so exalt my lights that none can stand before me.</p>
 <p>11. When the Lord God had finished his discourse, the other Gods responded in love and adoration. Thus ended the feast, and, according to the rites in other heavens, the Gods and Goddesses went and sat at the foot of the throne, and De'yus came down and took them by the hand, one at a time, and raised them up, saying: Arise, O God, and in my name, and wisdom, and power, go thy way. Thus they departed.</p>
 <p>12. And as to the earth, great havoc and persecution were visited upon the Zarathustrians and Israelites, being put to death by hundreds of thousands.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah279.htm">Next: Chapter XIII</a></center>
 </body>