<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah242.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah244.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter V</h3>
 <p>1. THE wise shall rule over the foolish, but to raise them up.</p>
 <p>2. The rich shall apportion their riches for the benefit of the city.</p>
 <p>3. The poor shall reverence the rich and take counsel from them.</p>
 <p>4. Behold, I have given many gifts unto my people: the woman to give suck; the very strong man to carry burdens; the wise man to oversee the city; the learned man to explain the ancients; the prophet to hear my voice; the magician to hear the voice of angels; the physician to heal the sick; every several one gave I good gifts.</p>
 <p>5. Thou shalt not covet another man's gifts, but be wise in discovering thine own, and using them for the benefit of the city.</p>
 <p>6. Neither shalt thou covet another man's riches, nor anything that is his. What more is a rich man than a watch-dog? Behold, it is his matter, whether he fulfilleth my commandments.</p>
 <p>7. According to every man's gifts do I require of him, as to what he can do for the people of his city.</p>
 <p>8. To the poor man, my exactions <a name="page_320b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 320b</font></a> are lighter than a straw on a camel's back.</p>
 <p>9. For the ignorant man, and for the very young child, I provided the wise and rich as Gods to raise them up. As they minister unto them, so do I bless them for their labor.</p>
 <p>10. What they do corporeally for the resurrection of those beneath them, so do I answer them in spirit in my resurrections in the heavens.</p>
 <p>11. Thou shalt not marry but once; neither shalt thou look after any other partner all the days of thy life.</p>
 <p>12. The husband shall be the master of the house; but when he is not present, the wife shall be master.</p>
 <p>13. Seven castes have I made for my chosen: The first are the prophets; the second, such as have the highest geneology; the third, the rab'bahs and priests; the fourth, the nuns (spe-e-su); the fifth, physicians; the sixth, the rich; and seventh, the very poor.</p>
 <p>14. Each and every caste shall remain by itself; all of them are worthy before me, and are equally my children.</p>
 <p>15. Thou shalt not kill, for food to eat, anything that breathes the breath of life.</p>
 <p>16. Thou shalt love to search for thy Creator in all things on the earth, in the earth, in the waters, and in the air above the earth.</p>
 <p>17. Thou shalt love to search for all that is good in thy neighbor; but to excuse all the evil that is in him.</p>
 <p>18. Thou shalt keep the sacred days of thy God, and cause all thy people to rejoice in the delightful creations of thy Creator.</p>
 <p>19. Thou shalt obey the prophet of thy God; and be obedient to the father (rab'bah) of the city. Next to these, thou shalt honor thy father and thy mother, and pay reverence to thy grandfather and grandmother.</p>
 <p>20. In the house (temple) of thy God, remember that all men are alike; for even as death layeth the high and the low alike, so stand my people in the house I have built.</p>
 <p>21. Thou shalt respect the opinions of all men; for even thyself may be in error.</p>
 <p>22. Thou shalt speak but little of thyself or anything that is thine; for all others have a history also.</p>
 <p>23. Thou shalt make thyself compatible unto others in all righteousness.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah244.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a></center>
 </body>