<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah237.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah239.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIII</h3>
 <p>1. THE Light of Jehovih now spread over Haot-saiti and lined the Road of Salkwatka, in etherea, extending from the Orian Banks of Loo-che-wan to the Oixanian Spars of Ochesu. The Cross Roads, Chi-ea-wha-chong, and the plains of Sha-tumatz, were as seas and worlds of crystal fire. And in the piercing light, the old-time Gods, of millions of years agone, sped forth in awful majesty, in answer to the prayers of Cpenta-armij.</p>
 <p>2. And there rose over the earth and her heavens, farther than Chinvat, a trident arc, broad as a world, of shimmering light, the countless rays of ethe, as mortals see the glimmering air in a summer's day; but the ethe was of every color, hue and tint, reflective and brilliant, the clear soul of things separate, the very breath of Jehovih. It was the beginning of the form of the arc of Spe-ta, the deliverance of the earth and her heavens into <a name="page_350a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 350a</font></a> a new condition; to give, to bestow it upon itself, ratified by the ceremony of a festival for the Gods and Goddesses of that neighborhood, hundreds of millions of miles around about!</p>
 <p>3. Meanwhile, their high-raised companion, Cpenta-armij, known and loved in hundreds of etherean worlds, was down on the low earth, laying the corner-stone for Jehovih's everlasting kingdom, whereon should fall, presently, from out the arc of Spe-ta, a shaft of fire, the feast for the purified Chieftainess, who had for four years subsisted on the coarse provender of the lower heavens!</p>
 <p>4. And, touched by the hand of Immortal Light, was Brahma, long trained to look toward Jehovih; for his angel wife rose upward, leading his vision toward a realm amongst the Gods and Goddesses, whom he beheld in countless numbers receiving her most royally. Thus gazing on the glorious scene, the great man in soul came forth, leaving his corporeal part stretched on the ground. And Cpenta-armij and God took him; received the soul of Brahma, and held, in obedience to the sacred purpose, his place in the sacred circle with mortals three days.</p>
 <p>5. Then, on the fourth, the Chieftainess signaled her swift messengers; and they touched the currents along, till they ran high beyond the earth's vortex, where the stationed Gods of etherea fastened on the ethe'ic wave, extending to the great arc over all.</p>
 <p>6. It was the signal for the shaft of light; of which mortals have a weak and coarse symbol in the electric currents which tear things unmeaningly and without judgment; but the ethe'ic current is not so small and purposeless, but mighty, and a tool from Jehovih's fountain of All Power, with skill, and learnedly directed by such high-raised angels as have had millions of years of experience, who know well what prayers deserve an answer from the Immortal spheres.</p>
 <p>7. And Cpenta-armij's name, and word, and wisdom, had long been in fellowship with mighty works on many worlds; and her well-trained thought, so tuned to the Creator's purpose, kept ever in concert with the ethe'ic foundation of the place and administration of thousands of Gods and Goddesses.</p>
 <p>8. And when the signal shot upward, and the shaft of light began to pierce the earth's vortex, making way for Craoshivi, it was also the signal for Owks, and See-wah-Gon, and Ha-o-ha, to fly instantly for their arrow-ship and make all speed for Cpenta-armij; the which they did now, even as a flash <a name="page_351a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 351a</font></a> of light darteth forth, guides and directors of Jehovih's flame to the grave of Brahma and Yu-tiv.</p>
 <p>9. As Cpenta-armij, standing by her ship, saw the shaft descending, she flew forth to the centre of the circle; her hand pointing to the graves, she said: There, O Jehovih! Come forth, O earth! Earth, in Jehovih's name! 'Tis I command!</p>
 <p>10. And down fell the bolt of light, piercing the new disturbed ground, rich with mortal tears, and thus made powerful to the soul current; and as a breath of wind would move a heap of feathers, so did the light, by the wave of Cpenta'armij's hand, blow the earth away, and lift up the buried forms of two dead lovers, Brahma and Yu-tiv, and marched them full before the mortal audience, newly animated, and lovingly, hand in hand, triumphant over death.</p>
 <p>11. Then spake Hog, the youngest mortal son, an Osirian in belief, seeing the resurrected forms: It is, it is! The very Brahma! And Yu-tiv! My father and mother!</p>
 <p>12. The great Brahma, now quickened in Cpenta-armij's arms, and God's, spake from Jehovih's throne, a few words, to the loving sons and mortal concourse, then took final leave. Cpenta-armij seized the folds of the shaft of light, as a mortal would the ropes and canvas of a toy ship, and wrapping the earthly part of Brahma and Yu-tiv about securely, then wheeled in line her own ship and raked in the etherean current from high heavens.</p>
 <p>13. Tossing up her hand, the known signal to the great workers in the trident arc above, the exchanging currents of the traveling flame began, and now raised up the whole etherean hosts and the bodies of Brahma and Yu-tiv, the which had not raised a mile before they were etherealized, scattered and gone, and the souls of the two sweet loves in cognizance and fellowship with the millions of Jehovih's Sons and Daughters now swiftly making way for Craoshivi.</p>
 <p>14. Cpenta'armij's work was done. In the arc of light and companionship of her compeers, the feast was open, and the thousands of millions in rapport sat along the series of tables, hundreds of millions of miles, to relish soul food brought from more than a thousand worlds.</p>
 <p>15. Meanwhile, God, to finish his labors, resumed his throne in Craoshivi, just in time to receive the twelve avalanzas sent from Yuckowts' factories, in Abarom, in etherea, to receive <a name="page_352a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 352a</font></a> the four and twenty thousand million Brides and Bridegrooms in Jehovih's name, who were to take the degree of third resurrection and be raised beyond the earth's vortex and emancipated in the etherean realms of Hoat-saiti.</p>
 <p>16. Chue-in-ista, Goddess of Oambuyu, chief commandress of the fleet, having been apprised of the number of initiates, had prepared twelve thousand rings, a thousand for each avalanza; and the fleet in turn was in a ring, and the ring extended sufficiently wide to encircle the holy capital and throne in Craoshivi, so that when it had descended to its place, God and his officers, and the Holy Council of heaven and earth, now thirty million members, were in the centre of the audience. On every side, far as the eye could see, stood the Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih, arrayed in spotless white, fearless before the Light and ceremonies.</p>
 <p>17. When the fleet landed, Chue-in-ista, the commandress, came forth from the east, facing God on the throne. She said: Thy voice, O God, hath called the name of Jehovih. Behold, I am His Daughter, sent by Him to know thy will and Holy Desires ?</p>
 <p>18. God said: Behold, I am His Son! Thou art my Sister! Hear me, then, in our Father's name. I have here a harvest of four and twenty thousand million angels brought up out of the earth, pure and holy, for Jehovih's emancipated kingdoms.</p>
 <p>19. Chue-in-ista said: In His name let them answer before me, that I may witness their wisdom and power sufficient to dwell in All Purity. My Father and I are one; my hosts have crossed the Nirvanian pastures; they no longer feed on substance rising from below, but on the Light emanating from etherean realms above.</p>
 <p>20. God said: I know Thou hast provided me, O Jehovih!</p>
 <p>21. Then here responded the hosts of Brides and Bridegrooms, saying: By Faith I know I am safe in Thy kingdoms, O Jehovih. Take me to Thy emancipated worlds; give me scope and power and wisdom for greater works.</p>
 <p>22. Then followed the full ceremony in the usual way of the third resurrection; and when it was completed, the which had been witnessed by Cpenta-armij and other Chieftainesses and Chiefs above, who were at the feast of the arc of Spe-ta; and when God had said: O Jehovih, give me crowns for Thy Sons and Daughters, Brides and Bridegrooms for Thy etherean worlds!--there were cast down by Cpenta-armij and her hosts, <a name="page_353a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 353a</font></a> four and twenty thousand million crowns; and they alighted on Jehovih's Brides' and Bridegrooms' heads.</p>
 <p>23. And now God turned to Thale, who was to be his successor for the next two hundred years. God said: In Jehovih's name, to thee I bestow the crown of earth and her heavens. And to thee also do I bequeath the triangle, symbol of these regions and the inqua, and the trident, the latter being new in these worlds, and symbolical of the arc of Spe-ta; and the interpretation of the trident shall be The Three Lights, Jehovih, His Son, God, and the Star in the mortal soul, emblem of resurrection.</p>
 <p>24. Thale said: In Thy name, O Jehovih, will I be God of earth and her heavens till the next rise of dan! Be Thou with me, O Father!</p>
 <p>25. Thereupon, he that had been God laid the crown and jewels on Thale, saying: Hail, O God of earth and heaven! Hail, O God of earth and heaven! Hail, O God of earth and heaven!</p>
 <p>26. Thus ended the ceremonies. He that had been God descended to the foot of the throne and sat down; and then God, who had been Thale, came down and took his hand, saying: Arise, O God, and go thy way! And he rose up and prepared to depart, for now had the ceremonies lasted one full day.</p>
 <p>27. Cpenta-armij, seeing it was finished, signaled the hosts for the close of the festival, and with her airavagna passed over and above the fleet, and gave Chue-in-ista, the commandress, the sign, whereupon the ascent began. The tens of thousands of millions of angels entered their respective places. The music of the es'enaurs and of the trumpeters sounded, and resounded, to the distance of a hundred worlds.</p>
 <p>28. Upward rose the fleets; downward fell the showers of flowers and perfumes to those left behind. Higher and higher the great world of lights; higher and higher, till soon they passed beyond the earth's vortex, the boundary Chinvat.</p>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">END OF BOOK OF CPENTA-ARMIJ, DAUGHTER OF JEHOVIH</p></font>.
 <p></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah239.htm">Next: Chapter I</a></center>
 </body>