<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah207.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah209.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_279"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 279</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Divinity</h1>
 <font size="2"><p>WHICH DESCENDED TO THE EARTH AND BECAME KNOWN BY THE NAMES, DIV, AND DIVA, AND DIVAN LAWS. BEING GOD'S LABORS IN ATMOSPHEREA (HADA), FOR A PERIOD OF THREE THOUSAND AND ONE HUNDRED YEARS, DURING THE PASSAGE OF THE EARTH FROM THE ARC OF LOO TO THE ARC OF SPE'TA, IN ETHEREA; AND ON THE EARTH, FROM THE TIME OF ZARATHUSTRA TO THE TIME OF ABRAHAM AND BRAHMA</p></font>.
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <p>1. GOD, Son of Jehovih, said: By virtue of mine own authority, and in the name of Jehovih, Creator of all things, peace and comprehensive judgment be unto angels and mortals.</p>
 <p>2. That ye may be taught from the little that has been demonstrated in the world, of governments and principalities being manifest on earth, that similar organic bodies exist in the heavens belonging to the earth.</p>
 <p>3. Which heavenly places and governments were the cause and forerunners of good governments manifested amongst mortals.</p>
 <p>4. Jehovih said: He that is chief of a government on earth shall be called king, but he who is Chief of My heavenly government shall be called God. And it was so.</p>
 <p>5. I, who am God in mine own behalf, for the enlightenment of the world, declare the Glory and Wisdom of Jehovih above all things on the earth or in the heavens above.</p>
 <p>6. Wherein Jehovih provided that no man could be a king forever, but must give way to a successor, even so, in His heavens, provided He also unto His Gods and Lords for successors at certain periods of time.</p>
 <p>7. That the way might be open for the everlasting resurrection of all men, whereby all who choose may, in time, become also Lords and Gods for the countless worlds that now are, and shall yet be created.</p>
 <p>8. Jehovih said: I blow My breath outward, and, behold, all things are created. They go away in disorder, but they come back to Me orderly and in organic companies. And every individual member is like a tree, bloomed in perfection in every branch.</p>
 <p>9.Jehovih said: These companies, returning to Me in all their glory, are marshaled in decorum and discipline by My Gods, for such is their labor.</p>
 <p>10. Jehovih said: The labors of My Gods shall be chiefly in atmospherea (hada). Nevertheless, My Gods and Lords shall not only labor with the spirits of the dead to teach them organic discipline and harmony, but they shall provide unto mortals that they also may learn the system and glory of My creations.</p>
 <p>11. In the time of Fragapatti, in the dawn of the cycle of Loo in heaven, Jehovih commanded the founding of an organic Congress for His God and Lords, and His Lord Gods.</p>
 <p>12. And Fragapatti thus created the organic body, and named it, the Diva, making God the Chief thereof, with the title, Div, even as is known to this day in the sacred books of mortals.</p>
 <p>13. Jehovih said: In the early days of a world I give the races of man (on the earth) a despot to rule over them. But in time after I give them representative governments with many voices, having a right to help make the laws. Even so do I provide unto the hadan heavens. In the early days I provide a God who shall be dictator and governor in his own way. But in after times I provide a parliament in heaven, wherein My God and My Lords shall jointly consult together in framing laws for angels and mortals. And these shall be called Divan laws.</p>
 <p>14. Jehovih said: Behold, My God and Lords and sub-Gods shall teach the same things in the different parts of the earth and these heavens. I <a name="page_280"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 280</font></a> will not have one Lord teaching one thing in one place, and another teaching the same thing differently in another place.</p>
 <p>15. Jehovih said: My God and Lords shall provide comprehensively, so that all peoples, on earth and in heaven, may be drawn toward Me in harmony and discipline.</p>
 <p>16. God said: I, God of earth, being made Div, by Jehovih's will, through His Son, Fragapatti, heard the Creator's voice, saying:</p>
 <p>17. Div, My Son, proclaim thou the Ormazdian law, and the I'hua'Mazdian law, and the Zarathustrian law.</p>
 <p>18. God said: This, then, is the Ormazdian law: Ormazd, the Creator, displayeth His creations, which He created. He set the stars in the firmament; these are the words of the book of the Almighty. He made the earth-substances of the earth, and all the things thereon and therein. These are the words of the Creator, Ormazd, the Jehovih.</p>
 <p>19. The substances of things going and coming forever; creating and dissolving from one shape into another, these are the Ormazdian law, the Jehovih'yan law. By virtue of His presence these things speak (impress) upon one another forever. What these things speak upon the soul of man, write upon the soul of man, these are man's knowledge, acquired by the Ormazdian law, the Jehovih'yan law. What these things speak upon the souls of angels, write upon the souls of angels, these are the angels' knowledge, acquired by the Ormazdian law, the Jehovih'yan law.</p>
 <p>20. God said: This also is the Ormazdian law: Perpetual growth. As a man, being brought forth out of what was not an entity, thereby becoming an entity, this is brought about by the Ormazdian law.</p>
 <p>21. With capacity in man for life everlasting; with capacity to acquire knowledge and power forever, and never attain to the Almighty. As a road, whereon a man may run in full liberty forever, and never come to the end thereof; rejoicing on his journey, this is the Ormazdian law.</p>
 <p>22. As the actions of corporeal substances produce light; as light is the expression and speech of certain corporeal changes, so is Ormazd, the Master Light, the Creator, that which illuminateth the soul of man, making man conscious that he is; making man express his impressions. This is the Ormazdian law, this is the Ever Presence that terminateth not forever.</p>
 <p>23. Though worlds come into being and go out of being (as such), yet Ormazd remaineth; He is the Forever; and within Him are all creations created. These are the Ormazdian law, the Jehovih'yan law.</p>
 <p>24. God said: This, then, that followeth, is the I'hua'Mazdian law: The school of knowledge, kept by God and his Lords, for teaching mortals and angels.</p>
 <p>25. Wherein certain discipline and words are necessary to cause the congregating of men and angels, to dwell together and to travel onward forever, in harmony and rejoicing.</p>
 <p>26. Behold, a great multitude was in disorder and confusion, and unhappiness resulted. Then came order and discipline, and the multitude were harmonized and filled with rejoicing. This that accomplished it, was the I'hua'Mazdian law.</p>
 <p>27. Jehovih had said: Behold, I create man with the possibility of becoming a creator under Me. The first lesson of creation I gave into man's hands, is, that he shall create harmony and affiliation within himself and with his neighbors, that the many may become in concert, even as one man.</p>
 <p>28. God said: Such was the Ormazdian law; to create man with the possibility of becoming a creator under Jehovih (Ormazd). But wherein man and angels, through their God and Lords, began to make, to create, harmony and discipline, this was the I'hua'Mazdian law.</p>
 <p>29. As the manual of arms is to soldiers, making them a unit in motion, so is the I'hua'Mazdian law in making and teaching peace and order and unity amongst mortals on earth and angels in heaven.</p>
 <p>30. By the I'hua'Mazdian law are the heavenly kingdoms in hada maintained; and by the same law are great kingdoms and nations on earth built up. The discipline of God and the Lords, through their ashars, in ruling over mortals, for the comprehensive benefit of the whole; this is the I'hua'Mazdian law. It is called the I'hua'Mazdian law because God and his Lords, through their ashars, keep guard and rule over all good mortals and angels for their own exaltation in the heavens above.</p>
 <p>31. God said: Here followeth then the Zarathustrian law: The bestowal of words to mortals, of the dominion of God and his Lords: The making of all good mortals joint heirs and members of the same heavenly kingdoms, wherein God and his Lords and their <a name="page_281"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 281</font></a> Holy Council in heaven devise and administer laws for the ultimate resurrection of all men.</p>
 <p>32. The revealed word of heaven, to mortals; this is the Zarathustrian law.</p>
 <p>33. The word was with God, and God became the word; this is the Zarathustrian law.</p>
 <p>34. For the word being established through Zarathustra became the life of God in flesh, being perpetual to the end of the world.</p>
 <p>35. For though Zarathustra be forgotten, and the words of his mouth remembered not on the whole earth, yet the Zarathustrian law (the revelations of God to man) became everlasting in the souls of mortals from that time forth, forever and ever.</p>
 <p>36. For man to know of, and to desire to become one with the All Highest, this is the Zarathustrian law. Nor mattereth it through what name he striveth, even so he strive to know the will of God.</p>
 <p>37. When a king desireth soldiers for his army, he sendeth recruiting emissaries, calling: Come ye, join the armies of the king. Even so, but for peace and righteousness, sendeth God his Lords and holy angels down to mortals, saying: Come ye, join the kingdom of God. And when they come, behold, they use certain rites and ceremonies, with words and sacred days: The name of these rites and ceremonies and the words revealed by God, these are the Zarathustrian laws. For they are the initiative, by which mortals become joint workers with God and his Lords.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah209.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>