<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah321.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah323.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_458a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 458a</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Lika, Son of Jehovih</h1>
 <font size="2"><p>KNOWN IN HEAVEN AS THE DAWN OF BON, AND ON EARTH AS THE CYCLE OF MOSES, CAPILYA AND CHINE! JEHOVIH SAID: I GAVE UNTO THE EARTH A TIME OF FULL EARTHHOOD; AND, THAT THE GENERATIONS OF MEN MIGHT KNOW THE PERIOD THEREOF, BEHOLD, I CAUSED MAN TO BUILD A PYRAMID IN THE MIDDLE OF THE WORLD. FOR IT WAS MY MARK, THAT, FROM THAT TIME HENCEFORTH, MAN SHOULD TURN FROM STONE TEMPLES, AND THE HOPE OF EVERLASTING FLESH-LIFE, TO REJOICE IN SPIRITUAL ABODES IN MY ETHEREAN HEAVENS. AND I BROUGHT THE EARTH OUT OF DARKNESS AND ENCOMPASSED IT AROUND WITH THE DAWN OF BON</p></font>.
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <p>1. IN the far-off etherean worlds spake the Voice of Jehovih, saying: Lika, Lika, My Son! Behold the red star, the earth. She cometh thy way; she mergeth dark and soiled from the forests of ji'ay, in the swamps of Bonassah. She will cross thy etherean fields, the Takuspe, and Opel, and Wedojain, dripping with the odor and dross of the ji'ay'an swamps. Go thou to her, and wash clean her soil and her atmospherean heavens.</p>
 <p>2. Lika said: Alas, O Jehovih, how they have forgotten Thee!</p>
 <p>3. I will go to the red star, the earth, O Father! I will deliver her into purity and faith. Thy chosen shall be delivered from bondage; Thy God made triumphant on earth and in her heavens.</p>
 <p>4. Lika called to his high Council, in <a name="page_459a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 459a</font></a> his etherean kingdom, Vetta'puissa, in the Plains of Peo'ya, off the Road of Ahtogonassas, at the high Arc of Bon, made light by the holy angels of tens of thousands of years; and he said:</p>
 <p>5. Behold, the red star, the earth; the Voice of Jehovih came to me, saying: Go thou to her, O My Son, and wash clean her soil and her atmospherean heavens. And I said: I will go, O Father! I will deliver her into purity and faith.</p>
 <p>6. Lika said: Five hundred million etherean hosts will I take with me. For five years and forty days will I and my hosts sojourn on the red star and in her heavens. Her true God shall be restored and delivered in my name by Jehovih's hand. According to the rank of harvest of the gardens of Honyon, so shall my marshals choose and record my hosts.</p>
 <p>7. Then spake the Council, the historians of the etherean libraries of the Vorkman Road, where hath traveled the earth for tens of thousands of years. And they detailed the affairs of the earth for many cycles past; made plain before the Gods assembled all the doings of the earth and her heavens.</p>
 <p>8. Then Lika sent swift messengers off to the earth and her heavens; in arrow-ships of fire they sped forth, twenty thousand, well skilled in coursing the etherean heavens and penetrating the atmospherean vortices of traveling stars. To obtain the details of her God and her false Gods; her Lords and false Lords; her hadas and her hells; to scan her libraries and hastily return to Vetta'puissa, to lay the matters before the high Council and Lika, the Nirvanian Chief on Jehovih's throne.</p>
 <p>9. Lika was sprung from the corporeal star Atos, which traversed the roads, Yatas-ko-owen, of the south circuit of Thoese, the vortex of another far-off sun, and was raised to etherea in the cycle of Sai-kah, one hundred and twenty-five thousand years, by Meth-ya, Goddess of Ori-iyi, afterward Chieftainess of Yeuna-gamaya.</p>
 <p>10. And Lika rose to be God of Avalassak four thousand years; God of Kemma, six thousand years; Inspector of Judas' etherean roads at the a'ji'an swamps of Hennassit, fifteen thousand years; Surveyor of Iwalt, two thousand years; Surveyor of the Wacha excursion, four thousand years; Recorder of Hitte-somat, eight thousand years; Deliverer of Habian vortices, twenty-six thousand years; Measurer of densities in Ablank, one thousand years; Recorder of the Ratiotyivi, two thousand years; God <a name="page_460a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 460a</font></a> of the Home Plains of Cteverezed, twelve thousand years; and Chief of Vetta-puissa, twenty-five thousand years.</p>
 <p>11.Lika had for his high Council thirty thousand Chieftains and Chieftainesses, of grades of more than a hundred thousand years in the etherean worlds; five hundred thousand of the rank of Inspectors; seven millions of the rank of Gods and Goddesses; and of the rank of Lords and Lordesses, more than half a thousand million.</p>
 <p>12. Of the Rapon hosts there were seven Chiefs and nine Chieftainesses, who were Lika's private companions. First, Rebsad, Chief of So-tissav, forty thousand years; Sufristor of Sheleves, sixty thousand years; Marshal of Zele'axi, twenty thousand years; Master of Bassaion, seventy thousand years; and he passed twenty thousand years on the journey of Loo-soit-ta-vragenea, besides thousands of other journeys of less duration.</p>
 <p>13. Next to Rebsad was Yanodi, Chieftainess of Ure, seventy thousand years; Chieftainess of the Roads of Sallatamya, seventy thousand years; marshalless of Petanasa, forty thousand years; Goddess of the ji-ay'an forest of Loo-loo-woh-ga, sixty-five thousand years; besides Goddess of Mor, Goddess of Chichigennahsmmah, Goddess of El, and of Raumba, and of Zee.</p>
 <p>14. Next to Yanodi was Thazid, Goddess of Zoleth; Matrusettes of Yith-kad, Chieftainess of Hagu, Chieftainess of De'baur, and of Hachull, and of the Roads of Oleaskivedho, besides Goddess of more than one hundred etherean worlds.</p>
 <p>15. Then came Thoso, Chief of Kassarah and Dassamatz, ninety thousand years; God of Saxax, seven thousand years; God of Chennesa, God of Hoxora, God of Fiben, God of Hotab, each six thousand years; surveyor of the Lymthian Roads, twelve thousand years; marker of meteors, two thousand years; Fireman of Thostus on the Ibien excursion, thirty thousand years.</p>
 <p>16. Next to Thoso came Miente, Chieftainess of Gawl and Sanabtis, in whose dominions the star T-lemos was uzated <a name="fr_34"></a><a href="#fn_34"><font size="1">*</font></a>, when Gai-loo opened the Road of Enjxi-ustus for the Nizaigi vortices of Messak; Chieftainess of Lam-Goo and Kud, Goddess of Itzi, Goddess of Ashem and of the Baxgor Wing, Goddess of the Duik Swamps, and Lordess of Sus and Havrij; in all one hundred and seven thousand years.</p>
 <p><a name="page_461b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 461b</font></a></p>
 <p>17. Chama-jius stood next; she was Chieftainess of Hors-ad and Tu and Okadad, Goddess of Asthy, and Hid, and Sheaugus, and Jagri, Surveyor of Arvat and the Vadhuan Roads; surveyor of Anchas; surveyor of the Han Mountains in the etherean Uuj of Drij-Lee; in all two hundred and sixty thousand years.</p>
 <p>18. Next stood Murdhana, Chieftainess of D'hup and Hen-Dhi, Chieftainess of Happa and Hirish, surveyor of Sepher and Daka, Inspector of Anachu, and Zadon, and Edau, and Medtisha, and Roth; in all ninety thousand years.</p>
 <p>19. Oshor stood next: Chief of Out-si and of Yotek, and of Samoan, and of Yadakha, maker of the Bridge of Weasitee, Marshal of the Honlaguoth expedition, and, besides these places, God of seven etherean worlds; in all one hundred and twelve thousand years.</p>
 <p>20. Next came Yihoha, Chief of Shung-how and Agon, Chief of Neo-sin, God of Izeaha, and Kaon, and Ahsow, and Una, and Yuk-Hoh, and Ahgoon. He was also the builder of the Raxon etherean arches; in all ninety thousand years.</p>
 <p>21. Hisin was next: Chief of the Kionas Belt, where Yagota, the Orian Chief, walled the Plains of Maga, the Nirvanian home of the delivered hells of Mina half a million years before. Hismi was here nicknamed Creator of Wit, because of establishing his Chieftaincy on the ruins of hell. He was also Chief of Mamsa and Jauap, God of Gah, and of Darah, the region of fountain flowers; in all ninety thousand years.</p>
 <p>22. Bowen was next: Chief of Apaha, formerly the Farms of Lung-wan and Srid, Chief of Vadhua, and of the Valleys of Nasqam, where a million years before the Chief of Chaksa disrupted the Atmospherean Sakri, and liberated from its four thousand hells more than thirty thousand million angel slaves in chaos. Bowen had also served as God of Amaan, and Havat, and Shedo, and Pivan; and as measurer of Pracha, and Xeri, and Asthus, surveyor of Ulam, and Sheyom, and Chozeh and Zadark, in all eighty thousand years.</p>
 <p>23. Gwan Goo was next; she was Chieftainess of Andol, the place of the one-time apex of the Karowgan vortex, whereat was formed the star Ogitas and sent on its course by Aclon-guin, Orian hemmer of Shegoweasa. This vortex, when first formed by Aclon-guin, was three hundred thousand million miles long and was cometary thirty thousand years in Aclon-guin's hands. Gwan Goo was also Chieftainess <a name="page_462a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 462a</font></a> of Ahsa-thah and Waegon; Goddess of Anoa, and of Howgil, and of Zahaive; in all one hundred and ninety thousand years.</p>
 <p>24. Geehoogan was next; Chieftainess of Sumatri in the By-roads of Yotargis, Chieftainess of the four etherean worlds, Yoni, Ogh, Theum and Wachwakags; surveyor of Unshin, Zarihea and Keanteri; inspectress of Saquiz, and Hagimal, and Hafha, and Borax, and Rab, and Shor-loo; in all eighty thousand years.</p>
 <p>25. Next stood Bachne-isij, Chief of Yahalom, where the Gein Maker, Tarmoth, cleared the Forests of the a'ji'an Haloth, in making a roadway for Havalad's group of Shemasian corporeal stars, in which labor he employed ninety thousand million Nirvanians for four thousand years, and the distance of the road was more than one hundred thousand million miles. Bachne-isij was Chief of Agwan, and Shoe-nastus, and Hador, and Ad; God of Vach, and of Kuja, and Rai, and Kathab, and Cynab, and Buhd, and Abbir; measurer of the mountains of the etherean worlds, Vijhath, and Hakan, and Dis; measurer of the arches in the etherean world Niksh; constructor of the Plains in the NIrvanian world Chom; in all one hundred and thirty thousand years.</p>
 <p>26. Rehemg was next; Chieftainess of Otaskaka, commonly called World of Shining Waters, a great visiting place in Nirvania; she was Goddess of Theasapalas and Timax, weigher of Sultzhowtcih in the Ofel Plains; in all one hundred and ten thousand years.</p>
 <p>27. Then stood Antosiv, Goddess of Munn, renowned because she was of two hundred and sixty thousand years, and had declined exaltation above the rank of Goddess.</p>
 <p>28. Such, then, were the Rapon hosts.</p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_34"></a><a href="oah322.htm#fr_34">460a:*</a> Dissolved out of being</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah323.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>