<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah355.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah357.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IX</h3>
 <p>1. WHEN Capilya had come to Wes-tu-chaw-aw, Jehovih said to him: Send messengers into twelve colonies which I will name to thee, to the chief rab'bahs thereof, summoning them hither, for thou shalt teach them alike and like.</p>
 <p>2. The colonies were: Tahdayis, L'wellaat, Ha'darax, Thowaka, Dormstdatta, Ghiballatu, Yhon, Themmista, Vrach'hao, Ebotha, Ewen and Sravat, and each of them sent the high priest (rab'bah) with three accompanying rab'bahs, so that in all, there were thirteen chief rab'bahs, and thirty-nine rab'bahs. And Capilya caused them to put on red hats, without brims, after the custom of the ancient Zarathustrians.</p>
 <p>3. Jehovih said to Capilya: Choose thou twenty damsels who are young and well grown; and twenty dames who have borne children. And these shalt thou adorn with blue hats with ear-flaps, after the manner of the Daughters of the Zarathustrian law.</p>
 <p>4. When Capilya had them clothed with hats and aprons, he caused the rab'bahs and the women to go with him to the summit of a mountain, so that they might not be approached by idlers or spectators without due warning. And on the summit of the mountain Capilya said: When ye were babes, I prayed for you; now that ye are mature ye shall worship the Creator <a name="page_480b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 480b</font></a> with your own words. Bring, therefore, every one a stone, and cast it down, for it shall be an altar before Jehovih for our sacrifice. And as I do, do ye.</p>
 <p>5. They all took stones and cast them in a pile; and when they were yet standing near, Capilya raised his hands to heaven and said: Father, when I was weak, Thou providedst for me. My mother and my father and my rab'bah prayed for me, and taught me of Thee. Wherefore I praise Thee with thanks and glorification. Now that I am strong, I stand upright before Thee and praise Thee and pray to Thee with mine own words, and not as the heathen who have priests to pray for them.</p>
 <p>6. Because Thou madest me a man (woman) I will labor to prove myself before Thee. As I have here cast down this stone, let it stand as my covenant to Thee that I will from this time cast away earthly passions and desires. And because I have raised up both my hands unto Thee, lead Thou me, O Father, in the right way!</p>
 <p>7. When they had all repeated these words, Capilya walked once around the altar, followed by the others, and he said: Jehovih (Ormazd) Almighty, glory be to Thee forever! Thou art on the mountain-top and in the valley; Thy circle is the circumference of the world. I walk in the circle with Thee; Thou art forever by my side; Thy light the glory of my soul. Praise Him, O ye mountains and valleys; sing to Him, thou moon, and ye stars; His hand holdeth ye up; His breath moveth all things!</p>
 <p>8. In Thee I live; of Thyself madest Thou me! O that I may not dishonor Thy handiwork; or make myself ashamed before Thee. Because Thou art Ever Present, I fear Thee; because I can not hide from Thee, I will be most circumspect in my behavior.</p>
 <p>9. Capilya then sat down on the altar, saying: Go ye hence a little way, and then return, that I may teach you how to approach the altar of Jehovih. The people did as commanded, and when they came near, Capilya said: Who cometh?</p>
 <p>10. Now herein are the questions and answers as Jehovih taught His children through Capilya:</p>
 <p>11. A worshipper of Jehovih (Ormazd): Behold, the altar of My people, who are known by their piety and good works, and in helping one another.</p>
 <p><a name="page_481b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 481b</font></a></p>
 <p>12. Who is Jehovih?</p>
 <p>13. The Ever Present. He filleth all place and space. He created me alive, and taught me to adore Him and His works.</p>
 <p>14. Why comest thou to this place above any other? If He be Ever Present why not worship Him in any other place?</p>
 <p>15. He sendeth guardian angels to abide with His children who are pure and good. These angels desire certain places and times, wherein my soul may be given to Jehovih. Through His holy angels He teacheth me in wisdom and love.</p>
 <p>16. Why not worship the angels themselves, since they are thy guardians and benefactors?</p>
 <p>17. To call not on the name of any angel who is Lord or God, is my religion; but to call on Jehovih, the Great Spirit. Whoso calleth on the name of angels, or Lords, or Gods, will be answered by them, but whoso calleth on the Creator will be answered by Him, Who is the All Highest.</p>
 <p>18. How can Jehovih answer thee? Hath He lips, and tongue, and mouth?</p>
 <p>19. Jehovih is the Soul of all things; He speaketh to Soul. His voice hath had many names; by the heathen and the idolator he is called Conscience.</p>
 <p>20. What profit hath thou in worshipping Him?</p>
 <p>21. I am so created; because of the fullness of Him in me, I desire to express my adoration, and to commune with Him. Whoso hath not this desire is an evil man.</p>
 <p>22. Will He answer thy prayers? Turn aside from His usual course and come especially to thee more than to another?</p>
 <p>23. As a horse drinketh water from a trough and so enlargeth himself, so doth the soul of the righteous man drink from the Everlasting Fountain, Jehovih, and the soul of man thus enlargeth and accomplisheth in answer to its own prayer; nevertheless, it all cometh from Jehovih. Neither turneth He aside from His usual course, for He is Ever Present, and thus answereth the prayer of the soul of man.</p>
 <p>24. What prayers answereth He? And what prayers answereth He not?</p>
 <p>25. He answereth the prayer for purity and love and wisdom and virtue. Whoso prayeth to Him for permission to do good unto others, He answereth <a name="page_482b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 482b</font></a> without fail. He answereth not selfishness, nor the prayers of the wicked. Wherefore the wicked say: He answereth not prayer.</p>
 <p>26. Capilya said: My beloved, when ye approach the altar of Jehovih, ye shall repeat the wise words I have taught you; but not aloud like the idolators, but in whisper or low voice.</p>
 <p>27. What is the worship of Jehovih's chosen? and wherein differeth it from the heathen's?</p>
 <p>28. Jehovih's chosen stand equal before the Father, and everyone shall work out his own resurrection, both in this world and the next. Hence they are direct worshippers, being taught to worship Jehovih with their own prayers and songs. The heathen have priests to do worship for the people, who contribute to them in money for the service. The heathen priests worship the spirits of the dead, who call themselves Lord, and God, and Savior. The chosen children war not, resent not by violence, but answer evil by good, and practice charity and love. The heathen, the worshippers of God, and of Lord, and of Dyaus, and all other idols, practice war, maintain armies of soldiers, who are taught the art of killing with great havoc. They build monuments to men, and otherwise blaspheme against Jehovih. They teach that Jehovih is void, but that He made Himself into Dyaus, a large man, and then created all things, after which He retired to His throne, leaving certain laws to govern His works.</p>
 <p>29. What is the Zarathustrian law of life?</p>
 <p>30. To eat not flesh of anything Jehovih created with the breath of life. To bathe once every day. To rise with the morning sun, and be temperate in all things.</p>
 <p>31. What is the Zarathustrian fatherhood and motherhood?</p>
 <p>32. To have but one wife; to have but one husband; to maintain sacred the maternal period.</p>
 <p>33. What was the Zarathustrian compensation?</p>
 <p>34. All things belong to Jehovih; man is but His servant. The fruits of the earth and of all labor shall be cast into the rab'bah's house, and by him delivered unto the needy.</p>
 <p><a name="page_483b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 483b</font></a></p>
 <p>35. Why were the Zarathustrians persecuted and destroyed?</p>
 <p>36. Because they resisted not by violence, and because they worshipped not the idols of the heathens.</p>
 <p>37. Had they no way of saving themselves?</p>
 <p>38. To that end Jehovih gave them certain signs and pass-words, whereby they might know one another, and in time of distress assist one another to flee away.</p>
 <p>39. Why did not Jehovih preserve His chosen people?</p>
 <p>40. By the laws of circumcision the Faithists could only marry amongst themselves, in order to preserve a knowledge of Jehovih (Ormazd) amongst mortals. They who were holy were preserved; they who went after earthly things, and after the idolators, were cut off. But even in this Jehovih profited the seed of the Faithist, by raising up heirs of su'is amongst the heathen.</p>
 <p>41. Capilya said: Teach ye these things to your children from their youth up, and enjoin it upon them to teach them to their children.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah357.htm">Next: Chapter X</a></center>
 </body>