<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah301.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah303.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXXVI</h3>
 <p>1. WHEN Osiris, the false God of Arabin'ya and her heavens, left De'yus, in Hored, the self (satan) that was in him, spake to him, saying: Osiris, thou art a fool! Thou deservest to be ground to dust! Behold thy wisdom and power, and yet thou cringest to thy inferiors on every side. Wert thou not made as well; and withal, as masterly in making others bow down to thy will and decrees? What more is required for Gods or men, than to make slaves of others, to do him honor and reverence? Then Osiris said:</p>
 <p>2. Thou truest of Gods. O that I had struck out from the first for myself! But I will amend my time. When I am in my heavenly place I will send to the earth to my laboring Gods, Baal and Ashtaroth, to come to me, and I will make our three kingdoms into one, and mine shall be chief. And I will offer emoluments to the best, highest grades in Hored, thereby drawing from De'yus his best fruits and flowers, and I will send to him some two or three thousand millions of my superabundant drujas.</p>
 <p>3. Accordingly, when Osiris arrived at Agho'aden, his heavenly place, he sent messengers down to the earth to Baal and Ashtaroth, summoning them at once to his presence. And they came, being attended, each, with ten thousand companions, besides heralds, musicians and trumpeters.</p>
 <p>4. Osiris had made great preparation for them. His receiving hosts, one million, were newly adorned for the occasion. The roadway, for three hundred miles, was illumed with pillars of fire. The Holy Council, half a million, were in extra session. The laborers, four thousand millions, were granted a day of rest. So that when Baal and Ashtaroth entered the heavenly capital, it was a magnificent scene, and as if in fact Osiris, the false, was a mighty God.</p>
 <p>5. Great were the ceremonies and salutations between the Gods, as also with the generals, captains, marshals and others; to describe which a whole book might be written and yet not mention one-half.</p>
 <p>6. After the reception, Osiris proclaimed an extra day of recreation to Agho'aden, and in the meantime he and Baal and Ashtaroth retired to a private chamber beyond the throne, to the east, to consult on the matters of heaven and earth.</p>
 <p>7. Osiris said: My brother and sister, ye are my loves; the worlds are all vain else! De'yus is the most selfish of Gods, and unreasonable. He said to me: Thou shouldst keep up the grades! Now, behold ye, his own grades are broken down. As I and other Gods send him contributions in subjects, so remain such subjects; no more education for them in Hored. Then he complaineth and assumeth to dictate. And this for De'yus' glory. Not a word for lifting angels or mortals up out of darkness.</p>
 <p>8. Baal said: A most unreasonable God. Saidst thou not to him: O that I had the power and means thou hast! What great good I would do!</p>
 <p>9. Ashtaroth said: This I have found before, the greater power a God hath, the less he doeth for others' good. As for my part, what good can I do? I have scarce two thousand million slaves, all told! O that I had a kingdom like De'yus! But what proposest thou, O Osiris, thou far-seeing God?</p>
 <p>10. Baal further said: Ashtaroth, thou wise Goddess, thou hast expressed mine own soul. Mine own kingdom is but little larger than thine; I am a very helpless God indeed. But once I reach De'yus' means, my soul's delight will be to fill all the heavens full of schools and hospitals! But speak thou, Osiris, whatsoever thou hast resolved is wise. As for myself I have been two thousand years trying to put myself in good position first, so I could help others.</p>
 <p>11. Osiris said: To cut loose from De'yus; this is wisdom. To send drujas into De'yus' kingdom, is greater wisdom. To establish Agho'aden as the all highest heavenly kingdom, with <a name="page_423"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 423</font></a> myself at the Godhead, and ye twain to be my sole Gods of the earth, is the greatest wisdom.</p>
 <p>12. Baal said: As I swear, thou hast spoken at last what I have for five hundred years hoped to hear thee say. To thee am I sworn forever. Put thou upon me whatsoever thou wilt.</p>
 <p>13. Ashtaroth said: Now am I blessed above all Goddesses! What I have heard thee speak, is what I would have spoken.</p>
 <p>14. Osiris said: It is enough then, this I proclaim, and on our crossed hands we swear: AGHO'ADEN, ALL HIGHEST HEAVEN! OSIRIS, SON OF THE ALL CENTRAL LIGHTS! THE MOST HIGH GOD! HIS ONLY SON, BAAL, RULER OF THE CORPOREAL EARTH! HIS ONLY DAUGHTER, ASHTAROTH, RULER OF THE CORPOREAL EARTH! FIDELITY AND UNION FOREVER!</p>
 <p>15. Thus they swore themselves into the Godhead. And on the next day Osiris sent messengers to De'yus, in his heavenly place, informing him of what had been done, and adding thereto: But thou, De'yus, I cut thee off from these earth regions. Get thy supplies whither thou canst. Adversity doth a proud soul some good.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah303.htm">Next: Chapter XXXVII</a></center>
 </body>