<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah348.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah350.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter II</h3>
 <p>1. THESE are the generations of the scattered tribes, contributory to the bringing forth of Capilya:</p>
 <p>2. In Brahma, begotten of the Lord, Hathiv, who begat Runoad, who begat Yaid, who begat Ovarana, who begat Chesam, who begat Hottaya, who begat Riviat, who begat Dhor, who begat Avra, who begat Lutha, who begat Jaim, who begat Yanhad, who begat Vravishaah, who begat Hoamya, who begat Wotcha, who begat Saratta, who begat Hriviista, who begat Samatrav, who begat Gatonat, who begat Thurin, who begat Vrissagga, who begat Hesemwotchi, who begat Ratha, who begat Yoshorvat, who begat Capilya.</p>
 <p>3. Know ye, then, the way of God through his holy angels, and profit ye in the light of his revelations.</p>
 <p>4. Capilya was a natural born iesu; and also a natural born su'is and sar'gis.</p>
 <p>5. God said: Behold, man shall not only learn to bring forth seedless fruits in his garden, but also learn that all flesh tendeth in the same direction, toward barrenness.</p>
 <p>6. And as man draweth nearer and nearer to the light of Jehovih, so doth his race become less prolific. And when man attaineth to be one with the All Light, behold he is iesu also.</p>
 <p>7. God said: By diet and by fasting, iesu can be attained, even by many who have it not. But the natural born <a name="page_460b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 460b</font></a> iesu standeth more to the way of Jehovih.</p>
 <p>8. When Capilya was born, a light in the form of a crescent appeared above his head, and the voice of God spake out of the light thereof, saying: This is my son. By him will I overthrow the governments of the tyrants who have persecuted my people.</p>
 <p>9. When Capilya's mother was pregnant, the angels of Jehovih, under the archangel Hirattax, stood guard over her, thinking holy thoughts night and day, whereby the mother's soul ran constantly to heavenly things.</p>
 <p>10. And when Capilya was born, behold, Hirattax appointed a host of one hundred and forty-four angels to be with the child day and night. Into four watches of six hours each, divided he the guardian angels.</p>
 <p>11. So the angels of God taught Capilya from the time of his birth, and he became wise above all other children.</p>
 <p>12. But, of the way in which God ruleth over nations for the glory of the Creator, consider ye the history of this deliverance.</p>
 <p>13. Jehovih had suffered the power of the kings of Vind'yu to become centered chiefly in Yokovrana, king of Hafghanistun, of the capital, Oblowski, a great city dedicated to Dyaus. Yokovrana held forty provinces and four hundred cities tributary to himself, and every city furnished one governor, and these were the royal Council of king Yokovrana.</p>
 <p>14. By the laws of Hafghanistun, the oldest male heir succeeded to the throne; but in case the king had no male heir, then the king's oldest brother's male heir succeeded to the throne. Therefore, every king desired a son, but Yokovrana was frustrated by the plans of the loo'is, the angels of Jehovih.</p>
 <p>15. For Hirattax, chief loo'is, had said: I will not only raise up an heir to Thee, Jehovih; but I will have dominion over Thy enemies, to Thine own glory. For by inspiration will I lead the king of kings to marry with a barren woman; and because he shall have no heirs, he shall become a tool in my hands for the deliverance of the Faithists, who are persecuted and outlawed.</p>
 <p>16. And in those days, whoso was of the seed of the worshippers of the Great spirit, Ormazd, was outlawed in receiving instruction. So that the chosen, <a name="page_461b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 461b</font></a> the Faithists, were held in ignorance, lest a man of learning might rise up amongst them and deliver them. And the angel of Jehovih foresaw that Capilya should be a learned man, and acquainted with the cities and the royal Council. For which matter the angel, Hirattax, provided the chief king, Yokovrana, to be childless and to desire an heir as successor to the throne.</p>
 <p>17. When the king consulted the oracle, behold, the angels of Jehovih had possession, and they answered the king, saying: Put thy wife away in a dark chamber for nine months, and she will deliver into thy hand a male child, who shall save the crown from thy brother's child.</p>
 <p>18. The king told the queen, who was near the time of limit for women, and she would not believe. Nevertheless, she also went to consult the oracle, and to her the angel of Jehovih said: Have not kings killed their wives in order to obtain one who shall have an heir to the throne?</p>
 <p>19. The queen acknowledged this, adding: What, then, shall I do, for of a truth I know I shall bear no child.</p>
 <p>20. The angel said: Do thou as the king hath said, and the angels will bring a male child unto thee in thy dark chamber; and thy maids and thy servants shall see to it that no other woman entereth into thy place; and they will testify that the child is thine own. Neither shalt thou, under penalty of death, inform the king otherwise.</p>
 <p>21. On the other hand the angels of Jehovih foretold the father and mother of Capilya, even before his birth, that the child would be carried away and given to the king, Yokovrana, known for his cruelty as the most hated of men. And the angels said, moreover: Neither shall ye grieve for loss of the child, for Ormazd will make of him a deliverer of his people. And it shall come to pass even in the day the child is delivered to the queen, its own mother shall become its nurse.</p>
 <p>22. Thus it came to pass; and in the time of the birth of Capilya, the angels carried him into the city of Oblowski, into the king's palace, and to the queen's arms, in the dark chamber. And in that same instant of time, the angels illumed the chamber, so that all the maids and servants saw the child and the light withal, and they were frightened, and fell down, beseeching Dyaus for protection.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah350.htm">Next: Chapter III</a></center>
 </body>