<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah375.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah377.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXIX</h3>
 <p>1. TE-ZEE, the king, said unto Chine: Because thou hast given me this great light, it seemeth to me I should issue a decree commanding all my people to accept thy doctrines.</p>
 <p>2. Chine replied: O man! How short thou art in understanding our Father! Violence is His enemy. Such a decree would be no better than a decree establishing any other heavenly ruler. It would thwart itself. He cometh not with sword and spear, like the idol-Gods; He cometh with education, the chief book of which is the example of good works, and of peace and liberty to all.</p>
 <p>3. Te-zee said: Thou reasonest well. Hear me, then, thou greatest of men; command me even as if I were the meanest of servants, and I will obey thee.</p>
 <p>4. Chine said: O king, thou tormentest me with my own inability to make thee understand! Thou shalt not make thyself servant to any man, but to Ormazd, the Great Spirit.</p>
 <p>5. The king said: Then I will put away my kingdom. But Chine said: Consider first if thou can best serve Him by doing this way or that way, and then follow thy highest light, and thou shalt not err.</p>
 <p>6. The king asked: How, sayest thou, shall I put aside my kingdom and my riches and do as thou dost?</p>
 <p>7. Chine said: Thou shalt be thine own judge. If I judge for thee, and thou follow my judgment, then am I bound to thee. Suffer me to have my liberty also.</p>
 <p>8. Te-zee said: If the Great Spirit would give me thy wisdom, then would I serve Him. How long, sayest thou, a man shall serve Him in order to reach great wisdom?</p>
 <p>9. Chine said: Suppose a man had several pieces of glass; some clear, some clouded with smoke and grease; how long, sayest thou, would it require to make them all clear alike? For such is the self in man; it cloudeth his soul; and when he hath put self away, then is his soul clear, and that is wisdom, for then he beholdeth the Father through his own soul; yea, and heareth Him also. And until he doeth this, he believeth not in His Person or Presence, no matter how much he professeth.</p>
 <p>10. The king kept Chine many days, and questioned him with great wisdom and delight. One day Chine said to him: Jehovih saith to me: Go thou quickly unto the five other provinces of Chine'ya, and explain to the kings thereof Who I am. Chine added: Therefore, O Te-zee, I must leave thee, but after many days I will return to thee and exhibit to thee the testimony of immortal life.</p>
 <p>11. The king provided camels and servants, and sent Chine on his way. And, after Chine was gone, Te-zee said to himself: Although I can not decree Chine's doctrines, I see no reason why I can not decree the extinction of Te-in and other idol-Gods. And thereupon he did as he thought best, prohibiting the priests from doing sacrifice to Joss (God), or Ho-Joss (Lord God), or Te-in, or Po, or any other ruler in heaven, save and except the Great Spirit.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah377.htm">Next: Chapter XXX</a></center>
 </body>