<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah302.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah304.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXXVII</h3>
 <p>1. OSIRIS said to Baal and Ashtaroth: Go ye down to the earth to subdue it; and your first labor shall be in Arabin'ya, and Parsi'e, and Heleste; after that ye shall fall upon remote parts and subdue them unto ourselves also. But go ye not as other Gods, to destroy mortals, for we want them to propogate and make subjects for us. Nor pursue ye them, tribe against tribe, putting them to death if they worship not Osiris or Baal or Ashtaroth. Nay, not even the worshippers of the Great Spirit, save of such, whose spirits we cannot catch at time of death; them destroy.</p>
 <p>2. But suffer mortals to worship as they may, and if they worship the Creator, say unto them: It is well. If they worship Ahura, say: It is well. If De'yus: Yea, it is well; for all of these are but one person, who is Osiris, whose high heavenly place is Agho'Aden. Thus teach them.</p>
 <p>3. This also shall ye do: Re-establish places of learning, teaching the Osirian law; cause to be rebuilt, houses of philosophy, oracles and temples; and in all such places where mortals come to consult the spirits, provide ye such spirits who shall answer through the oracles for benefit of our dominions.</p>
 <p>4. It was ourselves that gave the name Lord God to the Arabin'yans; it was ourselves that gave the name De'yus to Parsi'e and Heleste. Let us not waste ourselves away undoing what hath been done, but appropriate it to ourselves.</p>
 <p>5. Such, then, was the basis on which these three Gods set out to establish heaven and earth. Osiris gave to Baal and Ashtaroth, in addition to their own kingdoms, twelve Lords each, to labor with them in the earth department; and every Lord was allotted one million servant soldiers, to be under the Lord's jurisdiction.</p>
 <p>6. With this, Baal and Ashtaroth returned to their heavenly kingdoms on the earth, and at once set about their labors. First, by inspiring mortal kings and queens to build the required oracles. And the kings and queens thus inspired impressed tens of thousands and hundreds of thousands of their subjects to do the building.</p>
 <p>7. And in seven years' time there were built in Parsi'e and Arabin'ya four thousand altars for the sacred dances; seven thousand temples of sacrifice, four hundred and seventy oracle temples, and thirty-one sar'gis temples, where the Lords took on corporeal forms and reasoned with mortals; especially on the stars and moon and on the earth; teaching the philosophers the four motions of the earth: axial, oscillaic, orbitic and vorkum; the plan of the hissagow, and the cycles of the earth; the cycles of the sun; and the cycles of the sun's sun; the north star-belt therein, and the vortices that move them all.</p>
 <p>8. And the inhabitants of Arabin'ya and Parsi'e and Heleste began again to prosper, and became mighty. But after many years, behold, Baal and Ashtaroth rebelled against Osiris, and seceded from Arabin'ya. And this was the end of the heavenly confederacy founded by De'yus. As for the far-off Gods in other divisions of the earth, they seceded at the time Osiris and Te-in and Sudga did. And from this time on, no more spirits were sent to the Lord God, the false, the author of the name De'yus.</p>
 <p>9. When Baal and Ashtaroth seceded from Osiris and resumed their own kingdoms, behold, in all the divisions of the earth, every God was for himself and his own kingdom. But between Osiris and Baal and Ashtaroth a triangular war ensued in reference <a name="page_424"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 424</font></a> to the boundaries and divisions of the lands of the earth.</p>
 <p>10. Now, therefore, since the self-Gods had become the beginning of a new order of dominion in heaven and earth, every one in his own way, it is profitable to leave them for the present, to be resumed afterward. Hear ye, then, of De'yus, the false Lord God; and of God, the true Son of Jehovih:</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah304.htm">Next: Chapter XXXVIII</a></center>
 </body>