<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah313.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah315.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XLVIII</h3>
 <p>1. IN Haikwad, in Parsi'e, dwelt king Luthag, a man of great wisdom and kingly power. His capital city, Sowruts, lay on the border of Fonecea, and had twelve tributary cities, each city being ruled over by a king.</p>
 <p>2. And great drouth came upon the regions ruled by Luthag; and, being a king of benevolence, he sent inspectors far and near, to find a country of water and good soil. But alas, they found not what was desired.</p>
 <p>3. Luthag consulted the oracles, and behold, the angel, Egupt, came and answered the king, saying: Send thou thy seer and I will lead him. So the king sent for his high seer, and told him the words of the oracle. The seer said: Wherever the God touched thee, suffer thou me to touch also, and perhaps I can hear thy God speak.</p>
 <p>4. The seer touched the king in the place, and at once the God spake to him, and he heard. So it came to pass, the God led the seer into Egupt, which <a name="page_442"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 442</font></a> at that time was called South Arabin'ya. The seer knew not the country, and he asked the God. The spirit said: Behold, the land of Egupt. Thus was named that land, which is to this day called Egypt.</p>
 <p>5. The seer found the land fertile and well watered; and he returned to Parsi'e and informed the king. Thereupon the king commanded his people to migrate to Egupt. And they so went, in the first year fifty thousand, and in the second year one hundred thousand; and for many years afterward an equal number.</p>
 <p>6. These things occurred in the seven hundredth year of the reign of De'yus in Hored. And in the space of two hundred years more, behold, the land of Egupt was peopled over with millions of people; for the drouth and famines in countries around about drove them hither.</p>
 <p>7. Luthag sent his son to govern the land of Egupt, and he made it tributary to the kingdom of Sowruts. The son's name was Haxax; and when he was old and died, he left the governorship of Egupt to his son, Bakal, who broke the allegiance with Parsi'e and established all of Egupt as an independent kingdom. Bakal's son, Goth, succeeded him; and Goth enriched his kingdom with great cities and temples, and places of learning, and founded games and tournaments. Goth's daughter, Rabec, succeeded him; and was the first queen of Egupt. Rabec still further enriched the great land with cities and places of learning. Thus stood the country at the time De'yus was overthrown in his heavenly kingdom. And now for seventy years the Gods, Osiris, Baal, and Ashtaroth, and Egupt, had not much power with mortals.</p>
 <p>8. And during this short period, the shepherd kings migrated into Egupt in vast numbers; and, in sympathy with these, and of kindred faith, were the followers of Abraham, the Faithists, who also migrated rapidly into Egupt.</p>
 <p>9. Meantime the kingdom had passed from Rabec to her oldest son, Hwan; and to his oldest son, Naman; and to his oldest son, Sev; and to his daughter, Arma; and to her oldest son, Hotha; and to his oldest son, Rowtsag.</p>
 <p>10. And here stood the matter when Osiris resolved to revise the records of mortals and angels as regardeth the history of creation by God; which he did according to his own decrees, which were as hereinbefore stated.</p>
 <p>11. So it came to pass that through the oracles, king Rowtsag bestowed upon the libraries of Egupt the history of the creation of heaven and earth, with the origin of sin, and the creation of man, the first of whom was thence after called Adam, instead of A'su, adopting the Parsi'e'an word instead of the Vedic.</p>
 <p>12. And these records were the same from which Ezra, three thousand years afterward, made selections, and erroneously attributed them to be the doctrines of the Faithists, who were called Iz'Zerlites. And the records of the Faithists were not kept, nor permitted in the state records, but kept amongst the Faithists themselves, for they were out-lawed then, even as they are to this day, because they would not adopt the Saviors and Gods of the state.</p>
 <p>13. Rowtsag's son, Hi-ram, succeeded him; and Thammas, his son, succeeded Hi-ram. Thammas was a seer and prophet, and could see the Gods and talk with them understandingly. Thammas was succeeded by his daughter, Hannah; and she was succeeded by Hojax, who was a builder on the TEMPLE OF OSIRIS, commonly called the great GREAT PYRAMID.</p>
 <p>14. In honor of the prophet of De'yus, the first mortal servant of Osiris, whose name was Thoth, Hojax named himself Thothma, which is to say, God-Thoth; for Osiris told Hojax: Thou art the very Thoth re-incarnated; and behold, thou shalt be God of the earth.</p>
 <p>15. Thothma could hear the Gods and talk with them understandingly. And to him, Osiris, through his angel servant God, Egupt, gave especial care from his youth up. At the age of sixteen years, Thothma passed the examination in the house of philosophy, and in astronomy and mineralogy. At seventeen he passed THE BUILDER'S SCHOOL and the HISTORIES OF THE THOUSAND GODS. At eighteen he was admitted as an ADEPT IN LIFE AND DEATH, having power to attain the dormant state; and to see without his mortal eyes, and to hear without his mortal ears. At nineteen, he ascended the throne, it being the time of the death of his father and mother.</p>
 <p>16. For because Osiris desired to use Thothma, he sent his destroying angels, and they inoculated the breath of Hannah and her husband, and they died by poison in the lungs.</p>
 <p>17. Osiris, through his servant God, Egupt, thus spake to Thothma, saying: My son, my son! Thothma said: I hear thee, O God, what wouldst thou? Osiris said: Provide thou a dark chamber <a name="page_443"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 443</font></a> and I will come to thee. Thothma provided a dark chamber, and then Osiris through his servant God, came to him, saying:</p>
 <p>18. Thou hast great wisdom, but thou forgettest thy promise! Thothma said: In what, O God? Osiris said: When thou wert in heaven, thou saidst: Now will I go down to the earth and re-incarnate myself, and prove everlasting life in the flesh. For many years Osiris had told this same thing to Thothma until he believed faithfully he had so been in heaven, and returned, and re-incarnated himself for such purpose.</p>
 <p>19. And he answered Osiris, saying: Like a dream it so seemeth to me, even as thou sayest.</p>
 <p>20. Osiris asked Thothma what was the greatest, best of all things. Thothma said: There are but two things, corporeal and spiritual.</p>
 <p>21. Osiris said: True. What then is wisdom? Thothma said: To acquire great corporeal knowledge in the first place; and in the second, to acquire spiritual knowledge. But tell me, thou God of wisdom, how can a man attain the highest spiritual knowledge?</p>
 <p>22. Osiris said: To come and dwell in heaven and see for one's self. Thothma said: How long shall a man sojourn in heaven in order to learn its wisdom? Osiris said: One day; a hundred days; a thousand years; a million years, according to the man.</p>
 <p>23. Thothma said: If one could leave the corporeal part for a hundred days and travel in heaven for a hundred days, would it profit him? Osiris said: To do that is to master death. Behold, thou hast already attained to power of the dormant state. To control the course of the spirit; that is the next lesson.</p>
 <p>24. Thothma said: Behold, O God, I have attained to the power of the dormant state, even as the magicians who submit to be buried for ninety days. Yea, and I go hence in spirit, and see many things, but my soul is like a breath of wind, and goeth at random.</p>
 <p>25. Osiris said: Provide thou me a temple, and I will come and teach thee. Thothma said: How to keep the body so long, that it be not damaged, that is a question? The magicians who have been buried long, and being dug up and resuscitated, find their bodies so damaged that they die soon after.</p>
 <p><a name="pyramid">26. Osiris said: Thou shalt build a TEMPLE OF ASTRONOMY, and dedicate it unto Osiris, Savior of men and angels, God of heaven and earth. And it shall be built square with the world, east and west and north and south. And the observing line shall be with the apex of the Hidan vortex, which lieth in the median line of the variation of the north star (Tuax).</a></p>
 <p>27. In the form of a pyramid shalt thou build it; measure for measure, will I show thee every part.</p>
 <p>28. And thou shalt provide such thickness of walls that no sound, nor heat, nor cold, can enter therein; and yet thou shalt provide chambers within, suitable for thyself and for thy chiefs, and thy friends, who are also adepts. For I have also provided the earth unto heaven, and heaven unto the earth; and my angels shall come and dwell for a season on the earth; and my earth-born shall go and dwell for a season in heaven; yea, they shall come to me on my throne and behold the glories I have prepared for them.</p>
 <p>29. Nor shall my temple be exclusive, but open unto all who will pursue the philosophies of earth and heaven. For which reason thou shalt build it with the sun, moon and stars; and it shall be a testimony unto the nations of the earth that thou art the highest of all mortals, and first founder of everlasting life in the flesh. For as the angels of heaven can return to the earth and take upon themselves corporeal bodies for a season, so shalt thou master thine own flesh to keep it as thou wilt. For this is the end and glory for which I created man on earth.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah315.htm">Next: Chapter XLIX</a></center>
 </body>