<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah346.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah348.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXVI</h3>
 <p>1. LIKA sent messengers to all his Gods and Lords, to install their successors, and to bestow them; after which the Gods and Lords were to report in Theovrahkistan ready for the cyclic resurrection. And he commanded them to bring their etherean hosts with them, save such as chose to volunteer to remain the next dan of two hundred years.</p>
 <p>2. Lika had previously sent word by his swift messengers to etherea, to Lissa, Goddess of Teannakak, in etherea, next to Howgil. And he said unto Lissa: My resurrection will be eight links, each one equal to eight thousand million Brides and Bridegrooms. Send thou a cowppon to deliver them.</p>
 <p>3. Lissa sent word back to Lika, saying: O Jehovih, I am delighted with the command of Thy Son, Lika, Chief of Vetta'puissa! I will deliver the chain of cowppon.</p>
 <p>4. Then Lissa gave her commands in Teannakak, to have her builders construct the cowppon; and she also set her officers to work selecting such hosts as she would need for her great undertaking. For she had been notified in sufficient time; for it was a matter of great magnitude even in etherean realms.</p>
 <p>5. And so perfectly were Lissa's commands carried out, that not one day's time too much or too little was wide the mark. And then she embarked with her hosts for the red star, the earth, with her thousand million <a name="page_522a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 522a</font></a> trained resurrectionists; on her long journey, twenty thousand million miles!</p>
 <p>6. Jehovih had said: Carry far My Brides and Bridegrooms; make them know the magnificence of the heavens I have created. House them not together in a small corner. Let them feast their souls on the splendors of My great heavens!</p>
 <p>7. In the meantime Lika and his Hosts in Theovrahkistan were getting ready for the ceremonies and for the ascension.</p>
 <p>8. The Gods, with their hosts, were now coming in from every quarter of the lower heavens, bringing in their harvests and quartering them in the places allotted by the marshals.</p>
 <p>9. Most conspicuous and beloved of all was Ahura. Next to him were the five true Gods: Inane, Injek, Inlay, Inoal and Inyith, with their heavenly hosts restored to them; for it was through these five Gods that the three mortals, Capilya, Moses and Chine, had delivered the Faithists of Vind'yu, Jaffeth and Arabin'ya. These five Gods had in five years changed the mortal dominions and laws of Vind'yu and Jaffeth, and sent four million Faithists on a westward journey round the earth; and had firmly established the All One in the four great divisions of the earth, and had delivered from bondage all the Faithists on the face of the earth.</p>
 <p>10. Great also was the work accomplished by At'yesonitus, and by Yussamis; and by the Gods that had delivered the hells and the knots; and by many others. So good and great were the works of them all, that a history of any one of them in the five years' labor, would make a book that a man could not read in a life-time.</p>
 <p>11. And they had left successors to carry out what they had founded; so that all the lower heavens were in order, system and discipline, such as had not been for two thousand years.</p>
 <p>12. The drujas of the earth were removed away from mortals; the battle-fields of the earth were cleared of the chaotic spirits slain in wars.</p>
 <p>13. So that the whole earth and her heavens were delivered into a new condition, in the way and form of Jehovih's light.</p>
 <p>14. And this was the Arc of Deliverance in Bon.</p>
 <p>15. Then descended Lissa with her chain of cowppon; with her ships of fire stretched wide as the earth. And the <a name="page_523a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 523a</font></a> hosts of Theovrahkistan, the Brides and Bridegrooms, sixty-four thousand million Sons and Daughters of Jehovih, stood, waiting, watching, nervous, but filled with inexpressible delight.</p>
 <p>16. And they saw the cowppon coming; knew the mission of the mighty Goddess, Lissa, Daughter of Jehovih!</p>
 <p>17. Arrayed in spotless white, the sixty-four thousand millions stood; shuddered at the etheric current, the whirlwind of the higher heavens, stood the exalted affianced of Great Jehovih!</p>
 <p>18. Nearer and nearer came the mighty sea of etherean fire; and nearer, till it landed at the plateau of Theovrahkistan.</p>
 <p>19. Then came forth Lissa, saluting; and, being answered by great Lika, Jehovih's Son, proceeded before Jehovih's throne.</p>
 <p>20. Then Lissa demanded in the usual form, why she had been summoned in Jehovih's name. Lika also answered in the usual form: To bestow Jehovih's affianced Sons and Daughters.</p>
 <p>21. After this, each of the five Gods of the earth took their hosts and bequeathed them to Jehovih, through Lissa, His Daughter.</p>
 <p>22. But so great and grand were the ceremonies that mortal words cannot describe them. And as for the awe and magnificence, together with the music, could they be described to mortals, understandingly, they scarce could live, because of the enchantment.</p>
 <p>23. But there is a time, and a limit, and an end to all such matters; and so there was to the labor of Lika, Son of Jehovih. The hosts were wed, and they marched aboard the great etherean ships, the cowppon. Lika and his hosts went into his own airavagna. And, as it were, with a thread light, he made fast to the cowppon, and gave the word, the command to go.</p>
 <p>24. Then raised up the mighty seas of fire, the eight-linked cowppon and the airavagna! Slowly, steadily moving onward, upward, higher and higher, faster and faster, and still higher. And thus departed Lika with his thousands of millions of upraised Sons and Daughters of Jehovih. And thus ended the dawn of Bon.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">End of Book of Lika, Son of Jehovih.</p>
 <p></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah348.htm">Next: Chapter I</a></center>
 </body>