<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah306.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah308.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XLI</h3>
 <p>1. DARKER and darker, the hadan fields palled before the touch of Jehovih's hand, to try the self-assumed Lord God and his heavenly works. As if an epoch new and terrible had come to one so audacious, who foremost in heaven and earth had sought to banish the worship and the name of the Great Spirit from mortals, and give them instead a heavenly ruler in the image of man.</p>
 <p>2. For before this, all nations knew the office of Gods and Lords, and reverenced them as Jehovih's high officers, raised up spirits of the dead, wise and powerful. But now, in five great divisions of the earth, satan's hadan chief had bound his name in mortals, with threatened penalties, and even death, for mentioning Jehovih's name. And, to put them to the test, made oaths on burning flesh, that whoso would not eat thereof should die.</p>
 <p>3. For this was the criterion before the courts that they that refused fish and flesh food, or would not pollute the body by noxious drinks and smoke, intoxicating to the sense, were possessed of Jehovihian worship, and so deserved torture and death.</p>
 <p>4. So the names of Lord and God, and Lord God, and De'yus, had now become for a thousand years fixed in mortals' minds as the Creator, a large man sitting on a throne in Hored, his heavenly seat, watched and guarded by his son, Anubi, keeper of the scales, and of the gate to heaven. To make a plausible story of which, the angels, through oracles, and magicians, and priests, and prophets, proclaimed that: In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth, and all things therein and thereon. And he was tired, and rested; and, as if creation was a completed work, left certain laws to run the wonderful machine whilst he sat afar off, looking on; smiling at the pranks of mortals, and their failure to understand him, with a devil and a horrid fire to torture their souls, if they sang not in praise of this compounded, false Lord God.</p>
 <p>5. Thus turned he, their false God, the voice of mortals from Him Who is Ever Present, whose speech hath every <a name="page_428"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 428</font></a> soul heard, Whose Presence moveth all things in heaven and earth! The false God turned them to sing and pray to himself, so he should clutch and bind their souls in endless slavery; untaught, half fed; as drudges, to bring into his capital, provender and building stones to glorify him forever.</p>
 <p>6. Over Jaffeth, far and wide, this traitor to Jehovih had sealed in stone, and papyrus, and wood, and sacred cloth, his name, Ho-Joss, to suit the Panic voice, as whilst in Vind'yu he made them engrave it Dyaus, to fit the Vedic tongue; and thence in Fonece to suit the higher-spirited race, Adonia-Egad, and go over to Heleste, and, in less distince and bastard Greece, whisper Zeus, saying: These words are watch-words to gain Anubi's ear, and turn the scales for endless paradise. Go ye, slaves, engrave my names; and, in mortal libraries, register my great exploit, of how I created the world!</p>
 <p>7. And make me spotless pure, letting sin into the races of men by Osiris' cunning tale of Eve's weakness by fault of the earth. For I am not come like Jehovih's captains, spirits sent to rule men for a season, but a very God of blood and bones, who once, in terrible anger, flooded the earth to drown my disobedient sons and daughters. Make ye them to tremble and draw long breath when my name is spoken, or, by mine own soul, I will hurl heaven and earth into endless chaos!</p>
 <p>8. Pressing downward ji'ay came, slowly and surely, the very motion spake as a million tongues, serious, awful. For many, on every side, of the hosts of Anuhasaj were deserting him. As one in a small way may see on a sinking ship, how the expert swimmers, with strong arms, leap into the water boldly and swim for the far-off shore, whilst the helpless, in frantic rage, cluster fast upon the distracted officers, blockading them from doing good. So began the tumult in the fast descending plateau, Hored, which was increased a hundred-fold by the flood of drujas cast upon De'yus' kingdom by his own traitorous false Gods.</p>
 <p>9. De'yus' generals and captains first tried music to hold the forty thousand millions to peace and order; but the es'enaurs themselves took fright, and by the million fled, flying down to the earth to Osiris', or Te-in's, or Sudga's kingdoms, and over-flooding mortals with ghostly revelries. Next, by parades, and rites, and great processions, did De'yus' officers seek to divert the panic-stricken millions.</p>
 <p>10. Thus for years this maddened God with wonderful strength of will almost held his own, inventing tens of thousands of strategems. But at last, in the downward course, Hored touched upon the corporeal earth; and suddenly, as if startled by the shock, the frantic millions screamed, and then, alas, all order died.</p>
 <p>11. The doors of hell were opened! Anuhasaj's throne and capital, with all their splendor, the maddened mob broke loose to pillage or to destroy. And then rushed in the fault-finders, shouting: Thou lying God, but like a man, who art thou? And thou, Anubi! Deceiving judge! A thousand horrid deaths to thee!</p>
 <p>12. But the unlearned drujas knew not who was rank or officer, God or judge, but seized the pale and trembling De'yus and Anubi, and more than a million officers, overpowered them, by ten millions to one, pressed on by the foul-smelling crowd. And now, with blows and kicks and cuffs, on every side began the awful fray. Till stretched as wide as the earth, the countless millions were plunged into hell. Hereupon, to right and left, was now an unceasing combat, and all the hosts of the Lord God were sworn for vengeance against any one they came against.</p>
 <p>13. Then came the torturers, casting into the hells most offensive smells and suffocating gases, crammed in the nose and mouth of their victims. No more were the Lord God and Anubi seen, but swallowed up in measureless darkness, where every soul sought nothing good, but labored hard to give unto others excruciating tortures for vengeance sake.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah308.htm">Next: Chapter XLII</a></center>
 </body>