<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah350.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah352.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IV</h3>
 <p>1. THE word of Jehovih (Ormazd) came to Capilya, saying: Son of heaven, hear thou the Voice of the Ever Present! Capilya asked: How sayest Thou? The Ever Present?</p>
 <p>2. Jehovih (Ormazd) said: Behold Me; I am not of the king's laws; I am the Maker of kings. They have made a law against Me, the Ever Present. They have scattered My people. They have denied My people the right to obtain knowledge.</p>
 <p>3. Capilya said: Mine eyes and ears have proved these things. What shall Thy servant do?</p>
 <p>4. Jehovih said: Thou shalt deliver the slaves unto freedom, and provide them places to dwell together, according to the laws of the ancients.</p>
 <p>5. Capilya said: O Ormazd (Jehovih), why hast Thou put this upon me, Thy servant? Why gavest Thou not such matters into the hands of the Vrix?</p>
 <p>6. Jehovih said: Thou art thyself of the race of Faithists, and have been prepared for this labor from the time of thy birth. Go thou and find <a name="page_465b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 465b</font></a> thy nurse that cared for thee in infancy, and when thou hast her alone, say to her: Nurse, the voice of heaven hath come to me, saying: Capilya, thou art of the race of Faithists: how sayest thou? And the nurse will say to thee: My son! my son! Alas me! Thinkest thou I would by thy death, or thy mothers death? For is not such the law?</p>
 <p>7. Capilya went and inquired of the nurse, and she said to him: My son, my son. Alas me! Thinkest thou I would be thy death, or thy mother's death? For is not such the law? Capilya answered: Such is the law. But tell me the truth, and I swear unto thee, both under the name Dyaus and under the name of thy God, Jehovih (Ormazd), that thy words shall be secret with me, as the God's will. Am I an adopted Vrix?</p>
 <p>8. The nurse said: Behold, thou hast loved me all thy days; from mine own breasts wert thou fed. Shall I, then, lose thy love, and so die of a broken heart?</p>
 <p>9. Then Capilya made oath before the Gods, and thereafter she answered him, saying: I am thy mother, O prince! The angels of the Ever Present came to me in the moment thou wert born, and carried thee into the queen's arms; and the king knew not even to this day but thou wert his.</p>
 <p>10. Capilya said: Why hath this been done unto me?</p>
 <p>11. The nurse said: Hearken, O prince! The king's wife was barren; the king desired a son who should be heir to the throne.</p>
 <p>12. Capilya interrupted: And thou barteredst thy flesh and flood with the queen for this?</p>
 <p>13. The nurse said: Patience, O prince! I am of a race that owneth only One King, the Ever Present! Respect me, therefore, till thou hast learned the whole truth. The angels of Ormazd came to me before thy birth, saying: Alas, the Chosen People are persecuted and abused, scattered and despised; but because they are faithful and most virtuous, the Ever Present will come and deliver them. Then I said unto the angels: What is this matter to me? Behold, I am myself but a servant, and can do nothing.</p>
 <p>14. Then the angel answered, saying: Thou shalt have a son, and shalt call <a name="page_466b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 466b</font></a> his name Capilya; and he shall be the deliverer of thy people. For which purpose he shall receive great learning. But because great learning is denied to thy people, thy son shall be adopted by the queen, and the king, believing it is his own son, will render unto the child learning and power also.</p>
 <p>15. And I said unto the angel: Flesh and blood of me are nothing if I can thereby serve Jehovih (Ormazd).</p>
 <p>16. Capilya said: Since thou committedst me to thy God, then am I indeed his. Now whilst they were yet talking, Jehovih spake to Capilya, saying: I am not come to give new doctrines unto men, but to rescue My people from bondage, and to restore equal rights unto the inhabitants of the earth. For this purpose wert thou, O Capilya, sent into the world. Because thou wert of the race of the Faithists My voice hath come to thee.</p>
 <p>17. Because the king imagineth thou art his son, and loveth thee dearly, thou shalt not suffer from his hand. Go, then, whither I will lead thee, and it shall be testimony to thee, that I am the Ever Present, moving them by means of the spirit to come to thee.</p>
 <p>18. In due time the prince departed from home, not advising the king of his purpose; and he went as Jehovih led him, and came to Hosagoweth, near the river Vesuthata, where there was a forest, with meadows interspersed, and he found a camp of four families of wandering Faithists, and they were famished with hunger, and were ragged.</p>
 <p>19. The prince, seeing they feared him, said: Be not afraid; I come not to persecute or drive you hence. As ye perceive by my dress, I am a prince, judge ye not me to be your enemy, come to destroy you. For, by the same power ye were led hither, am I come also. This land do I bequeath to you, to be yours forever. Cease ye, therefore, traveling about, but begin and till the soil.</p>
 <p>20. Yatithackka, the rab'bah, said: How sayest thou? Thou wert brought hither by the same God? Then, of a truth, thou knowest the signs and pass-words?</p>
 <p>21. Capilya said: None of these things have I learnt; but even as there is a legend amongst thy people that one would come of Jehovih and restore His chosen people, so declare I unto you, I am he. That thy Ruler is <a name="page_467b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 467b</font></a> my Ruler; take me in private with thee, O rab'bah, and the Ever Present will give the signs and pass-words, and thus prove me.</p>
 <p>22. Moreover, I say to thee in prophecy, ere three suns have risen and set, there shall come to this place hundreds and hundreds of thy people. Now when the rab'bah had examined Capilya, and found that he had the signs and pass-words, he wondered exceedingly. The prince then caused wood and stone to be laid in the form of a crescent, and its size was sufficient for seats for one hundred people. He said: This is the altar of Jehovih (Ormazd). Let us sit this night, for the Father's voice is with me.</p>
 <p>23. During the day, many more came; so by night there were one hundred, men, women and children, and the prince commanded them to sit about the altar of Jehovih. And presently the Voice spake in the midst of the altar, saying: This is My Son, of whom it hath been prophesied, one would come to restore My people. Behold, I am the Ever Present, and not in the figure or image of a man, but I am the All Space and Place, doing My will through My angels and through the souls of men. Be ye steadfast in righteous works and love toward one another; and most just to a fraction with all other peoples. With you will I establish Myself, even as in the ancient days with your forefathers.</p>
 <p>24. Capilya then appointed the oldest rab'bah as chief of the altar; and this was the first established family (community) since many a hundred years, that was assured by a prince that they should not be driven off.</p>
 <p>25. On the next day the prince took the people a little way off, about half an hour's walk, and he said to them: Build ye here another altar, for yet, ere night comes, there shall come others even here. Let the Ever Present have an altar provided unto them. Accordingly the people fell to in faith, and built another altar; and when it was finished, and the sun gone down, there came many wanderers, Faithists, to the place.</p>
 <p>26. Capilya said unto them: Come ye to the altar of Ormazd, for he desireth sacrifice of all whom he blesseth. And they went in and sang, and prayed, giving thanks to God. Jehovih <a name="page_468b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 468b</font></a> said: Suffer him I have sent unto you to build three more altars at like distances apart; for I will bring My people together for three places of sacrifice.</p>
 <p>27. On the next day there came many more wanderers, who had escaped from the province of Anassayon, where a war was being carried on against raiders from Tubet, the high mountain region. And Capilya built altars for them also; and to them he also appointed rab'bahs and chief rab'bahs.</p>
 <p>28. Now, behold, they were without food, and many had been famished for many days. Capilya, perceiving that some of the people were suspicious of him, said unto them: Whoso hath faith in me of Jehovih, let him stand with me this night, for the Father will manifest unto us.</p>
 <p>29. Not more than forty came to the place designated; for they feared Capilya was an imposter. And when they were assembled, Capilya tried them, and found of a truth they had faith. And he said unto them: Stand in a circle and join hands, and I will stand in the midst. Yet I know not what the Great Spirit will do for us.</p>
 <p>30. And when they were thus standing, Jehovih sent a cold wind, and there came down from heaven an abundance of Ahaoma, sufficient to feed the whole of the people for many days. Neither knew any man of what ahaoma was made; but it was savory and nutritious.</p>
 <p>31. And the people came and ate, and also gathered up the ahaoma, and carried it home. Capilya said unto them: Because Ormazd hath done this, go ye into the altars and return thanks unto Him.</p>
 <p>32. And the people did as commanded; and from this time forth not one of them lacked faith in Capilya. And thereupon he said unto them: This place shall be called Maksabi, for it is the first colony (Tarag-attu) in all the world where the Father hath fed His people with His Own hand. So the place was called Maksabi, which, in Vedic, would be Suta-ci-ci (I speak with food!).</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah352.htm">Next: Chapter V</a></center>
 </body>