<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah388.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah390.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter X</h3>
 <p>1. GOD said: Here is wisdom, O man: To be observant of all things and adapt thyself thereto on Jehovih's side.</p>
 <p>2. To obtain great learning that applieth to the resurrection of thy soul in comprehending the works of the Almighty.</p>
 <p>3. To suffer not thyself to be conceited in the wisdom of the moderns over the ancients, nor of the ancients over the moderns.</p>
 <p>4. The Creator created man wisely for the time of the world in which man was created.</p>
 <p>5. Thou art for this era, and not for the past.</p>
 <p>6. The ancients were for the past era, and not for the present.</p>
 <p>7. To know the <a name="page_565"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 565</font></a> present; to be up with the signs of the times, this it is, to see Jehovih's hand.</p>
 <p>8. Make not a God of riches, nor of thy supposed sciences and learning.</p>
 <p>9. For in the time thou seest men doing these things, behold, that is the time of a cyclic coil in the great beast.</p>
 <p>10. Thy God and thy Savior shall surely be swept away.</p>
 <p>11. Make Jehovih, the Creator, the idol of thy soul; neither setting up this or that as impossible.</p>
 <p>12. Opening up thy understanding to find the tree of light and righteousness of soul.</p>
 <p>13. Admitting that all things are possible in Jehovih's hands.</p>
 <p>14. Then thy God shall surely not be swept away.</p>
 <p>15. Look about thee, O man, and learn from the Sons and Daughters of Jehovih, the march of the Almighty's kingdoms.</p>
 <p>16. Who shall make a system or a philosophy like Jehovih? What hast thou found that is infallible?</p>
 <p>17. The truth of yesterday is not a truth to-day; the truth of yesterday is the truth to-day.</p>
 <p>18. Thou shalt come to understand even this.</p>
 <p>19. To learn how to live; to rejoice, and to do good, and make thy neighbor rejoice also, this is wisdom.</p>
 <p>20. Let these be thy loves and the glory of thy speech, and thou shalt learn to prophesy concerning the ways of Jehovih.</p>
 <p></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah390.htm">Next: Plate 49</a></center>
 </body>