<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah357.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah359.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XI</h3>
 <p>1. JEHOVIH said to Capilya: My chosen shall not have kings; I, Jehovih, am King. As through Zarathustra I gave rab'bahs and chief rab'bahs, so have I through thee; and their families are My families.</p>
 <p>2. Kings and kingdoms of men I give to the unrighteous; for they, perceiving not Me, for I am the higher law, shall have that that they can perceive, which is the lower law.</p>
 <p>3. A kingdom is thrust upon thee; what wilt thou? Capilya said: What <a name="page_490b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 490b</font></a> shall I do, O Jehovih? Jehovih answered, saying: Suffer thyself to be proclaimed at home and in the provinces, after which thou shalt ratify the laws, and then abdicate, and the kingdom shall fall into other hands.</p>
 <p>4. Capilya was proclaimed, and thenceafter known as king Capilya, and he abdicated, and then Heloepesus became king, and he became obligated to Capilya, so that the latter, though not king, stood as a protector over the Faithists, even greater than Heloepesus, nor could any laws be enacted affecting the Faithists without the consent of Capilya.</p>
 <p>5. Jehovih had said: My people shall be a separate people; they shall live under My laws, for I am their King.</p>
 <p>6. Now the whole time, from Capilya's first beginning of the restoration of the Zarathustrians (Faithists), until establishing a protectorate for them, was five years. After this Capilya traveled about, east and west, and north and south, collecting together the scattered remnants of his people; and he established them in colonies, and taught them not only rites and ceremonies, but taught the lost arts of tilling the soil and of making fabrics out of hemp and wool and silk; and he established schools and provided teachers for the people.</p>
 <p>7. Capilya said: The first virtue is to learn to find Jehovih in all things, and to love and glorify Him.</p>
 <p>8. The second virtue is Cleanliness; all peoples, old and young, shall bathe once a day.</p>
 <p>9. The third virtue is to eat no fish nor flesh, nor other unclean thing; for of what profit is it to bathe the outer part if one putteth filth within?</p>
 <p>10. The fourth virtue is Industry. Because the Father gave man neither feathers, nor hair nor wool; let it be testimony of His commandment that man shall clothe himself. To clothe one's self, and to provide one's self with food; these are the enforced industry upon all people. In addition to <a name="page_491b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 491b</font></a> these, to labor for the helpless; to bathe them and feed them, and house them and clothe them; these are the volunteer industries permitted by the Father that ye may prove your soul's worthiness before Him. Without industry no people can be virtuous.</p>
 <p>11. One of the rab'bahs asked him what Industry was? To this Capilya replied: To keep one's self in constant action to a profitable result. To rise before the sun and bathe and perform the religious rites by the time the sun riseth; and to labor thereafter not severely but pleasantly until sunset, this is Industry. The industrious man findeth little time for satan's inspiration.</p>
 <p>12. The fifth virtue is of the same kind, which is Labor. There shall be no rich amongst you; but all shall labor. As ye develop your corporeal bodies unto strength by reasonable labor, so doth the act of labor develop the spirit of man to profitable growth for its habitation in heaven. For I declare unto you a great truth, which is, that the idle and the rich, who labor not with the corporeal body, are born into heaven helpless as babes.</p>
 <p>13. The sixth virtue, which is greater than all the rest, is Abnegation of one's self. Without Abnegation no man shall have peace of soul, either on earth or in heaven. Consider what thou doest, not that it shall profit thyself, but whether it will benefit others, even as if thou wert not one of them. Without the sixth virtue no family can dwell together in peace.</p>
 <p>14. The seventh virtue is Love. Consider when thou speakest whether thy words will promote love; if not, then speak not. And thou shalt have no enemies all the days of thy life. But if thou canst justly say a good thing of any man, be not silent; this is the secret to win many loves.</p>
 <p>15. The eighth virtue is Discretion, especially in words. Consider well, and then speak. If all men would do this, <a name="page_492b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 492b</font></a> thou wouldst be surprised at the wisdom of thy neighbors. Discretion is a regulator; without it, man is like a tangled thread.</p>
 <p>16. The ninth virtue is System and Order. A weak man, with System and Order, doeth more than a strong man without them.</p>
 <p>17. The tenth virtue is Observance. With Observance a man accepteth from the ancients such things as have been proven to be good, such as rites and ceremonies. Without Observance a man beginneth back even with the earliest of the ancients, and thus casteth aside his profit in the world.</p>
 <p>18. The eleventh virtue is Discipline, the Discipline for the individual and the family. He who hath not Discipline is like a race-horse without a rider. A time to rise; a time to eat; a time to pray; a time to dance; a time to labor; these are good in any man; but the family that practiceth them in unison with one another hath Discipline.</p>
 <p>19. The twelfth virtue is like unto it, and is Obedience. All good and great men are obedient. He that boasteth his disobedience to discipline is a fool and a madman. Greater and better is the weak man of obedience, than the strong man of defiance. For the one promoteth the harmony of the family; but the other ruptureth it.</p>
 <p>20. Consider these twelve virtues; they are sufficient laws unto the whole world. Man may multiply books and laws forever, but they will not make the family, nor colony, nor state, happy, without the adoption of these twelve virtues.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah359.htm">Next: Chapter XII</a></center>
 </body>