<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah494.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah496.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XII</h3>
 <p>1. GOD, Son of Jehovih, through his Holy Council, in Paradise, his heavenly seat, now decreed:</p>
 <p>2. To the Faithists of Arabin'ya, Ebeneezer captain, with five million angels as a protecting host. To the Faithists of Chine'ya, Luiwatha, captain, with ten million angels as a protecting host. To the Faithists of Vind'yu, Li Chong, captain, with eight million angels as a protecting host. To the Faithists of Guatama, Manito, captain, with ten million angels as a protecting host.</p>
 <p>3. And to each of the captains I give authority to draw additional armies from the Lords who hold dominions in the regions where they may be.</p>
 <p>4. But it so happened that the lowest heavenly plateaus were also engaged in wars.</p>
 <p>5. And in less than a hundred years of a'ji many of the Lords were without kingdoms, and, with a few chosen friends, were become involuntary wandering spirits, scattered about in all the heavens of the earth, or upon the earth.</p>
 <p>6. God saw this, and he called out to them; through his messengers he called unto them, saying: Having lost your kingdoms, why will you lose yourselves? Is it not better that ye fall to, in the remaining kingdoms and by your steadfastness, help to maintain faith in Jehovih in the hearts of the less learned?</p>
 <p>7. But satan (self) gained access to their souls, saying to each one of them: Thou, who hast been Lord of the hosts of heaven! Thou, take a place like a common laborer! Thou wouldst be laughed at! The non-resistant policy is good enough in times and places of peace. But now is war. And war can only be overcome by war. If great De'yus was overcome and cast into hell, why not our God also? So they heeded not God.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah496.htm">Next: Chapter XIII</a></center>
 </body>