<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah442.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah444.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_652"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 652</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Bon's Book of Praise</h1>
 <h3 align="CENTER">ESK.</h3>
 <p>1. THESE are the words of Bon: Thou, O Jehovih! Who can fashion Thee with words, or show Thy immensity? Where stood Thy feet in the time of Creation or rested Thy hand!</p>
 <p>2. Thou Present and Afar! Thou Who art older than time, O Jehovih! Thou Dealer in worlds; where can I write the wonder of Thy name!</p>
 <p>3. O That I had a standing place to see Thee! That I could come to an understanding with My Creator! To find wisdom for my song; a dialogue in the words of the Almighty!</p>
 <p>4. Sing to Him, O Yavist, thou farthest star, and thy boundless firmament! And Neopodis, ye brightest shining heavens, which He created. Give the boundary of Jehovih's Person, O thou universe!</p>
 <p>5. Thou that made me! By Thy sweet breath overspread the world with life and song. How shall I render Thee praise; in Thy glory make my speech acceptable!</p>
 <p>6. Who hath considered the All Light, or found the Cause of the brightness of the sun, Thy great symbol? Or the power of Thy hand that stood him in the midst of heaven?</p>
 <p>7. Or knoweth the times of Thy labor and the birth of thy worlds? Or counteth the stars Thou hast created! Yea, or knoweth the history of the least of all of them?</p>
 <p>8. O that I could fashion a thought of Thy greatness; or conceive the breadth of Thy arms! Thou Whole Compriser! Thou All Perfect, Jehovih!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah444.htm">Next: TEK</a></center>
 </body>