<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah403.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah405.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter III</h3>
 <p>1. HERE followeth the method of manufacturing light and heat as they are on the earth and moon and sun, and all other planets:</p>
 <p>2. The half of the earth's vortex (for example) which faceth toward the sun is a concave lens to the earth. A similar lens, but far larger, is at the sun-centre: The convex faces of the two lenses are toward each other forever. They are ethereally connected by solutions of corpor needles linear in position. (See cut C, Fig 5.)</p>
 <p>3. The vortex is larger than the earth, so that polar lights are possible on the shadow side. And the brilliancy of the polar lights are proportionately less than daylight at noon in the tropics, exactly in correspondence to the concentration of the rays by a lens of the magnitude referred to.</p>
 <p>4. The vortexya rising up out of the earth at night is negative, or less than the vortexya descending in daylight, and their conjunctive line is near the earth's surface. Hence, five or six miles' altitude is intense cold; whilst five or six hundred is so cold that mortals could not possibly measure it.</p>
 <p>5. In the early days of the earth, when there was more heat emitted from the earth than at present, it also rose to a greater altitude; but it was nevertheless thrown back, to a great extent, every day, even after the same manner it is to-day, by the vortexian lens referred to. And as of the heat, so also of the light.</p>
 <p>6. In the sum of all the universe there was, and is now, and ever shall be, the same latent amount of heat and light. The vortex in formation driveth them to the centre for a period of time; nevertheless a time cometh when the heat and light escape outward. And though the vortexian lens recast them back in a measure, thus producing day and warmth on the face of the earth, yet there is ever a trifling loss toward perpetual coldness and darkness.</p>
 <p>7. This great hemispherical lens, atmospherea, not only thus manufactureth light and heat, but it also affordeth man the means of seeing the sun and moon and stars. It hath the power also of magnifying millions of comparatively dense etherean worlds, so that man can see through them. The student should consider this from the standpoint of a magnifying lens in a microscope, which hath power to distend many things so one can see through their fibres, which to the naked eye seem dense. For etherea is not nearly so rarified as mortals suppose. Without the sun's atmospherean lens, man could not even see the moon, nor stars; and the sun itself would seem as a pale red star.</p>
 <p>8. As the vortex of the earth is thus a lens to the earth, so is the moon's vortex to the moon, and so also of the sun and all other stars and planets, where light and heat are manifested.</p>
 <p>9. When the moon is half full, a dim outline of the shadow side of the moon is to be seen with the naked eye. This, by philosophers hath been erroneously called the earth's shine. For they ignorantly believed the light of the earth was reflected on the moon. The real cause of this sub-light on the moon is in consequence of the action of a sub-lens on the moon, facing the earth's vortex, which operateth after the same manner as the other.</p>
 <p>10. When the moon produceth a full eclipse of the sun (by which philosophers ignorantly believed the light and heat of the sun were cut off from the earth), it causeth darkness on the earth by breaking the linear connection betwixt the earth's vortex and the sun-centre, so that the positive current in the earth's vortex is cut off, and that part that would otherwise be a lens becometh negative in its action, in the linear space. (See cut C, Fig. 6, eclipse of sun.) But when the eclipse falleth far in the north or south part of the earth only, then the action of the moon's shadow will fall in the direction of the earth's lens, so that a sub-lens is impossible. Whereas, <a name="page_576"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 576</font></a> were there such a thing as earth's shine, in time of total eclipse of the sun, the equatorial light would make the moon shine at that time also.</p>
 <p>11. As light, and heat, and magnetism, and electricity, are all one and the same thing, which are the manifestation of vortexian currents under different conditions, the student must not lose sight of the fact that none of these so-called things are things in fact, that is, entities of themselves, separately or combined.</p>
 <p>12. Vortexya can be charged, as before mentioned, into iron and other substances. When it is charged in iron it is called magnetism; when charged in phosphorus it is called light (inactive); when charged in nitrate of silver it is called darkness. If its application be continued on phosphorus, the latter will combine with common air and ignite. With phosphorus and without it, it will, as before stated, combine oxygen and hydrogen, and it will also separate them. And yet vortexya, in fact, is no substance or thing as such; but is the vortex in axial and orbitic motion, or, in other words, corpor in an etheic solution.</p>
 <p>13. As previously stated, ethe holdeth corpor in solution, which is the condition of atmospherea and of the etherean regions beyond. When a portion of this solution is given a rotary motion it is called a vortex. Nor is a vortex a substance or thing of itself, more than is a whirlwind, or as a whirlpool in the water. As a whirlpool can not exist without water, or a whirlwind exist without air, so can not a vortex exist without the etheic solution. As previously stated, in the beginning of a vortex it is long, but in course of time it hath a tendency to become round like a globe, but flattened a little at the poles. This also happeneth to every vortex that carrieth a satellite: That the periphery of the vortex is undulated; and the extent of its undulation can be determined by the minimum and maximum distance of the satellite from its planet.</p>
 <p>14. In consequence of this discrepancy, the lens power of the vortex of the earth varies constantly, even daily, monthly and yearly. Nevertheless, the sum of heat and cold and the sum of light and darkness are nearly the same, one generation with another. This was, by the ancient prophets, called the FIRST RULE IN PROPHECY. This was again subdivided by three, into eleven years, whereof it was found that one eleven years nearly corresponded with another eleven years. This was the SECOND RULE IN PROPHECY. The THIRD RULE was NINETY-NINE YEARS, whereto was added one year.</p>
 <p>15. In the case of the tides, a still further allowance of six years was found necessary to two hundred; but in the succeeding four hundred years a deduction was required of five years. Whereupon the moon's time was eighteen years.</p>
 <p>16. As the lens power loseth by flattening the vortex, and increaseth by rounding the vortex, it will be observed that the position of the moon's vortex relatively to the earth's, is a fair conclusion as to the times of ebb and flood tide. In periods of thirty-three years, therefore, tables can be constructed expressing very nearly the variations of vortexya for every day in the year, and to prophesy correctly as to the winters and summers, so far as light and darkness, and heat and cold, are concerned. This flattening and rounding of the vortexian lens of the earth is one cause of the wonderful differences between the heat of one summer compared with another, and of the difference in the coldness of winters, as compared with one another. Of these also, tables can be made. Winter tables made by the ancients were based on periods of six hundred and sixty-six years, and were called SATAN'S TABLES, or the TIMES OF THE BEAST. Tables made on such a basis are superior to calculations made on the relative position of the moon.</p>
 <p>17. But where they have prophesied ebb and flood tide to be caused by certain positions of the moon, they have erred in suffering themselves to ignorantly believe the cause lay with the moon. A man may prophesy by a traveling wagon what time it will reach town; but the correctness of his prophecy does not prove that the wagon pushed the horse to town. These revelations pertain more to the cause of things, than to giving new prophecies. What mortals can not discover by any corporeal observation must come by inspiration. In the year 4 B.K. Leverrier, of France, prophesied the existence of Neptune by the calculation of planetary disturbances. (See Humboldt's Cosmos, vol. iv., p. 357.) Other discoveries have been made in the same way; whereupon they have believed the said disturbances to be caused by one planet's power on another.</p>
 <p>18. Planetary disturbances are not caused by any power or effect of one planet on another; the cause of the disturbances lieth in the vortices wherein they float. Mortals can not see <a name="page_577"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 577</font></a> the vortices; their only means of prophesying lieth in corpor. A man may prophesy of the moon by calculations of the disturbances of the tides. But to attribute to the tides the CAUSE of the moon's position would be no more erroneous than to attribute the cause of tides to the moon.</p>
 <p>19. It is not the intention, in these revelations, to give new calculations in regard to occurrences on the planets; it is a trifling difference whether a man prophesy by a vortex or by a planet. Wherein he erreth in regard to judging the cause of things, he should be put on the right road. Wherein he hath had no knowledge of the forces and currents of the unseen worlds and their dominion over the seen worlds, revelation only can reach him.</p>
 <p>20. They have said there are five elements of corpor; then again sixty; and a hundred. But in time they will say there are millions. And yet all of them are comprehended in the word corpor. To resolve them, discover them, and classify them, and their combinations, is the work of man. Where they are aggregated together, as the earth, the result is called a CREATION, or a created world. When such a globe is dissolved in ethe and sublimated, it is said a world is destroyed, or a star is destroyed. Nevertheless, in any of these operations, no one ingredient as such is annihilated. What is creation more than to make a drop of rain; or the dissolution of a world more than the evaporation of a drop of water?</p>
 <p>21. Pour a few drops of water on a table covered with dust, and each drop will become a globe. Look for them tomorrow, and they are gone (evaporated). The globe is annihilated (for it was not a thing in fact), but the water, which was the thing, is not annihilated, but evaporated. The term annihilation applieth to such as are not things in fact, but which are forms and figures. A ray of light (so-called) can be annihilated; but that that comprised it can not be annihilated.</p>
 <p>22. Were the earth's vortex to break, the earth would be precipitated into dissolution, under ordinary conditions. But were the earth's vortex to be swallowed in the vortex of another planet, then the earth would be precipitated as a globe to such planet. Such is the case as regardeth double stars, and triplets and quadruplets, especially where they are in contact. The same principle holdeth in regard to the vortices of some nebulae and comets; one is frequently swallowed up within another. But in such case the corpor commingleth.</p>
 <p>23. In the case of double stars, and triplets, and so on, if conjoined, the centre of gravitation (so-called) is not to each one, but to the intervening centre between them. The polarity of such a group is as to the vortex. Think not, however, that double stars or triplets or quadruples are the limit of combinations in one vortex. There are clusters of planets, hundreds of them, thousands, and even millions, that sometimes occupy one vortex.</p>
 <p>24. As a globe can be annihilated, so can a vortex, and so can vortexya; for none of these are things of themselves in fact, but combinations in some given place or condition; but the corpor of such expression of known forms and figures and motions can not be annihilated.</p>
 <p>25. Though the general form of a vortex, as before stated, in its beginning is long, funnel-shaped (like a whirlwind), its ultimate is toward a globular form. And though the current of a vortex is spiral, at first, its currents ultimate toward less spirality. If one could imagine a very long serpent in spiral form, constantly turning its head in at one pole, and its tail at the other, and forever crawling upon its own spirality, such a view would somewhat illustrate the currents of a vortex.</p>
 <p>26. In one plate the black centre representeth a planet, and the black spot with the letter "S" representeth a satellite. The white lines indicate the course of the vortexian currents, but purposely exaggerated in the drawing. First, to show the undulation in the vortex where the satellite resteth, and secondly, to show the head turning in at one end, and the bulge of the tail ready to overlap itself, wherefrom there is an excess of light manifested in the tail (northern) regions.</p>
 <p>27. Were the currents of the vortex to attain due east and west lines, without polar out-cropping, the winds would cease to blow on the face of the earth. The air and the earth would ultimate in equilibrium in axial revolution.</p>
 <p>28. Herein lieth the cause of the winds chiefly; nevertheless, high mountain ranges of irregular forms, and places on the earth's surface, add considerably to breaking and changing the currents that would otherwise result. The transcendent heat of the tropical atmosphere would seem to call for replacement from the north and south by cold currents of wind; but it must be remembered that only a few miles up from the earth the temperature of the tropical air is as low as the polar air. Only so far as icebergs float toward the <a name="page_578"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 578</font></a> equator is there any very perceptible lowering of the temperature of the air, and of wind currents toward the tropics.</p>
 <p>29. As previously stated, in describing the positive current of vortexya being in the form of a right-angle triangle, with the angle in the centre of the earth, and one leg toward the north pole, and one in the east, at the equator, it will now be perceived that the greatest cold region of the earth can not be at either the equator or the poles, but must occupy places distant from the poles in the exact ratio of the difference in the power between the positive and negative currents of vortexya and m'vortexya, and corresponding to the atmospherean lens of the earth.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah405.htm">Next: Chapter IV</a></center>
 </body>