<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah405.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah407.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter V</h3>
 <p>1. IN the transposition of needles of corpor from parallel polarity to mixed or transverse positions, are produced all kinds of colors. It is an error to say: Wave of light, or bent ray of light, or that a given number of vibrations or undulations produce different kinds of colors; there is neither wave nor undulation in fact. Needles are arbitrary and can not be bent. Compare a needle to a transparent glass crystal. Place a given number of these end to end, touching, and in a line: To bend this line is impossible, save at angles, for where every two ends join there will be an angle: Be the needles ever so short there will be no bend in fact, but a succession of arbitrary lines and elbows.</p>
 <p>2. Such is not, however, the juxtaposition, save when they are in a line direct; otherwise the ends of the needles do not bend like joints, but each one turneth more or less on its own axis. If they all turn, an APPARENT wave is produced, expressive of a certain color; if part of them turn, another color is produced. In proportion to this disturbance, so are the APPARENT vibrations slow or fast, as to mortal observation.</p>
 <p>3. In regions of the earth's atmosphere where they have cyclones, reddish lights appear in the firmament, even before the cyclone manifesteth on the earth. And these lights travel with the cyclone, manifesting great heat on the earth. In the regions of monsoons, a similar manifestation occurreth, but generally with pink or bluish lights instead of red, if over the ocean; but if over the land, a smoky atmosphere resulteth.</p>
 <p>4. These colors, and all others, manifested in atmospherea, are not confined to the earth stratum, but they extend even to the outer extreme of the earth's vortex. And in many instances they are so altitudinous that their manifestations are imperceptible to mortal observation, save that, for example, the moon or the sun shineth less brightly. When one of the transpositions is dark and is high up in the atmosphere at night, they say the moon is surrounded by a haze. And yet, the while, the atmospheric stratum next the earth may be clear.</p>
 <p>5. The earth's vortex hath millions of these strata, and of various colors, shades and tints. In taking photographs of the moon or the sun, these often interpose, and the picture taken deceiveth the observer, that he hath made a picture of the oxygen or hydrogen of the planet's atmosphere.</p>
 <p>6. The same state of affairs belongeth also in the sun's vortex; so that, with these clouds of color intervening in etherea, the telescope encountereth much travail.</p>
 <p>7. As a vortex groweth older, these disturbances, together with imperfect solutions of corpor, become less frequent. So also in the early age of a vortex they are more frequent and of longer duration. So that, at times, a red light, or blue light, or other color, will overspread the earth for periods of a thousand or more years without interruption. And in some cases, darkness for as long a period. Whatever living thing, as herbs and trees, grasses and so on, were quickened into life <a name="page_581"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 581</font></a> during darkness, were without eyes. Nevertheless, in this day, even these things turn toward the light; as plants and flowers placed in a window will manifest.</p>
 <p>8. Where se'mu was quickened into life in lighter times, it focalized toward the light, and this focus was called an eye. And such as were thus quickened into life, and not attached to the earth by fibres or roots, were called animals. And the LIFE they inherited gave power unto them, to go about from place to place. So great are the powers of the eyes of some animals that they can see and distinguish in the darkest of nights. Such eyes are absorbents of vortexya, and they shine in the dark.</p>
 <p>9. Hence the first organs of sense created in any animal were the eyes; whereof it hath been said, the eye is the seed of the tree of knowledge. The sight of the eye is the beginning of self-creation, in acquiring knowledge; and it doeth by going forth and staying at home at the same time. The sight of the eye is a miniature sun, sending forth and receiving vortexian power at the same time. As may be proved by looking on the eyelids of a person sleeping, who will awake because thereof.</p>
 <p>10. Since, then, the eye of man can go forth with intelligent power, controlling things, it hath been concluded since thousands of years, by the wisest philosophers, that an All Seeing Eye is the Cause and Creator of the whole universe, which is His Person.</p>
 <p>11. In the first quickening of eyes, they partook of the color of the vortexian lights at that time; and even so at the same period of time were colored the skins of mortals, and according to their surroundings, some light, some dark, and some red, or yellow, or copper-colored.</p>
 <p>12. And all of them propogated after their own kind, and do so to this day. And though the blacks might live for thousands of generations with themselves only, in any country in the world, they would never become whites. And the same rule applieth to whites and browns, and all the races of man.</p>
 <p>13. But because they can mix, and because that mixture can propogate, all the races of man are one and the same in all their organs and capabilities. Now, as previously stated, white things manufacture a white atmosphere around them; whilst black things do not (being negative). The white give off, or radiate light and power; the black are not radiants. The white man's radiating power recoileth upon himself, and he suffereth with heat. So also with the white bear. The black man and black bear are the reverse.</p>
 <p>14. Wherefrom this rule will now be plain to the student: When a planet hath attained to so great age she no longer giveth forth light or heat to radiate upon herself, she can not be seen in the heavens. Of which kinds of planets there are millions in the etherean firmament. Some of these move slower than any of the planets man can see. Some of these at times eclipse the sun, and are taken for sun-spots, although, perhaps, not a million miles from the earth.</p>
 <p>15. Like unto these, in darkness, are there plateaux of nebula floating in the firmament, which also produce eclipses of the sun and of the moon. For convenience, let such planets and nebula be called dead planets and dead nebula. And that there are millions of such bodies, sufficient to eclipse the sun, or a star, or the moon, the different periods of darkness on the earth will prove. (See notes at end of Book of Ben.)</p>
 <p>16. In prophesying the tendency of a planet's approach to death, refer once more to the moon: Now the moon hath, as to the earth's face, no axial revolution. But it must be remembered the moon can not go around the earth without making an actual axial revolution. Seventy and one-half revolutions of the moon's vortex complete one travel around the earth's vortex. Consequently we arrive at the exact speed of the moon's vortexya and the strength of light and heat manifested on the moon. The student should make allowance for the moon's ellipse, for the light of the moon is much stronger (as seen from the earth) some times than others.</p>
 <p>17. Place the se'muan age at ninety-nine degrees, the time of quickening animal life. It will be found that the moon at such period must have had an axial motion, facing the earth, of three and four-sevenths' times faster than the earth. Whilst at the same period of time the earth made its daily revolution in what would now be twenty-one hours and forty minutes. This would give a difference in animal heat of two and a half degrees of vortexya on the earth, as compared to the se'muan age. Consequently large animals, which are now extinct, had a temperature (average) higher of two and a half degrees than at present. Wherein we perceive three hours and seventeen minutes' loss in axial motion produced a loss of two and a half degrees of vortexian heat.</p>
 <p><a name="page_582"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 582</font></a></p>
 <p>18. The difference, therefore, on the moon, in temperature below blood-heat and what it now must be, must correspond exactly with its comparative slowness (one revolution a month), as to the loss manifested on the earth. Now, although the student will discover the moon hath fallen to a temperature far below zero, yet it emitteth both light and heat.</p>
 <p>19. To find the se'muan age (especially of man), place his temperature at ninety-eight (for good health), and one hundred and two at inflammation or death. Four below normal will, therefore, be the period of man's inhabitation of the earth. After the vortexian radiation reacheth this period, man will cease to propogate, and, so, become extinct as to the earth.</p>
 <p>20. This giveth man eight degrees of vortexya as the sum of his existence. One degree is equivalent to twelve million seven hundred and sixty thousand radi c'vorkum. The serpent's coil would be one and one-fourth. That is, twenty-four thousand years to the time of completion. Thus, 12,760,000 divided by 260,000 add 1,402 1-2 add 24,000 x 3 = 76,750 years, the time of the se'muan age for man. To this should be added one cycle, of, say, three thousand years, which was the beginning of the fall of se'mu.</p>
 <p>21. By reversing these measurements, find the axial decrease of the earth in seventy-eight thousand years, which will be just one hundred minutes, or 3-340ths of a second annually, which is the earth's decline in speed. For which reason the first of the race of man on earth began about seventy-eight thousand years B.K.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah407.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a></center>
 </body>