<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah484.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah486.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter II</h3>
 <p>1. GOD, Son of Jehovih, said: Give ear, O earth, and be attentive to the words of Jehovih's Son:</p>
 <p>2. And ye mortals of the earth; for I have said: The time shall surely come when all things shall be revealed to the inhabitants of the earth.</p>
 <p>3. Be patient and wise in understanding me; my words are for your resurrection forever, and for the glory of the Creator.</p>
 <p>4. And ye angels of heaven, draw near; for I will reveal to you that which is for your own good. The multitude of my kingdoms shall be opened up to your understanding also.</p>
 <p>5. And O ye, my high raised Lords and officers of heaven, call up your hosts from far and near. Hear ye the words of your God. Call ye up the mighty ones of Yogannaqactra and the inhabitants of Theovrahkistan.</p>
 <p>6. And Hibin, the successor to Yussamis, of the six heavens of Ugsadisspe, to Tewallawalla, to Setee'song, to Go'e'dhu, to Ellapube, to Apax and to Fue. And call ye up the successors to Hibin, and the primal Gods under him of his six mighty heavens.</p>
 <p>7. And Ong Woo, the successor to Anuhasaj, of the heavenly regions, the <a name="page_665"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 665</font></a> a'ji'an forest, Turpeset, with her twelve heavenly kingdoms; the place of Negathogan and Shumat and Thorokak and Enisshappaga and Habor and Amga and Magossa and Dhi Wan and Seffakostrus and Inubib and Marh and Wischowitcha, and to the primal Gods and generals and captains.</p>
 <p>8. And to Yusalithth, successor to Osiris, of Vrigginyannah; and to Raxya, successor to Te'in of Ovella; and to Yadonya, successor to Sudga, of Tempissiv; and to Yima, successor to Egupt, of Rathyaya; and to Hidemmes, successor to Shu Wan Loo, of Wowahyotos.</p>
 <p>9. And to their primal Gods and successors, and to their generals and captains.</p>
 <p>10. And to Zhubon, successor to the line of Yaton'te, with her twelve subjective heavens, the Fiskadore, the Wooloo, the Yamyam, the Katiro, the Wannahogan, the Ravax, the Ginnewan, the Shawnea, the Wishogah, the Pottomatta, the Shiwasae and Muskadayan.</p>
 <p>11. And to their primal Gods and successors, and to their generals and captains.</p>
 <p>12. And to Yessotosissi, successor to Yodma, of the heavenly regions of Ornababa, with seven mighty kingdoms, Gootha and Yembique and Waing T'soo and Ithya and Yorama and Hi'D'honyah and Wurrtembogga.</p>
 <p>13. And to their primal Gods and their successors, and to their generals and captains.</p>
 <p>14. And to Pidissomo, successor to Savvaqactra, of the heavenly place Joisyama, with her eighteen heavenly kingdoms, You and Loo Sin and Kad and Rum and Jassak and Solomon and Ressa and Nibbakak and Hizeph and Sakkar and Sin Chong and Remthaxax and Avardissa and Kessadronakas and Hui'gammaksonad and Nu Lee Wing and Trasmas and Kissayaya.</p>
 <p>15. And to their primal Gods and successors, and to their generals and captains.</p>
 <p>16. And to all other Gods of the heavenly regions of atmospherea, the hada of the earth; and to their successors and generals and captains; and to the heavenly, hadan regions of Sho'e'gan, with her twenty-eight sub-kingdoms, and to the heavenly, hadan ragions of Ghi'e'wan, with her forty-four sub-kingdoms, and to their exalted officers and teachers, heavenly Sons and Daughters of Jehovih.</p>
 <p>17. And to the plateau of Narid, in the second resurrection, with her two hundred heavenly kingdoms, their Gods and generals and captains and high teachers, Sons and Daughters of Jehovih.</p>
 <p>18. And to the plateau of Yakabba, two thousand miles high, with her six hundred heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high officers.</p>
 <p>19. And to the plateau of Yannurib, two thousand one hundred miles high, with her four hundred heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high officers.</p>
 <p>20. And the seven plateaux of Havagamatris, with their two thousand heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high officers.</p>
 <p>21. And the six plateaux of Vraggaomen, with their fourteen hundred heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high officers.</p>
 <p>22. And the fourteen plateaux of Ghemayumaistra, with their three thousand four hundred heavenly kingdoms, and their Gods and high officers.</p>
 <p>23. And to all other plateaux in the heavens of the earth, the atmospherean regions, and to the Gods of all heavenly kingdoms in these lower heavens; the intermediate world of the angels raised up out of the earth.</p>
 <p>24. God said: Jehovih called upon me, His Son, saying: My Son! Call aloud in My name; with My Voice stir up all these heavenly regions I have named.</p>
 <p>25. For My Gods and high-raised officers shall open unto thee their libraries of heavenly books which shall yield up My treasures. I will make the angels of heaven know Me and My word! They shall come together from their countless heavenly kingdoms and places; for My hand and My strong arm is upon them.</p>
 <p>26. The labors of My lower heavens shall be clothed in mortal words, and handed down to mortals. My Gods and My primal Gods and generals and captains shall uncover their proceedings before the heavens and the earth.</p>
 <p>27. They shall come together and be as one man with one voice, and their word shall be My word.</p>
 <p>28. For My prophets have proclaimed it abroad, that the time would come when I would reveal all things unto men; and things that were dark made plain; and things in the light made as heaven, rejoicing.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah486.htm">Next: Chapter III</a></center>
 </body>