<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah410.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah412.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter X</h3>
 <p>1. IT is not the part of this book to deal with spiritual matters, only so far as enableth the student to begin etheic knowledge.</p>
 <p>2. First, then, there are two kinds of prophecy, or two ways to prophesy. For example, the ant and the bee, and many animals, prophesy in regard to an approaching winter. Even birds begin to fly toward tropical regions whilst it is yet warm weather.</p>
 <p>3. These creatures prophesy by the direct action of vortexian currents upon them. They feel what is approaching, BECAUSE THE UNSEEN CAUSE IS ALREADY UPON THEM.</p>
 <p>4. Man can learn to acquire the same kind of prophecy. And this is different from the prophecy herein before mentioned, because he prophesieth in this last method without rules or calculations.</p>
 <p>5. To attain this kind of prophecy, the following discipline is requisite:</p>
 <p>6. To live in the fields and forests, and study the action of unseen forces upon himself; to eat not fish, nor flesh, nor any food that cometh of animals; to bathe daily; to permit no passion to enter his mind; to abnegate self and to wed himself to the Creator for righteousness sake, and to do good; to discipline his mind, to remain in any given direction on any subject, for days if necessary; to become oblivious to pain. After which he shall receive anointment from one who had previously attained the seership.</p>
 <p>7. To attain such prophecy is to forfeit sexual powers; to forfeit appetite; to forfeit ambition for leadership and fame; to forfeit concern for the opinions of the world. In fact, to become a Bridegroom (or a Bride) to the Creator.</p>
 <p><a name="page_589"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 589</font></a></p>
 <p>8. Not all persons can attain to this; but some are born closely allied to it.</p>
 <p>9. There is also another kind of prophecy, wherein man prophesieth by spirits speaking through him. This is dangerous, for lying spirits may come to him.</p>
 <p>10. Rather, let man seek to become one with the Father, making close observations of the rules of vortexya; for in this he provideth for the development of all his faculties.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah412.htm">Next: Chapter XI</a></center>
 </body>