<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah448.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah450.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">RAK.</h3>
 <p>1. PRAISE Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O thou sea of lands. Ye boundless prairies, that stretch out to the horizon, to the rising sun and to the setting thereof in a sea of fire. <a name="page_654"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 654</font></a></p>
 <p>2. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty. Praise Him, O ye towering mountains, ye mighty walls of heaven! And thou everlasting snow, shining like diamonds in the sun.</p>
 <p>3. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye colors that overspread the heavens. Ye clouds of purple and yellow and burning gold, and in flames of fire.</p>
 <p>4. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye green meadows and ye waving fields of wheat and corn. And ye ripened harvests that beckon and wave like sheets of gold.</p>
 <p>5. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye far-off Blue Mountains, and ye defiant Black Hills. In sombre hue and silent majesty, proclaim Him! Eternity! Eternity!</p>
 <p>6. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye Rocky Mountains. In the long wall of your mightiness proclaim the power of His hand and great majesty!</p>
 <p>7. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye Sierra Nevadas. In your everlasting snow and mighty forests. Your fearful hanging rocks, above the clouds!</p>
 <p>8. Praise Jehovih, the Almighty! Praise Him, O ye great rivers, that gallop down from the Alleghanies, the Rocky Mountains and Sierra Nevadas; that travel so far to the mighty oceans.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah450.htm">Next: OTE</a></center>
 </body>