<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah466.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah468.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">NIV.</h3>
 <p>1. HOLY, Holy, Holy, O Bon! Thou arc of the fountain of preserved records. Thy labor is done! The earth is surrounded by the Faithists of Jehovih. The shout of gladness riseth up from mortals for the glory of the Almighty.</p>
 <p>2. The harvest of your labor, Esdras and Wedojain and Mieute, ye etherean kingdoms in the high heavens of the Great Spirit. With your ninety thousand million angels in the songs of the Most High! Proclaim it in your seas of fire, Jehovih hath won!</p>
 <p>3. O ye heavenly kingdoms, Takuspe and Kenna and Vetta'puissa and Looloowonga, sing glory to the All One, the Great Spirit! His hand hath encircled the earth, His name is written and sung in the souls of mortals; there is but one Great Spirit, Jehovih!</p>
 <p>4. Proclaim the joy of the earth, O ye etherean heavens, Lotisiv and Aptlong and Wiskloo and Hotab, with your millions of etherean seas, and your tens of millions of etherean plains and high mountains.</p>
 <p>5. Rejoice for the joy of mortals, O ye etherean heavens, Hennasit and Hoxora and Lon and Oriyi and Sing and Avolassak, with your holy mountains, Yetungwas and seventy thousand million miles of plains.</p>
 <p>6. Ye contributors to mortals, O ye high angels of the etherean heavens, ye volunteers to Lika, Son of Jehovih! Proclaim the great joy in the everlasting heavens of the Great Spirit, Jehovih.</p>
 <p>7. Sing an endless song to the Almighty, the Creator of hundreds of thousands of millions of etherean heavens! The red star, the earth, is risen! The kingdom of Jehovih resteth on the solid earth!</p>
 <p>8. Glorify Him in the highest, the All One, Who is farther than all the universe, the Almighty, Jehovih; your labors on earth, O ye angels of the etherean heavens, harvesting unto the Almighty!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah468.htm">Next: VEN</a></center>
 </body>