<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah404.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah406.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IV</h3>
 <p>1. THE currents of the vortex of the earth being in constant change, the following results happen. In the regions where they overlap one another, and break to a limited extent, producing discord in motion, certain eddies and whirlpools result, and the corpor in solution is condensed, like little planets or meteoric stones, varying in size from a pin's head to ten or twenty miles in diameter. And the little broken currents in the vortex lose their prey, and the meteoric stones or little planets are carried by the vortexian current down to the earth's surface.</p>
 <p>2. The belt in atmospherea where these things happen is usually about five or six or seven hundred miles up from the earth's surface. But the belt sometimes ascendeth a thousand miles. But at other distances upward other belts exist; and others still beyond, and so on.</p>
 <p>3. Another result that happeneth from these overlapping currents in the vortex, is the production of rain and snow and hail. Certain parts of the earth are given to snow; certain parts to rain and hail; and other parts to drouth. In drouth regions the vortexian overlappings descend to the very earth, where they are called by various names, such as cyclones, whirlwinds and so on; but if they occur on the ocean, carrying either up or down a current of water, they are termed water-spouts. In regions where there are rain, hail and snow falls, the vortexian commotion taketh place from half a mile to three miles above the earth's surface. Here the discord resulteth in liberating the moisture which was in transparent solution, and clouds result. But if the commotion continue, these are, atomically, still further liberated, and either rain or snow or hail resulteth, which is carried down to the earth.</p>
 <p>4. The places in the vortex of the earth where these discords result are nearly uniform in their relative distance from the earth, and in the times of the occurrence, having special reference to the prophetic periods previously given.</p>
 <p>5. Refer to in Book of Ben where will be seen a variety of representations of the forms and figures of snow-flakes. But these are not all; there are thousands of millions of them, differing so much from one another that description is not possible. As previously stated, corpor being in solution in ethe, hath in the main the shape of needles, but of such infinitesimal size that corporeal knowledge of them can only be, at most, subjective knowledge. But in the snow-flake are both the casting and the mold of discordant m'vortexian currents.</p>
 <p>6. But it must be borne in mind that where one snow-flake is molded in one moment, another snow-flake molded in the same place the next moment, and so on, would display no two snow-flakes alike. Three stages may be described in the discordant results: first, the cloud; second, the frozen cloud, which is snow; and third, the rain-drop or hail-stone.</p>
 <p>7. In the meteoric regions (which are above such clouds as produce rain) corpor also presenteth three stages of development, which are: Ash-clouds, transparent or otherwise; and crystal needles; and meteoric stones. The latter only, as a general rule, are precipitated to the earth. But on certain occasions, both the other forms of corpor are also precipitated to the earth.</p>
 <p>8. Allowing a certain size to rain clouds, which are near the earth, corporeal clouds high up in the vortex, are proportionately larger according to the ratio of the difference between their globular circumference and that of the lower strata. So also are the discordant waves proportionally longer, wider and deeper.</p>
 <p>9. It is an error to say that the atmosphere of the earth decreaseth gradually and continually in specific gravity according to the distance above the earth.</p>
 <p>10. It is an error to say that there is any gravity in it, save only that it precipitateth formations like rain, snow, hail and meteoric stones. As before shown, these things have no gravity of their own to go in any direction. Nor <a name="page_578"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 578</font></a> is there any attraction in the earth to pull them down. They are driven to the earth by the vortexian current. But the point herein now considered is, the commonly expressed knowledge of men, that the atmosphere hath less density outward, away from the earth, in proportion to the distance from the earth's surface. In one respect this is an error; in another a truth: As to density <i>per se</i> there is no difference in the atmosphere on the face of the earth compared to that of a thousand miles high, or a hundred thousand miles high. It is all in even balance, as to pressure and density, <i>per se.</i> But because the etheic solution of corpor is more sublimated by swifter axial motion in the higher regions, and because the lower regions contain less perfectly dissolved corpor, the difference hath been improperly described. Air is no heavier because of rain; the weight lieth in the rain only.</p>
 <p>11. Hence the gravity (so-called) of the atmosphere hath reference only to imperfect solutions of corpor. And it is true that a superabundance of these imperfect solutions are near the earth.</p>
 <p>12. At the sea-level a certain pressure seemeth to manifest, as in a barometer; on a high mountain a less pressure seemeth to manifest. There is also a variation in the barometer according to certain conditions of the atmosphere. The difference is not that the pressure of the atmosphere is different; the pressure of the atmosphere, <i>per se,</i> is the same in all directions, high and low. The cause of the variation of the barometer is in reference to distension (sublimated solution of corpor), and hath no reference to pressure as such. This capacity to distension is not only external to the barometer, but within it also; so that as a measure of atmospheric pressure <i>per se</i> it is entirely worthless. The suction pump, or inverted tube filled with water, showeth the pressure of the atmosphere upward as well as downward, and showeth what the pressure is.</p>
 <p>13. Wherefrom it is shown there is no such thing as attraction of gravitation of the atmosphere toward the earth more than away from it. Where the atmosphere is overcharged with an imperfect solution of corpor, or snow or rain, that excess is that which balanceth toward the earth. But this also only applieth in regions close to the earth's surface. Fifty or a hundred thousand miles up from the earth, the axial velocity of the vortex is so great that rain or snow would be instantaneously dissolved, distended and lost to sight. Consequently the solutions in the higher atmosphere not only contain moisture, but they contain iron, lead, zinc, gold, platinum, clay, granite, diamonds and all other things known to exist on the earth, and many others besides.</p>
 <p>14. In the early age of the vortex of the earth, so swiftly flew the outer rim that border eddies ensued, from which nebula congregated, until the earth had a nebulous belt around it. This belt, in time, losing pace with the earth's vortex, condensed and made the moon.</p>
 <p>15. But to return to the snow-flake and to the needles of the corpor whilst in the etheic solutions: On a cloudy day these solutions or needles (mist, or dull atmosphere) are more or less transverse to the vortexian lines. In a clear day the needles are linear to the earth, and this is the reason it is a clear day. The latter direction of the needles may be called direct, and the former indirect. Wherein they are direct, and they fall on the photoplate, the force of their blows is called actinic force, and it is the same as where they fall on the wet linen in the bleachman's field. In this actinic blow a weak electric flame is produced by each needle; hence the bleaching power, and also the power to blister an exposed skin which hath been kept for years in the dark (negative).</p>
 <p>16. If a solution of iron, transparent, or of quinine, or other recipient of negative electricity, be sprinkled on the cloth, the actinic ray will not result in the electric spark, and no bleaching effect will be produced; and even, sometimes, on the contrary, a black spot will result.</p>
 <p>17. Wherever the vortexian current falleth, corpor is more or less damaged or dissolved, or changed in its combinations. On a piece of iron, fresh broken, it produceth rust. Because the vortexian solution contained oxygen, this effect hath been called oxidation. Nevertheless, in point of fact, oxygen of itself is inert: The break of its needles liberateth vortexya, which result is a minor representation of the discharge of an electric spark from the pole of a battery.</p>
 <p>18. As previously stated, the vortexian currents are to the earth in the daylight; and from the earth in the night; although their force is toward the centre of the earth (from the east) and toward the north pole afterward. The following result happeneth: For example, a pool of water is charged during the day with the positive current; during the night the negative <a name="page_580"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 580</font></a> current escapeth upward from the water. The decomposition resulting therefrom is called se'mu (green scum), a mucilaginous substance which floateth on the surface of the water. In some days' time this se'mu, by motion (from some external cause), assumeth certain defined shapes, crystalline, fibrous and otherwise, after the manner of strange configurations of frost on a window-pane. In some days after this, if the se'mu be examined with a lens it will be discovered that here are miniature trees, even forests, with vines and grasses. No seed was there.</p>
 <p>19. This new property is called LIFE, and because it existeth everywhere it is called OMNIPRESENT. Man can account for the se'mu; for the positive and negative forces; for corpor and for ethe; but Life is unfathomable by man. The se'mu (green scum) floateth against the ground; its infinitesimal trees and vines and grasses take root and grow, and live a season and die; but from the roots and seeds a larger growth succeedeth. Thus becometh all the world inhabitated over with living creatures. Nevertheless not one thing of all of them mergeth into another; but every one bringeth forth after its own kind.</p>
 <p>20. Man inquireth of the earth, the rocks, the air, and of all things: Who is this Life? This Omnipresent that quickeneth into life all the living? But none can answer him. Then man inquireth of LIFE: Who art Thou, O Life? And the answer cometh to the soul of man: I AM LIFE! I AM THE I AM! I AM THE EVER PRESENT! All that thou seest in earth or heaven, and even the unseen worlds, also, are My very Person! I am the Whole!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah406.htm">Next: Chapter V</a></center>
 </body>