<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah460.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah462.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">LAIS.</h3>
 <p>1. SING to Jehovih, O ye heavenly places in the Orian fields of Yuniv and H'monken; and ye Saughts and Mentabraw, and of the arc of Ole and Leigga.</p>
 <p>2. O ye heavenly places in the Nirvanian Mountains of Itis and Vairiyonirom; and in the crystal fountains of Ittiyivius, the great summer visiting place of millions of Gods; in the high Clefts and Arches of Yasinosa!</p>
 <p>3. O ye heavenly places in the etherean plains of Aoit and Tas and Foe and Raim, and of the Mantles of Light in Thessagon, home of the forty thousand millions.</p>
 <p>4. O ye seas of Nista and Hoit, in the Nirvanian heavens, where course a thousand million ships of the congregations of the Almighty. Sing to Him, thou sea of etherean fire, Poyisativi, home of billions!</p>
 <p>5. O ye fields of Norse and ye Marshes of Ho in the Orian Chain of Avasta and Songastos. Sing to the Creator, ye etherean swamps and plains and mountains, Habak and Yadis, home of a hundred thousand millions.</p>
 <p>6. O ye etherean farms of Izaracna and Towen, by the road of Oya. Sing to the Creator, O Wuts, thou old head-quarters of the Gods and Goddesses, Foetisya and Yagahectus and Sortaba, in the Holy Council of the roads.</p>
 <p>7. O ye etherean worlds, Sue'kan and Yabaxax and Sud, where the ten thousand fleets of the ships of Navagatta and Plowkom and Iodoyo came in the Council of Habiyi, to make the vortex of Novian to Jehovih.</p>
 <p>8. O all ye millions of heavenly worlds created by the Creator for His countless millions of high-raised angels, since millions of years; proclaim Him in the matchless wonder of His creations, the Almighty, the All One, Jehovih.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah462.htm">Next: LOO</a></center>
 </body>