<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah445.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah447.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">SAR.</h3>
 <p>1. ALMIGHTY! Almighty! Love Abounding! Who gathered up the dust of the earth, as a wind, with judgment and forethought; and sorted the substance thereof and shaped it.</p>
 <p>2. None but Thee, Jehovih, looked on or knew Thy proceedings. And to one Thou saidst: Be thou a beast of the field; and to another: Be thou a serpent; and to another: Be thou a wild beast of the forest.</p>
 <p>3. And they ran forth at Thy command, every one to his place, rejoicing in the work of Thy hand. And I looked thereon, O Thou Almighty! What work of perfection in each, even to the flesh and bones.</p>
 <p>4. But Thou turnedst mine eyes inward, and I saw the wisdom of the serpent and the beast; and the thoughts and desires of their understanding, how perfectly Thou hast made them.</p>
 <p>5. I saw the love Thou gavest each unto its own kind; yea, even the serpent gathered up her young, because of her love, to shield them from harm.</p>
 <p>6. O that I could find the first Cause of the judgment of every living thing! To come close to the Almighty; to question Him!</p>
 <p>7. Thou Who shapedst a moiety of earth, and said: Be thou a bird, with feathers! Fly and sing! And it went forth, upward in the air of heaven, rejoicing in Thy name, Jehovih!</p>
 <p>8. To another: Be thou an eagle; in ice and snow freeze not; above the clouds proclaim the Almighty!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah447.htm">Next: UNH</a></center>
 </body>