<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah465.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah467.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_658"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 658</font></a></p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">JAUS.</h3>
 <p>1. O that I could sing worthily unto Thee, in praise of the Arc of Speta. For Thy Mightiness, O that I could find mortal words to magnify Thy vast kingdoms.</p>
 <p>2. In Thy great Goddess, Cpenta-armij, and her mighty etherean legions that came down to earth, O what a glory in Thy praise. Who can forget Thy heaven, Terashish, Thou Almighty.</p>
 <p>3. And Haot-Saiti and Hodws and Lugga and Bonassah and Tule and Speta-arc, with their ten million seas and their hundred million crystal rivers in the arches of Woo.</p>
 <p>4. With their eighty thousand million high-raised Gods and Goddesses. With their one hundred and sixty thousand million miles of etherean roadways and capitals!</p>
 <p>5. And thou, Solastus plains, with thy twelve million arches in the waters of Waltad; with seventy million ship-builders, the workers and handlers of Thy immortal fire.</p>
 <p>6. And the etherean kingdoms of Hards and Iwalt and Kollenpoitaben and Embralik and Loogan and Aftguy and Riv and Lurnzan, with their two hundred thousand million miles of arches built unto Thee.</p>
 <p>7. Let them rejoice in Thy name, and in the fruit of the garden of Thy Daughter, Cpenta-armij, for the harvest is ripened unto Thee.</p>
 <p>8. Thy Sons and Daughters answer to the echo on the mortal earth: There is but one Almighty! Let us sing unto the Boundless, the Everlasting Creator.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah467.htm">Next: NIV</a></center>
 </body>