<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah472.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah474.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">RUX.</h3>
 <p>1. THEN sang the bound heavens, the atmosphereans. First, Ghiovagna, with her two million cities, in the plateau Wahaputosivi.</p>
 <p>2. Almighty Creator, hear Thy Daughter in the Hemsan-way, sweet cliffs in the colleges of Tuan, with her thirty million students, swift uprising. Marching onward in praise of Thee, my Creator.</p>
 <p>3. With ample material, O Thou Boundless, for Thy sixty million hosts in jubilee. Striving onward in Thy praise, buoyant with love and rejoicing in the lessons of the Omnipotent.</p>
 <p>4. With seven million factories to train the untutored es'yan the purpose of the talents Thou createdst with all to be most shining lights in building the house of the Almighty in rapturous industry.</p>
 <p>5. With her two million nurseries for the spirits of infants, full of delight and songs to Jehovih! With fragrance and delightful plains and forests and shining waters, created by Thee, Thou All Perfect.</p>
 <p>6. With my four million miles of roadways and atmospherean oceans, wherein Thy high-raised angels teach the es'yans how to master the elements Thou createdst, swift and mighty, proclaiming Thy power.</p>
 <p>7. O the songs and praises of Thy Daughter, Ghiovagna, the heaven of four hundred million angels, swift in learning, pure in love, with a choir a million strong to sing and chant to Thee on the waters of heaven.</p>
 <p>8. O the songs of gladness, the shining robes of Thy loved ones, Jehovih. The lessons of wisdom, the growth of talent, the dance and merry-making, the learning to master Thy elements, O thou Almighty.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah474.htm">Next: GHOI</a></center>
 </body>