<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah556.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah558.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIV</h3>
 <p>1. FOR three hundred years prior to the above transactions, the four false Gods had been in war to a limited extent in their heavens, and for certain earth possessions also.</p>
 <p>2. In Chine'ya, the Ka'yuans (Confucians) had made great progress, to the injury of the false Brahma, Ennochissa. But the latter had pushed his people into Vind'yu and Parsi'e.</p>
 <p>3. On the part of Kabalactes, the false Buddha, he had pushed his people into Chine'ya and Parsi'e also. And in many parts of Vind'yu, these Budhists had treated the Brahmins with great slaughter.</p>
 <p>4. But neither of the above false Gods was a match for Thoth, alias God-Gabriel. Under the name and doctrines of Mohammed, he had made great inroads upon the possessions of the other two false Gods, both as to the earth and the heavens thereof.</p>
 <p>5. And yet, on the other hand, Looeamong, the false Kriste, had taken advantage of all the other three false Gods. He had found mortal emissaries in Britain (western Uropa) whom he had inspired under the name, EAST INDIA COMPANY. To these he had said: Come, I will lead you where there is great wealth and most luxurious enjoyment. Behold, ye shall possess the place, and overcome the heathen of a rich country.</p>
 <p>6. So, Looeamong led them, and they took with them missionaries and bibles and swords and cannons and war-ships. And when they arrived at Vind'yu, Looeamong, through his angel hosts, said unto them: Tell these heathen, ye are worshipers of the Lamb of Peace; that ye have come in love and for righteousness' sake. And, behold, they will receive you. And it shall come to pass, when ye are once within, ye shall fall upon them, and destroy them by the million, men, women and children. And ye shall fall upon their aqueducts, which irrigate the lands, and ye shall destroy them also; and, behold, millions of these heathen shall starve every year, because of the famines that shall surely come upon them.</p>
 <p>7. Now, all these came to pass; the idolaters of Looeamong did fall upon the Budhists' earthly possessions, and did possess the land of Vind'yu, and, in the name of Kriste and the Holy Ghost, did kill seven million men, women and children.</p>
 <p>8. And they also destroyed the aqueducts, whereby famines came upon the Vind'yuans, so that, in course of time, thirty millions more perished of starvation.</p>
 <p>9. Now, although Kabalactes thus lost, in a great measure, his earthly possessions, he still maintained the heavens of Vind'yu, so that Looeamong really gained but few souls, in heaven, after all his destructions.</p>
 <p>10. Looeamong had also led his mortal emissaries into Chine'ya, in hope to possess that country also. He had said to them: Go thither, and enforce upon them the opium trade. And it shall come to pass, they will become a drunken and worthless people, and ye shall fall upon them, and overcome them, and possess all their country, wherein there are stored great riches.</p>
 <p>11. And the idolaters of the false Kriste did fall upon the Chine'yans and enforce the opium trade, and did also make many of them a drunken and worthless people. And after they were thus drunk, the idolaters of the false Kriste raised the cry: Behold, the drunken heathen! The indulgers in opium!</p>
 <p>12. Nevertheless, the Ka'yuans of Chine'ya were a mighty power, and they baffled Looeamong's emissaries in all further encroachments.</p>
 <p>13. Now, although Looeamong had been beaten by the wisdom of God, in possessing the colonies of Guatama, nevertheless, Looeamong still hoped to regain the country to himself. And to carry out his designs, he sent two thousand million angel warriors to accomplish <a name="page_744"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 744</font></a> the destruction of the Algonquin tribes that inhabited the country.</p>
 <p>14. And this also came to pass, the idolaters of Looeamong did fall upon the Algonquins, and caused three millions of them to be put to death, men, women and children.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XV</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">GOD, JEHOVIH'S SON, CASTETH OUT THE FOUR FALSE GODS</p></font>.
 <p>1. WHEN the right time came, Jehovih spake to God, saying: My Son, behold, the kosmon era is near, and the light of the arc of su'is entereth the fields of Paradise. Stretch forth thy hand over the nations of the earth and over the heavens thereof, and sweep clean thy kingdoms for My everlasting light.</p>
 <p>2. The four false Gods, the perpetuators of the beast, will call out in agony, but thou shalt heed them not in My judgments.</p>
 <p>3. Then God sent forth his disciplined hosts, twelve thousand millions, to cut off the supplies of the earth. Even as a mortal general cutteth off the supplies of a wicked city to subdue it, so was the accumulated power of the All Light upon the four kingdoms of the four false Gods, they that had proclaimed themselves the Saviors of mortals and angels.</p>
 <p>4. And the angels of God spread around about the whole earth! In armies of millions and tens of millions, well disciplined, they gathered together in the mortal cities, and in the country places, amongst all nations, tribes and peoples.</p>
 <p>5. And these angel armies were officered and drilled to work in concert, with lines of light extending to the throne of God.</p>
 <p>6. And God spake in Paradise, by means of the lines of light, and his voice went into all the mighty armies of his hosts, the twelve thousand million, saying:</p>
 <p>7. Cut off the earth supplies of the four beasts of the earth.   They and their countless legions of followers have become profitless in the resurrection of mortals and angels.</p>
 <p>8. Their names have become a stench upon the earth. Their mortal followers are grovelers in all manner of uncleanness. Their spirits have become as vagabonds on the earth and in the heavens thereof.</p>
 <p>9. My hosts have tried to persuade them, but they will not hear; the light of the upper kingdoms, they will not receive.</p>
 <p>10. But I will make them look up. Like beasts that are untamed, they shall cry out for sustenance, but they shall not find it in the places of their old haunts.</p>
 <p>11. Then, the hosts of God marched in betwixt the drujas, the worshipers of the four false Gods, and their mortal harvests.</p>
 <p>12. And the drujas turned to their respective Gods, the false Brahma, the false Buddha, and Gabriel of Kalla, and the false Kriste, crying out: Behold, our supplies are cut off! Is not the earth thy kingdom, and the place of thy footstool. Saidst thou not that thou wert the Almighty? How, then, hath another God come between? If thou art, indeed, our Savior, now save us! But if thou hast been all this while deceiving, then shall hell by thy portion!</p>
 <p>13. The four false Gods heard the cry of anger and suspicion in their mighty kingdoms; heard the wailings of the sixty thousand millions. And they feared, and trembled.</p>
 <p>14. Most of all in fear was the false Kriste, for, for sake of aggrandizing his own kingdom, he had had it proclaimed on the earth that: Whosoever believeth in me, shall be saved; but whosoever believeth not in me, shall be in danger of hell-fire!</p>
 <p>15. And countless millions of mortals had taken no thought as to self-resurrection, but taken him at his word; and so had lived and died and become his slaves for hundreds of years. Millions of these angels had heavenly banners made, with the promises of this false Lord inscribed thereon, and with these went in processions in heaven, crying out: Bread or blood! Bread or blood! We come not to bring peace in heaven; we come to bring a sword! We come to set angel against angel! Give unto us, O thou, our God, or hell shall be thy portion!</p>
 <p>16. Thus, it came to pass, as had been foretold by God, whereof he had said: Anarchy shall encompass your heavenly kingdoms, and ye shall yet own that ye are false before Jehovih.</p>
 <p>17. And the four false Gods, fearing the fires of hell, went about, crying out: I am not the true Brahma! I am not the true Budah! I am not the true God! I am not the true Kriste!</p>
 <p>18. For they hoped thereby to save themselves. But, alas, for them. Their thousands of millions fell upon their heavenly cities, palaces and thrones, and robbed them.</p>
 <p>19. And, when their fury was started, behold, the vast multitudes rushed for <a name="page_745"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 745</font></a> the false Gods, and fell upon them, beat them, suffocated them with foul smells, covered them up with suffocating gases, walled them in with sulphurous fires.</p>
 <p>20. And they brought the officers and priests and monks and high officers, and cast them into hells also, millions and millions of high-ruling angels of the false Gods.</p>
 <p>21. Thus were these four false Gods hemmed in, even within their own dissolute kingdoms, and every day and every hour grew more terrible. It was the infuriated madness of sixty thousand millions of deceived angels, broken loose from slavery, turned upon them.</p>
 <p>22. Then Jehovih's God, from Paradise, went forth in a ship of fire, brilliant, past the endurance of drujas; went forth with ten millions high in the grades; ten millions against sixty thousand millions. God brought these from the realms of Aroqu and Harivya, well disciplined for the purpose.</p>
 <p>23. And on the ship, and on the banners thereof, were inscribed these words: THERE IS BUT ONE GREAT SPIRIT, JEHOVIH. TO ASSIMULATE WITH HIM, IS THE SALVATION OF MORTALS AND ANGELS.</p>
 <p>24. He crieth out: Come unto Me; My kingdoms are ample unto all the living. Be ye strong in resurrection, for I am come to deliver.</p>
 <p>25. And God gathered in from the highest grades of the disrupted heavenly kingdoms thirteen thousand million homeless angels, who had been worshipers of the four false Gods. And God had them sent to Luana, on the plateau, Hivestos, where he officered them in colonies, with places for education and labor.</p>
 <p>26. God said unto them: Ye hoped to ascend to Jehovih's highest kingdoms by prayers and confessions to false Gods. Behold, I say unto you, there is no resurrection but by developing the talents Jehovih created unto all men. Go ye to work, therefore, and to places of education, that ye may become fit companions to Jehovih's exalted angels.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah558.htm">Next: Chapter XVI</a></center>
 </body>