<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah553.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah555.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XI</h3>
 <p>1. ES said: Hear ye, O earth, and ye, heavens of the earth, of the ways of Jehovih, through his God, in this, His kingdom. Understand ye how all things are accomplished for the ultimate triumph of righteousness.</p>
 <p>2. Now, after the etherean angels came to Paradise, in answer to God's prayer for help, God divided his hosts unto all the earth and the heavens thereof, not for sudden triumph by violent means, but to the end that man should, in after years, comprehend the wisdom and glory of Jehovih.</p>
 <p>3. So, God made eleven divisions of his hosts, four divisions for the earth, and seven for the heavens of the earth.</p>
 <p>4. And as chiefs of the four divisions for the earth, he appointed, Eezen, Khan, Ah Cho and Lakash, to go to hada, the heavenly kingdoms of the four false Gods, to establish a guard, thence to the earth.</p>
 <p><a name="page_739"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 739</font></a></p>
 <p>5. And God gave to each of them one thousand million hosts to labor with them. And when these were all selected, and had come before the throne of God, he said unto them:</p>
 <p>6. Because the four false Gods have accomplished all the good they can accomplish, and are now only leading mortals and angels down into darkness, I shall presently cut them and their supplies off from the earth. In that day and hour there will be danger in heaven.</p>
 <p>7. For there are more than three hundred million spirits in the hadan heavens, who were put to untimely deaths, in order to establish the false Brahma, the false Buddha, the false Kriste, and the false God-Gabriel.</p>
 <p>8. Go ye, then, to your places, and provide yourselves in wisdom and strength. Guard well these spirits, for once they congregate for vengeance sake, they will cast their Gods in hell.</p>
 <p>9. They answered with one voice: Jehovih's will and thine be done! And they saluted, and departed.</p>
 <p>10. God then called up the other seven of the Holy Eleven, to wit: Yopes Loe, Likar, Vadhuan, Ardolfus, Yutemis, Zahawe and Yedna, together with their seven thousand million hosts, and he said unto them:</p>
 <p>11. Behold, the eleven kingdoms which have been preparing for more than two thousand years shall now be opened up, and established, with roadways to the kingdoms of the four false Gods. For the time is near at hand when I shall cast them out, and remove them and their kingdoms away from the earth, and forever.</p>
 <p>12. That a revolt may be prevented, ye shall provide places and vessels for the removal of their drujas, of which there are more than twenty thousand millions. Go, then, to your respective places, and be ye ready by the time of my command.</p>
 <p>13. They answered unanimously: Jehovih's will and thine be done! And they saluted, and departed also.</p>
 <p>14. After this, God appointed twelve of the etherean Gods and Goddesses as a Severing Host, and he allotted to them six thousand million angels to work with them, when the time should require them.</p>
 <p>15. To these twelve Gods and Goddesses, God said: When the time is at hand, behold, ye shall take your six thousand million hosts, and cut off all the earth supplies on which the four false Gods and their kingdoms subsist.</p>
 <p>16. And their kingdoms shall fall in anarchy and ruin. Their drujas shall be liberated; none shall stay them; and they shall fall upon their Gods' kingdoms, and despoil them utterly, and cast their false Gods into hell (anarchy).</p>
 <p>17. Go, therefore, to the places whither I have provided, as my messengers will show you, and make ready in all things, for the time and the signal of my hand.</p>
 <p>18. So, these twelve Gods and Goddesses saluted and departed for their labor also.</p>
 <p>19. Now, as yet, none but the Holy Council and the Gods and Goddesses knew the plans of God, Jehovih's Son, nor the object and labor provided unto the hosts sent thus forth to all parts of the earth and the hadan (lowest) heavens.</p>
 <p>20. Nevertheless, God had commanded the officers to maintain lines of light with his throne in Paradise, so that concert of action would manifest all around the earth, in the same moment of time.</p>
 <p>21. Now, therefore, be it known, that of the fire-boats and crews sent by the false Gods to Paradise, only one, Looeamong's, returned to tell the tale of chagrin and disappointment in not meeting the etherean God, Litabakathrava.</p>
 <p>22. As for the other three, fitted out so extravagantly, with a million hosts, crowned and adorned in such magnificence, they concluded to go away, each into a different heavenly region, and establish three independent kingdoms of their own.</p>
 <p>23. Many of these angel hosts had been promised, for hundreds of years, that they should have sub-kingdoms, with millions of slaves, but had ever been put off, until they were discouraged.</p>
 <p>24. Accordingly, they resolved to appropriate their outfits in founding thrones and capitals.</p>
 <p>25. So, the fire-boat sent out by Ennochissa, returned to his heavenly regions, but not to Ennochissa. And that of Kabalactes went to his regions, but not to Kabalactes. And that of Gabriel (Thoth) returned to his regions, but not to him.</p>
 <p>26. And they all proceeded much after the same manner, which was, after having found a place, to go about in the fire-boat, enticing subjects to come to their places.</p>
 <p>27. And it came to pass, ere their respective masters were aware of it, they had heavenly kingdoms, with hundreds of millions of slaves.</p>
 <p>28. When the three false Gods, Ennochissa, Kabalactes, and Gabriel-God, heard of the proceedings of their traitorous <a name="page_740"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 740</font></a> subjects, they, separately, declared war against the pretenders.</p>
 <p>29. In not many years, therefore, from this small beginning, great wars engrossed these three false Gods' kingdoms on every side, but wholly interior to each one's kingdom.</p>
 <p>30. Which enabled God, Jehovih's Son, to pursue the two great plans for the redemption of mortals and angels. These plans were, to provide protection to the Ka'yuans (Confucians) of Chine'ya, the worshipers of Jehovih, and to found the country of Guatama free from the grasp of Looeamong.</p>
 <p>31. So, as soon as God had provided a sufficient protecting host of angels for the Ka'yuans, he devoted his energies to Guatama and her heavens.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah555.htm">Next: Chapter XII</a></center>
 </body>