<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah572.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah574.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XI</h3>
 <p>1. REMEMBER thy Creator and the comprehension of His kingdoms; and be considerate of the words of thy God:</p>
 <p><a name="page_764"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 764</font></a></p>
 <p>2. All men profess to desire resurrection; they hope to ascend to exalted heavenly spheres.</p>
 <p>3. Yet, many will not even try to exalt themselves.</p>
 <p>4. He saith in one breath: To not eat the flesh of anything created alive, is the highest.</p>
 <p>5. But, straightway, he filleth his belly with flesh.</p>
 <p>6. He saith: To return good for evil is the highest.</p>
 <p>7. But he doeth evil even before the sound of his voice is hushed.</p>
 <p>8. And yet, he will find fault with his Creator, if holy angels promise him not a high seat in heaven.</p>
 <p>9. And there are others who constantly profess to have the higher light; but they go about tattling, and making evil remarks of their neighbors.</p>
 <p>10. Yet, many of these do good unto others, giving to the helpless; verily are they both rising and falling, in regard to the resurrection.</p>
 <p>11. The measure of the grade of such shall be by weighing the whole behavior as to its result in the community where he abideth. And this rule shall apply, both on earth and in heaven, to all such people.</p>
 <p>12. There are men who do great good unto others, and are talented withal, but who are great liars; and much prone to exaggeration. So, that their good works are outbalanced by the shame of their tongues.</p>
 <p>13. The grade of resurrection of such shall not be modified or benefited but little by their good works. But they shall be weighed as to such evil habit, whether it be increasing or decreasing; and the grade of such man shall be accordingly, and shall come under the rank of spiritual disease. Because it will be entailed upon them into the es world, and shut them out from the grade which they manifested.</p>
 <p>14. When thou searchest for the grade of a city, therefore, all such persons shall stand as grade one.</p>
 <p>15. There be some who say: I care not for the spiritual man nor the es worlds. One world at a time is sufficient for me.</p>
 <p>16. And they may be good as to the way of the city, contributing alms to the helpless, and visiting the sick. Nevertheless, they utter truthfully their own resurrection, which shall stand grade one.</p>
 <p>17. There is no crime in them, but a misfortunate embecility of spirit. When such persons die, their knowledge, for the most part, dieth with them. And the enter the es world even as if they had died in infancy.</p>
 <p>18. They shall stand grade one, because owing to their weakness of spirit, they must need be inhabited on the earth for many years.</p>
 <p>19. There be others, who are forever talking of heaven, and consulting the spirits of the dead, who are, nevertheless, low as to good works, and low in holiness of heart. These shall be graded the same as liars and hypocrites.</p>
 <p>20. For in prophecy, thou shalt estimate the sum of all the virtues and vices of thyself, and of thy neighbor, and of the whole city, or state, or even the world; and accredit the grade in ascension or declension, and thou shalt compare one generation with another, as to the increase or decrease of its spirituality.</p>
 <p>21. And thou shalt know of a truth the standing of the whole world.</p>
 <p>22. And from this, thou shalt also determine the time, when man came on the earth; how long the race will survive and bring forh; and the time he shall become extinct as to the earth.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah574.htm">Next: Chapter XII</a></center>
 </body>