<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah571.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah573.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter X</h3>
 <p>1. THOU art remembered, O man, by thy God, and admonished and instructed for thy soul's sake that thou mayest become a glory to thy Creator and to thyself.</p>
 <p>2. Hear then, thy responsibility and the extent thereof, and consider the magnitude of thine own grade on earth and in heaven.</p>
 <p>3. Which is in proportion to the power and the distance of thy reach. Which I have also graded unto all men on earth and in heaven.</p>
 <p>4. If thy Creator give thee strength to carry four men on thy back, and thou wilt carry but one, thou shalt be one-quarter grade. But, if thou carriest the whole four, thou shalt be full grade.</p>
 <p>5. One man hath wherewithal to feed one man; another hath sufficient for a thousand; and another for a hundred thousand. These are the distances of the reach and power of these men, which is the extent beyond which nothing more can be exacted of them, on earth or in heaven.</p>
 <p>6. Yet, when they have all fulfilled these to the utmost, they shall be therein only equal in grade.</p>
 <p>7. But, if they fail in their parts, the responsibility of one shall be a hundred thousand; and another shall be ten thousand, and the least shall be only one. These are the debts men owe the people of the nation, the city and the hamlet.</p>
 <p>8. Consider, therefore, the darkness of the people of thy nation; the poverty and the crime; and judge thyself as to thine own responsibility.</p>
 <p>9. And this rule shall apply both, on earth and in heaven. And thy grade of responsibility in heaven shall begin even in the same place thou established it on the earth. Wherein thou wert short, thou shalt labor; wherein thou didst fulfill, thou shalt rejoice, and be without compunctions.</p>
 <p>10. Also shall this rule be with the king and queen and emperor, and all rulers who have means and power; and the responsibility shall extend to all the people of the kingdom or empire.</p>
 <p>11. Nor shall this responsibility be escaped by death; but the bondage in heaven shall be according to the avoidance of the trust imposed.</p>
 <p>12. Consider, then, what thou shalt be encumbered with in the es world.</p>
 <p>13. Pursue this philosophy, and thou shalt determine what shall be the labor of the king and the queen and the great ruler, after they have died, and entered the es world.</p>
 <p>14. Find the grade of their respective dominions, and thou shalt determine, by the ascension thereof, the duration of their bondage in the first resurrection, whether it be fifty years or five hundred years.</p>
 <p>15. But if such emperor's dominions be in declension instead of resurrection, then, on his entrance into heaven, he shall be at the mercy of the spirits of his kingdom, who shall be in wait for him, and he shall not escape them.</p>
 <p>16. Some other heavenly kingdom shall deliver them; otherwise, they fall into anarcy and madness (hell).</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah573.htm">Next: Chapter XI</a></center>
 </body>