<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah550.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah552.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VIII</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">OF GOD IN PARADISE</p></font>.
 <p>1. ES said: After the Light of Jehovih came to God, saying: Go, provide mortals to cross the ocean, to build up the western continent, God ceased striving to redeem the four heavenly kingdoms of the four false Gods, but directed his energies, to regain a broader earth-anchorage, for sake of Jehovih's kingdom.</p>
 <p>2. So, God sent down from Paradise, one Melkazad, crowned as Lord, with <a name="page_735"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 735</font></a> ten thousand angels in his command to inspire migration to Guatama, and to make the country known to the eastern peoples.</p>
 <p>3. And Melkazad, with his hosts, came and ascertained the grade and choice of mortals for such purpose. And Melkazad and his hosts did raise up Columbo (Columbus), a mortal from Genoa, together with crews, sufficient in number, whom they inspired to go with ships to the westward, across the ocean, in search of the lay and plan of the world.</p>
 <p>4. And it came to pass, that Columbo, thus inspired of God, through his holy angels, did discover the western continent, not knowing, he was under inspiration.</p>
 <p>5. It was shortly after this, that the angel hosts from etherea came down to the throne of God in Paradise, to labor with him in providing for the approach of the kosmon era.</p>
 <p>6. Now, whilst God and his angels in the heavenly kingdom of Paradise were rejoicing because of the success of Columbo, which had been reported by Melkazad to God, behold, in that same time it was, that the etherean ship of Litabakathrava arrived.</p>
 <p>7. And God received the ethereans with great rejoicing; and, after due ceremonies, God declared a recreation of three days, that the angels of Paradise might rejoice, before Jehovih, because the a'ji of so many hundreds of years was breaking away, and because of Columbo's success, and because of the coming of the ethereans.</p>
 <p>8. Great, indeed, were the rejoicings, the praise, the music and glee of the thousand million angels of Paradise.</p>
 <p>9. At the end of three days, the trumpet called the Holy Council of God, to resume labor before the throne. Then, the marshals from various places in Gods kingdoms called their students and laborers, and withdrew to their several departments. The Holy Council resumed their places before God, and God ascended the throne, and order was.</p>
 <p>10. Then, God called the ethereans, Chonling, Thetchaya, Che Sin, Bornothetes, Atavia and Thotagawawa to come and honor the throne. Whereupon, these visiting Gods did as commanded.</p>
 <p>11. Then spake God, saying: What tribute, O Jehovih, can I pay to Thy Son, Litabakathrava? For the light and glory of his presence provide Thou unto me and my Holy Council.</p>
 <p>12. Thereupon, all the Holy Council, one million, rose to their feet, and then all the Gods rose up also. God said: Come thou, honor my throne.</p>
 <p>13. Then, Litabakathrava walked up, and sat on the throne of God. When he was seated, God commanded all the rest to be seated. And thereupon, Litabakathrava rose up, and said:</p>
 <p>14. Thou hast given me great honor, O God of the earth and her heavens. May be light of the Person of Jehovih dawn upon all the kingdoms of heaven and earth.</p>
 <p>15. Yet, O God, be not puffed up with the hope of sudden success. I have seen many corporeal worlds arrive at the kosmon era. But it is like a new birth, brought forth in pain, and with much labor.</p>
 <p>16. Thou hast yet several generations of mortals to be born ere kosmon come. The four dark corners of the lodge will bound upon thee, to destroy the work of thy hand and of Jehovih's.</p>
 <p>17. The four false Gods will fight thee to the death; only till they go down in hell, can Jehovih's kingdom come.</p>
 <p>18. On all the planetary worlds it is ever the same; certain four false Gods rise up to possess the corporeal worlds and her heavens.</p>
 <p>19. They will profess truth, but practice falsehood; profess peace, but practice war. They will incite mortals and angels to all manner of evil for sake of thwarting Jehovih's Person and proceedings. Yea, they will even yet assume that they themselves are Jehovih, the veritable Creator. And they will inspire mortals, to consider them as such.</p>
 <p>20. And when thy people profess Jehovih and not them, behold, they will inspire others to fall upon thy people to destroy them, or to torture them with great suffering.</p>
 <p>21. Nevertheless, it shall come to pass with thee, Jehovih shall triumph over all the earth and in the heavens of the earth. Men and angels shall be free, and none shall make them afraid.</p>
 <p>22. Litabakathrava ceased, and sat down, and suddenly a great shining light gathered above his head, and a Voice spake out of the light saying:</p>
 <p>23. All the earth is Mine, and the waters, and the air above the earth. These are members of My body and Person. Man I created not to possess them, but to dwell thereon and therein. Unto all men alike gave I of these inheritances; nor to any man a part, nor to any nation or people a part.</p>
 <p>24. But with liberty and privilege unto these, gave I man the right to draw sustenance and support.</p>
 <p>25. All men are My children; into <a name="page_736"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 736</font></a> conscious being created I them alike, privileged unto all the earth, and the waters of the earth, and the air in the firmament above the earth.</p>
 <p>26. Brothers and sisters created I them; of various tribes and races and colors and sizes, but nevertheless, in Mine own way I created them, every one for a glory in the way I made them.</p>
 <p>27. In the early days, behold, I kept man on certain continents and places, that I might unfold him in the glory for which I designed him.</p>
 <p>28. But in kosmon, I open the gates of the oceans, and the seas, and the rivers, and I say unto all My people: Come forth, behold your brethren; go ye into this country, and into that, and learn wisdom from that which I have proved in the family of My house. Be ye profitable unto one another, in the experience and practice of My hand upon all peoples.</p>
 <p>29. In one, tallness; in another, shortness; in one, sound teeth and bones and well-formed limbs; in another, sagacity; in one, a dense population and well-tilled lands; in another, plain food and long life; for in kosmon, man shall go abroad into all countries, one nation with another; and they shall profit by wisdom, to bring forth a new race with all the glories selected from the whole.</p>
 <p>30. Neither shall man be bound more by the doctrines of this God or that God, or by this Savior or that Savior, nor by any of the ancient books, nor by inspirations of the olden times. But he shall know how to obtain inspirations from My Gods, and My heavens for his own good, and for his own wisdom.</p>
 <p>31. Neither shall one nation judge another, and cry out, heathen; nor one people judge another and cry out, pagan.</p>
 <p>32. Behold, I alone shall judge; My mark is upon all those that engage in war, or who keep warriors; or who keep forts and arsenals, and use weapons of death; and upon all who kill, and eat the flesh of anything I created alive; for all such are pagan and heathen in My sight.</p>
 <p>33. Neither shall they go from nation to nation to find evil, but to find goodness and wisdom and virtue.</p>
 <p>34. My Gods shall minister unto all nations and peoples to these ends, to bring them together in peace and harmony, to open the ports of those that have been seclusive nations and peoples, to persuade them to put away war and the glory of destruction, to make nations and peoples acceptable to one another.</p>
 <p>35. The Voice of the Light ceased, and all about the throne of God was like a sea of golden fire.</p>
 <p>36. The time for the departure of Litabakathrava and his hosts had arrived. Accordingly, he went down, and sat on the foot of the throne, and then, God descended, and took his hand, saying: Arise, Orian Chief, Jehovih's Son, and go thy way. The Father calleth thee and thy people.</p>
 <p>37. So Litabakathrava passed down into the arena, and saluted on the sign, DAWN OF KOSMON,and God answered in the sign, FORTIFIED IN JEHOVIH'S NAME!</p>
 <p>38. Litabakathrava and his hosts then went into the otevan, the monster ship, with its photosphere, large as a continent. And presently, whilst the es'enaurs and the trumpeters chanted, PRAISE TO THE ALMIGHTY, the vessel started from its foundation, and rose slowly upward, applauded by the thousands of millions assembled in Paradise.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah552.htm">Next: Chapter IX</a></center>
 </body>