<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah555.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah557.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIII</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">THE REPUBLIC ESTABLISHED</p></font>.
 <p>1. ES said: Since three hundred years, the loo'is of God's allotment to the earth, had been providing the generations of men unto the coming work of God.</p>
 <p>2. And through these had God, Jehovih's Son, raised up one thousand two hundred men, to be directly under the inspiration of the second resurrection, for establishing an emancipated government for mortals.</p>
 <p>3. And these one thousand two hundred men were raised to grades above sixty, and some of them to eighty.</p>
 <p>4. Chief of these men raised up by God, to establish the foundation of Jehovih's kingdom with mortals, were the following, all of whom stood above grade eighty, to wit:</p>
 <p>5. Paine, Jefferson, Adams, Franklin, Caroll, Hancock and Washington.</p>
 <p>6. Into the hands of these seven men did Jehovih, through God, His Son, place the leadership of the mortal hosts; and they were under the guidance of Jehovih's Lord, Yotahiza.</p>
 <p>7. And the Lord caused Paine, to proclaim the new doctrines, as against Looeamong and the sacred books, on which the inquisitions had been carried out.</p>
 <p>8. These, then, were the doctrines of Paine, inspired by the Lord, Jehovih's Son, to wit:</p>
 <p>9. One, the Creator, who is Almighty, matchless in wisdom, truth, power and unity of purpose; the author of all things, on the earth and on all other worlds, seen and unseen.</p>
 <p>10. That the soul of man is immortal and everlasting, and shall ultimately attain to peace and joy in the heavens of the Almighty.</p>
 <p>11. That, according to man's good or evil deeds, words, thoughts and actions whilst on earth, even so shall he inherit in heaven, light or darkness, joy or unhappiness.</p>
 <p>12. That all the world is my country, and the same right alike to all men.</p>
 <p>13. To do good, with all of one's wisdom and strength, is the highest religion.</p>
 <p>14. That man hath a natural right, above all kings, priests and sacred writings, to serve his Creator in his own way.</p>
 <p>15. That this is an age of reason, in which all men should be inspired, to read and think, and judge with their own judgment and not through any priest or church or Savior.</p>
 <p>16. That the doctrine of a Savior is unjust; that no honest man should accept another's dying for him.</p>
 <p>17. That the so-called sacred books are not the writings of the Creator; that their multiplicity of defects prove them to have been manufactured by corruptible authors.</p>
 <p>18. That, in practice, the said sacred books have been used by unprincipled priests to promote wars, inquisitions, tyranny and destruction.</p>
 <p>19. That man should rise up in his might to embrace his Creator, by the practice of good works, and by promoting brotherly love toward all men; and by charity and independence elicit the protection, the pride and the glory of the Almighty.</p>
 <p>20. The doctrines of God, Paine proclaimed publicly; and they were printed, and circulated amongst the inhabitants of Guatama.</p>
 <p>21. And it came to pass, that they fell into the hands of such men and women as had been previously prepared by God to receive them. And these people applauded the new doctrines to so great an extent that the colonies repudiated the Divine right (Divan laws) of kings to govern without the consent of the governed.</p>
 <p>22. Looeamong, the false Kriste, perceived the design of God, Jehovih's Son, and immediately sent down to the earth, to Guatama, two thousand angel warriors, to overthrow Paine's doctrines, and to precipitate the colonies into war against the home government in western Uropa.</p>
 <p>23. So, war in Guatama, on earth, and in the heavens thereof, set in, mortals against mortals and angels against angels.</p>
 <p>24. The Lord, Yotahiza, now assigned the army of the inquisition, the seven thousand angels sent of God, to be the protecting hosts to the seven leaders of the Guatama revolt.</p>
 <p>25. Besides these angels, who were generals and captains of the hosts, there were of non-commissioned angel officers, two thousand seven hundred <a name="page_742"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 742</font></a> and eighty-four, who had also been martyred as to earth-life, by scourging, and by the rack, and by being pulled in quarters, and by being burnt, who were distributed amongst the mortal armies of soldiers. And these angel officers had angel armies and companies, disciplined and quartered in the camps of the mortals with the soldiers.</p>
 <p>26. Such, then, were the inspiring hosts, varying in number from six millions to twelve millions, who remained with the soldiers of the republic during the war, day and night, inspiring them to fortitude, and manipulating them to give them health and strength and endurance.</p>
 <p>27. God spake to the angel commander of these hosts, saying: Though thy hosts inspire these mortals to liberty as to earthly things, yet thou shalt also take advantage of this opportunity to sow the seed of higher spiritual light amongst them. Remember, then, the sermon of the All High: There is but one Great Spirit, Jehovih. And this shall thy hosts forever inspire the mortals with.</p>
 <p>28. For seven years the war lasted, and during all the while, the earthly commander, Washington, was under the guardianship of the commander of the angel hosts. And there were detailed to guard Washington, day and night, one thousand angels. And though he was shot at, and in many ways sought for to be destroyed, these angels saved him, even catching in their hands the bullets that were fired at him.</p>
 <p>29. And in like manner were many other mortal leaders and privates in the war protected and saved from harm by the angels.</p>
 <p>30. And yet all this while the angels of Looeamong fought on the other side, endeavoring to pull away the guardian angels, and so make the mortal leaders vulnerable.</p>
 <p>31. But these angels were lower in grade and less potent, and, withal, not so enthusiastic, for they had not suffered martyrdom.</p>
 <p>32. Jehovih hath said: Rather let a man glory in martyrdom for righteousness' sake; for herein he taketh high resolves against evil; which resolves are a great power to the soul when it entereth heaven.</p>
 <p>33. And it came to pass that the republic was established.</p>
 <p>34. And God caused the commander of the angels who had accomplished this work, to call his hosts together, that they might hear the voice of Jehovih. And there thus assembled eighteen million three hundred and forty thousand in number, in an extemporized heaven above the Haguan mountains, where the chiefs of Paradise had already prepared an altar to Jehovih for the occasion.</p>
 <p>35. Of the higher grades from other plateaux, were here assembled in the sacred circle, seventy million angels, to promote the Voice. Of which matters God had previously sent word to Aroqu, that a chain of light might be made to the upper heavens.</p>
 <p>36. Now, when the angels of the inquisition were thus assembled before God, and duly placed by the marshals, God caused the light to be lowered, so that they might rejoice rather than suffer because of its brilliancy.</p>
 <p>37. And when God sat on the throne, and the es'enaurs had chanted unto Jehovih glory for having founded the republic of mortals, a ray of light was seen descending from the upper realms, and it extended down to the throne of God, where now, on all sides, the illumination was in splendor. Presently, just above the throne, a single star of light was formed, and out of this came the Voice of Jehovih, saying:</p>
 <p>38. Peace, My beloved. The way is open: liberty to the conscience of mortals is founded on earth. Ye have lifted them above the bondage of Gods.</p>
 <p>39. Because ye were cut down before ye had finished your labor on earth, I suffered ye to come back to mortals to complete your own aspirations.</p>
 <p>40. Because ye united with one another in companies and phalanxes for a good work, instead of working single-handed, ye are now admitted into the second resurrection of My kingdoms.</p>
 <p>41. By the light of My throne are ye this day absolved from the bondage of earth and first resurrection.</p>
 <p>42. The Voice ceased; but God spake unto his marshals, saying: Provide ye an avalanza sufficient for the ascension of these my beloved angels, and take them to the fields and forests of Attusasabak, in the Ortheon plateau, where I have already provided them ample residences.</p>
 <p>43. And, after they are delivered, grade them, and give unto them suitable instructors and companions, that in due time they may become Brides and Bridegrooms to Jehovih, and ascend to the emancipated kingdoms in the etherean worlds.</p>
 <p>44. Suffer them now to pass before the throne, that they may receive badges from the Most High! For these will be to them a connection with the exalted kingdoms.</p>
 <p><a name="page_743"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 743</font></a></p>
 <p>45. The marshals then filed them past the throne, and there fell, from the heavens above, upon them, badges of immortal light, unchangeable.</p>
 <p>46. And the builders in Yutis brought them an avalanza, and they went therein, to the sound of the singing of three millions of voices in Jehovih's praise. And when they were within, God again spake to them, saying:</p>
 <p>47. Ye go now far off from the earth. But as ye freed this land unto itself, and now go away, behold, I will call ye back again before another hundred years, to free the people from the doctrines and creeds of the ancients. No God nor Lord nor Savior shall be enforced in this land! Till then, Jehovih be with you all, and give you joy and happiness!</p>
 <p>48. Thereupon, the officers of the avalanza set it in motion, rising upward. And the musicians, they that remained and they that ascended, sang and trumpeted until the fire-ship ascended out of sight.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah557.htm">Next: Chapter XIV</a></center>
 </body>