<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah537.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah539.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter LV</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">GOD CONTINUETH HIS CHASTISEMENT AGAINST THE FOUR FALSE GODS</p></font>.
 <p>1. GOD said: In the name of Jehovih, wherein shall I find an excuse for your behavior?</p>
 <p>2. When my angels taught man how to make a capstan and a screw and a telescope and a compass, behold, your emissaries inspired my chosen to be tortured, or put to death.</p>
 <p>3. When my angels inspired man to comprehend and announce the glory of the stars and planets, ye put my chosen to death; through your vindictive angels against Jehovih were these things accomplished.</p>
 <p>4. When my angels taught man by inspiration that the earth was round instead of flat, ye sent spirits of darkness to inspire the death of my philosophers.</p>
 <p>5. Because, forsooth, my inspiration agreed not with the sacred books which ye compounded for your own glory.</p>
 <p>6. Yea, ye palmed off your compilations from other false Gods as being Jehovih's; and ye played upon the honest innocence of man's understanding, contrary to the will of the Almighty.</p>
 <p>7. Ye have holden your sacred books up, and said: Here is the ultimate; beyond this, no man shall go!</p>
 <p>8. And ye knew, the while, that any fixed revelation could not be true, because all the universe is in constant progress.</p>
 <p>9. Ye have holden up your own sacred books, and said: Here are rules and a sure guide to reach the all highest heavens!</p>
 <p>10. Knowing the while that your heavens were the lowest of the bound heavens of the earth.</p>
 <p>11. Now, behold, the same rules apply unto you as to the least of Jehovih's children; which are, that whoso setteth up a mark, with himself as the highest, and he, the interpreter thereof, is already on the downward grade.</p>
 <p>12. And whoso seeketh to glorify himself by his kingdoms, or by the magnificence of his possessions, taketh a burden upon his shoulders, that will, soon or late, fall upon him, and crush him.</p>
 <p>13. And whoso fortifieth himself by armies, whether in the heavens or on the earth, bindeth himself therewith for his ultimate sorrow.</p>
 <p>14. And whoso turneth away from Jehovih, and saith: I will go not after Him, nor search to find Him more; but I will build unto myself, planneth an edifice that will tumble down upon him in time to come.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah539.htm">Next: Chapter LVI</a></center>
 </body>