<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah563.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah565.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_753"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 753</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">The Book of Judgment</h1>
 <font size="2"><p>BEING THE GRADES AND RATES OF MORTALS AND ANGELS IN THE LIGHT OF GOD, AS THE WORD CAME TO ES, DAUGHTER OF JEHOVIH.</p>
 </font><h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <p>1. THESE are the words of Judgment by the will of God, Jehovih's Son, as rendered by Es, for the resurrection of man:</p>
 <p>2. Hear the words of thy God, O man! I am thy elder brother of tens of thousands of years experience. Profit thou in my wisdom, and learn the discourse of thy God.</p>
 <p>3. Jehovih, Creator of all things, spake to me, thy God, saying: Give ear unto Me, O God, My embassador of the earth and her heavens for this thy season. Obey My mandates, and teach mortals and the angels of thy lower heavens to know Me and to rejoice in My creations. The time is now come when the light of thy inspiration and thy angels shall extend around the whole earth and in her heavens also.</p>
 <p>4. In all former cycles, My Gods had to deal with separate divisions of the earth; My revelations were unto each, for a special time, which is now at hand. I have prepared this land untrammeled with Gods and Saviors and Lords, enforced by the sword, so that My revelations of this day shall be published and not suppressed. And thou shalt reveal to mortals the plan of My worlds; and, as to who thou art, and the method of thy inspiration and dominion on the earth and her heavenly kingdoms.</p>
 <p>5. Thou shalt keep open the gates of heaven for a season, and the spirits of the dead shall commune with mortals, good and evil, wise and foolish. And mortals shall see them, and talk with them, face to face; and they shall recognize their own kin, sons and daughters, fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, the dead and the living.</p>
 <p>6. And the angels shall demonstrate the subtlety of corporeal things, and the capacity of one solid to pass through another solid uninjured.</p>
 <p>7. Yea, the angels shall bring forth from great distances heavy substances, and cast them down in the presence of mortals, who shall see these things done, and testify thereto.</p>
 <p>8. And man shall understand, that, even as plants and trees and fish and serpents can be wielded by My angels, so also can virus and pestilence be carried by angels of darkness to cast mortals in death.</p>
 <p>9. And thou shalt suffer evil spirits and all manner of drujas, and vampires and engrafters, to come, and manifest unto mortals, that they may know, whereof My revelations unfold the matters of earth and heaven.</p>
 <p>10. For man shall understand what I mean by the words: As ye live on the earth, so shall ye reap in heaven.</p>
 <p>11. And thou shalt suffer to fall in darkness such mortals as consult the angels in regard to riches, or to marriage, or to self,or for curiosity, or frivolity, or for anything of an earthly nature for profit's sake. They shall prosper for a season, but end in being confronted with folly and falsehood.</p>
 <p>12. And whoso asketh for the spirits of great men, suffer ye him, to be deceived by drujas and all manner of lying spirits.</p>
 <p>13. And whoso asketh of the sar'gis for great men, or for Moses, or Jesus, or Kriste, or for any well-known name, as applied to ancient times, suffer him to be answered by evil spirits and deceivers.</p>
 <p>14. Whoso desireth the angels for profit's sake, and he have power in sar'gis, give unto him a band of drujas and vampires, and give them great power in signs and miracles.</p>
 <p>15. And whoso consulteth the angels, without regard to becoming a better man himself, suffer him also, to become captive to lying spirits.</p>
 <p>16. And to all men that feed on fish or flesh, suffer thou vampires to inhabit them.</p>
 <p><a name="page_754"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 754</font></a></p>
 <p>17. And to such as drink to drunkenness, and smoke or take narcotics, suffer thou fetals and engrafters, to come upon them.</p>
 <p>18. And in families, whose heirs are born from parents, wed for earthly considerations, suffer thou spirits of obsession, to enter and drive them mad.</p>
 <p>19. For they shall be made to know the meaning of the word, hell, as applied to the lower heavens.</p>
 <p>20. And to whomsoever worshippeth Gods or Saviors because of miracles, give thou them plentifully of miracles and signs through unclean spirits, and through mortal sar'gis (mediums) of low grade. Yea, thou shalt let spirits of darkness assume to be these very Gods, that mortals may be made to know what manner of evil spirits dwell in their churches and temples.</p>
 <p>21. And to the rich man, who maketh pretence to righteousness, but who doeth not toward the poor as to himself, give thou him a host of spirits of hypocrisy and lying, that he may realize the company he is preparing his own spirit for in heaven.</p>
 <p>22. Give thou signs and miracles to the unclean seer as well as to the clean; to the liar and deceiver, as well as to the truthful man.</p>
 <p>23. For I will destroy the worship of all Gods and Lords and Saviors on the ground of miracles.</p>
 <p>24. And thou shalt take great liars, and give them lying spirits to speak through them by inspiration and entrancement. And these spirits shall profess the names of great persons long since dead. And they shall manifest great oratory and wisdom and truth; but, nevertheless, their preaching shall be of little avail for righteousness sake, or for good works.</p>
 <p>25. And their applauding audiences will not contribute to the poor, nor found any improvement on the doctrines of the ancients.</p>
 <p>26. For the spirits, who speak through them, shall be the first resurrection, and know not Me nor the higher kingdoms. Verily shall they be of the same order as the spirits who minister in the churches and temples, being such spirits as have not yet been delivered up from the earth.</p>
 <p>27. And some shall say: Hear thou me, for I am God! Some shall say: Hear thou me, for I am the Lord! Some shall say: Hear thou me, for I am Jehovih! And others shall profess the names of mortals who had great power on the earth. Suffer thou them to do these things.</p>
 <p>28. For I will make man understand that he shall accept nothing from angels or men because of the name professed. On the merit only of wisdom and truth, and such good doctrines as raise men up out of darkness and poverty and crime, shall they accept either spoken or written words.</p>
 <p>29. And they shall try to organize to carry out good works, but they shall fail. For many will desire to be leaders, being under the influence of selfish considerations, desiring the applause of men.</p>
 <p>30. And they will profess freedom, but they will not pledge themselves to any sacrifice, either of money or opinion for sake of the public good.</p>
 <p>31. And little good shall come out of their works, and even less peace of soul shall come unto them. For they shall dispute and quarrel, being divided in all their ideas and philosophies and sentiments and in their understanding of My kingdoms.</p>
 <p>32. For, by this means, shalt thou show them they are under the inspiration of the unorganized es world; and of spirits who have not yet entered into My resurrections, which I created for them. But in the time of the light of My revelations, thou shalt raise up a few, here and there, capable of the All Light. And these, thou shalt cause to form a basis for My kingdom on earth.</p>
 <p>33. And they shall forswear all Gods and Lords and Saviors, but profess Me, the Great Spirit, Jehovih.</p>
 <p>34. And they shall pledge themselves unto one another in fullness, as brothers and sisters, holding their possessions in common.</p>
 <p>35. To live for sake of perfecting themselves and others in spirit, and for good works.</p>
 <p>36. They shall not eat fish nor flesh of any creature that breathed the breath of life.</p>
 <p>37. And keep the seventh day as a day of communion with Me and My angel hosts.</p>
 <p>38. With rites and ceremonies explanatory of all the doctrines in the world.</p>
 <p>39. Practicing good for evil; non-resistance to persecution and abuse.</p>
 <p>40. And abjure war; even, if necessary, by submitting to death rather than take part therein.</p>
 <p>41. And they shall become an organic body in communities of tens and twenties and hundreds and thousands.</p>
 <p>42. But they shall have no leaders, only their Creator; but be organic, for sake of good works.</p>
 <p><a name="page_755"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 755</font></a></p>
 <p>43. But they shall not go about preaching for sinners to go to repentance.</p>
 <p>44. Nor preaching for charity to the poor.</p>
 <p>45. But they shall go themselves about gathering up sinners, and the poor and helpless and orphans; and bring them into comfortable homes, teaching them how to live, to be a glory unto Me and My kingdoms.</p>
 <p>46. To such persons shall My angels from the second resurrection come, and minister in My name for the joy of the earth.</p>
 <p>47. And when such people die, they shall be received into the second resurrection, escaping the first.</p>
 <p>48. Neither shall any other people in all the world escape the place of the first resurrection.</p>
 <p>49. Be they kings, or queens, or beggars, or Brahmins, or Budhists, or Kriste'yans, or Mohammedans, or any other pretenders in heaven or earth.</p>
 <p>50. Behold, the day of preaching and professions is at an end. I will have practice only.</p>
 <p>51. Whoso is not in My organic kingdoms on earth, shall go into My inorganic kingdoms in heaven.</p>
 <p>52. Like unto like, created I the heavens and the earth, and all things therein.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah565.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>