<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah560.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah562.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_749"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 749</font></a></p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIX</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">THE DAWN OF KOSMON</p></font>.
 <p>1. ES said: Now, whilst the Holy Council were still sitting in Paradise, a light, like a star, came, and stood above the throne of God. And the Voice came out of the light, saying:</p>
 <p>2. Behold, the false Gods are cast out, and sent unto their places.</p>
 <p>3. Never more shall there be any other false God, or Lord, or Savior, to lead my people away.</p>
 <p>4. I am sufficient unto Mine own creations.</p>
 <p>5. Let this, therefore, be the beginning of the kosmon era.</p>
 <p>6. My people have settled the whole earth around, from east to west; the lands on the western borders of Guatama have become inhabited.</p>
 <p>7. Go, then, My God, My Son, open the gates of heaven unto mortals.</p>
 <p>8. Let My angels meet them, and talk with them, face to face.</p>
 <p>9. Behold, My etherean embassadress, Che'sivi'anathaotes, cometh in a sea of fire!</p>
 <p>10. The ships of the etherean Goddess were seen descending from the higher heavens, coming as an open ring, to embrace the whole earth.</p>
 <p>11. Again, the Voice spake out of the light, saying:</p>
 <p>12. I know no distinctions of men, of races, or sects, or doctrines, or past revelations. All people are My people!</p>
 <p>13. Open the gates of heaven; let my angels speak to mortals!</p>
 <p>14. Swifter and swifter came the etherean archangels, till all the heavens of Paradise were encircled in the love of the Almighty.</p>
 <p>15. Then, God called out the legions who had the matter in charge, where mortals had been born for the work of Jehovih's kingdom. And God said:</p>
 <p>16. Open the gates of heaven; let the angels of heaven speak with mortals; the time of the Father's kingdom is at hand!</p>
 <p>17. Open the gates of heaven! Let the angels come forth in power!</p>
 <p>18. And in Hidesville, in Guatama, on the earth, the angels opened the door in Jehovih's name, to be not closed again forever, forever!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah562.htm">Next: Chapter XX</a></center>
 </body>