<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah540.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah542.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter LVIII</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">GOD PLEADETH WITH THE FOUR FALSE GODS</p></font>.
 <p>1. GOD said: In the name of Jehovih, greeting unto you.</p>
 <p>2. Hear the plea of God, Jehovih's Son.</p>
 <p>3. Like one that is whipt and beaten in a great contest, I cry out, because of the Almighty, whom I serve.</p>
 <p>4. What is the fault of Jehovih, that ye have turned away from Him?</p>
 <p>5. Behold, I will plead for Him. Was not His name good enough? What name is greater than the word, Creator?</p>
 <p>6. If ye rejoice that ye live, then are ye not beholden to Him?</p>
 <p>7. Why have ye substituted other names? Who was to be the gainer thereby?</p>
 <p>8. Certainly not Jehovih.</p>
 <p>9. What excuse can ye assign, that ye have made other names than Jehovih's worshipful on earth and in heaven?</p>
 <p>10. Mortals will ask these questions in time to come.</p>
 <p>11. Did not the Almighty, before your times, find a way to reveal Himself and his commandments?</p>
 <p>12. Why have ye persecuted, abused and put to death mortals for worshipping Jehovih?</p>
 <p>13. Behold, all ye four profess to be the Prince of Peace; but ye carry concealed daggers, and ye strike to death those who glorify the Creator.</p>
 <p>14. I run after my children, as a father would, to snatch them away from a serpent; but ye slaughter them before my eyes.</p>
 <p><a name="page_725"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 725</font></a></p>
 <p>15. I weep for them.</p>
 <p>16. In shame, I look upon the earth and the heavens thereof, and I say unto myself: O thou God, to whom these were given in charge, how incompetent thou art against the flood of evil!</p>
 <p>17. And I pray unto Jehovih, that your hearts may be turned to pity. I see, before you all, certain ruin and terrible hells; and I cry out to Jehovih, to give me the means to save you.</p>
 <p>18. I pray, that I may be even unmolested in rescuing and saving the helpless and distressed, but ye frustrate all my inventions.</p>
 <p>19. I am weary with my labor, and with the great kingdoms given into my keeping.</p>
 <p>20. Alas, I am shut off on all sides from doing good, and yet, that is all I desire to do.</p>
 <p>21. Now, I beseech you, O ye false Gods, make ye concessions unto Jehovih.</p>
 <p>22. Save yourself from certain destruction, and Jehovih's Son from humiliation, before the high-raised Gods of other worlds.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah542.htm">Next: Chapter LIX</a></center>
 </body>