<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah526.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah528.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XLIV</h3>
 <p align="CENTER">DOCTRINES OF JOSHU AND HIS DEATH.</p>
 <p>1. GOD said: These were my doctrines, as I taught through Joshu:</p>
 <p>2. Thou shalt keep the ten commandments of Moses.</p>
 <p>3. Thou shalt not engage in war, nor abet war.</p>
 <p>4. Thou shalt eat no flesh of any animal, or fish, or bird, or fowl, or creeping thing which Jehovih created alive.</p>
 <p>5. Thou shalt dwell in families, after the manner of the ancient Israelites, who held all things in common.</p>
 <p>6. Thou shalt have no king nor queen, nor bow down in worship to any, save thy Creator.</p>
 <p>7. Thou shalt not call on the name <a name="page_709"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 709</font></a> of angels to worship them, nor to counsel with them on the affairs of earth.</p>
 <p>8. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, and do unto thy fellow man as thou wouldst have him do unto thee.</p>
 <p>9. Thou shalt return good for evil, and pity to them that sin.</p>
 <p>10. It hath been said: An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; but I say, return good for evil.</p>
 <p>11. And if a man smite thee on one cheek, turn the other unto him also.</p>
 <p>12. The man shall have but one wife, and the woman but one husband.</p>
 <p>13. As the children honor the father, so will the family be blest with peace and plenty.</p>
 <p>14. Remember, that all things are of Jehovih, and ye are His servants, to help one another.</p>
 <p>15. And as much as ye do these services to one another, so serve ye Jehovih.</p>
 <p>16. Behold only the virtues and wisdom in thy neighbor; his faults thou shalt not discover.</p>
 <p>17. His matters are with his Creater.</p>
 <p>18. Call not on the name of any God or Lord in worship; but worship Jehovih only.</p>
 <p>19. And when thou prayest, let it be after this manner:</p>
 <p>20. Jehovih, who rulest in heaven and earth, hallowed be Thy name, and reverent amongst men. Sufficient unto me is my daily bread; and, as much as I forgive those that trespass against me, forgive Thou me, and make me steadfast, to shun temptation, for all honor and glory are Thine, worlds without end. Amen!</p>
 <p>21. To visit the sick and distressed, the helpless and blind, and to relieve them; to provide for the widow and orphan, and keep thyself unspotted before men; these are the way of redemption.</p>
 <p>22. Thou shalt take no part in the governments of men, but observe the will of Jehovih, being obedient unto all governments for His sake.</p>
 <p>23. All men are the children of One Father, who is Jehovih; and whosoever chooseth Him, and keepeth His commandments, is His chosen.</p>
 <p>24. To preserve the seed of His chosen, thou shalt not wed but with the chosen.</p>
 <p>25. Contend not with any man for opinion's sake, nor for any earthly thing.</p>
 <p>26. And let thy speech be for other's joy; nor open not thy mouth, if thy words will give pain.</p>
 <p>27. Therefore, be considerate of thy speech; teaching others by gentleness and love, to be respectful toward all men.</p>
 <p>28. Preserve the sacred days of the rab'bahs; and the rites and ceremonies of emethachavah.</p>
 <p>29. For three years, Joshu traveled amongst the Israelites, preaching, and restoring the ancient doctrines.</p>
 <p>30. And there were gathered in groups, of tens and twenties and fifties, more than two thousand Israelites, of the ancient Order of Moses, who became steadfast followers of the teachings of Joshu.</p>
 <p>31. But, because of persecution, by the apostate Jews, they kept themselves aloof from the world, having signs and pass-words, whereby they knew one another.</p>
 <p>32. First, the God, Baal, and after him, Thoth, inspired the kings and rulers, against these Faithists.</p>
 <p>33. And they proved them by commanding them to eat flesh, even swine's flesh, the which, if they refused, was testimony sufficient before the laws, to convict them of being enemies against the Gods.</p>
 <p>34. So, they were scourged, and put to death, whenever found.</p>
 <p>35. Now, it came to pass, that Joshu went into Jerusalem to preach, and in not many days thereafter, he was accused of preaching Jehovih.</p>
 <p>36. And he was arrested, and whilst being carried to prison, he said:</p>
 <p>37. Ye are hypocrites and blasphemers! Ye practice none of the commandments, but all the evils of satan.</p>
 <p>38. Behold, the temple shall be rent in twain, and ye shall become vagabonds on the earth.</p>
 <p>39. At that, the multitude cast stones upon him, and killed him!</p>
 <p>40. And Jehovih sent a chariot of fire, and bore his soul to Paradise.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah528.htm">Next: Chapter XLV</a></center>
 </body>