<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah510.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah512.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXVIII</h3>
 <p>1. SAKAYA said: Without rites and ceremonies, a people is like a collection of musicians, with every one playing a different tune.</p>
 <p>2. Without pledges to general rules, a community is like a farm without fences, where cattle roam about, destroying the harvests.</p>
 <p>3. Two things stand prominently before all men, about which there need be no dispute, Light and Darkness. Whether ye call the Light, EOLIN, or ORMAZD, or GOD, or SUDGA, it mattereth little, provided the idea eliminated hath reference to that which is THE HIGHEST CONCEIVED OF, Who is Ever Present, and is the Person from which all persons sprung. And whether ye call darkness SIN, or EVIL, or SATAN, it mattereth little, provided the idea eliminated is that which is the extreme opposite of light.</p>
 <p>4. Without these two entities in view, to shun the one, and strive for the other, a community is like race-horses striving for a prize by running in circular capers, instead of going on a well provided track.</p>
 <p>5. Take no man nor woman into the family till first pledged to serve the All Person, Jehovih (Ormazd), with a full and willing heart.</p>
 <p>6. To shun satan and his emissaries, be circumspect.</p>
 <p>7. And when ye are come together, choose ye the oldest, wisest, best man, to be the father of the family (community).</p>
 <p>8. When matters come up for discussion, whoever speaketh thereon shall <a name="page_690"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 690</font></a> speak in the direction of light, and not of darkness.</p>
 <p>9. When asked further explanation on this, Sakaya said:</p>
 <p>10. There are two modes of discussion before all men: One is to impart light, and the other is to abuse the opponent. The first is Jehovih's, the second is satan's method. In the family discussion, the latter method shall not be tolerated by the father.</p>
 <p>11. After the discussion is finished, the rab'bah shall decree according to the light of the Father in him.</p>
 <p>12. Sakaya was here asked: Why not decree according to the majority vote?</p>
 <p>13. Sakaya said: That is the lower light, being the light of men only.</p>
 <p>14. For I declare unto you, ye can not serve both Jehovih and men. It is incumbent on every man in the community that entereth the discussion to speak from the higher light, as he perceiveth it, without regard to policy or consequences. And the same law shall be binding on the rab'bah; and though nine men out of ten side the other way, yet the rab'bah's decree shall stand above all the rest.</p>
 <p>15. When the discussion turneth upon rites and ceremonies, which the community may adopt, or the music, or the discipline regarding funerals, or marriages, or births, the speakers shall remember that a family is composed of old and young; of sedate and jocose; and that every talent is created for the glory of the whole, and for the glory of the Creator; and they shall enlarge their understanding, to embrace the whole. Remembering, it is easier to walk beside a bull, and turn him in his course, than to come against him for the same purpose.</p>
 <p>16. One man hath joy in sacrifice (worship) by clapping his hands and dancing; another, in poetry; another, in singing; another, in silent prayers. And yet, one hath no preference over another in sight of Him Who created them, for they are His own handiwork.</p>
 <p>17. Consider, then, that ye provide a time and place in the community for all of these in their own way, directing them holily. For if ye strive to bind them, that are of exuberant spirits, not to dance and clap their hands, they will find vent in secrecy and to an evil end.</p>
 <p>18. Herein have the Brahmin priests been aiders and abettors of bawdy houses and of drunkenness and licentiousness; because they have sought to make you ascetics by overthrowing your natural talents.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah512.htm">Next: Chapter XXIX</a></center>
 </body>