<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah586.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah588.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXV</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">GOD SHOWETH HOW AND WHEN THE SECOND RESURRECTION MANIFESTETH UNTO MORTALS</p></font>.
 <p>1. GOD said: In the cities and country places, I have innumerable Lords, apportioned to districts and to the mortals and angels thereof.</p>
 <p>2. And my Lords know the rates and grades of their people, their occupations, their aspirations, their labor, their behavior, private and public.</p>
 <p>3. Now, behold, I have said unto my Lords: The era of dictation is past; man hath arrived at kosmon. Declare ye the light of my heavens unto man; but let man judge himself, and labor to save himself, that he may have honor and glory thereby.</p>
 <p>4. And I further said unto my Lords: Man hath prayed, saying: Thy kingdom come on earth as it is in heaven. Now, this I give unto you: That, where men abnegate self, and affiliate into a communal brotherhood, after the manner of my heavenly kingdoms, then shall ye affiliate my organic angels with such mortals, and make them one with my second resurrections.</p>
 <p>5. And ye shall surround such communal brotherhoods with the light of my kingdoms, thereby controlling the angelic intercourse with mortals, so that drujas and vampire spirits cannot molest them.</p>
 <p>6. And these brotherhoods shall be taught to question not the spirits and oracles on personal matters, but for light and truth as to what will contribute to meliorating the condition of man, and as to light and truth, regarding the higher and lower heavens; and as to attaining spiritual gifts and great wisdom.</p>
 <p>7. And such mortals shall have times and places for worshipful matters; and these times shall be in concert with my Lord of that district; and the light of his throne shall be given unto such a brotherhood.</p>
 <p>8. The members of such a brotherhood shall not desire a leader; neither will any one of them desire to be a leader. For, if one should so desire, he would not be of the Godhead, but of himself.</p>
 <p><a name="page_779"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 779</font></a></p>
 <p>9. Moreover, none of the members of such a brotherhood shall go off, of his own accord, to minister as an individual to the inhabitants of Uz. But each and all in the brotherhood shall concentrate their profits and force unto one end and object.</p>
 <p>10. Even so, O man, are my organic heavens; all the members of each heaven being as a unit with the whole, they waste not their strength and time in isolated emdeavors.</p>
 <p>11. Whereby, when a prophet foolishly boasteth to thee, as to having some high-raised angel, with a loud-sounding name, as his special guardian and guide, know thou such prophet is in the hands of drujas, who have not entered my heavenly kingdoms.</p>
 <p>12. Neither hath it ever happened on the earth with any individual man, raised up by me or my Lords for a specific work, like Moses, or Ka'yu, or Sakaya, or any other, that they knew of or boasted of any especial angel over them; but all of them experienced the light, which was as a pillar of fire.</p>
 <p>13. Even such is the manifestation of the second resurrection through my Lord and his Holy Council.</p>
 <p>14. And the manifestations are not like those of a mere magician; but the accomplishment of something that embraceth nations, empires and mighty peoples.</p>
 <p>15. For this reason, O man, I declare unto thee that the Father's kingdom is now being founded on earth, and the mortal manifestation thereof is near at hand.</p>
 <p>16. But it shall not come in this era, as in the past, through any one great leader-forth; but it shall appear as a spontaneous light, permeating the soul of thousands; and they shall come forth, establishing Jehovih in truth and fullness.</p>
 <p>17. Now, therefore, O man, consider the judgment of God against all such as are called the best of men, the wisest of men, the greatest of kings or queens or popes; for none of these have even entered the first resurrection in their own practice.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah588.htm">Next: Chapter XXVI</a></center>
 </body>