<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah581.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah583.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XX</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>GOD DECLARETH A DAY OF JUDGMENT, AND ALSO HE BEQUEATHETH LIBERTY UNTO ALL MEN</p></font>.
 <p>1. GOD said: There shall be a day of judgment unto thee, O man. Soon or late, thou shalt take the matter into thine own hand; and thou shalt look into thine own soul to judge thyself. This is unto all men; none can escape it.</p>
 <p>2. Such, then, is the judgment day. Let no man complain against the judge; thou shalt be thine own judge.</p>
 <p>3. And every one judgeth against himself, and, soon or late, crieth out: O Jehovih, I have sinned against Thee; <a name="page_774"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 774</font></a> in my youth I tried to find excuses for my behavior, but now I am broken down utterly.</p>
 <p>4. After judgment, reformation and resurrection within man begin as a new tree of life.</p>
 <p>5. But, whether thou shalt judge thyself in this life, or wait till thou art dead and risen in spirit, the matter is in thine own hands.</p>
 <p>6. Yet, better would it be for thee, if thou wouldst sit in judgment on thyself every day of thy life.</p>
 <p>7. But touching the matter, as to how thou shalt judge thyself, hear thou the wisdom of thy God, thy elder brother, and profit thou accordingly.</p>
 <p>8. Because of the Ever Presence of Jehovih, thou wert quickened into a conscious being. As thy earth-body is of the earth, so is thy spirit of Jehovih. Nevertheless, spirit is the opposite of corporeal life; for the latter cometh to an end; but the spirit of man is a tree of everlasting life.</p>
 <p>9. Thy spirit groweth by cultivation, which is by the practice of wisdom, truth, virtue, benevolence and affiliation unto others.</p>
 <p>10. Think not, that the soul groweth by prayers or confessions unto this God, or that God; for, in whatsoever God thou firmly believest, him shalt thou worship, for he is thy choice. Nor shall any man prevent thee in this thy liberty. But, remember, the same rule holdeth unto all in this day: Thou shalt never see the God thou worshippest, save, indeed, it be an idol, or an image of wood or stone or some corporeal substance.</p>
 <p>11. For, behold, I have cast out all Gods, Lords and Saviors on the earth and in the heavens of the earth.</p>
 <p>12. And, when the spirits of the dead come to thee in sar'gis, saying: Behold me! I am thy Savior! I am thy Lord! I say unto thee: All such spirits are drujas.</p>
 <p>13. Nevertheless, if thou worship a God, or Lord, let it be as a figure unto thee to cast thine eyes into thine own soul, to purify thyself in the sight of thy Creator, whom thou canst not doubt.</p>
 <p>14. In such respect, it is no sin for thee to worship any good ideal, whom thou shalt emulate in thy behavior.</p>
 <p>15. Yet this also shalt thou prove: That, whosoever of the ancients was great, or whatever Gods was well known, that thou settest thy soul on to love, behold, familiar spirits will come to thee to deceive thee, professing to be that ancient or that God.</p>
 <p>16. And, when thou art dead, and thy soul risen from the dead, behold, some deceiving spirit will come to thee to use thee; neither shalt thou discover for a long season that thou hast been the dupe and slave of an unscrupulous master.</p>
 <p>17. This day in the lower heavens there are millions of false Brahmas, millions of false Budhas, millions of false Kristes and millions of false Gabriel-Gods.</p>
 <p>18. Whosoever bindeth himself to these names whilst on earth, becometh a fit subject for drujas to fall upon when he entereth heaven.</p>
 <p>19. Think not that great wisdom cometh suddenly by dying; in thy early entrance into the es world, thou shalt be easily deceived.</p>
 <p>20. For which reason thou shalt school thyself every day of thy life, that thy Creator only is thy God; and that Him thou shalt never see as thou seest a man or an angel; but that Him also thou canst see every day in the glory of His works.</p>
 <p>21. With this faith in thy soul, thou shalt die and enter heaven fearlessly; and, when a pretended God or Savior cometh to thee asking tribute, thou shalt know of a truth he is false.</p>
 <p>22. Now, therefore, when thou judgest thyself, to determine the balance of thy good and evil deeds, and thy good and evil thoughts, let thy Creator stand as the light of thy soul, and, through Him, judge thou thyself, but not as to thy worship, but as to thy works.</p>
 <p>23. Neither shalt thou judge thyself by any God, or Lord, or Savior, or by any idol, or by any man or woman; for thou standest thyself second to Jehovih in thy attributes. It behooveth thee to make a God of thyself, in thy behavior and in thy words and deeds.</p>
 <p>24. Neither shalt thou judge thyself by any sacred book, or any bible, in all the world; nor by the words within them purporting to be my words, or the words of any God, Lord or Savior.</p>
 <p>25. For I have abolished all such sacred books and bibles and words and sayings contained in them, purporting to be my words and the words of any God, Lord or Savior.</p>
 <p>26. Neither shalt thou bind thyself by them, nor judge thyself by anything that is written or printed in them.</p>
 <p>27. But, behold, I declare a greater glory and judge unto thee in place thereof, which is Jehovih, thy Creator.</p>
 <p>28. By Him and through Him shalt thou judge, and be judged.</p>
 <p>29. Books are maculate; but Jehovih, never.</p>
 <p><a name="page_775"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 775</font></a></p>
 <p>30. Neither shalt thou, henceforth, swear by any book under the sun; nor by any God, nor Lord, nor Savior, nor spirit, nor idol, nor image. But thou shalt swear by Jehovih, thy Creator.</p>
 <p>31. To Jehovih only shalt thou covenant thyself, and this shalt thou do in thine own way only, and not according to any book, or bible, or priest, or church, or spirit.</p>
 <p>32. Behold, the olden times are past away; and thy God setteth aside the bondages of the olden times also.</p>
 <p>33. Sufficient were they for the times they were created. A man shall not be bound as a child; neither shall the judgment of man be bound by the things that were intended for man before he attained judgment.</p>
 <p>34. Hast thou not beholden the signs of the times? What I here give in words, Jehovih manifesteth over all the length and breadth of the world.</p>
 <p>35. None can stay the hand of the Almighty.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah583.htm">Next: Chapter XXI</a></center>
 </body>