<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah602.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah604.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter II</h3>
 <p>1. THOU art of inspiration made, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>2. I made thee a corporeal body, and I wrote upon it. The result thou art.</p>
 <p>3. And I made thee susceptible, so all things external to thyself could write upon thee.</p>
 <p>4. The sum of these is thy knowledge.</p>
 <p>5. As it is with thee, so is it with all men, and with all the living which I created.</p>
 <p>6. Nor is there any knowledge in the world, but what I gave.</p>
 <p>7. All of it is My inspiration.</p>
 <p>8. Man said: By certain measurements I teach my son mathematics.</p>
 <p>9. I am back of all, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>10. I taught thy father's father and all who were before him. The sum of all of man's knowledge is but man's capacity to perceive My Light.</p>
 <p>11. I made thee My servant, to teach thy son by certain measurements. This was the road I made to reach thy son's soul.</p>
 <p>12. Man said: I know more than did my father; and yet my father knew more than did his father. We reason, we digest, we compound from one another.</p>
 <p>13. I am the All External; from Me <a name="page_795"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 795</font></a> are smaller lights focalized, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>14. A man holdeth a condensing lens to the sun, and he lighteth a fire thereby, but yet the lens contained not the heat.</p>
 <p>15. After such manner hast thou accumulated knowledge; yet, no knowledge was of thine own begetting, but all came from Me. I gave it all.</p>
 <p>16. The increase in knowledge now upon the earth, with all the races of men, is only the increase I gave. Man of himself created none of it.</p>
 <p>17. Neither canst thou create one thought, nor idea, nor impulse.</p>
 <p>18. Thou canst only gather together from My harvests, or from Me in Person.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah604.htm">Next: Chapter III</a></center>
 </body>