<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah601.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah603.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_794"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 794</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Inspiration</h1>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <p>1. THESE are the words of Tae, in kosmon: I am Light; I am Central, but Boundless, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>2. I give thee of My Light; and when thou hast received, thou criest out: Behold, I am wise!</p>
 <p>3. Thy corpor I made, in which to localize thee; to mature thy entity.</p>
 <p>4. Without Me, thou hadst not come to life. Thou art as the end of a ray of light from My Person.</p>
 <p>5. And thou art focalized in thy corporeal body.</p>
 <p>6. I am to thy spirit, as is the sun to a ray of light. I am the Light that illuminateth thy soul.</p>
 <p>7. The ray of light that goeth out of Me, taketh root in mortality, and thou art the product, the tree.</p>
 <p>8. Thou wert nothing; though all things that constitute thee, were before.</p>
 <p>9. These I drove together, and quickened.</p>
 <p>10. Thus I made thee.</p>
 <p>11. After the manner I made thee corporeally, so made I thee spiritually, intellectually.</p>
 <p>12. As out of corpor I made thy corporeal body, so, out of My Light, which is My Very Self, I built thee up in spirit, with consciousness that thou art.</p>
 <p>13. Thou canst not add one jot or tittle to thy corporeal self, of thine own will and exertion.</p>
 <p>14. It is by and through Me, that the process of absorption by the blood addeth unto thee.</p>
 <p>15. Thy blood floweth in thy veins because of My quickening power upon thee.</p>
 <p>16. When I withdraw My hand, thou diest. Life and death are of Me.</p>
 <p>17. All thy corporeal part is, therefore, of Me and through Me.</p>
 <p>18. Even so is thy spirit of Me also.</p>
 <p>19. And as thou canst not add a fraction to thy corporeal self, neither canst thou add a fraction to thy spiritual self.</p>
 <p>20. Out of Myself groweth thy spirit.</p>
 <p>21. Neither canst thou, of thine own self, manufacture or acquire or take unto thyself, one new thought, nor idea, nor invention.</p>
 <p>22. All thought and knowledge and judgment which thou hast, I gave unto thee.</p>
 <p>23. As the whirlwind gathereth up dust, and driveth it toward a center, so is the plan of My universe.</p>
 <p>24. Thou art as a center; all things come to thee from without.</p>
 <p>25. Thy knowledge, as well as thy corporeality, came to thee from without, from that which was external to thyself.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah603.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>