<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah611.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah613.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XI</h3>
 <p>1. SEEK not to spread My gospels, and entice followers unto this, or that, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>2. Neither go about preaching, saying: Thus saith Jehovih!</p>
 <p>3. Let all men hear Me in their own way.</p>
 <p>4. No man shall follow another.</p>
 <p>5. I will have no sect.</p>
 <p>6. I will have no creed.</p>
 <p>7. I am not exclusive; but I am with all My living creatures.</p>
 <p>8. To those who choose Me, practicing their all highest light, I am a shield and fortification against all darkness, and against all evil and contention.</p>
 <p>9. Thou shalt not establish Me by man's laws, nor by the government of man, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>10. Nor establish by man's laws or government any book or revelation, saying: Behold, this is Jehovih's book.</p>
 <p>11. To keep man from interfering <a name="page_800"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 800</font></a> with man, this hath been great labor.</p>
 <p>12. To teach man to comprehend liberty, especially as to thought and as to knowledge, this hath been a great labor.</p>
 <p>13. For he falleth easily under the inspiration of his surroundings, and falleth under the teachings and persuasions of his brother.</p>
 <p>14. Because he cometh from My hand into the world in innocence, a helpless infant.</p>
 <p>15. And his elder brothers take advantage of his innocence, and teach him their own knowledge, instead of directing him to Me.</p>
 <p>16. And his elder brothers were in darkness themselves, and their elder brothers before them.</p>
 <p>17. I said unto man: Be free! Learn to know liberty! Think for thyself! Study thy Creator in all things, and in thyself in particular!</p>
 <p>18. Turn thou away from thy elder brothers; come thou to the All Highest Fountain.</p>
 <p>19. Be not confounded with abstruse reasonings; cut all things short, Godlike; learn thou of the Creator and His creations, there is nothing more.</p>
 <p>20. Thou art one of the seeds of Jehovih, and wert planted by His Hand. Be thou free from all the world.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah613.htm">Next: Chapter XII</a></center>
 </body>