<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah604.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah606.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IV</h3>
 <p>1. WHEN the infant is young, My Light is its first knowledge, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>2. It seeth Me and heareth Me; and it seeth and heareth My angels.</p>
 <p>3. By the pressure of My Light upon its corporeal eyes and ears, it learneth to see and hear corporeally.</p>
 <p>4. This is the beginning of two senses, which I created to grow parallel to each other, and equal in strength.</p>
 <p>5. But the infant, being in the corporeal world, heedeth more the things that appeal to the corporeal senses than such as appeal to the spiritual senses.</p>
 <p>6. So that one person groweth up, forgetting Me and My angels. He is a skeptic.</p>
 <p>7. But another person groweth up, remembering Me, and My angels. He is a believer.</p>
 <p>8. And, behold, thou, O man, inquirest of them: Whence came the idea of a Creator, an All Person?</p>
 <p><a name="page_796"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 796</font></a></p>
 <p>9. And one of them answereth thee: It is inherent; it is natural.</p>
 <p>10. But the other answereth: It is folly; it came from darkness.</p>
 <p>11. But I say unto thee, O man: Darkness can not create an idea; not even darkness would be known but for the light I make beside it.</p>
 <p>12. Thou canst not imagine any animal under the sun which I have not created.</p>
 <p>13. Man said: I imagine a horse with a fish's head and fins.</p>
 <p>14. Whatsoever thou inventest, saith Jehovih, thou but taketh the parts of one of My creations, and puttest them to another.</p>
 <p>15. Let this prove unto thee, if thou canst not invent a new living creature, that thy forefathers did not do so either in regard to Me.</p>
 <p>16. Nevertheless, thou hast a thought, and an idea of Me and My Person.</p>
 <p>17. And thou hast a thought, and an idea of the spirits of the dead.</p>
 <p>18. By My Presence and inspiration upon thee, I taught thee I am the I AM, a Person.</p>
 <p>19. By the inspiration and presence of My angels, I taught thee of them also.</p>
 <p>20. My inspiration upon the bird causeth it to sing; by My Presence I teach it to build its nest.</p>
 <p>21. By My Presence I color one rose red, and another white.</p>
 <p>22. Proof of My Person is in the harmony of the whole, and of every one being a person of itself, perfect in its order.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah606.htm">Next: Chapter V</a></center>
 </body>