<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah648.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah650.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter V</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>GOD SHOWETH HOW MORTALS MAY ATTAIN INSPIRATION FROM JEHOVIH AND FROM THE ANGELS OF THE SECOND RESURRECTION</p></font>.
 <p>1. WHOSO ruleth over his own earthly desires, passions, actions, words and thoughts, being constantly watchful for the highest light and greatest good, is on the right road.</p>
 <p>2. And if he persist in this till it hath become a constitutional growth within him, then shall he hear the Voice.</p>
 <p>3. Who then can judge him, save they have also attained to the same high estate? Is it wise for the unlearned to dispute with the learned; or the unholy with the holy?</p>
 <p>4. Shall the drunken man, reeking with foul smell, sign the pledge to drink no more, and straightway say: We temperance men!--and presume to dwell with the pure?</p>
 <p>5. I say unto thee, till that man is purified and grown to be constitutionally temperate he is not temperate.</p>
 <p>6. Consider then the seers and prophets (who hear the angels) whether they have grown constitutionally to be one with Purity, Wisdom and Goodness.</p>
 <p>7. For this is required of such as presume to hear me and my holy ones. And having attained to this, who can judge them, save they have attained unto the same?</p>
 <p>8. Shall a man inquire of the magician as to the inspiration of the prophets of thy God? Or the angels of the first resurrection be consulted as to their opinions of my revelations, and their words taken for truth without substantiation?</p>
 <p>9. Let all things be proved, or supported by corresponding testimony known to be true. As the holy man perceiveth how things should be in the heavens above, so they are. The unholy man seeth heavenly things but dimly; he bindeth himself in ancient revelations which have become corrupted.</p>
 <p>10. Jehovih is as near this day as in time of the ancients; put thyself in order, becoming one with Him, and no book so easily read as His created universe.</p>
 <p>11. Inspiration cometh less by books, than by what Jehovih wrote--His worlds. Read thou Him and His works. Frame thy speech and thy thoughts for Him; He will answer thee in thine own behavior, and in the happiness of thy soul.</p>
 <p>12. Great wisdom cannot be attained in a day; nor purity, and strength, to overcome temptation, till the growth be from the foundation.</p>
 <p>13. The fool will say: The sacred books are no more than man of his own knowledge might write; yet, he hath not imitated wisely the power of the words of thy God.</p>
 <p>14. Let him do this well, and, behold, he will also declare my words are from me. Yea, he will recognize them wherever found.</p>
 <p>15. It is the will and wish of thy God, that all men become constitutionally capable of receiving and comprehending the highest light, and that they shall no longer depend upon any priest, church, oracle or holy book, or upon consulting the spirits.</p>
 <p>16. That their behavior may make the earth a place of peace, with long life unto all people, for the glory of Jehovih.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah650.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a></center>
 </body>