<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah609.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah611.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IX</h3>
 <p>1. MAN I created with capacity to distinguish My direct from My indirect inspirations, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>2. And My angels gave him rules, whereby he might make manifest the difference betwixt the two.</p>
 <p>3. Man has said: Behold, any man may say: Thus saith Jehovih! One killeth his neighbor, saying: I was thus inspired of Jehovih. Another practiseth all goodness, and his words are wisdom and comprehension, and he saith: I was inspired by Jehovih!</p>
 <p>4. I say unto thee, O man: In this I also gave thee liberty; therefore, judge thou, thyself, which came from Me, and which from his surroundings (satan).</p>
 <p>5. Thou shalt be thine own judge in all things.</p>
 <p>6. Behold, I sent My God to jduge thee; but thou shalt also judge the judgments of thy God; and, afterward, thou shalt judge thyself in the same way.</p>
 <p>7. A perpetual judge created I thee, not only to judge thyself and all the world beside, but thou shalt judge Me, thy Creator.</p>
 <p>8. I have given thee many sacred books, and I said to thee:</p>
 <p>9. Save thou judgest them, thou shalt be caught in a snare; I charge thee, thou shalt accept nothing from men, nor angels, nor Gods.</p>
 <p>10. But thou shalt rely on thine own inspiration from thy Creator.</p>
 <p>11. Such is My word which I speak to thine own soul.</p>
 <p>12. What cometh to thee from a man is indirect inspiration; what cometh from an angel is indirect; and what cometh from the Gods is indirect.</p>
 <p>13. No direct inspiration of Me can come to thee from a book, nor a sermon, nor from anything in all My creations, but only from Me, thy Creator.</p>
 <p>14. Though one man receive direct inspiration from Me, and he write it in a book, yet, when it cometh to thee, it is indirect inspiration, and is not binding upon thee, only so far as My direct inspiration upon thee moveth thee to receive it.</p>
 <p><a name="page_799"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 799</font></a></p>
 <p>15. Yet, not all men created I with the same clearness to perceive Me, and to frame My wisdom in words.</p>
 <p>16. Few only will turn away from the inspiration of the world, and come unto Me.</p>
 <p>17. Many profess Me in words, but they do not fulfill My inspiration in practice.</p>
 <p>18. My words come easily to the pure in heart; and My wisdom showeth itself in the frame of their speech.</p>
 <p>19. For I give them words, even as I give to the animal inspiration to do perfectly and wisely the parts for which I created them.</p>
 <p>20. Behold, I show the dumb spider how to weave its geometrical net; is it greater wonder for Me, to give words of wisdom to a righteous man?</p>
 <p>21. Or to put him in the way of receiving My revelations?</p>
 <p>22. Or to show him the harmony and glory of My creations?</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah611.htm">Next: Chapter X</a></center>
 </body>