<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah656.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah658.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIII</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">OF DESTROYERS AND OF BUILDERS</p></font>.
 <p>1. ONE goeth about preaching against heavenly revelations, and against the wisdom of Jehovih; and his daring speeches and good logic fall upon errors and blunders in the written words, and he draweth the populace, after the manner of a gladiator.</p>
 <p>2. Yet one such man that hath organized a brotherhood for doing good--the world hath not found.</p>
 <p>3. Another man goeth forth preaching in laudation of heavenly revelations, and on the glory of Jehovih. The errors in inspiration he heedeth not; the good he treasureth. He may draw but few unto him and his work may seem little.</p>
 <p>4. But in time to come his work becometh mighty over all the world. He organizeth his people in love and fellowship.</p>
 <p>5. The latter is a builder on Jehovih's edifice.</p>
 <p>6. Let these two examples stand before thee; and when the speech of the vain man is directed against heavenly revelations, saying: This is not of God; this is not of Jehovih, or this is not of angels--know thou that that man is not a builder.</p>
 <p>7. But when a man saith all things are of Jehovih, either directly or indirectly; whatsoever is good in them is my delight--know thou that that man is a builder.</p>
 <p>8. To strive continually to comprehend the right, and to do it--this is excellent discipline.</p>
 <p>9. To be capable of judging the right, and ever to practice it within a fraternity--this is Godliness.</p>
 <p>10. In the day thou judgest thyself, as with the eye of thy Creator, thou art as one about to start on a long journey through a delightful country.</p>
 <p>11. In the day thou hast rendered judgment against thyself for not practicing thy highest light, thou art as one departed from a coast of breakers toward mid-ocean--like one turned from mortality toward Jehovih! like one turned from perishable things toward the Ever Eternal--the Almighty.</p>
 <p>12. And when thou hast joined with others in a fraternity to do these things--then thou hast begun the second resurrection.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah658.htm">Next: Chapter XIV</a></center>
 </body>