<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah647.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah649.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IV</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>GOD ILLUSTRATETH THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MORTALS ACCORDINGLY AS THEY ARE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF THE FIRST OR SECOND RESURRECTION</p></font>.
 <p>1. CONSIDER the words of thy God, O man, and profit thou in the application of thy judgment for the growth of thy soul everlastingly.</p>
 <p>2. Of the first resurrection man saith: I know my rights and dare maintain them.</p>
 <p>3. Of the second, he saith: I ask not for rights for my own self; whatsoever is put upon me, that will I bear.</p>
 <p>4. Of the first: No man shall impose upon me.</p>
 <p>5. Of the second: Impose upon me whatsoever thou wilt.</p>
 <p>6. Of the first: Let me justify myself in what I have done; behold, I am falsely accused.</p>
 <p>7. Of the second: Jehovih knoweth my case; neither will I plead in my own behalf. Whoso is falsely accused, let him wait; in time the Father will right all things.</p>
 <p>8. Of the first: Let no man try to rule over me; I will maintain my liberty at all hazards.</p>
 <p><a name="page_838"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 838</font></a></p>
 <p>9. Of the second: Since no man in all the world hath full liberty--why should I ask it?</p>
 <p>10. Of the first: Make me a leader; let me be the head.</p>
 <p>11. Of the second: Make me not a leader; lest I would feel responsible for those I led.</p>
 <p>12. Of the first: I have done my share, let others do as well.</p>
 <p>13. Of the second: Though I do all I can, yet I am short before Jehovih.</p>
 <p>14. Of the first: O that I were rich as my neighbor, what a great good I would do!</p>
 <p>15. Of the second: Take all I have, and at once.</p>
 <p>16. Of the first: Myself, and then my family will I help; after that, others.</p>
 <p>17. Of the second: We are all brothers and sisters; why shall we prefer one of Jehovih's children above another?</p>
 <p>18. Of the first: I will not consider my shortcomings, lest I be dejected in spirit.</p>
 <p>19. Of the second: Teach me, O Father, to look into my every act, word and thought, to purify myself in Thy sight.</p>
 <p>20. Of the first: What might the world say? Ah! my reputation is at stake!</p>
 <p>21. Of the second: What will Jehovih say? With Him must I preserve my reputation, more than with ten thousand worlds.</p>
 <p>22. Of the first: Who injureth me shall suffer by my hand.</p>
 <p>23. Of the second: Let us render good unto those that injure us.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah649.htm">Next: Chapter V</a></center>
 </body>