<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah59.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah61.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter III</h3>
 <p>1. O ye angels, of hada of the red star; and thou, O God, and ye Lords, upraised and mighty, with hosts, countless, and quick answering the thoughts of mortals, hear the words of Aph, Son of Jehovih:</p>
 <p>2. When I was in the Orian arc of Noe, and the red star passed the Utswowldayark, in the etherean group of Vorh, the voice of Jehovih came to me, saying: Go thou, My Son, deliver the earth. Take with thee all whom I may send.</p>
 <p>3. And I examined the records of the stars of heaven, and of the earth; and the accounts of Jehovih's harvests, and I perceived the bondage and labor of the red star were of the seventh magnitude in the advance of habitable worlds.</p>
 <p>4. When His voice called the legions in high heaven, from every side, and below and above the earth, there moved myriads of shapely stars, which were ships of fire, coursing the firmament, whereon rode the Gods and Goddesses called by Jehovih to the labor of earth and hada.</p>
 <p>5. Closing in on every side they came, and nearer and more compact, and brighter, with sparkling pillars of fire, and down-swaying curtains of light, till all the space around about the earth was hedged in with this army of Jehovih's etherean ships of fire.</p>
 <p>6. Again I heard the Father's voice, saying: O Aph, My Son, My holy one, hearken to the voice of Jehovih, Creator of Gods and Goddesses:</p>
 <p>7. Behold, I sent My Son, Neph, to the red star, with wisdom and power. Long hath he been gone; long struggling with the black darkness of men and angels.</p>
 <p>8. As a valiant soldier rusheth into the heaviest part of battle, and forgetteth himself in desperate contest, but ceaseth not to struggle on against all odds, even so for three thousand years hath My God, Neph, hoped to save the whole limbs of the earth (the continents).</p>
 <p>9. From My holy place have I watched the battle for everlasting life; but the too prolific earth contributeth more to the corporeal than to the spiritual man. And I bring My legions to the rescue of My valiant <a name="page_75a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 75a</font></a> Son, Neph. Send thou to him, O Aph, My Son. Proclaim to him and his Lords, and to his ethereans, My just decrees. Aph said:</p>
 <p>10. And I sent swift messengers down to hada, informing Neph, Son of Jehovih, of the march and presence of Gods, and of the decree of the Father; and I added thereunto, saying: O Neph, Son of Jehovih, come hither, bringing thy hosts with thee.</p>
 <p>11. Presently Neph answered me in Jehovih's name, saying: O Aph, Son of Jehovih, I come! My prayers are answered. All praise to the All Highest!</p>
 <p>12. Then we saw, making ready in hada, preparatory to ascending, the ship of Neph and his faithful hosts; and that which was seen from my place was also seen by the myriads of Jehovih's vessels surrounding the earth. And my place became as a central throne to which the hosts now made speed, swift and orderly.</p>
 <p>13. And in the time they came, also rose up the ship of Neph from hada. Meanwhile, my ship rested on the borders of Chinvat, in the School of Hein, and from the moon seven agus. <a name="fr_12"></a><a href="#fn_12"><font size="1">1</font></a></p>
 <p>14. Again the voice of Jehovih came to me, saying: My Son, make fast thy ship, for thy place shall be the head of the army of My hosts. And let thy consorts extend in a line from thy place down to the earth, for this shall be the delivery of them whom I shall cut off.</p>
 <p>15. So I made fast, and my messengers hastened to the concentrating forces of heaven, informing the etherean groups on Jehovih's ships of His commandments. And now came Neph; his ship rose up, filled with his long-laboring hosts. And I greeted him and said unto him: By the power and wisdom of Jehovih, the continent of Whaga is to be cut loose and submerged, and her heavens carried away. Return thou to the earth and bring all the spirits of darkness from all the divisions of earth and heaven to Whaga, that I may carry them away. Then Neph and his hosts viewed the imposing scene and returned back to the earth.</p>
 <p>16. Quickly, now, the ships of fire formed in line, extending from my place down to hada, where rested Neph and his Lords of the earth, whose hosts extended to all the divisions of land and water, embracing the various heavenly kingdoms previously built by the Lords.</p>
 <p>17. And in the line of the etherean ships were stationed the plateaux of rank; and the hosts of Gods and Goddesses took their places according to <a name="page_76a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 76a</font></a> the rank of wisdom, power and love manifested in the etherean departments whence they came, with the two Orian Chiefs at either extremity.</p>
 <p>18. And I divided the line into sections, each with two hundred and fifty ships, and there were one thousand sections. And every ship was contracted ten thousand fold, which was the force required to break the crust of the earth and sink a continent.</p>
 <p>19. Along the line I stationed sentinels and talemen, and messengers, without number, so that Jehovih's voice and His sons' voices could traverse in a moment of time to every part. And after that I formed the tube of transit, which extended in front of the ships, and from the earth to beyond Chinvat; and I filled it with the earth's atmosphere to the extreme, whither it joined Io'sank, whither I determined to deliver the drujas and fetals of such as were to perish in the ocean of the earth.</p>
 <p>20. For every ten sections I appointed one hundred marshals and one God, and for every ten Gods one Chief in Emuts; according to their rank in the heavens whence they came, so appointed I them. These, then, are the Chief Emuts, to wit:</p>
 <p>21. Agar, of the order of Achav, Son of Jehovih, in Bowitch, from the corporeal star Godad, raised in Ben of a'ji, seventy, of seven hundred thousand years inhabitant of Gon.</p>
 <p>22. Hoe'ghi, Son of Jehovih, Marsh'wan of Hadom and Ag, nebulæ four and Petrath; swift messenger of Jun, of the corporeal star Alanx, of one million two hundred thousand years inhabitant of Roth'wok in Jois.</p>
 <p>23. Fist'humitaivi, Daughter of Jehovih, ji'ya'an Oods'lon in Kaih; Goddess of Ine; Goddess of Ad; Governess of Wal'wal, of the corporeal star Ter'wig, and of the plains of Exwer and Gohen, in the etherean arc of Labis, of one million three hundred thousand years.</p>
 <p>24. Hi'ata, Daughter of Jehovih, and nurse of Hue'enbak, in fifty-seven, a'ji, of the corporeal star Heats, a milkmaid, Goddess of Luf, Goddess of the plateau of O'banf, in etherea, rank ninety, and of two millions of years inhabitant of Nud and Ix.</p>
 <p>25. Gon'leps, Son of Jehovih, God of Ney, God of Aper, God of Don, God of Mu, God of Reau; physician of Bo, and of Ir, and of Jan'er; marshal of Kute and Oblin of Sharar, in etherea, of the a'ji'an field of Do; of seven hundred thousand years inhabitant of On'lof and Rick'tus.</p>
 <p>26. Neo, God of Lun and Hintaya; God of Mors, and of Thespune; Master <a name="page_77a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 77a</font></a> of Peh and Savior of Woh'haggai, a'ji plain seven, and risen from the corporeal star Se'etiyi, and inhabitant of Sirne one million seven hundred thousand years.</p>
 <p>27. Sicci, Goddess of Nu, in Loots and Rab; Goddess of Bad; Goddess of Ture; Goddess of Red, a'ji twenty, from the corporeal star Ith'mule, inhabitant of Suga one million of years; inhabitant of Ranna one million two hundred thousand years.</p>
 <p>28. Listiac'ca, Goddess of Man; Goddess of Hirze; Goddess of Som and Nye; Weaver of Olt'bak and Agimus. Rank ninety, raised on the corporeal star Mem; inhabitant of Das'sawig and Gabriomety two millions nine hundred thousand years.</p>
 <p>29. Tussica, Goddess of Kol; Goddess of Lowst and Wittawhaggat; Goddess of Du'e'jhi and Loo of Maggatza; Goddess of Ep; Goddess Gek of Hennasshalonkya; Goddess of Tur in the ji'ay'an swamp of Dobbokta, fifty-five, raised on the corporeal sun Nitz, of the Serpent Tan, inhabitant of Tayay'hitsivi, two millions of years; inhabitant of Palla one million seven hundred thousand years.</p>
 <p>30. Fiatisi, Goddess of Lubbuk; Goddess of Saran'ya, in Gowlolo; Goddess of Iz; Goddess of Serl; Goddess of Lok'low; Goddess Um of a'ji, seventy-five; Goddess of Wartz and Do'e'huitta; Goddess of Crayya; Goddess of Bak'hoo; Goddess of Teel and Ros'itz; Goddess of Mutz'mutz; Goddess of La'errets of Wouk'humhowtz; Goddess of Bil and Dusk'wan'guessel; Goddess of Ork'sa; Goddess of Unksoot; Goddess of Sl'huitta; Goddess of Shein; Goddess of Isa; Goddess of Ham; Goddess of Reikowow and Shuitit; Goddess of Daing and Gou'wok; Goddess of Faitta'zammel; Goddess of Zittayya'howb of the gardens of Zittayya'bauf in a'ji seven; surgeon of Hualla; surgeon of Bos; surgeon of Rappaya; surgeon of Lum'zon; nurse of Paigga of Semathais; nurse of Zid; nurse of Loo'see; nurse of Home; nurse of Briathath; Queen of Ouppa; Queen of Rog'ga, disciplinarian of Tuh; of Kaibbi'summak, of Tootz'mutz, of Bir'bir, of Ctenski, of Rivvia, of soon, of Hadab, of Fussohowtz and Ceres; raised on the star Planzza, swift messenger in Bal and Wawa'lauk five hundred thousand years; swift messenger in To'wakka and Runfwot five hundred thousand years; inhabitant of Terashash one million of years; inhabitant of the fields of Ni'jayay one million of years; inhabitant of Gun five hundred thousand years; maker of corporeal roadways five hundred thousand years.</p>
 <p><a name="page_78a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 78a</font></a></p>
 <p>31. So Fiatisi outranked all other Gods and Goddesses, and was special guest of honor to Aph, Chief over all the rest.</p>
 <p>32. And the star of Fiatisi's etherean ship was stationed near the earth, that she might the better behold the deliverance of the spirits that were to be freed by the submersion of the land of Whaga; and of these spirits there were upward of twenty-four billion four hundred millions, of whom more than three billion were fetals and familiars and spirits in chaos.</p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_12"></a><a href="oah60.htm#fr_12">75a:1</a> An agus is about a thousand miles</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah61.htm">Next: Chapter IV</a></center>
 </body>