<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah627.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah629.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter X</h3>
 <p>1. NOW, whilst the organization of Shalam had been going on, Tae and his hosts had interspersed the same in laboring; some in building houses, some in digging and planting, and others in clearing the ground from stones and rubbish, whilst the women were busy with the infants.</p>
 <p>2. And it so happened that amongst the hosts, Jehovih had provided a goodly number of musicians, players and singers, who furnished spiritual entertainment in response to the prayers and sermons of such as supplicated the Almighty.</p>
 <p>3. In addition to these occupations, the groups were cast into responsible positions for the future; so that the members of all the groups found it necessary to begin and pursue a special line of education, themselves, so as to become teachers.</p>
 <p>4. Consequently, each group became as a school in its specialty; for whoso had taken it upon himself to live and practice his highest light was bound also to admit an increase of light.</p>
 <p>5. Jehovih hath said: Two conditions have I placed before all men, ascension and declension; let no man stand still, for so I did not create him.</p>
 <p>6. Such as will not ascend, shall be in declension; such as desire not declension, let them not stand still.</p>
 <p>7. And I have given to My Gods and Lords of heaven, and to wise men on earth, knowledge to provide unto the multitude something to do constantly, that satan (mischief) may not enter in amongst them to their injury.</p>
 <p>8. Tae said: Now is kosmon; men and women know of their own knowledge a way to provide unto self-development in wisdom, virtue, truth and affiliation.</p>
 <p>9. And it was so; the hosts of Shalam had been chosen and provided by Jehovih as an example of self-purifiers and self-instructors for founding His kingdom on earth.</p>
 <p>10. Jehovih hath said: In kosmon, purification shall not come by baptism with either water or fire. But each one shall turn his thoughts inward, to himself, to becoming a constant magistrate, sitting in judgment upon himself as to his thoughts, works and behavior.</p>
 <p>11. To perfect himself in his part, in the family of My kingdom, is My new commandment unto My chosen.</p>
 <p>12. For no man perfecteth himself unto full requitement whilst he leaveth undone that which he might have done.</p>
 <p>13. After awhile, Tae and his hosts divided and apportioned the hours of the day; so many to labor, so many to rest, so many to study, thus to one thing and another, that the groups might be orderly. Nevertheless, entire freedom was given to all the members to come and go, to labor or rest, as they might elect.</p>
 <p>14. Now, it so happened that more than half of the people were celibates, and they reasoned, and said, inquiring: Is it not better that the teachers and nurses be celibates? And this question extended throughout the colony, so it became necessary to determine which should be . And though the question was not weighty of itself, yet, in order to provide an understanding for similar questions, the chiefs of the nurses and the chiefs of the teachers appealed to Tae, who was C'chief.</p>
 <p>15. And the Light of Jehovih came upon Tae, and he said unto them: Did either one shirk from service it would be plain what should be judged for righteousness' sake. But because ye are ambitious to do good work, which is tedious, with many trials, ye all deserve great honor.</p>
 <p>16. Because ye are ambitious to serve the Father, by serving these little ones, your aspirations are noble. Because ye are willing to yield to one another any preference, ye are an example of holiness.</p>
 <p>17. The question ye have asked, which is simply: Who can be the highest best teacher of an orphan child, a celibate who has never raised a child, or a married person who hath raised a child? is not a question, therefore, of self-interest or self-gratification, but one of knowledge.</p>
 <p>18. If I decide this matter, behold, it would be simply one man's decision. Why should I make myself responsible in a matter that can be determined by yourselves?</p>
 <p>19. Take ye, therefore, sufficient time to inquire as to the facts that have been demonstrated. Go, find of married <a name="page_817"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 817</font></a> people who have raised up children of their own in the right way, and number their proportion to those who have raised up their children in the wrong way.</p>
 <p>20. The chiefs took the matter in hand, and they not only examined those in Shalam, but hundreds of families of Uzians, and again they came before Tae, to report.</p>
 <p>21. And this was the sum of their report, namely: Every one accuseth all others, that no married people have raised up their children in the right way, and, yet, each one accrediteth himself as having raised his own in nearly the right way.</p>
 <p>22. Tae asked: But how found ye the children they had raised?</p>
 <p>23. They answered: They were all raised in the wrong way. Though they were good enough in their own parents' eyes, yet, to others, they were far short of the mark of either wisdom or righteousness.</p>
 <p>24. Tae said: Why, then, since those who have raised children have been failures, ye shall surely not choose them. The celibates have made no failures, for they have not tried.</p>
 <p>25. Let this, then, be our rule and guide: Since every mortal life should be made ripe with experience in all things, and since celibates have no children of their own, and since these children are orphans and castaways, let it be testimony that Jehovih hath thus provided the celibates as substitutes for natural parents.</p>
 <p>26. So, let the nurses and teachers, in their youngest infancy, be celibates.</p>
 <p>27. And this was carried out in practice.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah629.htm">Next: Chapter XI</a></center>
 </body>