<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah603.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah605.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter III</h3>
 <p>1. THE eye of man I made to obtain knowledge by light; but the ear of man I made to obtain knowledge from darkness, and within darkness, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>2. The power of touch I gave to man, whereby he might learn of things their adaptability and compatibility and incompatibility with himself.</p>
 <p>3. These are the corporeal doorways I gave unto thee, O man, whereby thou mightst receive knowledge from Me and My creations, consciously to thyself.</p>
 <p>4. Through these, thou art constantly impregnated; through these, thy soul accumulateth knowledge of My works.</p>
 <p>5. Whatsoever is charged upon these doorways of my soul, is inspiration.</p>
 <p>6. When thou seest bread, thou art inspired to eat; when thou seest a horse, thou art inspired to ride; when thou touchest a nettle, thou art inspired with pain.</p>
 <p>7. Yet, in all cases, thou must have practice before thou canst comprehend the inspiration that cometh to thee from these external things.</p>
 <p>8. Man saith: To-day, I remember my friend whom I saw not for many a year.</p>
 <p>9. Jehovih saith: I made thee as a storehouse, and as a book that was written before.</p>
 <p>10. And I gave to thee power to re-read thy stores and thy book, within thy soul.</p>
 <p>11. This was the accumulated inspiration which I had previously given thee.</p>
 <p>12. When thou art fevered, or entranced, or in diverse action from thy usual bent, thy soul turneth into these stores, and thy memory cometh forth wonderfully.</p>
 <p>13. This is the manifestation of inspiration which I had previously given thee.</p>
 <p>14. I made thee that thou shouldst receive inspiration, not only from the world external to thyself, but inspiration from the members of thy body.</p>
 <p>15. My impression upon thee is inspiration; but thou must realize My inspiration, in order to know Me.</p>
 <p>16. An idiot holdeth fire in his hand, and it giveth him pain, but yet, he knoweth not the cause, nor whence the origin of the pain.</p>
 <p>17. So, also, I come to thee, and give thee inspiration, but thou discernest not Me.</p>
 <p>18. Another man discerneth My Presence, and My inspiration. He heareth Me speak; he seeth My Person.</p>
 <p>19. Yet, I am with both alike.</p>
 <p>20. One man openeth his mouth to speak, and, behold My words come forth.</p>
 <p>21. And yet another saith: No man know Jehovih; none have heard Him.</p>
 <p>22. One man is sensitive, as a plate for a picture, and he catcheth My Light instantly, and knoweth it is from Me.</p>
 <p>23. Another one saith: A sudden thought struck me! But he discerneth not whence it came.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah605.htm">Next: Chapter IV</a></center>
 </body>