<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah651.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah653.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VIII</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">GOD SHOWETH WHAT IS MEANT BY FOLLOWING THE HIGHEST LIGHT</p></font>.
 <p>1. BE considerate of thy fellow man, and weigh his standing place in the sight of thy God.</p>
 <p>2. For one man saith: My highest light is to get money; another, to get great learning; another, to enjoy earthly pleasure; another, to contemplate sexual relations; another, to serve Buddha; another, to serve Brahma; another, to serve Christ; another, to be efficient in warfare, and so on, every one from his own standpoint.</p>
 <p>3. Many are also under the prejudice of old things, or the influence of a neighbor, or a spirit or their surroundings, or the impulse of their own flesh, and say: I too follow my highest light.</p>
 <p>4. Whereas they are in darkness altogether; neither know they what is meant by the term--highest light--often venturing an opinion or a vague surmise instead, and believing they are expressing their highest light.</p>
 <p>5. For which reasons thou shalt explain that only facts well known, or comparatively proven, are light. An opinion is not light.</p>
 <p><a name="page_841"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 841</font></a></p>
 <p>6. That whoso professeth light must know the matter of his own knowledge.</p>
 <p>7. That facts, numbers, figures or axioms can demonstrate light; and that without these, then the supposed light is only darkness.</p>
 <p>8. Pursue this philosophy and thou shalt easily discover who amongst you hath the highest light; and also what kind of judgment shall govern the chief's rulings.</p>
 <p>9. Some will desire to consult the angels, as to which--in a given matter--is the highest light; but I say unto thee, thou shalt weigh the words of angels even as if they were mortals, exacting similar facts and substantiation.</p>
 <p>10. Was it not the consulting of the oracles that destroyed Vind'yu (India), Socatta, Fonece (Phoenecia), Persia, Ghem and Greece? Such consultation of angels is answered from the first resurrection; and it ever will be so, save man exact from the angels facts and substantial proof.</p>
 <p>11. These, then, are rules of light: That which is self-evident: That which is axiomatic: That which is substantiated by facts: That which hath a parallel in known things: Things that lead to peace, order, and the uplifting of thy neighbor and thyself.</p>
 <p>12. Also to discipline thyself to be constantly on the alert to be pure, good, truthful and gentle in thy speech; to practice right-doing--these are following the highest light.</p>
 <p>13. This though is darkness--to express fault finding, criticism, censure, or even an opinion unsupportable by facts.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah653.htm">Next: Chapter IX</a></center>
 </body>