<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah607.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah609.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VII</h3>
 <p>1. I created man, even from the first, that he should learn to be an independent being, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>2. And when My angels had taught man speech, making man name all the animals in the world, after the names the animals called themselves, I commanded My angels to come away from man, for a season.</p>
 <p>3. To My angels I said: Behold, of all the animals I created in the world, to man only gave I capacity to transmit knowledge to his brethren by words.</p>
 <p>4. And to man only gave I capacity to comprehend an idea of Me, his Creator.</p>
 <p>5. Nevertheless, I inspire all living animals which I created; but they know it not.</p>
 <p>6. I inspire the spider to make its net; the bird to build her nest; the wild goose to fly to the south, before the winter cometh; the mare to neigh for her colt; the ant to lay in its stores; the bees to dwell in a queendom; and so on, every living creature do I move and control by My inspiration upon them.</p>
 <p>7. Males and females I inspire to come together at times and seasons; and then to live apart during gestation. These I keep before man as a lesson of the wisdom of My inspiration.</p>
 <p>8. To man I give liberty to acquire wisdom by observing the method of My work, as I manifest in other living creatures.</p>
 <p>9. I have also given man capacity to attain to know My inspiration in contradistinction from the inspiration he receiveth from his surroundings.</p>
 <p>10. To no other creature gave I this capacity.</p>
 <p>11. What cometh of Me, is without pain or injury to any one, and with liberty unto all. Such are My inspirations.</p>
 <p>12. When man witnesseth a battle, he is inspired to battle; when he witnesseth peace and love, he is inspired to peace and love.</p>
 <p>13. What moveth man in consonance and wisdom, and to life, is My inspiration.</p>
 <p>14. What moveth man in disconsonance and folly, and to death, is inspiration from man's surroundings.</p>
 <p>15. I inspire the serpent to bite to death; for thus created I it. This is no sin, for it fulfilleth its labor; it is the remnant of poison of other eras.</p>
 <p>16. Man I created not to destruction, but to life, wisdom, peace and love toward all.</p>
 <p>17. When man practiceth virtue, wisdom, truth and love unto all, his inspiration is from Me direct.</p>
 <p>18. When man practiceth destruction and selfishness, his inspiration is indirectly from Me, through the conflict of his surroundings.</p>
 <p>19. And thus becometh he evil, instead of good.</p>
 <p>20. By direct inspiration do I move upon all the animals I created.</p>
 <p>21. This I also created possible unto men, separate from indirect inspiration.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah609.htm">Next: Chapter VIII</a></center>
 </body>