<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah625.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah627.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VIII</h3>
 <p>1. TO the chief of architecture, Tae said: Thy duties shall be one with thy group, and what I say to thee shall apply to them also. Thou shalt not only build houses for Shalam, providing them comfortably with rooms and with wholesome conveniences, but thou shalt teach our adopted infants, by models and otherwise, the art and science of architecture.</p>
 <p>2. At a very early age thou shalt explain to them, by blocks and with tools, the science and measurements of architecture, as to the names and kinds thereof, to the place and use of braces, beams and roofs.</p>
 <p>3. Moreover, as soon as they are <a name="page_814"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 814</font></a> capable of holding a pencil, thou shalt teach them to make drafts of houses, and the parts thereof. And when they are old enough to handle tools, thou shalt teach them to make models of houses, and to estimate the strength of the parts required.</p>
 <p>4. To the chief of clothiers, Tae said: Thy duties shall be one with thy group, and what I say to thee is to them also. Thou shalt not only provide clothing for Shalam, in wisdom as to comfort, pattern and beauty, but thou shalt prepare the way to teach these, our adopted infants, the art and workmanship of clothing the human form in the way most conducive to health and comfort.</p>
 <p>5. At an early age thou shalt teach them the art of sewing and cutting, providing for them models in human form, so they may learn everything from a hat to a shoe, as to the material used, the strength required, and how to determine the same.</p>
 <p>6. To the chief of dieticians, Tae said: Thou and thy group shall be one; what I say to thee is to them also. Thou shalt determine and provide diet for Shalam; as to the best herbivorous foods, and how to prepare them, and how to preserve such as shall be kept over.</p>
 <p>7. In this matter thou shalt determine and explain the constituent parts of the human body, and shalt find and provide herbivorous elements adapted to development and purity, so that the best and strongest and healthiest of men and women may be made out of these, our adopted infants. Neither shalt thou follow whims or fancies; but thou shalt support thyself by facts collected from the different nations of the earth.</p>
 <p>8. And in the preparation of food, thou shalt teach these infants the art and the properties and all things pertaining to food and diet. And explain to them the blood-thirsty character of carnivorous animals, and carnivorous people, giving them facts and figures, so that in all thou teachest them they shall be learned wisely, and not in conceit merely.</p>
 <p>9. Thus spake Tae to all the chiefs, explaining to them their parts. And after he had finished with them individually, then he spake to them collectively, saying:</p>
 <p>10. The greatest of all learning is to learn how to live in the best way, that we may be happy here and hereafter. There is no other learning so important as this.</p>
 <p>11. To man, Jehovih provided neither wool nor hair nor feathers to cover his body; and yet He created him too tender to live without covering.</p>
 <p>12. In sexual relation, man and woman alone, of all the animal world, can be taught shame.</p>
 <p>13. Whatever dress attracteth the least thought to sex is the most modest dress; whatever dress giveth the fullest, best development to all parts of the body, with adaptation to comfort for the seasons, is the best dress.</p>
 <p>14. Next to dress is diet. As to what is best to eat, for the best, healthiest corporeal man, and the best for the wisest, holiest spiritual man, is the best diet.</p>
 <p>15. These, with houses to live in, comprise the chief requirements for the corporeal life of man.</p>
 <p>16. And yet, to produce these, and prepare them up unto man's service, many trades and sciences have been developed on the earth.</p>
 <p>17. Now, behold, in this day Jehovih hath provided amply unto us. He hath opened up unto us the nations of the earth, where we can go and witness many things, especially as to the habits and dispositions of man; as to his mode of life, in food and clothes and houses.</p>
 <p>18. Now, behold, ye have taken a great work upon yourselves; which is to riase up these little ones according to your highest light.</p>
 <p>19. Ye have bound yourselves to follow your own highest light. And ye know that all light is progressive. Ye can not settle down, saying: I know enough!</p>
 <p>20. But ye are bound to investigate. And how can ye do this without acquainting yourselves with what hath been proved amongst other peoples?</p>
 <p>21. In some countries, infants are whipped for crying; in other countries, they are held up by the heels; and, in some countries, infants cry not at all.</p>
 <p>22. The chief of nurses shall discover these facts, and appropriate them.</p>
 <p>23. In like manner, shall every chief take his part, and develop the highest proven and possible standard.</p>
 <p>24. As much as ye thus fulfill your places, so shall be your satisfaction and happiness afterward. As much as ye neglect your parts, so will ye censure and accuse yourselves afterward.</p>
 <p>25. As Faithists, ye accept all people as angels; mortals are simply undelivered.</p>
 <p><a name="page_815"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 815</font></a></p>
 <p>26. All mortals are in an embryotic state, preparing for birth (commonly called, death).</p>
 <p>27. Heaven is now, and is near, even within all who will accept it.</p>
 <p>28. At an early age, infants can be taught that to serve Jehovih bringeth happiness; to serve mortal inspirations and surroundings (satan) bringeth unhappiness.</p>
 <p>29. Therefore, though ye teach our infants about diet and architecture and clothing and all other things, ye will still be but little improvement on Uz, save ye teach them that the chief aim of life should be to develop the spiritual man that is within.</p>
 <p>30. By this system of education in Shalam, there shall be two branches, one relating to corporeal things and one to spiritual things.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah627.htm">Next: Chapter IX</a></center>
 </body>