<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah606.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah608.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VI</h3>
 <p>1. I am One Spirit, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>2. My quickening power is upon all the living; because of this, they live and move.</p>
 <p>3. According to the different structure of the living, so is My inspiration manifested by them.</p>
 <p>4. One, as the hare, runneth away in cowardice; another, as a lion, is ferocious; another, without judgment, as the serpent.</p>
 <p>5. And as to man: One is inspired to music; another to mathematics; another to seership, and so on.</p>
 <p>6. To all of these I am the One, the Universal Inspirer that moveth all of them.</p>
 <p>7. According to their organic structure, so do they manifest My inspiration.</p>
 <p>8. The lowest of living creatures made I the serpent, for I gave to him an element capable of destroying himself.</p>
 <p>9. When the earth was encircled with poisonous gases, I created poisonous vines and weeds and trees and all kinds of herbs, rich-growing upon the earth.</p>
 <p>10. Thus, from destroying gases and from earth-substance created I the vegetable world. And, in that day, all growing things upon the earth which I had created were poison as to animal life.</p>
 <p><a name="page_797"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 797</font></a></p>
 <p>11. Then, I created the serpents; of all sizes created I them. And they were poison also.</p>
 <p>12. And the serpents I created were carniverous, feeding upon one another. Self-impregnating created I them.</p>
 <p>13. Thus drove I the poison of the air down into vegetation, and thence into the animal world; thus I purified the air of heaven.</p>
 <p>14. This was the first creation I created on this world.</p>
 <p>15. Then I overcast the earth with falling nebulae, and covered up the poisons growing upon the earth, and they were turned to oil and coal.</p>
 <p>16. Then, I made a new creation; giving feet and legs and bones to the animals I designed for the earth.</p>
 <p>17. And when the earth was ripe for man, then I created him; male and female created I those of the second creation.</p>
 <p>18. And man was dumb, like other animals; without speech and without understanding, even less than any other creature which I had created.</p>
 <p>19. Nevertheless, I had given to man, and thus made him, out of the dissolved elements of every living thing that had preceded him.</p>
 <p>20. And man partook of the first and the second creations. After the manner of every animal on the earth, so created I man; with all the characteristics of all of them, so created I him, male and female created I them.</p>
 <p>21. And man was unconscious of his creation, not knowing whence he came; nor knew he which was his own species.</p>
 <p>22. And I sent angels to man, to teach him who he was, and to rouse him up to his capabilities, for which I created him.</p>
 <p>23. And my angels drew, from man's side, substance, and thus took on corporeal forms; and the angels dwelt with man as helpmates, to make man understand.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah608.htm">Next: Chapter VII</a></center>
 </body>