<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah608.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah610.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_798"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 798</font></a></p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VIII</h3>
 <p>1. ALTHOUGH all inspiration goeth from Me to all the living, directly, yet I also created man susceptible to indirect inspiration from all My creations.</p>
 <p>2. Whatsoever receiveth from Me direct, is in harmony with Me.</p>
 <p>3. The lily and the rose I created perfect in their order; the female bird I inspire to build her nest in season, perfect in her order.</p>
 <p>4. Even so is it with all My created beings, save man. All the rest err not, in the order I made them; and they all fulfill the glory for which I made them.</p>
 <p>5. But because I made man capacitated to receive inspiration from all things, he manifesteth both, evil and good; according to his birth and surroundings, so is man good or bad.</p>
 <p>6. Nevertheless, I created man with capacity to comprehend this also; for, I designed him, from the first, to work his way up to the Godhead, understanding all below him.</p>
 <p>7. And I sent my angels to man, teaching him how to distinguish the difference in the inspirations upon him, that he might govern himself accordingly.</p>
 <p>8. And My angels said unto man: Become thou one with thy Creator; these are His direct inspirations:</p>
 <p>9. To love thy Creator above all else, and thy neighbor as thyself.</p>
 <p>10. To give delights only, and not pain.</p>
 <p>11. To kill not.</p>
 <p>12. To do not violently against His creatures.</p>
 <p>13. To be considerate of the liberty of all the living.</p>
 <p>14. To interdict not the happiness and hope of others, only where thou canst return a transcendent glory and hope in place thereof.</p>
 <p>15. For these are direct inspirations from thy Creator.</p>
 <p>16. But these are thy evil inspirations, O man, these come from thy birth and surroundings, formerly called, satan:</p>
 <p>17. To kill.</p>
 <p>18. To slander.</p>
 <p>19. To punish.</p>
 <p>20. To destroy Jehovih's created beings.</p>
 <p>21. To strive for thyself, above another.</p>
 <p>22. To gratify thy flesh at the expense of purity or wisdom.</p>
 <p>23. To be false to Jehovih.</p>
 <p>24. To be false to thyself.</p>
 <p>25. To speak falsely.</p>
 <p>26. To covet another's.</p>
 <p>27. To cohabit in the gestative period.</p>
 <p>28. To engage in strife, or to aid and abet conflicts, which are the fruit of carniverous food, transmitted in birth.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah610.htm">Next: Chapter IX</a></center>
 </body>