<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah71.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah73.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XV</h3>
 <p>1. JEHOVIH spake in the light of the throne of God in Hored, saying: Behold, a star cometh!</p>
 <p>2. The voice ceased, but God and his hosts knew the meaning, for it was the time of Aph to return and complete his deliverance of Neph and his hosts, and his Lords and their hosts.</p>
 <p>3. So the Council were moved to look into the firmament; and the messengers who had heard the voice, and who were departing on their various missions, also looked upward, even as they sped forth to their places; and they proclaimed it in the places of all the heavens of the earth, and to the Lords and their divisions of the earth.</p>
 <p>4. And the angels of heaven and those that abode with mortals were stirred up, and because of their contiguity to mortals, the latter comprehended that something unusual was near at hand.</p>
 <p>5. The Council of Hored knew not how they should proceed, for the event was to surpass in magnificence anything they had ever witnessed.</p>
 <p>6. God said: I have heard Thy voice, O Jehovih. I know a star cometh, and great shall be the glory thereof. Give me light, O Father. How shall Thy servant know the decorum of Orian Chiefs? Behold, I am as one abashed with obscurity in Thy wide universe!</p>
 <p>7. Jehovih's voice answered, saying: Fear not, My Son. And let thy Council be strong also. Proceed at once to decorate thy people, preparatory to receiving the resurrection. And those who are to be My Brides and Bridegrooms clothe ye in white.</p>
 <p>8. The whole Council heard Jehovih's voice, and they ordained officers to proceed throughout atmospherea and put in effect Jehovih's commandment. And the decorated angels, and those prepared as Brides and Bridegrooms for etherea, were ordered to form in companies near the throne of God in Hored; and the officers of companies were also provided with badges, whereon was inscribed an account of their labor on earth and in heaven, the number and nature of their charities and self-sacrifices for others' good, and their grade in purity and power and wisdom. And the privates were decorated with stars to illustrate the same things, in degree and number; and the stations of their file in Hored were provided in the order of music, rating them according to their chord and discord, and their social adaptability.</p>
 <p>9. For these things were done before etherean judges, to whom Jehovih had said: Let the people pass before you, and judge ye them, that being assorted and arranged they shall make one harmonious whole; for it is only by this they will have power to ascend and endure in My regions of light. There were one million of these judges, and they took up their stations in different parts of atmospherea, wherever the second resurrection had been established, every judge choosing a district for himself or herself, for they were both men and women.</p>
 <p>10. And as the angels passed before them, the wisdom of the judges was so great they could comprehend all they had ever done, either on earth or in heaven. And by signals the proper officers were advised how to decorate and adorn all of them.</p>
 <p>11. And as fast as companies of one thousand passed, they were provided with conductors, who took them to their places, which had been previously determined by the command of God.</p>
 <p>12. Whilst this work was proceeding, lights began to appear in the firmament above; these were the marshals of the Orian fields in etherea, in their star-ships, making course for Hored, and their number was legion. But presently one brighter and more powerful <a name="page_93"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 93</font></a> than the rest made way from the western arc of Onah'yi, and it steered direct to God's throne, growing brighter and larger as it came. And when it entered past Chinvat, and was well within the vortex of the earth in the belt of the moon's orbit, its light spread across the whole atmosphere of heaven, and Hored was illumined, and the angels of Hored were stirred up with enthusiasm.</p>
 <p>13. Not long the brilliant star delayed the suspense of the angel world, for he who sailed them was a God of millions of years, and by his wisdom attained to such mastery that the elements of earth and atmospherea gave way, as if appalled by a heaven on fire. Down came the star-ship whose majesty outweighed all ceremony, a very crown of magnificence, even to the arena of the Council of Hored. And he who came, attended by half a million, was Sue'ji, marshal for that which was soon to follow.</p>
 <p>14. God rose up, saluting, and all the hosts rose up, whereupon Sue'ji ascended the throne, greeted by God and his Council, near at hand. Sue'ji said:</p>
 <p>15. By thy will, O Jehovih! And God said: In Thy name, O Father, Creator! Welcome to Thy Son! And presently all the place was aglow with a golden light, which ranks first in heaven of all colors, and the voice of Jehovih descended on Sue'ji, and he said:</p>
 <p>16. Well beloved, come! Long enduring, come! Of patience and steadfastness, My sons and daughters! Behold, I came in the darkness and delivered Mi, for she was of twins heavily laden. And the one dwelt with the mother, but the other I sent to nurse in Hautuon. And they are grown to maturity; a son and daughter twin.</p>
 <p>17. Turn ye to Hautuon; lo, the twin cometh! She was the puny child; but look ye upon her, O ye Gods and Goddesses! Her thousand millions come as an avalanche of ji'ay'an worlds. Open your arms, O My beloved sons and daughters.</p>
 <p>18. The voice ceased, and Sue'ji said: When the harvest of Hautuon arriveth, attended by the Gods and Goddesses who helped deliver the children of darkness, and who have changed them into beacons of light, behold ye, there shall be three days of recreation in atmospherea; for the hosts of Hautuon shall be shown their native world, whence they came; and they shall read the lineage of kin and condition whence they were rescued by Jehovih's sons and daughters.</p>
 <p>19. But on the first day, behold, Aph, the Orian Chief, will descend in all his glory. And on the fourth day all your upraised sons and daughters shall ascend into the etherean worlds, where there are in waiting, to receive you, millions of millions of souls, long since dwellers in Nirvana. Sue'ji ceased speaking, having given commands as to the stations of his marshals around about the earth and her heaven.</p>
 <p>20. God sent his messengers, saying: Go ye to Wak'hah and say: God saith: My heavens have been numbered, and the account of my laborers rendered and recorded in the libraries of Hored. And of all the hosts who have labored with thy God, behold, thou, O Wak'hah, standest on the highest grade. Come, therefore, to the throne of thy God and be anointed God of heaven and earth for the next four hundred years, and as long after as Jehovih willeth!</p>
 <p>21. The messengers, attended by one thousand marshals, departed for Adjun, the place of labor where Wak'hah dwelt, being a physician's nurse for es'yans and still-born mortal children and those killed by abortion. And they delivered the message of God, to which Wak'hah replied: Thanks, O Jehovih! Tell God I will come. But yet let me surmise: I have been all my life, now some thirty thousand earth years, trying to learn where I should be most serviceable to Jehovih and His sons and daughters. And when I judge that I have found it, lo, a summons cometh from another way, saying: Come thou hither. Wherefore it seemeth Jehovih forever hurrieth us onward, faster than our wisdom can discover the requirement. So the marshals provided an otevan, and Wak'hah was conducted before Hored, even to the foot of the throne of God, where he was saluted and received under a rod of water, according to his rank.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah73.htm">Next: Chapter XVI</a></center>
 </body>