<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah80.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah82.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IV</h3>
 <p>1. WHEN the time of the festival had come, there congregated in Hored, besides the etherean hosts, more than a thousand million souls, to witness and participate in the ceremonies. Sue said: Here is wisdom and folly; false Gods and their dupes; laziness and industry; swiftness and sloth. Yea, here is a world worthless before Jehovih.</p>
 <p><a name="page_104"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 104</font></a></p>
 <p>2. And why? Simply for lack of discipline and harmony. Every one is for self, and none are producers for the general good. Alas, they are the same as mortals, but stript of flesh. They are of no value to themselves. Now will I show thee, O God, that these hapless beings, with no joy in life nor hope of resurrection, shall become a great glory to the Father and His Kingdoms.</p>
 <p>3. God said: Pity them, O Father! It is over a thousand years since they have been visited by the higher heaven. Many of them are learned, but doubting if there be other heavens, save the plateaus of the atmospherea of the earth. Millions and millions of them have never seen an etherean. Alas, I fear for them.</p>
 <p>4. Sue said: Fear not, O God. They are as mortar in my hands. Neither shall there be preaching to them, nor praying for them. They are tired of these things. But I will found a new light amongst them, and it shall speak for us. Hear me, then, and with the populace I shall be as One that is unknown. Call, then, thy es'enaurs, and thy trumpeters and harpists, and all the musicians belonging to thy kingdom and to the kingdoms of thy Lords, and let the procession begin.</p>
 <p>5. For in all public matters those who are at the front, if wise, can lead on forever. Be politic, therefore, and shape the populace whilst the self-Gods are amazed at the immensity of the hosts assembled.</p>
 <p>6. God did as commanded, and the people saw there was a head to the proceedings. Sue said: Send thy marshals and decorators to follow close after the musicians, distributing raiment to all who will follow in the procession. My etherean hosts are advised. They will stand by the way, and, with marvelous swiftness, provide the raiment. And all possible extravagant colors and fabrics, and hats and ornaments, shall be distributed, and gratuitously.</p>
 <p>7. My hosts shall be arranged in plain white; and they shall march not, but be as servants and workmen. And when the atmosphereans have played and sung over all the boundaries of Hored, then shall My etherean band sing and play and start the dance.</p>
 <p>8. All these things were done, and from the very start to the termination of the music there was harmony in every place and corner amongst the thousand millions assembled. Nor was there ever so extravagantly equipped a multitude in the earth's heaven. And, so completely captivated were the people, their enthusiasm was boundless. Then came the etherean dance, the which so far surpassed the capacity of the atmosphereans that not one could join in. Neither could they take part in the etherean music.</p>
 <p>9. So the atmosphereans looked on, confounded by the excellence of that which was before their eyes.</p>
 <p>10. Thus ended the first day's proceedings, which to describe in full would require a large book. So the people were called to refreshment. And the ethereans, still dressed in white, and as servants and laborers, provided the viands. For they had previously made convenience for a supply of material. And so easily and with such swiftness did they their work that now for the first time did the more learned of atmospherea begin to observe them with surprise and wonder.</p>
 <p>11. Presently inquiries were made as to who they were and whence they came. For so Jehovih created man, that when of his own accord he admireth the excellence of his neighbor, he goeth to the extreme in praising him.</p>
 <p>12. So God said: On the morrow shall a new entertainment be given, and new raiment and new viands for the feast. And the hosts shouted with great vigor and praise. Then the people mingled together to converse on all they had witnessed; neither comprehended they the object, save for pleasure only.</p>
 <p>13. When the next day came the ethereans had been divided into groups, and the rites of the ancients and of the hosts of a'ji in Partha were announced, requiring extravagant toilets and millions of atmosphereans as assistants.</p>
 <p>14. So great was their ambition to take part that only by promises of something in the next rites could the marshals make selections.</p>
 <p>15. Sue, Jehovih's Son, had previously stationed signal bells at remote distances from one another, but connected them so that the sounds would answer quickly. And in the intervening places, extemporized forests and waterfalls were arranged; and near the middle space one thousand columns of fire were erected.</p>
 <p>16. So, in the morning of the second day, when all these glorious scenes were completed, and the ethereans, still plain and in white, stationed about, the atmosphereans were more confounded than ever, and more loudly shouting in their praise.</p>
 <p><a name="page_105"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 105</font></a></p>
 <p>17. First came the birth-rites; then marriage-rites; then death-rites and the first resurrection; then the rites of harmony. And the play represented a million of ethereans who went to a corporeal world and followed it through its life, and to death and resurrection; its darkness and inharmony and terrible suffering in atmospherea; ending with a tableau of a great sun of light descending, to deliver them into everlasting paradise.</p>
 <p>18. So grand was the spectacle, and so sublime the music and the spoken words, that the hosts of Hored wept, and laughed, and shouted, and prayed, as if their souls would break with joy.</p>
 <p>19. Thus ended the second day, and so complete was the glorious work that every soul had sworn a solemn oath to forsake the earth and lower heaven forever. Then God announced for the third day, the display of etherean power.</p>
 <p>20. And the people were so bewildered already that a child could have led the most stubborn of all. For thus Jehovih created man, who, having become much conceited in himself, turneth right about and maketh himself a submissive fool.</p>
 <p>21. So, on the third day, the ethereans displayed their power over the elements of the atmosphere; making corporeal substances and dissolving them at pleasure; making light into darkness, and darkness into light. Weaving fabrics and making diadems and precious stones. Gathering viands from the essence of things evaporated up from the earth; founding plateaux and temples in heaven. Making ships and chains and musical instruments. And, lastly, the etherean marshals, with half a million ethereans, turned the winds and sent a heavy shower of rain down to the corporeal earth.</p>
 <p>22. And all the while, the musicians of the hosts of Sue were discoursing music, the sweetness and grandeur of which surpassed the atmosphereans so far that they were as nothing.</p>
 <p>23. So, because of the exhibition of great power and wisdom, the third day had changed the fortunes and aspirations of every man and woman in the lower heaven. And they were running hither and thither, pleading to be taken as apprentices or servants, pledging themselves to do anything required of them. Neither would they be put off, demanding that half of the next day should be given to initiating them as real beginners in the second resurrection.</p>
 <p>24. Then God spake to them, saying: Ye know not what ye speak. Behold, I have commanded ye for hundreds of years to put away your fine raiment and sparkling gems, and to begin adorning your souls, so as to become Brides and Bridegrooms of the Great Spirit.</p>
 <p>25. But ye would not, but strove continually to adorn yourselves, forgetting to labor for those beneath you. Behold, now stand Jehovih's Brides and Bridegrooms before you. What is their worth compared to yours? Are they not plain? And are ye not decorated?</p>
 <p>26. But millions of voices rose up, saying: We will do whatever thou commandest, O God. There is no God like unto thee. Then God spake, saying: Hear me, then, further: This is to begin the second resurrection: to put away your jewels and diadems and ornaments, and, above all things, to forsake self, and henceforth labor for others who are beneath you. If ye do this in a brotherhood, ye are already beginning the second resurrection. Neither is there any other road to wisdom and power.</p>
 <p>27. Again the multitude cried out: We will do anything; we have faith. And God answered them, saying: Suffer, then, a few to be initiated on to-morrow; but be ye patient and of good judgment; slow to resolve, but firm forever.</p>
 <p>28. So on the fourth day, in the morning, behold, more than a hundred millions of spirits had abandoned their showy raiment and stood arrayed in white, devoid of jewels and diadems, ready to be initiated and take the vows of the second resurrection, as above. And accordingly new music was prepared, and the procession and ceremonies so arranged that the greatest possible glory would be manifested.</p>
 <p>29. Canopies were stretched overhead, and arches and columns on the borders of the march, decorated with flowers and vines; and amidst these, half concealed, were nestled the response singers, who were to speak for and with the initiates. But concealed from view, and afar off, were bells and explosives, which were the morning signals.</p>
 <p>30. And the glad and solemn sound of the Immortal Voice came upon the souls of millions impatient to vow themselves to a new life; and God and his hosts welcomed them with great joy. So grand and imposing were the ceremonies, that, ere midday, another hundred millions came, robed in white, to be initiated also. Neither desired the people any other entertainment.</p>
 <p>31. And so the initiations were continued <a name="page_106"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 106</font></a> on the fifth day; and yet another hundred millions applied, also robed in white. And this was continued on the sixth and seventh and eighth and ninth and tenth days. And, lo and behold, a thousand million angels had taken the vows of the second resurrection.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah82.htm">Next: Chapter V</a></center>
 </body>