<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry002.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry004.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO I: NÁRAD.  <a name="fr_6"></a><a href="#fn_6"><font size="1">4b</font></a></h3>
 <p>
 </p><center>*********</center><br>
 
 <p>
 </p><center>OM.  <a name="fr_7"></a><a href="#fn_7"><font size="1">5b</font></a></center><br>
 
 <p>
     To sainted Nárad, prince of those<br>
 Whose lore in words of wisdom flows.<br>
 Whose constant care and chief delight<br>
 Were Scripture and ascetic rite,<br>
 The good Válmíki, first and best<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_2"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 2</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Of hermit saints, these words addressed: <a name="fr_8"></a><a href="#fn_8"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 'In all this world, I pray thee, who<br>
 Is virtuous, heroic, true?<br>
 Firm in his vows, of grateful mind,<br>
 To every creature good and kind?<br>
 Bounteous, and holy, just, and wise,<br>
 Alone most fair to all men's eyes?<br>
 Devoid of envy, firm, and sage,<br>
 Whose tranquil soul ne'er yields to rage?<br>
 Whom, when his warrior wrath is high,<br>
 Do Gods embattled fear and fly?<br>
 Whose noble might and gentle skill<br>
 The triple world can guard from ill?<br>
 Who is the best of princes, he<br>
 Who loves his people's good to see?<br>
 The store of bliss, the living mine<br>
 Where brightest joys and virtues shine?<br>
 Queen Fortune's  <a name="fr_9"></a><a href="#fn_9"><font size="1">2</font></a> best and dearest friend,<br>
 Whose steps her choicest gifts attend?<br>
 Who may with Sun and Moon compare,<br>
 With Indra,  <a name="fr_10"></a><a href="#fn_10"><font size="1">3</font></a> Vishnu,  <a name="fr_11"></a><a href="#fn_11"><font size="1">4</font></a> Fire, and Air?<br>
 Grant, Saint divine,  <a name="fr_12"></a><a href="#fn_12"><font size="1">5</font></a> the boon I ask,<br>
 For thee, I ween, an easy task,<br>
 To whom the power is given to know<br>
 If such a man breathe here below.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Nárad, clear before whose eye<br>
 The present, past, and future lie,  <a name="fr_13"></a><a href="#fn_13"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Made ready answer: 'Hermit, where<br>
 Are graces found so high and rare?<br>
 Yet listen, and my tongue shall tell<br>
 In whom alone these virtues dwell.<br>
 From old Ikshváku's  <a name="fr_14"></a><a href="#fn_14"><font size="1">2b</font></a> line he came,<br>
 Known to the world by Ráma's name:<br>
 With soul subdued, a chief of might,<br>
 In Scripture versed, in glory bright,<br>
 His steps in virtue's paths are bent,<br>
 Obedient, pure, and eloquent.<br>
 In each emprise he wins success,<br>
 And dying foes his power confess.<br>
 Tall and broad-shouldered, strong of limb,<br>
 Fortune has set her mark on him.<br>
 Graced with a conch-shell's triple line,<br>
 His threat displays the auspicious sign. <a name="fr_15"></a><a href="#fn_15"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_3"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 3</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 High destiny is clear impressed<br>
 On massive jaw and ample chest,<br>
 His mighty shafts he truly aims,<br>
 And foemen in the battle tames.<br>
 Deep in the muscle, scarcely shown,<br>
 Embedded lies his collar-bone.<br>
 His lordly steps are firm and free,<br>
 His strong arms reach below his knee; <a name="fr_16"></a><a href="#fn_16"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 All fairest graces join to deck<br>
 His head, his brow, his stately neck,<br>
 And limbs in fair proportion set:<br>
 The manliest form e'er fashioned yet.<br>
 Graced with each high imperial mark,<br>
 His skin is soft and lustrous dark.<br>
 Large are his eyes that sweetly shine<br>
 With majesty almost divine.<br>
 His plighted word he ne'er forgets;<br>
 On erring sense a watch he sets.<br>
 By nature wise, his teacher's skill<br>
 Has trained him to subdue his will.<br>
 Good, resolute and pure, and strong,<br>
 He guards mankind from scathe and wrong,<br>
 And lends his aid, and ne'er in vain,<br>
 The cause of justice to maintain.<br>
 Well has he studied o'er and o'er<br>
 The Vedas <a name="fr_17"></a><a href="#fn_17"><font size="1">2</font></a> and their kindred lore.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Well skilled is he the bow to draw, <a name="fr_18"></a><a href="#fn_18"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Well trained in arts and versed in law;<br>
 High-souled and meet for happy fate,<br>
 Most tender and compassionate;<br>
 The noblest of all lordly givers,<br>
 Whom good men follow, as the rivers<br>
 Follow the King of Floods, the sea:<br>
 So liberal, so just is he.<br>
 The joy of Queen Kaus'alyá's <a name="fr_19"></a><a href="#fn_19"><font size="1">2b</font></a> heart,<br>
 In every virtue he has part:<br>
 Firm as Himálaya's <a name="fr_20"></a><a href="#fn_20"><font size="1">3b</font></a> snowy steep,<br>
 Unfathomed like the mighty deep:<br>
 The peer of Vishnu's power and might,<br>
 And lovely as the Lord of Night; <a name="fr_21"></a><a href="#fn_21"><font size="1">4b</font></a><br>
 Patient as Earth, but, roused to ire,<br>
 Fierce as the world-destroying fire;<br>
 In bounty like the Lord of Gold, <a name="fr_22"></a><a href="#fn_22"><font size="1">5b</font></a><br>
 And Justice self ia human mould.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With him, his best and eldest son,<br>
 By all his princely virtues won<br>
 King Das'aratha <a name="fr_23"></a><a href="#fn_23"><font size="1">6b</font></a> willed to share<br>
 His kingdom as the Regent Heir.<br>
 But when Kaikeyí, youngest queen,<br>
 With eyes of envious hate had seen<br>
 The solemn pomp and regal state<br>
 Prepared the prince to consecrate,<br>
 She bade the hapless king bestow<br>
 Two gifts he promised long ago,<br>
 That Ráma to the woods should flee,<br>
 And that her child the heir should be.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 By chains of duty firmly tied,<br>
 Thw wretched king perforce complied.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_4"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 4</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ráma, to please Kaikeyí went<br>
 Obedient forth to banishment.<br>
 Then Lakshman's truth was nobly shown,<br>
 Then were his love and courage known,<br>
 When for his brother's sake he dared<br>
 All perils, and his exile shared.<br>
 And Sítá, Ráma's darling wife,<br>
 Loved even as he loved his life,<br>
 Whom happy marks combined to bless,<br>
 A miracle of loveliness,<br>
 Of Janak's royal lineage sprung,<br>
 Most excellent of women, clung<br>
 To her dear lord, like Rohiní<br>
 Rejoicing with the Moon to be.  <a name="fr_24"></a><a href="#fn_24"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The King and people, sad of mood,<br>
 The hero's car awhile pursued.<br>
 But when Prince Ráma lighted down<br>
 At S'riugavera's pleasant town,<br>
 Where Gangá's holy waters flow,<br>
 He bade his driver turn and go.<br>
 Guha, Nishádas' king, he met,<br>
 And on the farther bank was set.<br>
 Then on from wood to wood they strayed,<br>
 O'er many a stream, through constant shade,<br>
 As Bharadvája bade them, till<br>
 They came to Chitrakúta's hill.<br>
 And Ráma there, with Lakshman's aid,<br>
 A pleasant little cottage made,<br>
 And spent his days with Sítá, dressed<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 In coat of bark and deerskin vest.  <a name="fr_25"></a><a href="#fn_25"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 And Chitrakuta grew to be<br>
 As bright with those illustrious three<br>
 An Meru's  <a name="fr_26"></a><a href="#fn_26"><font size="1">2b</font></a> sacred peaks that shine<br>
 With glory, when the Gods recline<br>
 Beneath them: Siva's  <a name="fr_27"></a><a href="#fn_27"><font size="1">3b</font></a> self between<br>
 The Lord of Gold and Beauty's Queen.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The aged king for Rama pined,<br>
 And for the skies the earth resigned,<br>
 Bharat, his son, refused to reign,<br>
 Though urged by all the twice-born  <a name="fr_28"></a><a href="#fn_28"><font size="1">4b</font></a> train.<br>
 Forth to the woods he fared to meet<br>
 Hia brother, fell before his feet,<br>
 And cried, 'Thy <a href="errata.htm#0">claim</a> all men allow:<br>
 O come, our lord and king be thou.'<br>
 But Rama nobly chose to be<br>
 Observant of his sire's decree.<br>
 He placed his sandals  <a name="fr_29"></a><a href="#fn_29"><font size="1">5b</font></a> in his hand<br>
 A pledge that he would rule the land:<br>
 And bade his brother turn again.<br>
 Then Bharat. finding prayer was vain,<br>
 The sandals took and went away;<br>
 Nor in Ayodhyá would he stay.<br>
 But turned to Nandigráma, where<br>
 He ruled the realm with watchful care,<br>
 Still longing eagerly to learn<br>
 Tidings of Ráma's safe return.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then lest the people should repeat<br>
 Their visit to his calm retreat,<br>
 Away from Chitrakúta's hill<br>
 Fared Ráma ever onward till<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_5"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 5</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Beneath the shady trees he stood<br>
 Of Dandaká's primeval wood,<br>
 Virádha, giant fiend, he slew,<br>
 And then Agastya's friendship knew.<br>
 Counselled by him he gained the sword<br>
 And bow of Indra, heavenly lord:<br>
 A pair of quivers too, that bore<br>
 Of arrows an exhaustless store.<br>
 While there he dwelt in greenwood shade<br>
 The trembling hermits sought his aid,<br>
 And bade him with his sword and bow<br>
 Destroy the fiends who worked them woe:<br>
 To come like Indra strong and brave,<br>
 A guardian God to help and save.<br>
 And Ráma's falchion left its trace<br>
 Deep cut on Súrpanakhá's face:<br>
 A hideous giantess who came<br>
 Burning for him with lawless flame.<br>
 Their sister's cries the giants heard.<br>
 And vengeance in each bosom stirred:<br>
 The monster of the triple head.<br>
 And Dúshan to the contest sped.<br>
 But they and myriad fiends beside<br>
 Beneath the might of Ráma died.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When Rávan, dreaded warrior, knew<br>
 The slaughter of his giant crew:<br>
 Rávan, the king, whose name of fear<br>
 Earth, hell, and heaven all shook to hear:<br>
 He bade the fiend Márícha aid<br>
 The vengeful plot his fury laid.<br>
 In vain the wise Márícha tried<br>
 To turn him from his course aside:<br>
 Not Rávan's self, he said, might hope<br>
 With Ráma and his strength to cope.<br>
 Impelled by fate and blind with rage<br>
 He came to Ráma's hermitage.<br>
 There, by Márícha's magic art,<br>
 He wiled the princely youths apart,<br>
 The vulture <a name="fr_30"></a><a href="#fn_30"><font size="1">1</font></a> slew, and bore away<br>
 The wife of Ráma as his prey.<br>
 The son of Raghu <a name="fr_31"></a><a href="#fn_31"><font size="1">2</font></a> came and found<br>
 Jatáyu slain upon the ground.<br>
 He rushed within his leafy cot;<br>
 He sought his wife, but found her not.<br>
 Then, then the hero's senses failed;<br>
 In mad despair he wept and wailed,<br>
 Upon the pile that bird he laid,<br>
 And still in quest of Sitá strayed.<br>
 A hideous giant then he saw,<br>
 Kabandha named, a shape of awe.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The monstrous fiend he smote and slew,<br>
 And in the flame the body threw;<br>
 When straight from out the funeral flame<br>
 In lovely form Kabandha came,<br>
 And bade him seek in his distress<br>
 A wise and holy hermitess.<br>
 By counsel of this saintly dame<br>
 To Pampá's pleasant flood he came,<br>
 And there the steadfast friendship won<br>
 Of Hanumán the Wind-God's son.<br>
 Counselled by him he told his grief<br>
 To great Sugríva, Vánar chief,<br>
 Who, knowing all the tale, before<br>
 The sacred flame alliance swore.<br>
 Sugríva to his new-found friend<br>
 Told his own story to the end:<br>
 His hate of Báli for the wrong<br>
 And insult he had borne so long.<br>
 And Ráma lent a willing ear<br>
 And promised to allay his fear.<br>
 Sugríva warned him of the might<br>
 Of Báli, matchless in the fight,<br>
 And, credence for his tale to gain,<br>
 Showed the huge fiend <a name="fr_32"></a><a href="#fn_32"><font size="1">1b</font></a> by Báli slain.<br>
 The prostrate corpse of mountain size<br>
 Seemed nothing in the hero's eyes;<br>
 He lightly kicked it, as it lay,<br>
 And cast it twenty leagues <a name="fr_33"></a><a href="#fn_33"><font size="1">2b</font></a> away.<br>
 To prove his might his arrows through<br>
 Seven palms in line, uninjured, flew.<br>
 He cleft a mighty hill apart,<br>
 And down to hell he hurled his dart,<br>
 Then high Sugríva's spirit rose,<br>
 Assured of conquest o'er his foes.<br>
 With his new champion by his side<br>
 To vast Kishkindhá's cave he hied.<br>
 Then, summoned by his awful shout,<br>
 King Báli came in fury out,<br>
 First comforted his trembling wife,<br>
 Then sought Sugríva in the strife.<br>
 One shaft from Ráma's deadly bow<br>
 The monarch in the dust laid low.<br>
 Then Ráma bade Sugríva reign<br>
 In place of royal Báli slain.<br>
 Then speedy envoys hurried forth<br>
 Eastward and westward, south and north,<br>
 Commanded by the grateful king<br>
 Tidings of Ráma's spouse to bring.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then by Sampáti's counsel led,<br>
 Brave Hanumán, who mocked at dread,<br>
 Sprang at one wild tremendous leap<br>
 Two hundred leagues across the deep.<br>
 To Lanká's <a name="fr_34"></a><a href="#fn_34"><font size="1">3b</font></a> town he urged his way,<br>
 Where Rávan held his royal sway.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_6"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 6</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 There pensive 'neath As'oka  <a name="fr_35"></a><a href="#fn_35"><font size="1">1</font></a> boughs<br>
 He found poor Sitá, Ráma's spouse.<br>
 He gave the hapless girl a ring,<br>
 A token from her lord and king.<br>
 A pledge from her fair hand he bore;<br>
 Then battered down the garden door.<br>
 Five captains of the host be slew,<br>
 Seven sons of councillors o'erthrew;<br>
 Crushed youthful Aksha on the field,<br>
 Then to his captors chose to yield.<br>
 Soon from their bonds his limbs were free,<br>
 But honouring the high decree<br>
 Which Brahmá had pronounced of yore,  <a name="fr_36"></a><a href="#fn_36"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 He calmly all their insults bore.<br>
 The town he burnt with hostile flame,<br>
 And spoke again with Ráma's dame,<br>
 Then swiftly back to Ráma flew<br>
 With tidings of the interview.<br>
     Then with Sugríva for his guide,<br>
 Came Ráma to the ocean side.<br>
 He smote the sea with shafts as bright<br>
 As sunbeams in their summer height,<br>
 And quick appeared the Rivers' King  <a name="fr_37"></a><a href="#fn_37"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 Obedient to the summoning.<br>
 A bridge was thrown by Nala o'er<br>
 The narrow sea from shore to shore.  <a name="fr_38"></a><a href="#fn_38"><font size="1">4</font></a><br>
 They crossed to Lanká's golden town,<br>
 Where Ráma's hand smote Rávan down.<br>
 Vibhishan there was left to reign<br>
 Over his brother's wide domain.<br>
 To meet her husband Sitá came;<br>
 But Ráma, stung with ire and shame,<br>
 With bitter words his wife addressed<br>
 Before the crowd that round her pressed.<br>
 But Sitá, touched with noble ire,<br>
 Gave her fair body to the fire.<br>
 Then straight the God of Wind appeared,<br>
 And words from heaven her honour cleared.<br>
 And Ráma clasped his wife again,<br>
 Uninjured, pure from spot and stain,<br>
 Obedient to the Lord of Fire<br>
 And the high mandate of his sire.<br>
 Led by the Lord who rules the sky,<br>
 The Gods and heavenly saints drew nigh,<br>
 And honoured him with worthy meed,<br>
 Rejoicing in each glorious deed.<br>
 His task achieved, his foe removed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 He triumphed, by the Gods approved,<br>
 By grace of Heaven he raised to life<br>
 The chieftains slain in mortal strife;<br>
 Then in the magic chariot through<br>
 The clouds to Nandigráma flew.<br>
 Met by his faithful brothers there,<br>
 He loosed his votive coil of hair:<br>
 Thence fair Ayodhyá's town he gained,<br>
 And o'er his father's kingdom reigned.<br>
 Disease or famine ne'er oppressed<br>
 His happy people, richly blest<br>
 With all the joys of ample wealth,<br>
 Of sweet content and perfect health.<br>
 No widow mourned her well-loved mate,<br>
 No sire his son's untimely fate.<br>
 They feared not storm or robber's hand;<br>
 No fire or flood laid waste the land:<br>
 The Golden Age  <a name="fr_39"></a><a href="#fn_39"><font size="1">1b</font></a> had come again<br>
 To bless the days of Ráma's reign.<br>
     From him, the great and glorious king,<br>
 Shall many a princely scion spring.<br>
 And he shall rule, beloved by men,<br>
 Ten thousand years and hundreds ten, <a name="fr_40"></a><a href="#fn_40"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 And when his life on earth is past<br>
 To Brahmá's world shall go at last.'<br>
     Whoe'er this noble poem reads<br>
 That tells the tale of Ráma's deeds,<br>
 Good as the Scriptures, he shall be<br>
 From every sin and blemish free.<br>
 Whoever reads the saving strain,<br>
 With all his kin the heavens shall gain.<br>
 Bráhmans who read shall gather hence<br>
 The highest praise for eloquence.<br>
 The warrior, o'er the laud shall reign,<br>
 The merchant, luck in trade obtain;<br>
 And S'údras listening  <a name="fr_41"></a><a href="#fn_41"><font size="1">3b</font></a> ne'er shall fail<br>
 To reap advantage from the tale.  <a name="fr_42"></a><a href="#fn_42"><font size="1">4b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_7"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 7</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_3"></a><a href="ry001.htm#fr_3">1:1b</a>  Comparison with the Ganges is implied,
 that river being called the purifier of the
 world.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_4"></a><a href="ry001.htm#fr_4">1:2b</a>  'This name may have been given to the
 father of Válmíki allegorically. If we
 look at the derivation of the word (<i>pra</i>,
 before, and <i>chetas</i>, mind) it is as if the
 poet were called the son of Prometheus, the
 Forethinker.' SCHLEGEL.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_5"></a><a href="ry002.htm#fr_5">1:3b</a>  Called in Sanskrit also <i>Bála-Kánda</i>,
 and in Hindi <i>Bál-Kánd</i>, i. e. the Book
 describing Ráma's childhood, <i>bála</i> meaning
 a boy up to his sixteenth year.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_6"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_6">1:4b</a>  A divine saint, son of Brahmá. He
 is the eloquent messenger of the Gods, a
 musician of exquisite skill, and the inventor
 of the <i>viná</i> or Indian lute. He
 bears a strong resemblance to Hermes or
 Mercury.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_7"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_7">1:5b</a>  This mystic syllable, said to typify
 the supreme Deity, the Gods collectively,
 the Vedas, the three spheres of the world,
 the three holy fires, the three steps of
 Vishnu etc., prefaces the prayers and most
 venerated writings of the Hindus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_8"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_8">2:1</a>  This colloquy is supposed to have
 taken place about sixteen years after
 Ráma's return from his wanderings and
 occupation of his ancestral throne.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_9"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_9">2:2</a>  Called also S'ri and Lakshmi, the
 consort of Vishnu, the Queen of Beauty
 as well as the Dea Fortuna. Her birth
 'from the full-flushed wave' is described
 in Canto XLV of this Book.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_10"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_10">2:3</a>  One of the most prominent objects of
 worship in the Rig-veda, Indra was superseded
 in later times by the more popular
 deities Vishnu and S'iva. He is the God
 of the firmament, and answers in many
 respects to the Jupiter Pluvius of the
 Romans. See <i>Additional Notes</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_11"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_11">2:4</a>  The second God of the Trimúrti or
 Indian Trinity. Derived from the root
 <i>vis'</i> to penetrate, the meaning of the name
 appears to be <i>he who penetrates or pervades
 all things</i>. An embodiment of the preserving
 power of nature, he is worshipped as
 a Saviour who has nine times been incarnate
 for the good of the world and
 will descend on earth once more. See
 <i>Additional Notes</i> and Muir's Sanskrit
 Texts <i>passim</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_12"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_12">2:5</a>  In Sanskrit <i>devarshi. Rishi</i> is the
 general appellation of sages, and another
 word is frequently prefixed to distinguish
 the degrees. A <i>Brahmarshi</i> is a theologian
 or Bráhmanical sage; a Rájarshi is a
 royal sage or sainted king; a <i>Devarshi</i> is
 a divine or deified sage or saint.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_13"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_13">2:1b</a>  <i>Trikálaj'na</i>. Literally <i>knower of the
 three times</i>. Both Schlegel and Gorresio
 quote Homer's.
 
 </p><p>
 Os aedae ta t eonta, ta t essomena,
 pro t eonta.
 
 </p><p>
 'That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
 The past, the present, and the future knew.'
 
 </p><p>
 The Bombay edition reads <i>trilokajna,
 who knows the three worlds</i> (earth, air and
 heaven.) 'It is by <i>topas</i> (austere fervour)
 that rishis of subdued souls, subsisting on
 roots, fruits and air, obtain a vision of the
 three worlds with all things moving and
 stationary.' MANU, XI. 236.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_14"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_14">2:2b</a>  Son of Manu, the first king of Kos'ala
 and founder of the solar dynasty or family
 of the Children of the Sun, the God of
 that luminary being the father of Manu.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_15"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_15">2:3b</a>  The Indians paid great attention to
 the art of physiognomy and believed that
 character and fortune could be foretold
 not from the face only, but from marks
 upon the neck and hands. Three lines
 under the chin like those at the mouth of
 a conch (<i>S'an'kha</i>) were regarded as a
 peculiarly auspicious sign indicating, as
 did also the mark of Vishnu's discus on
 the hand, one born to be a <i>chakravartin</i> or
 universal emperor. In the palmistry of
 Europe the line of fortune, as well as the
 line of life, is in the hand. Cardan says
 that marks on the nails and teeth also
 show what is to happen to us: 'Sunt
 etiam in nobis vestigia quædam futurorum
 eyentuum in unguibus atque etiam in dentibus.'
 Though the palmy days of Indian
 chiromancy have passed away, the art
 is still to some extent studied and believed
 in.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_16"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_16">3:1</a>  Long arms were regarded as a sign of
 heroic strength.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_17"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_17">3:2</a>  'Veda means originally knowing or
 knowledge, and this name ia given by the
 Bráhmans not to one work, but to the
 whole body of their most ancient sacred
 literature. Veda is the same word which
 appears in the Greek οἰδα, I know, and
 in the English wise, wisdom, to wit. The
 name of Veda is commonly given to four
 collections of hymns, which are respectively
 known by the names of Rig-veda,
 Yajur-veda, Sáma-veda, and Atharva-veda.'
 
 </p><p>
 'As the language of the Veda, the Sanskrit,
 is the most ancient type of the English
 of the present day, (Sanskrit and
 English are but varieties of one and the
 same language,) so its thoughts and feelings
 contain in reality the first roots and
 germs of that intellectual growth which
 by an unbroken chain connects our own
 generation with the ancestors of the Aryan
 race,--with those very people who at the
 rising and setting of the sun listened with
 trembling hearts to the songs of the Veda,
 that told them of bright powers above, and
 of a life to come after the sun of their own
 lives had set in the clouds of the evening.
 These men were the true ancestors of our
 race, and the Veda is the oldest book we
 have in which to study the first beginnings
 of our language, and of all that is embodied
 in language. We are by nature
 Aryan, Indo-European, not Semitic: our spiritual kith
 and kin are to be found in
 India, Persia, Greece, Italy, Germany: not
 in Mesopotamia, Egypt, or Palestine.'
 <i>Chips from a German Workshop,</i>
 Vol. I. pp. 8. 4.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_18"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_18">3:1b</a>  As with the ancient Persians and
 Scythians, Indian princes were carefully
 instructed in archery which stands for
 military science in general, of which,
 among Hindu heroes, it was the most important
 branch.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_19"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_19">3:2b</a>  Chief of the three queens of Das'aratha
 and mother of Ráma.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_20"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_20">3:3b</a>  From <i>hima</i> snow, (Greek χειμ-ών
 Latin hiems) and <i>álaya</i> abode, the Mansion
 of snow.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_21"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_21">3:4b</a>  The moon (<i>Soma, Indu, Chandra etc.</i>)
 is masculine with the Indians as with the
 Germans.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_22"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_22">3:5b</a>  Kuvera, the Indian Plutus, or God of
 Wealth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_23"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_23">3:6b</a>  The events here briefly mentioned will
 be related fully in the course of the poem.
 The first four cantos are introductory, and
 are evidently the work of a later hand
 than Valmiki's.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_24"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_24">4:1</a>  'Chandra, or the Moon, is fabled to have
 been married to the twenty-seven daughters
 of the patriarch Daksha, or Asviní and the
 rest, who are in fact personifications of the
 Lunar Asterisms. His favourite amongst
 them was Rohiní to whom he so wholly
 devoted himself as to neglect the rest. They
 complained to their father, and Daksha
 repeatedly interposed, till, finding his
 remonstrances vain, he denounced a curse
 upon his son-in-law, in consequence of
 which he remained childless and became
 affected by consumption. The wives of
 Chandra having interceded in his behalf
 with their father, Daksha modified an
 imprecation which he could not recall,
 and pronounced that the decay should be
 periodical only, not permanent, and that
 it should alternate with periods of recovery.
 Hence the successive wane and increase
 of the Moon. <i>Padma, Purána, Swarga-Khanda,</i>
 Sec. II. <i>Rohini</i> in Astronomy is
 the fourth lunar mansion, containing live
 stars, the principal of which is Aldebaran.'
 WILSON, <i>Specimens of the Hindu
 Theatre</i>. Vol. I. p. 234.
 
 </p><p>
 The Bengal recension has a different
 reading:
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
 'Shone with her husband like the light<br>
 Attendant on the Lord of Night.'<br>
 </dir>
 
 <p><a name="fn_25"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_25">4:1b</a>  The garb prescribed for ascetics by Manu.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_26"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_26">4:2b</a>  Mount Meru, situated like Kailása in
 the lofty regions to the north of the
 Himálayas, is celebrated in the traditions
 and myths of India. Meru and Kailása
 are the two Indian Olympi. Perhaps they
 were held in such veneration because the
 Sanskrit-speaking Indians remembered the
 ancient home where they dwelt with the
 other primitive peoples of their family
 before they descended to occupy the vast
 plains which extend between the Indus and
 the Ganges.' GOBRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_27"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_27">4:3b</a>  The third God of the Indian Triad, the
 God of destruction and reproduction. See
 <i>Additional Notes</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_28"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_28">4:4b</a>  The epithet <i>dmija</i>, or <i>twice-born</i>, is
 usually appropriate to Bráhmans, but is
 applicable to the three higher castes.
 Investiture with the sacred thread and
 initiation of the neophyte into certain
 religious mysteries are regarded as his
 regeneration or second birth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_29"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_29">4:5b</a>  His shoes to be a memorial of the absent
 heir and to maintain his right. Kálidása
 (Raghuvans'a, XII. 17.) says that they were
 to be <i>ahidevate</i> or guardian deities of
 the kingdom.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_30"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_30">5:1</a>  Jatáyu, a semi-divine bird, the friend
 of Ráma, who fought in defence of Sitá.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_31"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_31">5:2</a>  Raghu was one of the most celebrated
 ancestors of Ráma whose commonest
 appellation is, therefore, Rághava or
 descendant of Raghu. Kálidása in the
 Raghuvans'a makes him the son of Dilipa
 and great-grandfather of Ráma. See
 <i>Idylls from the Sanskrit</i>, 'Aja' and
 'Dilipa'.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_32"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_32">5:1b</a>  Dundhubi</p>
 <p><a name="fn_33"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_33">5:2b</a>  Literally <i>ten yojanas</i>. The yojana is
 a measure of uncertain length variously
 reckoned as equal to nine miles, five, and
 a little less.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_34"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_34">5:3b</a>  Ceylon</p>
 <p><a name="fn_35"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_35">6:1</a>  The Jonesia As'oka is a most beautiful
 tree bearing a profusion of red blossoms.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_36"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_36">6:2</a>  <i>Brahmá</i>, the Creator, is usually regarded
 as the first God of the Indian Trinity,
 although, as Kálidása says:
 
 </p><p>
 'Of Brahma, Vishnu, S'iva, each may be
 First, second, third, amid the blessed Three.'
 
 </p><p>
     Brahmá had guaranteed Rávan's life
 against all enemies except man.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_37"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_37">6:3</a>  Ocean personified.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_38"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_38">6:4</a>  The rocks lying between Ceylon and
 the mainland are still called Ráma's
 Bridge by the Hindus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_39"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_39">6:1b</a>  The Bráhmans, with a system rather
 cosmogonical than chronological, divide
 the present mundane period into four ages
 or <i>yugas</i> as they call them: the Krita,  the
 Tretá, the Dwápara, and the Kali. The
 Krita, cailed also the Deva-yuga or that
 of the Gods, is the age of truth, the perfect
 age, the Tretá is the age of the three
 sacred fires, domestic and sacrificial; the
 Dwápara is the age of doubt; the Kali,
 the present age, is the age of evil.'
 GORRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_40"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_40">6:2b</a>  The ancient kings of India enjoyed
 lives of more than patriarchal length as
 will appear in the course of the poem.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_41"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_41">6:3b</a>  S'údras, men of the fourth and lowest
 pure caste, were not allowed to read the
 poem, but might hear it recited.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_42"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fr_42">6:4b</a>  The three <i>s'lokas</i> or distichs which
 these twelve lines represent are evidently
 a still later and very awkward addition to
 the introduction.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry004.htm">Next: Canto II: Brahmá's Visit</a></center>
 </body>