<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry008.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry010.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VII.: THE MINISTERS.</h3>
 <p>
 Two sages, holy saints, had he,<br>
 His ministers and priests to be:<br>
 Vasishtha, faithful to advise.<br>
 And Vámadeva, Scripture-wise.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Eight other lords around him stood,<br>
 All skilled to counsel, wise and good;<br>
 Jayanta, Vijay, Dhrishti bold<br>
 In fight, affairs of war controlled:<br>
 Siddhárth and Arthasádhak true<br>
 Watched o'er expense and revenue,<br>
 And Dharmapál and wise Aœok<br>
 Of right and law and justice spoke.<br>
 With these the sage Sumantra, skilled<br>
 To urge the car, high station filled.<br>
     All these in knowledge duly trained<br>
 Each passion and each sense restrained:<br>
 With modest manners, nobly bred<br>
 Each plan and nod and look they read,<br>
 Upon their neighbours' good intent,<br>
 Most active and benevolent:<br>
 As sit the Vasus  <a name="fr_78"></a><a href="#fn_78"><font size="1">1b</font></a> round their king.<br>
 They sate around him counselling.<br>
 They ne'er in virtue's loftier pride<br>
 Another's lowly gifts decried.<br>
 In fair and seemly garb arrayed,<br>
 No weak uncertain plans they made.<br>
 Well skilled in business, fair and just,<br>
 They gained the people's love and trust,<br>
 And thus without oppression stored<br>
 The swelling treasury of their lord,<br>
 Bound in sweet friendship each to each,<br>
 They spoke kind thoughts in gentle speech.<br>
 They looked alike with equal eye<br>
 On every caste, on low and high.<br>
 Devoted to their king, they sought,<br>
 Ere his tongue spoke, to learn his thought.<br>
 And knew, as each occasion rose,<br>
 To bide their counsel or disclose.<br>
 In foreign land--or in their own<br>
 Whatever passed, to them was known.<br>
 By secret spies they timely knew<br>
 What men were doing or would do.<br>
 Skilled in the grounds of war and peace<br>
 They saw the monarch's state increase,<br>
 Watching his weal with conquering eye<br>
 That never let occasion by,<br>
 While nature lent her aid to bless<br>
 Their labours with unbought success.<br>
 Never for anger, lust, or gain,<br>
 Would they their lips with falsehood stain.<br>
 Inclined to mercy they could scan<br>
 The weakness and the strength of man.<br>
 They fairly judged both high and low,<br>
 And ne'er would wrong a guiltless foe;<br>
 Yet if a fault were proved, each one<br>
 Would punish e'en his own dear son.<br>
 But there and in the kingdom's bound<br>
 No thief or man impure was found:<br>
 None of loose life or evil fame,<br>
 No temper of another's dame.<br>
 Contented with their lot each caste<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_15"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 15</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Calm days in blissful quiet passed;<br>
 And, all in fitting tasks employed,<br>
 Country and town deep rest enjoyed,<br>
 With these wise lords around his throne<br>
     The monarch justly reigned,<br>
 And making every heart his own<br>
     The love of all men gained.<br>
 With trusty agents, as beseems,<br>
     Each distant realm he scanned,<br>
 As the sun visits with his beams<br>
     Each corner of the land.<br>
 Ne'er would he on a mightier foe<br>
     With hostile troops advance,<br>
 Nor at an equal strike a blow<br>
     In war's delusive chance.<br>
 These lords in council bore their part<br>
 With ready brain and faithful heart,<br>
 With skill and knowledge, sense and tact,<br>
 Good to advise and bold to act.<br>
 And high and endless fame he won<br>
     With these to guide his schemes,<br>
 As, risen in his might, the sun<br>
     Wins glory with his beams.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_75"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fr_75">14:1</a>  The elephants of Indra and other
 deities who preside over the four points
 of the compass.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_76"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fr_76">14:2</a>  There are four kinds of elephants.
 1 <i>Bhaddar</i>. It is well proportioned, has
 an erect head, a broad chest, large ears, a
 long tail, and is bold and can bear fatigue.
 2 <i>Mand.</i> It is black, has yellow
 eyes, a uniformly sized body, and is wild
 and ungovernable. 3 <i>Mirg</i>. It has a
 whitish skin, with black spots. 4 <i>Mir</i>.
 It has a small head, and obeys readily.
 It gets frightened when it thunders.'
 <i>Ain-i-Ahbarí</i> * . Translated by H. Blochmann,
 Ain 41, <i>The Imperial Elephant
 Stables</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_77"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fr_77">14:3</a>  Ayodhyá means <i>not to be fought
 against</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_78"></a><a href="ry009.htm#fr_78">14:1b</a>  Attendants of Indra, eight Gods whose
 names signify fire, light aud its phenomena.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry010.htm">Next: Canto VIII.: Sumantra's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>