<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry007.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry009.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VI.: THE KING.</h3>
 <p>
 There reigned a king of name revered,<br>
 To country and to town endeared,<br>
 Great Das'aratha, good and sage.<br>
 Well read in Scripture's holy page:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_13"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 13</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Upon his kingdom's weal intent,<br>
 Mighty and brave and provident;<br>
 The pride of old Ikshváku's seed<br>
 For lofty thought and righteous deed.<br>
 Peer of the saints, for virtues famed,<br>
 For foes subdued and passions tamed:<br>
 A rival in his wealth untold<br>
 Of Indra and the Lord of Gold.<br>
 Like Manu first of kings, he reigned.<br>
 And worthily his state maintained,<br>
 For firm and just and ever true<br>
 Love, duty, gain he kept in view,<br>
 And ruled his city rich and free,<br>
 Like Indra's Amarávatí.<br>
 And worthy of so fair a place<br>
 There dwelt a just and happy race<br>
     With troops of children blest.<br>
 Each man contented sought no more,<br>
 Nor longed with envy for the store<br>
     By richer friends possessed.<br>
 For poverty was there unknown,<br>
 And each man counted as his own<br>
     Kine, steeds, and gold, and grain.<br>
 All dressed in raiment bright and clean,<br>
 And every townsman might be seen<br>
 With earrings, wreath, or chain.<br>
 None deigned to feed on broken fare,<br>
 And none was false or stingy there.<br>
 A piece of gold, the smallest pay,<br>
 Was earned by labour for a day.<br>
 On every arm were bracelets worn,<br>
 And none was faithless or forsworn,<br>
     A braggart or unkind.<br>
 None lived upon another's wealth,<br>
 None pined with dread or broken health,<br>
     Or dark disease of mind.<br>
 High-souled were all. The slanderous word,<br>
 The boastful lie, were never heard.<br>
 Each man was constant to his vows,<br>
 And lived devoted to his spouse.<br>
 No other love his fancy knew,<br>
 And she was tender, kind, and true.<br>
 Her dames were fair of form and face,<br>
 With charm of wit and gentle grace,<br>
 With modest raiment simply neat,<br>
 And winning manners soft and sweet.<br>
 The twice-born sages, whose delight<br>
 Was Scripture's page and holy rite,<br>
 Their calm and settled course pursued,<br>
 Nor sought the menial multitude.<br>
 In many a Scripture each was versed,<br>
 And each the flame of worship nursed,<br>
     And gave with lavish hand.<br>
 Each paid to Heaven the offerings due,<br>
 And none was godless or untrue<br>
     In all that holy band.<br>
 To Bráhmans, as the laws ordain,<br>
 The Warrior caste were ever fain<br>
     The reverence due to pay;<br>
 And these the Vais'yas' peaceful crowd,<br>
 Who trade and toil for gain, were proud<br>
 
 </p><p>
     To honour and obey;<br>
 And all were by the S'údras  <a name="fr_69"></a><a href="#fn_69"><font size="1">1</font></a> served,<br>
 Who never from their duty swerved,<br>
 Their proper worship all addressed<br>
 To Bráhman, spirits, God, and guest.<br>
 Pure and unmixt their rites remained,<br>
 Their race's honour ne'er was stained.  <a name="fr_70"></a><a href="#fn_70"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Cheered by his grandsons, sons, and wife,<br>
 Each passed a long and happy life.<br>
 Thus was that famous city held<br>
 By one who all his race excelled,<br>
     Blest in his gentle reign,<br>
 As the whole land aforetime swayed<br>
 By Manu, prince of men, obeyed<br>
     Her king from main to main.<br>
 And heroes kept her, strong and brave,<br>
 As lions guard their mountain cave:<br>
 Fierce as devouring flame they burned,<br>
 And fought till death, but never turned.<br>
 Horses had she of noblest breed,<br>
 Like Indra's for their form and speed,<br>
 From Váhlí's  <a name="fr_71"></a><a href="#fn_71"><font size="1">3</font></a> hills and Sindhu's  <a name="fr_72"></a><a href="#fn_72"><font size="1">4</font></a> sand,<br>
 Vanáyu  <a name="fr_73"></a><a href="#fn_73"><font size="1">5</font></a> and Kámboja's land.  <a name="fr_74"></a><a href="#fn_74"><font size="1">6</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_14"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 14</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Her noble elephants had strayed<br>
 Through Vindhyan and Himálayan shade,<br>
 Gigantic in their bulk and height,<br>
 Yet gentle in their matchless might.<br>
 They rivalled well the world-spread fame<br>
 Of the great stock from which they came,<br>
     Of Váman, vast of size,<br>
 Of Mahápadma's glorious line,<br>
 Thine, Aujan, and, Airávat, thine. <a name="fr_75"></a><a href="ry009.htm#fn_75"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
     Upholders of the skies.<br>
 With those, enrolled in fourfold class,<br>
 Who all their mighty kin surpass,<br>
 Whom men Matangas name,<br>
 And Mrigas spotted black and white,<br>
 And Bhadras of unwearied might,<br>
 And Mandras hard to tame.  <a name="fr_76"></a><a href="ry009.htm#fn_76"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Thus, worthy of the name she bore, <a name="fr_77"></a><a href="ry009.htm#fn_77"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 Ayodhyá for a league or more<br>
     Cast a bright glory round,<br>
 Where Das'aratha wise and great<br>
 Governed his fair ancestral state,<br>
     With every virtue crowned.<br>
 Like Indra in the skies he reigned<br>
 In that, good town whose wall contained<br>
     High domes and turrets proud,<br>
 With gates and arcs of triumph decked,<br>
 And sturdy barriers to protect<br>
     Her gay and countless crowd.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_67"></a><a href="ry007.htm#fr_67">12:1b</a>  The <i>Sataghní, i. e. centicide</i>, or slayer
 of a hundred, is generally supposed to be
 a sort of fire-arms, or the ancient Indian
 rocket; but it is also described as a stone
 set round with iron spikes.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_68"></a><a href="ry007.htm#fr_68">12:2b</a>  The Nágas (serpents) are demigods
 with a human face and serpent body.
 They inhabit Pátála or the regions under
 the earth. Bhogavatí is the name of
 their capital city. Serpents are still worshipped
 in India. See Fergusson'a <i>Tree
 and Serpent Worship.</i></p>
 <p><a name="fn_69"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fr_69">13:1</a>  The fourth and lowest pure caste
 whose duty was to serve the three first
 classes.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_70"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fr_70">13:2</a>  By forbidden marriages between persons
 of different castes.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_71"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fr_71">13:3</a>  Váhlí or Váhlika is Bactriana; its
 name is preserved in the modern Balkh.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_72"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fr_72">13:4</a>  The Sanskrit word Sindhu is in the
 singular the name of the river Indus, in
 the plural of the people and territories on
 its banks. The name appears as <i>Hidhu</i>
 in the cuneiform inscription of Darius son
 of Hystaspes, in which the nations tributary
 to that king are enumerated.
 
 </p><p>
 The Hebrew form is <i>Hodda</i> (Esther, 1. I.)
 In Zend it appears as <i>Hendu</i> in a somewhat
 wider sense. With the Persians later
 the signification of <i>Hind</i> seems to have
 co-extended with their increasing acquaintance
 with the country. The weak Ionic
 dialect omitted the Persian <i>h</i>, and we
 find in Hecatæus and Herodotus <i>Indos</i>
 and <i>hae Indikae</i>. In this form the Romans
 received the names and transmitted them
 to us. The Arabian geographers in their
 ignorance that Hind and Sind are two
 forms of the same word have made of them
 two brothers and traced their decent
 from Noah. See Lassen's Indische Alterthumskunde
 Vol. I. pp. 2, 3.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_73"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fr_73">13:5</a>  The situation of Vanáyu is not exactly
 determined: it seems to have lain to the
 north-west of India.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_74"></a><a href="ry008.htm#fr_74">13:6</a>  Kámboja was probably still further
 to the north-west. Lassen thinks that the <a name="page_14"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 14</font></a> name is etymologically connected with
 <i>Cambyses</i> which in the cuneiform inscription
 of Behistun is written Ka(m)bujia.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry009.htm">Next: Canto VII.: The Ministers.</a></center>
 </body>