<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry000.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry002.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <br>
 
 <p>
 <a name="page_1"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 </p><h1 align="CENTER">INVOCATION. <a name="fr_0"></a><a href="#fn_0"><font size="1">1</font></a></h1><br>
 
 <p>
 Praise to Válmíki, <a name="fr_1"></a><a href="#fn_1"><font size="1">2</font></a> bird of charming song, <a name="fr_2"></a><a href="#fn_2"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
     Who mounts on Poesy's sublimest spray,<br>
 And sweetly sings with accent clear and strong<br>
     Ráma, aye Ráma, in his deathless lay.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Where breathes the man can listen to the strain<br>
     That flows in music from Válmíki's tongue,<br>
 Nor feel his feet the path of bliss attain<br>
     When Ráma's glory by the saint is sung!<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The stream Rámáyan leaves its sacred fount<br>
     The whole wide world from sin and stain to free. <a name="fr_3"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fn_3"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 The Prince of Hermits is the parent mount,<br>
     The lordly Ráma is the darling sea.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Glory to him whose fame is ever bright!<br>
     Glory to him, Prachetas'  <a name="fr_4"></a><a href="ry003.htm#fn_4"><font size="1">2b</font></a> holy son!<br>
 Whose pure lips quaff with ever new delight<br>
     The nectar-sea of deeds by Ráma done.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Hail, arch-ascetic, pious, good, and kind!<br>
     Hail, Saint Válmíki, lord of every lore!<br>
 Hail, holy Hermit, calm and pure of mind!<br>
     Hail, First of Bards, Válmíki, hail once more!<br>
 
 <br>
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_0"></a><a href="ry001.htm#fr_0">1:1</a>  The MSS. vary very considerably in these
 stanzas of invocation: many lines are
 generally prefixed in which not only the
 poet, but those who play the chief parts in
 the poem are panegyrized. It is self-apparent
 that they are not by the author
 of the Rámáyan himself.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1"></a><a href="ry001.htm#fr_1">1:2</a>  'Válmíki was the son of Varuna, the
 regent of the waters, one of whose names
 is Prachetas. According to the <i>Adhyátmá
 Rámáyana</i>, the sage, although a Bráhman
 by birth, associated with foresters and
 robbers. Attacking on one occasion the
 seven Rishis, they expostulated with him
 successfully, and taught him the <i>mantra</i>
 of Ráma reversed, or <i>Mará</i>, <i>Mará</i>, in the
 inaudible repetition of which he remained
 immovable for thousands of years, so that
 when the sages returned to the same spot
 they found him still there, converted into
 a <i>valmik</i> or ant-hill, by the nests of the
 termites, whence his name of Válmíki.'
 
 </p><p>
 WILSON. <i>Specimens of the Hindu
 Theatre, Vol. I. p</i>. 313.
 
 </p><p>
 'Válmíki is said to have lived a solitary
 life in the woods: he is called both a <i>muni</i>
 and a <i>rishi</i>. The former word properly
 signifies an anchorite or hermit; the latter
 has reference chiefly to wisdom. The two
 words are frequently used promiscuously,
 and may both be rendered by the Latin
 <i>cates</i> in its earliest meaning of <i>seer</i>:
 Válmíki was both poet and seer, as he is
 said to have sung the exploits of Ráma by
 the aid of divining insight rather than of
 knowledge naturally acquired.' SCHLEGEL.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_2"></a><a href="ry001.htm#fr_2">1:3</a>  Literally, <i>Kokila</i>, the Koil, or Indian
 Cuckoo. Schlegel translates 'luscinium.'</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry002.htm">Next: Book I</a></center>
 </body>