<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry011.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry013.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO X.: RISHYAS'RING INVITED.</h3>
 <p>
 'Again, O best of kings, give ear:<br>
 My saving words attentive hear,<br>
 And listen to the tale of old<br>
 By that illustrious Bráhman told,<br>
 'Of famed Ikshváku's line shall spring<br>
 ('Twas thus he spoke) a pious king,<br>
 Named Das'aratha, good and great,<br>
 True to his word and fortunate.<br>
 He with the Angas' mighty lord<br>
 Shall ever live in sweet accord,<br>
 And his a daughter fair shall be,<br>
 S'ántá of happy destiny.<br>
 But Lomapád, the Angas' chief,<br>
 Still pining in his childless grief,<br>
 To Das'aratha thus shall say:<br>
 'Give me thy daughter, friend, I pray,<br>
 Thy S'ántá of the tranquil mind,<br>
 The noblest one of womankind.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The father, swift to feel for woe,<br>
 Shall on his friend his child bestow;<br>
 And he shall take her and depart<br>
 To his own town with joyous heart.<br>
 The maiden home in triumph led,<br>
 To Rishyas'ring the king shall wed.<br>
 And he with loving joy and pride<br>
 Shall take her for his honoured bride.<br>
 And Das'aratha to a rite<br>
 That best of Bráhmans shall invite<br>
 With supplicating prayer,<br>
 To celebrate the sacrifice<br>
 To win him sons and Paradise,  <a name="fr_82"></a><a href="#fn_82"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 That he will fain prepare.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_19"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 19</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 From him the lord of men at length<br>
     The boon he seeks shall gain,<br>
 And see four sons of boundless strength<br>
     His royal line maintain.'<br>
 'Thus did the godlike saint of old<br>
     The will of fate declare,<br>
 And all that should befall unfold<br>
     Amid the sages there.<br>
 O Prince supreme of men, go thou,<br>
     Consult thy holy guide,<br>
 And win, to aid thee in thy vow,<br>
     This Bráhman to thy side.'<br>
 Sumantra's counsel, wise and good,<br>
     King Das'aratha heard,<br>
 Then by Vas'ishtha's side he stood<br>
     And thus with him conferred:<br>
 'Sumantra counsels thus: do thou<br>
 My priestly guide, the plan allow.'<br>
     Vas'ishtha gave his glad consent,<br>
 And forth the happy monarch went<br>
 With lords and servants on the road<br>
 That led to Rishyas'ring's abode.<br>
 Forests and rivers duly past,<br>
 He reached the distant town at last<br>
 Of Lomapád the Angas' king,<br>
 And entered it with welcoming.<br>
 On through the crowded streets he came,<br>
 And, radiant as the kindled flame,<br>
 He saw within the monarch's house<br>
 The hermit's son most glorious.<br>
 There Lomapád, with joyful breast,<br>
     To him all honour paid,<br>
 For friendship for his royal guest<br>
     His faithful bosom swayed.<br>
 Thus entertained with utmost care<br>
 Seven days, or eight, he tarried there,<br>
 And then that best men thus broke<br>
 His purpose to the king, and spoke:<br>
 'O King of men, mine ancient friend,<br>
     (Thus Das'aratha prayed)<br>
 Thy S'antá with her husband send<br>
     My sacrifice to aid.<br>
 Said he who ruled the Angas, Yea,<br>
     And his consent was won:<br>
 And then at once he turned away<br>
     To warn the hermit's son.<br>
 He told him of their ties beyond<br>
 Their old affection's faithful bond:<br>
 'This king,' he said, 'from days of old<br>
 A well beloved friend I hold.<br>
 To me this pearl of dames he gave<br>
 From childless woe mine age to save,<br>
 The daughter whom he loved so much,<br>
 Moved by compassion's gentle touch.<br>
 In him thy S'antá's father see:<br>
 As I am even so is he.<br>
 For sons the childless monarch yearns:<br>
 To thee alone for help he turns.<br>
 Go thou, the sacred rite ordain<br>
 To win the sons he prays to gain:<br>
 Go, with thy wife thy succour lend,<br>
 And give his vows a blissful end.'<br>
     The hermit's son with quick accord<br>
 Obeyed the Angas' mighty lord,<br>
 And with fair S'antá at his side<br>
 To Das'aratha's city hied.<br>
 Each king, with suppliant hands upheld,<br>
     Gazed on the other's face:<br>
 And then by mutual love impelled<br>
     Met in a close embrace.<br>
 Then Das'aratha's thoughtful care,<br>
     Before he parted thence,<br>
 Bade trusty servants homeward bear<br>
     The glad intelligence:<br>
 'Let all the town be bright and gay<br>
     With burning incense sweet;<br>
 Let banners wave, and water lay<br>
     The dust in every street,'<br>
 Glad were the citizens to learn<br>
 The tidings of their lord's return,<br>
 And through the city every man<br>
 Obedienly his task began.<br>
 And fair and bright Ayodhyá showed,<br>
 As following his guest he rode<br>
 Through the full streets where shell and drum<br>
 Proclaimed aloud the king was come.<br>
 And all the people with delight<br>
     Kept gazing on their king,<br>
 Attended by that youth so bright,<br>
     The glorious Rishyas'ring.<br>
 When to his home the king had brought<br>
     The hermit's saintly son,<br>
 He deemed that all his task was wrought,<br>
     And all he prayed for won.<br>
 And lords who saw that stranger dame<br>
     So beautiful to view,<br>
 Rejoiced within their hearts, and came<br>
     And paid her honour too.<br>
 There Rishyasring passed blissful days,<br>
 Graced like the king with love and praise<br>
 And shone in glorious light with her,<br>
 Sweet S'ántá, for his minister,<br>
 As Brahmá's son Vas'ishtha, he<br>
 Who wedded Saint Arundhati. <a name="fr_83"></a><a href="ry013.htm#fn_83"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_82"></a><a href="ry012.htm#fr_82">18:1</a>  'Sons and Paradise are intimately
 connected in Indian belief. A man desires
 above every thing to have a son to perpetuate
 his race, and to assist with sacrifices
 and funeral rites to make him worthy to
 obtain a lofty seat in heaven or to preserve
 that which he has already obtained.'
 GORRESIO.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry013.htm">Next: Canto XI: The Sacrifice Decreed.</a></center>
 </body>