<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry014.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry016.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIII.: THE SACRIFICE FINISHED.</h3>
 <p>
 The circling year had filled its course,<br>
 And back was brought the wandering horse:<br>
 Then upon Sarjú's northern strand<br>
 Began the rite the king had planned.<br>
 With Rishyas'ring the forms to guide,<br>
 The Bráhmans to their task applied,<br>
 At that great offering of the steed<br>
 Their lofty-minded king decreed.<br>
 The priests, who all the Scripture knew,<br>
 Performed their part in order due,<br>
 And circled round in solemn train<br>
 As precepts of the law ordain.<br>
 Pravargya rites  <a name="fr_91"></a><a href="#fn_91"><font size="1">1</font></a> were duly sped:<br>
 For Upusads  <a name="fr_92"></a><a href="#fn_92"><font size="1">2</font></a> the flames were fed.<br>
 Then from the plant  <a name="fr_93"></a><a href="#fn_93"><font size="1">3</font></a> the juice was squeezed,<br>
 And those high saints with minds well pleased<br>
 Performed the mystic rites begun<br>
 With bathing ere the rise of sun.<br>
 They gave the portion Indra's claim,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 And hymned the King whom none can blame.<br>
 The mid-day bathing followed next,<br>
 Observed as bids the holy text.<br>
 Then the good priests with utmost care,<br>
 In form that Scripture's rules declare,<br>
 For the third time pure water shed<br>
 On high souled Das'aratha's head.<br>
 Then Rishyas'ring and all the rest<br>
 To Indra and the Gods addressed<br>
 Their sweet-toned hymn of praise and prayer,<br>
 And called them in the rite to share.<br>
 With sweetest song and hymn intoned<br>
 They give the Gods in heaven enthroned,<br>
 As duty bids, the gifts they claim,<br>
 The holy oil that feeds the flame.<br>
 And many an offering there was paid,<br>
 And not one slip in all was made,<br>
 For with most careful heed they saw<br>
 That all was done by Veda law.<br>
 None, all those days, was seen oppressed<br>
 By hunger or by toil distressed.<br>
 Why speak of human kind? No beast<br>
 Was there that lacked an ample feast.<br>
 For there was store for all who came,<br>
 For orphan child and lonely dame;<br>
 The old and young were well supplied,<br>
 The poor and hungry satisfied.<br>
 Throughout the day ascetics fed,<br>
 And those who roam to beg their bread:<br>
 While all around the cry was still,<br>
 'Give forth, give forth,' and ' Eat your fill.'<br>
 'Give forth with liberal hand the meal,<br>
 And various robes in largess deal.'<br>
 Urged by these cries on every side<br>
 Unweariedly their task they plied:<br>
 And heaps of food like hills in size<br>
 In boundless plenty met the eyes:<br>
 And lakes of sauce, each day renewed,<br>
 Refreshed the weary multitude.<br>
 And strangers there from distant lands,<br>
 And women folk in crowded bands<br>
 The best of food and drink obtained<br>
 At the great rite the king ordained.<br>
 Apart from all, the Bráhmans there,<br>
 Thousands on thousands, took their share<br>
 Of various dainties sweet to taste,<br>
 On plates of gold and silver placed,<br>
 All ready set, as, when they willed,<br>
 The twice-born men their places filled.<br>
 And servants in fair garments dressed<br>
 Waited upon each Bráhman guest.<br>
 Of cheerful mind and mien were they,<br>
 With gold and jewelled earrings gay.<br>
 The best of Bráhmans praised the fare<br>
 Of countless sorts, of flavour rare:<br>
 And thus to Raghu's son they cried:<br>
 'We bless thee, and are satisfied.'<br>
 Between the rites some Bráhmans spent<br>
 The time in learned argument,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_23"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 23</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With ready flow of speech, sedate,<br>
 And keen to vanquish in debate.  <a name="fr_94"></a><a href="#fn_94"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 There day by day the holy train<br>
 Performed all rites as rules ordain.<br>
 No priest in all that host was found<br>
 But kept the vows that held him bound:<br>
 None, but the holy Vedas knew,<br>
 And all their six-fold science  <a name="fr_95"></a><a href="#fn_95"><font size="1">2</font></a> too.<br>
 No Bráhman there was found unfit<br>
 To speak with eloquence and wit.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And now the appointed time came near<br>
 The sacrificial posts to rear.<br>
 They brought them, and prepared to fix<br>
 Of Bel  <a name="fr_96"></a><a href="#fn_96"><font size="1">3</font></a> and Khádir  <a name="fr_97"></a><a href="#fn_97"><font size="1">4</font></a> six and six;<br>
 Six, made of the Palás'a  <a name="fr_98"></a><a href="#fn_98"><font size="1">5</font></a> tree,<br>
 Of Fig-wood one, apart to be:<br>
 Of Sleshmát  <a name="fr_99"></a><a href="#fn_99"><font size="1">6</font></a> and of Devadár  <a name="fr_100"></a><a href="#fn_100"><font size="1">7</font></a><br>
 One column each, the mightiest far:<br>
 So thick the two, the arms of man<br>
 Their ample girth would fail to span.<br>
 All these with utmost care were wrought<br>
 By hand of priests in Scripture taught,<br>
 And all with gold were gilded bright<br>
 To add new splendour to the rite:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Twenty-and-one those stakes in all,<br>
 Each one-and-twenty cubits tall:<br>
 And one-and-twenty ribbons there<br>
 Hung on the pillars, bright and fair.<br>
 Firm in the earth they stood at last,<br>
 Where cunning craftsmen fixed them fast;<br>
 And there unshaken each remained,<br>
 Octagonal and smoothly planed.<br>
 Then ribbons over all were hung,<br>
 And flowers and scent around them flung.<br>
 Thus decked they cast a glory forth<br>
 Like the great saints who star the north.  <a name="fr_101"></a><a href="#fn_101"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 The sacrificial altar then<br>
 Was raised by skilful twice-born men,<br>
 In shape and figure to behold<br>
 An eagle with his wings of gold,<br>
 With twice nine pits and formed three-fold<br>
 Each for some special God, beside<br>
 The pillars were the victims tied;<br>
 The birds that roam the wood, the air,<br>
 The water, and the land were there,<br>
 And snakes and things of reptile birth,<br>
 And healing herbs that spring from earth;<br>
 As texts prescribe, in Scripture found,<br>
 Three hundred victims there were bound.<br>
 The steed devoted to the host<br>
 Of Gods, the gem they honour most,<br>
 Was duly sprinkled. Then the Queen<br>
 Kaus'alyá, with delighted mien,<br>
 With reverent steps around him paced.<br>
 And with sweet wreaths the victim graced;<br>
 Then with three swords in order due<br>
 She smote the steed with joy, and slew.<br>
 That night the queen, a son to gain,<br>
 With calm and steady heart was fain<br>
 By the dead charger's side to stay<br>
 From evening till the break of day.<br>
 Then came three priests, their care to lead<br>
 The other queens to touch the steed,<br>
 Upon Kaus'alyá to attend,<br>
 Their company and aid to lend.<br>
 As by the horse she still reclined,<br>
 With happy mien and cheerful mind,<br>
 With Rishyas'ring the twice-born came<br>
 And praised and blessed the royal dame.<br>
 The priest who well his duty knew,<br>
 And every sense could well subdue,<br>
 From out the bony chambers freed<br>
 And boiled the marrow of the steed.<br>
 Above the steam the monarch bent,<br>
 And, as he smelt the fragrant scent,<br>
 In time and order drove afar<br>
 All error that his hopes could mar.<br>
 Then sixteen priests together came<br>
 And cast into the sacred flame<br>
 The severed members of the horse,<br>
 Made ready all in ordered course.<br>
 On piles of holy Fig-tree raised<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_24"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 24</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The meaner victims' bodies blazed:<br>
 The steed, of all the creatures slain,<br>
 Alone required a pile of cane.<br>
 Three days, as is by law decreed,<br>
 Lasted that Offering of the Steed.<br>
 The Chatushtom began the rite,<br>
 And when the sun renewed his light,<br>
 The Ukthya followed: after came<br>
 The Atirátra's holy flame.<br>
 These were the rites, and many more<br>
 Arranged by light of holy lore,<br>
 The Aptoryám of mighty power,<br>
 And, each performed in proper hour,<br>
 The Abhijit and Vis'vajit<br>
 With every form and service fit;<br>
 And with the sacrifice at night<br>
 The Jyotishtom and Áyus rite.  <a name="fr_102"></a><a href="#fn_102"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 The task was done, as laws prescribe:<br>
 The monarch, glory of his tribe,<br>
 Bestowed the land in liberal grants<br>
 Upon the sacred ministrants.<br>
 He gave the region of the east,<br>
 His conquest, to the Hotri priest.<br>
 The west, the celebrant obtained:<br>
 The south, the priest presiding gained:<br>
 The northern region was the share<br>
 Of him who chanted forth the prayer,  <a name="fr_103"></a><a href="#fn_103"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Thus did each priest obtain his meed<br>
 At the great Slaughter of the Steed,<br>
 Ordained, the best of all to be,<br>
 By self-existent deity.<br>
 Ikshváku's son with joyful mind<br>
 This noble fee to each assigned,<br>
 But all the priests with one accord<br>
 Addressed that unpolluted lord:<br>
 'Tis thine alone to keep the whole<br>
 Of this broad earth in firm control.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_25"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 25</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 No gift of lands from thee we seek:<br>
 To guard these realms our hands were weak.<br>
 On sacred lore our days are spent:<br>
 Let other gifts our wants content.'<br>
 The chief of old Ikshváku's line<br>
 Gave them ten hundred thousand kine,<br>
 A hundred millions of fine gold,<br>
 The same in silver four times told.<br>
 But every priest in presence there<br>
 With one accord resigned his share.<br>
 To Saint Vas'ishtha, high of soul,<br>
 And Rishyas'ring they gave the whole.<br>
 That largess pleased those Brahmans well,<br>
 Who bade the prince his wishes tell.<br>
 Then Das'aratha, mighty king.<br>
 Made answer thus to Rishyas'ring:<br>
 'O holy Hermit, of thy grace,<br>
 Vouchsafe the increase of my race.'<br>
 He spoke; nor was his prayer denied:<br>
 The best of Bráhmans thus replied:<br>
 'Four sons, O Monarch, shall be thine,<br>
 Upholders of thy royal line.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_91"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_91">22:1</a>  'The Pravargya ceremony lasts for
 three days, and is always performed
 twice a day, in the forenoon and afternoon.
 It precedes the animal and Soma
 sacrifices. For without having undergone
 it no one is allowed to take part in the
 solemn Soma feast prepared for the gods.'
 HAUG's <i>Aitareya Bráhmanam</i>. Ved. II.
 p. 41. note,. <i>q. v.</i></p>
 <p><a name="fn_92"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_92">22:2</a>   <i>Upasads</i>. 'The Gods said, Let us
 perform the burnt offerings called Upasads
 (<i>i. e.</i> besieging). For by means of an
 <i>Upasad</i>, <i>i. e.</i> besieging, they conquer a
 large (fortified) town.' --<i>Ibid.</i> p. 32.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_93"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_93">22:3</a>  The Soma plant, or Asclepias Acida.
 lts fermented juice was drunk in sacrifice
 by the priests and offered to the Gods
 who enjoyed the intoxicating draught.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_94"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_94">23:1</a>  'Dum* in caerimoniarum intervallis
 Brachmanae facundi, sollertes, crebros sermones
 de rerum causis instituebant, alter
 alterum vincendi cupidi. This public disputation
 in the assembly of Bráhmans on
 the nature of things, and the almost fraternal
 connexion between theology and
 philosophy deserves some notice; whereas
 the priests of some religions are generally
 but little inclined to show favour to philosophers,
 nay, sometimes persecute them
 with the most rancorous hatred, as we are
 taught both by history and experience....
 This s'loka is found in the MSS. of different
 recensions of the Rámáyan, and we
 have, therefore, the most trustworthy
 testimony to the antiquity of philosophy
 among the Indians.' SCHLEGEL.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_95"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_95">23:2</a>  The <i>Angas</i> or appendices of the Vedas,
 pronunciation, prosody, grammar, ritual,
 astronomy, and explanation of obscurities.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_96"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_96">23:3</a>  In Sanskrit <i>vilva</i>, the Aegle Marmelos.
 'He who desires food and wishes to grow
 fat, ought to make his Yúpa (sacrificial
 Post) of Bilva wood.' HAUG'S <i>Aítareya
 Bráhmanam</i>. Vol. II. p. 73.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_97"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_97">23:4</a>  The <i>Mimosa Catechu</i>. ' He who desires
 heaven ought to make his Yúpa of
 Khádira wood.' --<i>Ibid</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_98"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_98">23:5</a>  The <i>Butea Frondosa</i>. 'He who desires
 beauty and sacred knowledge ought to
 make his Yúpa of Palás'a wood.' --<i>lbid</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_99"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_99">23:6</a>  The <i>Cardia Latifolia</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_100"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_100">23:7</a>  A kind of pine. The word means
 literally the tree of the Gods; Compare
 the עצי יהוה 'trees of the Lord.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_101"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_101">23:1b</a>  The Hindus call the constellation of
 Ursa Major the Seven Rishis or Saints.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_102"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_102">24:1</a>  A minute account of these ancient
 ceremonies would be out of place here.
 'Ágnishtoma is the name of a sacrifice,
 or rather a series of offerings to fire for
 five days. It is the first and principal
 part of the Jyotishtoma, one of the great
 sacrifices in which especially the juice of
 the Soma plant is offered for the purpose
 of obtaining Swarga or heaven.' GOLDSTÜCKER'S
 DICTIONARY. 'The <i>Ágnishtoma</i>
 is Agni. It is called so because they
 (the gods) praised him with this Stoma.
 They called it so to hide the proper meaning
 of the word: for the gods like to hide
 the proper meaning of words.'
 
 </p><p>
 'On account of four classes of gods
 having praised Agni with four Stomas,
 the whole was called <i>Chatushtoma</i> (containing
 four Stomas).'
 
 </p><p>
 'It (the Ágnishtoma) is called <i>Jyotishtoma</i>,
 for they praised Agni when he had
 risen up (to the sky) in the shape of a
 light (<i>jyotis</i>).'
 
 </p><p>
 'This (Ágnishtoma) is a sacrificial performance
 which has no beginning and
 no end.' HAUG'S <i>Aitareya Bráhmanam</i>.
 
 </p><p>
 The Atirátra, literally <i>lasting through
 the night</i>, is a division of the service of
 the Jyotishtoma.
 
 </p><p>
 The Abhijit, <i>the everywhere victorious</i>,
 is the name of a sub-division of the great
 sacrifice of the Gavámanaya.
 
 </p><p>
 The Vis'vajit, or <i>the all-conquering</i>, is
 a similar sub-division.
 
 </p><p>
 Áyus is the name of a service forming
 a division of the Abhiplava sacrifice.
 
 </p><p>
 'The <i>Aptoryám</i>, is the seventh or last
 part of the Jyotishtoma, for the performance
 of which it is not essentially necessary,
 but a voluntary sacrifice instituted
 for the attainment of a specific desire.
 The literal meaning of the word would
 be in conformity with the <i>Praudhamanoramá</i>,
 a sacrifice which procures the
 attainment of the desired object. GOLDSTÜCKER'S
 DICTIONARY.
 
 </p><p>
 'The <i>Ukthya</i> is a slight modification of
 the Agnishtoma sacrifice. The noun to
 be supplied to it is <i>kratu</i>. It is a Soma
 sacrifice also, and one of the seven Sansthas
 or component parts of the Jyotishtoma.
 Its name indicates its nature.
 For <i>Ukthya</i> means "what refers to the
 Uktha," which is an older name for
 Shástra, i.e. recitation of one of the Hotri
 priests at the time of the Soma libations.
 Thus this sacrifice is only a kind of supplement
 to the Agnishtoma.' HAUG.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_103"></a><a href="ry015.htm#fr_103">24:1b</a>  'Four classes of priests were required
 in India at the most solemn sacrifices.
 1. The officiating priests, manual labourers,
 and acolytes, who had chiefly to prepare
 the sacrificial ground, to dress the
 altar, slay the victims, and pour out the
 libations. 2. The choristers, who chant
 the sacred hymns. 3. The reciters or
 readers, who repeat certain hymns. 4.
 The overseers or bishops, who watch and
 superintend the proceedings of the other
 priests, and ought to be familiar with all
 the Vedas. The formulas and verses to
 be muttered by the first class are contained
 in the Yajur-veda-sanhitá. The hymns
 to be sung by the second class are in the
 Sama-veda-sanhitá. The Atharva-veda
 in said to be intended for the Brahman
 or overseer, who is to watch the proceedings
 of the sacrifice, and to remedy any
 mistake that may occur. The hymns to
 he recited by the third class are contained
 in the Rigveds,' <i>Chips from a German Workshop</i>.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry016.htm">Next: Canto XIV.: Rávan Doomed.</a></center>
 </body>