<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry013.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry015.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XII.: THE SACRIFICE BEGUN.</h3>
 <p>
 Again the spring with genial heat<br>
 Returning made the year complete.<br>
 To win him sons, without delay<br>
 His vow the king resolved to pay:<br>
 And to Vas'ishtha, saintly man,<br>
 In modest words this speech began:<br>
 'Prepare the rite with all things fit<br>
 As is ordained in Holy Writ,<br>
 And keep with utmost care afar<br>
 Whate'er its sacred forms might mar.<br>
 Thou art, my lord, my trustiest guide,<br>
 Kind-hearted, and my friend beside;<br>
 So is it meet thou undertake<br>
 This heavy task for duty's sake.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then he, of twice-born men the best,<br>
 His glad assent at once expressed:<br>
 'Fain will I do whate'er may be<br>
 Desired, O honoured King, by thee.'<br>
 To ancient priests he spoke, who, trained<br>
 In holy rites, deep skill had gained:<br>
 'Here guards be stationed, good and sage<br>
 Religious men of trusted age.<br>
 And various workmen send and call,<br>
 Who frame the door and build the wall:<br>
 With men of every art and trade,<br>
 Who read the stars and ply the spade,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_21"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 21</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And mimes and minstrels hither bring,<br>
 And damsels trained to dance and sing.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then to the learned men he said,<br>
 In many a page of Scripture read:<br>
 'Be yours each rite performed to see<br>
 According to the king's decree.<br>
 And stranger Bráhmans quickly call<br>
 To this great rite that welcomes all.<br>
 Pavilions for the princes, decked<br>
 With art and ornament, erect,<br>
 And handsome booths by thousands made<br>
 The Bráhman visitors to shade,<br>
 Arranged in order side by side,<br>
 With meat and drink and all supplied.<br>
 And ample stables we shall need<br>
 For many an elephant and steed:<br>
 And chambers where the men may lie,<br>
 And vast apartments, broad and high,<br>
 Fit to receive the countless bands<br>
 Of warriors come from distant lands.<br>
 For our own people too provide<br>
 Sufficient tents, extended wide,<br>
 And stores of meat and drink prepare,<br>
 And all that can be needed there.<br>
 And food in plenty must be found<br>
 For guests from all the country round.<br>
 Of various viands presents make,<br>
 For honour, not for pity's sake,<br>
 That fit regard and worship be<br>
 Paid to each caste in due degree.<br>
 And let not wish or wrath excite<br>
 Your hearts the meanest guest to slight;<br>
 But still observe with special grace<br>
 Those who obtain the foremost place,<br>
 Whether for happier skill in art<br>
 Or bearing in the rite their part.<br>
 Do you, I pray, with friendly mind<br>
 Perform the task to you assigned,<br>
 And work the rite, as bids the law,<br>
 Without omission, slip, or flaw'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 They answered: 'As thou seest fit<br>
 So will we do and naught omit.'<br>
 The sage Vas'ishtha then addressed<br>
 Sumantra called at his behest:<br>
 'The princes of the earth invite,<br>
 And famous lords who guard the rite,<br>
 Priest, Warrior, Merchant, lowly thrall,<br>
 In countless thousands summon all.<br>
 Where'er their home be, far or near,<br>
 Gather the good with honour here,<br>
 And Janak, whose imperial sway<br>
 The men of Míthilá  <a name="fr_86"></a><a href="#fn_86"><font size="1">1</font></a> obey.<br>
 The firm of vow, the dread of foes,<br>
 Who all the lore of Scripture knows,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Invite him here with honour high,<br>
 King Das'aratha's old ally.<br>
 And Kás'i's  <a name="fr_87"></a><a href="#fn_87"><font size="1">1b</font></a> lord of gentle speech,<br>
 Who finds a pleasant word for each,<br>
 In length of days our monarch's peer,<br>
 Illustrious king, invite him here.<br>
 The father of our ruler's bride,<br>
 Known for his virtues far and wide,<br>
 The king whom Kekaya's  <a name="fr_88"></a><a href="#fn_88"><font size="1">2b</font></a> realms obey,<br>
 Him with his son invite, I pray.<br>
 And Lomapád the Angas' king,<br>
 True to his vows and godlike, bring.<br>
 For be thine invitations sent<br>
 To west and south and orient.<br>
 Call those who rule Suráshtra's  <a name="fr_89"></a><a href="#fn_89"><font size="1">3b</font></a> land,<br>
 Suvíra's  <a name="fr_90"></a><a href="#fn_90"><font size="1">4b</font></a> realm and Sindhu's strand,<br>
 And all the kings of earth beside<br>
 In friendship's bonds with us allied:<br>
 Invite them all to hasten in<br>
 With retinue and kith and kin.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Vas'ishtha's speech without delay<br>
 Sumantra bent him to obey.<br>
 And sent his trusty envoys forth<br>
 Eastward and westward, south and north.<br>
 Obedient to the saint's request<br>
 Himself he hurried forth, and pressed<br>
 Each nobler chief and lord and king<br>
 To hasten to the gathering.<br>
 Before the saint Vas'ishtha stood<br>
 All those who wrought with stone and wood,<br>
 And showed the work which every one<br>
 In furtherance of the rite had done,<br>
 Rejoiced their ready zeal to see,<br>
 Thus to the craftsmen all said he:<br>
 'I charge ye, masters, see to this,<br>
 That there be nothing done amiss,<br>
 And this, I pray, in mind be borne,<br>
 That not one gift ye give in scorn:<br>
 Whenever scorn a gift attends<br>
 Great sin is his who thus offends.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And now some days and nights had past,<br>
 And kings began to gather fast,<br>
 And precious gems in liberal store<br>
 As gifts to Das'aratha bore.<br>
 Then joy thrilled through Vas'ishtha's breast<br>
 As thus the monarch he addressed:<br>
 'Obedient to thy high decree<br>
 The kings, my lord, are come to thee.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_22"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 22</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And it has been my care to greet<br>
 And honour all with reverence meet.<br>
 Thy servants' task is ended quite,<br>
 And all is ready for the rite.<br>
 Come forth then to the sacred ground<br>
 Where all in order will be found.'<br>
 Then Rishyas'ring confirmed the tale:<br>
 Nor did their words to move him fail.<br>
 The stars propitious influence lent<br>
 When forth the world's great ruler went.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then by the sage Vas'ishtha led<br>
     The priest begun to speed<br>
 Those glorious rites wherein is shed<br>
     The lifeblood of the steed.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_86"></a><a href="ry014.htm#fr_86">21:1</a>  Called also Vidcha, later Tirabhukti,
 corrupted into the modern Tirhut, a province
 bounded on the west and east by the
 Gaudakí and Kaus'ikí rivers, on the south
 by the Ganges, and on the north by the
 skirts of the Himálayas.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_87"></a><a href="ry014.htm#fr_87">21:1b</a>  The celebrated city of Benares. See
 Dr. Hall's learned and exhaustive Monograph
 in the <i>Sacred City of the Hindus</i>,
 by the Rev. M. A. Sherring.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_88"></a><a href="ry014.htm#fr_88">21:2b</a>  Kekaya is supposed to have been in
 the Panjáb. The name of the king was
 As'vapati (Lord of Horses), father of
 Das'aratha's wife Kaikeyi.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_89"></a><a href="ry014.htm#fr_89">21:3b</a>  Surat.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_90"></a><a href="ry014.htm#fr_90">21:4b</a>  Apparently in the west of India not
 far from the Indus.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry015.htm">Next: Canto XIII.: The Sacrifice Finished.</a></center>
 </body>