<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry010.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry012.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO IX.: RISHYAS'RING.</h3>
 <p>
 The wise Sumantra, thus addressed,<br>
 Unfolded at the king's behest<br>
 The plan the lords in council laid<br>
 To draw the hermit from the shade:<br>
 'The priest, amid the lordly crowd,<br>
 To Lomapád thus spoke aloud:<br>
 'Hear, King, the plot our thoughts have framed,<br>
 A harmless trick by all unblamed.<br>
 Far from the world that hermit's child<br>
 Lives lonely in the distant wild:<br>
 A stranger to the joys of sense,<br>
 His bliss is pain and abstinence;<br>
 And all unknown are women yet<br>
 To him, a holy anchoret.<br>
 The gentle passions we will wake<br>
 That with resistless influence shake<br>
     The hearts of men; and he<br>
 Drawn by enchantment strong and sweet<br>
 Shall follow from his lone retreat,<br>
     And come and visit thee.<br>
 Let ships be formed with utmost care<br>
 That artificial trees may bear,<br>
     And sweet fruit deftly made;<br>
 Let goodly raiment, rich and rare,<br>
 And flowers, and many a bird be there<br>
     Beneath the leafy shade.<br>
 Upon the ships thus decked a band<br>
 Of young and lovely girls shall stand,<br>
 Rich in each charm that wakes desire,<br>
 And eyes that burn with amorous fire;<br>
 Well skilled to sing, and play, and dance<br>
 And ply their trade with smile and glance<br>
 Let these, attired in hermits' dress,<br>
 Betake them to the wilderness,<br>
 And bring the boy of life austere<br>
 A voluntary captive here.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ended; and the king agreed,<br>
     By the priest's counsel won.<br>
 And all the ministers took heed<br>
     To see his bidding done.<br>
 In ships with wondrous art prepared<br>
 Away the lovely women fared,<br>
 And soon beneath the shade they stood<br>
 Of the wild, lonely, dreary wood.<br>
 And there the leafy cot they found<br>
     Where dwelt the devotee,<br>
 And looked with eager eyes around<br>
     The hermit's son to see.<br>
 Still, of Vibhándak sore afraid,<br>
 They hid behind the creepers' shade.<br>
 But when by careful watch they knew<br>
 The elder saint was far from view,<br>
 With bolder steps they ventured nigh<br>
 To catch the youthful hermit's eye.<br>
 Then all the damsels, blithe and gay,<br>
 At various games began to play.<br>
 They tossed the flying ball about<br>
 With dance and song and merry shout,<br>
 And moved, their scented tresses bound<br>
 With wreaths, in mazy motion round.<br>
 Some girls as if by love possessed,<br>
 Sank to the earth in feigned unrest,<br>
 Up starting quickly to pursue<br>
 Their intermitted game anew.<br>
 It was a lovely sight to see<br>
     Those fair ones, as they played,<br>
 While fragrant robes were floating free,<br>
 And bracelets clashing in their glee<br>
     A pleasant tinkling made.<br>
 The anklet's chime, the Koïl's  <a name="fr_81"></a><a href="#fn_81"><font size="1">1</font></a> cry<br>
     With music filled the place<br>
 As 'twere some city in the sky<br>
     Which heavenly minstrels grace.<br>
 With each voluptuous art they strove<br>
 To win the tenant of the grove,<br>
 And with their graceful forms inspire<br>
 His modest soul with soft desire.<br>
 With arch of brow, with beck and smile,<br>
 With every passion-waking wile<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_17"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 17</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     Of glance and lotus hand,<br>
 With all enticements that excite<br>
 The longing for unknown delight<br>
     Which boys in vain withstand.<br>
 Forth came the hermit's son to view<br>
 The wondrous sight to him so new,<br>
     And gazed in rapt surprise,<br>
 For from his natal hour till then<br>
 On woman or the sons of men<br>
     He ne'er had cast his eyes.<br>
 He saw them with their waists so slim,<br>
 With fairest shape and faultless limb,<br>
 In variegated robes arrayed,<br>
 And sweetly singing as they played.<br>
 Near and more near the hermit drew,<br>
     And watched them at their game,<br>
 And stronger still the impulse grew<br>
     To question whence they came.<br>
 They marked the young ascetic gaze<br>
 With curious eye and wild amaze,<br>
 And sweet the long-eyed damsels sang,<br>
 And shrill their merry laughter rang,<br>
 Then came they nearer to his side,<br>
 And languishing with passion cried:<br>
 'Whose son, O youth, and who art thou,<br>
 Come suddenly to join us now?<br>
 And why dost thou all lonely dwell<br>
 In the wild wood? We pray thee, tell,<br>
 We wish to know thee, gentle youth;<br>
 Come, tell us, if thou wilt, the truth.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He gazed upon that sight he ne'er<br>
 Had seen before, of girls so fair,<br>
 And out of love a longing rose<br>
 His sire and lineage to disclose:<br>
 'My father,' thus he made reply,<br>
 'Is Kas'yap's son, a saint most high,<br>
 Vibhándak styled; from him I came,<br>
 And Rishyaœring he calls my name,<br>
 Our hermit cot is near this place:<br>
 Come thither, O ye fair of face;<br>
 There be it mine, with honour due,<br>
 Ye gentle youths, to welcome you.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 They heard his speech, and gave consent,<br>
 And gladly to his cottage went.<br>
 Vibhándak's son received them well<br>
 Beneath the shelter of his cell<br>
 With guest-gift, water for their feet,<br>
 And woodland fruit and roots to eat,<br>
 They smiled, and spoke sweet words like these,<br>
 Delighted with his courtesies:<br>
 'We too have goodly fruit in store,<br>
 Grown on the trees that shade our door;<br>
 Come, if thou wilt, kind Hermit, haste<br>
 The produce of our grove to taste;<br>
 And let, O good Ascetic, first<br>
 This holy water quench thy thirst.'<br>
 They spoke, and gave him comfits sweet<br>
 Prepared ripe fruits to counterfeit;<br>
 And many a dainty cake beside<br>
 And luscious mead their stores supplied.<br>
 The seeming fruits, in taste and look,<br>
 The unsuspecting hermit took,<br>
 For, strange to him, their form beguiled<br>
 The dweller in the lonely wild.<br>
 Then round his neck fair arms were flung,<br>
 And there the laughing damsels clung,<br>
 And pressing nearer and more near<br>
 With sweet lips whispered at his ear;<br>
 While rounded limb and swelling breast<br>
 The youthful hermit softly pressed.<br>
 The pleasing charm of that strange bowl,<br>
     The touch of a tender limb,<br>
 Over his yielding spirit stole<br>
     And sweetly vanquished him.<br>
 But vows, they said, must now be paid;<br>
     They bade the boy farewell,<br>
 And, of the aged saint afraid,<br>
     Prepared to leave the dell.<br>
 With ready guile they told him where<br>
     Their hermit dwelling lay:<br>
 Then, lest the sire should find them there,<br>
     Sped by wild paths away.<br>
 They fled and left him there alone<br>
     By longing love possessed;<br>
 And with a heart no more his own<br>
     He roamed about distressed.<br>
 The aged saint came home, to find<br>
     The hermit boy distraught,<br>
 Revolving in his troubled mind<br>
     One solitary thought.<br>
 'Why dost thou not, my son,' he cried,<br>
     'Thy due obeisance pay?<br>
 Why do I see thee in the tide<br>
     Of whelming thought to-day?<br>
 A devotee should never wear<br>
     A mien so sad and strange.<br>
 Come, quickly, dearest child, declare<br>
     The reason of the change.'<br>
 And Rishyas'ring, when questioned thus,<br>
     Made answer in this wise:<br>
 'O sire, there came to visit us<br>
     Some men with lovely eyes.<br>
 About my neck soft arms they wound<br>
     And kept me tightly held<br>
 To tender breasts so soft and round,<br>
     That strangely heaved and swelled.<br>
 They sing more sweetly as they dance<br>
     Than e'er I heard till now,<br>
 And play with many a sidelong glance<br>
     And arching of the brow.'<br>
 'My son,' said he, 'thus giants roam<br>
     Where holy hermits are,<br>
 And wander round their peaceful home<br>
     Their rites austere to mar.<br>
 I charge thee, thou must never lay<br>
     Thy trust in them, dear boy:<br>
 They seek thee only to betray,<br>
     And woo but to destroy.'<br>
 Thus having warned him of his foes<br>
     That night at home he spent.<br>
 And when the morrow's sun arose<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_18"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 18</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     Forth to the forest went.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 But Rishyas'ring with eager pace<br>
 Sped forth and hurried to the place<br>
 Where he those visitants had seen<br>
 Of daintly waist and charming mien.<br>
 When from afar they saw the son<br>
 Of Saint Vibhándak toward them run,<br>
 To meet the hermit boy they hied,<br>
 And hailed him with a smile, and cried:<br>
 'O come, we pray, dear lord, behold<br>
 Our lovely home of which we told<br>
 Due honour there to thee we'll pay,<br>
 And speed thee on thy homeward way.'<br>
 Pleased with the gracious words they said<br>
 He followed where the damsels led.<br>
 As with his guides his steps he bent,<br>
     That Bráhman high of worth,<br>
 A flood of rain from heaven was sent<br>
     That gladdened all the earth.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Vibhándak took his homeward road,<br>
 And wearied by the heavy load<br>
 Of roots and woodland fruit he bore<br>
 Entered at last his cottage door.<br>
 Fain for his son he looked around,<br>
 But desolate the cell he found.<br>
 He stayed not then to bathe his feet,<br>
 Though fainting with the toil and heat,<br>
 But hurried forth and roamed about<br>
 Calling the boy with cry and shout,<br>
 He searched the wood, but all in vain;<br>
 Nor tidings of his son could gain.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 One day beyond the forest's bound<br>
 The wandering saint a village found,<br>
 And asked the swains and neatherds there<br>
 Who owned the land so rich and fair,<br>
 With all the hamlets of the plain,<br>
 And herds of kine and fields of grain.<br>
 They listened to the hermit's words,<br>
 And all the guardians of the herds,<br>
 With suppliant hands together pressed,<br>
 This answer to the saint addressed:<br>
 The Angas' lord who bears the name<br>
 Of Lomapád, renowned by fame,<br>
 Bestowed these hamlets with their kine<br>
 And all their riches, as a sign<br>
 Of grace, on Rishyas'ring: and he<br>
 Vibhándak's son is said to be.'<br>
 The hermit with exulting breast<br>
 The mighty will of fate confessed,<br>
 By meditation's eye discerned;<br>
 And cheerful to his home returned.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 A stately ship, at early morn,<br>
 The hermit's son away had borne.<br>
 Loud roared the clouds, as on he sped,<br>
 The sky grew blacker overhead;<br>
 Till, as he reached the royal town,<br>
 A mighty flood of rain came down.<br>
 By the great rain the monarch's mind<br>
 The coming of his guest divined.<br>
 To meet the honoured youth he went,<br>
 And low to earth his head he bent.<br>
 With his own priest to lead the train,<br>
 He gave the gift high guests obtain.<br>
 And sought, with all who dwelt within<br>
 The city walls, his grace to win.<br>
 He fed him with the daintiest fare,<br>
 He served him with unceasing care,<br>
 And ministered with anxious eyes<br>
 Lest anger in his breast should rise;<br>
 And gave to be the Bráhman's bride<br>
 His own fair daughter, lotus-eyed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus loved and honoured by the king,<br>
 The glorious Bráhman Rishyas'ring<br>
 Passed in that royal town his life<br>
 With S'ántá his beloved wife.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_81"></a><a href="ry011.htm#fr_81">16:1</a>  The Koïl or <i>kokila</i> (Cuculus Indicus) as
 the harbinger of spring and love is a
 universal favourite with Indian poets. His
 voice when first heard in a glorious spring
 morning is not unpleasant, but becomes
 in the hot season intolerably wearisome
 to European ears.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry012.htm">Next: Canto X.: Rishyas'ring Invited.</a></center>
 </body>