<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry012.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry014.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XI: THE SACRIFICE DECREED.</h3>
 <p>
 The Dewy Season  <a name="fr_84"></a><a href="#fn_84"><font size="1">2</font></a> came and went;<br>
     The spring returned again:<br>
 Then would the king, with mind intent,<br>
     His sacrifice ordain.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_20"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 20</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He came to Rishyas'ring, and bowed<br>
     To him of look divine,<br>
 And bade him aid his offering vowed<br>
     For heirs, to save his line.<br>
 Nor would the youth his aid deny:<br>
     He spake the monarch fair,<br>
 And prayed him for that rite so high<br>
     All requisites prepare.<br>
 The king to wise Sumantra cried<br>
     Who stood aye ready near;<br>
 'Go summon quick each holy guide,<br>
     To counsel and to hear.'<br>
 Obedient to his lord's behest<br>
     Away Sumantra sped,<br>
 And brought Vas'ishtha and the rest,<br>
 In Scripture deeply read.<br>
 Suyajna, Vámadeva came,<br>
     Jávali, Kas'yap's son,<br>
 And old Vas'ishtha, dear to fame,<br>
     Obedient every one.<br>
 King Das'aratha met them there<br>
     And duly honoured each,<br>
 And spoke in pleasant words his fair<br>
     And salutary speech:<br>
 'In childless longing doomed to pine,<br>
 No happiness, O lords, is mine.<br>
 So have I for this cause decreed<br>
 To slay the sacrificial steed.<br>
 Fain would I pay that offering high<br>
 Wherein the horse is doomed to die,<br>
 With Rishyas'ring his aid to lend,<br>
 And with your glory to befriend.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With loud applause each holy man<br>
 Received his speech, approved the plan,<br>
 And, by the wise Vas'ishtha led,<br>
 Gave praises to the king, and said:<br>
 'The sons thou cravest shalt thou see,<br>
 Of fairest glory, born to thee,<br>
 Whose holy feelings bid thee take<br>
 This righteous course for offspring's sake.'<br>
 Cheered by the ready praise of those<br>
 Whose aid he sought, his spirits rose,<br>
 And thus the king his speech renewed<br>
 With looks of joy and gratitude:<br>
 'Let what the coming rites require<br>
 Be ready as the priests desire,<br>
 And let the horse, ordained to bleed,<br>
 With fitting guard and priest, be freed,  <a name="fr_85"></a><a href="#fn_85"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Yonder on Sarjú's northern side<br>
 The sacrificial ground provide;<br>
 And let the saving rites, that naught<br>
 Ill-omened may occur, be wrought.<br>
 The offering I announce to-day<br>
 Each lord of earth may claim to pay,<br>
 Provided that his care can guard<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 the holy rite by flaws unmarred.<br>
 For wandering fiends, whose watchful spite<br>
 Waits eagerly to spoil each rite,<br>
 Hunting with keenest eye detect<br>
 The slightest slip, the least neglect;<br>
 And when the sacred work is crossed<br>
 The workman is that moment lost.<br>
 Let preparation due be made:<br>
     Your powers the charge can meet:<br>
 That so the noble rite be paid<br>
     In every point complete.'<br>
 And all the Bráhmans answered, Yea,<br>
     His mandate honouring,<br>
 And gladly promised to obey<br>
     The order of the king.<br>
 They cried with voices raised aloud:<br>
     'Success attend thine aim!'<br>
 Then bade farewell, and lowly bowed,<br>
     And hastened whence they came.<br>
 King Das'aratha went within,<br>
     His well loved wives to see:<br>
 And said: 'Your lustral rites begin,<br>
     For these shall prosper me.<br>
 A glorious offering I prepare<br>
 That precious fruit of sons may bear.'<br>
 Their lily faces brightened fast<br>
 Those pleasant words to hear,<br>
 As lilies, when the winter's past,<br>
 In lovelier hues appear.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_83"></a><a href="ry012.htm#fr_83">19:1</a>  One of the Pleiades and generally regarded
 as the model of wifely excellence.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_84"></a><a href="ry013.htm#fr_84">19:2</a>  The Hindu year is divided into six
 seasons of two months each, spring, summer,
 rains, autumn, winter, and dews.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_85"></a><a href="ry013.htm#fr_85">20:1</a>  It was essential that the horse should
 wander free for a year before immolation
 as a sign that his masters paramount
 sovereignty was acknowledged by all
 neighbouring princes.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry014.htm">Next: Canto XII.: The Sacrifice Begun.</a></center>
 </body>