<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry021.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry023.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XX.: VIS'VÁMITRA'S VISIT.</h3>
 <p>
 Now Das'aratha's pious mind<br>
 Meet wedlock for his sons designed;<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_33"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 33</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With priests and friends the king began<br>
 To counsel and prepare his plan.<br>
 Such thoughts engaged his bosom, when,<br>
 To see Ayodhyá's lord of men,<br>
 A mighty saint of glorious fame,<br>
 The hermit Vis'vámitra  <a name="fr_137"></a><a href="#fn_137"><font size="1">1</font></a> came.<br>
 For evil fiends that roam by night<br>
 Disturbed him in each holy rite.<br>
 And in their strength and frantic rage<br>
 Assailed with witcheries the sage.<br>
 He came to seek the monarch's aid<br>
 To guard the rites the demons stayed,<br>
 Unable to a close to bring<br>
 One unpolluted offering.<br>
 Seeking the king in this dire strait<br>
 He said to those who kept the gate:<br>
 'Haste, warders, to your master run,<br>
 And say that here stands Gádhi's son.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Soon as they heard the holy man,<br>
 To the king's chamber swift they ran<br>
 With minds disordered all, and spurred<br>
 To wildest zeal by what they heard.<br>
 On to the royal hall they sped,<br>
 There stood and lowly bowed the head,<br>
 And made the lord of men aware<br>
 That the great saint was waiting there.<br>
     The king with priest and peer arose<br>
         And ran the sage to meet,<br>
     As Indra from his palace goes<br>
         Lord Brahmá's self to greet.<br>
 When glowing with celestial light<br>
 The pious hermit was in sight,<br>
 The king, whose mien his transport showed,<br>
 The honoured gift for guests bestowed.<br>
 Nor did the saint that gift despise,<br>
 Offered as holy texts advise;<br>
 He kindly asked the earth's great king<br>
 How all with him was prospering.<br>
 The son of Kus'ik  <a name="fr_138"></a><a href="#fn_138"><font size="1">2</font></a> bade him tell<br>
 If all in town and field were well,<br>
 All well with friends, and kith and kin,<br>
 And royal treasure stored within:<br>
     'Do all thy neighbours own thy sway?<br>
         Thy foes confess thee yet?<br>
     Dost thou continue still to pay<br>
         To Gods and men each debt?'<br>
 Then he of hermits first and best,<br>
 Vas'ishtha with a smile  <a name="fr_139"></a><a href="#fn_139"><font size="1">3</font></a> addressed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 And asked him of his welfare too,<br>
 Showing him honour as was due.<br>
 Then with the sainted hermit all<br>
 Went joyous to the monarch's hall,<br>
 And sate them down by due degree,<br>
 Each one, of rank and dignity.<br>
 Joy filled the noble prince's breast<br>
 Who thus bespoke the honoured guest:<br>
 'As amrit  <a name="fr_140"></a><a href="ry023.htm#fn_140"><font size="1">1b</font></a> by a mortal found,<br>
 As rain upon the thirsty ground,<br>
 As to an heirless man a son<br>
 Born to him of his precious one,<br>
 As gain of what we sorely miss,<br>
 As sudden dawn of mighty bliss,<br>
 So is thy coming here to me:<br>
 All welcome, mighty Saint, to thee.<br>
 What wish within thy heart hast thou?<br>
 If I can please thee, tell me how.<br>
 Hail, Saint, from whom all honours flow,<br>
 Worthy of all I can bestow.<br>
 Blest is my birth with fruit to-day,<br>
 Nor has my life been thrown away.<br>
 I see the best of Bráhman race<br>
 And night to glorious morn gives place.<br>
 Thou, holy Sage, in days of old<br>
 Among the royal saints enrolled,<br>
 Didst, penance glorified, within<br>
 The Bráhman caste high station win.<br>
 'Tis meet and right in many a way<br>
 That I to thee should honour pay.<br>
 This seems a marvel to mine eyes:<br>
 All sin thy visit purifies;<br>
 And I by seeing thee, O Sage,<br>
 Have reaped the fruit of pilgrimage.<br>
 Then say what thou wouldst have me do,<br>
 That thou hast sought this interview.<br>
 Favoured by thee, my wish is still,<br>
 O Hermit, to perform thy will.<br>
 Nor needest thou at length explain<br>
 The object that thy heart would gain.<br>
 Without reserve I grant it now:<br>
 My deity, O Lord, art thou.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The glorious hermit, far renowned,<br>
 With highest fame and virtue crowned,<br>
 Rejoiced these modest words to hear<br>
 Delightful to the mind and ear.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_136"></a><a href="ry021.htm#fr_136">32:1b</a>   Schlegel. in the <i>Indische Bibliothek</i>,
 remarks that the proficiency of the Indians
 in this art early attracted the attention
 of Alexander's successors, and natives
 of India were so long exclusively employed
 in this service that the name Indian was
 applied to any elephant-driver, to whatever
 country be might belong.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_137"></a><a href="ry022.htm#fr_137">33:1</a>  The story of this famous saint is given
 at sufficient length in Cantos LI-LV.
 
 </p><p>
 This saint has given his name to the
 district and city to the east of Benares.
 The original name, preserved in a land-
 grant on copper now in the Museum of
 the Benares College, has been Moslemized
 into Ghazeepore (the City of the Soldier-
 martyr).</p>
 <p><a name="fn_138"></a><a href="ry022.htm#fr_138">33:2</a>  The son of Kus'ik is Vis'vámitra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_139"></a><a href="ry022.htm#fr_139">33:3</a>  At the recollection of their former
 enmity, to be described hereafter.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry023.htm">Next: Canto XXI.: Vis'vámitra's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>