<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry028.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry030.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVII.: THE BIRTH OF TÁDAKÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 When thus the sage without a peer<br>
 Had closed that story strange to hear.<br>
 Ráma again the saint addressed<br>
 To set one lingering doubt at rest:<br>
 'O holy man, 'tis said by all<br>
 That spirits' strength is weak and small:<br>
 How can she match, of power so slight,<br>
 A thousand elephants in might?'<br>
 And Vis'vámitra thus replied<br>
 To Raghu's son the glorified:<br>
 'Listen, and I will tell thee how<br>
 She gained the strength that arms her now.<br>
 A mighty spirit lived of yore;<br>
 Suketu was the name he bore.<br>
 Childless was he, and free from crime<br>
 In rites austere he passed his time.<br>
 The mighty Sire was pleased to show<br>
 His favour, and a child bestow.<br>
 Tádaká named, most fair to see.<br>
 A pearl among the maids was she.<br>
 And matched, for such was Brahmá's dower,<br>
 A thousand elephants in power.<br>
 Nor would the Eternal Sire, although<br>
 The spirit longed, a son bestow.<br>
 That maid in beauty's youthful pride<br>
 Was given to Sunda for a bride.<br>
 Her son, Máricha was his name,<br>
 A giant, through a curse, became.<br>
 She, widowed, dared with him molest<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_40"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 40</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Agastya,  <a name="fr_162"></a><a href="#fn_162"><font size="1">1</font></a> of all saints the best.<br>
 Inflamed with hunger's wildest rage,<br>
 Roaring she rushed upon the sage.<br>
 When the great hermit saw her near,<br>
 On speeding in her fierce career,<br>
 He thus pronounced Márícha's doom:<br>
 'A giant's form and shape assume.'<br>
 And then, by mighty anger swayed,<br>
 On Tádaká this curse he laid:<br>
 'Thy present form and semblance quit,<br>
 And wear a shape thy mood to fit;<br>
 Changed form and feature by my ban.<br>
 A fearful thing that feeds on man.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She, by his awful curse possessed,<br>
 And mad with rage that fills her breast,<br>
 Has on this land her fury dealt<br>
 Where once the saint Agastya dwelt.<br>
 Go, Ráma, smite this monster dead,<br>
 The wicked plague, of power so dread,<br>
 And further by this deed of thine,<br>
 The good of Bráhmans and of kine,<br>
 Thy hand alone can overthrow,<br>
 In all the worlds, this impious foe.<br>
 Nor let compassion lead thy mind<br>
 To shrink from blood of womankind;<br>
 A monarch's son must ever count<br>
 The people's welfare paramount.<br>
 And whether pain or joy he deal<br>
 Dare all things for his subjects' weal;<br>
 Yea, if the deed bring praise or guilt,<br>
 If life be saved or blood be spilt:<br>
 Such, through all time, should be the care<br>
 Of those a kingdom's weight who bear.<br>
 Slay, Ráma, slay this impious fiend,<br>
 For by no law her life is screened.<br>
 So Manthará, as bards have told,<br>
 Virochan's child, was slain of old<br>
 By Indra, when in furious hate<br>
 She longed the earth to devastate.<br>
 So Kávya's mother, Bhrigu's wife,<br>
 Who loved her husband as her life,<br>
 When Indra's throne she sought to gain,<br>
 By Vishnu's hand of yore was slain.<br>
 By these and high-souled kings beside,<br>
 Struck down, have lawless women died.'<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_162"></a><a href="ry029.htm#fr_162">40:1</a>  'This is one of those indefinable
 mythic personages who are found in the
 ancient traditions of many nations, and
 in whom cosmogonical or astronomical
 notions are generally figured. Thus it is
 related of Agastya that the Vindhyan
 mountains prostrated themselves before
 him; and yet the same Agastya is believed to
 be regent of the star Canopus,' --GORRESIO.
 
 </p><p>
 He will appear as the friend and helper
 of Ráma farther on in the poem.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry030.htm">Next: Canto XXVIII.: The Death of Tádaká</a></center>
 </body>