<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry024.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry026.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIII.: VAS'ISHTHA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 While thus the hapless monarch spoke,<br>
 Paternal love his utterance broke.<br>
 Then words like these the saint returned.<br>
 And fury in his bosom burned:<br>
 'Didst thou, O King, a promise make,<br>
 And wishest now thy word to break?<br>
 A son of Raghu's line should scorn<br>
 To fail in faith, a man forsworn.<br>
 But if thy soul can bear the shame<br>
 I will return e'en as I came.<br>
 Live with thy sons, and joy be thine,<br>
 False scion of Kakutstha's line.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As Vis'vámitra, mighty sage,<br>
 Was moved with this tempestuous rage,<br>
 Earth rocked and reeled throughout her frame,<br>
 And fear upon the Immortals came.<br>
 But Saint Vas'ishtha, wisest seer,<br>
 Observant of his vows austere,<br>
 Saw the whole world convulsed with dread,<br>
 And thus unto the monarch said:<br>
 'Thou, born of old Ikshváku's seed,<br>
 Art Justice' self in mortal weed.<br>
 Constant and pious, blest by fate,<br>
 The right thou must not violate.<br>
 Thou, Raghu's son, so famous through<br>
 The triple world as just and true,<br>
 Perform thy bounden duty still,<br>
 Nor stain thy race by deed of ill<br>
 If thou have sworn and now refuse<br>
 Thou must thy store of merit lose.<br>
 Then, Monarch, let thy Ráma go,<br>
 Nor fear for him the demon foe.<br>
 The fiends shall have no power to hurt<br>
 Him trained to war or inexpert,<br>
 Nor vanquish him in battle field,<br>
 For Kus'ik's son the youth will shield.<br>
 He is incarnate Justice, he<br>
 The best of men for bravery.<br>
 Embodied love of penance drear,<br>
 Among the wise without a peer.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_36"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 36</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Full well he knows, great Kus'ik's son,<br>
 The arms celestial, every one,<br>
 Arms from the Gods themselves concealed,<br>
 Far less to other men revealed.<br>
 These arms to him, when earth he swayed,<br>
 Mighty Kris'ás'va, pleased, conveyed.<br>
 Kris'ás'va's sons they are indeed,<br>
 Brought forth by Daksha's lovely seed,  <a name="fr_145"></a><a href="ry026.htm#fn_145"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Heralds of conquest, strong and bold,<br>
 Brilliant, of semblance manifold.<br>
 Jayá and Vijayá, most fair,<br>
 And hundred splendid weapons bare.<br>
 Of Jayá, glorious as the morn,<br>
 First fifty noble sons were born.<br>
 Boundless in size yet viewless too,<br>
 They came the demons to subdue.<br>
 And fifty children also came<br>
 Of Vijayá the beauteous dame,<br>
 Samháras named, of mighty force,<br>
 Hard to assail or check in course.<br>
 Of these the hermit knows the use,<br>
 And weapons new can he produce.<br>
 All these the mighty saint will yield<br>
 To Ráma's hand, to own and wield;<br>
 And armed with these, beyond a doubt<br>
 Shall Ráma put those fiends to rout.<br>
 For Ráma and the people's sake,<br>
 For thine own good my counsel take,<br>
 Nor seek, O King, with fond delay,<br>
 The parting of thy son to stay,'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry026.htm">Next: Canto XXIV.: The Spells.</a></center>
 </body>