<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry027.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry029.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVI.: THE FOREST OF TÁDAKÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 When the fair light of morning rose<br>
 The princely turners of their foes<br>
 Followed, his morning worship o'er,<br>
 The hermit to the river's shore.<br>
 The high-souled men with thoughtful care<br>
 A pretty barge had stationed there.<br>
 All cried. 'O lord, this barge ascend,<br>
 And with thy princely followers bend<br>
 To yonder side thy prosperous way<br>
 With naught to check thee or delay.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Nor did the saint their rede reject:<br>
 He bade farewell with due respect,<br>
 And crossed, attended by the twain,<br>
 That river rushing to the main.<br>
 When now the bark was half way o'er,<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman heard the roar,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 That louder grew and louder yet,<br>
 Of waves by dashing waters met.<br>
 Then Ráma asked the mighty seer:<br>
 'What is the tumult that I hear<br>
 Of waters cleft in mid career?'<br>
 Soon as the speech of Ráma, stirred<br>
 By deep desire to know, he heard,<br>
 The pious saint began to tell<br>
 What paused the waters' roar and swell:<br>
 'On high Kailása's distant hill<br>
     There lies a noble lake<br>
 Whose waters, born from Brahmá's will,<br>
     The name of Mánas <a name="fr_157"></a><a href="#fn_157"><font size="1">1b</font></a> take.<br>
 Thence, hallowing where'er they flow,<br>
     The streams of Sarjú fall,<br>
 And wandering through the plains below<br>
     Embrace Ayodhyá's wall.<br>
 Still, still preserved in Sarjú's name<br>
     Sarovar's <a name="fr_158"></a><a href="#fn_158"><font size="1">2b</font></a> fame we trace.<br>
 The flood of Brahma whence she came<br>
     To run her holy race.<br>
 To meet great Gangá here she hies<br>
     With tributary wave:<br>
 Hence the loud roar ye hear arise,<br>
     Of floods that swell and rave.<br>
 Here, pride of Raghu's line, do thou<br>
 In humble adoration bow.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke. The princes both obeyed,<br>
 And reverence to each river paid. <a name="fr_159"></a><a href="#fn_159"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 They reached the southern shore at last,<br>
 And gaily on their journey passed.<br>
 A little space beyond there stood<br>
 A gloomy awe-inspiring wood.<br>
 The monarch's noble son began<br>
 To question thus the holy man:<br>
 'Whose gloomy forest meets mine eye<br>
 Like some vast cloud that fills the sky?<br>
 Pathless and dark it seems to be,<br>
 Where birds in thousands wander free;<br>
 Where shrill cicadas' cries resound,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_39"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 39</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And fowl of dismal note abound,<br>
 Lion, rhinoceros, and bear,<br>
 Boar, tiger, elephant, are there,<br>
     There shrubs and thorns run wild:<br>
 Dháo, Sál, Bignonia, Bel, <a name="fr_160"></a><a href="#fn_160"><font size="1">1</font></a> are found,<br>
 And every tree that grows on ground.<br>
     How is the forest styled?'<br>
 The glorious saint this answer made:<br>
     'Dear child of Raghu, hear<br>
 Who dwells within the horrid shade<br>
     That looks so dark and drear.<br>
 Where now is wood, long ere this day<br>
     Two broad and fertile lands,<br>
 Malaja and Karúsha lay.<br>
     Adorned by heavenly hands.<br>
 Here, mourning friendship's broken ties,<br>
 Lord Indra of the thousand eyes<br>
 Hungered and sorrowed many a day,<br>
 His brightness soiled with mud and clay,<br>
 When in a storm of passion he<br>
 Had slain his dear friend Namuchi.<br>
 Then came the Gods and saints who bore<br>
 Their golden pitchers brimming o'er<br>
 With holy streams that banish stain,<br>
 And bathed Lord Indra pure again.<br>
 When in this land the God was freed<br>
 From spot and stain of impious deed<br>
 For that his own dear friend he slew,<br>
 High transport thrilled his bosom through.<br>
 Then in his joy the lands he blessed,<br>
 And gave a boon they long possessed:<br>
 'Because these fertile lands retain<br>
 The washings of the blot and stain,'<br>
     'Twas thus Lord Indra sware,<br>
 'Malaja and Karúsha's name<br>
 Shall celebrate with deathless fame<br>
     My malady and care.' <a name="fr_161"></a><a href="#fn_161"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 'So be it', all the Immortals cried,<br>
     When Indra's speech they heard,<br>
 And with acclaim they ratified<br>
     The names his lips conferred.<br>
 Long time, O victor of thy foes,<br>
 These happy lands had sweet repose,<br>
 And higher still in fortune rose.<br>
 At length a spirit, loving ill,<br>
 Tádaká , wearing shapes at will,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Whose mighty strength, exceeding vast<br>
 A thousand elephants, surpassed,<br>
 Was to fierce Sunda, lord and head<br>
 Of all the demon armies, wed.<br>
 From her, Lord Indra's peer in might<br>
 Giant Máricha sprang to light:<br>
 And she, a constant plague and pest,<br>
 These two fair realms has long distressed.<br>
 Now dwelling in her dark abode<br>
 A league away she bars the road:<br>
 And we, O Ráma, hence must go<br>
 Where lies the forest of the foe.<br>
 Now on thine own right arm rely,<br>
     And my command obey:<br>
 Smite the foul monster that she die.<br>
     And take the plague away.<br>
 To reach this country none may dare<br>
     Fallen from its old estate,<br>
 Which she, whose fury naught can bear,<br>
     Has left so desolate.<br>
 And now my truthful tale is told<br>
     How with accursed sway<br>
 The spirit plagued this wood of old,<br>
     And ceases not to-day.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_156"></a><a href="ry027.htm#fr_156">38:1</a>  <i>The Bodiless one.</i></p>
 <p><a name="fn_157"></a><a href="ry028.htm#fr_157">38:1b</a>  'A celebrated lake regarded in India
 as sacred. It lies in the lofty region between
 the northern highlands of the Himalayas
 and mount Kailása, the region of
 the sacred lakes. The poem, following
 the popular Indian belief, makes the river
 Sarayú (now Sarjú) flow from the Mánasa
 lake; the sources of the river are a little to
 the south about a day's journey from the
 lake. See Lassen, <i>Indische Alterthumsbunde</i>,
 page 34.' GORBESIO. <i>Manas</i> means
 mind; <i>mánasa</i>, mental, mind-born.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_158"></a><a href="ry028.htm#fr_158">38:2b</a>  <i>Sarovar</i> means best of lakes. This is
 another of the poet's fanciful etymologies.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_159"></a><a href="ry028.htm#fr_159">38:3b</a>  The confluence of two or more rivers
 is often a venerated and holy place. The
 most famous is Prayág or Allahabad,
 where the Sarasvatí by an underground
 course is believed to join the Jumna and
 the Ganges.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_160"></a><a href="ry028.htm#fr_160">39:1</a>  The botanical names of the trees
 mentioned in the text are Grislea Tormentosa,
 Shorea Robusta, Echites Antidysenterica,
 Bignonia Suaveolens, Aegle Marmelos,
 and Diospyrus Glutinosa. I have
 omitted the <i>Kutaja</i> (Echites) and the
 <i>Tinduka</i> (Diospyrus).</p>
 <p><a name="fn_161"></a><a href="ry028.htm#fr_161">39:2</a>  Here we meet with a fresh myth to
 account for the name of these regions.
 <i>Malaja</i> is probably a non-Aryan word
 signifying a hilly country: taken as a
 Sanskrit compound it means <i>sprung from
 defilement</i>. The word <i>Karúsha</i> appears to
 have a somewhat similar meaning.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry029.htm">Next: Canto XXVII.: The Birth of Tádaká.</a></center>
 </body>