<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry026.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry028.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXV.: THE HERMITAGE OF LOVE.</h3>
 <p>
 Soon as appeared the morning light<br>
 Up rose the mighty anchorite,<br>
 And thus to youthful Ráma said,<br>
 Who lay upon his leafy bed:<br>
 'High fate is hers who calls thee son:<br>
     Arise,'tis break of day;<br>
 Rise, Chief, and let those rites be done<br>
     Due at the morning's ray.' <a name="fr_150"></a><a href="#fn_150"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 At that great sage's high behest<br>
     Up sprang the princely pair,<br>
 To bathing rites themselves addressed,<br>
     And breathed the holiest prayer.<br>
 Their morning task completed, they<br>
     To Vis'vámitra came<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 That store of holy works, to pay<br>
     The worship saints may claim.<br>
 Then to the hallowed spot they went<br>
     Along fair Sarjú's side<br>
 Where mix her waters confluent<br>
     With three-pathed Gangá's tide.  <a name="fr_151"></a><a href="#fn_151"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 There was a sacred hermitage<br>
     Where saints devout of mind<br>
 Their lives through many a lengthened age<br>
     To penance had resigned.<br>
 That pure abode the princes eyed<br>
     With unrestrained delight,<br>
 And thus unto the saint they cried.<br>
     Rejoicing at the sight:<br>
 'Whose is that hermitage we see?<br>
     Who makes his dwelling there?<br>
 Full of desire to hear are we:<br>
     O Saint, the truth declare.'<br>
 The hermit smiling made reply<br>
     To the two boys' request:<br>
 'Hear, Rama, who in days gone by<br>
     This calm retreat possessed.<br>
 Kandarpa in apparent form,<br>
     Called Káma  <a name="fr_152"></a><a href="#fn_152"><font size="1">2b</font></a> by the wise,<br>
 Dared Umá's  <a name="fr_153"></a><a href="#fn_153"><font size="1">3b</font></a> new-wed lord to storm<br>
     And make the God his prize.<br>
 'Gainst Sthánu's  <a name="fr_154"></a><a href="#fn_154"><font size="1">4b</font></a> self, on rites austere<br>
     And vows intent,  <a name="fr_155"></a><a href="#fn_155"><font size="1">5b</font></a> they say,<br>
 His bold rash hand be dared to rear,<br>
     Though Sthánu cried, Away!<br>
 But the God's eye with scornful glare<br>
     Fell terrible on him.<br>
 Dissolved the shape that was so fair<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_38"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 38</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     And burnt up every limb.<br>
 Since the great God's terrific rage<br>
     Destroyed his form and frame,<br>
 Káma in each succeeding age<br>
     Has borne Ananga's  <a name="fr_156"></a><a href="ry028.htm#fn_156"><font size="1">1</font></a> name.<br>
 So, where his lovely form decayed,<br>
     This land is Anga styled:<br>
 Sacred to him of old this shade,<br>
     And hermits undefiled.<br>
 Here Scripture-talking elders sway<br>
     Each sense with firm control,<br>
 And penance-rites have washed away<br>
     All sin from every soul.<br>
 One night, fair boy, we here will spend,<br>
     A pure stream on each hand,<br>
 And with to-morrow's light will bend<br>
     Our steps to yonder strand.<br>
 Here let us bathe, and free from stain<br>
     To that pure grove repair,<br>
 Sacred to Káma, and remain<br>
     One night in comfort there.'<br>
 With penance' far-discerning eye<br>
     The saintly men beheld<br>
 Their coming, and with transport high<br>
     Each holy bosom swelled.<br>
 To Kus'ik's son the gift they gave<br>
     That honoured guest should greet,<br>
 Water they brought his feet to lave,<br>
     And showed him honor meet.<br>
 Ráma, and Lakshman next obtained<br>
     In due degree their share.<br>
 Then with sweet talk the guests remained,<br>
     And charmed each listener there.<br>
 The evening prayers were duly said<br>
     With voices calm and low:<br>
 Then on the ground each laid his head<br>
     And slept till morning's glow.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_150"></a><a href="ry027.htm#fr_150">37:1</a>  'At the rising of the sun as well as at
 noon certain observances, invocations,
 and prayers were prescribed which might
 under no circumstances be omitted. One
 of these observances was the recitation of
 the Sávitri, a Vedic hymn to the Sun of
 wonderful beauty.' GORBESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_151"></a><a href="ry027.htm#fr_151">37:1b</a>  <i>Tripathaga, Three-path-go,</i> flowing
 in heaven, on earth, and under the earth.
 See Canto XLV</p>
 <p><a name="fn_152"></a><a href="ry027.htm#fr_152">37:2b</a>  Tennyson's ' Indian Cama,' the God
 of Love, known also by many other names.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_153"></a><a href="ry027.htm#fr_153">37:3b</a>  <i>Uma</i>, or <i>Parvati,</i> was daughter of
 Himálaya, Monarch of mountains, and
 wife of S'iva. See Kálidása's <i>Kumára
 Sambhava,</i> or <i>Birth of the War-God.</i></p>
 <p><a name="fn_154"></a><a href="ry027.htm#fr_154">37:4b</a>  <i>Sthánu,</i> The Unmoving one, a name
 of S'iva.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_155"></a><a href="ry027.htm#fr_155">37:5b</a>  The practice of austerities, voluntary
 tortures, and mortifications was anciently
 universal in India, and was held by the
 Indians to be of immense efficacy. Hence
 they mortified themselves to expiate sins,
 to acquire merits, and to obtain superhuman
 gifts and powers; the Gods themselves
 sometimes exercised themselves in
 such austerities, either to raise themselves
 to greater power and grandeur, or to
 counteract the austerities of man which
 threatened to prevail over them and to
 deprive them of heaven.... Such austerities
 were called in India <i>tapas</i> (burning
 ardour, fervent devotion) and he who
 practised them <i>tapasvin</i>.'GORRESIO.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry028.htm">Next: Canto XXVI.: The Forest of Tádaká.</a></center>
 </body>