<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry019.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry021.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVIII.: RISHYAS'RING'S DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 The monarch called a Bráhman near<br>
     And said, 'Now speed away<br>
 To Kas'yap's son,  <a name="fr_126"></a><a href="#fn_126"><font size="1">2</font></a> the mighty seer,<br>
     And with all reverence say<br>
 The holy child he holds so dear,<br>
 The hermit of the noble mind.<br>
 Whose equal it were hard to find,<br>
     Returned, is dwelling here.<br>
 Go, and instead of me do thou<br>
 Before that best of hermits bow,<br>
 That still he may, for his dear son,<br>
 Show me the favour I have won.'<br>
 Soon as the king these words had said,<br>
 To Kas'yap's son the Bráhman sped.<br>
 Before the hermit low he bent<br>
 And did obeisance, reverent;<br>
 Then with meek words his grace to crave<br>
 The message of his lord he gave:<br>
 'The high-souled father of his bride<br>
 Had called thy son his rites to guide:<br>
 Those rites are o'er, the steed is slain;<br>
 Thy noble child is come again.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Soon as the saint that speech had heard<br>
 His spirit with desire was stirred<br>
 To seek the city of the king<br>
 And to his cot his son to bring.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_31"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 31</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With young disciples at his side<br>
 Forth on his way the hermit hied,<br>
 While peasants from their hamlets ran<br>
 To reverence the holy man,<br>
 Each with his little gift of food,<br>
 Forth came the village multitude,<br>
 And, as they humbly bowed the head,<br>
 'What may we do for thee?' they said.<br>
 Then he, of Bráhmans first and best,<br>
 The gathered people thus addressed:<br>
 'Now tell me for I fain would know,<br>
 Why is it I am honoured so?'<br>
 They to the high-souled saint replied:<br>
 'Our ruler is with thee allied.<br>
 Our master's order we fulfil;<br>
 O Bráhman, let thy mind be still.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With joy the saintly hermit heard<br>
 Each pleasant and delightful word,<br>
 And poured a benediction down<br>
 On king and ministers and town.<br>
 Glad at the words of that high saint<br>
 Some servants hastened to acquaint<br>
 Their king, rejoicing to impart<br>
 The tidings that would cheer his heart.<br>
 Soon as the joyful tale he knew<br>
 To meet the saint the monarch flew,<br>
 The guest-gift in his hand he brought,<br>
 And bowed before him and besought:<br>
 'This day by seeing thee I gain<br>
 Not to have lived my life in vain.<br>
 Now be not wroth with me, I pray,<br>
 Because I wiled thy son away.'  <a name="fr_127"></a><a href="#fn_127"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The best of Bráhmans answer made:<br>
 'Be not, great lord of kings, afraid.<br>
 Thy virtues have not failed to win<br>
 My favour, O thou pure of sin.'<br>
 Then in the front the saint was placed,<br>
 The king came next in joyous haste,<br>
 And with him entered his abode,<br>
 Mid glad acclaim as on they rode.<br>
 To greet the sage the reverent crowd<br>
 Raised suppliant hands and humbly bowed.<br>
 Then from the palace many a dame<br>
 Following well-dressed S'ántá came,<br>
 Stood by the mighty saint and cried:<br>
 'See, honour's source, thy son's dear bride.'<br>
 The saint, who every virtue knew,<br>
 His arms around his daughter threw,<br>
 And with a father's rapture pressed<br>
 The lady to his wondering breast.<br>
 Arising from the saint's embrace<br>
 She bowed her low before his face,<br>
 And then, with palm to palm applied,<br>
 Stood by her hermit father's side.<br>
 He for his son, as laws ordain,<br>
 Performed the rite that frees from stain,  <a name="fr_128"></a><a href="#fn_128"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And, honoured by the wise and good,<br>
 With him departed to the wood.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_125"></a><a href="ry019.htm#fr_125">30:1</a>  The <i>Michelia champaca</i>. It bears a
 scented yellow blossom:
 </p><dir><br>
     'The maid of India blest again to hold<br>
     In her full lap the Champac's leaves of gold.'<br>
 </dir>
 <i>Lallah Rookh</i>.
 <p><a name="fn_126"></a><a href="ry020.htm#fr_126">30:2</a>  Vibhándak, the father of Rishyás'ring.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_127"></a><a href="ry020.htm#fr_127">31:1</a>  A hemis'loka is wanting in Schlegel's
 text, which he thus fills up in his Latin
 translation.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_128"></a><a href="ry020.htm#fr_128">31:2</a>  Rishyas'ring, a Bráhman, had married
 Sántá who was of the Kshatriya or Warrior
 caste and an expiatory ceremony was
 necessary on account of this violation of
 the law.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry021.htm">Next: Canto XIX.: The Birth of The Princes.</a></center>
 </body>