<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry025.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry027.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIV.: THE SPELLS.</h3>
 <p>
 Vas'ishtha thus was speaking still:<br>
 The monarch, of his own free will.<br>
 Bade with quick seal and joyful cheer<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman hasten near.<br>
 Mother and sire in loving care<br>
 Sped their dear son with rite and prayer:<br>
 Vas'ishtha blessed him ere he went;<br>
 O'er his loved head the father bent,<br>
 And then to Kus'ik's son resigned<br>
 Ráma with Lakshman close behind.<br>
 Standing by Vis'vámitra's side,<br>
 The youthful hero, lotus-eyed,<br>
 The Wind-God saw, and sent a breeze<br>
 Whose sweet pure touch just waved the trees.<br>
 There fell from heaven a flowery rain,<br>
 And with the song and dance the strain<br>
 Of shell and tambour sweetly blent<br>
 As forth the son of Raghu went.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The hermit led: behind him came<br>
 The bow-armed Ráma, dear to fame,<br>
 Whose locks were like the raven's wing;  <a name="fr_146"></a><a href="#fn_146"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Then Lakshman, closely following.<br>
 The Gods and Indra, filled with joy,<br>
 Looked down upon the royal boy,<br>
 And much they longed the death to see<br>
 Of their ten-headed enemy.  <a name="fr_147"></a><a href="#fn_147"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Ráma and Lakshman paced behind<br>
 That hermit of the lofty mind.<br>
 As the young As'vins,  <a name="fr_148"></a><a href="#fn_148"><font size="1">3b</font></a> heavenly pair,<br>
 Follow Lord Indra through the air.<br>
 On arm and hand the guard they wore,<br>
 Quiver and bow and sword they bore;<br>
 Two fire-born Gods of War seemed they.  <a name="fr_149"></a><a href="#fn_149"><font size="1">4b</font></a><br>
 He, S'iva's self who led the way.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Upon fair Sarjú's southern shore<br>
 They now had walked a league and more,<br>
 When thus the sage in accents mild<br>
 To Ráma said: 'Beloved child,<br>
 This lustral water duly touch;<br>
 My counsel will avail thee much.<br>
 Forget not all the words I say,<br>
 Nor let the occasion slip away.<br>
 Lo, with two spells I thee invest,<br>
 The mighty and the mightiest.<br>
 O'er thee fatigue shall ne'er prevail,<br>
 Nor age or change thy limbs assail.<br>
 Thee powers of darkness ne'er shall smite<br>
 ln tranquil sleep or wild delight.<br>
 No one is there in all the land<br>
 Thine equal for the vigorous hand.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_37"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 37</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thou, when thy lips pronounce the spell,<br>
 Shalt have no peer in heaven or hell,<br>
 None in the world with thee shall vie,<br>
 O sinless one, in apt reply,<br>
 In fortune, knowledge, wit, and tact,<br>
 Wisdom to plan and skill to act.<br>
 This double science take, and gain<br>
 Glory that shall for aye remain.<br>
 Wisdom and judgment spring from each<br>
 Of these fair spells whose use I teach.<br>
 Hunger and thirst unknown to thee,<br>
 High in the worlds thy rank shall be.<br>
 For these two spells with might endued,<br>
 Are the Great Father's heavenly brood,<br>
 And thee, O Chief, may fitly grace,<br>
 Thou glory of Kakutstha's race.<br>
 Virtues which none can match are thine,<br>
 Lord, from thy birth, of gifts divine,<br>
 And now these spells of might shall cast<br>
 Fresh radiance o'er the gifts thou hast.'<br>
 Then Ráma duly touched the wave,<br>
     Raised suppliant hands, bowed low his head,<br>
 And took the spells the hermit gave<br>
     Whose soul on contemplation fed.<br>
 From him whose might these gifts enhanced,<br>
 A brighter beam of glory glanced:<br>
 So shines in all his autumn blaze<br>
 The Day-God of the thousand rays.<br>
 The hermit's wants those youths supplied,<br>
 As pupils use to holy guide.<br>
 And then the night in sweet content<br>
 On Sarjú's pleasant bank they spent.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_145"></a><a href="ry025.htm#fr_145">36:1</a>  These mysterious animated weapons
 are enumerated in Cantos XXIX and
 XXX. Daksha was the son of Brahmá
 and one of the Prajápatis, Demiurgi, or
 secondary authors of creation.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_146"></a><a href="ry026.htm#fr_146">36:1b</a>  Youths of the Kshatriya class used
 to leave unshorn the side locks of their
 hair. These were called <i>Káka-paksha</i>,
 or raven's wings.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_147"></a><a href="ry026.htm#fr_147">36:2b</a>  The Rákshas  or giant Rávan, king ot
 Lanká.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_148"></a><a href="ry026.htm#fr_148">36:3b</a>  The meaning of As'vins (from <i>as'va</i> a
 horse, Persian asp, Greek ἵιππος, Latin
 <i>equus</i>, Welsh *eck, is Horsemen. They
 were twin deities of whom frequent mention
 is made in the Vedas and the Indian
 myths. The As'vins have much in common
 with the Dioscuri of Greece, and
 their mythical genealogy seems to indicate
 that their origin was astronomical. They
 were, perhaps, at first the morning star
 and evening star. They are said to be the
 children of the sun and the nymph As'viní,
 who is one of the lunar asterisms personified.
 In the popular mythology they are
 regarded as the physicians of the Gods.
 GORRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_149"></a><a href="ry026.htm#fr_149">36:4b</a>  The word Kumára, (a young prince, h
 Childe, is also a proper name of Skanda
 or Kártikeya God of War, the son of S'iva
 and Umá. The babe was matured in the
 fire. See Appendix, <i>Kártikeii Generatio</i>.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry027.htm">Next: Canto XXV.: The Hermitage of Love.</a></center>
 </body>