<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry022.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry024.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXI.: VIS'VÁMITRA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 The hermit heard with high content<br>
 That speech so wondrous eloquent,<br>
 And while each hair with joy arose, <a name="fr_141"></a><a href="#fn_141"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_34"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 34</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He thus made answer at the close:<br>
 'Good is thy speech O noble King,<br>
 And like thyself in everything.<br>
 So should their lips be wisdom-fraught<br>
 Whom kings begot, Vas'ishtha taught.<br>
 The favour which I came to seek<br>
 Thou grantest ere my tongue can speak.<br>
 But let my tale attention claim,<br>
 And hear the need for which I came,<br>
 O King, as Scripture texts allow,<br>
 A holy rite employs me now.<br>
 Two fiends who change their forms at will<br>
 Impede that rite with cursed skill. <a name="fr_142"></a><a href="#fn_142"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Oft when the task is nigh complete,<br>
 These worst of fiends my toil defeat,<br>
 Throw bits of bleeding flesh, and o'er<br>
 The altar shed a stream of gore.<br>
 When thus the rite is mocked and stayed,<br>
 And all my pious hopes delayed,<br>
 Cast down in heart the spot I leave,<br>
 And spent with fruitless labour grieve.<br>
 Nor can I, checked by prudence, dare<br>
 Let loose my fury on them there:<br>
 The muttered curse, the threatening word,<br>
 In such a rite must ne'er be heard.<br>
 Thy grace the rite from check can free.<br>
 And yield the fruit I long to see.<br>
 Thy duty bids thee, King, defend<br>
 The suffering guest, the suppliant friend.<br>
 Give me thy son, thine eldest born,<br>
 Whom locks like raven's wings adorn,<br>
 That hero youth, the truly brave,<br>
 Of thee, O glorious King, I crave,<br>
 For he can lay those demons low<br>
 Who mar my rites and work me woe:<br>
 My power shall shield the youth from harm,<br>
 And heavenly might shall nerve his arm.<br>
 And on my champion will I shower<br>
 Unnumbered gifts of varied power,<br>
 Such gifts as shall ensure his fame<br>
 And spread through all the worlds his name.<br>
 Be sure those fiends can never stand<br>
 Before the might of Ráma's hand,<br>
 And mid the best and bravest none<br>
 Can slay that pair but Raghu's son.<br>
 Entangled in the toils of Fate<br>
 Those sinners, proud and obstinate,<br>
 Are, in their fury overbold,<br>
 No match for Ráma mighty-souled.<br>
 Nor let a father's breast give way<br>
 Too far to fond affection's sway.<br>
 Count thou the fiends already slain:<br>
 My word is pledged, nor pledged in vain.<br>
 I know the hero Ráma well<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 In whom high thoughts and valour dwell;<br>
 So does Vas'ishtha, so do these<br>
 Engaged in long austerities.<br>
 If thou would do the righteous deed,<br>
 And win high fame, thy virtue's meed,<br>
 Fame that on earth shall last and live,<br>
 To me. great King, thy Ráma give.<br>
 If to the words that I have said,<br>
 With Saint Vas'ishtha at their head<br>
 Thy holy men, O King, agree,<br>
 Then let thy Ráma go with me.<br>
 Ten nights my sacrifice will last,<br>
 And ere the stated time be past<br>
 Those wicked fiends, those impious twain,<br>
 Must fall by wondrous Ráma slain.<br>
 Let not the hours, I warn thee, fly,<br>
 Fixt for the rite, unheeded by;<br>
 Good luck have thou, O royal Chief,<br>
 Nor give thy heart to needless grief."<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus in fair words with virtue fraught<br>
 The pious glorious saint besought.<br>
 But the good speech with poignant sting<br>
 Pierced ear and bosom of the king,<br>
 Who, stabbed with pangs too sharp to bear,<br>
 Fell prostrate and lay fainting there.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_140"></a><a href="ry022.htm#fr_140">33:1b</a>  The Indian nectar or drink of the Gods.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_141"></a><a href="ry023.htm#fr_141">33:2b</a>  Great joy, according to the Hindu
 belief, has this effect, not causing each
 particular hair to stand on end, but
 gently raising all the down upon the body.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_142"></a><a href="ry023.htm#fr_142">34:1</a>  The Rákshasas, giants, or fiends who
 are represented as disturbing the sacrifice,
 signify here, as often elsewhere, merely
 the savage tribes which placed themselves
 in hostile opposition to Bráhmanical institutions.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry024.htm">Next: Canto XXII.: Das'aratha's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>