<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry038.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry040.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIX.: THE SONS OF SAGAR.</h3>
 <p>
 The saint in accents sweet and clear<br>
 Thus told his tale for Ráma's ear,<br>
 And thus anew the holy man<br>
 A legend to the prince began:<br>
 'There reigned a pious monarch o'er<br>
 Ayodhyá in the days of yore:<br>
 Sagar his name: no child bad he,<br>
 And children much he longed to see.<br>
 His honoured consort, fair of face,<br>
 Sprang from Vidarbha's royal race,<br>
 Kes'ini, famed from early youth<br>
 For piety and love of truth.<br>
 Arishtanemi's daughter fair,<br>
 With whom no maiden might compare<br>
 In beauty, though the earth is wide,<br>
 Sumati, was his second bride.<br>
 With his two queens afar he went,<br>
 And weary days in penance spent,<br>
 Fervent, upon Himálaya's hill<br>
 Where springs the stream called Bhrigu' rill.<br>
 Nor did he fail that saint to please<br>
 With his devout austerities,<br>
 And, when a hundred years had fled,<br>
 Thus the most truthful Bhrigu said:<br>
 'From thee, O Sagar, blameless King,<br>
 A mighty host of sons shall spring,<br>
 And thou shalt win a glorious name<br>
 Which none, O Chief, but thou shall claim.<br>
 One of thy queens a son shall bear,<br>
 Maintainer of thy race and heir;<br>
 And of the other there shall be<br>
 Sons sixty thousand born to thee.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus as he spake, with one accord,<br>
 To win the grace of that high lord,<br>
 The queens, with palms together laid,<br>
 In humble supplication prayed:<br>
 'Which queen, O Bráhman, of the pair,<br>
 The many, or the one shall bear?<br>
 Most eager, Lord, are we to know,<br>
 And as thou sayest be it so.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
  <a name="fr_180"></a><a href="#fn_180"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_50"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 50</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With his sweet speech the saint replied:<br>
 'Yourselves, O Queens, the choice decide.<br>
 Your own discretion freely use<br>
 Which shall the one or many choose:<br>
 One shall the race and name uphold,<br>
 The host be famous, strong, and bold.<br>
 Which will have which?' Then Kes'inî<br>
 The mother of one heir would be.<br>
 Sumati, sister of the king  <a name="fr_181"></a><a href="ry040.htm#fn_181"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Of all the birds that ply the wing,<br>
 To that illustrious Bráhman sued<br>
 That she might bear the multitude<br>
 Whose fame throughout the world should sound<br>
 For mighty enterprise renowned.<br>
 Around the saint the monarch went,<br>
 Bowing his head, most reverent.<br>
 Then with his wives, with willing feet,<br>
 Besought his own imperial seat.<br>
 Time passed. The elder consort bare<br>
 A son called Asamanj, the heir.<br>
 Then Sumati, the younger, gave<br>
 Birth to a gourd,  <a name="fr_182"></a><a href="ry040.htm#fn_182"><font size="1">2</font></a> O hero brave,<br>
 Whose rind, when burst and cleft in two,<br>
 Gave sixty thousand babes to view.<br>
 All these with care the nurses laid<br>
 In jars of oil; and there they stayed,<br>
 Till, youthful age and strength complete,<br>
 Forth speeding from each dark retreat,<br>
 All peers in valour, years, and might,<br>
 The sixty thousand came to light.<br>
 Prince Asamanj, brought up with care,<br>
 Scourge of his foes, was made the heir.<br>
 But liegemen's boys he used to cast<br>
 To Sarjû's waves that hurried past,<br>
 Laughing the while in cruel glee<br>
 Their dying agonies to see.<br>
 This wicked prince who aye withstood<br>
 The counsel of the wise and good,<br>
 Who plagued the people in his hate,<br>
 His father banished from the state.<br>
 His son, kind-spoken, brave, and tall,<br>
 Was Ans'uman, beloved of all.<br>
     Long years flew by. The king decreed<br>
 To slay a sacrificial steed.<br>
 Consulting with his priestly band<br>
 He vowed the rite his soul had planned,<br>
 And, Veda skilled, by their advice<br>
 Made ready for the sacrifice.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_180"></a><a href="ry039.htm#fr_180">49:1b</a>  I am compelled to omit Cantos XXXVII
 and XXXVIII, THE GLORY OF UMÀ, and
 THE BIRTH OF KÁRTIKEYA, as both in
 subject and language offensive to modern
 taste. They will be found in Schlegel's
 Latin translation.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry040.htm">Next: Canto XL.: The Cleaving of The Earth.</a></center>
 </body>