<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry030.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry032.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIX.  <a name="fr_164"></a><a href="#fn_164"><font size="1">2</font></a>: THE CELESTIAL ARMS.</h3>
 <p>
 That night they slept and took their rest;<br>
 And then the mighty saint addressed,<br>
 With pleasant smile and accents mild<br>
 These words to Raghu's princely child:<br>
 'Well pleased am I. High fate be thine,<br>
 Thou scion of a royal line.<br>
 Now will I, for I love thee so,<br>
 All heavenly arms on thee bestow.<br>
 Victor with these, whoe'er oppose,<br>
 Thy hand shall conquer all thy foes,<br>
 Though Gods and spirits of the air,<br>
 Serpents and fiends, the conflict dare.<br>
 I'll give thee as a pledge of lore<br>
 The mystic arms they use above,<br>
 For worthy thou to have revealed<br>
 The weapons I have learnt to wield.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_42"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 42</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 First, son of Raghu, shall be thine<br>
 The arm of Vengeance, strong, divine:<br>
 The arm of Fate, the arm of Right,<br>
 And Vishnu's arm of awful might:<br>
 That, before whioh no foe can stand,<br>
 The thunderbolt of Indra's hand;<br>
 And S'iva's trident, sharp and dread,<br>
 And that dire weapon Brahmá's Head,<br>
 And two fair clubs, O royal child,<br>
 One Charmer and one Pointed styled<br>
 With flame of lambent fire aglow,<br>
 On thee, O Chieftain, I bestow.<br>
 And Fate's dread net and Justice' noose<br>
 That none may conquer, for thy use:<br>
 And the great cord, renowned of old,<br>
 Which Varun ever loves to hold.<br>
 Take these two thunderbolts, which I<br>
 Have got for thee, the Moist and Dry,<br>
 Here S'iva's dart to thee I yield,<br>
 And that which Vishnu wont to wield.<br>
 I give to thee the arm of Fire,<br>
 Desired by all and named the Spire.<br>
 To thee I grant the Wind-God's dart,<br>
 Named Crusher, O thou pure of heart.<br>
 This arm, the Horse's Head, accept,<br>
 And this, the Curlew's Bill yclept,<br>
 And these two spears, the best e'er flew,<br>
 Named the Invincible and True.<br>
 And arms of fiends I make thine own,<br>
 Skull-wreath and mace that smashes bone.<br>
 And Joyous, whioh the spirits bear,<br>
 Great weapon of the sons of air.<br>
 Brave offspring of the best of lords,<br>
 I give thee now the Gem of swords,<br>
 And offer next, thine hand to arm,<br>
 The heavenly bards' beloved charm.<br>
 Now with two arms I thee invest<br>
 Of never-ending Sleep and Rest,<br>
 With weapons of the Sun and Rain,<br>
 And those that dry and burn amain;<br>
 And strong Desire with conquering touch,<br>
 The dart that Káma prizes much.<br>
 I give the arm of shadowy powers<br>
 That bleeding flesh of men devours.<br>
 I give the arms the God of Gold<br>
 And giant fiends exult to hold.<br>
 This smites the foe in battle-strife,<br>
 And takes his fortune, strength, and life.<br>
 I give the arms called False and True,<br>
 And great Illusion give I too;<br>
 The hero's arm called Strong and Bright<br>
 That spoils the foeman's strength in fight.<br>
 I give thee as a priceless boon<br>
 The Dew, the weapon of the Moon,<br>
 And add the weapon, deftly planned,<br>
 That strengthens Vis'vakarmá's hand.<br>
 The Mortal dart whose point is chill,<br>
 And Slaughter, ever sure to kill;<br>
 All these and other arms, for thou<br>
 Art very dear, I give thee now.<br>
 Receive these weapons from my hand,<br>
 Son of the noblest in the land.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Facing the east, the glorious saint<br>
 Pure from all spot of earthly taint,<br>
 To Ráma, with delighted mind,<br>
 That noble host of spells consigned.<br>
 He taught the arms, whose lore is won<br>
 Hardly by Gods, to Raghu's son.<br>
 He muttered low the spell whose call<br>
 Summons those arms and rules them all<br>
 And, each in visible form and frame,<br>
 Before the monarch's son they came.<br>
 They stood and spoke in reverent guise<br>
 To Ráma with exulting cries:<br>
 'O noblest child of Raghu, see,<br>
 Thy ministers and thralls are we.'<br>
     With joyful heart and eager hand<br>
 Ráma received the wondrous band,<br>
 And thus with words of welcome cried:<br>
 'Aye present to my will abide.'<br>
 Then hasted to the saint to pay<br>
 Due reverence, and pursued his way.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_163"></a><a href="ry030.htm#fr_163">41:1</a>  The famous pleasure-garden of Kuvera
 the God of Wealth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_164"></a><a href="ry031.htm#fr_164">41:2</a>  'The whole of this Canto together
 with the following one, regards the belief,
 formerly prevalent in India, that by virtue
 of certain spells, to be learnt and muttered,
 secret knowledge and superhuman
 powers might be acquired. To this the
 poet has already alluded in Canto xxiii.
 These incorporeal weapons are partly represented
 according to the fashion of
 those ascribed to the Gods and the different
 orders of demi-gods, partly are the
 mere creations of fancy; and it would not
 be easy to say what idea the poet had of
 them in his own mind, or what powers he
 meant to assign to each.' SCHLEGEL.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry032.htm">Next: Canto XXX.: The Mysterious Powers.</a></center>
 </body>