<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry029.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry031.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVIII.: THE DEATH OF TÁDAKÁ</h3>
 <p>
 Thus spoke the saint. Each vigorous word<br>
 The noble monarch's offspring heard,<br>
 And, reverent hands together laid,<br>
 His answer to the hermit made:<br>
 'My sire and mother bade me aye<br>
 Thy word, O mighty Saint, obey<br>
 So will I, O most glorious, kill<br>
 This Tádaká who joys in ill,<br>
 For such my sire's, and such thy will.<br>
 To aid with mine avenging hand<br>
 The Bráhmans, kine, and all the land,<br>
 Obedient, heart and soul, I stand.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spoke the tamer of the foe,<br>
 And by the middle grasped his bow.<br>
 Strongly he drew the sounding string<br>
 That made the distant welkin ring.<br>
 Scared by the mighty clang the deer<br>
 That roamed the forest shook with fear.<br>
 And Tádaká the echo heard,<br>
 And rose in haste from slumber stirred.<br>
 In wild amaze, her soul aflame<br>
 With fury toward the spot she came.<br>
 When that foul shape of evil mien<br>
 And stature vast as e'er was seen<br>
 The wrathful son of Raghu eyed,<br>
 He thus unto his brother cried:<br>
 'Her dreadful shape, O Lakshman, see,<br>
 A form to shudder at and flee.<br>
 The hideous monster's very view<br>
 Would cleave a timid heart in two.<br>
 Behold the demon hard to smite,<br>
 Defended by her magic might.<br>
 My hand shall stay her course to-day,<br>
 And shear her nose and ears away.<br>
 No heart have I her life to take:<br>
 I spare it for her sex's sake.<br>
 My will is but, with 'minished force,<br>
 To check her in her evil course.'<br>
 While thus he spoke, by rage impelled<br>
     Roaring as she came nigh,<br>
 The fiend her course at Ráma held<br>
     With huge arms tossed on high.<br>
 Her, rushing on, the seer assailed<br>
     With a loud cry of hate;<br>
 And thus the sons of Raghu hailed:<br>
     'Fight, and be fortunate.'<br>
 Then from the earth a horrid cloud<br>
     Of dust the demon raised,<br>
 And for awhile in darkling shroud<br>
     Wrapt Raghu's sons amazed.<br>
 Then calling on her magic power<br>
     The fearful fight to wage,<br>
 She smote him with a stony shower,<br>
     Till Ráma burned with rage.<br>
 Then pouring forth his arrowy rain<br>
     That stony flood to stay,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_41"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 41</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With winged darts, as she charged amain,<br>
     He shore her hands away.<br>
 As Tádaká still thundered near<br>
     Thus maimed by Ráma's blows,<br>
 Lakshman in fury severed sheer<br>
     The monster's ears and nose.<br>
 Assuming by her magic skill,<br>
     A fresh and fresh disguise,<br>
 She tried a thousand shapes at will,<br>
     Then vanished from their eyes.<br>
 When Gádhi's son of high renown<br>
 Still saw the stony rain pour down<br>
 Upon each princely warrior's head,<br>
 With words of wisdom thus he said:<br>
 'Enough of mercy, Ráma, lest<br>
 This sinful evil-working pest,<br>
 Disturber of each holy rite,<br>
 Repair by magic arts her might.<br>
 Without delay the fiend should die,<br>
 For, see, the twilight hour is nigh.<br>
 And at the joints of night and day<br>
 Such giant foes are hard to slay.'<br>
 Then Ráma, skilful to direct<br>
     His arrow to the sound,<br>
 With shafts the mighty demon checked<br>
     Who rained her stones around.<br>
 She sore impeded and beset<br>
 By Ráma and his arrowy net,<br>
 Though skilled in guile and magic lore,<br>
 Rushed on the brothers with a roar.<br>
 Deformed, terrific, murderous, dread,<br>
 Swift as the levin on she sped,<br>
 Like cloudy pile in autumn's sky,<br>
 Lifting her two vast arms on high,<br>
 When Ráma smote her with a dart,<br>
 Shaped like a crescent, to the heart.<br>
 Sore wounded by the shaft that came<br>
 With lightning speed and surest aim,<br>
 Blood spouting from her mouth and side.<br>
 She fell upon the earth and died.<br>
 Soon as the Lord who rules the sky<br>
 Saw the dread monster lifeless lie,<br>
 He called aloud, Well done! well done!<br>
 And the Gods honoured Raghu's son.<br>
 Standing in heaven the Thousand-eyed,<br>
 With all the Immortals, joying cried:<br>
 'Lift up thine eyes, O Saint, and see<br>
 The Gods and Indra nigh to thee.<br>
 This deed of Ráma's boundless might<br>
 Has filled our bosoms with delight,<br>
 Now, for our will would have it so,<br>
 To Raghu's son some favour show.<br>
 Invest him with the power which naught<br>
 But penance gains and holy thought,<br>
 Those heavenly arms on him bestow<br>
 To thee entrusted long ago<br>
 By great Krisás'va best of kings,<br>
 Son of the Lord of living things,<br>
 More fit recipient none can be<br>
 Than he who joys it following thee<br>
 And for our sakes the monarch's seed<br>
 Has yet to do a mighty deed.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke; and all the heavenly train<br>
 Rejoicing sought their homes again,<br>
 While honour to the saint they paid.<br>
 Then came the evening's twilight shade,<br>
 The best of hermits overjoyed<br>
 To know the monstrous fiend destroyed,<br>
 His lips on Ráma's forehead pressed,<br>
 And thus the conquering chief addressed:<br>
 'O Ráma gracious to the sight.<br>
 Here will we pass the present night,<br>
 And with the morrow's earliest ray<br>
 Bend to my hermitage our way.'<br>
 The son of Das'aratha heard,<br>
 Delighted, Vis'vámitra's word,<br>
 And as he bade, that night he spent<br>
 In Tádaká's wild wood, content.<br>
 And the grove shone that happy day,<br>
 Freed from the curse that on it lay,<br>
 Like Chaitraratha  <a name="fr_163"></a><a href="ry031.htm#fn_163"><font size="1">1</font></a> fair and gay.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry031.htm">Next: Canto XXIX. : The Celestial Arms.</a></center>
 </body>