<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry035.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry037.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIV.: BRAHMADATTA.</h3>
 <p>
 'A king of Brahmá's seed who bore<br>
 The name of Kus'a reigned of yore.<br>
 Just, faithful to his vows, and true,<br>
 He held the good in honour due.<br>
 His bride, a queen of noble name.<br>
 Of old Vidarbha's  <a name="fr_171"></a><a href="#fn_171"><font size="1">1</font></a> monarchs came.<br>
 Like their own father, children four,<br>
 All valiant boys, the lady bore.<br>
 In glorious deeds each nerve they strained,<br>
 And well their Warrior part sustained.<br>
 To them most just, and true, and brave,<br>
 Their father thus his counsel gave:<br>
 "Beloved children, ne'er forget<br>
 Protection is a prince's debt:<br>
 The noble work at once begin,<br>
 High virtue and her fruits to win."<br>
 The youths to all the people dear,<br>
 Received his speech with willing ear;<br>
 And each went forth his several way,<br>
 Foundations of a town to lay.<br>
 Kus'án, a prince of high renown,<br>
 Was builder of Kaus'ámbí's town,<br>
 And Kus'anábha, just and wise,<br>
 Bade high Mahodaya's towers arise.<br>
 Amúrtarajas chose to dwell<br>
 In Dharmáranya's citadel,<br>
 And Vasu bade his city fair<br>
 The name of Girivraja bear. <a name="fr_172"></a><a href="#fn_172"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 This fertile spot whereon we stand<br>
 Was once the high-souled Vasu's land.<br>
 Behold! as round we turn our eyes,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Five lofty mountain peaks arise.<br>
 See! bursting from her parent hill,<br>
 Sumágadhi, a lovely rill,<br>
 Bright gleaming as she flows between<br>
 The mountains, like a wreath is seen,<br>
 And then through Magadh's plains and groves<br>
 With many a fair mæander roves.<br>
 And this was Vasu's old domain,<br>
 The fertile Magadh's broad champaign,<br>
 Which smiling fields of tilth adorn<br>
 And diadem with golden corn.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The queen Ghrítáchí, nymph most fair,<br>
 Married to Kus'anábha, bare<br>
 A hundred daughters, lovely-faced,<br>
 With every charm and beauty graced.<br>
 It chanced the maidens, bright and gay<br>
 As lightning-flashes on a day<br>
 Of rain time, to the garden went<br>
 With song and play and merriment,<br>
 And there in gay attire they strayed,<br>
 And danced, and laughed, and sang, and played.<br>
 The God of Wind who roves at will<br>
 All places, as he lists, to fill,<br>
 Saw the young maidens dancing there,<br>
 Of faultless shape and mien most fair,<br>
 'I love you all, sweet girls,' he cried,<br>
 And each shall be my darling bride.<br>
 Forsake, forsake your mortal lot,<br>
 And gain a life that withers not.<br>
 A fickle thing is youth's brief span,<br>
 And more than all in mortal man.<br>
 Receive unending youth, and be<br>
 Immortal, O my loves, with me.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The hundred girls, to wonder stirred,<br>
 The wooing of the Wind-God heard,<br>
 Laughed, as a jest, his suit aside,<br>
 And with one voice they thus replied.<br>
 'O mighty Wind, free spirit who<br>
 All life pervadest, through and through,<br>
 Thy wondrous power we maidens know;<br>
 Then wherefore wilt thou mock us so?<br>
 Our sire is Kus'anábha, King;<br>
 And we, forsooth, have charms to bring<br>
 A God to woo us from the skies;<br>
 But honour first we maidens prize.<br>
 Far may the hour, we pray, be hence,<br>
 When we, O thou of little sense,<br>
 Our truthful father's choice refuse,<br>
 And for ourselves our husbands choose.<br>
 Our honoured sire our lord we deem,<br>
 He is to us a God supreme,<br>
 And they to whom his high decree<br>
 May give us shall our husbands be.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He heard the answer they returned,<br>
 And mighty rage within him burned.<br>
 On each fair maid a blast he sent:<br>
 Each stately form be bowed and bent.<br>
 Bent double by the Wind-God's ire<br>
 Tliey sought the palace of their sire,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_47"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 47</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 There fell upon the ground with sighs,<br>
 While tears and shame were in their eyes.<br>
 The king himself, with troubled brow,<br>
 Saw his dear girls so fair but now,<br>
 A mournful sight all bent and bowed,<br>
 And grieving thus he cried aloud:<br>
 'What fate is this, and what the cause!<br>
 What wretch has scorned all heavenly laws?<br>
 Who thus your forms could curve and break?<br>
 You struggle, but no answer make.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 They heard the speech of that wise king<br>
 Of their misfortune questioning.<br>
 Again the hundred maidens sighed,<br>
 Touched with their heads his feet, and cried;<br>
 'The God of Wind, pervading space,<br>
 Would bring on us a foul disgrace,<br>
 And choosing folly's evil way<br>
 From virtue's path in scorn would stray.<br>
 But we in words like these reproved<br>
 The God of Wind whom passion moved:<br>
 'Farewell, O Lord! A sire have we,<br>
 No women uncontrolled and free.<br>
 Go, and our sire's consent obtain<br>
 If thou our maiden hands wouldst gain.<br>
 No self-dependent life we live:<br>
 If we offend, our fault forgive.'<br>
 'But led by folly as a slave,<br>
 He would not hear the rede we gave,<br>
 And even as we gently spoke<br>
 We felt the Wind-God's crushing stroke.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The pious king, with grief distressed,<br>
 The noble hundred thus addressed:<br>
 'With patience, daughters, bear your fate,<br>
 Yours was a deed supremely great<br>
 When with one mind you kept from shame<br>
 The honour of your father's name.<br>
 Patience, when men their anger vent,<br>
 Is woman's praise and ornament;<br>
 Yet when the Gods inflict the blow<br>
 Hard is it to support the woe.<br>
 Patience, my girls, exceeds all price:<br>
 'Tis alms, and truth, and sacrifice.<br>
 Patience is virtue, patience fame:<br>
 Patience upholds this earthly frame.<br>
 And now, I think, is come the time<br>
 To wed you in jour maiden prime.<br>
 Now, daughters, go where'er you will:<br>
 Thoughts for your good my mind shall fill.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The maidens went, consoled, away:<br>
 The best of kings, that very day,<br>
 Summoned his ministers of state<br>
 About their marriage to debate.<br>
 Since then, because the Wind-God bent<br>
 The damsels' forms for punishment,<br>
 That royal town is known to fame<br>
 By Kanyákubja's  <a name="fr_173"></a><a href="#fn_173"><font size="1">1</font></a> borrowed name.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 There lived a sage called Chúli then,<br>
 Devoutest of the sons of men;<br>
 His days in penance rites he spent,<br>
 A glorious saint, most continent.<br>
 To him absorbed in tasks austere<br>
 The child of Urmilá drew near,<br>
 Sweet Somadá, the heavenly maid,<br>
 And lent the saint her pious aid.<br>
 Long time near him the maiden spent,<br>
 And served him meek and reverent,<br>
 Till the great hermit, pleased with her,<br>
 Thus spoke unto his minister:<br>
 'Grateful am I for all thy care:<br>
 Blest maiden, speak, thy wish declare.'<br>
 The sweet-voiced nymph rejoiced to see<br>
 The favour of the devotee,<br>
 And to that eloquent old man,<br>
 Most eloquent she thus began:<br>
 'Thou hast, by heavenly grace sustained,<br>
 Close union with the Godhead gained.<br>
 I long, O Saint, to see a son<br>
 By force of holy penance won.<br>
 Unwed, a maiden life I live:<br>
 A son to me, thy suppliant, give.'<br>
 The saint with favour heard her prayer,<br>
 And gave a son exceeding fair.<br>
 Him, Chúli's spiritual child,<br>
 His mother Brahmadatta  <a name="fr_174"></a><a href="#fn_174"><font size="1">1b</font></a> styled.<br>
 King Brahmadatta, rich and great,<br>
 In Kámpilí maintained his state,<br>
 Ruling, like Indra in his bliss,<br>
 His fortunate metropolis.<br>
 King Kus'anábha planned that he<br>
 His hundred daughters' lord should be.<br>
 To him, obedient to his call,<br>
 The happy monarch gave them all.<br>
 Like Indra then he took the hand<br>
 Of every maiden of the band.<br>
 Soon as the hand of each young maid<br>
 In Brahmadatta's palm was laid,<br>
 Deformity and cares away,<br>
 She shone in beauty bright and gay.<br>
 Their freedom from the Wind-God's might<br>
 Saw Kus'anábha with delight.<br>
 Each glance that on their forms he threw<br>
 Filled him with raptures ever new.<br>
 Then when the rites were all complete,<br>
 Witli highest marks of honour meet<br>
 The bridegroom with his brides he sent<br>
 To his great seat of government.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The nymph received with pleasant speech<br>
 Her daughters; and, embracing each,<br>
 Upon their forms she fondly gazed,<br>
 And royal Kus'anábha praised.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_48"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 48</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_171"></a><a href="ry036.htm#fr_171">46:1</a>  The modern Berar.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_172"></a><a href="ry036.htm#fr_172">46:2</a>  According to the Bengal recension the
 first (Kus'ámba) is called Kus'ás'va, and his
 city Kaus'ás'ví. This name does not occur
 elsewhere. The reading of the northern
 recension is confirmed by *Foê *Kouê Ki;
 p. 385, where the citv <i>Kiaoshangmi</i> is mentioned.
 It lay 500 <i>lis</i> to the south-west of
 <i>Prayága</i>, on the south bunk of the Jumna.
 <i>Mahodaya</i> is another name of Kanyakubja:
 <i>Dharmáranya</i>, the wood to which the
 God of Justice is said to have fled through
 fear of Soma the Moon-God, was in Magadh.
 Girivraja w s in the same neighbourhood,
 See Lasson's I. A. Vol. I, p. 604.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_173"></a><a href="ry036.htm#fr_173">47:1</a>  That is, the City of the Bent Virgins,
 the modern Kanauj or Canouge.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_174"></a><a href="ry036.htm#fr_174">47:1b</a>  Literally, Given by <i>Brahma</i> or devout contemplation.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry037.htm">Next: Canto XXXV: Visvámitra's Lineage.</a></center>
 </body>