<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry032.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry034.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXI: THE PERFECT HERMITAGE.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus spoke the prince of boundless might,<br>
 And thus replied the anchorite:<br>
 'Chief of the mighty arm, of yore<br>
 Lord Vishnu whom the Gods adore,<br>
 For holy thought and rites austere<br>
 Of penance made his dwelling here.<br>
 This ancient wood was called of old<br>
 Grave of the Dwarf, the mighty-souled,<br>
 And when perfection he attained<br>
 The grove the name of Perfect gained.<br>
 Bali of yore, Virochan's son,<br>
 Dominion over Indra won,<br>
 And when with power his proud heart swelled,<br>
 O'er the three worlds his empire held.<br>
 When Bali then began a rite,<br>
 The Gods and Indra in affright<br>
 Sought Vishnu in this place of rest,<br>
 And thus with prayers the God addressed:<br>
 'Bali, Virochan's mighty son,<br>
 His sacrifice has now begun:<br>
 Of boundless wealth, that demon king<br>
 Is bounteous to each living thing.<br>
 Though suppliants flock from every side<br>
 The suit of none is e'er denied.<br>
 Whate'er, where'er, howe'er the call,<br>
 He hears the suit and gives to all.<br>
 Now with thine own illusive art<br>
 Perform, O Lord, the helper's part:<br>
 Assume a dwarfish form, and thus<br>
 From fear and danger rescue us.' <a name="fr_166"></a><a href="#fn_166"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus in their dread the Immortals sued:<br>
 The God a dwarflike shape indued: <a name="fr_167"></a><a href="#fn_167"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Before Virochan's son he came,<br>
 Three steps of land his only claim.<br>
 The boon obtained, in wondrous wise<br>
 Lord Vishnu's form increased in size;<br>
 Through all the worlds, tremendous, vast,<br>
 God of the Triple Step, he passed. <a name="fr_168"></a><a href="#fn_168"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 The whole broad earth from side to side<br>
 He measured with one mighty stride,<br>
 Spanned with the next the firmament,<br>
 And with the third through heaven he went.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_44"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 44</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus was the king of demons hurled<br>
 By Vishnu to the nether world,<br>
 And thus the universe restored<br>
 To Indra's rule, its ancient lord.<br>
 And now because the immortal God<br>
 This spot in dwarflike semblance trod,<br>
 The grove has aye been loved by me<br>
 For reverence of the devotee.<br>
 But demons haunt it, prompt to stay<br>
 Each holy offering I would pay.<br>
 Be thine, O lion-lord, to kill<br>
 These giants that delight in ill.<br>
 This day, beloved child, our feet<br>
 Shall rest within the calm retreat:<br>
 And know, thou chief of Raghu's line,<br>
 My hermitage is also thine.'<br>
     He spoke; and soon the anchorite,<br>
 With joyous looks that beamed delight,<br>
 With Ráma and his brother stood<br>
 Within the consecrated wood.<br>
 Soon as they saw the holy man,<br>
 With one accord together ran<br>
 The dwellers in the sacred shade,<br>
 And to the saint their reverence paid,<br>
 And offered water for his feet,<br>
 The gift of honour and a seat;<br>
 And next with hospitable care<br>
 They entertained the princely pair.<br>
 The royal tamers of their foes<br>
 Rested awhile in sweet repose:<br>
 Then to the chief of hermits sued<br>
 Standing in suppliant attitude:<br>
 'Begin, O best of saints, we pray,<br>
 Initiatory rites to-day.<br>
 This Perfect Grove shall be anew<br>
 Made perfect, and thy words be true.'<br>
     Then, thus addressed, the holy man,<br>
 The very glorious sage, began<br>
 The high preliminary rite.<br>
 Restraining sense and appetite.<br>
 Calmly the youths that night reposed,<br>
 And rose when morn her light disclosed,<br>
 Their morning worship paid, and took<br>
 Of lustral water from the brook.<br>
 Thus purified they breathed the prayer,<br>
 Then greeted Vis'vamítra where<br>
 As celebrant he sate beside<br>
 The flame with sacred oil supplied.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_166"></a><a href="ry033.htm#fr_166">43:1</a>  I omit, after this line, eight <i>s'lokas</i>
 which, as Schlegel allows, are quite out
 of place.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_167"></a><a href="ry033.htm#fr_167">43:2</a>  This is the fifth of the <i>avatárs</i>, descents
 or incarnations of Vishnu.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_168"></a><a href="ry033.htm#fr_168">43:3</a>  This is a solar allegory. Vishnu is
 the sun, the three steps being his rising,
 culmination, and setting.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry034.htm">Next: Canto XXXII.: Vis'vámitra's Sacrifice.</a></center>
 </body>