<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry034.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry036.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIII.: THE SONE.</h3>
 <p>
 Their task achieved, the princes spent<br>
 That night with joy and full content.<br>
 Ere yet the dawn was well displayed<br>
 Their morning rites they duly paid,<br>
 And sought, while yet the light was faint,<br>
 The hermits and the mighty saint.<br>
 They greeted first that holy sire<br>
 Resplendent like the burning fire,<br>
 And then with noble words began<br>
 Their sweet speech to the sainted man:<br>
 'Here stand, O Lord, thy servants true:<br>
 Command what thou wouldst have us do.'<br>
 The saints, by Vis'vámitra led,<br>
 To Ráma thus in answer said:<br>
 'Janak the king who rules the land<br>
 Of fertile Mithilá has planned<br>
 A noble sacrifice, and we<br>
 Will thither go the rite to see.<br>
 Thou, Prince of men, with us shalt go,<br>
 And there behold the wondrous bow,<br>
 Terrific, vast, of matchless might,<br>
 Which, splendid at the famous rite,<br>
 The Gods assembled gave the king.<br>
 No giant, fiend, or God can string<br>
 That gem of bows, no heavenly bard:<br>
 Then, sure, for man the task were hard.<br>
 When lords of earth have longed to know<br>
 The virtue of that wondrous bow,<br>
 The strongest sons of kings in vain<br>
 Have tried the mighty cord to strain.<br>
 This famous bow thou there shalt view,<br>
 And wondrous rites shalt witness too.<br>
 The high-souled king who lords it o'er<br>
 The realm of Mithilá of yore<br>
 Gained from the Gods this bow, the price<br>
 Of his imperial sacrifice.<br>
 Won by the rite the glorious prize<br>
 Still in the royal palace lies,<br>
 Laid up in oil of precious scent<br>
 With aloe-wood and incense blent.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma answering, Be it so,<br>
 Made ready with the rest to go.<br>
 The saint himself was now prepared,<br>
 But ere beyond the grove he fared,<br>
 He turned him and in words like these<br>
 Addressed the sylvan deities:<br>
 'Farewell! each holy rite complete,<br>
 I leave the hermits' perfect seat:<br>
 To Gangá's northern shore I go<br>
 Beneath Himálaya's peaks of snow.'<br>
 With reverent steps he paced around<br>
 The limits of the holy ground,<br>
 And then the mighty saint set forth<br>
 And took his journey to the north.<br>
 His pupils, deep in Scripture's page,<br>
 Followed behind the holy sage,<br>
 And servants from the sacred grove<br>
 A hundred wains for convoy drove.<br>
 The very birds that winged that air,<br>
 The very deer that harboured there,<br>
 Forsook the glade and leafy brake<br>
 And followed for the hermit's sake.<br>
 They travelled far, till in the west<br>
 The sun was speeding to his rest,<br>
 And made, their portioned journey o'er,<br>
 Their halt on S'ona's  <a name="fr_170"></a><a href="#fn_170"><font size="1">1</font></a> distant shore.<br>
 The hermits bathed when sank the sun,<br>
 And every rite was duly done,<br>
 Oblations paid to Fire, and then<br>
 Sate round their chief the holy men.<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman lowly bowed<br>
 In reverence to the hermit crowd,<br>
 And Ráma, having sate him down<br>
 Before the saint of pure renown,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_46"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 46</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With humble palms together laid<br>
 His eager supplication made:<br>
 'What country, O my lord, is this,<br>
 Fair-smiling in her wealth and bliss?<br>
 Deign fully. O thou mighty Seer,<br>
 To tell me, for I long to hear.'<br>
 Moved by the prayer of Ráma, he<br>
 Told forth the country's history.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_170"></a><a href="ry035.htm#fr_170">45:1</a>  A river which rises in Budelcund and
 falls into the Ganges near Patna. It is
 called also <i>Hiranyabáhu</i>, Golden-armed,
 and <i>Hiranyaváha</i>, Auriferous.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry036.htm">Next: Canto XXXIV.: Brahmadatta.</a></center>
 </body>