<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry037.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry039.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVI.: THE BIRTH OF GANGÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 The hours of night now waning fast<br>
 On S'ona's pleasant shore they passed.<br>
 Then, when the dawn began to break,<br>
 To Ráma thus the hermit spake:<br>
 'The light of dawn is breaking clear,<br>
 The hour of morning rites is near,<br>
 Rise, Ráma, rise, dear son, I pray,<br>
 And make thee ready for the way.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma rose, and finished all<br>
 His duties at the hermit's call,<br>
 Prepared with joy the road to take,<br>
 And thus again in question spake:<br>
 'Here fair and deep the S'ona flows,<br>
 And many an isle its bosom shows:<br>
 What way, O Saint, will lead us o'er<br>
 And land us on the farther shore?<br>
 The saint replied: 'The way I choose<br>
 Is that which pious hermits use.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_49"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 49</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 For many a league they journeyed on<br>
 Till, when the sun of mid-day shone,<br>
 The hermit-haunted flood was seen<br>
 Of Jáhnaví,  <a name="fr_176"></a><a href="#fn_176"><font size="1">1</font></a> the Rivers' Queen.<br>
 Soon as the holy stream they viewed,<br>
 Thronged with a white-winged multitude<br>
 Of sarases  <a name="fr_177"></a><a href="#fn_177"><font size="1">2</font></a> and swans,  <a name="fr_178"></a><a href="#fn_178"><font size="1">3</font></a> delight<br>
 Possessed them at the lovely sight:<br>
 And then prepared the hermit band<br>
 To halt upon that holy strand.<br>
 They bathed as Scripture bids, and paid<br>
 Oblations due to God and shade.<br>
 To Fire they burnt the offerings meet,<br>
 And sipped the oil, like Amrit sweet.<br>
 Then pure and pleased they sate around<br>
 Saint Vis'vámitra on the ground.<br>
 The holy men of lesser note,<br>
 In due degree, sate more remote,<br>
 While Raghu's sons took nearer place<br>
 By virtue of their rank and race.<br>
 Then Ráma said: 'O Saint, I yearn<br>
 The three-pathed Gangá's tale to learn.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus urged, the sage recounted both<br>
 The birth of Gangá and her growth:<br>
 'The mighty hill with metals stored,<br>
 Himálaya, is the mountains' lord,<br>
 The father of a lovely pair<br>
 Of daughters fairest of the fair:<br>
 Their mother, offspring of the will<br>
 Of Meru, everlasting hill,<br>
 Mená, Himálaya's darling, graced<br>
 With beauty of her dainty waist.<br>
 Gangá was elder-born: then came<br>
 The fair one known by Umá's name.<br>
 Then all the Gods of heaven, in need<br>
 Of Gangá's help their vows to speed,<br>
 To great Himálaya came and prayed<br>
 The mountain King to yield the maid.<br>
 He, not regardless of the weal<br>
 Of the three worlds, with holy zeal<br>
 His daughter to the Immortals gave,<br>
 Gangá whose waters cleanse and save,<br>
 Who roams at pleasure, fair and free,<br>
 Purging all sinners, to the sea.<br>
 The three-pathed Gangá thus obtained,<br>
 The Gods their heavenly homes regained.<br>
 Long time the sister Umá passed<br>
 In vows austere and rigid fast,<br>
 And the king gave the devotee<br>
 Immortal Rudra's  <a name="fr_179"></a><a href="#fn_179"><font size="1">4</font></a> bride to be,<br>
 Matching with that unequalled Lord<br>
 His Umá through the worlds adored.<br>
 So now a glorious station fills<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Each daughter of the King of Hills:<br>
 One honoured as the noblest stream,<br>
 One mid the Goddesses supreme.<br>
 Thus Gangá, King Himálaya's child,<br>
 The heavenly river, undefiled,<br>
 Rose bearing with her to the sky<br>
 Her waves that bless and purify.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_176"></a><a href="ry038.htm#fr_176">49:1</a>  One of the names of the Ganges
 considered as the daughter of Jahnu. See
 Canto XLIV.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_177"></a><a href="ry038.htm#fr_177">49:2</a>  The Indian Crane.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_178"></a><a href="ry038.htm#fr_178">49:3</a>  Or, rather, geese.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_179"></a><a href="ry038.htm#fr_179">49:4</a>  A name of the God S'iva.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry039.htm">Next: Canto XXXIX.: The Sons of Sagar.</a></center>
 </body>