<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry047.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry049.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVIII.: INDRA AND AHALYÁ</h3>
 <p>
 When mutual courtesies had past,<br>
 Vis'álá's ruler spoke at last:<br>
 'These princely youths, O Sage, who vie<br>
 In might with children of the sky,<br>
 Heroic, born for happy fate,<br>
 With elephants' or lions' gait,<br>
 Bold as the tiger or the bull,<br>
 With lotus eyes so large and full,<br>
 Armed with the quiver, sword, and bow,<br>
 Whose figures like the As'vins <a name="fr_216"></a><a href="#fn_216"><font size="1">1</font></a> show,<br>
 Like children of the deathless Powers,<br>
 Come freely to these shades of ours, <a name="fr_217"></a><a href="#fn_217"><font size="1">2</font></a>--<br>
 How have they reached on foot this place?<br>
 What do they seek, and what their race?<br>
 As sun and moon adorn the sky,<br>
 This spot the heroes glorify.<br>
 Alike in stature, port, and mien,<br>
 The same fair form in each is seen,'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke; and at the monarch's call<br>
 The best of hermits told him all,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 How in the grove with him they dwelt,<br>
 And slaughter to the demons dealt.<br>
 Then wonder filled the monarch's breast,<br>
 Who tended well each royal guest.<br>
 Thus entertained, the princely pair<br>
 Remained that night and rested there,<br>
 And with the morn's returning ray<br>
 To Mithilá pursued their way.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When Janak's lovely city first<br>
 Upon their sight, yet distant, burst,<br>
 The hermits all with joyful cries<br>
 Hailed the fair town that met their eyes.<br>
 Then Ráma saw a holy wood,<br>
 Close, in the city's neighbourhood,<br>
 O'ergrown, deserted, marked by age,<br>
 And thus addressed the mighty sage:<br>
 'O reverend lord. I long to know<br>
 What hermit dwelt here long ago.'<br>
 Then to the prince his holy guide,<br>
 Most eloquent of men, replied:<br>
 'O Ráma, listen while I tell<br>
 Whose was this grove, and what befell<br>
 When in the fury of his rage<br>
 The high saint cursed the hermitage.<br>
 This was the grove--most lovely then--<br>
 Of Gautam, O thou best of men,<br>
 Like heaven itself, most honoured by<br>
 The Gods who dwell above the sky.<br>
 Here with Ahalyá at his side<br>
 His fervid task the ascetic plied.<br>
 Years fled in thousands. On a day<br>
 It chanced the saint had gone away,<br>
 When Town-destroying Indra came,<br>
 And saw the beauty of the dame.<br>
 The sage's form the God endued,<br>
 And thus the fair Ahalyá wooed:<br>
 'Love, sweet! should brook no dull delay<br>
 But snatch the moments when he may.'<br>
 She knew him in the saint's disguise,<br>
 Lord Indra of the Thousand Eyes,<br>
 But touched by love's unholy fire,<br>
 She yielded to the God's desire.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Now, Lord of Gods!' she whispered, 'flee,<br>
 From Gautam save thyself and me.'<br>
 Trembling with doubt and wild with dread<br>
 Lord Indra from the cottage fled;<br>
 But fleeing in the grove he met<br>
 The home-returning anchoret,<br>
 Whose wrath the Gods and fiends would shun,<br>
 Such power his fervent rites had won.<br>
 Fresh from the lustral flood he came,<br>
 In splendour like the burning flame,<br>
 With fuel for his sacred rites,<br>
 And grass, the best of eremites.<br>
 The Lord of Gods was sad of cheer<br>
 To see the mighty saint so near,<br>
 And when the holy hermit spied<br>
 In hermit's garb the Thousand-eyed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_61"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 61</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He knew the whole, his fury broke<br>
 Forth on the sinner as he spoke:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Because my form thou hast assumed,<br>
 And wrought this folly, thou art doomed,<br>
 For this my curse to thee shall cling,<br>
 Henceforth a sad and sexless thing'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 No empty threat that sentence came,<br>
 It chilled his soul and marred his frame,<br>
 His might and godlike vigour fled,<br>
 And every nerve was cold and dead.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then on his wife his fury burst.<br>
 And thus the guilty dame he cursed:<br>
 'For countless years, disloyal spouse,<br>
 Devoted to severest vows,<br>
 Thy bed the ashes, air thy food,<br>
 Here shalt thou live in solitude.<br>
 This lonely grove thy home shall be,<br>
 And not an eye thy form shall see.<br>
 When Ráma, Das'aratha's child,<br>
 Shall seek these shades then drear and wild,<br>
 His coming shall remove thy stain,<br>
 And make the sinner pure again.<br>
 Due honour paid to him, thy guest,<br>
 Shall cleanse thy fond and erring breast,<br>
 Thee to my side in bliss restore,<br>
 And give thy proper shape once more.' <a name="fr_218"></a><a href="ry049.htm#fn_218"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus to his guiltv wife he said,<br>
 Then far the holy Gautam fled.<br>
 And on Himálaya's lovely heights<br>
 Spent the long years in sternest rites.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *       *       *       *       *<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_216"></a><a href="ry048.htm#fr_216">60:1</a>  The Heavenly Twins.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_217"></a><a href="ry048.htm#fr_217">60:2</a>  Not banished from heaven as the inferior
 Gods and demigods sometimes were.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry049.htm">Next: Canto XLIX.: Ahalyá Freed.</a></center>
 </body>