<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry048.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry050.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIX.: AHALYÁ FREED.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma, following still his guide,<br>
 Within the grove, with Lakshman, hied.<br>
 Her vows a wondrous light had lent<br>
 To that illustrious penitent.<br>
 He saw the glorious lady, screened<br>
 From eye of man, and God, and fiend,<br>
 Like some bright portent which the care<br>
 Of Brahmá launches through the air,<br>
 Designed by his illusive art<br>
 To flash a moment and depart:<br>
 Or like the flame that leaps on high<br>
 To sink involved in smoke and die:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Or like the full moon shining through<br>
 The wintry mist, then lost to view:<br>
 Or like the sun's reflection, cast<br>
 Upon the flood, too bright to last:<br>
 So was the glorious dame till then<br>
 Removed from Gods' and mortals' ken,<br>
 Till--such was Gautam's high decree--<br>
 Prince Ráma came to set her free.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then, with great joy that dame to meet,<br>
 The sons of Raghu clapped her feet;<br>
 And she, remembering Gautam's oath,<br>
 With gentle grace received them both;<br>
 Then water for their feet she gave,<br>
 Guest-gift, and all that strangers crave.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The prince, of courteous rule aware,<br>
 Received, as meet, the lady's care.<br>
 Then flowers came down in copious rain,<br>
 And moving to the heavenly strain<br>
 Of music in the skies that rang.<br>
 The nymphs and minstrels danced and sang:<br>
 And all the Gods with one glad voice<br>
 Praised the great dame, and cried, 'Rejoice!<br>
 Through fervid rites no more defiled,<br>
 But with thy husband reconciled.'<br>
 Gautam, the holy hermit knew--<br>
 For naught escaped his godlike view--<br>
 That Ráma lodged beneath that shade,<br>
 And hasting there his homage paid.<br>
 He took Ahalyá to his side.<br>
 From sin and folly purified,<br>
 And let his new-found consort bear<br>
 In his austerities a share.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,<br>
 Welcomed by Gautam, face to face,<br>
 Who every highest honour showed,<br>
 To Mithilá pursued his road.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_218"></a><a href="ry048.htm#fr_218">61:1</a>  Kumarila says:' In the same manner,
 if it is said that Indra was the seducer of
 Ahalyá this does not imply that the God
 Indra committed such a crime, but Indra
 means the sun, and Ahalyá (from ahan
 and lí) the night; and as the night is
 seduced and ruined by the sun of the
 morning, therefore is Indra called the
 paramour of Ahalyá.' MAX MULLER,
 <i>History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature</i>, p.530</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry050.htm">Next: Canto L.: Janak.</a></center>
 </body>