<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry042.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry044.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIII.: BHAGIRATH.</h3>
 <p>
 When Sagar thus had bowed to fate,<br>
 The lords and commons of the state<br>
 Approved with ready heart and will<br>
 Prince Ans'umán his throne to fill.<br>
 He ruled, a mighty king, unblamed,<br>
 Sire of Dilípa justly famed.<br>
 To him. his child and worthy heir,<br>
 The king resigned his kingdom's care,<br>
 And on Himálaya's pleasant side<br>
 His task austere of penance plied.<br>
 Bright as a God in clear renown<br>
 He planned to bring pure Gangá down.<br>
 There on his fruitless hope intent<br>
 Twice sixteen thousand years he spent,<br>
 And in the grove of hermits stayed<br>
 Till bliss in heaven his rites repaid.<br>
 Dilípa then, the good and great,<br>
 Soon as he learnt his kinsmen's fate,<br>
 Bowed down by woe, with troubled mind,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_54"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 54</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Pondering long no cure could find.<br>
 'How can I bring,' the mourner sighed,<br>
 'To cleanse their dust, the heavenly tide?<br>
 How can I give them rest, and save<br>
 Their spirits with the offered wave?'<br>
 Long with this thought his bosom skilled<br>
 In holy discipline was filled.<br>
 A son was born, Bhagirath named,<br>
 Above all men for virtue famed.<br>
 Dilipa many a rite ordained,<br>
 And thirty thousand seasons reigned.<br>
 But when no hope the king could see<br>
 His kinsmen from their woe to free,<br>
 The lord of men, by sickness tried,<br>
 Obeyed the law of fate, and died;<br>
 He left the kingdom to his son,<br>
 And gained the heaven his deeds had won.<br>
 The good Bhagirath, royal sage.<br>
 Had no fair son to cheer his age.<br>
 He, great in glory, pure in will,<br>
 Longing for sons was childless still.<br>
 Then on one wish, one thought intent,<br>
 Planning the heavenly stream's descent,<br>
 Leaving his ministers the care<br>
 And burden of his state to bear,<br>
 Dwelling in far Gokarna  <a name="fr_194"></a><a href="#fn_194"><font size="1">1</font></a> he<br>
 Engaged in long austerity.<br>
 With senses checked, with arms upraised,<br>
 Five fires  <a name="fr_195"></a><a href="#fn_195"><font size="1">2</font></a> around and o'er him blazed.<br>
 Each weary month the hermit passed<br>
 Breaking but once his awful fast.<br>
 In winter's chill the brook his bed,<br>
 In rain, the clouds to screen his head.<br>
 Thousands of years he thus endured<br>
 Till Brahmá's favour was assured,<br>
 And the high Lord of living things<br>
 Looked kindly on his sufferings.<br>
 With trooping Gods the Sire came near<br>
 The king who plied his task austere:<br>
 'Blest Monarch, of a glorious race,<br>
 Thy fervent rites have won my grace.<br>
 Well hast thou wrought thine awful task:<br>
 Some boon in turn, O Hermit, ask.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Bhagirath, rich in glory's light,<br>
 The hero with the arm of might,<br>
 Thus to the Lord of earth and sky<br>
 Raised suppliant hands and made reply:<br>
 'If the great God his favour deigns,<br>
 And my long toil its fruit obtains,<br>
 Let Sagar's sons receive from me<br>
 Libations that they long to see.<br>
 Let Gangá with her holy wave<br>
 The ashes of the heroes lave,<br>
 That so my kinsmen may ascend<br>
 To heavenly bliss that ne'er shall end.<br>
 And give, I pray, O God, a son,<br>
 Nor let my house be all undone.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Sire of the worlds! be this the grace<br>
 Bestowed upon Ikshváku's race.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The Sire, when thus the king had prayed,<br>
 In sweet kind words his answer made.<br>
 'High, high thy thought and wishes are,<br>
 Bhagirath of the mighty car!<br>
 Ikshváku's line is blest in thee,<br>
 And as thou prayest it shall be.<br>
 Gangá, whose waves in Swarga  <a name="fr_196"></a><a href="ry044.htm#fn_196"><font size="1">1b</font></a> flow,<br>
 Is daughter of the Lord of Snow.<br>
 Win S'iva that his aid be lent<br>
 To hold her in her mid descent,<br>
 For earth alone will never bear<br>
 Those torrents hurled from upper air;<br>
 And none may hold her weight but He,<br>
 The Trident wielding deity.'<br>
 Thus having said, the Lord supreme<br>
 Addressed him to the heavenly stream;<br>
 And then with Gods and Maruts  <a name="fr_197"></a><a href="ry044.htm#fn_197"><font size="1">2b</font></a> went<br>
 To heaven above the firmament.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_193"></a><a href="ry042.htm#fr_193">53:1b</a>  Garud.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_194"></a><a href="ry043.htm#fr_194">54:1</a>  A famous and venerated region near
 the Malabar coast.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_195"></a><a href="ry043.htm#fr_195">54:2</a>  That is four fires and the sun.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry044.htm">Next: Canto XLIV.: The Descent of Gangà.</a></center>
 </body>