<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry058.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry060.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIX.: THE SONS OF VAS'ISHTHA.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Kus'ik's son, by pity warmed,<br>
 Spoke sweetly to the king transformed:<br>
 'Hail! glory of Ikshváku's line:<br>
 I know how bright thy virtues shine.<br>
 Dismiss thy fear, O noblest Chief,<br>
 For I myself will bring relief.<br>
 The holiest saints will I invite<br>
 To celebrate thy purposed rite:<br>
 So shall thy vow, O King, succeed,<br>
 And from thy cares shalt thou be freed.<br>
 Thou in the form which now thou hast,<br>
 Transfigured by the curse they cast,--<br>
 Yea, in the body, King, shalt flee,<br>
 Transported, where thou fain wouldst be.<br>
 O Lord of men, I ween that thou<br>
 Hast heaven within thy hand e'en now,<br>
 For very wisely hast thou done,<br>
 And refuge sought with Kus'ik's son.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus having said, the sage addressed<br>
 His sons, of men the holiest,<br>
 And bade the prudent saints whate'er<br>
 Was needed for the rite prepare.<br>
 The pupils he was wont to teach<br>
 He summoned next, and spoke this speech:<br>
 'Go bid Vas'ishtha'a sons appear,<br>
 And all the saints be gathered here.<br>
 And what they one and all reply<br>
 When summoned by this mandate high,<br>
 To me with faithful care report,<br>
 Omit no word and none distort.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The pupils heard, and prompt obeyed,<br>
 To every side their way they made.<br>
 Then swift from every quarter sped<br>
 The sages in the Vedas read.<br>
 Back to that saint the envoys came,<br>
 Whose glory shone like burning flame,<br>
 And told him in their faithful speech<br>
 The answer that they bore from each:<br>
 'Submissive to thy word, O Seer,<br>
 The holy men are gathering here.<br>
 By all was meet obedience shown:<br>
 Mahodaya  <a name="fr_238"></a><a href="#fn_238"><font size="1">1b</font></a> refused alone.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_71"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 71</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And now, O Chief of hermits, hear<br>
 What answer, chilling us with fear,<br>
 Vas'ishtha's hundred sons returned,<br>
 Thick-speaking as with rage they burned:<br>
 'How will the Gods and saints partake<br>
 The offerings that the prince would make,<br>
 And he a vile and outcast thing,<br>
 His ministrant one born a king?<br>
 Can we, great Bráhmans, eat his food,<br>
 And think to win beatitude,<br>
 By Vis'vámitra purified?'<br>
 Thus sire and sons in scorn replied,<br>
 And as these bitter words they said,<br>
 Wild fury made their eyeballs red.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Their answer when the arch-hermit heard,<br>
 His tranquil eyes with rage were blurred;<br>
 Great fury in his bosom woke,<br>
 And thus unto the youths he spoke:<br>
 'Me, blameless me they dare to blame,<br>
 And disallow the righteous claim<br>
 My fierce austerities have earned:<br>
 To ashes be the sinners turned.<br>
 Caught in the noose of Fate shall they<br>
 To Yama's kingdom sink to-day.<br>
 Seven hundred times shall they be born<br>
 To wear the clothes the dead have worn.<br>
 Dregs of the dregs, too vile to hate.<br>
 The flesh of dogs their maws shall sate.<br>
 In hideous form, in loathsome weed,<br>
 A sad existence each shall lead.<br>
 Mahodaya too, the fool who fain<br>
 My stainless life would try to stain,<br>
 Stained in the world with long disgrace<br>
 Shall sink into a fowler's place.<br>
 Rejoicing guiltless blood to spill,<br>
 No pity through his breast shall thrill.<br>
 Cursed by my wrath for many a day,<br>
 His wretched life for sin shall pay.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus, girt with hermit, saint, and priest,<br>
 Great Vis'vámitra spoke--and ceased.<br>
 
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_238"></a><a href="ry059.htm#fr_238">70:1b</a>  This appellation, occuring nowhere
 else in the poem except as the name of
 a city, appears twice in this Canto as a
 name of Vas'ishtha.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry060.htm">Next: Canto LX.: Tris'anku's Ascension.</a></center>
 </body>