<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry049.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry051.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO L.: JANAK.</h3>
 <p>
 The sons of Raghu journeyed forth,<br>
 Bending their steps 'twixt east and north.<br>
 Soon, guided by the sage, they found,<br>
 Enclosed, a sacrificial ground.<br>
 Then to the best of saints, his guide,<br>
 In admiration Ráma cried:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The high-souled king no toil has spared,<br>
 But nobly for his rite prepared.<br>
 How many thousand Bráhmans here,<br>
 From every region, far and near,<br>
 Well read in holy lore, appear!<br>
 How many tents, that sages screen,<br>
 With wains in hundreds, here are seen!<br>
 Great Bráhman, let us find a place<br>
 Where we may stay and rest a space.'<br>
 The hermit did as Ráma prayed,<br>
 And in a spot his lodging made,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_62"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 62</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Far from the crowd, sequestered, clear,<br>
 With copious water flowing near.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Janak, best of kings, aware<br>
 Of Vis'vámitra lodging there,<br>
 With S'atánanda for his guide--<br>
 The priest on whom he most relied.<br>
 His chaplain void of guile and stain--<br>
 And others of his priestly train,<br>
 Bearing the gift that greets the guest,<br>
 To meet him with all honour pressed.<br>
 The saint received with gladsome mind<br>
 Each honour and observance kind:<br>
 Then of his health he asked the king,<br>
 And how his rites were prospering,<br>
 Janak, with chaplain and with priest,<br>
 Addressed the hermits, chief and least,<br>
 Accosting all, in due degree,<br>
 With proper words of courtesy.<br>
 Then, with his palms together laid,<br>
 The king his supplication made:<br>
 'Deign, reverend lord, to sit thee down<br>
 With these good saints of high renown.'<br>
 Then sate the chief of hermits there,<br>
 Obedient to the monarch's prayer.<br>
 Chaplain and priest, and king and peer,<br>
 Sate in their order, far or near.<br>
 Then thus the king began to say:<br>
 'The Gods have blest my rite to-day,<br>
 And with the sight of thee repaid<br>
 The preparations I have made.<br>
 Grateful am I, so highly blest,<br>
 That thou, of saints the holiest,<br>
 Hast come, O Bráhman, here with all<br>
 These hermits to the festival.<br>
 Twelve days, O Bráhman Sage, remain--<br>
 For so the learned priests ordain--<br>
 And then, O heir of Kus'ik's name,<br>
 The Gods will come their dues to claim.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With looks that testified delight<br>
 Thus spake he to the anchorite,<br>
 Then with his suppliant hands upraised,<br>
 He asked, as earnestly he gazed:<br>
 'These princely youths, O Sage, who vie<br>
 In might with children of the sky,<br>
 Heroic, born for happy fate,<br>
 With elephants' or lions' gait,<br>
 Bold as the tiger and the bull,<br>
 With lotus eyes so large and full,<br>
 Armed with the quiver, sword and bow,<br>
 Whose figures like the As'vins show,<br>
 Like children of the heavenly Powers,<br>
 Come freely to these shades of ours,--<br>
 How have they reached on foot this place?<br>
 What do they seek, and what their race?<br>
 As sun and moon adorn the sky,<br>
 This spot the heroes glorify:<br>
 Alike in stature, port, and mien,<br>
 The same fair form in each is seen.' <a name="fr_219"></a><a href="#fn_219"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spoke the monarch, lofty-souled.<br>
 The saint, of heart unfathomed, told<br>
 How, sons of Das'aratha, they<br>
 Accompanied his homeward way,<br>
 How in the hermitage they dwelt,<br>
 And slaughter to the demons dealt:<br>
 Their journey till the spot they neared<br>
 Whence fair Vis'álá's towers appeared:<br>
 Ahalyá seen and freed from taint;<br>
 Their meeting with her lord the saint;<br>
 And how they thither came, to know<br>
 The virtue of the famous bow.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus Vis'vámitra spoke the whole<br>
 To royal Janak, great of soul.<br>
 And when this wondrous tale was o'er,<br>
 The glorious hermit said no more.<br>
 
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_219"></a><a href="ry050.htm#fr_219">62:1</a>   The preceding sixteen lines have
 occured before in Canto XLVIII. This
 Homeric custom of repeating a passage of
 several lines is strange to our poet. This
 is the only instance I remember. The
 repetition of single lines is common enough.' SCHLEGEL.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry051.htm">Next: Canto LI.: Vis'vámitra.</a></center>
 </body>