<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry051.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry053.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LII.: VAS'ISHTHA'S FEAST.</h3>
 <p>
 Right glad was Vis'vámitra when<br>
 He saw the prince of saintly men.<br>
 Low at his feet the hero bent,<br>
 And did obeisance, reverent.<br>
     The king was welcomed in, and shown<br>
 A seat beside the hermit's own,<br>
 Who offered him, when resting there,<br>
 Fruit in due course, and woodland fare.<br>
 And Vis'vámitra, noblest king,<br>
 Received Vas'ishtha's welcoming,<br>
 Turned to his host, and prayed him tell<br>
 That he and all with him were well.<br>
 Vas'ishtha to the king replied<br>
 That all was well on every side,<br>
 That fire, and vows, and pupils throve,<br>
 And all the trees within the grove.<br>
 And then the son of Brahmá, best<br>
 Of all who pray with voice suppressed,<br>
 Questioned with pleasant words like these<br>
 The mighty king who sate at ease:<br>
 'And is it well with thee? I pray;<br>
 And dost thou win by virtuous sway<br>
 Thy people's love, discharging all<br>
 The duties on a king that fall?<br>
 Are all thy servants fostered well?<br>
 Do all obey, and none rebel?<br>
 Hast thou, destroyer of the foe,<br>
 No enemies to overthrow?<br>
 Does fortune, conqueror! still attend<br>
 Thy treasure, host, and every friend!<br>
 Is it all well? Does happy fate<br>
 On sons and children's children wait!'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     He spoke. The modest king replied<br>
 That all was prosperous far and wide.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_64"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 64</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus for awhile the two conversed,<br>
 As each to each his tale rehearsed,<br>
 And as the happy moments flew,<br>
 Their joy and friendship stronger grew.<br>
 When such discourse had reached an end,<br>
 Thus spoke the saint most reverend<br>
 To royal Vis'vamitra, while<br>
 His features brightened with a smile:<br>
 'O mighty lord of men. I fain<br>
 Would banquet thee and all thy train<br>
 In mode that suits thy station high:<br>
 And do not thou my prayer deny.<br>
 Let my good lord with favour take<br>
 The offering that I fain would make,<br>
 And let me honour, ere we part.<br>
 My royal guest with loving heart.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Him Vis'vámitra thus addressed:<br>
 'Why make, O Saint, this new request?<br>
 Thy welcome and each gracious word<br>
 Sufficient honour have conferred.<br>
 Thou gavest roots and fruit to eat,<br>
 The treasures of this pure retreat,<br>
 And water for my mouth and feet;<br>
 And--boon I prize above the rest--<br>
 Thy presence has mine eyesight blest.<br>
 Honoured by thee in every way,<br>
 To whom all honour all should pay,<br>
 I now will go. My lord, Good-bye!<br>
 Regard me with a friendly eye.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Him speaking thus Vas'ishtha stayed,<br>
 And still to share his banquet prayed.<br>
 The will of Gádhi's son he bent,<br>
 And won the monarch to consent,<br>
 Who spoke in answer. 'Let it be,<br>
 Great Hermit, as it pleases thee.'<br>
 When, best of those who breathe the prayer,<br>
 He heard the king his will declare,<br>
 He called the cow of spotted skin,<br>
 All spot without, all pure within.<br>
 'Come, Dapple-skin,' he cried, 'with speed;<br>
 Hear thou my words and help at need.<br>
 My heart is set to entertain<br>
 This monarch and his mighty train<br>
 With sumptuous meal and worthy fare;<br>
 Be thine the banquet to prepare.<br>
 Each dainty cute, each goodly dish,<br>
 Of six-fold taste <a name="fr_221"></a><a href="#fn_221"><font size="1">1</font></a>  as each may wish--<br>
 All these, O cow of heavenly power,<br>
 Rain down for me in copious shower:<br>
 Viands and drink for tooth and lip,<br>
 To eat, to suck, to quaff, to sip--<br>
 Of these sufficient, and to spare,<br>
 O plenty-giving cow, prepare.'<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_220"></a><a href="ry051.htm#fr_220">63:1</a>  Divine personages of minute size produced
 from the hair of Brahmá, and probably
 the origin of
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
                       'That small infantry<br>
     Warred on by cranes.'<br>
 </dir>
 
 <p><a name="fn_221"></a><a href="ry052.htm#fr_221">64:1</a>  Sweet, salt, pungent, bitter, acid, and
 astringent.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry053.htm">Next: Canto LIII.: Vis'vàmitra's Request.</a></center>
 </body>