<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry052.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry054.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIII.: VIS'VÀMITRA'S REQUEST.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus charged, O slayer of thy foes,<br>
 The cow from whom all plenty flows,<br>
 Obedient to her saintly lord,<br>
 Viands to suit each taste, outpoured.<br>
 Honey she gave, and roasted grain,<br>
 Mead sweet with flowers, and sugar-cane.<br>
 Each beverage of flavour rare,<br>
 And food of every sort, were there:<br>
 Hills of hot rice, and sweetened cakes,<br>
 And curdled milk and soup in lakes.<br>
 Vast beakers foaming to the brim<br>
 With sugared drink prepared for him,<br>
 And dainty sweetmeats, deftly made,<br>
 Before the hermit's guests were laid.<br>
 So well regaled, so nobly fed,<br>
 The mighty army banqueted,<br>
 And all the train, from chief to least,<br>
 Delighted in Vas'ishtha's feast.<br>
 Then Vis'vámitra, royal sage,<br>
 Surrounded by his vassalage,<br>
 Prince, peer, and counsellor, and all<br>
 From highest lord to lowest thrall,<br>
 Thus feasted, to Vas'ishtha cried<br>
 With joy, supremely gratified:<br>
 'Richh honour I, thus entertained,<br>
 Most honourable lord, have gained:<br>
 Now hear, before I journey hence,<br>
 My words, O skilled in eloquence.<br>
 Bought for a hundred thousand kine,<br>
 Let Dapple-skin. O Saint, be mine.<br>
 A wondrous jewel is thy cow,<br>
 And gems are for the monarch's brow. <a name="fr_222"></a><a href="#fn_222"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 To me her rightful lord resign<br>
 This Dapple-skin thou callest thine.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The great Vas'ishtha, thus addressed,<br>
 Arch-hermit of the holy breast,<br>
 To Vis'vamitra answer made,<br>
 The king whom all the land obeyed:<br>
 Not for a hundred thousand,--nay,<br>
 Not if ten million thou wouldst pay,<br>
 With silver heaps the price to swell,--<br>
 Will I my cow, O Monarch, sell.<br>
 Unmeet for her is such a fate.<br>
 That I my friend should alienate.<br>
 As glory with the virtuous, she<br>
 For ever makes her home with me.<br>
 On her mine offerings which ascend<br>
 To Gods and spirits all depend:<br>
 My very life is due to her,<br>
 My guardian, friend, and minister.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_65"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 65</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The feeding of the sacred flame, <a name="fr_223"></a><a href="#fn_223"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The dole which living creatures claim. <a name="fr_224"></a><a href="#fn_224"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 The mighty sacrifice by fire,<br>
 Each formula the rites require, <a name="fr_225"></a><a href="#fn_225"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 And various saving lore beside,<br>
 Are by her aid, in sooth, supplied.<br>
 The banquet which thy host has shared,<br>
 Believe it, was by her prepared.<br>
 In her mine only treasures lie,<br>
 She cheers mine heart and charms mine eye.<br>
 And reasons more could I assign<br>
 Why Dapple-skin can ne'er be thine.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The royal sage, his suit denied,<br>
 With eloquence more earnest cried:<br>
 'Tusked elephants, a goodly train,<br>
 Each with a golden girth and chain.<br>
 Whose goads with gold well fashioned shine--<br>
 Of these be twice seven thousand thine.<br>
 And four-horse cars with gold made bright,<br>
 With steeds most beautifully white,<br>
 Whose bells make music as they go,<br>
 Eight hundred, Saint, will I bestow.<br>
 Eleven thousand mettled steeds<br>
 From famous lands, of noble breeds--<br>
 These will I gladly give, O thou<br>
 Devoted to each holy vow.<br>
 Ten million heifers, fair to view,<br>
 Whose sides are marked with every hue--<br>
 These in exchange will I assign;<br>
 But let thy Dapple-skin be mine.<br>
 Ask what thou wilt, and piles untold<br>
 Of priceless gems and gleaming gold,<br>
 O best of Bráhmans, shall be thine;<br>
 But let thy Dapple-skin be mine.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The great Vas'ishtha, thus addressed.<br>
 Made answer to the king's request:<br>
 'Ne'er will I give my cow away,<br>
 My gem, my wealth, my life and stay.<br>
 My worship at the moon's first show,<br>
 And at the full, to her I owe;<br>
 And sacrifices small and great,<br>
 Which largess due and gifts await.<br>
 From her alone, their root, O King,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 My rites and holy service spring.<br>
 What boots it further words to say?<br>
 I will not give my cow away<br>
 Who yields me what I ask each day.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_222"></a><a href="ry053.htm#fr_222">64:1b</a>  'Of old hoards and minerals in the
 earth, the king is entitled to half by reason
 of his general protection, and because he
 is the lord paramount of the soil.'
 
 </p><p>
                                                           MANU, Book VIII. 39.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_223"></a><a href="ry053.htm#fr_223">65:1</a>  Ghí or clarified butter, 'holy oil,' being
 one of the essentials of sacrifice.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_224"></a><a href="ry053.htm#fr_224">65:2</a> A Brahman had five principal duties
 to discharge every day: study and teaching
 the Veda, oblations to the manes or spirits
 of the departed, sacrifice to the Gods, hospitable
 offerings to men, and <i>a gift of
 food to all creatures</i>. The last consisted
 of rice or other grain which the Bráhman
 was to offer every day outside his house
 in the open air. MANU, Book III. 70.' GORRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_225"></a><a href="ry053.htm#fr_225">65:3</a>  These were certain sacred words of
 invocation such a <i>sváhá, vashat</i>, etc., pronounced
 at the time of sacrifice.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry054.htm">Next: Canto LIV.: The Battle.</a></center>
 </body>