<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry050.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry052.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LI.: VIS'VÁMITRA.</h3>
 <p>
 Wise Vis'vámitra's tale was done:<br>
 Then sainted Gautam's eldest son,<br>
 Great S'atánanda, far-renowned,<br>
 Whom long austerities had crowned<br>
 With glory--as the news he heard<br>
 The down upon his bodv stirred,--<br>
 Filled full of wonder at the sight<br>
 Of Ráma, felt supreme delight.<br>
 When S'atánanda saw the pair<br>
 Of youthful princes seated there,<br>
 He turned him to the holy man<br>
 Who sate at ease, and thus began:<br>
 'And didst thou, mighty Sage, in truth<br>
 Show clearly to this royal youth<br>
 My mother, glorious far and wide,<br>
 Whom penance-rites have sanctified?<br>
 And did my glorious mother--she,<br>
 Heiress of noble destiny--<br>
 Serve her great guest with woodland store,<br>
 Whom all should honour evermore?<br>
 Didst thou the tale to Ráma tell<br>
 Of what in ancient days befell,<br>
 The sin, the misery, and the shame<br>
 Of guilty God and faithless dame?<br>
 And, O thou best of hermits, say,<br>
 Did Ráma's healing presence stay<br>
 Her trial? was the wife restored<br>
 Again to him, my sire and lord?<br>
 Say, Hermit, did that sire of mine<br>
 Receive her with a soul benign,<br>
 When long austerities in time<br>
 Had cleansed her from the taint of crime?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_63"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 63</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And, son of Kus'ik, let me know,<br>
 Did my great-minded father show<br>
 Honour to Ráma, and regard,<br>
 Before he journeyed hitherward?'<br>
 The hermit with attentive ear<br>
 Marked all the questions ot the seer:<br>
 To him for eloquence far-famed,<br>
 His eloquent reply he framed:<br>
 'Yea, 'twas my care no task to shun,<br>
 And all I had to do was done;<br>
 As Renuká and Bhrigu's child,<br>
 The saint and dame were reconciled.'<br>
     When the great sage had thus replied,<br>
 To Ráma S'atánanda cried:<br>
 'A welcome visit, Prince, is thine,<br>
 Thou scion of King Raghu's line.<br>
 With him to guide thy way aright,<br>
 This sage invincible in might,<br>
 This Bráhman sage, most glorious-bright,<br>
 By long austerities has wrought<br>
 A wondrous deed, exceeding thought:<br>
 Thou knowest well, O strong of arm,<br>
 This sure defence from scathe and harm.<br>
 None, Ráma, none is living now<br>
 In all the earth more blest than thou,<br>
 That thou hast won a saint so tried<br>
 In fervid rites thy life to guide.<br>
 Now listen, Prince, while I relate<br>
 His lofty deeds and wondrous fate.<br>
 He was a monarch pious-souled.<br>
 His foemen in the dust he rolled;<br>
 Most learned, prompt at duty's claim,<br>
 His people's good his joy and aim.<br>
     Of old the Lord of Life gave birth<br>
 To mighty Kus'a, king of earth.<br>
 His son was Kus'anábha, strong,<br>
 Friend of the right, the foe of wrong.<br>
 Gádhi, whose fame no time shall dim,<br>
 Heir of his throne was born to him,<br>
 And Vis'vámitra, Gádhi's heir,<br>
 Governed the land with kingly care.<br>
 While years unnumbered rolled away<br>
 The monarch reigned with equal sway.<br>
 At length, assembling many a band,<br>
 He led his warriors round the land--<br>
 Complete in tale, a mighty force,<br>
 Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse.<br>
 Through cities, groves, and floods he passed,<br>
 O'er lofty hills, through regions vast.<br>
 He reached Vas'ishtha's pure abode,<br>
 Where trees, and flowers, and creepers glowed,<br>
 Where troops of sylvan creatures fed;<br>
 Which saints and angels visited.<br>
 Gods, fauns, and bards of heavenly race,<br>
 And spirits, glorified the place;<br>
 The deer their timid ways forgot,<br>
 And holy Bráhmans thronged the spot.<br>
 Bright in their souls, like fire, were these,<br>
 Made pure by long austerities,<br>
 Bound by the rule of vows severe,<br>
 And each in glory Brahmá's peer.<br>
 Some fed on water, some on air,<br>
 Some on the leaves that withered there.<br>
 Roots and wild fruit were others' food;<br>
 All rage was checked, each sense subdued,<br>
 There Bálakhilyas  <a name="fr_220"></a><a href="ry052.htm#fn_220"><font size="1">1</font></a> went and came,<br>
 Now breathed the prayer, now fed the flame:<br>
 These, and ascetic bands beside,<br>
 The sweet retirement beautified.<br>
 Such was Vas'ishtha's blest retreat,<br>
 Like Brahmá's own celestial seat,<br>
 Which gladdened Vis'vamitra's eyes,<br>
 Peerless for warlike enterprise.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry052.htm">Next: Canto LII.: Vas'ishtha's Feast.</a></center>
 </body>