<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry065.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry067.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVI.: JANAK'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 With cloudless lustre rose the sun;<br>
 The king, his morning worship done,<br>
 Ordered hid heralds to invite<br>
 The princes and the anchorite.<br>
 With honour, as the laws decree,<br>
 The monarch entertained the three.<br>
 Then to the youths and saintly man<br>
 Videha's lord this speech began:<br>
 'O blameless Saint, most welcome thou!<br>
 If I may please thee tell me how.<br>
 Speak, mighty lord, whom all revere,<br>
 'Tis thine to order, mine to hear.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus he on mighty thoughts intent;<br>
 Then thus the sage most eloquent:<br>
 'King Das'aratha's sons, this pair<br>
 Of warriors famous everywhere,<br>
 Are come that best of bows to see<br>
 That lies a treasure stored by thee.<br>
 This, mighty Janak, deign to show,<br>
 That they may look upon the bow,<br>
 And then, contented, homeward go.'<br>
 Then royal Janak spoke in turn:<br>
 'O best of Saints, the story learn<br>
 Why this famed bow, a noble prize,<br>
 A treasure in my palace lies.<br>
 A monarch, Devarát by name,<br>
 Who sixth from ancient Nimi came,<br>
 Held it as ruler of the land,<br>
 A pledge in his successive hand.<br>
 This bow the mighty Rudra bore<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_78"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 78</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 At Daksha's <a name="fr_245"></a><a href="#fn_245"><font size="1">1</font></a> sacrifice of yore,<br>
 When carnage of the Immortals stained<br>
 The rite that Daksha had ordained.<br>
 Then as the Gods sore wounded fled,<br>
 Victorious Rudra, mocking, said:<br>
 'Because, O Gods, ye gave me naught<br>
 When I my rightful portion sought,<br>
 Your dearest parts I will not spare,<br>
 But with my bow your frames will tear.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The Sons of Heaven, in wild alarm,<br>
 Soft flatteries tried his rage to charm.<br>
 Then Bhava, Lord whom Gods adore,<br>
 Grew kind and friendly as before,<br>
 And every torn and mangled limb<br>
 Was safe and sound restored by him.<br>
 Thenceforth this bow, the gem of bows,<br>
 That freed the God of Gods from foes,<br>
 Stored by our great forefathers lay<br>
 A treasure and a pride for aye.<br>
 Once, as it chanced, I ploughed the ground,<br>
 When sudden, 'neath the share was found<br>
 An infant springing from the earth,<br>
 Named Sitá from her secret birth.  <a name="fr_246"></a><a href="#fn_246"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 In strength and grace the maiden grew,<br>
 My cherished daughter, fair to view.<br>
 I vowed her, of no mortal birth,<br>
 Meet prize for noblest hero's worth.<br>
 In strength and grace the maiden grew,<br>
 And many a monarch came to woo.<br>
 To all the princely suitors I<br>
 Gave, mighty Saint, the same reply:<br>
 'I give not thus my daughter, she<br>
 Prize of heroic worth shall be.  <a name="fr_247"></a><a href="#fn_247"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 To Mithilá the suitors pressed<br>
 Their power and might to manifest.<br>
 To all who came with hearts aglow<br>
 I offered S'iva's wondrous bow.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Not one of all the royal band<br>
 Could raise or take the bow in hand.<br>
 The suitors' puny might I spurned,<br>
 And back the feeble princes turned.<br>
 Enraged thereat, the warriors met,<br>
 With force combined my town beset.<br>
 Stung to the heart with scorn and shame,<br>
 With war and threats they madly came,<br>
 Besieged my peaceful walls, and long<br>
 To Mithilá did grievous wrong.<br>
 There, wasting all, a year they lay,<br>
 And brought my treasures to decay,<br>
 Filling my soul, O Hermit chief,<br>
 With bitter woe and hopeless grief.<br>
 At last by long-wrought penance I<br>
 Won favour with the Gods on high,<br>
 Who with my labours well content<br>
 A four-fold host to aid me sent.<br>
 Then swift the baffled heroes fled<br>
 To all the winds discomfited--<br>
 Wrong-doers, with their lords and host,<br>
 And all their valour's idle boast.<br>
 This heavenly bow, exceeding bright,<br>
 These youths shall see, O Anchorite.<br>
 Then if young Ráma's hand can string<br>
 The bow that baffled lord and king,<br>
 To him I give, as I have sworn,<br>
 My Sitá, not of woman born.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_245"></a><a href="ry066.htm#fr_245">78:1</a>  'Daksha was one of the ancient Progenitors
 or Prajápatis created by Brahmá.
 The sacrifice which is here spoken of and
 in which S'ankar or S'iva (called also here
 Rudra and Bhava) smote the Gods because
 he had not been invited to share the sacred
 oblations with them, seems to refer to the
 origin of the worship of S'iva, to its increase
 and to the struggle it maintained
 with other older forms of worship.'
 GORRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_246"></a><a href="ry066.htm#fr_246">78:2</a>  Sítá means a furrow.
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
                 'Great Erectheus swayed,<br>
     That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,<br>
     But from the teeming furrow took his birth,<br>
     The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.'<br>
 </dir>
                                                                                   Iliad, Book II.
 <p><a name="fn_247"></a><a href="ry066.htm#fr_247">78:3</a>  'The whole story of Sítá, as will be seen
 in the course of the poem has a great
 analogy with the ancient myth of Proserpine.'
 GORRESIO.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry067.htm">Next: Canto LXVII.: The Breaking of The Bow.</a></center>
 </body>