<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry064.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry066.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXV.: VIS'VÁMITRA'S TRIUMPH</h3>
 <p>
 Then from Himálaya's heights of snow,<br>
 The glorious saint prepared to go,<br>
 And dwelling in the distant east<br>
 His penance and his toil increased.<br>
 A thousand years his lips he held<br>
 Closed by a vow unparalleled,<br>
 And other marvels passing thought,<br>
 Unrivalled in the world, he wrought.<br>
 In all the thousand years his frame<br>
 Dry as a log of wood became.<br>
 By many a cross and check beset,<br>
 Rage had not stormed his bosom yet.<br>
 With iron will that naught could bend<br>
 He plied his labour till the end.<br>
 So when the weary years were o'er,<br>
 Freed from his vow so stern and sore,<br>
 The hermit, all his penance sped,<br>
 Sate down to eat his meal of bread.<br>
 Then Indra, clad in Bráhman guise,<br>
 Asked him for food with hungry eyes.<br>
 The mighty saint, with steadfast soul,<br>
 To the false Bráhman gave the whole,<br>
 And when no scrap for him remained,<br>
 Fasting and faint, from speech refrained.<br>
 His silent vow he would not break:<br>
 No breath he heaved, no word he spake<br>
 Then as he checked his breath, behold!<br>
 Around his brow thick smoke-clouds rolled<br>
 And the three worlds, as if o'erspread<br>
 With ravening flames, were filled with dread.<br>
 Then God and saint and bard, convened.<br>
 And Nága lord, and snake, and fiend,<br>
 Thus to the General Father cried,<br>
 Distracted, sad, and terrified:<br>
 'Against the hermit, sore assailed,<br>
 Lure, scathe, and scorn have naught availed,<br>
 Proof against rage and treacherous art<br>
 He keeps his vow with constant heart.<br>
 Now if his toils assist him naught<br>
 To gain the boon his soul has sought,<br>
 He through the worlds will ruin send<br>
 That fixt and moving things shall end,<br>
 The regions now are dark with doom,<br>
 No friendly ray relieves the gloom.<br>
 Each ocean foams with maddened tide<br>
 The shrinking hills in fear subside.<br>
 Trembles the earth with feverous throe<br>
 The wind in fitful tempest blows.<br>
 No cure we see with troubled eyes:<br>
 And atheist brood on earth may rise.<br>
 The triple world is wild with care,<br>
 Or spiritless in dull despair.<br>
 Before that saint the sun is dim,<br>
 His blessed light eclipsed by him.<br>
 Now ere the saint resolve to bring<br>
 Destruction on each living thing,<br>
 Let us appease, while yet we may,<br>
 Him bright as fire, like fire to slay.<br>
 Yea, as the fiery flood of Fate<br>
 Lays all creation desolate.<br>
 He o'er the conquered Gods may reign:<br>
 O, grant him what he longs to gain.'<br>
 <a name="page_77"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 77</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then all the Blest, by Brahmá led,<br>
 Approached the saint and sweetly said:<br>
 'Hail, Bráhman Saint! for such thy place:<br>
 Thy vows austere have won our grace.<br>
 A Bráhman's rank thy penance stern<br>
 And ceaseless labour richly earn.<br>
 I with the Gods of Storm decree<br>
 Long life, O Bráhman Saint, to thee.<br>
 May peace and joy thy soul possess;<br>
 Go where thou wilt in happiness.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus by the General Sire addressed,<br>
 Joy and high triumph filled his breast.<br>
 His head in adoration bowed,<br>
 Thus spoke he to the Immortal crowd:<br>
 'If I, ye Gods, have gained at last<br>
 Both length of days and Bráhman caste,<br>
 Grant that the high mysterious name,<br>
 And holy Vedas, own my claim,<br>
 And that the formula to bless<br>
 The sacrifice, its lord confess.<br>
 And let Vas'ishtha, who excels<br>
 In Warriors' art and mystic spells,<br>
 In love of God without a peer.<br>
 Confirm the boon you promise here.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With Brahmá's son Vas'ishtha, best<br>
 Of those who pray with voice repressed,<br>
 The Gods by earnest prayer prevailed,<br>
 And thus his new-made friend he hailed:<br>
 'Thy title now is sure and good<br>
 To rights of saintly Bráhmanhood.'<br>
 Thus spake the sage. The Gods, content,<br>
 Back to their heavenly mansions went.<br>
 And Vis'vamitra, pious-souled,<br>
 Among the Bráhman saints enrolled,<br>
 On reverend Vas'ishtha pressed<br>
 The honours due to holy guest.<br>
 Successful in his high pursuit,<br>
 The sage, in penance resolute,<br>
 Walked in his pilgrim wanderings o'er<br>
 The whole broad land from shore to shore.<br>
 'Twas thus the saint, O Raghu's son,<br>
 His rank among the Bráhmans won.<br>
 Best of all hermits, Prince, is he;<br>
 In him incarnate Penance see.<br>
 Friend of the right, who shrinks from ill,<br>
 Heroic powers attend him still.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The Bráhman, versed in ancient lore,<br>
 Thus closed his tale, and said no more,<br>
 To S'atánanda Kus'ik's son<br>
 Cried in delight, Well done! well done!<br>
 Then Janak, at the tale amazed,<br>
 Spoke thus with suppliant hands upraised:<br>
 'High fate is mine, O Sage, I deem,<br>
 And thanks I owe for bliss supreme,<br>
 That thou and Raghu's children too<br>
 Have come my sacrifice to view.<br>
 To look on thee with blessed eyes<br>
 Exalts my soul and purifies.<br>
 Yea, thus to see thee face to face<br>
 Enriches me with store of grace.<br>
 Thy holy labours wrought of old,<br>
 And mighty penance, fully told,<br>
 Ráma and I with great delight<br>
 Have heard, O glorious Anchorite.<br>
 Unrivalled thine ascetic deeds:<br>
 Thy might, O Saint, all might exceeds.<br>
 No thought may scan, no limit bound<br>
 The virtues that in thee are found.<br>
 The story of thy wondrous fate<br>
 My thirsty ears can never sate.<br>
 The hour of evening rites is near:<br>
 The sun declines in swift career.<br>
 At early dawn, O Hermit, deign<br>
 To let me see thy face again.<br>
 Best of ascetics, part in bliss:<br>
 Do thou thy servant now dismiss.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The saint approved, and glad and kind<br>
 Dismissed the king with joyful mind<br>
 Around the sage King Janak went<br>
 With priests and kinsmen reverent.<br>
 Then Vis'vámitra, honoured so,<br>
 By those high-minded, rose to go,<br>
 And with the princes took his way<br>
 To seek the lodging where they lay.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry066.htm">Next: Canto LXVI.: Janak's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>