<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry061.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry063.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXII.: AMBARESHA'S SACRIFICE.</h3>
 <p>
 As thus the king that youth conveyed,<br>
 His weary steeds at length he stayed<br>
 At height of noon their rest to take<br>
 Upon the bank of Pushkar's lake.<br>
 There while the king enjoyed repose<br>
 The captive S'unahs'epha rose,<br>
 And hasting to the water's side<br>
 His uncle Visvamitra spied,<br>
 With many a hermit 'neath the trees<br>
 Engaged in stern austerities.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Distracted with the toil and thirst,<br>
 With woeful mien, away he burst,<br>
 Swift to the hermit's breast he flew,<br>
 And weeping thus began to sue:<br>
 'No sire nave I, no mother dear,<br>
 No kith or kin my heart to cheer:<br>
 As justice bids, O Hermit, deign<br>
 To save me from the threatened pain.<br>
 O thou to whom the wretched flee,<br>
 And find a saviour, Saint, in thee,<br>
 Now let the king obtain his will,<br>
 And me my length of days fulfil,<br>
 That rites austere I too may share,<br>
 May rise to heaven and rest me there.<br>
 With tender soul and gentle brow<br>
 Be guardian of the orphan thou,<br>
 And as a father pities, so<br>
 Preserve me from my fear and woe.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When Vísvámitra, glorious saint,<br>
 Had heard the boy's heart-rending plaint.<br>
 He soothed his grief, his tears he dried,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_74"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 74</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then called his sons to him, and cried:<br>
 'The time is come for you to show<br>
 The duty and the aid bestow<br>
 For which, regarding future life,<br>
 A man gives children to his wife.<br>
 This hermit's son, whom here you see<br>
 A suppliant, refuge seeks with me.<br>
 O sons, the friendless youth befriend,<br>
 And, pleasing me, his life defend.<br>
 For holy works you all have wrought,<br>
 True to the virtuous life I taught.<br>
 Go, and as victims doomed to bleed,<br>
 Die, and Lord Agni's hunger feed,<br>
 So shall the rite completed end,<br>
 This orphan gain a saving friend,<br>
 Due offerings to the Gods be paid,<br>
 And your own father's voice obeyed.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Madhushyand and all the rest<br>
 Answered their sire with scorn and jest:<br>
 'What! aid to others' sons afford,<br>
 And leave thine own to die, my lord!<br>
 To us it seems a horrid deed,<br>
 As 'twere on one's own flesh to feed.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The hermit heard his sons' reply,<br>
 And burning rage inflamed his eye.<br>
 Then forth his words of fury burst:<br>
 'Audacious speech, by virtue cursed!<br>
 It lifts on end each shuddering hair--<br>
 My charge to scorn! my wrath to dare!<br>
 You, like Vas'ishtha's evil brood,<br>
 Shall make the flesh of dogs your food<br>
 A thousand years in many a birth,<br>
 And punished thus shall dwell on earth.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus on his sons his curse he laid.<br>
 Then calmed again that youth dismayed,<br>
 And blessed him with his saving aid;<br>
 'When in the sacred fetters bound,<br>
 And with a purple garland crowned,<br>
 At Vishnu's post thou standest tied,<br>
 With lauds be Agni glorified.<br>
 And these two hymns of holy praise<br>
 Forget not, Hermit's son, to raise<br>
 In the king's rite, and thou shalt be<br>
 Lord of thy wish, preserved, and free.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He learnt the hymns with mind intent,<br>
 And from the hermit's presence went.<br>
 To Ambarísha thus he spake:<br>
 'Let us our onward journey take.<br>
 Haste to thy home, O King, nor stay<br>
 The lustral rites with slow delay.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The boy's address the monarch cheered,<br>
 And soon the sacred ground he neared.<br>
 The convocation's high decree<br>
 Declared the youth from blemish free;<br>
 Clothed in red raiment he was tied<br>
 A victim at the pillar's side.<br>
 There bound, the Fire-God's hymn he raised,<br>
 And Indra and Upendra praised.<br>
 Thousand-eyed Vishnu, pleased to hear<br>
 The mystic laud, inclined his ear,<br>
 And won by worship, swift to save,<br>
 Long life to S'unahs'epha gave.<br>
 The King in bounteous measure gained<br>
 The fruit of sacrifice ordained,<br>
 By grace of Him who rules the skies,<br>
 Lord Indra of the thousand eyes.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And Vis'vámitra evermore.<br>
 Pursued his task on Pushkar's shore<br>
 Until a thousand years had past<br>
 In fierce austerity and fast.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry063.htm">Next: Canto LXIII.: Menaká.</a></center>
 </body>