<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry060.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry062.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXI: S'UNAHS'EPHA.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Vis'vámitra, when the Blest<br>
 Had sought their homes of heavenly rest,<br>
 Thus, mighty Prince, his counsel laid<br>
 Before the dwellers of the shade:<br>
 'The southern land where now we are<br>
 Offers this check our rites to bar: <a name="fr_240"></a><a href="#fn_240"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 To other regions let us speed,<br>
 And ply our tasks from trouble freed.<br>
 Now turn we to the distant west.<br>
 To Pushkar's  <a name="fr_241"></a><a href="#fn_241"><font size="1">2b</font></a> wood where hermits rest,<br>
 And there to rites austere apply,<br>
 For not a grove with that can vie.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The saint, in glory's light arrayed,<br>
 In Pushkar's wood his dwelling made,<br>
 And living there on roots and fruit<br>
 Did penance stern and resolute.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The king who filled Ayodhyá's throne,<br>
 By Ambarísha's name far known,<br>
 At that same time, it chanced, began<br>
 A sacrificial rite to plan.<br>
 But Indra took by force away<br>
 The charger that the king would slay.<br>
 The victim lost, the Bráhman sped<br>
 To Ambarísha's side, and said:<br>
 'Gone is the steed, O King, and this<br>
 Is due to thee, in care remiss.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_73"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 73</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such heedless faults will kings destroy<br>
 Who fail to guard what they enjoy.<br>
 The flaw is desperate: we need<br>
 The charger, or a man to bleed.<br>
 Quick! bring a man if not the horse,<br>
 That so the rite may have its course.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The glory of Ikshváku's line<br>
 Made offer of a thousand kine,<br>
 And sought to buy at lordly price<br>
 A victim for the sacrifice.<br>
 To many a distant land he drove,<br>
 To many a people, town, and grove,<br>
 And holy shades where hermits rest,<br>
 Pursuing still his eager quest.<br>
 At length on Bhrigu's sacred height<br>
 The saint Richika met his sight<br>
 Sitting beneath the holy boughs.<br>
 His children near him, and his spouse.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The mighty lord drew near, assayed<br>
 To win his grace, and reverence paid;<br>
 And then the sainted king addressed<br>
 The Bráhman saint with this request:<br>
 'Bought with a hundred thousand kine,<br>
 Give me, O Sage, a son of thine<br>
 To be a victim in the rite,<br>
 And thanks the favour shall requite.<br>
 For I have roamed all countries round,<br>
 Nor sacrificial victim found.<br>
 Then, gentle Hermit, deign to spare<br>
 One child amid the number there.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then to the monarch's speech replied<br>
 The hermit, penance-glorified:<br>
 'For countless kine, for hills of gold,<br>
 Mine eldest son shall ne'er be sold.'<br>
 But, when she heard the saint's reply,<br>
 The children's mother, standing nigh,<br>
 Words such as these in answer said<br>
 To Ambarisha, monarch dread:<br>
 'My lord, the saint, has spoken well:<br>
 His eldest child he will not sell.<br>
 And know, great Monarch, that above<br>
 Tht rest my youngest born I love.<br>
 'Tis ever thus: the father's joy<br>
 Is centred in his eldest boy.<br>
 The mother loves her darling best<br>
 Whom last she reeked upon her breast:<br>
 My youngest I will ne'er forsake.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As thus the sire and mother spake,<br>
 Young S'unahs'epha, of the three<br>
 The midmost, cried unurged and free:<br>
 'My sire withholds his eldest son,<br>
 My mother keeps her youngest one:<br>
 Then take me with thee, King: I ween<br>
 The son is sold who comes between.'<br>
 The king with joy his home resought,<br>
 And took the prize his kine had bought.<br>
 He bade the youth his car ascend,<br>
 And hastened back the rites to end. <a name="fr_242"></a><a href="#fn_242"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_240"></a><a href="ry061.htm#fr_240">72:1b</a>  'This cannot refer to the events just
 related: for Vis'vámitra was successful in
 the sacrifice performed for Tris'anku. And
 yet no other impediment is mentioned.
 Still his restless mind would not allow
 him to remain longer in the same spot.
 So the character of Vis'vámitra is ingeniously
 and skilfully shadowed forth: as he
 had been formerly a most warlike king,
 loving battle and glory, bold, active,
 sometimes unjust, and more frequently
 magnanimous, such also he always shows
 himself in his character of anchorite and
 ascetic.' SCHLEGEL.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_241"></a><a href="ry061.htm#fr_241">72:2b</a>  Near the modern city of Ajmere. The
 place is sacred still, and the name is preserved
 in the Hindí. Lassen, however, says
 that this Pushkala or Pushkara, called
 by the Grecian writers Πευκελἀίτις, the
 earliest place of pilgrimage mentioned by
 name, is not to be confounded with the
 modern Pushkara in Ajmere.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_242"></a><a href="ry061.htm#fr_242">73:1</a>  Ambarisha is the twenty-ninth in
 descent from Ikshváku, and is therefore
 separated by an immense space of time
 from Tris'anku in whose story Vis'vámitra
 had played so important a part. Yet
 Richíka, who is represented as having
 young sons while Ambarísha was yet reigning,
 being himself the son of Bhrigu and
 to be numbered with the most ancient
 sages, is said to have married the younger
 sister of Vis'vámitra. But I need not again
 remark that there is a perpetual anachronism
 in Indian mythology.' SCHLEGEL.
 
 </p><p>
 'In the mythical story related in this
 and the following Canto we may discover,
 I think, some indication of the epoch at
 which the immolation of lower animals
 was substituted for human sacrifice....
 
 </p><p>
 So when Iphigenia was about to be sacrificed
 at Aulis, one legend tells us that a
 hind was substituted for the virgin.'
                                                                                       GORRESIO.
 
 </p><p>
 So the ram caught in the thicket took
 the place of Isaac, or, as the Musalmáns
 say, of Ishmael.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry062.htm">Next: Canto LXII.: Ambaresha's Sacrifice.</a></center>
 </body>