<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry068.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry070.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIX.: DAS'ARATHA'S VISIT.</h3>
 <p>
 Soon as the shades of night had fled,<br>
 Thus to the wise Sumantra said<br>
 The happy king, while priest and peer,<br>
 Each in his place, were standing near:<br>
 'Let all my treasurers to-day,<br>
 Set foremost in the long array,<br>
 With gold and precious gems supplied<br>
 In bounteous store, together ride.<br>
 And send you out a mighty force,<br>
 Foot, chariot, elephant, and horse.<br>
 Besides, let many a car of state,<br>
 And noblest steeds, my will await.<br>
 Vas'ishtha, Vámadeva sage,<br>
 And Márkandeya's reverend age,<br>
 Jáváli, Kas'yap's godlike seed,<br>
 And wise Kátyáyana, shall lead.<br>
 Thy care, Sumantra, let it be<br>
 To yoke a chariot now for me,<br>
 That so we part without delay:<br>
 These envoys hasten me away.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 So fared he forth. That host, with speed,<br>
 Quadruple, as the king decreed,<br>
 With priests to head the bright array,<br>
 Followed the monarch on his way.<br>
 Four days they travelled on the road,<br>
 And eve Videha's kingdom showed.<br>
 Janak had left his royal seat<br>
 The venerable king to greet,<br>
 And, noblest, with these words addressed<br>
 That noblest lord, his happy guest:<br>
 'Hail, best of kings: a blessed fate<br>
 Has led thee, Monarch, to my state.<br>
 Thy sons, supreme in high emprise,<br>
 Will gladden now their father's eyes.<br>
 And high my fate, that hither leads<br>
 Vas'ishtha, bright with holy deeds,<br>
 Girt with these sages far-renowned,<br>
 Like Indra with the Gods around.<br>
 Joy! joy! for vanquished are my foes:<br>
 Joy! for my house in glory grows,<br>
 With Raghu's noblest sons allied,<br>
 Supreme in strength and valour's pride.<br>
 To-morrow with its early light<br>
 Will shine on my completed rite.<br>
 Then, sanctioned by the saints and thee,<br>
 The marriage of thy Ráma see.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Das'aratha, best of those<br>
 Whose speech in graceful order flows,<br>
 With gathered saints on every side,<br>
 Thus to the lord of earth replied:<br>
 'A truth is this I long have known,<br>
 A favour is the giver's own.<br>
 What thou shalt bid, O good and true,<br>
 We, as our power permits, will do.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 That answer of the truthful lord,<br>
 With virtuous worth and honour stored,<br>
 Janak, Videha's noble king,<br>
 Heard gladly, greatly marvelling.<br>
 With bosoms filled with pleasure met<br>
 Long-parted saint and anchoret,<br>
 And linked in friendship's tie they spent<br>
 The peaceful night in great content.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ráma and Lakshman thither sped,<br>
 By sainted Vis'vámitra led,<br>
 And bent in filial love to greet<br>
 Their father, and embraced his feet.<br>
 The aged king, rejoiced to hear<br>
 And see again his children dear,<br>
 Honoured by Janak's thoughtful care,<br>
 With great enjoyment rested there.<br>
 King Janak, with attentive heed,<br>
 Consulted first his daughters' need,<br>
 And ordered all to speed the rite;<br>
 Then rested also for the night.<br>
 
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry070.htm">Next: Canto LXX.: The Maidens Sought.</a></center>
 </body>