<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry063.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry065.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIV.: RAMBHÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 'A great emprise, O lovely maid,<br>
 To save the Gods, awaits thine aid:<br>
 To bind the son of Kus'ik sure,<br>
 And take his soul with love's sweet lure.'<br>
 Thus orderd by the Thousand-eyed<br>
 The suppliant nymph in fear replied:<br>
 'O Lord of Gods, this mighty sage<br>
 Is very fierce and swift to rage.<br>
 I doubt not, he so dread and stern<br>
 On me his scorching wrath will turn.<br>
 Of this, my lord, am I afraid:<br>
 Have mercy on a timid maid.'<br>
 Her suppliant hands began to shake,<br>
 When thus again Lord Indra spake:<br>
 'O Rambhá, drive thy fears away,<br>
 And as I bid do thou obey.<br>
 In Koïl's form, who takes the heart<br>
 When trees in spring to blossom start,<br>
 I, with Kandarpa for my friend,<br>
 Close to thy side mine aid will lend.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_76"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 76</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Do thou thy beauteous splendour arm<br>
 With every grace and winsome charm,<br>
 And from his awful rites seduce<br>
 This Kus'ik's son, the stern recluse.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Lord Indra ceased. The nymph obeyed;<br>
 In all her loveliest charms arrayed,<br>
 With winning ways and witching smile<br>
 She sought the hermit to beguile.<br>
 The sweet note of that tuneful bird<br>
 The saint with ravished bosom heard,<br>
 And on his heart a rapture passed<br>
 As on the nymph a look he cast.<br>
 But when he heard the bird prolong<br>
 His sweet incomparable song,<br>
 And saw the nymph with winning smile,<br>
 The hermit's heart perceiv'd the wile.<br>
 And straight he knew the Thousand-eyed<br>
 A plot against his peace had tried.<br>
 Then Kus'ik's son indignant laid<br>
 His curse upon the heavenly maid:<br>
 'Because thou wouldst my soul engage<br>
 Who fight to conquer love and rage,<br>
 Stand, till ten thousand years have flown,<br>
 Ill-fated maid, transformed to stone.<br>
 A Bráhman then, in glory strong,<br>
 Mighty through penance stern and long,<br>
 Shall free thee from thine altered shape;<br>
 Thou from my curse shalt then escape.'<br>
 But when the saint had cursed her so,<br>
 His breast was burnt with fires of woe,<br>
 Grieved that long effort to restrain<br>
 His mighty wrath was all in vain.<br>
 Cursed by the angry sage's power,<br>
 She stood in stone that selfsame hour.<br>
 Kandarpa heard the words he said,<br>
 And quickly from his presence fled.<br>
 His fall beneath his passion's sway<br>
 Had reft the hermit's meed away.<br>
 Unconquered yet his secret foes,<br>
 The humbled saint refused repose:<br>
 'No more shall rage my bosom till,<br>
 Sealed be my lips, my tongue be still.<br>
 My very breath henceforth I hold<br>
 Until a thousand years are told:<br>
 Victorious o'er each erring sense,<br>
 I'll dry my frame with abstinence,<br>
 Until by penance duly done<br>
 A Bráhman's rank be bought and won.<br>
 For countless yearn, as still as death.<br>
 I taste no food, I draw no breath,<br>
 And as I toil my frame shall stand<br>
 Unharmed by time's destroying hand.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry065.htm">Next: Canto LXV.: Vis'vámitra's Triumph</a></center>
 </body>