<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry076.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry078.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXVII.: BHARAT'S DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma with a cheerful mind<br>
 The bow to Varun's hand resigned.<br>
 Due reverence to the saints he paid,<br>
 And thus addressed his sire dismayed:<br>
 'As Bhrigu's son is far from view,<br>
 Now let the host its march pursue,<br>
 And to Ayodhyá's town proceed<br>
 In four-fold bands, with thee to lead.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 King Das'aratha thus addressed<br>
 His lips to Ráma's forehead pressed,<br>
 And held him to his aged breast.<br>
 Rejoiced in sooth was he to know<br>
 That Bhrigu's son had parted so,<br>
 And hailed a second life begun<br>
 For him and his victorious son.<br>
 He urged the host to speed renewed,<br>
 And soon Ayodhyá's gates he viewed.<br>
 High o'er the roofs gay pennons played;<br>
 Tabour and drum loud music made;<br>
 Fresh water cooled the royal road,<br>
 And flowers in bright profusion glowed.<br>
 Glad crowds with garlands thronged the ways<br>
 Rejoicing on their king to gaze<br>
 And all the town was bright and gay<br>
 Exalting in the festive day.<br>
 People and Bráhmans flocked to meet<br>
 Their monarch ere he gained the street.<br>
 The glorious king amid the throng<br>
 Rode with his glorious sons along,<br>
 And passed within his dear abode<br>
 That like Himálaya's mountain showed.<br>
 And there Kausalyá, noble queen,<br>
 Sumitrá with her lovely mien,<br>
 Kaikeyí of the dainty waist,<br>
 And other dames his bowers who graced,<br>
 Stood in the palace side by side<br>
 And welcomed home each youthful bride:<br>
 Fair Sítá, lofty-fated dame,<br>
 Urmilá of the glorious fame,<br>
 And Kus'adhwaja's children fair,<br>
 With joyous greeting and with prayer,<br>
 As all in linen robes arrayed<br>
 With offerings at the altars prayed,<br>
 Due reverence paid to God above.<br>
 Each princess gave her soul to love,<br>
 And hidden in her inmost bower<br>
 Passed with her lord each blissful hour.<br>
 The royal youths, of spirit high,<br>
 With whom in valor none shall vie,<br>
 Lived each within his palace bounds<br>
 Bright as Kuvera's pleasure-grounds,<br>
 With riches, troops of faithful friends,<br>
 And bliss that wedded life attends:<br>
 Brave princes trained in warlike skill,<br>
 And duteous to their father's will.<br>
 At length the monarch called one morn<br>
 Prince Bharat, of Kaikeyí born,<br>
 And cried: 'My son, within our gates<br>
 Lord Yudhájit thine uncle waits.<br>
 The son of Kekaya's king is he,<br>
 And came, my child, to summon thee.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Bharat for the road prepared,<br>
 And with S'atrughna forth he fared.<br>
 First to his sire he bade adieu,<br>
 Brave Ráma, and his mothers too.<br>
 Lord Yudhájit with joyful pride<br>
 Went forth, the brothers by his side,<br>
 And reached the city where he dwelt:<br>
 And mighty joy his father felt.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ráma and Lakshman honoured still<br>
 Their godlike sire with duteous will.<br>
 Two constant guides for Ráma stood,<br>
 His father's wish, the people's good.<br>
 Attentive to the general weal<br>
 He thought and wrought to please and heal,<br>
 His mothers too he strove to please<br>
 With love and sonly courtesies.<br>
 At every time, in every spot,<br>
 His holy guides he ne'er forgot.<br>
 So for his virtues kind and true<br>
 Dearer and dearer Ráma grew<br>
 To Das'aratha, Bráhmans, all<br>
 In town and country, great and small.<br>
 And Ráma by his darling's side<br>
 Saw many a blissful season glide,<br>
 Lodged in her soul, each thought on her,<br>
 Lover, and friend, and worshipper.<br>
 He loved her for his father's voice<br>
 Had given her and approved the choice:<br>
 He loved her for each charm she wore<br>
 And her sweet virtues more and more.<br>
 So he her lord and second life<br>
 Dwelt in the bosom of his wife,<br>
 In double form, that, e'en apart,<br>
 Each heart could commune free with heart.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Still grew that child of Janak's race,<br>
 More goddess-fair in form and face,<br>
 The loveliest wife that e'er was seen,<br>
 In mortal mould sweet Beauty's Queen.<br>
 Then shone the son Kaus'alyá bore,<br>
     With this bright dame allied,<br>
 Like Vishnu whom the Gods adore,<br>
     With Lakshmi by his side.<br>
 
 <br>
 </p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry078.htm">Next: Book II</a></center>
 </body>