<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry070.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry072.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXI.: JANAK'S PEDIGREE.</h3>
 <p>
 Then to the saint supremely wise<br>
 King Janak spoke in suppliant guise:<br>
 'Deign, Hermit, with attentive ear,<br>
 Mv race's origin to hear.<br>
 When kings a daughter's hand bestow,<br>
 'Tis right their line and fame to show.<br>
 There was a king whose deeds and worth<br>
 Spread wide his name through heaven and earth,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Nimi, most virtuous e'en from youth,<br>
 The best of all who love the truth,<br>
 His son and heir was Mithi, and<br>
 His Janak, first who ruled this land.<br>
 He left a son Udávasu,<br>
 Blest with all virtues, good and true.<br>
 His son was Nandivardhan, dear<br>
 For pious heart and worth sincere.<br>
 His son Suketu, hero brave,<br>
 To Devarát, existence gave.<br>
 King Devarát, a royal sage,<br>
 For virtue, glory of the age,<br>
 Begot Vrihadratha; and he<br>
 Begot, his worthy heir to be,<br>
 The splendid hero Mahábir<br>
 Who long in glory governed here.<br>
 His son was Sudhriti, a youth<br>
 Firm in his purpose, brave in sooth,<br>
 His son was Dhristaketu, blest<br>
 With pious will and holy breast.<br>
 The fame of royal saint he won:<br>
 Haryas'va was his princely son.<br>
 Haryas'va's son was Maru, who<br>
 Begot Pratíndhak, wise and true.<br>
 Next Kírtiratha held the throne,<br>
 His son, for gentle virtues known.<br>
 Then followed Devamidha, then<br>
 Vibudh, Mahándhrak, kings of men.<br>
 Mahándhrak's son, of boundless might,<br>
 Was Kírtirát, who loved the right.<br>
 He passed away, a sainted king,<br>
 And Maháromá following<br>
 To Swarnaromá left the state.<br>
 Then Hras'varomá, good and great,<br>
 Succeeded, and to him a pair<br>
 Of sons his royal consort bare,<br>
 Elder of these I boast to be:<br>
 Brave Kus'adhwaj is next to me.  <a name="fr_251"></a><a href="#fn_251"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Me then, the elder of the twain,<br>
 My sire anointed here to reign.<br>
 He bade me tend my brother well,<br>
 Then to the forest went to dwell.<br>
 He sought the heavens, and I sustained<br>
 The burden as by law ordained,<br>
 And noble Kus'adhwaj, the peer<br>
 Of Gods, I ever held most dear.<br>
 Then came Sánkás'yá's mighty lord,<br>
 Sudhanvá, threatening siege and sword,<br>
 And bade me swift on him bestow<br>
 S'iva's incomparable bow,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_83"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 83</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And Sítá of the lotus eyes:<br>
 But I refused each peerless prize.<br>
 Then, host to host, we met the foes,<br>
 And fierce the din of battle rose,<br>
 Sudhanvá, foremost of his band,<br>
 Fell smitten by my single hand.<br>
 When thus Sánkás'yá's lord was slain,<br>
 I sanctified, as laws ordain,<br>
 My brother in his stead to reign,<br>
 Thus are we brothers, Saint most high<br>
 The younger he, the elder I.<br>
 Now, mighty Sage, my spirit joys<br>
 To give these maidens to the boys.<br>
 Let Sítá be to Ráma tied.<br>
 And Urmilá be Lakshman's bride.<br>
 First give, O King, the gift of cows,<br>
 As dowry of each royal spouse,<br>
 Due offerings to the spirits pay,<br>
 And solemnize the wedding-day.<br>
 The moon tonight, O royal Sage,<br>
 In Maghá's <a name="fr_252"></a><a href="ry072.htm#fn_252"><font size="1">1</font></a> House takes harbourage;<br>
 On the third night his rays benign<br>
 In second Phálguni <a name="fr_253"></a><a href="ry072.htm#fn_253"><font size="1">2</font></a> will shine:<br>
 Be that the day, with prosperous fate,<br>
 The nuptial rites to celebrate.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
   <br>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_249"></a><a href="ry070.htm#fr_249">82:1</a>  This is another fanciful derivation,
 <i>Sa</i>--with, and <i>gara</i>--poison.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_250"></a><a href="ry070.htm#fr_250">82:2</a>  <i>Purushádak</i> means a cannibal. First
 called <i>Kalmáshapáda</i> on account of his
 spotted feet he is said to have been turned
 into a cannibal for killing the son of
 Vas'ishtha.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_251"></a><a href="ry071.htm#fr_251">82:1b</a>  'In the setting forth of these royal
 genealogies the Bengal recension varies
 but slightly from the Northern. The first
 six names of the genealogy of the Kings
 of Ayodhyá are partly theogonical and
 partly cosmogonical; the other names are
 no doubt in accordance with tradition and
 deserve the same amount of credence as
 the ancient traditional genealogies of
 other nations.' GORRESIO.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry072.htm">Next: Canto LXXII.: The Gift of Kine.</a></center>
 </body>