<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry075.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry077.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXVI.: DEBARRED FROM HEAVEN.</h3>
 <p>
 The haughty challenge, undeterred<br>
 The son of Das'aratha heard,<br>
 And cried, while reverence for his sire<br>
 Checked the full torrent of his ire:<br>
 'Before this day have I been told<br>
 The deed that stained thy hands of old.<br>
 But pity bids my soul forget:<br>
 Thy father, murdered, claimed the debt.<br>
 My strength, O Chief, thou deemest slight,<br>
 Too feeble for a Warrior's might.<br>
 Now will I show thy wondering eyes<br>
 The prowess which they dare despise.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He hastened then with graceful ease<br>
 Tbat mighty bow and shaft to seize.<br>
 His hand the weapon strung and swayed:<br>
 The arrow on the string was laid.<br>
 Then Jamadagni's son he eyed,<br>
 And thus in words of fury cried:<br>
 'Thou art a Bráhman, still to be<br>
 Most highly honoured, Chief, by me.<br>
 For Visvámitra's sake beside<br>
 Shall reverence due be ne'er denied.<br>
 Though mine the power, I would not send<br>
 A dart at thee thy life to end.<br>
 But thy great power to wander free,<br>
 Which penance-rites have won for thee,<br>
 Or glorious worlds from thee to wrest,<br>
 Is the firm purpose of my breast,<br>
 And Vishnu's dart which now I strain<br>
 Can ne'er be shot to fall in vain:<br>
 It strikes the mighty, and it stuns<br>
 The madness of the haughty ones.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Gods, and saints and heavenly choir<br>
 Preceded by the General Sire,<br>
 Met in the air and gazed below<br>
 On Ráma with that wondrous bow.<br>
 Nymph, minstrel, angel, all were there,<br>
 Snake-God, and spirit of the air,<br>
 Giant, and bard, and gryphon, met,<br>
 Their eyes upon the marvel set.<br>
 In senseless hush the world was chained<br>
 While Ráma's hand the bow retained,<br>
 And Jamadagni's son amazed<br>
 And powerless on the hero gazed.<br>
 Then when his swelling heart had shrunk,<br>
 And his proud strength in torpor sunk,<br>
 Scarce his voice ventured, low and weak,<br>
 To Ráma lotus-eyed, to speak:<br>
 'When long ago I gave away<br>
 The whole broad land to Kas'yap's sway<br>
 He charged me never to remain<br>
 Within the limits of his reign.<br>
 Obedient to my guide's behest<br>
 On earth by night I never rest.<br>
 My choice is made. I will not dim<br>
 Mine honour and be false to him.<br>
 So, son of Raghu, leave me still<br>
 The power to wander where I will,<br>
 And swifter than the thought my flight<br>
 Shall place me on Mahendra's height.<br>
 My mansions of eternal joy.<br>
 By penance won, thou mayst destroy.<br>
 My path to these thy shaft may stay.<br>
 Now to the work! No more delay!<br>
 I know thee Lord of Gods; I know<br>
 Thy changeless might laid Madhu low.<br>
 All other hands would surely fail<br>
 To bend this bow. All hail! all hail!<br>
 See! all the Gods have left the skies<br>
 To bend on thee their eager eyes,<br>
 With whose achievements none compete.<br>
 Whose arm in war no God can meet.<br>
 No shame is mine. I ween, for thou,<br>
 Lord of the Worlds, hast dimmed my brow.<br>
 Now, pious Ráma, 'tis thy part<br>
 To shoot afar that glorious dart:<br>
 I, when the fatal shaft is shot,<br>
 Will seek that hill and tarry not.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased. The wondrous arrow flew,<br>
 And Jamadagni's offspring knew<br>
 Those glorious worlds to him were barred,<br>
 Once gained by penance long and hard.<br>
 Then straight the airy quarters cleared,<br>
 And the mid regions bright appeared,<br>
 While Gods and saints unnumbered praised<br>
 Ráma, the mighty bow who raised.<br>
 And Jamadagni's son, o'erawed.<br>
 Extolled his name with highest laud,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_88"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 88</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With reverent steps around him strode,<br>
 Then hastened on his airy road.<br>
 Far from the sight of all he fled,<br>
 And rested on Mahendra's head.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry077.htm">Next: Canto LXXVII.: Bharat's Departure.</a></center>
 </body>