<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry073.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry075.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXIV.: RÁMA WITH THE AXE. <a name="fr_254"></a><a href="#fn_254"><font size="1">1</font></a></h3>
 <p>
 Soon as the night had reached its close<br>
 The hermit Vis'vámitra rose;<br>
 To both the kings he bade adieu<br>
 And to the northern hill withdrew.<br>
 Ayodhyá's lord of high renown<br>
 Received farewell, and sought his town.<br>
 Then as each daughter left her bower<br>
 King Janak gave a splendid dower,<br>
 Bugs, precious silks, a warrior force,<br>
 Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse,<br>
 Divine to see and well arrayed;<br>
 And many a skilful tiring-maid,<br>
 And many a young and trusty slave<br>
 The father of the ladies gave.<br>
 Silver and coral, gold and pearls<br>
 He gave to his beloved girls.<br>
 These precious gifts the king bestowed<br>
 And sped his guest upon his road.<br>
 The lord of Mithilá's sweet town<br>
 Rode to his court and lighted down.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Ayodhyá's monarch, glad and gay,<br>
 Led by the seers pursued his way<br>
 With his dear sons of lofty mind:<br>
 The royal army marched behind.<br>
 As on he fared the voice he heard<br>
 Around of many a dismal bird,<br>
 And every beast in wild affright<br>
 Began to hurry to the right.<br>
 The monarch to Vas'ishtha cried:<br>
 'What strange misfortune will betide?<br>
 Why do the beasts in terror fly,<br>
 And birds of evil omen cry?<br>
 What is it shakes my heart with dread?<br>
 Why is my soul disquieted?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Soon as he heard, the mighty saint<br>
 Thus answered Das'aratha's plaint<br>
 In sweetest tone: 'Now, Monarch, mark,<br>
 And learn from me the meaning dark.<br>
 The voices of the birds of air<br>
 Great peril to the host declare:<br>
 The moving beasts the dread allay,<br>
 So drive thy whelming fear away,'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As he and Das'aratha spoke<br>
 A tempest from the welkin broke,<br>
 That shook the spacious earth amain<br>
 And hurled high trees upon the plain.<br>
 The sun grew dark with murky cloud,<br>
 And o'er the skies was cast a shroud,<br>
 While o'er the army, faint with dread,<br>
 A veil of dust and ashes spread.<br>
 King, princes, saints their sense retained,<br>
 Fear-stupefied the rest remained.<br>
 At length, their wits returning, all<br>
 Beneath the gloom and ashy pall<br>
 Saw Jamadagni's son with dread,<br>
 His long hair twisted round his head,<br>
 Who, sprung from Bhrigu, loved to beat<br>
 The proudest kings beneath his feet.<br>
 Firm as Kailása's hill he showed,<br>
 Fierce as the fire of doom he glowed.<br>
 His axe upon his shoulder lay,<br>
 His bow was ready for the fray,<br>
 With thirsty arrows wont to fly<br>
 Like Lightnings from the angry sky.<br>
 A long keen arrow forth he drew,<br>
 Invincible like those which flew<br>
 From S'iva's ever-conquering bow<br>
 And Tripurá in death laid low.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When his wild form, that struck with awe,<br>
 Fearful as ravening flame, they saw,<br>
 Vas'ishtha and the saints whose care<br>
 Was sacrifice and muttered prayer,<br>
 Drew close together, each to each,<br>
 And questioned thus with bated speech:<br>
 'Indignant at his father's fate<br>
 Will he on warriors vent his hate,<br>
 The slayers of his father slay,<br>
 And sweep the loathed race away?<br>
 But when of old his fury raged<br>
 Seas of their blood his wrath assuaged:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_86"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 86</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 So doubtless now he has not planned<br>
 To slay all warriors in the land.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then with a gift the saints drew near<br>
 To Bhrigu's son whose look was fear,<br>
 And Ráma! Ráma! soft they cried.<br>
 The gift he took, no word replied.<br>
 Then Bhrigu's son his silence broke<br>
 And thus to Ráma Ráma spoke:<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_254"></a><a href="ry074.htm#fr_254">85:1</a>   This is another Ráma, son of Jamadagni,
 called Paras'uráma, or Ráma with
 the axe, from the weapon which he
 carried. He was while he lived the terror
 ot the Warrior caste, and his name recalls
 long and fierce struggles between the
 sacerdotal and military order in which
 tne latter suffered severely at the hands
 of their implacable enemy.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry075.htm">Next: Canto LXXV.: The Parle.</a></center>
 </body>