<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry071.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry073.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXII.: THE GIFT OF KINE.</h3>
 <p>
 When royal Janak's words were done,<br>
 Joined with Vas'ishtha Kus'ik's son,<br>
 The mighty sage began his speech:<br>
 'No mind may soar, no thought can reach<br>
 The glories of Ikshváku's line,<br>
 Or, great Videha's King, of thine:<br>
 None in the whole wide world may vie<br>
 With them in fame and honours high.<br>
 Well matched, I ween, in holy bands,<br>
 These peerless pairs will join their hands.<br>
 But hear me as I speak once more;<br>
 Thy brother, skilled in duty's lore,<br>
 Has at his home a royal pair<br>
 Of daughters most divinely fair.<br>
 I for the hands of these sweet two<br>
 For Bharat and S'atrughna sue,<br>
 Both princes of heroic mould,<br>
 Wise, fair of form, and lofty-souled.<br>
 All Das'aratha's sons, I ween,<br>
 Own each young grace of form and mien:<br>
 Brave as the Gods are they, nor yield<br>
 To the great Lords the worlds who shield.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 By these, good Prince of merits high,<br>
 Ikshváku's house with thine ally.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The suit the holy sage preferred,<br>
 With willing ear the monarch heard:<br>
 Vas'ishtha's lips the counsel praised:<br>
 Then spake the king with hands upraised:<br>
 'Now blest indeed my race I deem,<br>
 Which your high will, O Saints supreme,<br>
 With Das'aratha's house unites<br>
 In bonds of love and marriage rites.<br>
 So be it done. My nieces twain<br>
 Let Bharat and S'atrughna gain,<br>
 And the four youths the selfsame day<br>
 Four maiden hands in theirs shall lay.<br>
 No day so lucky may compare,<br>
 For marriage--so the wise declare--<br>
 With the last day of Phálguni<br>
 Ruled by the genial deity.'<br>
 Then with raised hands in reverence due<br>
 To those arch-saints he spoke anew:<br>
 'I am your pupil, ever true:<br>
 To me high favour have ye shown;<br>
 Come, sit ye on my royal throne,<br>
 For Das'aratha rules these towers<br>
 E'en as Ayodhyá now is ours.<br>
 Do with your own whate'er ye choose:<br>
 Your lordship here will none refuse.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke, and to Videha's king<br>
 Thus Das'aratha, answering:<br>
 'Boundless your virtues, lords, wbose sway<br>
 The realms of Mithilá obey.<br>
 With honouring care you entertain.<br>
 Both holy sage and royal train.<br>
 Now to my house my steps I bend--<br>
 May blessings still on you at end--<br>
 Due offerings to the shades to pay.'<br>
 Thus spoke the king, and turned away:<br>
 To Janak first he bade adieu,<br>
 Then followed fast those holy two.<br>
 The monarch reached his palace where<br>
 The rites were paid with solemn care.<br>
 When the next sun began to shine<br>
 He rose and made his gift of kine.<br>
 A bundled thousand cows prepared<br>
 For each young prince the Bráhmans shared.<br>
 Each had her horns adorned with gold;<br>
 And duly was the number told,<br>
 Four hundred thousand perfect tale:<br>
 Each brought a calf, each filled a pail.<br>
 And when that glorious task was o'er,<br>
 The monarch with his children four,<br>
 Showed like the Lord of Life divine<br>
 When the worlds' guardians round him shine.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_84"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 84</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_252"></a><a href="ry071.htm#fr_252">83:1</a>  The tenth of the lunar asterisms, composed
 of five stars.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_253"></a><a href="ry071.htm#fr_253">83:2</a>  'There are two lunar asterisms of this
 name, one following the other immediately,
 forming the eleventh and twelfth of the
 lunar mansions.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry073.htm">Next: Canto LXXIII.: The Nuptials.</a></center>
 </body>