<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry088.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry090.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XI.: THE QUEEN'S DEMAND.</h3>
 <p>
 To him enthralled by love, and blind,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Pierced by his darts who shake the mind, <a name="fr_274"></a><a href="#fn_274"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Kaikeyi with remorseless breast<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Her grand purpose thus expressed:<br>
 "O King, no insult or neglect<br>
 Have I endured, or disrespect.<br>
 One wish I have, and faith would soe<br>
 That longing granted, laid, by thee.<br>
 Now pledge thy word if thou incline<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 To listen to this prayer of mine,<br>
 Then I with confidence will speak,<br>
 And thou shalt hear the boon I seek.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ere she had ceased, the monarch fell,<br>
 A victim to the lady's spell,<br>
 And to the deadly snare she set<br>
 Sprang, like a roebuck to the net.<br>
 Her lover raised her drooping head,<br>
 Smiled, playing with her hair, and said:<br>
 'Hast thou not learnt, wild dame, till now<br>
 That there is none so dear as thou'<br>
 To me thy loving husband, save<br>
 My Rama bravest of the brave!<br>
 By him my race's high-souled heir,<br>
 By him whom none can match, I swear,<br>
 Now speak the wish that on thee weighs:<br>
 By him whose right is length of days,<br>
 Whom if my fond paternal eye<br>
 Saw not one hour I needs must die,--<br>
 I swear by Rama myd ear son,<br>
 Speak, and thy bidding shall be done.<br>
 Speak, darling; if thou choose, request<br>
 To have the heart from out my breast;<br>
 Regard my words, sweet love, and name<br>
 The wish thy mind thinks fit to frame.<br>
 Nor let shy soul give way to doubt:<br>
 My power should drive suspicion out.<br>
 Yea, by my merits won I swear,<br>
 Speak, darling, I will grant thy prayer,'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The queen, ambitious, overjoyed<br>
 To see him by her plot decoyed.<br>
 More eager still her aims to reach,<br>
 Spoke her abominable speech:<br>
 'A boon thou grantest, nothing loth,<br>
 And swearest with repeated oath.<br>
 Now let the thirty Gods and three<br>
 My witnesses, with Indra, be.<br>
 Let sun and moon and planets hear,<br>
 Heaven, quarters, day and night, give ear.<br>
 The mighty world, the earth outspread,<br>
 With birds of heaven and demons regard;<br>
 The ghosts that walk in midnight shade,<br>
 And household Gods, our present aid,<br>
 A every being great and small<br>
 To hear and mark the oath I call.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When this the archer king was bound,<br>
 With treacherous arts and oaths unwound,<br>
 She to her beauteous lord subdued,<br>
 By blinding love, her speech renewed:<br>
 'Rememer, King, that long-past day<br>
 Of Gods' and demons' battle fray.<br>
 And how thy foe in doubtful strife<br>
 Had nigh bereft thee of thy life.<br>
 Remember, it was only I<br>
 Preserved thee when about to die,<br>
 And thou for watchful love and care<br>
 Wouldst grant my first aud second prayer.<br>
 Those offered boons, pledged with thee then,<br>
 I now demand, O King of men,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_103"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 103</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Of thee, O Monarch, good and just,<br>
 Whose righteous soul observes each trust.<br>
 If thou refuse thy promise sworn,<br>
 I die, despised, before the morn.<br>
 These rites in Ráma's name begun<br>
 Transfer them, and enthrone my son.<br>
 The time is come to claim at last<br>
 The double boon of days long-past,<br>
 When Gods and demons met in fight.<br>
 And thou wouldst fain my care requite.<br>
 Now forth to Dandak's forest drive<br>
 Thy Ráma for nine years and five,<br>
 And let him dwell a hermit there<br>
 With deerskin coat and matted hair.<br>
 Without a rival let my boy<br>
 The empire of the land enjoy,<br>
 And let mine eyes ere morning see<br>
 Thy Ráma to the forest flee.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_273"></a><a href="ry088.htm#fr_273">102:1</a>  The Sloka or distich which I have
 been forced to expand into these nine
 lines is evidently spurious, but is found in
 all the commented MSS. whioh Schiegel
 consulted.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_274"></a><a href="ry089.htm#fr_274">102:2</a>  Maumatha, Mind-disturber, a name of
 Kama or Love.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry090.htm">Next: Canto XII.: Dasaratha's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>