<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry083.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry085.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VI.: THE CITY DECORATED.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma bathed in order due,<br>
 His mind from worldly thoughts withdrew,<br>
 And with big large-eyed wife besought<br>
 Náráyan, as a votary ought.<br>
 Upon his head the brimming cup<br>
 Of holy oil he lifted up,<br>
 Then placed within the kindled fire<br>
 The offering to that heavenly Sire,<br>
 And as he sipped the remnant prayed<br>
 To Him for blessing and for aid.<br>
 Then with still lips and tranquil mind<br>
 With his Videhan he reclined,<br>
 In Vishnu's chapel, on a bed<br>
 Where holy grass was duly spread,<br>
 While still the prince's every thought<br>
 Tbe God supreme, Náráyan, sought.<br>
 One watch remained the night to close<br>
 When Ráma from his couch arose,<br>
 And bade the men and maids adorn<br>
 His palace for the solemn morn.<br>
 He heard the bards and heralds raise<br>
 Auspicious strains of joy and praise;<br>
 And breathed devout, with voice restrained,<br>
 The hymn for morning rites ordained;<br>
 Then, with his head in reverence bowed,<br>
 Praised Madhu's conquering foe aloud.<br>
 And, in pure linen robes arrayed,<br>
 The priests to raise their voices prayed.<br>
 Obedient to the summons they<br>
 Proclaimed to all the festal day.<br>
 The Bráhmans' voices, deep and sweet,<br>
 Resounded through the crowded street,<br>
 And echoed through Ayodhyá went<br>
 By many a loud-toned instrument.<br>
 Then all the people joyed to hear<br>
 That Ráma with his consort dear<br>
 Had fasted till the morning light<br>
 In preparation for the rite.<br>
 Swiftly the joyful tidings through<br>
 Ayodhyá's crowded city flew,<br>
 And soon as dawn appeared, each man<br>
 To decorate the town began.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_96"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 96</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 In all the temples bright and fair<br>
 As white clouds towering in the air,<br>
 In streets, and where the cross-ways met,<br>
 Where holy fig-trees had been set,<br>
 In open square, in sacred shade,<br>
 Where merchants' shops their wealth displayed,<br>
 On all the mansions of the great,<br>
 And householders of wealth and state,<br>
 Where'er the people loved to meet,<br>
 Where'er a tree adorned the street,<br>
 Gay banners floated to the wind,<br>
 And ribands round the staves were twined.<br>
 Then clear the singers' voices rang,<br>
 As, charming mind and ear, they sang.<br>
 Here players shone in bright attire,<br>
 There dancing women swelled the quire.<br>
 Each with his friend had much to say<br>
 Of Ráma's consecration-day:<br>
 Yea, even children, as they played<br>
 At cottage doors beneath the shade.<br>
 The royal street with flowers was strown<br>
 Which loving hands in heaps had thrown,<br>
 And here and there rich incense lent<br>
 Its fragrance to the garland's scent;<br>
 And all was fresh and fair and bright<br>
 In honour of the coming rite.<br>
 With careful foresight to illume<br>
 With borrowed blaze the midnight gloom,<br>
 The crowds erected here and there<br>
 Trees in each street gay lamps to bear.<br>
 The city thus from side to side<br>
 In festal guise was beautified.<br>
 The people of the town who longed<br>
 To view the rite together thronged,<br>
 And filling every court and square<br>
 Praised the good king in converse there:<br>
 'Our high-souled king! He throws a grace<br>
 On old Ikshváku's royal race.<br>
 He feels his years' increasing weight,<br>
 And makes his son associate.<br>
 Great joy to us the choice will bring<br>
 Of Ráma for our lord and king.<br>
 The good and bad to him are known,<br>
 And long will he protect his own.<br>
 No pride his prudent breast may swell,<br>
 Most just, he loves his brothers well,<br>
 And to us all that love extends,<br>
 Cherished as brothers and as friends.<br>
 Long may our lord in life remain,<br>
 Good Das'aratha, free from stain,<br>
 By whose most gracious favour we<br>
 Ráma anointed king shall see.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such were the words the townsmen spoke<br>
 Heard by the gathering countryfolk,<br>
 Who from the south, north, east, and west,<br>
 Stirred by the joyful tidings, pressed.<br>
 For by their eager longing led<br>
 To Ráma's consecration sped<br>
 The villagers from every side,<br>
 And filled Ayodhyá's city wide.<br>
 This way and that way strayed the crowd,<br>
 While rose a murmur long and loud,<br>
 As when the full moon floods the skies<br>
 And Ocean's waves with thunder rise.<br>
     That town, like Indra's city fair,<br>
         While peasants thronged her ways.<br>
     Tumultuous roared like Ocean, where<br>
         Each flood-born monster plays.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry085.htm">Next: Canto VII.: Manthará's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>