<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry085.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry087.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VIII: MANTHARÁ'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 The damsel's breast with fury burned:<br>
 She answered, as the gift she spurned:<br>
 'What time, O simple Queen, is this<br>
 For idle dreams of fancied bliss?<br>
 Hast thou not sense thy state to know,<br>
 Engulfed in seas of whelming woe;<br>
 Sick as I am with grief and pain<br>
 My lips can scarce a laugh restrain<br>
 To see thee hail with ill-timed joy<br>
 A peril mighty to destroy.<br>
 I mourn for one so fondly blind:<br>
 What woman of a prudent mind<br>
 Would welcome, e'en as thou hast done,<br>
 The lordship of a rival's son,<br>
 Rejoiced to find her secret foe<br>
 Empowered, like death, to launch the blow;<br>
 I see that Ráma still must fear<br>
 Thy Bharat, to his throne too near.<br>
 Hence is my heart disquieted,<br>
 For those who fear are those we dread.<br>
 Lakshman, the mighty bow who draws,<br>
 With all his soul serves Ráma's cause;<br>
 And chains as strong to Bharat bind<br>
 S'atrughna, with his heart and mind,<br>
 Now next to Ráma, lady fair,<br>
 Thy Bharat is the lawful heir:<br>
 And far remote, I ween, the chance<br>
 That might the younger two advance.<br>
 Yes, Queen,'tis Ráma that I dread,<br>
 Wise, prompt, in warlike science bred;<br>
 And oh, I tremble when I think<br>
 Of thy dear child on ruin's brink.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_98"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 98</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Blest witn a lofty fate is she,<br>
 Kaus'alyá; for her son will be<br>
 Placed, when the moon and Pushya meet,<br>
 By Bráhmans on the royal seat,<br>
 Thou as a slave in suppliant guise<br>
 Must wait upon Kaus'alyá's eyes,<br>
 With all her wealth and bliss secured<br>
 And glorious from her foes assured.<br>
 Her slave with us who serve thee, thou<br>
 Wilt see thy son to Ráma bow,<br>
 And Sítá's friends exult o'er all,<br>
 While Bharat's wife shares Bharat's fall.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As thus the maid in wrath complained,<br>
 Kaikeyí saw her heart was pained,<br>
 And answered eager in defence<br>
 Of Ramá's worth and excellence:<br>
 'Nay, Ráma, born the monarch's heir,<br>
 By holy fathers trained with care,<br>
 Virtuous, grateful, pure, and true,<br>
 Claims royal sway as rightly due.<br>
 He, like a sire, will long defend<br>
 Each brother, minister, and friend.<br>
 Then why, O hump-back, art thou pained<br>
 To hear that he the throne has gained?<br>
 Be sure when Ráma's empire ends,<br>
 The kingdom to my son descends,<br>
 Who, when a hundred years are flown,<br>
 Shall sit upon his fathers' throne.<br>
 Why is thine heart thus sad to see<br>
 The joy that is and long shall be,<br>
 This fortune by possession sure<br>
 And hopes which we may count secure?<br>
 Dear as the darling son I bore<br>
 Is Ráma, yea, or even more.<br>
 Most duteous to Kaus'alyá, he<br>
 Is yet more dutiful to me.<br>
 What though he rule, we need not fear:<br>
 His brethren to his soul are dear.<br>
 And if the throne Prince Ráma fill<br>
 Bharat will share the empire still.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She ceased. The troubled damsel sighed<br>
 Sighs long and hot, and thus replied:<br>
 'What madness has possessed thy mind,<br>
 To warnings deaf, to dangers blind?<br>
 Canst thou not see the floods of woe<br>
 That threaten o'er thine head to flow:<br>
 First Ráma will the throne acquire,<br>
 Then Ráma's son succeed his sire,<br>
 While Bharat will neglected pine<br>
 Excluded from the royal line.<br>
 Not all his sons, O lady fair,<br>
 The kingdom of a monarch share:<br>
 All ruling when a sovereign dies<br>
 Wild tumult in the state would rise.<br>
 The eldest, be he good or ill,<br>
 Is ruler by the father's will.<br>
 Know, tender mother, that thy son<br>
 Without a friend and all undone.<br>
 Far from the joyous ease of home<br>
 An alien from his race will roam.<br>
 I sped to thee for whom I feel,<br>
 But thy fond heart mistakes my zeal,<br>
 Thy hand a present would bestow<br>
 Because thy rival triumphs so.<br>
 When Ráma once begins his sway<br>
 Without a foe his will to stay,<br>
 Thy darling Bharat he will drive<br>
 To distant lands if left alive.<br>
 By thee the child was sent away<br>
 Beneath his grandsire's roof to stay.<br>
 Even in stocks and stones perforce<br>
 Will friendship spring from intercourse.<br>
 The young S'atrughna too would go<br>
 With Bharat, for he loved him so.<br>
 As Lakshman still to Ráma cleaves,<br>
 He his dear Bharat never leaves.<br>
 There is an ancient tale they tell:<br>
 A tree the foresters would fell<br>
 Was saved by reeds that round it stood,<br>
 For love that sprang of neighbourhood.<br>
 So Lakshman Ráma will defend,<br>
 And each on each for aid depend.<br>
 Such fame on earth their friendship wins<br>
 As that which binds the Heavenly Twins.<br>
 And Ráma ne'er will purpose wrong<br>
 To Lakshman, for their love is strong.<br>
 But Bharat, Oh, of this be sure,<br>
 Must evil at his hands endure.<br>
 Come, Ráma from his home expel<br>
 An exile in the woods to dwell.<br>
 The plan, O Queen, which I advise<br>
 Secures thy weal if thou be wise,<br>
 So we and all thy kith and kin<br>
 Advantage from thy gain shall win.<br>
 Shall Bharat, meet for happier fate,<br>
 Born to endure his rival's hate,<br>
 With all his fortune ruined cower<br>
 And dread his brother's mightier power!<br>
 Up, Queen, to save thy son, arise;<br>
 Prostrate at Ráma's feet he lies.<br>
 So the proud elephant who leads<br>
 His trooping consorts through the reeds<br>
 Falls in the forest shade beneath<br>
 The lion's spring and murderous teeth.<br>
 Scorned by thee in thy bliss and pride<br>
 Kaus'alyá was of old defied,<br>
 And will she now forbear to show<br>
 The vengeful rancour of a foe?<br>
     O Queen, thy darling is undone<br>
     When Ráma's hand has once begun<br>
         Ayodhyá's realm to sway,<br>
     Come, win the kingdom for thy child<br>
     And drive the alien to the wild<br>
         In banishment to-day.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry087.htm">Next: Canto IX.: The Plot.</a></center>
 </body>