<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry087.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry089.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO X.: DAS'ARATHA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 As Queen Kaikeví thus obeyed<br>
 The sinful counsel of her maid<br>
 She sank upon the chamber floor,<br>
 As sinks in anguish, wounded sore,<br>
 An elephant beneath the smart<br>
 Of the wild hunter's venomed dart.<br>
 The lovely lady in her mind<br>
 Resolved the plot her maid designed,<br>
 And prompt the gain and risk to scan<br>
 She step by step approved the plan.<br>
 Misguided by the hump back's guile<br>
 She pondered her resolve awhile,<br>
 As the fair path that bliss secured<br>
 The miserable lady lured,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_101"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 101</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Devoted to her queen, and swayed<br>
 By hopes of gain and bliss, the maid<br>
 Rejoiced her lady's purpose known,<br>
 And deemed the prize she sought her own.<br>
 Then bent upon her purpose dire,<br>
 Kaikeyí with her soul on fire,<br>
 Upon the floor lay, languid, down,<br>
 Her brows contracted in a frown.<br>
 The bright-hued wreath that bound her hair,<br>
 Chains, necklets, jewels rich and rare,<br>
 Stripped off by her own fingers lay<br>
 Spread on the ground in disarray,<br>
 And to the floor a lustre lent<br>
 As stars light up the firmament.<br>
 Thus prostrate in the mourner's cell,<br>
 In garb of woe the lady fell,<br>
 Her long hair in a single braid,<br>
 Like some fair nymph of heaven dismayed.  <a name="fr_272"></a><a href="#fn_272"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
     The monarch, Ráma to install,<br>
 With thoughtful care had ordered all,<br>
 And now within his home withdrew,<br>
 Dismissing first his retinue.<br>
 Now all the town has heard, thought he,<br>
 What joyful rite the morn will see.<br>
 So turned he to her bower to cheer<br>
 With the glad news his darling's ear.<br>
 Majestic, as the Lord of Night,<br>
 When threatened by the Dragon's might,<br>
 Bursts radiant on the evening sky<br>
 Pale with the clouds that wander by,<br>
 So Das'aratha, great in fame,<br>
 To Queen Kaikeyí's palace came.<br>
 There parrots flew from tree to tree,<br>
 And gorgeous peacocks wandered free,<br>
 While ever and anon was heard<br>
 The note of some glad water-bird.<br>
 Here loitered dwarf and hump-backed maid,<br>
 There lute and here sweet music played.<br>
 Here, rich in blossom, creepers twined<br>
 O'er grots with wondrous art designed,<br>
 There Champac and As'oka flowers<br>
 Hung glorious o'er the summer bowers,<br>
 And mid the waving verdure rose<br>
 Gold, silver, ivory porticoes.<br>
 Through all the months in ceaseless store<br>
 The trees both fruit and blossom bore.<br>
 With many a lake the grounds were graced;<br>
 Seats gold and silver, here were placed;<br>
 Here every viand wooed the taste,<br>
 It was a garden meet to vie<br>
 E'en with the home of Gods on high.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Within the mansion rich and vast<br>
 The mighty Das'aratha passed:<br>
 Not there was his beloved queen<br>
 On her fair couch reclining seen.<br>
 With love his eager pulses beat<br>
 For the dear wife he came to meet,<br>
 And in his blissful hopes deceived,<br>
 He sought his absent love and grieved.<br>
 For never had she missed the hour<br>
 Of meeting in her sumptuous bower,<br>
 And never had the king of men<br>
 Entered the empty room till then.<br>
 Still urged by love and anxious thought<br>
 News of his favourite queen he sought,<br>
 For never had his loving eyes<br>
 Found her or selfish or unwise.<br>
 Then spoke at length the warder maid,<br>
 With hands upraised and sore afraid:<br>
 'My Lord and King, the queen has sought<br>
 The mourner's cell with rage distraught.'<br>
     The words the warder maiden said<br>
 He heard with soul disquieted,<br>
 And thus as fiercer grief assailed,<br>
 His troubled senses wellnigh failed.<br>
 Consumed by torturing fires of grief<br>
 The king, the world's imperial chief,<br>
 His lady lying on the ground<br>
 In most unqueenly posture, found.<br>
 The aged king, all pure within,<br>
 Saw the young queen resolved on sin,<br>
 Low on the ground, his own sweet wife,<br>
 To him far dearer than his life,<br>
 Like some fair creeping plant uptorn,<br>
 Or like a maid of heaven forlorn,<br>
 A nymph of air or Goddess sent<br>
 From Swarga down in banishment.<br>
 As some wild elephant who tries<br>
 To soothe his consort as she lies<br>
 Struck by the hunter's venomed dart,<br>
 So the great king disturbed in heart.<br>
 Strove with soft hand and fond caress<br>
 To soothe his darling queen's distress,<br>
 Aud in his love addressed with sighs<br>
 The lady of the lotus eyes:<br>
     'I know not, Queen, why thou shouldst be<br>
 Thus angered to the heart with me.<br>
 Say, who has alighted thee, or whence<br>
 Has come the cause of such offence<br>
 That in the dust thou liest low,<br>
 And rendest my fond heart with woe,<br>
 As if some goblin of the night<br>
 Had struck thee with a deadly blight,<br>
 And cast foul influence on her<br>
 Whose spells my loving bosom stir?<br>
 I have Physicians famed for skill,<br>
 Each trained to cure some special ill:<br>
 My sweetest lady, tell thy pain,<br>
 And they shall make thee well again.<br>
 Whom, darling, wouldst thou punished see?<br>
 Or whom enriched with lordly fee?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_102"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 102</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 "Weep not, my lovely Queen, and stay<br>
 This grief that wears thy frame away<br>
 Speak, and the guilty shall be freed,<br>
 The guiltless be condemned to bleed.<br>
 The poor enriched, the rich abased.<br>
 The low set high, the proud disgraced.<br>
 Mv lords and I thy will obey,<br>
 All slaves who own thy sovereign sway;<br>
 And I can ne'er my heart incline<br>
 To check in aught one wish of thine.<br>
 Now by my life I pray thee tell<br>
 The thoughts that in thy bosom dwell,<br>
 The power and might thou knowest wel.<br>
 Should from thy breast all doubt expel,<br>
 I swear by all my merit won,<br>
 Speak, and thy pleasure shall be done.<br>
 Far as the world's wide bounds extend<br>
 My glorious empire knows no end.<br>
 Mine are the tribes in eastern lands,<br>
 And those who dwell on Sindhu's sands:<br>
 Mine is Suráshtra, far away,<br>
 Suvíra's realm admits my sway.<br>
 My best the southern nations fear,<br>
 The Angas and the Vaugas hear.<br>
 And as lord paramount I reign<br>
 O'er Magadh and the Matsyas' plain,<br>
 Kos'al, and Kási's wide domain: <a name="fr_273"></a><a href="ry089.htm#fn_273"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 All rich in treasures of the mine.<br>
 In golden corn, sheep, goats, and kine.<br>
 Choose what thou wilt. Kaikeyi, thence:<br>
 But tell me, O my darling, whence<br>
 Arose thy grief, and it shall fly<br>
 Like hoar-frost when the sun is high.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She, by his loving words consoled,<br>
 Longed her dire purpose to unfold,<br>
 And sought with sharper pangs to wring<br>
 The bosom of her lord the king.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_272"></a><a href="ry088.htm#fr_272">101:1</a>  These verses are evidently an interpolation.
 They contain nothing that has
 not been already related: the words only
 are altered. As the whole poem could not
 be recited at once, the rhapsodists at the
 beginning of a fresh recitation would naturally
 remind their hearers of the events
 immediately preceding.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry089.htm">Next: Canto XI.: The Queen's Demand.</a></center>
 </body>