<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry079.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry081.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO II.: THE PEOPLE'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then to the full assembly bowed<br>
 The monarch, and addressed the crowd<br>
 With gracious speech, in accents loud<br>
 As heavenly drum or thunder-cloud:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Needs not to you who know declare<br>
 How ever with paternal care<br>
 My fathers of Ikshváku's line<br>
 Have ruled the realm which now is mine.<br>
 I too have taught my feet to tread<br>
 The pathway of the mighty dead,<br>
 And with fond care that never slept<br>
 Have, as I could, my people kept.<br>
 So toiling still, and ne'er remiss<br>
 For all my people's weal and bliss,<br>
 Beneath the white umbrella's  <a name="fr_260"></a><a href="#fn_260"><font size="1">1</font></a> shade.<br>
 Old age is come and strength decayed.<br>
 Thousands of years have o'er me flown,<br>
 And generations round me grown<br>
 And passed away. I crave at length<br>
 Repose and ease for broken strength.<br>
 Feeble and worn I scarce can bear<br>
 The ruler's toil, the judge's care,<br>
 With royal dignity, a weight<br>
 That tries the young and temperate.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 I long to rest, my labour done,<br>
 And in my place to set my son,<br>
 If to the twice-born gathered here<br>
 My counsel wise and good appear.<br>
 For greater gifts than mine adorn<br>
 Ráma my son, my eldest-born.<br>
 Like Indra brave, before him fall<br>
 The foeman's cities, tower and wall.<br>
 Him prince of men for power and might,<br>
 The best maintainer of the right,<br>
 Fair as the moon when nothing bars<br>
 His glory close to Pushya's stars,<br>
 Him with to-morrow's light I fain<br>
 Would throne the consort of my reign,<br>
 A worthy lord for you, I ween,<br>
 Marked as her own by Fortune's Queen.<br>
 The triple world itself would be<br>
 Well ruled by such a king as he.<br>
 To such high bliss and happy fate<br>
 Will I the country dedicate,<br>
 And my sad heart will cease to grieve<br>
 If he the precious charge receive.<br>
 Thus is my careful plan matured,<br>
 Thus for myself is rest secured;<br>
 Lieges, approve the words I say,<br>
 Or point ye out some wiser way.<br>
 Devise your prudent plan. My mind<br>
 Is fondly to this thought inclined,<br>
 But men by keen debating move<br>
 Some middle course which all approve.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The monarch ceased. In answer came<br>
 The joyous princes' glad acclaim.<br>
 So peacocks in the rain rejoice<br>
 And hail the cloud with lifted voice.<br>
 Murmurs of joy from thousands round<br>
 Shook the high palace with the sound.<br>
 Then when the gathered throng had learned<br>
 His will who right and gain discerned,<br>
 Peasant and townsman, priest and chief,<br>
 All met in consultation brief,<br>
 And soon agreed with one accord<br>
 Gave answer to their sovereign lord:<br>
 'King of the land, we know thee old:<br>
 Thousands of years have o'er thee rolled,<br>
 Ráma thy son, we pray, anoint.<br>
 And at thy side his place appoint<br>
 Our gallant prince, so brave and strong,<br>
 Riding in royal state along,<br>
 Our eyes with joyful pride will see<br>
 Screened by the shade that shelters thee.'<br>
 Then spake the king again, as though<br>
 Their hearts' true wish he sought to know:<br>
 'These prayers for Ráma's rule suggest<br>
 One question to my doubting breast.<br>
 This thing, I pray, with truth explain:<br>
 Why would ye, while I justly reign,<br>
 That he, mine eldest son, should bear<br>
 His part with me as ruling heir?'<br>
 Then all the people made reply,<br>
 Peasant and townsman, low and high:<br>
 ' Each noblest gift of form and mind,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_91"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 91</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 O Monarch, in thy son we find.<br>
 Do thou the godlike virtues hear<br>
 Which Ráma to our hearts endear.<br>
 So richly blest with graces, none<br>
 In all the earth excels thy son:<br>
 Nay, who to match with him may claim<br>
 In truth, in justice, and in fame?<br>
 True to his promise, gentle, kind,<br>
 Unenvious, of grateful mind,<br>
 Versed in the law and firm of soul,<br>
 He keeps each sense with strict control.<br>
 With duteous care he loves to sit<br>
 By Bráhmans skilled in Holy Writ.<br>
 Hence brightest glory, ne'er to end,<br>
 And matchless fame his youth attend.<br>
 Skilled in the use of spear and shield.<br>
 And arms which heavenly warriors wield,<br>
 Supreme in war, unconquered yet<br>
 Bv man, fiend, God in battle met,<br>
 Whene'er in pomp of war he goes<br>
 'Gainst town or city of the foes,<br>
 He ever comes with Lakshman back<br>
 Victorious from the fierce attack.<br>
 Returning homeward from afar<br>
 Borne on his elephant or car,<br>
 He ever to the townsmen bends<br>
 And greets them as beloved friends,<br>
 Asks how each son, each servant thrives,<br>
 How fare our pupils, offerings, wives;<br>
 And like a father bids us tell,<br>
 Each for himself, that all is well.<br>
 If pain or grief the city tries<br>
 His heart is swift to sympathize.<br>
 When festive scenes our thoughts employ<br>
 He like a father shares the joy.<br>
 High is the fate, O King, that gave<br>
 Thy Ráma born to bless and save,<br>
 With filial virtues fair and mild<br>
 Like Kas'yap old Maríchi's child.<br>
 Hence to the kingdom's distant ends<br>
 One general prayer for him ascends.<br>
 Each man in town and country prays<br>
 For Ráma's strength, health, length of days.<br>
 With hearts sincere, their wish the same,<br>
 The tender girl, the aged dame,<br>
 Subject and stranger, peasant, hind,<br>
 One thought impressed on every mind,<br>
 At evening and at dawning day<br>
 To all the Gods for Ráma pray.<br>
 Do thou, O King, of grace comply,<br>
 And hear the people's longing cry,<br>
 And let us on the throne by thee<br>
 The lotus-tinted Ráma see.<br>
     O thou who givest boons, attend;<br>
     A gracious ear, O Monarch, lend<br>
         And for our weal install,<br>
 Consenting to our earnest prayer,<br>
 Thy godlike Ráma Regent Heir,<br>
         Who seeks the good of all.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *       *       *       *      <br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_260"></a><a href="ry080.htm#fr_260">90:1</a>  Chief of the insignia of imperial dignity.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry081.htm">Next: Canto III.: Das'aratha's Precepts.</a></center>
 </body>