<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry086.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry088.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO IX.: THE PLOT.</h3>
 <p>
 As fury lit Kaikeyí's eyes<br>
 She spoke with long and burning sighs:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_99"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 99</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'This day my son enthroned shall see,<br>
 And Ráma to the woods shall flee.<br>
 But tell me, damsel, if thou can,<br>
 A certain way, a skilful plan<br>
 That Bharat may the empire gain,<br>
 And Ráma's hopes be nursed in vain.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The lady ceased. The wicked maid<br>
 The mandate of her queen obeyed,<br>
 And darkly plotting Ráma's fall<br>
 Responded to Kaikeyí's call.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'I will declare, do thou attend,<br>
 How Bharat may his throne ascend.<br>
 Dost thou forget what things befell?<br>
 Or dost thou feign, remembering well?<br>
 Or wouldst thou hear my tongue repeat<br>
 A story for thy need so meet?<br>
 Gay lady, if thy will be so,<br>
 Now hear the tale of long ago,<br>
 And when my tongue has done its part<br>
 Ponder the story in thine heart.<br>
 When Gods and demons fought of old,<br>
 Thy lord, with royal saints enrolled,<br>
 Sued to the war with thee to bring<br>
 His might to aid the Immortals' King.<br>
 Far to the southern land he sped<br>
 Where Dandak's mighty wilds are spread,<br>
 To Vaijayanta's city swayed<br>
 By S'ambara, whose flag displayd<br>
 The hugest monster of the sea.<br>
 Lord of a hundred wiles was be;<br>
 With might which Gods could never blame<br>
 Against the King of Heaven he came.<br>
 Then raged the battle wild and dread,<br>
 And mortal warriors fought and bled;<br>
 The fiends by night with strength renewed<br>
 Charged, slew the sleeping multitude.<br>
 Thy lord, King Das'aratha, long<br>
 Stood fighting with the demon throng,<br>
 But long of arm, unmatched in strength,<br>
 Fell wounded by their darts at length.<br>
 Thy husband, senseless, by thine aid<br>
 Was from the battle field conveyed.<br>
 And wounded nigh to death thy lord<br>
 Was by thy care to health restored.<br>
 Well pleased the grateful monarch sware<br>
 To grant thy first and second prayer.<br>
 Thou for no favour then wouldst sue,<br>
 The gifts reserved for season due;<br>
 And he, thy high-souled lord, agreed<br>
 To give the boons when thou shouldst need.<br>
 Myself I knew not what befell,<br>
 But oft the tale have heard thee tell,<br>
 And close to thee in friendship knit<br>
 Deep in my heart have treasured it.<br>
 Remind thy husband of his oath,<br>
 Recall the boons and claim them both,<br>
 That Bharat on the throne be placed<br>
 With rites of consecration graced,<br>
 And Ráma to the woods be sent<br>
 For twice seven years of banishment.<br>
 Go, Queen, the mourner's chamber  <a name="fr_270"></a><a href="#fn_270"><font size="1">1</font></a> seek,<br>
 With angry eye and burning cheek;<br>
 And with disordered robes and hair<br>
 On the cold earth lie prostrate there.<br>
 When the king comes still mournful lie,<br>
 Speak not a word nor meet his eye,<br>
 But let thy tears in torrent flow,<br>
 And lie enamoured of thy woe.<br>
 Well do I know thou long hast been,<br>
 And ever art, his darling queen.<br>
 For thy dear sake, O well-loved dame,<br>
 The mighty king would brave the flame,<br>
 But ne'er would anger thee, or brook<br>
 To meet his favourite's wrathful look.<br>
 Thy loving lord would even die<br>
 Thy fancy, Queen, to gratify,<br>
 And never could he arm his breast<br>
 To answer nay to thy request.<br>
 Listen and learn, O dull of sense,<br>
 Thine all-resistless influence.<br>
 Gems he will offer, pearls and gold:<br>
 Refuse his gifts, be stern and cold.<br>
 Those proffered boons at length recall,<br>
 And claim them till he grants thee all.<br>
 And O my lady, high in bliss,<br>
 With heedful thought forget not this.<br>
 When from the ground his queen he lifts<br>
 And grants again the promised gifts,<br>
 Bind him with oaths he cannot break<br>
 And thy demands unflnching, make.<br>
 That Ráma travel to the wild<br>
 Five years and nine from home exiled,<br>
 And Bharat, best of all who reign.<br>
 The empire of the land obtain.<br>
 For when this term of years has fled<br>
 Over the banished Ráma's head,<br>
 Thy royal son to vigour grown<br>
 And rooted firm will stand alone.<br>
 The king, I know, is well inclined,<br>
 And this the hour to move his mind.<br>
 Be bold: the threatened rite prevent,<br>
 And force the king from his intent.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She ceased. So counselled to her bane<br>
 Disguised beneath a show of gain,<br>
 Kaikeyí in her joy and pride<br>
 To Manthará again replied:<br>
 'Thy sense I envy, prudent maid;<br>
 With sagest lore thy lids persuade.<br>
 No hump-back maid in all the earth,<br>
 For wise resolve, can match thy worth.<br>
 Thou art alone with constant zeal<br>
 Devoted to thy lady's weal.<br>
 Dear girl, without thy faithful aid<br>
 I had not marked the plot he laid.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_100"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 100</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Full of all guile and sin and spite<br>
 Misshapen hump-backs shock the sight:<br>
 But thou art fair and formed to please,<br>
 Bent like a lily by the breeze.<br>
 I look thee o'er with watchful eye,<br>
 And in thy frame no fault can spy;<br>
 The chest so deep, the waist so trim,<br>
 So round the lines of breast and limb. <a name="fr_271"></a><a href="#fn_271"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Thy cheeks with moonlike beauty shine,<br>
 And the warm wealth of youth is thine.<br>
 Thy legs, my girl, are long and neat,<br>
 And somewhat long thy dainty feet,<br>
 While stepping out before my face<br>
 Thou seemest like a crane to pace.<br>
 The thousand wiles are in thy breast<br>
 Which Sambara the fiend possessed,<br>
 And countless others all thine own,<br>
 O damsel sage, to thee are known.<br>
 Thy very hump becomes thee too,<br>
 O thou whose face is fair to view,<br>
 For there reside in endless store<br>
 Plots, wissard wiles, and warrior lore.<br>
 A golden chain I'll round it fling<br>
 When Ráma's flight makes Bharat king:<br>
 Yea, polished links of finest gold,<br>
 When once the wished for prize I hold<br>
 With naught to fear and none to hate,<br>
 Thy hump, dear maid, shall decorate.<br>
 A golden frontlet wrought with care,<br>
 And precious jewels shalt thou wear:<br>
 Two lovely robes around thee fold,<br>
 And walk a Goddess to behold,<br>
 Bidding the moon himself compare<br>
 His beauty with a face so fair.<br>
 With scent of precious sandal sweet<br>
 Down to the nails upon thy feet,<br>
 First of the household thou shalt go<br>
 And pay with scorn each battled foe.'<br>
     Kaikeyi's praise the damnel heard,<br>
 And thus again her lady stirred,<br>
 Who lay upon her beauteous bed<br>
 Like fire upon the altar fed:<br>
 'Dear Queen, they build the bridge in vain<br>
 When swollen streams are dry again.<br>
 Arise, thy glorious task complete,<br>
 And draw the king to thy retreat.'<br>
     The large-eyed lady left her bower<br>
 Exulting in her pride of power,<br>
 And with the hump-back sought the gloom<br>
 And silence of the mourner's room.<br>
 The string of priceless pearls that huug<br>
 Around her neck to earth she flung,<br>
 With all the wealth and lustre lent<br>
 By precious gem and ornament.<br>
 Then, listening to her slave's advice,<br>
 Lay, like a nymph from Paradise.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 As on the ground her limbs she laid<br>
 Once more she cried unto the maid:<br>
 'Soon must thou to the monarch say<br>
 Kaikeyi's soul has past away,<br>
 Or, Ráma banished as we planned,<br>
 My son made king shall rule the land.<br>
 No more for gold and gems I care,<br>
 For brave attire or dainty fare.<br>
 If Ráma should the throne ascend,<br>
 That very hour my life will end.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     The royal lady wounded through<br>
 The bosom with the darts that flew<br>
     Launched from the hump-back's tongue<br>
 Pressed both her hands upon her side,<br>
 And o'er and o'er again she cried<br>
     With wildering fury stung:<br>
 'Yes, it shall be thy task to tell<br>
 That I have hurried hence to dwell<br>
     In Yama's realms of woe,<br>
 Or happy Bharat shall be king,<br>
 And doomed to years of wandering<br>
     Kaus'alyá's son shall go.<br>
 I heed not dainty viands now<br>
 Fair wreaths of flowers to twine my brow,<br>
     Soft balm or precious scent:<br>
 My very life I count as naught,<br>
 Nothing on earth can claim my thought<br>
     But Ráma's banishment.'<br>
     She spoke these words of cruel ire;<br>
 Then stripping off her gay attire,<br>
     The cold bare floor she pressed.<br>
 So, falling from her home on high,<br>
 Some lovely daughter of the sky<br>
     Upon the ground might rest.<br>
 With darkened brow and furious mien,<br>
 Stripped of her gems and wreath, the queen<br>
     In spotless beauty lay,<br>
 Like heaven obscured with gathering cloud,<br>
 When shades of midnight darkness shroud<br>
     Each star's expiring ray.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_270"></a><a href="ry087.htm#fr_270">99:1</a>  Literally <i>the chamber of wrath, a
 'growlery,'</i> a small, dark, unfurnished
 room to which it seems, the wives and
 ladies of the king betook themselves when
 offended and sulky.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_271"></a><a href="ry087.htm#fr_271">100:1</a>  In these four lines I do not translate
 faithfully, and I do not venture to follow
 Kaikeyi farther in her eulogy of the hump-
 back's charms.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry088.htm">Next: Canto X.: Das'aratha's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>