<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry095.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry097.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVIII.: THE SENTENCE.</h3>
 <p>
 With hopeless eye and pallid mien<br>
 There sat the monarch with the queen.<br>
 His father's feet with reverence due<br>
 He clasped, and touched Kaikey?s too.<br>
 The king, with eyes still brimming o'er,<br>
 Cried 'Ráma!' and could do no more.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 His voice was choked, his eye was dim,<br>
 He could not speak or look on him.<br>
 Then sudden fear made Ráma shake<br>
 As though his foot had roused a snake,<br>
 Soon as his eyes had seen the change<br>
 So mournful, terrible, and strange.<br>
 For there his reason well-nigh fled,<br>
 Sighing, with soul disquieted,<br>
     To torturing pangs a prey,<br>
 Dismayed, despairing, and distraught,<br>
 In a fierce whirl of wildering thought<br>
     The hapless monarch lay,<br>
 Like Ocean wave-engarlanded<br>
 Storm-driven from his tranquil bed,<br>
     The Sun-God in eclipse,<br>
 Or like a holy seer, heart-stirred<br>
 With anguish, when a lying word<br>
     Has passed his heedless lips.<br>
 The sight of his dear father, pained<br>
 With woe and misery unexplained<br>
     Filled Ráma with unrest,<br>
 As Ocean's pulses rise and swell<br>
 When the great moon he loves so well<br>
     Shines full upon his breast.<br>
 So grieving for his father's sake,<br>
 To his own heart the hero spake:<br>
 'Why will the king my sire to-day<br>
 No kindly word of greeting say?<br>
 At other times, though wroth he be,<br>
 His eyes grow calm that look on me.<br>
 Then why does anguish wring his brow<br>
 To see his well-beloved now?'<br>
 Sick and perplexed, distraught with woe,<br>
 To Queen Kaikeyí bowing low,<br>
 While pallor o'er his bright cheek spread,<br>
 With humble reverence he said:<br>
 'What have I done, unknown, amiss<br>
 To make my father wroth like this?<br>
 Declare it, O dear Queen, and win<br>
 His pardon for my heedless sin.<br>
 Why is the sire I ever find<br>
 Filled with all love to-day unkind?<br>
 With eyes cast down and pallid cheek<br>
 This day alone he will not speak.<br>
 Or lies he prostrate 'neath the blow<br>
 Of fierce disease or sudden woe?<br>
 For all our bliss is dashed with pain,<br>
 And joy unmixt is hard to gain.<br>
 Does stroke of evil fortune smite<br>
 Dear Bharat, charming to the sight,<br>
 Or on the brave S'atrughna fall,<br>
 Or consorts, for he loves them all?<br>
 Against his words when I rebel,<br>
 Or fail to please the monarch well,<br>
 When deeds of mine his soul offend,<br>
 That hour I pray my life may end.<br>
 How should a man to him who gave<br>
 His being and his life behave?<br>
 The sire to whom he owes his birth<br>
 Should be his deity on earth.<br>
 Hast thou, by pride and folly moved,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_114"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 114</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With bitter taunt the king reproved?<br>
 Has scorn of thine or cruel jest<br>
 To passion stirred his gentle breast?<br>
 Speak truly, Queen, that I may know<br>
 What cause has changed the monarch so.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus by the high-souled prince addressed,<br>
 Of Raghu's sons the chief and best,<br>
 She cast all ruth and shame aside,<br>
 And bold with greedy words replied:<br>
 'Not wrath, O Ráma, stirs the king,<br>
 Nor misery stabs with sudden sting;<br>
 One thought that fills his soul has he,<br>
 But dares not speak for fear of thee.<br>
 Thou art so dear, his lips refrain<br>
 From words that might his darling pain.<br>
 But thou, as duty bids, must still<br>
 The promise of thy sire fulfil.<br>
 He who to me in days gone by<br>
 Vouchsafed a boon with honours high,<br>
 Dares now, a king, his word regret,<br>
 And caitiff-like disowns the debt.<br>
 The lord of men his promise gave<br>
 To grant the boon that I might crave,<br>
 And now a bridge would idly throw<br>
 When the dried stream has ceased to flow.<br>
 His faith the monarch must not break<br>
 In wrath, or e'en for thy dear sake.<br>
 From faith, as well the righteous know,<br>
 Our virtue and our merits flow.<br>
 Now, be they good or be they ill,<br>
 Do thou thy father's words fulfil:<br>
 Swear that his promise shall not fail,<br>
 And I will tell thee all the tale.<br>
 Yes, Ráma, when I hear that thou<br>
 Hast bound thee by thy father's vow,<br>
 Then, not till then, my lips shall speak,<br>
 Nor will he tell what boon I seek.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He heard, and with a troubled breast<br>
 This answer to the queen addressed:<br>
 'Ah me, dear lady, canst thou deem<br>
 That words like these thy lips beseem?<br>
 I, at the bidding of my sire,<br>
 Would cast my body to the fire,<br>
 A deadly draught of poison drink,<br>
 Or in the waves of ocean sink:<br>
 If he command, it shall be done,--<br>
 My father and my king in one.<br>
 Then speak and let me know the thing<br>
 So longed for by my lord the king.<br>
 It shall be done: let this suffice;<br>
 Ráma ne'er makes a promise twice.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ended. To the princely youth<br>
 Who loved the right and spoke the truth,<br>
 Cruel, abominable came<br>
 The answer of the ruthless dame:<br>
 'When Gods and Titans fought of yore,<br>
 Transfixed with darts and bathed in gore<br>
 Two boons to me thy father gave<br>
 For the dear life 'twas mine to save.<br>
 Of him I claim the ancient debt,<br>
 That Bharat on the throne be set,<br>
 And thou, O Ráma, go this day<br>
 To Dandak forest far away.<br>
 Now, Ráma, if thou wilt maintain<br>
 Thy father's faith without a stain,<br>
 And thine own truth and honour clear,<br>
 Then, best of men, my bidding hear.<br>
 Do thou thy father's word obey,<br>
 Nor from the pledge he gave me stray.<br>
 Thy life in Dandak forest spend<br>
 Till nine long years and five shall end.<br>
 Upon my Bharat's princely head<br>
 Let consecrating drops be shed,<br>
 With all the royal pomp for thee<br>
 Made ready by the king's decree.<br>
 Seek Dandak forest and resign<br>
 Rites that would make the empire thine,<br>
 For twice seven years of exile wear<br>
 The coat of bark and matted hair.<br>
 Then in thy stead let Bharat reign<br>
 Lord of his royal sire's domain,<br>
 Rich in the fairest gems that shine,<br>
 Cars, elephants, and steeds, and kine.<br>
 The monarch mourns thy altered fate<br>
 And vails his brow compassionate:<br>
 Bowed down by bitter grief he lies<br>
 And dares not lift to thine his eyes.<br>
 Obey his word: be firm and brave,<br>
 And with great truth the monarch save.'<br>
     While thus with cruel words she spoke,<br>
         No grief the noble youth betrayed;<br>
     But forth the father's anguish broke,<br>
         At his dear Ráma's lot dismayed.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_285"></a><a href="ry095.htm#fr_285">113:1</a>  The Sea.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry097.htm">Next: Canto XIX.: Ráma's Promise.</a></center>
 </body>