<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry098.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry100.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXI.: KAUS'ALYÁ CALMED.</h3>
 <p>
 While thus Kaus'alyá wept and sighed.<br>
 With timely words sad Lakshman cried:<br>
 'O honoured Queen I like it ill<br>
 That, subject to a woman's will,<br>
 Ráma his royal state should quit<br>
 And to an exile's doom submit.<br>
 The aged king, fond, changed, and week,<br>
 Will as the queen compels him speak.<br>
 But why should Ráma thus be sent<br>
 To the wild woods in banishment?<br>
 No least offence I find in him,<br>
 I see no fault his fame to dim.<br>
 Not one in all the world I know,<br>
 Not outcast wretch, not secret foe,<br>
 Whose whispering lips would dare assail<br>
 His spotless life with slanderous tale.<br>
 Godlike and bounteous, just, sincere,<br>
 E'en to his very foemen dear:<br>
 Who would without a cause neglect<br>
 The right, and such a son reject?<br>
 And if a king such order gave,<br>
 In second childhood, passion's slave,<br>
 What son within his heart would lay<br>
 The senseless order, and obey?<br>
 Come, Ráma, ere this plot be known<br>
 Stand by me and secure the throne.<br>
 Stand like the King who rules below,<br>
 Stand aided by thy brother's bow:<br>
 How can the might of meaner men<br>
 Resist thy royal purpose then!<br>
 My shafts, if rebels court their fate,<br>
 Shall lay Ayodhyá desolate.<br>
 Then shall her streets with blood be dyed<br>
 Of those who stand on Bharat's side:<br>
 None shall my slaughtering hand exempt,<br>
 For gentle patience earns contempt.<br>
 If, by Kaikeyís counsel changed,<br>
 Our father's heart be thus estranged,<br>
 No mercy must our arm restrain,<br>
 But let the foe be slain, be slain.<br>
 For should the guide, respected long,<br>
 No more discerning right and wrorg,<br>
 Turn in forbidden paths to stray,<br>
 'Tis meet that force his steps should stay.<br>
 What power sufficient can he see,<br>
 What motive for the wish has he,<br>
 That to Kaikeyí would resign<br>
 The empire which is justly thine?<br>
 Can he, O conqueror of thy foes,<br>
 Thy strength and mine in war oppose?<br>
 Can he entrust, in our despite,<br>
 To Bharat's hand thy royal right!<br>
 I love this brother with the whole<br>
 Affection of my faithful soul.<br>
 Yea Queen, by bow and truth I swear,<br>
 By sacrifice, and gift, and prayer,<br>
 If Ráma to the forest goes,<br>
 Or where the burning furnace glows,<br>
 First shall my feet the forest tread,<br>
 The flames shall first surround my head.<br>
 My might shall chase thy grief and tears,<br>
 As darkness flies when morn appears.<br>
 Do thou, dear Queen, and Ráma too<br>
 Behold what power like mine can do.<br>
 My aged father I will kill,<br>
 The vassal of Kaikeyí's will,<br>
 Old, yet a child, the woman's thrall,<br>
 Infirm, and base, the scorn of all.'<br>
     Thus Lakshman cried,the mighty-souled:<br>
 Down her sad cheeks the torrents rolled,<br>
 As to her son Kaus'aly?spake:<br>
     'Now thou hast heard thy brother, take<br>
 His counsel if thou hold it wise,<br>
 And do the thing his words advise.<br>
 Do not, my son, with tears I pray,<br>
 My rival's wicked word obey,<br>
 Leave me not here consumed with woe,<br>
 Nor to the wood, an exile, go.<br>
 If thou, to virtue ever true,<br>
 Thy duty's path would still pursue,<br>
 The highest duty bids thee stay<br>
 And thus thy mother's voice obey.<br>
 Thus Kas'yap's great ascetic son<br>
 A seat among the Immortals won:<br>
 In his own home, subdued, he stayed,<br>
 And honour to his mother paid.<br>
 If reverence to thy sire be due,<br>
 Thy mother claims like honour too,<br>
 And thus I charge thee, O my child,<br>
 Thou must not seek the forest wild.<br>
 Ah, what to me were life and bliss,<br>
 Condemned my darling son to miss?<br>
 But with my Ráma near, to eat<br>
 The very grass itself were sweet.<br>
 But if thou still wilt go and leave.<br>
 Thy hapless mother here to grieve,<br>
 I from that hour will food abjure,<br>
 Nor life without my son endure.<br>
 Then it will be thy fate to dwell<br>
 In depth of world-detested hell.<br>
 As Ocean in the olden time<br>
 Was guilty of an impious crime<br>
 That marked the lord of each fair flood<br>
 As one who spills a Br?maa'a blood.' <a name="fr_288"></a><a href="#fn_288"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
     Thus spake the queen, and wept, and sighed:<br>
 Then righteous Ráma thus replied:<br>
 'I have no power to slight or break<br>
 Commandments which my father spake.<br>
 I bend my head, dear lady, low,<br>
 Forgive me, for I needs must go.<br>
 Once Kaudu, mighty saint, who made<br>
 His dwelling in the forest shade,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_119"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 119</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 A cow--and duty's claims he knew--<br>
 Obedient to his father, slew.<br>
 And in the line from which we spring,<br>
 When ordered by their sire the king,<br>
 Through earth the sons of Sagar cleft,<br>
 And countless things of life bereft.  <a name="fr_289"></a><a href="#fn_289"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 So Jamadagní's son  <a name="fr_290"></a><a href="#fn_290"><font size="1">2</font></a> obeyed<br>
 His sire, when in the wood he laid<br>
 Hia hand upon his axe, and smote<br>
 Through Renuká his mother's throat.<br>
 The deeds of these and more beside.<br>
 Peers of the Gods, my steps shall guide,<br>
 And resolute will I fulfil<br>
 My father's word, my father's will,<br>
 Nor I, O Queen, unsanctioned tread<br>
 This righteous path, by duty led:<br>
 The road my footsteps journey o'er<br>
 Was traversed by the great of yore.<br>
 This high command which all accept<br>
 Shall faithfully by me be kept,<br>
 For duty ne'er will him forsake<br>
 Who fears his sire's command to break.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus to his mother wild with grief:<br>
 Then thus to Lakshman spake the chief<br>
 Of those by whom the bow is bent,<br>
 Mid all who speak, most eloquent:<br>
 'I know what love for me thou hast,<br>
 What firm devotion unsurpassed:<br>
 Thy valour and thy worth I know,<br>
 And glory that appals the foe.<br>
 Blest youth, my mother's woe is great.<br>
 It bends her 'neath its matchless weight:<br>
 No claims will she, with blinded eyes,<br>
 Of truth and patience recognize,<br>
 For duty is supreme in place,<br>
 And truth is duty's noblest base.<br>
 Obedient to my sire's behest<br>
 I serve the cause of duty best.<br>
 For man should truly do whate'er<br>
 To mother, Bráhman, sire, he sware:<br>
 He must in duty's path remain,<br>
 Nor let his word be pledged in vain.<br>
 And, O my brother, how can I<br>
 Obedience to this charge deny?<br>
 Kaikeyí's tongue my purpose spurred,<br>
 But 'twas my sire who gave the word.<br>
 Cast these unholy thoughts aside<br>
 Which smack of war and Warriors' pride;<br>
 To duty's call, not wrath attend,<br>
 And tread the path which I commend,'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ráma by fond affection moved<br>
 His brother Lakshman thus reproved;<br>
 Then with joined hands and reverent head<br>
 Again to Queen Kausályá said:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'I needs must go--do thou consent--<br>
 To the wild wood in banishment.<br>
 O give me, by my life I pray,<br>
 Thy blessing ere I go away.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 I, when the promised years are o'er,<br>
 Shall see Ayodhyá's town once more.<br>
 Then, mother dear, thy tears restrain,<br>
 Nor let thy heart be wrung by pain:<br>
 In time, my father's will obeyed,<br>
 Shall I return from greenwood shade.<br>
 My dear Videhan, thou, and I,<br>
 Lakshman, Sumitrá, feel this tie,<br>
 And must my father's word obey,<br>
 As duty bids that rules for aye.<br>
 Thy preparations now forgo,<br>
 And lock within thy breast thy woe,<br>
 Nor be my pious wish withstood<br>
 To go an exile to the wood."<br>
 Calm and unmoved the prince explained<br>
     His duty's claim and purpose high.<br>
 The mother life and sense regained,<br>
     Looked on her son and made reply:<br>
 'If reverence be thy father's due,<br>
     The same by right and love is mine:<br>
 Go not, my charge I thus renew,<br>
     Nor leave me here in woe to pine,<br>
 What were such lonely life to me,<br>
     Rites to the shades, or deathless lot?<br>
 More dear, my son, one hour with thee<br>
     Than all the world where thou art not.<br>
 As bursts to view, when brands blaze high,<br>
     Some elephant concealed by night,<br>
 So, when he heard his mother's cry,<br>
     Burnt Ráma's grief with fiercer might.<br>
 Thus to the queen, half senseless still,<br>
     And Lakshman, burnt with heart-felt pain,<br>
 True to the right, with steadfast will,<br>
     His duteous speech he spoke again:<br>
 'Brother, I know thy loving mind,<br>
     Thy valour and thy truth I know,<br>
 But now to claims of duty blind<br>
     Thou and my mother swell my woe.<br>
 The fruits of deeds in human life<br>
     Make love, gain, duty, manifest,<br>
 Dear when they meet as some fond wife<br>
     With her sweet babes upon her breast.<br>
 But man to duty first should turn<br>
     Whene'er the three are not combined:<br>
 For those who heed but gain we spurn,<br>
     And those to pleasure all resigned.<br>
 Shall then the virtuous disobey<br>
     Hosts of an aged king and sire,<br>
 Though feverous joy that father sway,<br>
     Or senseless love or causeless ire?<br>
 I have no powcr, commanded thus,<br>
     To slight his promise and decree:<br>
 The honoured sire of both of us,<br>
     My mother's lord and life is he.<br>
 Shall she, while yet the holy king<br>
     Is living, on the right intent,--<br>
 Shall she, like some poor widowed thing,<br>
     Go forth with me to banishment?<br>
 Now, mother, speed thy parting son,<br>
     And let thy blessing soothe my pain,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_120"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 120</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 That I may turn, mine exile done,<br>
     Like King Yayáti, home again.<br>
 Fair glory and the fruit she gives,<br>
     For lust of sway I ne'er will slight:<br>
 What, for the span a mortal lives.<br>
     Were rule of earth without the right?'<br>
 He soothed her thus, firm to the last<br>
     His counsel to his brother told:<br>
 Then round the queen in reverence passed,<br>
     And held her in his loving hold.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_288"></a><a href="ry099.htm#fr_288">118:1</a>  The commentators say that, in a former
 creation, Ocean grieved his mother and
 suffered in consequence the pains of hell.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_289"></a><a href="ry099.htm#fr_289">119:1</a>  As described in Book I, Canto XL.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_290"></a><a href="ry099.htm#fr_290">119:2</a>  Parasúráma.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry100.htm">Next: Canto XXII.: Lakshman Calmed.</a></center>
 </body>