<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry094.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry096.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVII.: RÁMA'S APPROACH.</h3>
 <p>
 As Ráma, rendering blithe and gay<br>
 His loving friends, pursued his way,<br>
 He saw on either hand a press<br>
 Of mingled people numberless.<br>
 The royal street he traversed, where<br>
 Incense of aloe filled the air,<br>
 Where rose high palaces, that vied<br>
 With paly clouds, on either side;<br>
 With flowers of myriad colours graced.<br>
 And food for every varied taste,<br>
 Bright as the glowing path o'erhead<br>
 Which feet of Gods celestial tread,<br>
 Loud benedictions, sweet to hear,<br>
 From countless voices soothed his ear.<br>
 While he to each gave due salute<br>
 His place and dignity to suit:<br>
 'Be thou,' the joyful people cried,<br>
 'Be thou our guardian, lord and guide.<br>
 Throned and anointed king to-day,<br>
 Thy feet set forth upon the way<br>
 Wherein, each honoured as a God,<br>
 Thy fathers and forefathers trod.<br>
 Thy sire and his have graced the throne,<br>
 And loving care to us have shown:<br>
 Thus blest shall we and ours remain,<br>
 Yea still more blest in Ráma's reign.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_113"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 113</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 No more of dainty fare we need,<br>
 And but one cherished object heed,<br>
 That we may see our prince today<br>
 Invested with imperial sway.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such were the words and pleasant speech<br>
 That Ráma heard, unmoved, from each<br>
 Of the dear friends around him spread,<br>
 As onward through the street he sped,<br>
 For none could turn his eye or thought<br>
 From the dear form his glances sought,<br>
 With fruitless ardour forward cast<br>
 Even when Raghu's son had past.<br>
 And he who saw not Ráma nigh,<br>
 Nor caught a look from Ráma's eye,<br>
 A mark for scorn and general blame,<br>
 Reproached himself in bitter shame,<br>
 For to each class his equal mind<br>
 With sympathy and love inclined<br>
 Most fully of the princely four;<br>
 So greatest love to him they bore.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 His circling course the hero bent<br>
 Round shrine and altar, reverent,<br>
 Round homes of Gods, where cross-roads met,<br>
 Where many a sacred tree was set.<br>
 Near to his father's house he drew<br>
 Like Indra's beautiful to view,<br>
 And with the light his glory gave<br>
 Within the royal palace drave.<br>
 Through three broad courts, where bowmen kept<br>
 Their watch and ward, his coursers swept,<br>
 Then through the two remaining went<br>
 On foot the prince pre?inent.<br>
 Through all the courts the hero passed,<br>
 And gained the ladies' bower at last;<br>
 Then through the door alone withdrew,<br>
 And left without his retinue.<br>
 When thus the monarch's noble boy<br>
     Had gone his sire to meet,<br>
 The multitude, elate with joy,<br>
     Stood watching in the street,<br>
 And his return with eager eyes<br>
     Expected at the gates,<br>
 As for his darling moon to rise<br>
     The King of Rivers  <a name="fr_285"></a><a href="ry096.htm#fn_285"><font size="1">1</font></a> waits.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_283"></a><a href="ry094.htm#fr_283">112:1b</a>  In a former life.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_284"></a><a href="ry094.htm#fr_284">112:2b</a>  One of the lunar asterisms, represented
 as the favourite wife of the Moon. See
 p. 4, note.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry096.htm">Next: Canto XVIII.: The Sentence.</a></center>
 </body>