<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry093.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry095.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVI.: RÁMA SUMMONED.</h3>
 <p>
 So through the crowded inner door<br>
 Sumantra, skilled in ancient lore,<br>
 On to the private chambers pressed<br>
 Which stood apart from all the rest.<br>
 There youthful warriors, true and bold,<br>
 Whose ears were ringed with polished gold,<br>
 All armed with trusty bows and darts,<br>
 Watched with devoted eyes and hearts.<br>
 And hoary men, a faithful train,<br>
 Whose aged hands held staves of cane,<br>
 The ladies' guard, apparelled fair<br>
 In red attire, were stationed there.<br>
 Soon as they saw Sumantra nigh,<br>
 Each longed his lord to gratify,<br>
 And from his seat beside the door<br>
 Up sprang each ancient servitor.<br>
 Then to the warders quickly cried<br>
 The skilled Sumantra, void of pride:<br>
 'Tell Ráma that the charioteer<br>
 Sumantra waits for audience here.'<br>
 The ancient men with one accord<br>
 Seeking the pleasure of their lord,<br>
 Passing with speed the chamber door<br>
 To Ráma's ear the message bore.<br>
 Forthwith the prince with duteous heed<br>
 Called in the messenger with speed,<br>
 For 'twas his sire's command, he knew,<br>
 That sent him for the interview.<br>
 Like Lord Kuvera, well arrayed,<br>
     He pressed a couch of gold,<br>
 Wherefrom a covering of brocade<br>
     Hung down in many a fold.<br>
 Oil and the sandal's fragrant dust<br>
     Had tinged his body o'er<br>
 Dark as the stream the spearman's thrust<br>
     Drains from the wounded boar.<br>
 Him Sítá watched with tender care,<br>
     A chouri in her hand,<br>
 As Chitrá,  <a name="fr_281"></a><a href="#fn_281"><font size="1">1</font></a> ever fond in fair,<br>
     Beside the Moon will stand.<br>
 Him glorious with unborrowed light,<br>
 A liberal lord, of sunlike might,<br>
 Sumantra hailed in words like these,<br>
 Well skilled in gentle courtesies,<br>
 As, with joined hands in reverence raised,<br>
 Upon the beauteous prince he gazed:<br>
 'Happy Kaus'alyá! Blest is she,<br>
 The Mother of a son like thee.<br>
 Now rise, O Ráma, speed away.<br>
 Go to thy sire without delay:<br>
 For he and Queen Kaikeyí seek<br>
 An interview with thee to speak.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The lion-lord of men, the best<br>
 Of splendid heroes, thus addressed,<br>
 To Sítá spake with joyful cheer:<br>
 'The king and qneen, my lady dear,<br>
 Touching the throning, for my sake<br>
 Some salutary counsel take.<br>
 The lady ot the full black eye<br>
 Would fain her husband gratify,<br>
 And, all his purpose understood,<br>
 Counsels the monarch to my good.<br>
 A happy fate is mine, I ween,<br>
 When he, consulting with his queen,<br>
 Sumantra on this charge, intent<br>
 Upon my gain and good, has sent.<br>
 An envoy of so noble sort<br>
 Well suits the splendour of the court.<br>
 The consecration rite this day<br>
 Will join me in imperial sway.<br>
 To meet the lord of earth, for so<br>
 His order bids me, I will go.<br>
 Thou, lady, here in comfort stay,<br>
 And with thy maidens rest or play.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus Ráma spake. For meet reply<br>
 The lady of the large black eye<br>
 Attended to the door her lord,<br>
 And blessings on his head implored:<br>
 'The majesty and royal state<br>
 Which holy Bráhmans venerate,<br>
 The consecration and the rite<br>
 Which sanctifies the ruler's might,<br>
 And all imperial powers should be<br>
 Thine by thy father's high decree,<br>
 As He, the worlds who formed and planned,<br>
 The kingship gave to Indra's hand.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_112"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 112</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then shall mine eyes my king adore<br>
 When lustral rites and fast are o'er,<br>
 And black deer's skin and roebuck's horn<br>
 Thy lordly limbs and hand adorn.<br>
 May He whose hands the thunder wield<br>
 Be in the east thy guard and shield;<br>
 May Yama's care the south befriend,<br>
 And Varun's arm the west defend;<br>
 And let Kuvera, Lord of Gold,<br>
 The north with firm protection hold.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma spoke a kind farewell,<br>
 And hailed the blessings as they fell<br>
 From Sítá's gentle lips; and then,<br>
 As a young lion from his den<br>
 Descends the mountain's stony side,<br>
 So from the hall the hero hied.<br>
 First Lakshman at the door he viewed<br>
 Who stood in reverent attitude,<br>
 Then to the central court he pressed<br>
 Where watched the friends who loved him best.<br>
 To all his dear companions there<br>
 He gave kind looks and greeting fair.<br>
 On to the lofty car that glowed<br>
 Like fire the royal tiger strode.<br>
 Bright as himself its silver shone:<br>
 A tiger's skin was laid thereon.<br>
 With cloudlike thunder, as it rolled,<br>
 It flashed with gems and burnished gold,<br>
 And, like the sun's meridian blaze,<br>
 Blinded the eye that none could gaze.<br>
 Like youthful elephants, tall and strong,<br>
 Fleet coursers whirled the car along:<br>
 In such a car the Thousand-eyed<br>
 Borne by swift horses loves to ride.<br>
 So like Parjanya,  <a name="fr_282"></a><a href="#fn_282"><font size="1">1</font></a> when he flies<br>
 Thundering through the autumn skies,<br>
 The hero from the palace sped,<br>
 As leaves the moon some cloud o'erhead.<br>
 Still close to Ráma Lakshman kept,<br>
 Behind him to the car he leapt,<br>
 And, watching with fraternal care,<br>
 Waved the long chouri's silver hair,<br>
 As from the palace gate he came<br>
 Up rose the tumult of acclaim.<br>
 While loud huzza and jubilant shout<br>
 Pealed from the gathered myriads out.<br>
 Then elephants, like mountains vast,<br>
 And steeds who all their kind surpassed,<br>
 Followed their lord by hundreds, nay<br>
 By thousands, led in long array.<br>
 First marched a band of warriors trained,<br>
 With sandal dust and aloe stained;<br>
 Well armed was each with sword and bow,<br>
 And every breast with hope aglow,<br>
 And ever, as they onward went,<br>
     Shouts from the warrior train,<br>
 And every sweet-toned instrument<br>
     Prolonged the minstrel strain.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 On passed the tamer of his foes,<br>
 While well clad dames, in crowded rows,<br>
 Each chamber lattice thronged to view,<br>
 And chaplets on the hero threw.<br>
 Then all, of peerless face and limb,<br>
 Sang Ráma's praise for love of him,<br>
 And blent their voices, soft and sweet.<br>
 From palace high and crowded street:<br>
 'Now, sure, Kaus'alyá's heart must swell<br>
 To see the son she loves so well,<br>
 Thee Ráma, thee, her joy and pride,<br>
 Triumphant o'er the realm preside.'<br>
 Then--for they knew his bride most fair<br>
 Of all who part the soft dark hair,<br>
 His love, his life, possessed the whole<br>
 Of her young hero's heart and soul:--<br>
 'Be sure the lady's fate repays<br>
 Some mighty vow of ancient days,  <a name="fr_283"></a><a href="ry095.htm#fn_283"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 For blest with Ráma's love is she<br>
 As, with the Moon's, sweet Rohiní.'  <a name="fr_284"></a><a href="ry095.htm#fn_284"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such were the witching words that came<br>
 From lips of many a peerless dame<br>
 Crowding the palace roofs to greet<br>
 The hero as he gained the street.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_281"></a><a href="ry094.htm#fr_281">111:1</a>  A star in the spike of Virgo: hence
 the name of the mouth Chaitra at Chait.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_282"></a><a href="ry094.htm#fr_282">112:1</a>   The Rain-God.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry095.htm">Next: Canto XVII.: Ráma's Approach.</a></center>
 </body>