<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry091.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry093.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIV.: RÁMA SUMMONED.</h3>
 <p>
 The wicked queen her speech renewed,<br>
 When rolling on the earth she viewed<br>
 Ikshváku's son, Ayodhyá's king,<br>
 For his dear Ráma sorrowing:<br>
 'Why, by a simple promise bound,<br>
 Liest thou prostrate on the ground,<br>
 As though a grievous sin dismayed<br>
 Thy spirit! Why so sore afraid?<br>
 Keep still thy word. The righteous deem<br>
 That truth, mid duties, is supreme:<br>
 And now in truth and honour's name<br>
 I bid thee own the binding claim.<br>
 S'aivya, a king whom earth obeyed,<br>
 Onoe to a hawk a promise made,<br>
 Gave to the bird his flesh and bone,<br>
 And by his truth made heaven his own.  <a name="fr_277"></a><a href="#fn_277"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Alarka, when a Bráhman famed<br>
 For Scripture lore his promise claimed,<br>
 Tore from his head his bleeding eyes<br>
 And unreluctant gave the prize.<br>
 His narrow bounds prescribed restrain<br>
 The Rivers' Lord, the mighty main,<br>
 Who, though his waters boil and rave,<br>
 Keeps faithful to the word he gave.<br>
 Truth all religion comprehends,<br>
 Through all the world its might extends:<br>
 In truth alone is justice placed,<br>
 On truth the words of God are based;<br>
 A life in truth unchanging past<br>
 Will bring the highest bliss at last<br>
 If thou the right would still pursue,<br>
 Be constant to thy word and true:<br>
 Let me thy promise fruitful see,<br>
 For boons, O King, proceed from thee.<br>
 Now to preserve thy righteous fame,<br>
 And yielding to my earnest claim--<br>
 Thrice I repeat it--send thy child,<br>
 Thy Ráma, to the forest wild.<br>
 But if the boon thou still deny,<br>
 Before thy face, forlorn, I die.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus was the helpless monarch stung<br>
 By Queen Kaikeyí's fearless tongue,<br>
 As Bali strove in vain to loose<br>
 His limbs from Indra's fatal noose.<br>
 Dismayed in soul and pale with fear,<br>
 The monarch, like a trembling steer<br>
 Between the chariot's wheel and yoke,<br>
 Again to Queen Kaikeyí spoke,<br>
 With sad eyes fixt in vacant stare,<br>
 Gathering courage from despair:<br>
 'That hand I took, thou sinful dame,<br>
 With texts, before the sacred flame,<br>
 Thee and thy son, I scorn and hate,<br>
 And all at once repudiate.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_108"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 108</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The night is fled: the dawn is near:<br>
 Soon will the holy priests be here<br>
 To bid me for the rite prepare<br>
 That with my son the tnrone will share,<br>
 The preparation made to grace<br>
 My Ráma in his royal place--<br>
 With this, e'en this, my darling for<br>
 My death the funeral flood shall pour.<br>
 Thou and thy son at least forbear<br>
 In offerings to my shade to share,<br>
 For by the plot thy guile has laid<br>
 His consecration will be stayed.<br>
 This very day how shall I brook<br>
 To meet each subject's altered look?<br>
 To mark each gloomy joyless brow<br>
 That was so bright and glad but now?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 While thus the high-souled monarch spoke<br>
 To the stern queen, the Morning broke,<br>
 And holy night had slowly fled,<br>
 With moon and stars engarlanded.<br>
 Yet once again the cruel queen<br>
 Spoke words in answer fierce and keen,<br>
 Still on her evil purpose bent,<br>
 Wild with her rage and eloquent:<br>
 'What speech is this? Such words as these<br>
 Seem sprung from poison-sown disease.<br>
 Quick to thy noble Ráma send<br>
 And bid him on his sire attend.<br>
 When to my son the rule is given;<br>
 When Ráma to the woods is driven;<br>
 When not a rival copes with me,<br>
 From chains of duty thou art free.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus goaded, like a generous steed<br>
 Urged by sharp spurs to double speed,<br>
 'My senses are astray,' he cried,<br>
 'And duty's bonds my hands have tied.<br>
 I long to see mine eldest son,<br>
 My virtuous, my beloved one.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And now the night had past away;<br>
 Out shone the Maker of the Day,<br>
 Bringing the planetary hour<br>
 And moment of auspicious power.<br>
 Vas'ishtha, virtuous, far renowned,<br>
 Whose young disciples girt him round,<br>
 With sacred things without delay<br>
 Through the fair city took his way.<br>
 He traversed, where the people thronged.<br>
 And all for Ráma's coming longed,<br>
 The town as fair in festive show<br>
 As his who lays proud cities low.  <a name="fr_278"></a><a href="#fn_278"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 He reached the palace where he heard<br>
 The mingled notes of many a bird,<br>
 Where crowded thick high-honoured bands<br>
 Of guards with truncheons in their hands.<br>
 Begirt by many a sage, elate,<br>
 Vas'ishtha reached the royal gate,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 And standing by the door he found<br>
 Sumantra, for his form renowned,<br>
 The king's illustrious charioteer<br>
 And noble counsellor and peer.<br>
 To him well skilled in every part<br>
 Of his hereditary art<br>
 Vas'ishtha said: 'O charioteer,<br>
 Inform the king that I am here,<br>
 Here ready by my side behold<br>
 These sacred vessels made of gold,<br>
 Which water for the rite contain<br>
 From Gangá and each distant main.<br>
 Here for installing I have brought<br>
 The seat prescribed of fig-wood wrought,<br>
 All kinds of seed and precious scent<br>
 And many a gem and ornament;<br>
 Grain, sacred grass, the garden's spoil,<br>
 Honey and curds and milk and oil;<br>
 Eight radiant maids, the best of all<br>
 War elephants that feed in stall;<br>
 A four-horse car, a bow and sword.<br>
 A litter, men to bear their lord;<br>
 A white umbrella bright and fair<br>
 That with the moon may well compare;<br>
 Two chouries of the whitest hair;<br>
 A golden beaker rich and rare;<br>
 A bull high-humped and fair to view,<br>
 Girt with gold bands and white of hue;<br>
 A four-toothed steed with flowing mane,<br>
 A throne which lions carved sustain;<br>
 A tiger's skin, the sacred fire,<br>
 Fresh kindled, which the rites require;<br>
 The best musicians skilled to play,<br>
 And dancing-girls in raiment gay;<br>
 Kine, Bráhmans, teachers fill the court,<br>
 And bird and beast of purest sort.<br>
 From town and village, far and near,<br>
 The noblest men are gathered here;<br>
 Here merchants with their followers crowd,<br>
 And men in joyful converse loud,<br>
 And kings from many a distant land<br>
 To view the consecration stand.<br>
 The dawn is come, the lucky day;<br>
 Go bid the monarch haste away,<br>
 That now Prince Ráma may obtain<br>
 The empire, and begin his reign.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Soon as he heard the high behest<br>
 The driver of the chariot pressed<br>
 Within the chambers of the king,<br>
 His lord with praises honouring.<br>
 And none of all the warders checked<br>
 His entrance for their great respect<br>
 Of him well known, in place so high,<br>
 Still fain their king to gratify.<br>
 He stood beside the royal chief,<br>
 Unwitting of his deadly grief,<br>
 And with sweet words began to sing<br>
 The praises of his lord and king:<br>
 'As, when the sun begins to rise,<br>
 The sparkling sea delights our eyes,<br>
 Wake, calm with gentle soul, and thus<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_109"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 109</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Give rapture, mighty King, to us.<br>
 As Mátali  <a name="fr_279"></a><a href="#fn_279"><font size="1">1</font></a> this selfsame hour<br>
 Sang lauds of old to Indra's power,<br>
 When he the Titan hosts o'erthrew,<br>
 So hymn I thee with praises due.<br>
 The Vedas, with their kindred lore,<br>
 Brahma their soul-born Lord adore,<br>
 With all the doctrines of the wise,<br>
 And bid him, as I bid thee, rise.<br>
 As, with the moon, the Lord of Day<br>
 Wakes with the splendour of his ray<br>
 Prolific Earth, who neath him lies,<br>
 So, mighty King, I bid thee rise.<br>
 With blissful words, O Lord of men,<br>
 Rise, radiant in thy form, as when<br>
 The sun ascending darts his light<br>
 From Meru's everlasting height.<br>
 May Œiva, Agni, Sun, and Moon<br>
 Bestow on thee each choicest boon,<br>
 Kuvera, Varun, Indra bless<br>
 Kakutstha's son with all success.<br>
 Awake, the holy night is fled,<br>
 The happy light abroad is spread;<br>
 Awake, O best of kings, and share<br>
 The glorious task that claims thy care.<br>
 The holy sage Vaœishtha waits,<br>
 With all his Bráhmans, at the gate<br>
 Give thy decree, without delay,<br>
 To consecrate thy son today.<br>
 As armies, by no captain led,<br>
 As flocks that feed unshepherded,<br>
 Such is the fortune of a state<br>
 Without a king and desolate.'<br>
     Such were the words the bard addressed,<br>
 With weight of sage advice impressed;<br>
 And, as he heard, the hapless king<br>
 Felt deeper yet his sorrow's sting.<br>
 At length, all joy and comfort fled,<br>
 He raised his eyes with weeping red,<br>
 And, mournful for his Ráma's sake.<br>
 The good and glorious monarch spake:<br>
 'Why seek with idle praise to greet<br>
 The wretch for whom no praise is meet!<br>
 Thy words mine aching bosom tear,<br>
 And plunge me deeper in despair.'<br>
     Sumantra heard the sad reply,<br>
 And saw his master's tearful eye.<br>
 With reverent palm to palm applied<br>
 He drew a little space aside.<br>
 Then, as the king, with misery weak,<br>
 With vain endeavour strove to speak,<br>
 Kaikeyí, skilled in plot and plan,<br>
 To sage Sumantra thus began:<br>
 'The king, absorbed in joyful thought<br>
 For his dear son, no rest has sought:<br>
 Sleepless to him the night has past,<br>
 And now o'erwatched he sinks at last<br>
 Then go, Sumantra, and with speed<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The glorious Ráma hither lead:<br>
 Go, as I pray, nor longer wait;<br>
 No time is this to hesitate.'<br>
     'How can I go, O Ladv fair,<br>
 Unless my lord his will declare?'<br>
     'Fain would I see him,' cried the king,<br>
 'Quick, quick, my beauteous Ráma bring.'<br>
     Then rose the happy thought to cheer<br>
 The bosom of the charioteer,<br>
 'The king, I ween, of pious mind.<br>
 The consecration has designed.'<br>
 Sumantra for his wisdom famed,<br>
 Delighted with the thought he framed,<br>
 From the calm chamber, like a bay<br>
 Of crowded ocean, took his way.<br>
     He turned his face to neither side,<br>
       But forth he hurried straight;<br>
 Only a little while he eyed<br>
 The guards who kept the gate.<br>
 He saw in front a gathered crowd<br>
   Of men of every class,<br>
 Who, parting as he came, allowed<br>
   The charioteer to pass.<br>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_277"></a><a href="ry092.htm#fr_277">107:1</a>  See <i>Additional Notes</i>, THE SUPPLIANT
 DOVE.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_278"></a><a href="ry092.htm#fr_278">108:1</a>  Indra, called also Purandara, Town
 destroyer.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_279"></a><a href="ry092.htm#fr_279">109:1</a>  Indra's charioteer.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry093.htm">Next: Canto XV.: The Preparations.</a></center>
 </body>