<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry108.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry110.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXI.: LAKSHMAN'S PRAYER.</h3>
 <p>
 When Lakshman, who had joined them there,<br>
 Had heard the converse of the pair,<br>
 His mien was changed, his eyes o'erflowed,<br>
 His breast no more could bear its load.<br>
 The son of Raghu, sore distressed,<br>
 His brother's feet with fervour pressed,<br>
 While thus to Sita he complained.<br>
 And him by lofty vows enchained:<br>
 'If thou wilt make the woods thy home,<br>
 Where elephant and roebuck roam,<br>
 I too this day will take my bow<br>
 And in the path before thee go.<br>
 Our way will lie through forest ground<br>
 Where countless birds and beasts are found,<br>
 I heed not homes of Gods on high,<br>
 I heed not life that cannot die,<br>
 Nor would I wish, with thee away,<br>
 O'er the three worlds to stretch my sway.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus Lakshman spake, with earnest prayer<br>
 His brother's woodland life to share.<br>
 As Rama still his prayer denied<br>
 With soothing words, again he cried:<br>
 'When leave at first thou didst accord,<br>
 Why dost thou stay me now, my lord?<br>
 Thou art my refuge: O, be kind,<br>
 Leave me not, dear my lord, behind.<br>
 Thou canst not, brother, if thou choose<br>
 That I still live, my wish refuse.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The glorious chief his speech renewed<br>
 To faithful Lakshman as he sued,<br>
 And on the eyes of Ráma gazed<br>
 Longing to load, with hands upraised:<br>
 'Thou art a hero just and dear,<br>
 Whose steps to virtue's path adhere,<br>
 Loved as my life till life shall end.<br>
 My faithful brother and my friend.<br>
 If to the woods thou take thy way<br>
 With Sítá and with me to-day,<br>
 Who for Kaus'alyá will provide,<br>
 And guard the good Sumitra's side?<br>
 The lord of earth, of mighty power,<br>
 Who sends good things in plenteous shower,<br>
 As Indra pours the grateful rain,<br>
 A captive lies in passion's chain.<br>
 The power imperial for her son<br>
 Has As'vapati's daughter  <a name="fr_306"></a><a href="#fn_306"><font size="1">1</font></a> won,<br>
 And she, proud queen, will little heed<br>
 Her miserable rivals' need.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 So Bharat, ruler of the land,<br>
 By Queen Kaikeyí's side will stand,<br>
 Nor of those two will ever think.<br>
 While grieving in despair they sink.<br>
 Now, Lakshman, as thy love decrees,<br>
 Or else the monarch's heart to please,<br>
 Follow this counsel and protect<br>
 My honoured mother from neglect.<br>
 So thou, while not to me alone<br>
 Thy great affection will be shown,<br>
 To highest duty wilt adhere<br>
 By serving those thou shouldst revere.<br>
 Now, son of Raghu, for my sake<br>
 Obey this one request I make,<br>
 Or, of her darling son bereft,<br>
 Kausaly'á has no comfort left.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The faithful Lakshman, thus addressed<br>
 In gentle words which love expressed,<br>
 To him in lore of language learned,<br>
 His answer, eloquent, returned:<br>
 'Nay, through thy might each queen will share<br>
 Attentive Bharat's love and care.<br>
 Should Bharat, raised as king to sway<br>
 This noblest realm, his trust betray,<br>
 Nor for their safety well provide,<br>
 Seduced by ill-suggesting pride,<br>
 Doubt not my vengeful hand shall kill<br>
 The cruel wretch who counsels ill--<br>
 Kill him and all who lend him aid,<br>
 And the three worlds in league arrayed.<br>
 And good Kausaly'á well can fee<br>
 A thousand champions like to me.<br>
 A thousand hamlets rich in grain<br>
 The station of that queen maintain.<br>
 She may, and my dear mother too,<br>
 Live on the ample revenue.<br>
 Then let me follow thee: herein<br>
 Is naught that may resemble sin.<br>
 So shall I in my wish suceed,<br>
 And aid, perhaps, my brother's need.<br>
 My bow and quiver well supplied<br>
 With arrows hanging at my side,<br>
 My hands shall spade and basket bear,<br>
 And for thy feet the way prepare.<br>
 I'll bring thee roots and berries sweet.<br>
 And woodland fare which hermits eat.<br>
 Thou shall with thy Videhan spouse<br>
 Recline upon the mountain's brows:<br>
 Be mine the toil, be mine to keep<br>
 Watch o'er thee waking or asleep.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Filled by his speech with joy and pride<br>
 Ráma to Lakshman thus replied:<br>
 'Go then, my brother, bid adieu<br>
 To all thy friends and retinue.<br>
 And those two bows of fearful might,<br>
 Celestial, which, at that famed rite,<br>
 Lord Varun gave to Janak, king<br>
 Of fair Videha with thee bring,<br>
 With heavenly coats of sword-proof mail,<br>
 Quivers, whose arrows never fail,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_132"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 132</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And golden-hilted swords so keen,<br>
 The rivals of the sun in sheen.<br>
 Tended with care these arms are all<br>
 Preserved in my preceptor's hall.<br>
 With speed, O Lakshman, go, produce,<br>
 And bring them hither for our use.'<br>
 So on a woodland life intent,<br>
 To see his faithful friends he went,<br>
 And brought the heavenly arms which lay<br>
 By Ráma's teacher stored away,<br>
 And Raghu's son to Ráma showed<br>
 Those wondrous arms which gleamed and glowed,<br>
 Well kept, adorned with many a wreath<br>
 Of flowers on case, and hilt, and sheath.<br>
 The prudent Ráma at the sight<br>
 Addressed his brother with delight:<br>
 'Well art thou come, my brother dear.<br>
 For much I longed to see thee here.<br>
 For with thine aid, before I go,<br>
 I would my gold and wealth bestow<br>
 Upon the Bráhmans sage, who school<br>
 Their lives by stern devotion's rule.<br>
 And for all those who ever dwell<br>
 Within my house and serve me well,<br>
 Devoted servants, true and good,<br>
 Will I provide a livelihood.<br>
     Quick, go and summon to this place<br>
         The good Vas'ishtha's son,<br>
     Suyajna, of the Bráhman race<br>
         The first and holiest one.<br>
     To all the Bráhmans wise and good<br>
         Will I due reverence pay,<br>
     Then to the solitary wood<br>
         With thee will take my way.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_306"></a><a href="ry109.htm#fr_306">131:1</a>  Kaikeyi.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry110.htm">Next: Canto XXXII.: The Gift of The Treasures.</a></center>
 </body>