<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry101.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry103.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIV.: KAUS'ALYÁ CALMED.</h3>
 <p>
 But when Kaus'alyá saw that he<br>
 Resolved to keep his sire's decree,<br>
 While tears and sobs her utterance broke,<br>
 Her very righteous speech she spoke:<br>
 'Can he, a stranger yet to pain,<br>
 Whose pleasant words all hearts enchain,<br>
 Son of the king and me the queen,<br>
 Live on the grain his hands may glean;<br>
 Can he, whose slaves and menials eat<br>
 The finest cakes of sifted wheat--<br>
 Can Ráma in the forest live<br>
 On roots and fruit which woodlands give<br>
 Who will believe, who will not fear<br>
 When the sad story smites his ear,<br>
 That one so dear, so noble held,<br>
 Is by the king his sire expelled?<br>
 Now surely none may Fate resist,<br>
 Which orders all as it may list,<br>
 If, Ráma, in thy strength and grace,<br>
 The woods become thy dwelling-place.<br>
 A childless mother long I grieved,<br>
 And many a sigh for offspring heaved,<br>
 With wistful longing weak and worn<br>
 Till thou at last, my son, wast born.<br>
 Fanned by the storm of that desire<br>
 Deep in my soul I felt the fire,<br>
 Whose offerings flowed from weeping eyes,<br>
 With fuel fed of groans and sighs,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_123"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 123</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 While round the flame the smoke grew hot<br>
 Of tears because thou earnest not.<br>
 Now reft of thee, too fiery fierce<br>
 The flame of woe my heart will pierce,<br>
 As, when the days of spring return,<br>
 The sun's hot beams the forest burn.<br>
 The mother cow still follows near<br>
 The wanderings of her youngling dear.<br>
 So close to thine my feet shall be,<br>
 Where'er thou goest following thee.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ráma, the noblest lord of men,<br>
 Heard his fond mother's speech, and then<br>
 In soothing words like these replied<br>
 To the sad queen who wept and sighed:<br>
 'Nay, by Kaikeyí's art beguiled,<br>
 When I am banished to the wild,<br>
 If thou, my mother, also fly,<br>
 The aged king will surely die.<br>
 When wedded dames their lords forsake,<br>
 Long for the crime their souls shall ache.<br>
 Thou must not e'en in thought within<br>
 Thy bosom frame so dire a sin.<br>
 Long as Kakutstha's son, who reigns<br>
 Lord of the earth, in life remains,<br>
 Thou must with love his will obey:<br>
 This duty claims, supreme for aye.<br>
 Yes, mother, thou and I must be<br>
 Submissive to my sire's decree,<br>
 King, husband, sire is he confessed,<br>
 The lord of all, the worthiest.<br>
 I in the wilds my days will spend<br>
 Till twice seven years have reached an end,<br>
 Then with great joy will come again,<br>
 And faithful to thy hests remain.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Kaus'alyá by her son addressed,<br>
 With love and passion sore distressed,<br>
 Afflicted, with her eyes bedewed,<br>
 To Ráma thus her speech renewed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Nay, Ráma, but my heart will break<br>
 If with these queens my home I make.<br>
 Lead me too with thee; let me go<br>
 And wander like a woodland roe.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then, while no tear the hero shed.<br>
 Thus to the weeping queen he said:<br>
 'Mother, while lives the husband, he<br>
 Is woman's lord and deity.<br>
 O dearest lady, thou and I<br>
 Our lord and king must ne'er deny;<br>
 The lord of earth himself have we<br>
 Our guardian wise and friend to be.<br>
 And Bharat, true to duty's call,<br>
 Whose sweet words take the hearts of all,<br>
 Will serve thee well, and ne'er forget<br>
 The virtuous path before him set.<br>
 Be this, I pray, thine earnest care,<br>
 That the old king my father ne'er,<br>
 When I have parted hence, may know,<br>
 Grieved for his son, a pang of woe.<br>
 Let not this grief his soul distress,<br>
 To kill him with the bitterness.<br>
 With duteous care, in every thing,<br>
 Love, comfort, cheer the aged king.<br>
 Though, best of womankind, a spouse<br>
 Keeps firmly all her fasts and vows,<br>
 Nor yet her husband's will obeys, '<br>
 She treads in sin's forbidden ways.<br>
 She to her husband's will who bends,<br>
 Goes to high bliss that never ends,<br>
 Yea, though the Gods have found in her<br>
 No reverential worshipper.<br>
 Bent on his weal, a woman still<br>
 Must seek to do her husband's will:<br>
 For Scripture, custom, law uphold<br>
 This duty Heaven revealed of old.<br>
 Honour true Bráhmans for my sake,<br>
 And constant offerings duly make,<br>
 With fire-oblations and with flowers,<br>
 To all the host of heavenly powers.<br>
 Look to the coming time, and yearn<br>
 For the glad hour of my return.<br>
 And still thy duteous course pursue,<br>
 Abstemious, humble, kind, and true.<br>
 The highest bliss shall thou obtain<br>
 When I from exile come again,<br>
 If, best of those who keep the right,<br>
 The king my sire still see the light.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The queen, by Ráma thus addressed,<br>
 Still with a mother's grief oppressed,<br>
 While her long eyes with tears were dim,<br>
 Began once more and answered him:<br>
 'Not by my pleading maybe stayed<br>
 The firm resolve thy soul has made.<br>
 My hero, thou wilt go; and none<br>
 The stern commands of Fate may shun.<br>
 Go forth, dear child whom naught can bend<br>
 And may all bliss thy steps attend.<br>
 Thou wilt return, and that dear day<br>
 Will chase mine every grief away.<br>
 Thou wilt return, thy duty done,<br>
 Thy vows discharged, high glory won;<br>
 From filial debt wilt thou be free,<br>
 And sweetest joy will come on me.<br>
 My son, the will of mighty Fate<br>
 At every time must dominate,<br>
 If now it drives thee hence to stray<br>
 Heedless of me who bid thee stay.<br>
 Go, strong of arm, go forth, my boy,<br>
 Go forth, again to come with joy,<br>
 And thine expectant mother cheer<br>
 With those sweet tones she loves to hear.<br>
 O that the blessed hour were nigh<br>
 When thou shalt glad this anxious eye,<br>
 With matted hair and hermit dress<br>
 returning from the wilderness.'<br>
     Kaus'alyá's conscious soul approved,<br>
         As her proud glance she bent<br>
     On Ráma constant and unmoved,<br>
         Resolved on banishment.<br>
     Such words, with happy omens fraught<br>
         To her dear son she said,<br>
     Invoking with each eager thought<br>
         A blessing on his head.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_124"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 124</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry103.htm">Next: Canto XXV.: Kaus'alya's Blessing.</a></center>
 </body>