<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry104.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry106.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVII.: SÍTÁ'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 His sweetly-speaking bride, who best<br>
 Deserved her lord, he thus addressed.<br>
 Then tender love bade passion wake,<br>
 And thus the fair Videhan spake:<br>
 'What words are these that thou hast said?<br>
 Contempt of me the thought has bred.<br>
 O best of heroes, I dismiss<br>
 With bitter scorn a speech like this:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_127"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 127</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Unworthy of a warrior's fame<br>
 It taints a monarch's son with shame,<br>
 Ne'er to be heard from those who know<br>
 The science of the sword and bow.<br>
 My lord, the mother, sire, and son,<br>
 Receive their lots by merit won;<br>
 The brother and the daughter find<br>
 The portions to their deeds aligned.<br>
 The wife alone, whate'er await,<br>
 Must share on earth her husband's fate.<br>
 So now the king's command which sends<br>
 Thee to the wild, to me extends.<br>
 The wife can find no refuge, none,<br>
 In father, mother, self, or son:<br>
 Both here, and when they vanish hence,<br>
 Her husband is her sole defence.<br>
 If, Raghu's son, thy steps are led<br>
 Where Dandak's pathless wilds are spread,<br>
 My foot before thine own shall pass<br>
 Through tangled thorn and matted grass.<br>
 Dismiss thine anger and thy doubt:<br>
 Like refuse water cast them out,<br>
 And lead me, O my hero, hence--<br>
 I know not sin--with confidence.<br>
 Whate'er his lot,'tis far more sweet<br>
 To follow still a husband's feet<br>
 Than in rich palaces to lie,<br>
 Or roam at pleasure through the sky.<br>
 My mother and my sire have taught<br>
 What duty bids, and trained each thought,<br>
 Nor have I now mine ear to turn<br>
 The duties of a wife to learn,<br>
 I'll seek with thee the woodland dell<br>
 And pathless wild where no men dwell,<br>
 Where tribes of silvan creatures roam,<br>
 And many a tiger makes his home.<br>
 My life shall pass as pleasant there<br>
 As in my father's palace fair.<br>
 The worlds shall wake no care in me;<br>
 My only care be truth to thee.<br>
 There while thy wish I still obey,<br>
 True to my vows with thee I'll stray,<br>
 And there shall blissful hours be spent<br>
 In woods with honey redolent.<br>
 In forest shades thy mighty arm<br>
 Would keep a stranger's life from harm,<br>
 And how shall Sitá think of fear<br>
 When thou, O glorious lord, art near?<br>
 Heir of high bliss, my choice is made,<br>
 Nor can I from my will be stayed.<br>
 Doubt not; the earth will yield me roots,<br>
 These will I eat, and woodland fruits;<br>
 And as with thee I wander there<br>
 I will not bring thee grief or care.<br>
 I long, when thou, wise lord, art nigh,<br>
 All fearless, with delighted eye<br>
 To gaze upon the rocky hill,<br>
 The lake, the fountain, and the hill;<br>
 To sport with thee, my limbs to cool,<br>
 In some pure lily-covered pool,<br>
 While the white swan's and mallard's wings<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Are plashing in the water-springs.<br>
 So would a thousand seasons flee<br>
 Like one sweet day, if spent with thee.<br>
 Without my lord I would not prize<br>
 A home with Gods above the skies:<br>
 Without my lord, my life to bless,<br>
 Where could be heaven or happiness?<br>
     Forbid me not: with thee I go<br>
         The tangled wood to tread.<br>
     There will I live with thee, as though<br>
         This roof were o'er my head.<br>
     My will for thine shall be resigned;<br>
         Thy feet my steps shall guide.<br>
     Thou, only thou, art in my mind:<br>
         I heed not all beside.<br>
     Thy heart shall ne'er by me be grieved;<br>
         Do not my prayer deny:<br>
     Take me, dear lord; of thee bereaved<br>
         Thy Sitá swears to die.'<br>
     These words the duteous lady spake,<br>
         Nor would he yet consent<br>
     His faithful wife with him to take<br>
         To share his banishment.<br>
     He soothed her with his gentle speech;<br>
         To change her will he strove:<br>
     And much he said the woes to teach<br>
         Of those in wilds who rove.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry106.htm">Next: Canto XXVIII.: The Dangers of The Wood.</a></center>
 </body>