<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry100.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry102.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIII.: LAKSHMAN'S ANGER.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Rama to his brother said;<br>
 And Laksbnmn bent his drooping head.<br>
 In turns by grief and pride impelled,<br>
 A middle course of thought he held,<br>
 Then in a frown of anger, bent<br>
 His brows that chief most excellent,<br>
 And like a serpent in his hole,<br>
 Breathed fierce and fast in wrath of soul.<br>
 His threatening brows so darkly frowned,<br>
 His eyes so fiercely glanced around,<br>
 They made his glare, which none might brook,<br>
 Like some infuriate lion's look.<br>
 Like some wild elephant, full oft<br>
 He raised and shook his hand  <a name="fr_291"></a><a href="#fn_291"><font size="1">1</font></a> aloft.<br>
 Now turned his neck to left and right<br>
 Now bent, now raised its stately height.<br>
 Now in his rage that sword he felt<br>
 Which mangling wounds to foemen dealt,<br>
 With sidelong glance his brother eyed,<br>
 And thus in burning words replied:<br>
 'Thy rash resolve, thy eager haste,<br>
 Thy mighty fear, are all misplaced:<br>
 No room is here for duty's claim,<br>
 No cause to dread the people's blame.<br>
 Can one as brave as thou consent<br>
 To use a coward's argument?<br>
 The glory of the Warrior race<br>
 With craven speech his lips debase?<br>
 Can one like thee so falsely speak,<br>
 Exalling Fate, confessed so weak?<br>
 Canst thou, undoubting still restrain?<br>
 Suspicions of those sinful twain?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Canst thou, most duteous, fail to know<br>
 Their hearts are set on duty's show?<br>
 They with deceit have set their trains,<br>
 And now the fruit rewards their pains,<br>
 Had they not long ago agreed,<br>
 O Rama, on this treacherous deed,<br>
 That promised boon, so long retained,<br>
 He erst had given and she had gained.<br>
 I cannot, O my brother, bear<br>
 To see another throned as heir<br>
 With rites which all our people hate:<br>
 Then, O, this passion tolerate.<br>
 This vaunted duty which can guide<br>
 Thy steps from wisdom's path aside,<br>
 And change the counsel of thy breast,<br>
 O lofty-hearted, I detest.<br>
 Wilt thou, when power and might are thine,<br>
 Submit to this abhorred design?<br>
 Thy father's impious hest fulfil,<br>
 That vassal of Kaikeyi's will?<br>
 But if thou still wilt shut thine eyes,<br>
 Nor see the guile herein that lies.<br>
 My soul is sad, I deeply mourn.<br>
 And duty seems a thing to scorn.<br>
 Canst thou one moment think to please<br>
 This pair who live for love and ease,<br>
 And 'gainst thy peace, as foes, allied,<br>
 With tenderest names their hatred hide<br>
 Now if thy judgment still refers<br>
 To Fate this plot of his and hers,<br>
 My mind herein can ne'er agree:<br>
 And O, in this be ruled by me.<br>
 Weak, void of manly pride are they<br>
 Who bend to Fate's imputed sway:<br>
 The choicest souls, the nobly great<br>
 Disdain to bow their heads to Fate.<br>
 And he who dares his Fate control<br>
 With vigorous act and manly soul,<br>
 Though threatening Fate his hopes assail.<br>
 Unmoved through all need never quail.<br>
 This day mankind shall learn aright<br>
 The power of Fate and human might,<br>
 So shall the gulf that lies between<br>
 A man and Fate be clearly seen.<br>
 The might of Fate subdued by me<br>
 This hour the citizens shall see,<br>
 Who saw its intervention stay<br>
 Thy consecrating rites to-day<br>
 My power shall turn this Fate aside,<br>
 That threatens, as, with furious stride,<br>
 An elephant who scorns to feel,<br>
 In rage unchecked, tne driver's steel.<br>
 Not the great Lords whose sleepless might<br>
 Protects the worlds, shall stay the rite<br>
 Though earth, hell, heaven combine their powers:<br>
 And shall we fear this sire of ours?<br>
 Then if their minds are idly bent<br>
 To doom thee, King, to banishment,<br>
 Through twice seven years of exile they<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_122"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 122</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Shall In the lonely forest stay.<br>
 I will consume the hopes that fire<br>
 The queen Kaikeyí and our sire,<br>
 That to her son this check will bring<br>
 Advantage, making Bharat king.<br>
 The power of Fate will ne'er withstand<br>
 The might that arms my vigorous hand;<br>
 If danger and distress assail,<br>
 My fearless strength will still prevail.<br>
 A thousand circling years shall flee:<br>
 The forest then thy home shall be,<br>
 And thy good sons, succeeding, hold<br>
 The empire which their sire controlled.<br>
 The royal saints, of old who reigned,<br>
 For aged kings this rest ordained:<br>
 These to their sons their realm commit<br>
 That they, like sires, may cherish it.<br>
 O pious soul, if thou decline<br>
 The empire which is justly thine,<br>
 Lest, while the king distracted lies,<br>
 Disorder in the state should rise,<br>
 I,--or no mansion may I find<br>
 In worlds to hero souls assigned,--<br>
 The guardian of thy realm will be,<br>
 As the sea-bank protects the sea.<br>
 Then cast thine idle fears aside:<br>
 With prosperous rites be sanctified.<br>
 The lords of earth may strive in vain:<br>
 My power shall all their force restrain.<br>
 My pair of arms, my warrior's bow<br>
 Are not for pride of empty show:<br>
 For no support these shafts were made;<br>
 And binding up ill suits my blade:<br>
 To pierce the foe with deadly breach--<br>
 This is the work of all and each.<br>
 But small, methinks the love I show<br>
 For him I count my mortal foe.<br>
 Soon as my trenchant steel is bare,<br>
 Flashing its lightning through the air,<br>
 I heed no foe, nor stand aghast<br>
 Though Indra's self the levin cast.<br>
 Then shall the ways be hard to pass,<br>
 Where chariots lie in ruinous mass;<br>
 When elephant and man and steed<br>
 Crushed in the murderous onslaught bleed,<br>
 And legs and heads tall, heap on heap,<br>
 Beneath my sword's tremendous sweep.<br>
 Struck by my keen brand's trenchant blade,<br>
 Thine enemies shall fall dismayed,<br>
 Like towering mountains rent in twain,<br>
 Or lightning clouds that burst in rain.<br>
 When armed with brace and glove I stand,<br>
 And take my trusty bow in hand,<br>
 Who then shall vaunt his might? who dare<br>
 Count him a man to meet me there?<br>
 Then will I loose my shafts, and strike<br>
 Man, elephant, and steed alike:<br>
 At one shall many an arrow fly,<br>
 And many a foe with one shall die.<br>
 This day the world my power shall see,<br>
 That none in arms can rival me:<br>
 My strength the monarch shall abase,<br>
 And set thee, lord, in lordliest place.<br>
 These arms which breathe the sandal's<br>
     scent,<br>
 Which golden bracelets ornament,<br>
 These hands which precious gifts bestow,<br>
 Which guard the friend and smite the foe,<br>
 A nobler service shall assay,<br>
 And fight in Ráma's cause to-day,<br>
 The robbers of thy rights to stay.<br>
     Speak, brother, tell thy foeman's name<br>
         Whom I, in conquering strife,<br>
     May strip of followers and fame,<br>
         Of fortune, or of life.<br>
     Say, how may all this sea-girt land<br>
         Be brought to own thy sway:<br>
     Thy faithful servant here I stand<br>
         To listen and obey.'<br>
     Then strove the bride of Raghu's race<br>
         Sad Lakshman's heart to cheer,<br>
     While slowly down the hero's face,<br>
         Unchecked, there rolled a tear.<br>
     'The orders of my sire,' he cried,<br>
         'My will shall ne'er oppose:<br>
     I follow still, whate'er betide,<br>
         The path which duty shows.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *       *       *       *      *<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_291"></a><a href="ry101.htm#fr_291">121:1</a>  The Sanskrit word <i>hasta</i> signifies both
 <i>hand</i>, and the trunk of the beast that
 bears between his eyes a serpent for a hand.'</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry102.htm">Next: Canto XXIV.: Kaus'alyá Calmed.</a></center>
 </body>