<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry102.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry104.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXV.: KAUS'ALYA'S BLESSING.</h3>
 <p>
 Her grief and woe she cast aside,<br>
 Her lips with water purified,<br>
 And thus her benison began<br>
 That mother of the noblest man:<br>
 'If thou wilt hear no words of mine,<br>
 Go forth, thou pride of Raghu's line.<br>
 Go, darling, and return with speed,<br>
 Walking where noble spirits lead.<br>
 May virtue on thy steps attend.<br>
 And be her faithful lover's friend.<br>
 May Those to whom thy vows are paid<br>
 In temple and in holy shade,<br>
 With all the mighty saints combine<br>
 To keep that precious life of thine.<br>
 The arms wise Vis'v?itra <a name="fr_292"></a><a href="#fn_292"><font size="1">1</font></a> gave<br>
 Thy virtuous soul from danger save.<br>
 Long be thy life: thy sure defence<br>
 Shall b?thy truthful innocence,<br>
 And that obedience, naught can tire,<br>
 To me thy mother and thy sire.<br>
 May fanes where holy fires are fed,<br>
 Altars with grass and fuel spread,<br>
 Each sacrificial ground, each tree,<br>
 Rock, lake, and mountain, prosper thee.<br>
 Let old Vir?, <a name="fr_293"></a><a href="#fn_293"><font size="1">2</font></a> and Him who made<br>
 The universe, combine to aid;<br>
 Let Indra and each guardian Lord<br>
 Who keeps the worlds, their help afford,<br>
 And be thy constant friend the Sun,<br>
 Lord P?h? Bhaga, Aryaman. <a name="fr_294"></a><a href="#fn_294"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 Fortnights and seasons, nights and days,<br>
 Years, months, and hours, protect thy ways,<br>
 Vrihaspati shall still be nigh,<br>
 The War-God, and the Moon on high,<br>
 And N?ad <a name="fr_295"></a><a href="#fn_295"><font size="1">4</font></a> and the sainted seven <a name="fr_296"></a><a href="#fn_296"><font size="1">5</font></a><br>
 Shall watch thee from their starry heaven.<br>
 The mountains, and the seas which ring<br>
 The world, and Varuna the King,<br>
 Sky, ether, and the wind, whate'er<br>
 Moves not or moves, for thee shall care.<br>
 Each lunar mansion be benign,<br>
 With happier light the planets shine;<br>
 All gods, each light in heaven that glows,<br>
 Potect my child where'er he goes.<br>
 The twilight hours, the day and night,<br>
 Keep in the wood thy steps aright.<br>
 Watch, minute, instant, as they flee,<br>
 Shall all bring happiness to thee.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Celestials and the Titan brood<br>
 Protect thee in thy solitude,<br>
 And haunt the mighty wood to bless<br>
 The wanderer in his hermit dress.<br>
 Fear not, by mightier guardians screened,<br>
 The giant or night-roving fiend;<br>
 Nor let the cruel race who tear<br>
 Man's flesh for food thy bosom scare.<br>
 Far be the ape, the scorpion's sting,<br>
 Fly, gnat, and worm, and creeping thing.<br>
 Thee shall the hungry lion spare,<br>
 The tiger, elephant, and bear:<br>
 Safe, from their furious might repose,<br>
 Safe from the horned buffaloes.<br>
 Each savage thing the forests breed,<br>
 That love on human flesh to feed,<br>
 Shall for my child its rage abate,<br>
 When thus its wrath I deprecate.<br>
 Blest be thy ways: may sweet success<br>
 The valour of my darling bless.<br>
 To all that Fortune can bestow,<br>
 Go forth, my child, my Ráma, go.<br>
 Go forth, O happy in the love<br>
 Of all the Gods below, above;<br>
 And in those guardian powers confide<br>
 Thv paths who keep, thy steps who guide.<br>
 May S'ukra, <a name="fr_297"></a><a href="#fn_297"><font size="1">1b</font></a> Yama, Sun, and Moon,<br>
 And He who gives each golden boon, <a name="fr_298"></a><a href="#fn_298"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Won by mine earnest pravers, be good<br>
 To thee, my son, in Dandak wood.<br>
 Fire, wind, and smoke, each text and spell<br>
 From mouths of holy seers that fell,<br>
 Guard Ráma when his limbs he dips,<br>
 Or with the stream makes pure his lips!<br>
 May the great saints and He, the Lord<br>
 Who made the worlds, by worlds adored,<br>
 And every God in heaven beside<br>
 My banished Ráma keep and guide.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus with due praise the long-eyed dame,<br>
 Ennobled by her spotless fame,<br>
 With wreaths of flowers and precious scent<br>
 Worshipped the Gods, most reverent.<br>
 A high-souled Br?man lit the fire,<br>
 And offered, at the queen's desire,<br>
 The holy oil ordained to burn<br>
 For Ráma's weal and safe return.<br>
 Kaus'aly? best of dames, with care<br>
 Set oil, wreaths, fuel, mustard, there.<br>
 Then when the rites of fire had ceased,<br>
 For Ráma's bliss and health, the priest,<br>
 Standing without gave what remained<br>
 In general offering, <a name="fr_299"></a><a href="#fn_299"><font size="1">3b</font></a> as ordained.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_125"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 125</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Dealing among the twice-horn train<br>
 Honey, and curds, and oil, and grain,<br>
 He bade each heart and voice unite<br>
 To bless. the youthful anchorite.<br>
 Then Ráma's mother, glorious dame<br>
 Bestowed, to meet the Bráhman's claim,<br>
 A lordly fee for duty done:<br>
 And thus again addressed her son:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Such blessings as the Gods o'erjoyed<br>
 Poured forth, when Vritra  <a name="fr_300"></a><a href="#fn_300"><font size="1">1</font></a> was destroyed,<br>
 On Indra of the thousand eyes,<br>
 Attend, my child, thine enterprise!<br>
 Yea, such as Vinatá once gave<br>
 To King Suparna  <a name="fr_301"></a><a href="#fn_301"><font size="1">2</font></a> swift and brave,<br>
 Who sought the drink that cheers the skies,<br>
 Attend, my child, thine enterprise!<br>
 Yea, such as, when the Amrit rose,  <a name="fr_302"></a><a href="#fn_302"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 And Indra slew his Daitya foes,<br>
 The royal Aditi bestowed<br>
 On Him whose hand with slaughter glowed<br>
 Of that dire brood of monstrous size,<br>
 Attend, my child, thine enterprise!<br>
 E'en such as peerless Vishnu graced,<br>
 When with his triple step he paced,<br>
 Outbursting from the dwarf's disguise,  <a name="fr_303"></a><a href="#fn_303"><font size="1">4</font></a><br>
 Attend, my child, thine enterprise!<br>
 Floods, isles, and seasons as they fly,<br>
 Worlds, Vedas, quarters of the sky,<br>
 Combine, O mighty-armed, to bless<br>
 Thee destined heir of happiness!'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The long-eyed lady ceased: she shed<br>
 Pure scent and grain upon his head.<br>
 And that prized herb whose sovereign power<br>
 Preserves from dark misfortune's hour,<br>
 Upon the hero's arm she set,<br>
 To be his faithful amulet.<br>
 While holy tunes she murmured low,<br>
 Aud spoke glad words though crushed by woe,<br>
 Concealing with obedient tongue<br>
 The pangs with which her heart was wrung.<br>
 She bent,she kissed his brow, she pressed<br>
 Her darling to her troubled breast:<br>
 'Firm in thy purpose, go,' she cried,<br>
 'Go Ráma, and my bliss betide.<br>
 Attain returning safe and well,<br>
 Triumphant in Ayodhyá, dwell.<br>
 Then shall my happy eyes behold<br>
 The empire by thy will controlled.<br>
 Then grief and care shall leave no trace,<br>
 Joy shall light up thy mother's face,<br>
 And I shall see my darling reign,<br>
 In moonlike glory come again.<br>
 These eyes shall fondly gaze on thee<br>
 So faithful to thy sire's decree,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 When thou the forest wild shalt quit<br>
 On thine ancestral throne to sit.<br>
 Yea, thou shalt turn from exile back,<br>
 Nor choicest blessings ever lack,<br>
 Then fill with rapture ever new<br>
 My bosom and thy consort's too.<br>
     To S'iva and the heavenly host<br>
         My worship has been paid,<br>
     To mighty saint, to godlike ghost,<br>
         To every wandering shade.<br>
     Forth to the forest thou wilt hie,<br>
         Therein to dwell so long:<br>
     Let all the quarters of the sky<br>
         Protect my child from wrong.'<br>
     Her blessings thus the queen bestowed;<br>
         Then round him fondly paced,<br>
     And often, while her eyes o'erflowed,<br>
         Her dearest son embraced.<br>
     Kaus'alyá's honoured feet he pressed,<br>
         As round her steps she bent,<br>
     And radiant with her prayers that blessed,<br>
         To Sitá's home he went.<br>
 
 </p><p>
             *      *      *      *      *<br>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_292"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_292">124:1</a>  See p. 41.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_293"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_293">124:2</a>  The first progeny of Brahm? or Brahm?
 himself.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_294"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_294">124:3</a>  These are three names of the Sun.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_295"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_295">124:4</a>  See p. 1.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_296"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_296">124:5</a>  The saints who form the constellation
 of Ursa Major.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_297"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_297">124:1b</a>  The regent of the planert Venus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_298"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_298">124:2b</a>  Kuvera.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_299"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_299">124:3b</a>  <i>Bali</i>, or the presentation of food to all
 created beings, is one of the five great sacraments
 of the Hindu religion: it consists
 in throwing a small parcel of the offering,
 <i>Ghee</i>, or rice, or the like, into the open air
 at the back of the house.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_300"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_300">125:1</a>  In mythology, a demon slain by Indra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_301"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_301">125:2</a>  Called also Garud, the King of the
 birds, offspring of Vinatá. See p. 53.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_302"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_302">125:3</a>  See p. 56.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_303"></a><a href="ry103.htm#fr_303">125:4</a>  See p. 43.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry104.htm">Next: Canto XXVI.: Alone With Sitá</a></center>
 </body>