<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry107.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry109.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXX.: THE TRIUMPH OF LOVE.</h3>
 <p>
 The daughter of Videha's king,<br>
 While Ráma strove to soothe the sting<br>
 Of her deep anguish, thus began<br>
 Once more in furtherance of her plan:<br>
 And with her spirit sorely tried<br>
 By fear and anger, love and pride,<br>
 With keenly taunting words addressed<br>
 Her hero of the stately breast:<br>
 'Why did the king my sire, who reigns<br>
 O'er fair Videha's wide domains,<br>
 Hail Ráma son with joy unwise,<br>
 A woman in a man's disguise?<br>
 Now falsely would the people say,<br>
 By idle fancies led astray,<br>
 That Ráma's own are power and might,<br>
 As glorious as the Lord of Light.<br>
 Why sinkest thou in such dismay?<br>
 What fears upon thy spirit weigh,<br>
 That thou, O Ráma, fain wouldst flee<br>
 From her who thinks of naught but thee?<br>
 To thy dear will am I resigned<br>
 In heart and body, soul and mind,<br>
 As Sávitri gave all to one,<br>
 Satyaván, Dyumatsena's son.  <a name="fr_304"></a><a href="#fn_304"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Not e'en in fancy can I brook<br>
 To any guard save thee to look:<br>
 Let meaner wives their houses shame,<br>
 To go with thee is all my claim.<br>
 Like some low actor, deemst thou fit<br>
 Thy wife to others to commit--<br>
 Thine own, espoused in maiden youth,<br>
 Thy wife so long, unblamed for truth?<br>
 Do thou, my lord, his will obey<br>
 For whom thou losest royal sway,<br>
 To whom thou wouldst thy wife confide--<br>
 Not me, but thee, his wish may guide.<br>
 Thou must not here thy wife forsake,<br>
 And to the wood thy journey make,<br>
 Whether stern penance, grief, and care,<br>
 Or rule or heaven await thee there.<br>
 Nor shall fatigue my limbs distress<br>
 When wandering in the wilderness:<br>
 Each path which near to thee I tread<br>
 Shall seem a soft luxurious bed.<br>
 The reeds, the bushes where I pass,<br>
 The thorny trees, the tangled grass<br>
 Shall feel, if only thou be near,<br>
 Soft to my touch as skins of deer.<br>
 When the rude wind in fury blows,<br>
 And scattered dust upon me throws,<br>
 That dust, beloved lord, to me<br>
 Shall as the precious sandal be.<br>
 And what shall be more blest than I,<br>
 When gazing on the wood I lie<br>
 In some green glade upon a bed<br>
 With sacred grass beneath us spread?<br>
 The root, the leaf, the fruit which thou<br>
 Shalt give me from the earth or bough,<br>
 Scanty or plentiful, to eat,<br>
 Shall taste to me as Amrit sweet.<br>
 As there I live on flowers and roots<br>
 And every season's kindly fruits,<br>
 I will not for my mother grieve,<br>
 My sire, my home, or all I leave.<br>
 My presence, love, shall never add<br>
 One pain to make the heart more sad;<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_130"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 130</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 I will not cause thee grief or care,<br>
 Nor be a burden hard to bear.<br>
 With thee is heaven, where'er the spot;<br>
 Each place is hell where thou art not.<br>
 Then go with me, O Ráma; this<br>
 Is all my hope and all my bliss.<br>
 If thou wilt leave thy wife who still<br>
 Entreats thee with undaunted will,<br>
 This very day shall poison close<br>
 The life that spurns the rule of foes.<br>
 How, after, can my soul sustain<br>
 The bitter life of endless pain,<br>
 When thy dear face, my lord, I miss!<br>
 No, death is better far than this.<br>
 Not for an hour could I endure<br>
 The deadly grief that knows not cure,<br>
 Far less a woe I could not shun<br>
 For ten long years, and three, and one.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 While fires of woe consumed her, such<br>
 Her sad appeal, lamenting much;<br>
 Then with a wild cry, anguish-wrung,<br>
 About her husband's neck she clung.<br>
 Like some she-elephant who bleeds<br>
 Struck by the hunter's venomed reeds,<br>
 So in her quivering heart she felt<br>
 The many wounds his speeches dealt.<br>
 Then, as the spark from wood is gained,  <a name="fr_305"></a><a href="#fn_305"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Down rolled the tear so long restrained:<br>
 The crystal moisture, sprung from woe,<br>
 From her sweet eyes began to flow,<br>
 As runs the water from a pair<br>
 Of lotuses divinely fair.<br>
 And Sítá's face with long dark eyes,<br>
 Pure as the moon of autumn skies,<br>
 Faded with weeping, as the buds<br>
 Of lotuses when sink the floods.<br>
 Around his wife his arms he strained,<br>
 Who senseless from her woe remained,<br>
 And with sweet words, that bade her wake<br>
 To life again, the hero spake:<br>
 'I would not with thy woe, my Queen,<br>
 Buy heaven and all its blissful sheen.<br>
 Void of all fear am I as He,<br>
 The self-existent God, can be.<br>
 I knew not all thy heart till now,<br>
 Dear lady of the lovely brow<br>
 So wished not thee in woods to dwell;<br>
 Yet there mine arm can guard thee well.<br>
 Now surely thou, dear love, wast made<br>
 To dwell with me in green wood shade.<br>
 And, as a high saint's tender mind<br>
 Clings to its love for all mankind,<br>
 So I to thee will ever cling,<br>
 Sweet daughter of Videha's king.<br>
 The good, of old, O soft of frame,<br>
 Honoured this duty's sovereign claim,<br>
 And I its guidance will not shun,<br>
 True as light's Queen is to the Sun.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 I cannot, pride of Janak's line,<br>
 This journey to the wood decline:<br>
 My sire's behest, the oath he sware,<br>
 The claims of truth, all lead me there.<br>
 One duty, dear the same for aye,<br>
 Is sire and mother to obey:<br>
 Should I their orders once transgress<br>
 My very life were weariness.<br>
 If glad obedience be denied<br>
 To father, mother, holy guide,<br>
 What rites, what service can be done<br>
 That stern Fate's favour may be won?<br>
 These three the triple world comprise,<br>
 O darling of the lovely eyes.<br>
 Earth has no holy thing like these<br>
 Whom with all love men seek to please.<br>
 Not truth, or gift, or bended knee,<br>
 Not honour, worship, lordly fee,<br>
 Storms heaven and wins a blessing thence<br>
 Like sonly love and reverence.<br>
 Heaven, riches, grain, and varied lore,<br>
 With sons and many a blessing more,<br>
 All these are made their own with ease<br>
 By those their elders' souls who please.<br>
 The mighty-souled, who ne'er forget,<br>
 Devoted sons, their filial debt,<br>
 Win worlds where Gods and minstrels are,<br>
 And Brahmá's sphere more glorious far.<br>
 Now as the orders of my sire,<br>
 Who keeps the way of truth, require,<br>
 So will I do, for such the way<br>
 Of duty that endures for aye:<br>
 To take thee, love, to Dandak's wild<br>
 My heart at length is reconciled,<br>
 For thee such earnest thoughts impel<br>
 To follow, and with me to dwell.<br>
 O faultless form from feet to brows,<br>
 Come with me, as my will allows,<br>
 And duty there with me pursue,<br>
 Trembler, whose bright eyes thrill me through.<br>
 In all thy days, come good come ill,<br>
 Preserve unchanged such noble will,<br>
 And thou, dear love, wilt ever be<br>
 The glory of thy house and me.<br>
 Now, beauteous-armed, begin the tasks<br>
 The woodland life of hermits asks.<br>
 For me the joys of heaven above<br>
 Have charms no more without thee, love.<br>
 And now, dear Sítá, be not slow:<br>
 Food on good mendicants bestow,<br>
 And for the holy Bráhmans bring<br>
 Thy treasures and each precious thing.<br>
 Thy best attire and gems collect,<br>
 The jewels which thy beauty decked,<br>
 And every ornament and toy<br>
 Prepared for hours of sport and joy:<br>
 The beds, the cars wherein I ride,<br>
 Among our followers, next, divide.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She conscious that her lord approved<br>
 Her going, with great rapture moved,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_131"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 131</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Hastened within, without delay,<br>
 Prepared to give their wealth away.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_304"></a><a href="ry108.htm#fr_304">129:1</a>  The story of Savitri, told in the Mahábhárat,
 has been admirably translated by
 Rückert, and elegantly epitomized by Mrs.
 Manning in <i>India, Ancient and Mediaeval</i>.
 There is a free rendering of the story in
 <i>Idylls from the Sanskrit</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_305"></a><a href="ry108.htm#fr_305">130:1</a>  Fire for sacrificial purposes is produced
 by the attrition of two pieces of wood.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry109.htm">Next: Canto XXXI.: Lakshman's Prayer.</a></center>
 </body>