<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry099.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry101.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXII.: LAKSHMAN CALMED.</h3>
 <p>
 So Ráma kept unshaken still<br>
 His noble heart with iron will.<br>
 To his dear brother next he turned,<br>
 Whose glaring eyes with fury burned,<br>
 Indignant, panting like a snake,<br>
 And thus again his counsel spake:<br>
 'Thine anger and thy grief restrain,<br>
 And firm in duty's path remain.<br>
 Dear brother, lay thy scorn aside,<br>
 And be the right thy joy and pride.<br>
 Thy ready zeal and thoughtful care<br>
 To aid what rites should grace the heir,--<br>
 These 'tis another's now to ask;<br>
 Come, gird thee for thy noble task,<br>
 That Bharat's throning rites may he<br>
 Graced with the things prepared for me.<br>
 And with thy gentle care provide<br>
 That her fond heart, now sorely tried<br>
 With fear and longing for my sake,<br>
 With doubt and dread may never ache.<br>
 To know that thoughts of coming ill<br>
 One hour that tender bosom fill<br>
 With agony and dark despair<br>
 Is grief too great for me to bear.<br>
 I cannot, brother, call to mind<br>
 One wilful fault or undesigned,<br>
 When I have pained in anything<br>
 My mothers or my sire the king.<br>
 The right my father keeps in view,<br>
 In promise, word, and action true;<br>
 Let him then all his fear dismiss,<br>
 Nor dread the loss of future bliss.<br>
 He fears his truth herein will fail:<br>
 Hence bitter thoughts his heart assail.<br>
 He trembles lest the rites proceed,<br>
 And at his pangs my heart should bleed.<br>
 So now this earnest wish is mine,<br>
 The consecration to resign,<br>
 And from this city turn away<br>
 To the wild wood with no delay.<br>
 My banishment to-day will free<br>
 Kaikeyí from her cares, that she,<br>
 At last contented and elate,<br>
 May Bharat's throning celebrate.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then will the lady's trouble cease,<br>
 Then will her heart have joy and peace,<br>
 When wandering in the wood I wear<br>
 Deerskin, and bark, and matted hair.<br>
 Nor shall by me his heart be grieved<br>
 Whose choice approved, whose mind conceived<br>
 This counsel which I follow. No,<br>
 Forth to the forest will I go.<br>
 'Tis Fate, Sumitrás son, confess,<br>
 That sends me to the wilderness.<br>
 'Tis Fate alone that gives away<br>
 To'other hands the royal sway<br>
 How could Kaikeyí's purpose bring<br>
 On me this pain and suffering,<br>
 Were not her change of heart decreed<br>
 By Fate whose will commands the deed?<br>
 I know my filial love has been<br>
 The same throughout for every queen,<br>
 And with the same affection she<br>
 Has treated both her son and me.<br>
 Her shameful words of cruel spite<br>
 To stay the consecrating rite,<br>
 And drive me banished from the throne,--<br>
 These I ascribe to Fate alone,<br>
 How could she, born of royal race,<br>
 Whom nature decks with fairest grace,<br>
 Speak like a dame of low degree<br>
 Before the king to torture me?<br>
 But Fate, which none may comprehend,<br>
 To which all life must bow and bend,<br>
 In her and me its power has shown,<br>
 And all my hopes are overthrown.<br>
 What man, Sumitrá's darling, may<br>
 Contend with Fate's resistless sway,<br>
 Whose all-commanding power we find<br>
 Our former deeds alone can bind?<br>
 Our life and death, our joy and pain,<br>
 Anger and fear, and loss and gain,<br>
 Each thing that is, in every state,<br>
 All is the work of none but Fate.<br>
 E'en saints, inspired with rigid zeal.<br>
 When once the stroke of Fate they feel,<br>
 In sternest vows no more engage,<br>
 And fall enslaved by love and rage.<br>
 So now the sudden stroke whose weight<br>
 Descends unlooked for, comes of Fate,<br>
 And with unpitying might destroys<br>
 The promise of commencing joys.<br>
 Weigh this true counsel in thy soul:<br>
 With thy firm heart thy heart control;<br>
 Then, brother, thou wilt cease to grieve<br>
 For hindered rites which now I leave.<br>
 So cast thy needless grief away,<br>
 And strictly my commands obey.<br>
 Those preparations check with speed,<br>
 Nor let my throning rites proceed.<br>
 Those urns that stand prepared to shed<br>
 King-making drops upon my head,<br>
 Shall, with their pure lustrations now<br>
 Inaugurate my hermit's vow.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_121"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 121</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Yet what have I to do with things<br>
 That touch the state and pomp of kings?<br>
 These hands of mine shall water take<br>
 To sanctify the vow I make.<br>
 Now Lakshman, let thy heart no more<br>
 My fortune changed and lost deplore.<br>
 A forest life more joys may bring<br>
 Than those that wait upon a king,<br>
 Now though her arts successful mar<br>
         My consecrating rite,<br>
     Let not the youngest queen too far<br>
         Thy jealous fear excite.<br>
     Nor let one thought suggesting ill<br>
         Upon our father fall,<br>
     But let thy heart remember still<br>
         That Fate is lord of all.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry101.htm">Next: Canto XXIII.: Lakshman's Anger.</a></center>
 </body>