<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry115.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry117.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVIII.: CARE FOR KAUS'ALYÁ</h3>
 <p>
 Then when the people wroth and sad<br>
 Saw Sítá in bark vesture clad,<br>
 Though wedded, like some widowed thing,<br>
 They cried out, 'Shame upon thee, King!'<br>
 Grieved by their cry and angry look<br>
 The lord of earth at once forsook<br>
 All hope in life that still remained,<br>
 In duty, self, and fame unstained.<br>
 Ikshváku's son with burning sighs<br>
 On Queen Kaikeyí bent his eyes,<br>
 And said: 'But Sítá must not flee<br>
 In garments of a devotee.<br>
 My holy guide has spoken truth:<br>
 Unfit is she in tender youth,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_140"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 140</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 So gently nurtured, soft and fair,<br>
 The hardships of the wood to share.<br>
     How has she sinned, devout and true,<br>
         The noblest monarch's child,<br>
     That she should garb of bark indue<br>
         And journey to the wild?<br>
     That she should spend her youthful days<br>
         Amid a hermit band,<br>
     Like some poor mendicant who strays<br>
         Sore troubled, through the land?<br>
     Ah, let the child of Janak throw<br>
         Her dress of bark aside,<br>
     And let the royal lady go<br>
         With royal wealth supplied.<br>
     Not such the pledge I gave before,<br>
         Unfit to linger here:<br>
     The oath, which I the sinner swore<br>
         Is kept, and leaves her clear.<br>
     Won from her childlike love this too<br>
         My instant death would be,<br>
     As blossoms on the old bamboo<br>
         Destroy the parent tree.  <a name="fr_313"></a><a href="#fn_313"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 If aught amiss by Ráma done<br>
 Offend thee, O thou wicked one,<br>
 What least transgiession canst thou find<br>
 In her, thou worst of womankind?<br>
 What shade of fault in her appears,<br>
 Whose full soft eye is like the deer's?<br>
 What canst thou blame in Janak's child,<br>
 So gentle, modest, true, and mild?<br>
 Is not one crime complete, that sent<br>
 My Ráma forth to banishment!<br>
 And wilt thou other sins commit.<br>
 Thou wicked one, to double it?<br>
 This is the pledge and oath I swore,<br>
 What thou besoughtest, and no more,<br>
 Of Ráma--for I heard thee, dame--<br>
 When he for consecration came.<br>
 Now with this limit not content,<br>
 In hell should be thy punishment,<br>
 Who fain the Maithil bride wouldst press<br>
 To clothe her limbs with hermit dress.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spake the father in his woe;<br>
 And Ráma, still prepared to go,<br>
 To him who sat with drooping head<br>
 Spake in return these words and said:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Just King, here stands my mother dear,<br>
 Kaus'alyá, one whom all revere.<br>
 Submissive, gentle, old is she,<br>
 And keeps her lips from blame of thee,<br>
 For her, kind lord, of me bereft<br>
 A sea of whelming woe is left.<br>
 O, show her in her new distress<br>
 Still fonder love and tenderness.<br>
 Well honoured by thine honoured hand<br>
 Her grief for me let her withstand,<br>
 Who wrapt in constant thought of me<br>
 In me would live a devotee.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
     Peer of Mahendra, O, to her be kind,<br>
         And treat I pray, my gentle mother so,<br>
     That, when I dwell afar, her life resigned,<br>
         She may not, pass, to Yama's realm for woe.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_313"></a><a href="ry116.htm#fr_313">140:1</a>  It is said that the bamboo dies after
 flowering.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry117.htm">Next: Canto XXXIX.: Counsel To Sítá.</a></center>
 </body>