<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry111.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry113.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIV.: RÁMA IN THE PALACE.</h3>
 <p>
 The dark incomparable chief<br>
 Whose eye was like a lotus leaf,<br>
 Cried to the mournful charioteer,<br>
 'Go tell my sire that I am here.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     Sumantra, sad and all dismayed,<br>
 The chieftain's order swift obeyed.<br>
 Within the palace doors he hied<br>
 And saw the king, who wept and sighed.<br>
 Like the great sun when wrapped in shade<br>
 Like fire by ashes overlaid,<br>
 Or like a pool with waters dried,<br>
 So lay the world's great lord and pride,<br>
 A while the wise Sumantra gazed<br>
 On him whose senses woe has dazed,<br>
 Grieving for Ráma. Near he drew<br>
 With hands upraised in reverence due.<br>
 With blessing first his king he hailed;<br>
 Then with a voice that well-nigh failed,<br>
 In trembling accents soft and low<br>
 Addressed the monarch in his woe:<br>
 'The prince of men, thy Ráma, waits<br>
 Before thee at the palace gates.<br>
 His wealth to Bráhmans he has dealt,<br>
 And all whom in his home have dwelt.<br>
 Admit thy son. His friends have heard<br>
 His kind farewell and parting word,<br>
 He longs to see thee first, and then<br>
 Will seek the wilds, O King of men.<br>
 He, with each princely virtue's blaze,<br>
 Shines as the sun engirt by rays.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The truthful King who loved to keep<br>
 The law profound as Ocean's deep,<br>
 And stainless as the dark blue sky,<br>
 Thus to Sumantra made reply:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_135"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 135</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Go then, Sumantra, go and call<br>
 My wives and ladies one and all.<br>
 Drawn round me shall they fill the place<br>
 When I behold my Ráma's face.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     Quick to the inner rooms he sped,<br>
 And thus to all the women said,<br>
 'Come, at the summons of the king:<br>
 Come all, and make no tarrying.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     Their husband's word, by him conveyed,<br>
 Soon as they heard, the dames obeyed,<br>
 And following his guidance all<br>
 Came thronging to the regal hall.<br>
 ln number half seven hundred, they,<br>
 All lovely dames, in long array,<br>
 With their bright eyes for weeping red,<br>
 To stand round Queen Kaus'alyá, sped.<br>
 They gathered, and the monarch viewed<br>
 One moment all the multitude,<br>
 Then to Sumantra spoke and said:<br>
 'Now let my son be hither led.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     Sumantra went. Then Ráma came,<br>
 And Lakshman, and the Maithil dame,<br>
 And, as he led them on, their guide<br>
 Straight to the monarch's presence hied.<br>
 When yet far off the father saw<br>
 His son with raised palms toward him draw,<br>
 Girt by his ladies, sick with woes,<br>
 Swift from his royal seat he rose.<br>
 With all his strength the aged man<br>
 To meet his darling Ráma ran,<br>
 But trembling, wild with dark despair,<br>
 Fell on the ground and fainted there.<br>
 And Lakshman, wont in cars to ride,<br>
 And Ráma, threw them by the side<br>
 Of the poor miserable king,<br>
 Half lifeless with his sorrow's sting.<br>
 Throughout the spacious hall up went<br>
 A thousand women's wild lament:<br>
 'Ah Ráma!' thus they wailed and wept,<br>
 And anklets tinkled as they stepped.<br>
 Around his body, weeping, threw<br>
 Their loving arms the brothers two,<br>
 And then, with Sitá's gentle aid,<br>
 The king upon a couch was laid.<br>
 At length to earth's imperial lord,<br>
 When life and knowledge were restored,<br>
 Though seas of woe went o'er his head,<br>
 With suppliant hand, thus Ráma said:<br>
 'Lord ot us all, great King, thou art:<br>
 Bid me farewell before we part,<br>
 To Dandak wood this day I go:<br>
 One blessing and one look bestow.<br>
 Let Lakshman my companion be,<br>
 And Sítá also follow me.<br>
 With truthful pleas I sought to bend<br>
 Their purpose; but no ear they lend.<br>
 Now cast this sorrow from thy heart,<br>
 And let us all, great King, depart.<br>
 As Brahmá sends his children, so<br>
 Let Lakshman, me, and Sítá go.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He stood unmoved, and watched intent<br>
 Until the king should grant consent.<br>
 Upon his son his eyes he cast,<br>
 And thus the monarch spake at last:<br>
 'O Ráma, by her arts enslaved,<br>
 I gave the boons Kaikeyí craved,<br>
 Unfit to reign, by her misled:<br>
 Be ruler in thy father's stead.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus by the lord of men addressed,<br>
 Ráma, of virtue's friends the best,<br>
 In lore of language duly learned,<br>
 His answer, reverent, thus returned:<br>
 'A thousand years, O King, remain<br>
 O'er this our city still to reign.<br>
 I in the woods my life will lead:<br>
 The lust of rule no more I heed.<br>
 Nine years and five I there will spend,<br>
 And when the portioned days shall end,<br>
 Will come, my vows and exile o'er,<br>
 And clasp thy feet, my King, once more.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 A captive in the snare of truth,<br>
 Weeping, distressed with woe and ruth,<br>
 Thus spake the monarch, while the queen<br>
 Kaikeyí urged him on unseen:<br>
 'Go then, O Ráma, and begin<br>
 Thy course unvext by fear and sin:<br>
 Go, my beloved son, and earn<br>
 Success, and joy, and safe return.<br>
 So fast the bonds of duty bind.<br>
 O Raghu's son, thy truthful mind,<br>
 That naught can turn thee back, or guide<br>
 Thy will so strongly fortified.<br>
 But 0, a little longer stay.<br>
 Nor turn thy steps this night away,<br>
 That I one little day--alas!<br>
 One only--with my son may pass.<br>
 Me and thy mother do not slight,<br>
 But stay, my son, with me to-night;<br>
 With every dainty please thy taste,<br>
 And seek to-morrow morn the waste<br>
 Hard is thy task, O Raghu's son,<br>
 Dire is the toil thou wilt not shun,<br>
 Far to the lonely wood to flee,<br>
 And leave thy friends for love of me.<br>
 I swear it by my truth, believe,<br>
 For thee, my son, I deeply grieve,<br>
 Misguided by the traitress dame<br>
 With hidden guile like smouldering flame.<br>
 Now, by her wicked counsel stirred,<br>
 Thou fain wouldst keep my plighted word.<br>
 No marvel that my eldest born<br>
 Would hold me true when I have sworn.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma having calmly heard<br>
 His wretched father speak each word,<br>
 With Lakshman standing br his side<br>
 Thus, humbly, to the King replied:<br>
 'If dainties now my taste regale,<br>
 To-morrow must those dainties fail.<br>
 This day departure I prefer<br>
 To all that wealth can minister.<br>
 O'er this fair land, no longer mine,<br>
 Which I, with all her realms, resign,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_136"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 136</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Her multitudes of men,  her grain,<br>
 Her stores of wealth, let Bharat reign.<br>
 And let the promised boon which thou<br>
 Wast pleased to grant the queen ere now,<br>
 Be hers in full. Be true, O King,<br>
 Kind giver of each precious thing.<br>
 Thy spoken word I still will heed,<br>
 Obeying all thy lips decreed:<br>
 And fourteen years in woods will dwell<br>
 With those who live in glade and dell.<br>
 No hopes of power my heart can touch,<br>
 No selfish joys attract so much<br>
 As son of Raghu, to fulfil<br>
 With heart and soul my father's will.<br>
 Dismiss, dismiss thy needless woe,<br>
 Nor let those drowning torrents flow:<br>
 The Lord of Rivers in his pride<br>
 Keeps to the banks that bar his tide.<br>
 Here in thy presence I declare;<br>
 By thy good deeds, thy truth, I swear;<br>
 Nor lordship, joy, nor lands I prize;<br>
 Life, heaven, all blessings I despise.<br>
 I wish to see thee still remain<br>
 Most true, O King, and free from stain.<br>
 It must not, Sire, it must not be:<br>
 I cannot rest one hour with thee.<br>
 Then bring this sorrow to an end,<br>
 For naught my settled will can bend.<br>
 I gave a pledge that binds me too,<br>
 And to that pledge I still am true.<br>
 Kaikeyí bade me speed away:<br>
 She prayed me, and I answered yea.<br>
 Pine not for me, and weep no more;<br>
 The wood for us has joy in store,<br>
 Filled with the wild deer's peaceful herds<br>
 And voices of a thousand birds.<br>
 A father is the God of each,<br>
 Yea, e'en of Gods, so Scriptures teach:<br>
 And I will keep my sire's decree,<br>
 For as a God I honour thee.<br>
 O best of men, the time is nigh,<br>
 The fourteen years will soon pass by<br>
 And to thine eyes thy son restore:<br>
 Be comforted, and weep no more.<br>
 Thou with thy firmness shouldst support<br>
 These weeping crowds who throng the court;<br>
 Then why, O chief of high renown,<br>
 So troubled, and thy soul cast down?'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry113.htm">Next: Canto XXXV.: Kaikeyí Reproached.</a></center>
 </body>