<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry109.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry111.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXII.: THE GIFT OF THE TREASURES.</h3>
 <p>
 That speech so noble which conveyed<br>
 His friendly wish, the chief obeyed.<br>
 With steps made swift by anxious thought<br>
 The wise Suyajna's home he sought,<br>
 Him in the hall of Fire  <a name="fr_307"></a><a href="#fn_307"><font size="1">1</font></a> he found.<br>
 And bent before him to the ground:<br>
 'O friend, to Rama's house return,<br>
 Who now performs a task most stern.'<br>
 He, when his noonday rites were done.<br>
 Went forth with fair Sumitra's son,<br>
 And came to Ráma's bright abode<br>
 Rich in the love which Lakshmi showed.<br>
 The son of Raghu with his dame.<br>
 With joined hands met him as he came,<br>
 Showing to him who Scripture knew<br>
 The worship that is Agni's due.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 With armlets, bracelets, collars, rings,<br>
 With costly pearls on golden strings,<br>
 With many a gem for neck and limb<br>
 The son of Raghu honoured him.<br>
 Then Ráma, at his wife's request,<br>
 The wise Suyajna thus addressed;<br>
 'Accept a necklace too to deck<br>
 With golden strings thy spouse's neck.<br>
 And Sítá here, my friend, were glad<br>
 A girdle to her gift to add.<br>
 And many a bracelet wrought with care,<br>
 And many an armlet rich and rare,<br>
 My wife to thine is fain to give,<br>
 Departing in the wood to live.<br>
 A bed by skilful workmen made,<br>
 With gold and various gems inlaid--<br>
 This too, before she goes, would she<br>
 Present, O saintly friend, to thee.<br>
 Thine be my elephant, so famed,<br>
 My uncle's present. Victor named;<br>
 And let a thousand coins of gold,<br>
 Great Brahman, with the gift be told.'<br>
 Thus Ráma spoke: nor he declined<br>
 The noble gitts for him designed.<br>
 On Ráma, Lakshman, Sítá he<br>
 Invoked all high felicity.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 In pleasant words then Ráma gave<br>
 His hest to Lakshman prompt and brave,<br>
 As Brahmá speaks for Him to hear<br>
 Who rules the Gods' celestial sphere:<br>
 'To the two best of Bráhmans run;<br>
 Agastya bring, and Kus'ik's son,<br>
 And precious gifts upon them rain,<br>
 Like fostering floods upon the grain.<br>
 O long-armed Prince of Raghu's line,<br>
 Delight them with a thousand kine,<br>
 And many a fair and costly gem,<br>
 With gold and silver, give to them.<br>
 To him, so deep in Scripture, who,<br>
 To Queen Kaus'alyá, ever true,<br>
 Serves her with blessing and respect,<br>
 Chief of the Taittiriya sect  <a name="fr_308"></a><a href="#fn_308"><font size="1">1b</font></a>--<br>
 To him. with women-slaves, present<br>
 A chariot rich with ornament,<br>
 And costly robes of silk beside,<br>
 Until the sage be satisfied.<br>
 On Chitraratha. true aud dear,<br>
 My tuneful bard and charioteer,<br>
 Gems, robes, and plenteous wealth confer--<br>
 Mine ancient friend and minister.<br>
 And these who go with staff in hand,<br>
 Grammarians trained, a numerous band.<br>
 Who their deep study only prize,<br>
 Nor think of other exercise,<br>
 Who toil not, loving dainty fare,<br>
 Whose praises e'en the good declare--<br>
 On these be eighty cars bestowed,<br>
 And each with precious treasures load.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_133"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 133</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 A thousand bulls for them suffice,<br>
 Two hundred elephants of price,<br>
 And let a thousand kine beside<br>
 The dainties of each meal provide.<br>
 The throng who sacred girdles wear,<br>
 And on Káusalyá wait with care--<br>
 A thousand golden coins shall please,<br>
 Son of Sumitrá, each of these.<br>
 Let all, dear Lakshman, of the train<br>
 These special gifts of honour gain;<br>
 My mother will rejoice to know<br>
 Her Bráhmans have been cherished so.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Raghu's son addressed the crowd<br>
 Who round him stood and wept aloud,<br>
 When he to all who thronged the court<br>
 Had dealt his wealth for their support:<br>
 'In Lakshman's house and mine remain,<br>
 And guard them till I come again,'<br>
 To all his people sad with grief.<br>
 In loving ords thus spoke their chief,<br>
 Then bade his treasure-keeper bring<br>
 Gold, silver, and each precious thing.<br>
 Then straight the servants went and bore<br>
 Back to their chief the wealth in store,<br>
 Before the people's eyes it shone,<br>
 A glorious pile to look upon.<br>
 The prince of men with Lakshman's aid<br>
 Parted the treasuures there displaved,<br>
 Gave to the poor, the young, the old,<br>
 And twice-born men, the gems and gold.<br>
     A Bráhman, long in evil case.<br>
 Named Trijat, born of Garga's race,<br>
 Earned ever toiling in a wood<br>
 With spade and plough his livelihood.<br>
 The youthful wife, his babes who bore,<br>
 Their indigence felt more and more.<br>
 Thus to the aged man she spake:<br>
 'Hear this my word: my counsel take.<br>
 Come, throw thy spade and plough away;<br>
 To virtuous Ráma go to-day.<br>
 And somewhat of his kindness pray.'<br>
     He heard the word she spoke: around<br>
 His limbs his ragged cloth he wound.<br>
 And took his journey by the road<br>
 That led to Ráma's fair abode.<br>
 To the fifth court be made his way;<br>
 Nor met the Bráhman check or stay.<br>
 Brighu, Angiras <a name="fr_309"></a><a href="#fn_309"><font size="1">1</font></a> could not be<br>
 Brighter with saintly light than Vie,<br>
 To Ráma's presence on he pressed.<br>
 And thus the noble chief addressed:<br>
 'O Ráma, poor and weak am I,<br>
 And many children round me cry.<br>
 Scant living in the woods I earn:<br>
 On me thine eye of pity turn.'<br>
 And Ráma, bent on sport and jest,<br>
 The suppliant Bráhman thus addressed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 'O aged man, one thousand kine,<br>
 Yet undistributed, are mine.<br>
 The cows on thee will I bestow<br>
 As far as thou thy staff canst throw.<br>
     The Bráhman heard. In eager haste<br>
 He bound his cloth around his waist.<br>
 Then round his head his staff he whirled,<br>
 And forth with mightiest effort hurled.<br>
 Cast from his hand it flew, and sank<br>
 To earth on Sarjú's farther bank,<br>
 Where herds of kine in thousands fed<br>
 Near to the well-stocked bullock shed.<br>
 And all the cows that wandered o'er<br>
 The meadow, far as Sarjú's shore.<br>
 At Ráma's word the herdsmen drove<br>
 To Trijat's cottage in the grove.<br>
 He drew the Bráhman to his breast,<br>
 And thus with calming words addressed:<br>
 'Now be not angry, Sire. I pray:<br>
 This jest of mine was meant in play.<br>
 These thousand kine, but not alone.<br>
 Their herdsmen too, are all thine own.<br>
 And wealth beside I give thee: speak.<br>
 Thine shall be all thy heart can seek.'<br>
     Thus Ráma spake. And Trijat prayed<br>
 For means his sacrifice to aid.<br>
 And Rama gave much wealth, required<br>
 To speed his offering as desired.<br>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_307"></a><a href="ry110.htm#fr_307">132:1</a>  The chapel where the sacred fire used
 in worship is kept.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_308"></a><a href="ry110.htm#fr_308">132:1b</a>  The students and teachers of the Taittiríya
 portion of the Yajur Veda.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_309"></a><a href="ry110.htm#fr_309">133:1</a> Two of the divine persaonnges
 called <i>prejápatis</i> and <i>*Brahmadikas*</i>
 who were first created by Brahmá.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry111.htm">Next: Canto XXXIII.: The People's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>