<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry116.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry118.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIX.: COUNSEL TO SÍTÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 Scarce had the sire, with each dear queen,<br>
 Heard Ráma's pleading voice, and seen<br>
 His darling in his hermit dress<br>
 Ere failed his senses for distress.<br>
 Convulsed with woe, his soul that shook,<br>
 On Raghu's son he could not look;<br>
 Or if he looked with failing eye<br>
 He could not to the chief reply.<br>
 By pangs of bitter grief assailed,<br>
 The long-armed monarch wept and wailed,<br>
 Half dead a while and sore distraught,<br>
 While Ráma filled his every thought.<br>
 'This hand of mine in days ere now<br>
 Has reft her young from many a cow.<br>
 Or living things has idly slain:<br>
 Hence comes, I ween, this hour of pain.<br>
 Not till the hour is come to die<br>
 Can from its shell the spirit fly.<br>
 Death comes not, and Kaikeyí still<br>
 Torments the wretch she cannot kill,<br>
 Who sees his son before him quit<br>
 The fine soft robes his rank that fit,<br>
 And, glorious as the burning fire,<br>
 In hermit garb his limbs attire.<br>
 Now all the people grieve and groan<br>
 Through Queen Kaikeyí's deed alone,<br>
 Who, having dared this deed of sin,<br>
 Strives for herself the gain to win.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke. With tears his eyes grew dim,<br>
 His senses all deserted him.<br>
 He cried, O Ráma, once, then weak<br>
 And fainting could no further speak.<br>
 Unconscious there he lay: at length<br>
 Regathering his sense and strength,<br>
 While his full eyes their torrents shed,<br>
 To wise Sumantra thus he said:<br>
 'Yoke the light car, and hither lead<br>
 Fleet coursers of the noblest breed,<br>
 And drive this heir of lofty fate<br>
 Beyond the limit of the state.<br>
 This seems the fruit that virtues bear,<br>
 The meed of worth which texts declare--<br>
 The sending of the brave and good<br>
 By sire and mother to the wood.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He heard the monarch, and obeyed,<br>
 With ready feet that ne'er delayed,<br>
 And brought before the palace gate<br>
 The horses and the car of state.<br>
 Then to the monarch's son he sped,<br>
 And raising hands of reverence said<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_141"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 141</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 That the light car which gold made fair,<br>
 With best of steeds, was standing there.<br>
 King Das'aratha called in haste<br>
 The lord o'er all his treasures placed.<br>
 And spoke, well skilled in place and time,<br>
 His will to him devoid of crime:<br>
 'Count all the years she has to live<br>
 Afar in forest wilds, and give<br>
 To Sítá robes and gems of price<br>
 As for the time may well suffice.'<br>
 Quick to the treasure-room he went,<br>
 Charged by that king most excellent,<br>
 Brought the rich stores, and gave them all<br>
 To Sítá in the monarch's hall.<br>
 The Maithil dame of high descent<br>
 Received each robe and ornament,<br>
 And tricked those limbs, whose lines foretold<br>
 High destiny, with gems and gold.<br>
 So well adorned, so fair to view,<br>
 A glory through the hall she threw:<br>
 So, when the Lord of Light upsprings,<br>
 His radiance o'er the sky he flings.<br>
 Then Queen Kaus'alyá spake at last,<br>
 With loving arms about her cast,<br>
 Pressed lingering kisses on her head,<br>
 And to the high-souled lady said:<br>
 'Ah, in this faithless world below<br>
 When dark misfortune comes and woe,<br>
 Wives, loved and cherished every day,<br>
 Neglect their lords and disobey.<br>
 Yes, woman's nature still is this:--<br>
 After long days of calm and bliss<br>
 When some light grief her spirit tries,<br>
 She changes all her love, or flies.<br>
 Young wives are thankless, false in soul,<br>
 With roving hearts that spurn control.<br>
 Brooding on sin and quickly changed,<br>
 In one short hour their love estranged.<br>
 Not glorious deed or lineage fair,<br>
 Not knowledge, gift, or tender care<br>
 In chains of lasting love can bind<br>
 A woman's light inconstant mind.<br>
 But those good dames who still maintain<br>
 What right, truth, Scripture, rule ordain--<br>
 No holy thing in their pure eyes<br>
 With one beloved husband vies.<br>
 Nor let thy lord my son, condemned<br>
 To exile, be by thee contemned,<br>
 For be he poor or wealthy, he<br>
 Is as a God, dear child, to thee.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When Sítá heard Kaus'alyá's speech<br>
 Her duty and her gain to teach,<br>
 She joined her palms with reverent grace<br>
 And gave her answer face to face:<br>
 'All will I do, forgetting naught,<br>
 Which thou,O honoured Queen, hast taught.<br>
 I know, have heard, and deep have stored<br>
 The rules of duty to my lord.<br>
 Not me, good Queen, shouldst thou include<br>
 Among the faithless multitude.<br>
 Its own sweet light the moon shall leave<br>
 Ere I to duty cease to cleave.<br>
 The stringless lute gives forth no strain,<br>
 The wheelless car is urged in vain;<br>
 No joy a lordless dame, although<br>
 Blest with a hundred sons, can know.<br>
 From father, brother, and from son<br>
 A measured share of joy is won:<br>
 Who would not honour, love, and bless<br>
 Her lord, whose gifts are measureless?<br>
 Thus trained to think, I hold in awe<br>
 Scripture's command and duty's law.<br>
 Him can I hold in slight esteem?<br>
 Her lord is woman's God, I deem.'<br>
 Kaus'alyá heard the lady's speech,<br>
 Nor failed those words her heart to reach.<br>
 Then, pure in mind, she gave to flow<br>
 The tear that sprang of joy and woe.<br>
 Then duteous Ráma forward came<br>
 And stood before the honoured dame,<br>
 And joining reverent hands addressed<br>
 The queen in rank above the rest:<br>
 'O mother, from these tears refrain;<br>
 Look on my sire and still thy pain.<br>
 To thee my days afar shall fly<br>
 As if sweet slumber closed thine eye,<br>
 And fourteen years of exile seem<br>
 To thee, dear mother, like a dream.<br>
 On me returning safe and well,<br>
 Girt by my friends, thine eyes shall dwell.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus for their deep affection's sake<br>
 The hero to his mother spake,<br>
 Then to the half seven hundred too.<br>
 Wives of his sire, paid reverence due.<br>
 Thus Das'aratha's son addressed<br>
 That crowd of matrons sore distressed:<br>
 'If from these lips, while here I dwelt,<br>
 One heedless taunt you e'er have felt,<br>
 Forgive me, pray. And now adieu,<br>
 I bid good-bye to all of you.'<br>
 Then straight, like curlews' cries, upwent<br>
 The voices of their wild lament,<br>
 While, as he bade farewell, the crowd<br>
 Of royal women wept aloud,<br>
 And through the ample hall's extent.<br>
 Where erst the sound of tabour, blent<br>
 With drum and shrill-toned instrument,<br>
     In joyous concert rose,<br>
 Now rang the sound of wailing high,<br>
 The lamentation and the cry,<br>
 The shriek, the choking sob, the sigh<br>
     That told the ladies' woes.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry118.htm">Next: Canto XL.: Ráma's Departure.</a></center>
 </body>