<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry118.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry120.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLI.: THE CITIZENS' LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 The lion chief with hands upraised<br>
 Was born from eyes that fondly gazed.<br>
 But then the ladies' bower was rent<br>
 With cries of weeping and lament:<br>
 'Where goes he now, our lord, the sure<br>
 Protector of the friendless poor,<br>
 In whom the wretched and the weak<br>
 Defence and aid were wont to seek?<br>
 All words of wrath he turned aside,<br>
 And ne'er, when cursed, in ire replied.<br>
 He shared his people's woe, and stilled<br>
 The troubled breast which rage had filled.<br>
 Our chief, on lofty thoughts intent,<br>
 In glorious fame preeminent:<br>
 As on his own dear mother, thus<br>
 He ever looked on each of us.<br>
 Where goes he now? His sire's behest,<br>
 By Queen Kaikeyí's guile distressed,<br>
 Has banished to the forest hence<br>
 Him who was all the world's defence.<br>
 Ah, senseless King, to drive away<br>
 The hope of men, their guard and stay,<br>
 To banish to the distant wood<br>
 Ráma the duteous, true, and good!'<br>
 The royal dames, like cows bereaved<br>
 Of their young calves, thus sadly grieved.<br>
 The monarch heard them as they wailed,<br>
 And by the fire of grief assailed<br>
 For his dear son, he bowed his head,<br>
 And all his sense and memory fled.<br>
     Then were no fires of worship fed,<br>
 Thick darkness o'er the sun was spread.<br>
 The cows their thirsty calves denied,<br>
 And elephants flung their food aside.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_144"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 144</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Tris'anku,  <a name="fr_315"></a><a href="ry120.htm#fn_315"><font size="1">1</font></a> Jupiter looked dread,<br>
 And Mercury and Mars the red,<br>
 In direful opposition met,<br>
 The glory of the moon beset.<br>
 The lunar stars withheld their light,<br>
 The planets were no longer bright,<br>
 But meteors with their horrid glare,<br>
 And dire Vis'ákhás  <a name="fr_316"></a><a href="ry120.htm#fn_316"><font size="1">2</font></a> lit the air.<br>
 As troubled Ocean heaves and raves<br>
 When Doom's wild tempest sweeps the waves,<br>
 Thus all Ayodhyá reeled and bent<br>
 When Ráma to the forest went.<br>
 And chilling grief and dark despair<br>
 Fell suddenly on all men there.<br>
 Their wonted pastime all forgot,<br>
 Nor thought of food, or touched it not.<br>
 Crowds in the royal street were seen<br>
 With weeping eye and troubled mien:<br>
 No more a people gay and glad,<br>
 Each head and heart was sick and sad.<br>
 No more the cool wind softly blew,<br>
 The moon no more was fair to view,<br>
 No more the sun with genial glow<br>
 Cherished the world now plunged in woe.<br>
 Sons, brothers, husbands, wedded wives<br>
 Forgot the ties that joined their lives;<br>
 No thought for kith and kin was spared,<br>
 But all for only Ráma cared.<br>
 And Ráma's friends who loved him best,<br>
 Their minds disordered and distressed.<br>
 By the great burthen of their woes<br>
 Turned not to slumber or repose.<br>
     Like Earth with all her hills bereft<br>
         Of Indra's guiding care.<br>
     Ayodhyá in her sorrow left<br>
         By him, the high souled heir.<br>
     Was bowed by fear and sorrow's force,<br>
         And shook with many a throe,<br>
     While warrior, elephant, and horse<br>
         Sent up the cry of woe.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_314"></a><a href="ry118.htm#fr_314">143:1</a>  'Thirty centuries have passed since he
 began this memorable journey. Every step
 of it is known and is annually traversed
 by thousands: hero worship is not extinct.
 What can Faith do! How strong are the
 ties of religion when entwined with the
 legends of a country! How many a cart
 creeps creaking and weary along the road
 from Ayodhyá to Chitrakút. It is this
 that gives the Rámáyan a strange interest,
 the story still lives.' <i>Calcutta Review:
 Vol. XXIII.</i></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry120.htm">Next: Canto XLII.: Das'aratha's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>