<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry117.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry119.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XL.: RÁMA'S DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma, Sítá, Lakshman bent<br>
 At the king's feet, and sadly went<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_142"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 142</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Round him with slow steps reverent.<br>
 When Ráma of the duteous heart<br>
 Had gained his sire's consent to part,<br>
 With Sítá by his side he paid<br>
 Due reverence to the queen dismayed.<br>
 And Lakshman, with affection meet,<br>
 Bowed down and clasped his mother's feet.<br>
 Sumitrá viewed him as he pressed<br>
 Her feet, and thus her son addressed:<br>
 'Neglect not Ráma wandering there,<br>
 But tend him with thy faithful care.<br>
 In hours of wealth, in time of woe,<br>
 Him, sinless son, thy refuge know.<br>
 From this good law the just ne'er swerve,<br>
 That younger sons the eldest serve,<br>
 And to this righteous rule incline<br>
 All children of thine ancient line--<br>
 Freely to give, reward each rite,<br>
 Nor spare their bodies in the fight.<br>
 Let Ráma Das'aratha be,<br>
 Look upon Sítá as on me,<br>
 And let the cot wherein you dwell<br>
 Be thine Ayodhyá. Fare thee well."<br>
 Her blessing thus Sumitrá gave<br>
 To him whose soul to Ráma clave,<br>
 Exclaiming, when her speech was done,<br>
 ' Go forth, O Lakshman, go, my son.<br>
 Go forth, my son to win success,<br>
 High victory and happiness.<br>
 Go forth thy foemen to destroy,<br>
 And turn again at last with joy.'<br>
   As Mátali his charioteer<br>
 Speaks for the Lord of Gods to hear,<br>
 Sumantra, palm to palm applied,<br>
 In reverence trained, to Ráma cried:<br>
 'O famous Prince, my car ascend,--<br>
 May blessings on thy course attend,--<br>
 And swiftly shall my horses flee<br>
 And place thee where thou biddest me.<br>
 The fourteen years thou hast to stay<br>
 Far in the wilds, begin to-day;<br>
 For Oueen Kaikeyí cries, Away."<br>
     Then Sítá, best of womankind,<br>
 Ascended, with a tranquil mind,<br>
 Soon as her toilet task was done,<br>
 That chariot brilliant as the sun.<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman true and bold<br>
 Sprang on the car adorned with gold.<br>
 The king those years had counted o'er,<br>
 And given Sítá robes and store<br>
 Of precious ornaments to wear<br>
 When following her husband there.<br>
 The brothers in the car found place<br>
 For nets and weapons of the chase,<br>
 There warlike arms and mail they laid,<br>
 A leathern basket and a spade.<br>
 Soon as Sumantra saw the three<br>
 Were seated in the chariot, he<br>
 Urged on each horse of noble breed,<br>
 Who matched the rushing wind in speed.<br>
 As thus the son of Raghu went<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Forth for his dreary banishment,<br>
 Chill numbing grief the town assailed,<br>
 All strength grew weak, all spirit failed,<br>
 Ayodhá through her wide extent<br>
 Was filled with tumult and lament:<br>
 Steeds neighed and shook the bells they bore,<br>
 Each elephant returned a roar.<br>
 Then all the city, young and old,<br>
 Wild with their sorrow uncontrolled,<br>
 Rushed to the car, as, from the sun<br>
 The panting herds to water run.<br>
 Before the car, behind, they clung,<br>
 And there as eagerly they hung,<br>
 With torrents streaming from their eyes,<br>
 Called loudly with repeated cries:<br>
 'Listen, Sumantra: draw thy rein;<br>
 Drive gently, and thy steeds restrain.<br>
 Once more on Ráma will we gaze,<br>
 Now to be lost for many days.<br>
 The queen his mother has, be sure,<br>
 A heart of iron, to endure<br>
 To see her godlike Ráma go,<br>
 Nor feel it shattered by the blow.<br>
 Sítá, well done! Videha's pride,<br>
 Still like his shadow by his side;<br>
 Rejoicing in thy duty still<br>
 As sunlight cleaves to Meru's hill.<br>
 Thou, Lakshman, too, hast well deserved,<br>
 Who from thy duty hast not swerved,<br>
 Tending the peer of Gods above,<br>
 Whose lips speak naught but words of love.<br>
 Thy firm resolve is nobly great,<br>
 And high success on thee shall wait.<br>
 Yea, thou shalt win a priceless meed--<br>
 Thy path with him to heaven shall lead,'<br>
 As thus they spake, they could not hold<br>
 The tears that down their faces rolled,<br>
 While still they followed for a space<br>
 Their darling of Ikshváku's race.<br>
     There stood surrounded by a ring<br>
 Of mournful wives the mournful king;<br>
 For, 'I will see once more,' he cried,<br>
 'Mine own dear son,' and forth he hied.<br>
 As he came near, there rose the sound<br>
 Of weeping, as the dames stood round.<br>
 So the she-elephants complain<br>
 When their great lord and guide is slain.<br>
 Kakutstha's son, the king of men,<br>
 The glorious sire, looked troubled then,<br>
 As the full moon is when dismayed<br>
 By dark eclipse's threatening shade.<br>
 Then Das'aratha's son, designed<br>
 For highest fate of lofty mind.<br>
 Urged to more speed the charioteer,<br>
 'Away, away! why linger here?<br>
 Urge on thy horses,' Rama cried,<br>
 And 'Stay, O stay,' the people sighed.<br>
 Sumantra, urged to speed away,<br>
 The townsmen's call must disobey,<br>
 Forth as the long-armed hero went,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_143"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 143</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The dust his chariot wheels up sent<br>
 Was laid by streams that ever flowed<br>
 From their sad eyes who filled the road.<br>
 Then, sprung of woe, from eyes of all<br>
 The women drops began to fall,<br>
 As from each lotus on the lake<br>
 The darting fish the water shake.<br>
 When he, the king of high renown,<br>
 Saw that one thought held all the town,<br>
 Like some tall tree he fell and lay,<br>
 Whose root the axe has hewn away.<br>
 Then straight a mighty cry from those<br>
 Who followed Ráma's car arose,<br>
 Who saw their monarch fainting there<br>
 Beneath that grief too great to bear.<br>
 Then 'Ráma, Ráma!" with the cry<br>
 Of 'Ah, his mother!' sounded high,<br>
 As all the people wept aloud<br>
 Around the ladies' sorrowing crowd.<br>
 When Ráma backward turned his eye,<br>
 And saw the king his father lie<br>
 With troubled sense and failing limb,<br>
 And the sad queen, who followed him,<br>
 Like some young creature in the net,<br>
 That will not, in its misery, let<br>
 Its wild eyes on its mother rest,<br>
 So, by the bonds of duty pressed,<br>
 His mother's look he could not meet.<br>
 He saw them with their weary feet,<br>
 Who, used to bliss, in cars should ride,<br>
 Who ne'er by sorrow should be tried,<br>
 And, as one mournful look he cast,<br>
 'Drive on,' he cried, 'Sumantra, fast.'<br>
 As when the driver's torturing hook<br>
 Goads on an elephant, the look<br>
 Of sire and mother in despair<br>
 Was more than  Ráma's heart could bear.<br>
 As mother kine to stalls return<br>
 Which hold the calves for whom they yearn,<br>
 So to the car she tried to run<br>
 As a cow seeks her little one.<br>
 Once and again the hero's eyes<br>
 Looked on his mother, as with cries<br>
 Of woe she called and gestures wild,<br>
 'O Sítá, Lakshman, O my child!'<br>
 'Stay,' cried the king, 'thy chariot stay:'<br>
 'On, on,' cried Ráma, 'speed away.'<br>
 As one between two hosts, inclined<br>
 To neither was Sumantra's mind.<br>
 But Ráma spake these words again:<br>
 'A lengthened woe is bitterest pain.<br>
 On, on; and if his wrath grow hot,<br>
 Thine answer be, ' I heard thee not.'<br>
 Sumantra, at the chief's behest,<br>
 Dismissed the crowd that toward him pressed,<br>
 And, as he bade, to swiftest speed<br>
 Urged on his way each willing steed.<br>
 The king's attendants parted thence,<br>
 And paid him heart-felt reverence:<br>
 In mind, and with the tears he wept,<br>
 Each still his place near Ráma kept.<br>
 As swift away the horses sped,<br>
 His lords to Das'aratha said:<br>
 'To follow him whom thou again<br>
 Wouldst see returning home is vain.'<br>
     With failing limb and drooping mien<br>
         He heard their counsel wise:<br>
     Still on their son the king and queen<br>
         Kept fast their lingering eyes.  <a name="fr_314"></a><a href="ry119.htm#fn_314"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry119.htm">Next: Canto XLI.: The Citizens' Lament.</a></center>
 </body>