<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry124.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry126.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVII.: THE CITIZENS' RETURN.</h3>
 <p>
 The people, when the morn shone fair,<br>
 Arose to find no Ráma there.<br>
 Then fear and numbing grief subdued<br>
 The senses of the multitude.<br>
 The woe-born tears were running fast<br>
 As all around their eyes they cast,<br>
 And sadly looked, but found no trace<br>
 Of Ráma, searching every place.<br>
 Bereft of Ráma good and wise.<br>
 With drooping cheer and weeping eyes,<br>
 Each woe-distracted sage gave vent<br>
 To sorrow in his wild lament:<br>
 'Woe worth the sleep that stole our sense<br>
 With its beguiling influence,<br>
 That now we look in vain for him<br>
 Of the broad chest and stalwart limb!<br>
 How could the strong-armed hero, thus<br>
 Deceiving all, abandon us?<br>
 His people so devoted see,<br>
 Yet to the woods, a hermit, flee?<br>
 How can he, wont our hearts to cheer,<br>
 As a fond sire his children dear,--<br>
 How can the pride of Raghu's race<br>
 Fly from us to some desert place!<br>
 Here let us all for death prepare,<br>
 Or on the last great journey fare.  <a name="fr_320"></a><a href="#fn_320"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Of Ráma our dear lord bereft,<br>
 What profit in our lives is left?<br>
 Huge trunks of trees around us lie,<br>
 With roots and branches sere and dry.<br>
 Come let us set these logs on tire<br>
 And throw our bodies on the pyre.<br>
 What shall we speak? How can we say<br>
 We followed Ráma on his way.<br>
 The mighty chief whose arm is strong,<br>
 Who sweetly speaks, who thinks no wrong?<br>
 Ayodhyá's town with sorrow dumb,<br>
 Without our lord will see us come,<br>
 And hopeless misery will strike<br>
 Elder, and child, and dame alike.<br>
 Forth with that peerless chief we came,<br>
 Whose mighty heart is aye the same:<br>
 How, reft of him we love, shall we<br>
 Retuming dare that town to see?'<br>
     Complaining thus with varied cry<br>
 They tossed their aged arms on high.<br>
 And their sad hearts with grief were wrung.<br>
 Like cows who sorrow for their young.<br>
 A while they followed on the road<br>
 Which traces of his chariot showed,<br>
 But when at length those traces failed,<br>
 A deep despair their hearts assailed.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_150"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 150</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The chariot marks no more discerned,<br>
 The hopeless sages backward turned:<br>
 'Ah, what is this? What can we more?<br>
 Fate stops the way, and all is o'er.'<br>
 With wearied hearts, in grief and shame<br>
 They took the road by which they came,<br>
 And reached Ayodhyá's city, where<br>
 From side to side was naught but care.<br>
 With troubled spirits quite cast down<br>
 They looked upon the royal town,<br>
 And from their eyes, oppressed with woe,<br>
 Their tears again began to flow.<br>
 Of Ráma reft, the city wore<br>
 No look of beauty as before,<br>
 Like a dull river or a lake<br>
 By Garud robbed of every snake.<br>
 Dark, dismal as the moonless sky,<br>
 Or as a sea whose bed is dry,<br>
 So sad, to every pleasure dead,<br>
 They saw the town, disquieted.<br>
 On to their houses, high and vast,<br>
 Where stores of precious wealth were massed,<br>
 The melancholy Bráhmans passed,<br>
     Their hearts with anguish cleft:<br>
 Aloof from all, they came not near<br>
 To stranger or to kinsman dear,<br>
 Showing in faces blank and drear<br>
     That not one joy was left.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_320"></a><a href="ry125.htm#fr_320">149:1</a>  The great pilgrimage to the Himalayas,
 in order to die there.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry126.htm">Next: Canto XLVIII.: The Women's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>