<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry123.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry125.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVI.: THE HALT.</h3>
 <p>
 When Ráma. chief of Raghu's race,<br>
 Arrived at that delightful place,<br>
 He looked on Sítá first, and then<br>
 To Lakshman spake the lord of men:<br>
 'Now first the shades of night descend<br>
 Since to the wilds our steps we bend.<br>
 Joy to thee, brother! do not grieve<br>
 For our dear home and all we leave.<br>
 The woods unpeopled seem to weep<br>
 Around us, as their tenants creep<br>
 Or fly to lair and den and nest,<br>
 Both bird and beast, to seek their rest.<br>
 Methinks Ayodhyá's royal town<br>
 Where dwells my sire of high renown,<br>
 With all her men and dames to-night<br>
 Will mourn us vanished from their sight.<br>
 For, by his virtues won, they cling<br>
 In fond affection to their king,<br>
 And thee and me, O brave and true,<br>
 And Bharat and S'atrughna too.<br>
 I for my sire and mother feel<br>
 Deep sorrow o'er my bosom steal,<br>
 Lest mourning us, oppressed with fears,<br>
 They blind their eyes with endless tears.<br>
 Yet Bharat's duteous love will show<br>
 Sweet comfort in their hours of woe,<br>
 And with kind words their hearts sustain,<br>
 Suggesting duty, bliss, and gain.<br>
 I mourn my parents now no more:<br>
 I count dear Bharat's virtues o'er,<br>
 And his kind love and care dispel<br>
 The doubts I had, and all is well.<br>
 And thou thy duty wouldst not shun,<br>
 And, following me, hast nobly done;<br>
 Else, bravest, I should need a band<br>
 Around my wife as guard to stand.<br>
 On this first night, my thirst to slake,<br>
 Some water only will I take:<br>
 Thus, brother, thus my will decides,<br>
 Though varied store the wood provides.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus having said to Lakshman, he<br>
 Addressed in turn Sumantra: 'Be<br>
 Most diligent to-night, my friend,<br>
 And with due care thy horses tend.'<br>
 The sun had set: Sumantra tied<br>
 His noble horses side by side,<br>
 Gave store of grass with liberal hand,<br>
 And rested near them on the strand.<br>
 Each paid the holy evening rite,<br>
 And when around them fell the night,<br>
 The charioteer, with Lakshman's aid,<br>
 A lowly bed for Ráma laid.<br>
 To Lakshman Ráma bade adieu,<br>
 And then by, Sítá's side he threw<br>
 His limbs upon the leafy bed<br>
 Their care upon the bank had spread.<br>
 When Lakshman saw the couple slept,<br>
 Still on the strand his watch he kept,<br>
 Still with Sumantra there conversed,<br>
 And Ráma's varied gifts rehearsed.<br>
 All night he watched, nor sought repose,<br>
 Till on the earth the sun arose:<br>
 With him Sumantra stayed awake,<br>
 And still of Ráma's virtues spake.<br>
 Thus, near the river's grassy shore<br>
 Which herds unnumbered wandered o'er,<br>
 Repose, untroubled, Ráma found,<br>
 And all the people lay around.<br>
 The glorious hero left his bed,<br>
 Looked on the sleeping crowd, and said<br>
 To Lakshman, whom each lucky line<br>
 Marked out for bliss with surest sign:<br>
 'O brother Lakshman, look on these<br>
 Reclining at the roots of trees;<br>
 All care of house and home resigned,<br>
 Caring for us with heart and mind,<br>
 These people of the city yearn<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_149"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 149</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To see us to our home return:<br>
 To quit their lives will they consent,<br>
 But never leave their firm intent.<br>
 Come, while they all unconscious sleep,<br>
 Let us upon the chariot leap,<br>
 And swiftly on our journey speed<br>
 Where naught our progress may impede,<br>
 That these fond citizens who roam<br>
 Far from Ikshváku's ancient home,<br>
 No more may sleep 'neath bush and tree,<br>
 Following still for love of me.<br>
 A prince with tender care should heal<br>
 The self-brought woes his people feel,<br>
 And never let his subjects share<br>
 The burthen he is forced to bear.'<br>
     Then Lakshman to the chief replied,<br>
 Who stood like Justice by his side:<br>
 'Thy rede, O sage, I well commend:<br>
 Without delay the car ascend.'<br>
 Then Ráma to Sumantra spoke:<br>
 'Thy rapid steeds, I pray thee, yoke.<br>
 Hence to the forest will I go:<br>
 Away, my lord, and be not slow.'<br>
     Sumantra, urged to utmost speed,<br>
 Yoked to the car each generous steed,<br>
 And then, with hand to hand applied,<br>
 He came before the chief and cred:<br>
 'Hail, Prince, whom mighty arms adorn,<br>
 Hail, bravest of the chariot-borne!<br>
 With Sítá and thy brother thou<br>
 Mayst mount: the car is ready now.'<br>
     The hero clomb the car with haste:<br>
 His bow and gear within were placed,<br>
 And quick the eddying flood he passed<br>
 Of Tamasá whose waves run fast.<br>
 Soon as he touched the farther side.<br>
 That strong-armed hero, glorified,<br>
 He found a road both wide and clear,<br>
 Where e'en the timid naught could fear.<br>
 Then, that the crowd might be misled,<br>
 Thus Ráma to Sumantra said:<br>
 'Speed north a while, then hasten back,<br>
 Returning in thy former track,<br>
 That so the people may not learn<br>
 The course I follow: drive and turn.'<br>
     Sumantra, at the chief's behest.<br>
 Quick to the task himself addressed;<br>
 Then near to Ráma came, and showed<br>
 The chariot ready for the road.<br>
 With Sítá, then, the princely two,<br>
 Who o'er the line of Raghu threw<br>
 A glory ever bright and new,<br>
     Upon the chariot stood.<br>
 Sumantra fast and faster drove<br>
 His horses, who in fleetness strove<br>
 Still onward to the distant grove,<br>
     The hermit-haunted wood.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry125.htm">Next: Canto XLVII.: The Citizens' Return.</a></center>
 </body>