<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry121.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry123.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIV.: SUMITRA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Kaus´alyá ceased her sad lament,<br>
 Of beauteous dames most excellent.<br>
 Sumitrá who to duty clave,<br>
 In righteous words this answer gave:<br>
 'Dear Queen, all noble virtues grace<br>
 Thy son, of men the first in place.<br>
 Why dost thou shed these tears of woe<br>
 With bitter grief lamenting so?<br>
 If Ráma, leaving royal sway<br>
 Has hastened to the woods away,<br>
 'Tis for his high-souled father's sake<br>
 That he his promise may not break.<br>
 He to the path of duty clings<br>
 Which lordly fruit hereafter brings--<br>
 The path to which the righteous cleave--<br>
 For him, dear Queen, thou shouldst not grieve.<br>
 And Lakshman too. the blameless-souled,<br>
 The same high course with him will hold,<br>
 And mighty bliss on him shall wait,<br>
 So tenderly compassionate.<br>
 And Sítá, bred with tender care,<br>
 Well knows what toils await her there,<br>
 But in her love she will not part<br>
 From Ráma of the virtuous heart.<br>
 Now has thy son through all the world<br>
 The banner of his fame unfurled:<br>
 True, modest, careful of his vow,<br>
 What has he left to aim at now?<br>
 The sun will mark his mighty soul,<br>
 His wisdom, sweetness, self-control,<br>
 Will spare from pain his face and limb,<br>
 And with soft radiance shine for him.<br>
 For him through forest glades shall spring<br>
 A soft auspicious breeze, and bring<br>
 Its tempered heat and cold to play<br>
 Around him ever night and day.<br>
 The pure cold moonbeams shall delight<br>
 The hero as he sleeps at night,<br>
 And soothe him with the soft caress<br>
 Of a fond parent's tenderness.<br>
 To him, the bravest of the brave,<br>
 His heavenly arms the Bráhman gave,<br>
 When fierce Suváhu dyed the plain<br>
 With his life-blood by Ráma slain.<br>
 Still trusting to his own right arm<br>
 Thy hero son will fear no harm:<br>
 As in his father's palace, he<br>
 In the wild woods will dauntless be.<br>
 Whene'er he lets his arrows fly<br>
 His stricken foemen fall and die:<br>
 And is that prince of peerless worth<br>
 Too weak to keep and sway the earth?<br>
 His sweet pure soul, his beauty's charm,<br>
 His hero heart, his warlike arm,<br>
 Will soon redeem his rightful reign<br>
 When from the woods he comes again.<br>
 The Bráhmans on the prince's head<br>
 King-making drops shall quickly shed,<br>
 And Sitá, Earth, and Fortune share<br>
 The glories which await the heir.<br>
 For him, when forth his chariot swept,<br>
 The crowd that thronged Ayodhyá wept,<br>
 With agonizing woe distressed.<br>
 With him in hermít's mantle dressed<br>
 In guise of Sítá Lakshmí went,<br>
 And none his glory may prevent.<br>
 Yea, naught to him is high or hard,<br>
 Before whose steps, to be his guard,<br>
 Lakshman, the best who draws the bow,<br>
 With spear, shaft, sword rejoiced to go.<br>
 His wanderings in the forest o'er,<br>
 Thine eyes shall see thy son once more.<br>
 Quit thy faint heart, thy grief dispel,<br>
 For this, O Queen, is truth I tell.<br>
 Thy son returning, moonlike, thence,<br>
 Shall at thy feet do reverence,<br>
 And, blest and blameless lady, thou<br>
 Shalt see his head to touch them bow,<br>
 Yea, thou shalt see thy son made king<br>
 When he returns with triumphing,<br>
 And how thy happy eyes will brim<br>
 With tears of joy to look on him!<br>
 Thou, blameless lady, shouldst the whole<br>
 Of the sad people here console:<br>
 Why in thy tender heart allow<br>
 This bitter grief to harbour now?<br>
 As the long banks of cloud distil<br>
 Their water when they see the hill,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_147"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 147</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 So shall the drops of rapture run<br>
 From thy glad eyes to see thy son<br>
 Returning, as he lowly bends<br>
 To greet thee, girt by all his friends.'<br>
     Thus soothing, kindly eloquent,<br>
 With every hopeful argument<br>
 Kaus'alyá's heart by sorrow rent,<br>
     Fair Queen Sumitrá ceased.<br>
 Kaus'alyá heard each pleasant plea,<br>
 And grief began to leave her free,<br>
 As the light clouds of autumn flee,<br>
     Their watery stores decreased.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry123.htm">Next: Canto XLV.: The Tamasá.</a></center>
 </body>