<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry120.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry122.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIII.: KAUS'ALYÁ'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 Kaus'alyá saw the monarch lie<br>
 With drooping frame and failing eye,<br>
 And for her banished son distressed<br>
 With these sad words her lord addressed:<br>
 'Kaikeyí, cruel, false, and vile<br>
 Has cast the venom of her guile<br>
 On Ráma lord of men, and she<br>
 Will ravage like a snake set free;<br>
 And more and more my soul alarm,<br>
 Like a dire serpent bent on harm.<br>
 For triumph crowns each dark intent,<br>
 And Ráma to the wild is sent.<br>
 Ah, were he doomed but here to stray<br>
 Begging his food from day to day,<br>
 Or do, enslaved, Kaikeyí's will,<br>
 This were a boon, a comfort still.<br>
 But she, as chose her cruel hate,<br>
 Has hurled him from his high estate,<br>
 As Bráhmans when the moon is new<br>
 Cast to the ground the demons' due.  <a name="fr_318"></a><a href="#fn_318"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The long-armed hero, like the lord<br>
 Of Nágas, with his bow and sword<br>
 Begins, I ween, his forest life<br>
 With Lakshman and his faithful wife.<br>
 Ah, how will fare the exiles now,<br>
 Whom, moved by Queen Kaikeyí, thou<br>
 Hast sent in forests to abide,<br>
 Bred in delights, by woe untried?<br>
 Far banished when their lives are young,<br>
 With the fair fruit before them hung,<br>
 Deprived of all their rank that suits,<br>
 How will they live on grain and roots?<br>
 O, that my years of woe were passed,<br>
 And the glad hour were come at last<br>
 When I shall see my children dear,<br>
 Ráma, his wife, and Lakshman here!<br>
 When shall Ayodhyá, wild with glee,<br>
 Again those mighty heroes see,<br>
 And decked with wreaths her banners wave<br>
 To welcome home the true and brave?<br>
 When will the beautiful city view<br>
 With happy eyes the lordly two<br>
 Returning, joyful as the main<br>
 When the dear moon is full again?<br>
 When, like some mighty bull who leads<br>
 The cow exulting through the meads,<br>
 Will Ráma through the city ride,<br>
 Strong-armed, with Sítá at his side?<br>
 When will ten thousand thousand meet<br>
 And crowd Ayodhyá's royal street,<br>
 And grain in joyous welcome throw<br>
 Upon my sons who tame the foe?<br>
 When with delight shall youthful bands<br>
 Of Bráhman maidens in their hands<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_146"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 146</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Bear fruit and flowers in goodly show,<br>
 And circling round Ayodhyá go?<br>
 With ripened judgment of a sage,<br>
 And godlike in his blooming age,<br>
 When shall my virtuous son appear,<br>
 Like kindly rain, our hearts to cheer?<br>
 Ah, in a former life, I ween,<br>
 This hand of mine, most base and mean,<br>
 Has dried the udders of the kine<br>
 And left the thirsty calves to pine.<br>
 Hence, as the lion robs the cow,<br>
 Kaikeyí makes me childless now,<br>
 Exulting from her feebler foe<br>
 To rend the son she cherished so.<br>
 I had but him, in Scripture skilled,<br>
 With every grace his soul was filled.<br>
 Now not a joy has life to give,<br>
 And robbed of him I would not live:<br>
 Yea, all my days are dark and drear<br>
 If he, my darling, be not near,<br>
 And Lakshman brave, my heart to cheer.<br>
 As for my son I mourn and yearn,<br>
 The quenchless flames of anguish burn<br>
     And kill me with the pain,<br>
 As in the summer's noontide blaze<br>
 The glorious Day-God with his rays<br>
     Consumes the parching plain.´<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_318"></a><a href="ry121.htm#fr_318">145:1</a>  The husks and chaff of the rice offered
 to the Gods.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry122.htm">Next: Canto XLIV.: Sumitra's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>