<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry125.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry127.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVIII.: THE WOMEN'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 When those who forth with Ráma went<br>
 Back to the town their steps had bent,<br>
 It seemed that death had touched and chilled<br>
 Those hearts which piercing sorrow filled.<br>
 Each to his several mansion came,<br>
 And girt by children and his dame,<br>
 From his sad eyes the water shed<br>
 That o'er his cheek in torrents spread.<br>
 All joy was fled: oppressed with cares<br>
 No bustling trader showed his wares.<br>
 Each shop had lost its brilliant look,<br>
 Each householder forbore to cook.<br>
 No hand with joy its earnings told,<br>
 None cared to win a wealth of gold,<br>
 And scarce the youthful mother smiled<br>
 To see her first, her new-born child.<br>
 In every house a woman wailed,<br>
 And her returning lord assailed<br>
 With keen taunt piercing like the steel<br>
 That bids the tusked monster kneel;<br>
 'What now to them is wedded dame,<br>
 What house and home and dearest aim,<br>
 Or son, or bliss, or gathered store,<br>
 Whose eyes on Ráma look no more!<br>
 There is but one in all the earth,<br>
 One man alone of real worth,<br>
 Lakshman, who follows, true and good,<br>
 Ráma, with Sítá, through the wood,<br>
 Made holy for all time we deem<br>
 Each pool and fountain, lake and stream,<br>
 If great Kakutstha's son shall choose<br>
 Their water for his bath to use.<br>
 Each forest, dark with lovely trees,<br>
 Shall yearn Kakutstha's son to please;<br>
 Each mountain peak and woody hill,<br>
 Each mighty flood and mazy rill,<br>
 Each rocky height, each shady grove<br>
 Where the blest feet of Ráma rove,<br>
 Shall gladly welcome with the best<br>
 Of all they have their honoured guest.<br>
 The trees that clustering blossoms bear,<br>
 And bright-hued buds to gem their hair,<br>
 The heart of Ráma shall delight,<br>
 And cheer him on the breezy height.<br>
 For him the upland slopes will show<br>
 The fairest roots and fruit that grow,<br>
 And all their wealth before him fling<br>
 Ere the due hour of ripening.<br>
 For him each earth-upholding hill<br>
 Its crystal water shall distil,<br>
 And all its floods shall be displayed<br>
 In many a thousand-hued cascade.<br>
 Where Ráma stands is naught to fear,<br>
 No danger comes if he be near;<br>
 For all who live on him depend,<br>
 The world's support, and lord, and friend.<br>
 Ere in too distant wilds he stray,<br>
 Let us to Ráma speed away,<br>
 For rich reward on those will wait<br>
 Who serve a prince of soul so great.<br>
 We will attend on Sítá there;<br>
 Be Raghu's son your special care.'<br>
 The city dames, with grief distressed,<br>
 Thus once again their lords addressed:<br>
 'Ráma shall be your guard and guide,<br>
 And Sítá will for us provide.<br>
 For who would care to linger here,<br>
 Where all is sad and dark and drear?<br>
 Who, mid the mourners, hope for bliss<br>
 ln a poor soulless town like this?<br>
 If Queen Kaikeyí's treacherous sin,<br>
 Our lord expelled, the kingdom win,<br>
 We heed not sons or golden store,<br>
 Our life itself we prize no more.<br>
 If she, seduced by lust of sway,<br>
 Her lord and son could cast away,<br>
 Whom would she leave unharmed, the base<br>
 Defiler of her royal race?<br>
 We swear it by our children dear,<br>
 We will not dwell as servants here;<br>
 If Queen Kaikeyí live to reign,<br>
 We will not in her realm remain.<br>
 Bowed down by her oppressive hand,<br>
 The helpless, lordless, godless land,<br>
 Cursed for Kaikeyí's guilt will fall,<br>
 And swift destruction seize it all.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_151"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 151</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 For, Ráma forced from home to fly,<br>
 The king his sire will surely die,<br>
 And when the king has breathed his last<br>
 Ruin will doubtless follow fast.<br>
 Sad, robbed of merits, drug the cup<br>
 And drink the poisoned mixture up,<br>
 Or share the exiled Ráma's lot,<br>
 Or seek some land that knows her not.<br>
 No reason, but a false pretence<br>
 Drove Ráma, Sitá, Lakshman hence,<br>
 And we to Bharat have been given<br>
 Like cattle to the shambles driven.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 While in each house the women, pained<br>
 At loss of Ráma, still complained,<br>
 Sank to his rest the Lord of Day,<br>
 And night through all the sky held sway<br>
 The tires of worship all were cold,<br>
 No text was hummed, no tale was told,<br>
 And shades of midnight gloom came down<br>
 Eveloping the mournful town.<br>
 Still, sick at heart, the women shed,<br>
 As for a son or husband fled,<br>
 For Ráma tears, disquieted:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 No child was loved as he.<br>
 And all Ayodhyá, where the feast,<br>
 Music, and song, and dance had ceased,<br>
     And merriment and glee,<br>
 Where every merchant's store was closed<br>
 That erst its glittering wares exposed,<br>
 Was like a dried up sea.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry127.htm">Next: Canto XLIX.: The Crossing of The Rivers.</a></center>
 </body>