<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry122.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry124.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLV.: THE TAMASÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 Their tender love the people drew<br>
 To follow Ráma brave and true,<br>
 The high-souled hero, as he went<br>
 Forth from his home to banishment.<br>
 The king himself his friends obeyed,<br>
 And turned him homeward as they prayed.<br>
 But yet the people turned not back,<br>
 Still close on Ráma's chariot track.<br>
 For they who in Ayodhyá dwelt<br>
 For him such fond affection felt,<br>
 Decked with all grace and glories high,<br>
 The dear full moon of every eye.<br>
 Though much his people prayed and wept,<br>
 Kakutstha's son his purpose kept,<br>
 And still his journey would pursue<br>
 To keep the king his father true.<br>
 Deep in the hero's bosom sank<br>
 Their love, whose signs his glad eye drank.<br>
 He spoke to cheer them, as his own<br>
 Dear children, in a loving tone:<br>
 'If ye would grant my fond desire,<br>
 Give Bharat now that love entire<br>
 And reverence shown to me by all<br>
 Who dwell within Ayodhyá's wall.<br>
 For he, Kaikeyí's darling son,<br>
 His virtuous career will run,<br>
 And ever bound by duty's chain<br>
 Consult your weal and bliss and gain.<br>
 In judgment old, in years a child,<br>
 With hero virtues meek and mild,<br>
 A fitting lord is he to cheer<br>
 His people and remove their fear.<br>
 In him all kingly gifts abound,<br>
 Wore noble than in me are found:<br>
 Imperial prince, well proved and tried--<br>
 Obey him as your lord and guide.<br>
 And grant, I pray, the boon I ask:<br>
 To please the king be still your task,<br>
 That his fond heart, while I remain<br>
 Far in the wood, may feel no pain.'<br>
     The more he showed his will to tread<br>
 The path where filial duty led,<br>
 The more the people, round him thronged,<br>
 For their dear Ráma's empire longed.<br>
 Still more attached his followers grew,<br>
 As Ráma, with his brother, drew<br>
 The people with his virtues' ties,<br>
 Lamenting all with tear-dimmed eyes.<br>
 The saintly twice-born, triply old<br>
 In glory, knowledge, seasons told,<br>
 With hoary heads that shook and bowed,<br>
 Their voices raised and spake aloud:<br>
 'O steeds, who best and noblest are,<br>
 Who whirl so swiftly Ráma's car,<br>
 Go not, return: we call on you:<br>
 Be to your master kind and true.<br>
 For speechless things are swift to hear,<br>
 And naught can match a horse's ear.<br>
 O generous steeds, return, when thus<br>
 You hear the cry of all of us.<br>
 Each vow he keeps most firm and sure,<br>
 And duty makes his spirit pure.<br>
 Back with our chief! not wood-ward hence;<br>
 Back to his royal residence!'<br>
     Soon as he saw the aged band.<br>
 Exclaiming in their misery, stand,<br>
 And their sad cries around him rang,<br>
 Swift from his chariot Ráma sprang.<br>
 Then, still upon his journey bent,<br>
 With Sítá and with Lakshman went<br>
 The hero by the old men's side<br>
 Suiting to theirs his shortened stride.<br>
 He could not pass the twice-born throng<br>
 As weariedly they walked along:<br>
 With pitying heart, with tender eye,<br>
 He could not in his chariot fly.<br>
 When the steps of Ráma viewed<br>
 That still his onward course pursued.<br>
 Woe shook the troubled heart of each,<br>
 And burnt with grief they spoke this speech--<br>
     'With thee, O Ráma, to the wood<br>
 All Bráhmans go and Bráhmanhood:<br>
 Borne on our aged shoulders, see,<br>
 Our fires of worship go with thee.<br>
 Bright canopies that lend their shade<br>
 In Vajapeya <a name="fr_319"></a><a href="#fn_319"><font size="1">1</font></a> rites displayed,<br>
 In plenteous store are borne behind<br>
 Like cloudlets in the autumn wind.<br>
 No shelter from the sun hast thou,<br>
 And, lest his fury burn thy brow,<br>
 These sacrificial shades we bear<br>
 Shall aid thee in the noontide glare.<br>
 Our hearts, who ever loved to pore<br>
 On sacred text and Vedic lore,<br>
 Now all to thee, beloved, turn,<br>
 And for a life in forests yearn.<br>
 Deep in our aged bosoms lies<br>
 The Vedas' lore, the wealth we prize,<br>
 There still, like wives at home, shall dwell,<br>
 Whose love and truth protect them well.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_148"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 148</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To follow thee our hearts are bent;<br>
 We need not plan or argument.<br>
 All else in duty's law we slight,<br>
 For following thee is following right.<br>
 O noble Prince, retrace thy way:<br>
 O, hear us, Ráma, as we lay,<br>
 With many tears and many prayers,<br>
 Our aged heads and swan-white hairs<br>
 Low in the dust before thy feet;<br>
 O, hear us, Ráma, we entreat.<br>
 Full many of these who with thee run,<br>
 Their sacred rites had just begun.<br>
 Unfinished yet those rites remain;<br>
 But finished if thou turn again.<br>
 All rooted life and things that move<br>
 To thee their deep affection prove.<br>
 To them, when warmed by love, they glow<br>
 And sue to thee, some favour show<br>
 Each lowly bush, each towering tree<br>
 Would follow too for love of thee.<br>
 Bound by its root it must remain;<br>
 But--all it can--its boughs complain,<br>
 As when the wild wind rushes by<br>
 It tells its woe in groan and sigh.<br>
 No more through air the gay birds flit,<br>
 But, foodless, melancholy sit<br>
 Together on the branch and call<br>
 To thee whose kind heart feels for all.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As wailed the aged Bráhmans, bent<br>
 To turn him back, with wild lament,<br>
 Seemed Tamasá herself to aid,<br>
 Checking his progress, as they prayed.<br>
 Sumantra from the chariot freed<br>
 With ready hand each weary steed;<br>
 He groomed them with the utmost heed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Their limbs he bathed and dried,<br>
 Then led them forth to drink and feed<br>
 At pleasure in the grassy mead<br>
 That fringed the river side.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_319"></a><a href="ry123.htm#fr_319">147:1</a>  An important sacrifice at which seventeen
 victims were immolated.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry124.htm">Next: Canto XLVI.: The Halt.</a></center>
 </body>