<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry127.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry129.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO L.: THE HALT UNDER THE INGUDÍ. <a name="fr_321"></a><a href="#fn_321"><font size="1">1</font></a></h3>
 <p>
 So through the wide and fair extent<br>
 Of Kosala the hero went.<br>
 Then toward Ayodmá back he gazed,<br>
 And cried, with supple hands upraised:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Farewell, dear city, in this place,<br>
 Protected by Kakutatlm's  race  <a name="fr_322"></a><a href="#fn_322"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 And Gods, who in thy temples dwell,<br>
 And keep thine ancient citadel!<br>
 I from his debt my sire will free,<br>
 Thy well-loved towers again will see,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And, coming from my wild retreat,<br>
 My mother and my father meet.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_152"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 152</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then burning grief inflamed his eye,<br>
 As his right arm he raised on high,<br>
 And, while hot tears his check bedewed,<br>
 Addressed the mournful multitude:<br>
 'By love and tender pity moved,<br>
 Your love for me you well have proved;<br>
 Now turn again with joy, and win<br>
 Success in all your hands begin'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Before the high souled chief they bent,<br>
 With circling steps around him went,<br>
 And then with bitter wailing, they<br>
 Departed each his several way.<br>
 Like the great sun engulfed by night,<br>
 The hero sped beyond their sight,<br>
 While still the people mourned his fate<br>
 And wept aloud disconsolate.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The car-borne chieftain passed the bound<br>
 Of Kos'ala's delightful ground.<br>
 Where grain and riches bless the land,<br>
 And people give with liberal hand:<br>
 A lovely realm unvexed by fear,<br>
 Where countless shrines and stakes  <a name="fr_323"></a><a href="#fn_323"><font size="1">1</font></a> appear:<br>
 Where mango-groves and gardens grow,<br>
 And streams of pleasant water flow:<br>
 Where dwells content a well-fed race,<br>
 And countless kine the meadows grace:<br>
 Filled with the voice of praise and prayer:<br>
 Each hamlet worth a monarch's care.<br>
 Before him three-pathed Gangá rolled<br>
 Her heavenly waters bright and cold;<br>
 O'er her pure breast no weeds were spread,<br>
 Her banks were hermit-visited.<br>
 The car-borne hero saw the tide<br>
 That ran with eddies multiplied,<br>
 And thus the charioteer addressed:<br>
 'Here on the bank to-day we rest.<br>
 Not distant from the river, see!<br>
 There grows a lofty Ingudí<br>
 With blossoms thick on every spray:<br>
 There rest we, charioteer, to-day.<br>
 I on the queen of floods will gaze,<br>
 Whose holy stream has highest praise,<br>
 Where deer, and bird, and glittering snake,<br>
 God, Daitya, bard their pastime take."<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sumantra, Lakshman gave assent,<br>
 And with the steeds they thither went.<br>
 When Ráma reached the lovely tree,<br>
 With Sítá and with Lakshman, he<br>
 Alighted from the car: with speed<br>
 Sumantra loosed each weary steed,<br>
 And hand to hand in reverence laid,<br>
 Stood near to Ráma in the shade.<br>
 Ráma's dear friend, renowned by fame,<br>
 Who of Nisháda lineage came,<br>
 Guha, the mighty chief, adored<br>
 Through all the land as sovereign lord,<br>
 Soon as he heard that prince renowned<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Was resting on Nisháda ground,<br>
 Begirt by counsellor and peer<br>
 And many an honoured friend drew near.<br>
 Soon as the monarch came in view,<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman toward him flew.<br>
 Then Guha, at the sight distressed,<br>
 His arms around the hero pressed,<br>
 Laid both his hands upon his head<br>
 Bowed to those lotus feet, and said:<br>
 'O Ráma, make thy wishes known,<br>
 And be this kingdom as thine own.<br>
 Who, mighty-armed, will ever see<br>
 A guest so dear as thou to me?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He placed before him dainty fare<br>
 Of every flavour, rich and rare,<br>
 Brought forth the gift for honoured guest,<br>
 And thus again the chief addressed<br>
 'Welcome, dear Prince, whose arms are strong;<br>
 These lands and all to thee belong.<br>
 Thy servants we, our lord art thou;<br>
 Begin, good king, thine empire now.<br>
 See, various food before thee placed,<br>
 And cups to drink and sweets to taste<br>
 For thee soft beds are hither borne,<br>
 And for thy horses grass and corn.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To Guha as he pressed and prayed,<br>
 Thus Raghu's son his answer made:<br>
 ''Twas aye thy care my heart to please<br>
 With honour, love, and courtesies,<br>
 And friendship brings thee now to greet<br>
 Thy guest thus humbly on thy feet.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Again the hero spake, as round<br>
 The king his shapely arms he wound:<br>
 'Guha, I see that all is well<br>
 With thee and those who with thee dwell;<br>
 That health and bliss and wealth attend<br>
 Thy realm, thyself, and every friend.<br>
 But all these friendly gifts of thine,<br>
 Bound to refuse, I must decline.<br>
 Grass, bark, and hide my only wear,<br>
 And woodland roots and fruit my fare,<br>
 On duty all my heart is set;<br>
 I seek the woods, an anchoret.<br>
 A little grass and corn to feed<br>
 The horses--this is all I need.<br>
 So by this favour, King, alone<br>
 Shall honour due to me be shown.<br>
 For these good steeds who brought me here<br>
 Are to my sire supremely dear;<br>
 And kind attention paid to these<br>
 Will honour me and highly please,'<br>
 Then Guha quickly bade his train<br>
 Give water to the steeds, and grain,<br>
 And Ráma, ere the night grew dark,<br>
 Paid evening rites in dress of bark,<br>
 And tasted water, on the strand,<br>
 Drawn from the stream by Lakshman's hand.<br>
 And Lakshman with observance meet<br>
 Bathed his beloved brother's feet,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_153"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 153</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Who rested with his Maithil spouse:<br>
 Then sat him down 'neath distant boughs.<br>
 And Guha with his bow sat near<br>
 To Lakshman and the charioteer,<br>
 And with the prince conversing kept<br>
 His faithful watch while Rama slept.<br>
 As Das'aratha's glorious heir,<br>
 Of lofty soul and wisdom rare,<br>
 Reclining with his Sítá there<br>
     Beside the river lay--<br>
 He who no troubles e'er had seen,<br>
 Whose life a life of bliss had been--<br>
 That night beneath the branches green<br>
     Passed pleasantly away.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_321"></a><a href="ry128.htm#fr_321">151:1</a>  Known to Europeans as the Goemtee.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_322"></a><a href="ry128.htm#fr_322">151:2</a>  A tree, commonly called <i>Ingua</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_323"></a><a href="ry128.htm#fr_323">152:1</a>  Sacrificial posts to which the victims
 were tied.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry129.htm">Next: Canto LI.: Lakshman's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>