<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry119.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry121.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLII.: DAS'ARATHA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 While yet the dust was seen afar<br>
 That marked the course of Ráma's car,<br>
 The glory of Ikshváku's race<br>
 Turned not away his eager face.<br>
 While yet his duteous son he saw<br>
 He could not once his gaze withdraw,<br>
 But rooted to the spot remained<br>
 With eyes that after Ráma strained.<br>
 But when that dust no more he viewed,<br>
 Fainting he fell by grief subdued.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 To his right hand Kaus'alyá went,<br>
 And ready aid the lady lent,<br>
 While Bharat's loving mother tried<br>
 To raise him on the other side.<br>
 The king, within whose ordered soul<br>
 Justice and virtue held control,<br>
 To Queen Kaikeyí turned and said,<br>
 With every sense disquieted:<br>
 'Touch me not, thou whose soul can plot<br>
 All sin. Kaikeyí, touch me not.<br>
 No loving wife, no friend to me,<br>
 I ne'er again would look on thee;<br>
 Ne'er from this day have aught to do<br>
 With thee and all thy retinue;<br>
 Thee whom no virtuous thoughts restrain,<br>
 Whose selfish heart seeks only gain.<br>
 The hand I laid in mine, O dame,<br>
 The steps we took around the flame,  <a name="fr_317"></a><a href="#fn_317"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 And all that links thy life to mine<br>
 Here and hereafter I resign.<br>
 If Bharat too, thy darling son,<br>
 Joy in the rule thy art has won,<br>
 Ne'er may the funeral offerings paid<br>
 By his false hand approach my shade.'<br>
     Then while the dust upon him hung,<br>
 The monarch to Kaus'alyá clung,<br>
 And she with mournful steps and slow<br>
 Turned to the palace, worn with woe.<br>
 As one whose hand has touched the fire,<br>
 Or slain a Bráhman in his ire,<br>
 He felt his heart with sorrow torn<br>
 Still thinking of his son forlorn.<br>
 Each step was torture, as the road<br>
 The traces of the chariot showed,<br>
 And as the shadowed sun grows dim<br>
 So cure and anguish darkened him.<br>
 He raised a cry, by woe distraught,<br>
 As of his son again he thought.<br>
 And judging that the car had sped<br>
 Beyond the city, thus he said:<br>
 'I still behold the foot-prints made<br>
 By the good horses that conveyed<br>
 My son afar: these marks I see,<br>
 But high-souled Ráma, where is he?<br>
 Ah me, my son! my first and best,<br>
 On pleasant conches wont to rest,<br>
 With limbs perfumed with sandal, fanned<br>
 By many a beauty's tender hand:<br>
 Where will he lie with log or stone<br>
 Beneath him for a pillow thrown,<br>
 To leave at morn his earthy bed,<br>
 Neglected, and with dust o'erspread,<br>
 As from the flood with sigh and pant<br>
 Comes forth the husband elephant?<br>
 The men who make the woods their home<br>
 Shall see the long-armed hero roam<br>
 Roused from his bed, though lord of all,<br>
 In semblance of a friendless thrall.<br>
 Janak's dear child who ne'er has met<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_145"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 145</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With aught save joy and comfort yet,<br>
 Will reach to-day the forest, worn<br>
 And wearied with the brakes of thorn.<br>
 Ah, gentle girl, of woods unskilled,<br>
 How will her heart with dread be filled<br>
 At the wild beasts' deep roaring there,<br>
 Whose voices lift the shuddering hair!<br>
 Kaikeyí, glory in thy gain,<br>
 And, widow queen, begin to reign:<br>
 No will, no power to live have I<br>
 When my brave son no more is nigh.'<br>
     Thus pouring forth laments, the king,<br>
 Girt by the people's crowded ring,<br>
 Entered the noble bower like one<br>
 New-bathed when funeral rites are done.<br>
 Where'er he looked naught met his gaze<br>
 But empty houses, courts, and ways.<br>
 Closed were the temples: countless feet<br>
 No longer trod the royal street,<br>
 And thinking of his son he viewed<br>
 Men weak and worn and woe-subdued.<br>
 As sinks the sun into a cloud,<br>
 So passed he on, and wept aloud,<br>
 Within that house no more to be<br>
 The dwelling of the banished three,<br>
 Brave Ráma, his Videhan bride,<br>
 And Lakshman by his brother's side:<br>
 Like broad still waters, when the king<br>
 Of all the birds that ply the wing<br>
 Has swooped from heaven and borne away<br>
 The glittering snakes that made them gay.<br>
 With choking sobs and voice half spent<br>
 The king renewed his sad lament:<br>
 With broken utterance faint and low<br>
 Scarce could he speak these words of woe:<br>
 'My steps to Ráma's mother guide,<br>
 And place me by Kaus'alyá's side:<br>
 There, only there my heart may know<br>
 Some little respite from my woe.'<br>
     The warders of the palace led<br>
 The monarch, when his words were said,<br>
 To Queen Kaus'alyá's bower, and there<br>
 Laid him with reverential care.<br>
 But while he rested on the bed<br>
 Still was his soul disquieted.<br>
 In grief he tossed his arms on high<br>
 Lamenting with a piteous cry:<br>
 'O Ráma, Ráma,' thus said he,<br>
 'My son, thou hast forsaken me.<br>
 High bliss awaits those favoured men<br>
 Left living in Ayodhyá then,<br>
 Whose eyes shall see my son once more<br>
 Returning when the time is o'er.'<br>
 Then came the night, whose hated gloom<br>
 Fell on him like the night of doom.<br>
 At midnight Das'aratha cried<br>
 To Queen Kaus'alyá by his side:<br>
 I see thee not, Kaus'alyá; lay<br>
 Thy gentle hand in mine, I pray.<br>
 When Ráma left his home my sight<br>
 Went with him, nor returns to-night.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_315"></a><a href="ry119.htm#fr_315">144:1</a>  See p. 72.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_316"></a><a href="ry119.htm#fr_316">144:2</a>   Four stars of the sixteenth lunar
 asterism.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_317"></a><a href="ry120.htm#fr_317">144:1b</a>  In the marriage service.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry121.htm">Next: Canto XLIII.: Kaus'alyá's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>