<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry131.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry133.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIV.: BHARADVÁJA'S HERMITAGE.</h3>
 <p>
 So there that night the heroes spent<br>
 Under the boughs that o'er them bent,<br>
 And when the sun his glory spread,<br>
 Upstarting, from the place they sped.<br>
 On to that spot they made their way,<br>
 Through the dense wood that round them lay,<br>
 Where Yamuná's  <a name="fr_326"></a><a href="#fn_326"><font size="1">1</font></a> swift waters glide<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 To blend with Gangá's holy tide.<br>
 Charmed with the prospect ever new<br>
 The glorious heroes wandered through<br>
 Full many a spot of pleasant ground,<br>
 Rejoicing as they gazed around,<br>
 With eager eye and heart at ease,<br>
 On countless sorts of flowery trees.<br>
 And now the day was half-way sped<br>
 When thus to Lakshman Ráma said:<br>
 'There, there, dear brother, turn thine eyes;<br>
 See near Prayág  <a name="fr_327"></a><a href="#fn_327"><font size="1">1b</font></a> that smoke arise:<br>
 The banner of our Lord of Flames<br>
 The dwelling of some saint proclaims.<br>
 Near to the place our steps we bend<br>
 Where Yamuná and Gangá blend.<br>
 I hear and mark the deafening roar<br>
 When chafing floods together pour.<br>
 See, near us on the ground are left<br>
 Dry logs, by labouring woodmen cleft,<br>
 And the tall trees, that blossom near<br>
 Saint Bharadvája's home, appear.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The bow-armed princes onward passed,<br>
 And as the sun was sinking fast<br>
 They reached the hermit's dwelling, set<br>
 Near where the rushing waters met.<br>
 The presence of the warrior scared<br>
 The deer and birds as on he fared,<br>
 And struck them vith unwonted awe:<br>
 Then Bharadvája's cot they saw.<br>
 The high-souled hermit soon they found<br>
 Girt by his dear disciples round:<br>
 Calm saint, whose vows had well been wrought,<br>
 Whose fervent rites keen sight had bought.<br>
 Duly had flames of worship blazed<br>
 When Ráma on the hermit gazed:<br>
 His suppliant hands the hero raised,<br>
 Drew nearer to the holy man<br>
 With his companions, and began,<br>
 Declaring both his name and race<br>
 And why they sought that distant place;<br>
 'Saint, Das'aratha's children we,<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman, come to thee.<br>
 This my good wife from Janak springs.<br>
 The best of fair Videha's kings;<br>
 Through lonely wilds, a faultless dame,<br>
 To this pure grove with me she came.<br>
 My younger brother follows still<br>
 Me banished by my father's will:<br>
 Sumitrá's son, bound by a vow,--<br>
 He roams the wood beside me now.<br>
 Sent by my father forth to rove,<br>
 We seek, O Saint, some holy grove,<br>
 Where lives of hermits we may lead,<br>
 And upon fruits and berries feed.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When Bharadvája, prudent-souled,<br>
 Had heard the prince his tale unfold,<br>
 Water he bade them bring, a bull,<br>
 And honour-gifts in dishes full,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_159"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 159</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And drink and food of varied taste,<br>
 Berries and roots, before him placed,<br>
 And then the great ascetic showed<br>
 A cottage for the guests' abode.<br>
 The saint these honours gladly paid<br>
 To Ráma who had thither strayed,<br>
 Then compassed sat by birds and deer<br>
 And many a hermit resting near.<br>
 The prince received the service kind,<br>
 And sat him down rejoiced in mind.<br>
 Then Bharadvája silence broke,<br>
 And thus the words of duty spoke:<br>
 'Kakutstha's royal son, that thou<br>
 Hadst sought this grove I knew ere now.<br>
 Mine ears have heard thy story, sent<br>
 Without a sin to banishment.<br>
 Behold, O Prince, this ample space<br>
 Near where the mingling floods embrace,<br>
 Holy, and beautiful, and clear:<br>
 Dwell with us, and be happy here.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 By Bharadvája thus addressed,<br>
 Ráma whose kind and tender breast<br>
 All living things would bless and save,<br>
 In gracious words his answer gave:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'My honoured lord, this tranquil spot,<br>
 Fair home of hermits, suits me not:<br>
 For all the neighbouring people here<br>
 Will seek us when they know me near:<br>
 With eager wish to look on me,<br>
 And the Videhan dame to see,<br>
 A crowd of rustics will intrude<br>
 Upon the holy solitude.<br>
 Provide, O gracious lord, I pray,<br>
 Some quiet home that lies away,<br>
 Where my Videhan spouse may dwell<br>
 Tasting the bliss deserved so well.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The hermit heard the prayer he made:<br>
 A while in earnest thought he stayed.<br>
 And then in words like these expressed<br>
 His answer to the chief's request:<br>
 'Ten leagues away there stands a hill<br>
 Where thou mayvst live, if such thy will:<br>
 A holy mount, exceeding fair;<br>
 Great saints have made their dwelling there:<br>
 There great Langúrs  <a name="fr_328"></a><a href="#fn_328"><font size="1">1</font></a> in thousands play,<br>
 And bears amid the thickets stray;<br>
 Wide-known by Chitrakúta's name,<br>
 It rivals Gandhamádan's  <a name="fr_329"></a><a href="#fn_329"><font size="1">2</font></a> fame.<br>
 Long as the man that hill who seeks<br>
 Gazes upon its sacred peaks,<br>
 To holy things his soul he gives<br>
 And pure from thought of evil lives.<br>
 There, while a hundred autumns fled,<br>
 Has many a saint with hoary head<br>
 Spent his pure life, and won the prize,<br>
 By deep devotion, in the skies:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Best home, I ween, if such retreat,<br>
 Far from the ways of men, be sweet:<br>
 Or let thy yewre of exile flee<br>
 Here in this hermitage with me.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus Bharadvája spake, and trained<br>
 In lore of duty, entertained<br>
 The princes and the dame, and pressed<br>
 Hie friendly gifts on every guest.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus to Prayág the hero went,<br>
 Thus saw the saint preeminent,<br>
 And varied speeches heard and said:<br>
 Then holy night o'er heaven was spread.<br>
 And Ráma took, by toil oppressed,<br>
 With Sitá and his brother, rest;<br>
 And so the night, with sweet content,<br>
 In Bharadvája's grove was spent.<br>
 But when the dawn dispelled the night,<br>
 Ráma approached the anchorite,<br>
 And thus addressed the holy sire<br>
 Whose glory shone like kindled fire:<br>
 'Well have we spent, O truthful Sage,<br>
 The night within thy hermitage:<br>
 Now let my lord his guests permit<br>
 For their new home his grove to quit.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then, as he saw the morning break,<br>
 Ih answer Bharadvája spake:<br>
 'Go forth to Chitrakúta's hill,<br>
 Where berries grow, and sweets distil:<br>
 Full well, I deem, that home will suit<br>
 Thee, Ráma, strong and resolute.<br>
 Go forth, and Chitrakúta seek,<br>
 Famed mountain of the Varied Peak.<br>
 In the wild woods that gird him round<br>
 All creatures of the chase are found:<br>
 Thou in the glades shalt see appear<br>
 Vast herds of elephants and deer.<br>
 With Si'ta there shalt thou delight<br>
 To gaze upon the woody height;<br>
 There with expanding heart to look<br>
 On river, table-land, and brook,<br>
 And see the foaming torrent rave<br>
 Impetuous from the mountain cave.<br>
 Auspicious hill! where all day long<br>
 The lapwing's cry, the Koil's song<br>
 Make all who listen gay:<br>
 Where all is fresh and fair to see,<br>
 Where elephants and deer roam free,<br>
 There, as a hermit, stay.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_326"></a><a href="ry132.htm#fr_326">158:1</a>  The Jumna.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_327"></a><a href="ry132.htm#fr_327">158:1b</a>  The Hindu name of Allahabad.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_328"></a><a href="ry132.htm#fr_328">159:1</a>  The Langúr is a large monkey.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_329"></a><a href="ry132.htm#fr_329">159:2</a>  A mountain said to lie to the east of
 Meru.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry133.htm">Next: Canto LV.: The Passage of Yamuná.</a></center>
 </body>