<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry132.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry134.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LV.: THE PASSAGE OF YAMUNÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 The princely tamers of their foes<br>
 Thus passed the night in calm repose,<br>
 Then to the hermit having bent<br>
 With reverence, on their way they went.<br>
 High favour Rharadvája showed.<br>
 And blessed them ready for the road.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_160"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 160</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With such fond looks as fathers throw<br>
 On their own sons, before they go.<br>
 Then spake the saint with glory bright<br>
 To Ráma peerless in his might:<br>
 'First, lords of men, direct your feet<br>
 Where Yamuna' and Gangá meet;<br>
 Then to the swift Kalindi  <a name="fr_330"></a><a href="#fn_330"><font size="1">1</font></a> go,<br>
 Whose westward waves to Gangá flow.<br>
 When thou shalt see her lovely shore<br>
 Worn by their feet who hasten o'er,<br>
 Then, Raghu's son, a raft prepare.<br>
 And cross the Sun born river there.<br>
 Upon her farther bank a tree,<br>
 Near to the landing wilt thou see.<br>
 The blessed source of varied gifts,<br>
 There her green boughs that Eig tree lifts:<br>
 A tree where countless birds abide,<br>
 Bv Syáma's name known far and wide.<br>
 Sitá, revere that holy shade:<br>
 There be thy prayers for blessing prayed.<br>
 Thence for a league your way pursue,<br>
 And a dark wood shall meet your view,<br>
 Where tall bamboos their foliage show,<br>
 The Gum tree and the Jujube grow.<br>
 To Chitrakúta have I oft<br>
 Trodden that path so smooth and soft,<br>
 Where burning woods no traveller scare,<br>
 But all is pleasant, green, and fair.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When thus the guests their road had learned,<br>
 Back to his cot the hermit turned,<br>
 And Ráma, Lakshman, Sitá paid<br>
 Their reverent thanks for courteous aid.<br>
 Thus Ráma spake to Lakshman, when<br>
 The saint had left the lords of men:<br>
 'Great store of bliss in sooth is ours<br>
 On whom his love the hermit showers.'<br>
 As each to other wisely talked,<br>
 The lion lords together walked<br>
 On to Kálindi's woody shore;<br>
 And gentle Sita went before.<br>
 They reached that flood, whose waters flee<br>
 With rapid current to the sea;<br>
 Their minds a while to thought they gave<br>
 And counselled how to cross the wave.<br>
 At length, with logs together laid,<br>
 A mighty raft the brothers made.<br>
 Then dry bamboos across were tied,<br>
 And grass was spread from side to side.<br>
 And the great hero Lakshman brought<br>
 Cane and Rose Apple boughs and wrought,<br>
 Trimming the branches smooth and neat,<br>
 For Sitá's use a pleasant seat.<br>
 And Ráma placed thereon his dame<br>
 Touched with a momentary shame,<br>
 Resembling in her glorious mien<br>
 All thought surpassing Fortune's Queen<br>
 Then Ráma hastened to dispose.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Each in its place, the skins and bows,<br>
 And by the fair Videhan laid<br>
 The coats, the ornaments, and spade.<br>
 When Sitá thus was set on board,<br>
 And all their gear was duly stored,<br>
 The heroes each with vigorous hand,<br>
 Pushed off the raft and left the land.<br>
 When half its way the raft had made,<br>
 Thus Sitá to Kálindi prayed:<br>
 'Goddess, whose flood I traverse now,<br>
 Grant that my lord may keep his vow.<br>
 For thee shall bleed a thousand kine,<br>
 A hundred jars shall pour their wine,<br>
 When Ráma sees that town again<br>
 Where old Ikshváku's children reign."<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus to Kálindi's stream she sued<br>
 And prayed in suppliant attitude.<br>
 Then to the river's bank the dame,<br>
 Fervent in supplication, came.<br>
 They left the raft that brought them o'er,<br>
 And the thick wood that clothed the shore,<br>
 And to the Fig-tree Syama made<br>
 Their way, so cool with verdant shade.<br>
 Then Sitá viewed that best of trees,<br>
 And reverent spake in words like these:<br>
 'Hail,hail, O mighty tree! Allow<br>
 My husband to complete his vow;<br>
 Let us returning, I entreat,<br>
 Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá meet.'<br>
 Then with her hands together placed<br>
 Around the tree she duly paced.<br>
 When Ráma saw his blameless spouse<br>
 A suppliant under holy boughs,<br>
 The gentle darling of his heart,<br>
 He thus to Lakshman spake apart:<br>
 'Brother, by thee our way be led;<br>
 Let Sitá close behind thee tread:<br>
 I, best of men, will grasp my bow,<br>
 And hindmost of the three will go.<br>
 What fruits soe'er her fancy take,<br>
 Or flowers half hidden in the brake,<br>
 For Janak's child forget not thou<br>
 To gather from the brake or bough."<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus on they fared. The tender dame<br>
 Asked Ráma, as they walked, the name<br>
 Of every shrub that blossoms bore,<br>
 Creeper, and tree unseen before:<br>
 And Lakshman fetched, at Sitá's prayer,<br>
 Boughs of each tree with clusters fair.<br>
 Then Janak's daughter joyed to see<br>
 The sand-discoloured river flee,<br>
 Where the glad cry of many a bird,<br>
 The sa'ras and the swan, was heard.<br>
 A league the brothers travelled through<br>
 The forest noble game they slew:<br>
 Beneath the trees their meal they dressed<br>
 And sat them down to eat and rest.<br>
 A while in that delightful shade<br>
 Where elephants unnumbered strayed.<br>
 Where peacocks screamed and monkeys played.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_161"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 161</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     They wandered with delight.<br>
 Then by the river's side they found<br>
 A pleaaant spot of level ground,<br>
 Where all was smooth and fair around,<br>
     Their lodging for the night.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_330"></a><a href="ry133.htm#fr_330">160:1</a>  Another name of the Jumna, daughter
 of the Sun.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry134.htm">Next: Canto LVI.: Chitrakuta.</a></center>
 </body>