<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry134.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry136.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVII.: SUMANTRA'S RETURN.</h3>
 <p>
 When Ráma reached the southern bank,<br>
 King Guha's heart with sorrow sank:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 He with Sumantra talked, and spent<br>
 With his deep sorrow, homeward went.<br>
 Sumantra, as the king decreed,<br>
 Yoked to the car each noble steed,<br>
 And to Ayodhyá's city sped<br>
 With his sad heart disquieted.<br>
 On lake and brook and scented grove<br>
 His glances fell, as on he drove:<br>
 City and village came in view<br>
 As o'er the road his coursers flew.<br>
 On the third day the charioteer,<br>
 When now the hour of night was near,<br>
 Came to Ayodhyá's gate, and found<br>
 The city all in sorrow drowned.<br>
 To him, in spirit quite cast down,<br>
 Forsaken seemed the silent town,<br>
 And by the rush of grief oppressed<br>
 He pondered in his mournful breast:<br>
 'Is all Ayodhyá burnt with grief,<br>
 Steed, elephant, and man, and chief?<br>
 Does her loved Ráma's exile so<br>
 Afflict her with the fires of woe?'<br>
 Thus as he mused, his steeds flew fast,<br>
 And swiftly through the gate he passed.<br>
 On drove the charioteer, and then<br>
 In hundreds, yea in thousands, men<br>
 Ran to the car from every side,<br>
 And, 'Ráma, where is Ráma?' cried.<br>
 Sumantra said: 'My chariot bore<br>
 The duteous prince to Gangá's shore;<br>
 I left him there at his behest,<br>
 And homeward to Ayodhyá pressed.'<br>
 Soon as the anxious people knew<br>
 That he was o'er the flood they drew<br>
 Deep sighs, and crying, Ráma! all<br>
 Wailed, and big tears began to fall.<br>
 He heard the mournful words prolonged,<br>
 As here and there the people thronged:<br>
 'Woe, woe for us, forlorn, undone,<br>
 No more to look on Raghu's son!<br>
 His like again we ne'er shall see,<br>
 Of heart so true, of hand so free,<br>
 In gifts, in gatherings for debate,<br>
 When marriage pomps we celebrate,<br>
 What should we do? What earthly thing<br>
 Can rest, or hope, or pleasure bring?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus the sad town, which Ráma kept<br>
 As a kind father, wailed and wept.<br>
 Each mansion, as the car went by,<br>
 Sent forth a loud and bitter cry,<br>
 As to the window every dame,<br>
 Mourning for banished Ráma, came.<br>
 As his sad eyes with tears o'erflowed,<br>
 He sped along the royal road<br>
 To Das'aratha's high abode.<br>
 There leaping down his car he stayed;<br>
 Within the gates his way he made;<br>
 Through seven broad courts he onward hied<br>
 Where people thronged on every side.<br>
 From each high terrace, wild with woe<br>
 The royal Indies flocked below:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_163"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 163</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He heard them talk in gentle tone,<br>
 As each for Ráma made her moan:<br>
 'What will the charioteer reply<br>
 To Queen Kaus'alyá's eager cry?<br>
 With Ráma from the gates he went;<br>
 Homeward alone, his steps are bent.<br>
 Hard is a life with woe distressed!<br>
 But difficult to win is rest,<br>
 If, when her son is banished, still<br>
 She lives beneath her load of ill.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such was the speech Sumantra heard<br>
 From them whom grief unfeigned had stirred.<br>
 As fires of anguish burnt him through,<br>
 Swift to the monarch's hall he drew,<br>
 Past the eighth court; there met his sight,<br>
 The sovereign in his palace bright,<br>
 Still weeping for his son, forlorn,<br>
 Pale, faint, and all with sorrow worn.<br>
 As there he sat, Sumantra bent<br>
 And did obeisance reverent,<br>
 And to the king repeated o'er<br>
 The message he from Ráma bore.<br>
 The monarch heard, and well-nigh brake<br>
 His heart, but yet no word he spake:<br>
 Fainting to earth he fell, and dumb,<br>
 By grief for Ráma overcome,<br>
 Rang through the hall a startling cry,<br>
 And women's arms were tossed on high,<br>
 When, with his senses all astray,<br>
 Upon the ground the monarch lay.<br>
 Kaus'alyá with Sumitrás aid,<br>
 Raised from the ground her lord dismayed:<br>
 'Sire, of high fate, she cried, O, why<br>
 Dost thou no single word reply<br>
 To Ráma's messenger who brings<br>
 News of his painful wanderings?<br>
 The great injustice done, art thou<br>
 Shame-stricken for thy conduct now?<br>
 Rise up, and do thy part: bestow<br>
 Comfort and help in this our woe.<br>
 Speak freely, King; dismiss thy fear,<br>
 For Queen Kaikeyí stands not near,<br>
 Afraid of whom thou wouldst not seek<br>
 Tidings of Ráma: freely speak.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When the sad queen had ended so,<br>
 She sank, insatiate in her woe,<br>
 And prostrate lay upon the ground,<br>
 While her faint voice by sobs was drowned.<br>
 When all the ladies in despair<br>
 Saw Queen Kaus'alyá wailing there,<br>
 And the poor king oppressed with pain,<br>
 They flocked around and wept again.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_332"></a><a href="ry134.htm#fr_332">162:1</a>  Deities of a particular class in which
 five or ten are enumerated. They are
 worshipped particularly at the funeral
 obsequies in honour of deceased progenitors.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry136.htm">Next: Canto LVIII.: Ráma's Message.</a></center>
 </body>