<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry129.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry131.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LII.: THE CROSSING OF GANGÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 Soon as the shades of night had fled,<br>
 Uprising from his lowly bed,<br>
 Ráma the famous, broad of chest,<br>
 His brother Lakshman thus addressed:<br>
 'Now swift upsprings the Lord of Light,<br>
 And fled, is venerable night,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_154"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 154</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 That dark-winged bird the Koïl now<br>
 Is calling from the topmost bough,<br>
 And sounding from the thicket nigh<br>
 Is heard the peacock's early cry,<br>
 Come, cross the flood that seeks the sea,<br>
 The swiftly flowing Jáhnaví.'  <a name="fr_324"></a><a href="#fn_324"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     King Guha heard his speech, agreed,<br>
 And called his minister with speed:<br>
 'A boat,' he cried, 'swift, strong, and fair,<br>
 With rudder, oars, and men, prepare,<br>
 And place it ready by the shore<br>
 To bear the pilgrims quickly o'er.'<br>
 Thus Guha spake: his followers all<br>
 Bestirred them at their master's call;<br>
 Then told the king that ready manned<br>
 A gay boat waited near the strand.<br>
 Then Guha, hand to hand applied.<br>
 With reverence thus to Ráma cried:<br>
 'The boat is ready by the shore:<br>
 How, tell me, can I aid thee more?<br>
 O lord of men, it waits for thee<br>
 To cross the flood that seeks the sea,<br>
 O godlike keeper of thy vow,<br>
 Embark: the boat is ready now.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
     Then Ráma, lord of glory high,<br>
 Thus to King Guha. made reply:<br>
 'Thanks for thy gracious care, my lord:<br>
 Now let the gear be placed on board.'<br>
 Each bow-armed chief, in mail encased,<br>
 Bound sword and quiver to his waist,<br>
 And then with Sítá near them hied<br>
 Down the broad river's shelving side.<br>
 Then with raised palms the charioteer,<br>
 In lowly reverence drawing near,<br>
 Cried thus to Ráma good and true:<br>
 'Now what remains for me to do?'<br>
     With his right hand, while answering<br>
         The hero touched his friend:<br>
     'Go back,' he said, 'and on the king<br>
         With watchful care attend.<br>
 Thus far, Sumantra, thou wast guide;<br>
 Now to Ayodhyá turn,' he cried:<br>
 'Hence seek we leaving steeds and car,<br>
 On foot the wood that stretches far.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sumantra, when, with grieving heart,<br>
 He heard the hero bid him part,<br>
 Thus to the bravest of the brave,<br>
 Ikshváku's son, his answer gave:<br>
 'In all the world men tell of naught,<br>
 To match thy deed, by heroes wrought--<br>
 Thus with thy brother and thy wife<br>
 Thrall-like to lead a forest life.<br>
 No meet reward of fruit repays<br>
 Thy holy lore, thy saintlike days,<br>
 Thy tender soul, thy love of truth,<br>
 If woe like this afflicts thy youth.<br>
 Thou, roaming under forest boughs<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 With thy dear brother and thy spouse<br>
 Shalt richer meed of glory gain<br>
 Than if three worlds confessed thy reign.<br>
 Sad is our fate, O Ráma: we,<br>
 Abandoned and repelled by thee,<br>
 Must serve as thralls Kaikeyí's will,<br>
 Imperious, wicked, born to ill.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus cried the faithful charioteer,<br>
 As Raghu's son, in rede his peer,<br>
 Was fast departing on his road,--<br>
 And long his tears of anguish flowed.<br>
 But Ráma, when those tears were dried<br>
 His lips with water purified,<br>
 And in soft accents, sweet and clear,<br>
 Again addressed the charioteer:<br>
 'I find no heart, my friend, like thine,<br>
 So faithful to Ikshváku's line.<br>
 Still first in view this object keep,<br>
 That ne'er for me my sire may weep.<br>
 For he, the world's far-ruling king,<br>
 Is old, and wild with sorrow's sting;<br>
 With love's great burthen worn and weak:<br>
 Deem this the cause that thus I speak<br>
 Whate'er the high-souled king decrees<br>
 His loved Kaikeyí's heart to please,<br>
 Yea, be his order what it may,<br>
 Without demur thou must obey,<br>
 For this alone great monarchs reign,<br>
 That ne'er a wish be formed in vain.<br>
 Then, O Sumantra, well provide<br>
 That by no check the king be tried:<br>
 Nor let his heart in sorrow pine:<br>
 This care, my faithful friend, be thine<br>
 The honoured king my father greet,<br>
 And thus for me my words repeat<br>
 To him whose senses are controlled,<br>
 Untired till now by grief, and old;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 I, Sítá, Lakshman sorrow not,<br>
 O Monarch, for our altered lot:<br>
 The same to us, if here we roam,<br>
 Or if Ayodhyá be our home,<br>
 The fourteen years will quickly fly,<br>
 The happy hour will soon be nigh<br>
 When thou, my lord, again shalt see<br>
 Lakshman, the Maithlí dame, and me.<br>
 Thus having soothed, O charioteer,<br>
 My father and my mother dear,<br>
 Let all the queens my message learn.<br>
 But to Kaikeyí chiefly turn,<br>
 With loving blessings from the three,<br>
 From Lakshman, Sítá, and from me,<br>
 My mother, Queen Kausalyá, greet<br>
 With reverence to her sacred feet.<br>
 And add this prayer of mine: 'O King;<br>
 Send quickly forth and Bharat bring,<br>
 And set him on the royal throne<br>
 Which thy decree has made his own.<br>
 When he upon the throne is placed,<br>
 When thy fond arms are round him laced.<br>
 Thine aged heart will cease to ache<br>
 With bitter pangs for Ráma's sake.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_155"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 155</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And say to Bharat: 'See thou treat<br>
 The queens with all observance meet:<br>
 What care the king receives, the same<br>
 Show thou alike to every dame.<br>
 Obedience to thy father's will<br>
 Who chooses thee the throne to fill,<br>
 Will earn for thee a store of bliss<br>
 Both in the world to come and this.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus Ráma bade Sumantra go<br>
 With thoughtful care instructed so.<br>
 Sumantra all his message heard,<br>
 And spake again, by passion stirred:<br>
 'O, should deep feeling mar in aught<br>
 The speech by fond devotion taught,<br>
 Forgive whate'er I wildly speak:<br>
 My love is strong, my tongue is weak.<br>
 How shall I, if deprived of thee,<br>
 Return that mournful town to see:<br>
 Where sick at heart the people are<br>
 Because their Ráma roams afar.<br>
 Woe will be theirs too deep to brook<br>
 When on the empty car they look,<br>
 As when from hosts, whose chiefs are slain,<br>
 One charioteer comes home again.<br>
 This very day, I ween, is food<br>
 Forsworn by all the multitude,<br>
 Thinking that thou, with hosts to aid,<br>
 Art dwelling in the wild wood's shade.<br>
 The great despair, the shriek of woe<br>
 They uttered when they saw thee go.<br>
 Will, when I come with none beside,<br>
 A hundred-fold be multiplied.<br>
 How to Kaus'alyá can I say:<br>
 'O Queen, I took thy son away,<br>
 And with thy brother left him well:<br>
 Weep not for him; thy woe dispel?'<br>
 So false a tale I cannot frame,<br>
 Yet how speak truth and grieve the dame?<br>
 How shall these horses, fleet and bold,<br>
 Whom not a hand but mine can hold,<br>
 Bear others, wont to whirl the car<br>
 Wherein Ikshváku's children are!<br>
 Without thee, Prince, I cannot, no,<br>
 I cannot to Ayodhyá go.<br>
 Then deign, O Ráma, to relent,<br>
 And let me share thy banishment.<br>
 But if no prayers can move thy heart,<br>
 If thou wilt quit me and depart,<br>
 The flames shall end my car and me,<br>
 Deserted thus and reft of thee.<br>
 In the wild wood when foes are near,<br>
 When dangers check thy vows austere,<br>
 Borne in my car will I attend.<br>
 All danger and all care to end.<br>
 For thy dear sake I love the skill<br>
 That guides the steed and curbs his will:<br>
 And soon a forest life will be<br>
 As pleasant, for my love of thee.<br>
 And if these horses near thee dwell,<br>
 And serve thee in the forest well,<br>
 They, for their service, will not miss<br>
 The due reward of highest bliss.<br>
 Thine orders, as with thee I stray.<br>
 Will I with heart and head obey,<br>
 Prepared, for thee, without a sigh,<br>
 To lose Ayodhyá or the sky.<br>
 As one denied with hideous sin,<br>
 I never more can pass within<br>
 Ayodhyá, city of our king,<br>
 Unless beside me thee I bring.<br>
 One wish is mine, I ask no more,<br>
 That, when thy banishment is o'er<br>
 I in my car may bear my lord,<br>
 Triumphant, to his home restored.<br>
 The fourteen years, if spent with thee.<br>
 Will swift as light-winged moments flee;<br>
 But the same years, without thee told,<br>
 Were magnified a hundred-fold.<br>
 Do not, kind lord, thy servant leave,<br>
 Who to his master's son would cleave,<br>
 And the same path with him pursue,<br>
 Devoted, tender, just and true.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Again, again Sumantra made<br>
 His varied plaint, and wept and prayed.<br>
 Him Raghu's son, whose tender breast<br>
 Felt for his servants, thus addressed:<br>
 O faithful servant, well my heart<br>
 Knows how attached and true thou art.<br>
 Hear thou the words I speak, and know<br>
 Why to the town I bid thee go.<br>
 Soon as Kaikeyí, youngest queen,<br>
 Thy coming to the town has seen,<br>
 No doubt will then her mind oppress<br>
 That Ráma roams the wilderness.<br>
 And so the dame, her heart content<br>
 With proof of Ráma's banishment.<br>
 Will doubt the virtuous king no more<br>
 As faithless to the oath he swore.<br>
 Chief of my cares is this, that she,<br>
 Youngest amid the queens, may see<br>
 Bharat her son securely reign<br>
 O'er rich Ayodhyá's wide domain.<br>
 For mine and for the monarch's sake<br>
 Do thou thy journey homeward take,<br>
 And, as I bade, repeat each word<br>
 That from my lips thou here hast heard.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spake the prince, and strove to cheer<br>
 The sad heart of the charioteer,<br>
 And then to royal Guha said<br>
 These words most wise and spirited:<br>
 'Guha, dear friend, it is not meet<br>
 That people throng my calm retreat:<br>
 For I must live a strict recluse,<br>
 And mould my life by hermits' use.<br>
 I now the ancient rule accept<br>
 By good ascetics gladly kept.<br>
 I go: bring fig-tree juice that I<br>
 In matted coils my hair may tie.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Quick Guha hastened to produce,<br>
 For the king's son, that sacred juice.<br>
 Then Ráma of his long locks made,<br>
 And Lakshman's too, the hermit braid.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_156"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 156</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And the two royal brothers there<br>
 With coats of bark and matted hair,<br>
 Transformed in lovely likeness stood<br>
 To hermit saints who love the wood.<br>
 So Ráma, with his brother bold,<br>
 A pious anchorite enrolled,<br>
 Obeyed the vow which hermits take,<br>
 And to his friend, King Guha, spake:<br>
 'May people, treasure, army share,<br>
 And fenced forts, thy constant care:<br>
 Attend to all: supremely hard<br>
 The sovereign's task, to watch and guard.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ikshváku's son, the good and brave,<br>
 This last farewell to Guha gave,<br>
 And then, with Lakshman and his bride,<br>
 Determined, on his way he hied.<br>
 Soon as he viewed, upon the shore,<br>
 The bark prepared to waft them o'er<br>
 Impetuous Gangá's rolling tide,<br>
 To Lakshman thus the chieftain cried:<br>
 'Brother, embark; thy hand extend,<br>
 Thy gentle aid to Sítá lend:<br>
 With care her trembling footsteps guide,<br>
 And place the lady by thy side.'<br>
 When Lakshman heard, prepared to aid<br>
 His brother's words he swift obeyed.<br>
 Within the bark he placed the dame,<br>
 Then to her side the hero came.<br>
 Next Lakshman's elder brother, lord<br>
 Of brightest glory, when on board,<br>
 Breathing a prayer for blessings, meet<br>
 For priest or warrior to repeat,<br>
 Then he and car-borne Lakshman bent,<br>
 Well-pleased, their heads, most reverent,<br>
 Their hands, with Sítá, having dipped,<br>
 As Scripture bids, and water sipped,<br>
 Farewell to wise Sumantra said,<br>
 And Guha, with the train he led.<br>
 So Ráma took, on board, his stand,<br>
 And urged the vessel from the land.<br>
 Then swift by vigorous arms impelled<br>
 Her onward course the vessel held,<br>
 And guided by the helmsman through<br>
 The dashing waves of Gangá flew.<br>
 Half way across the flood they came,<br>
 When Sítá, free from spot and blame,<br>
 Her reverent hands together pressed,<br>
 The Goddess of the stream addressed:<br>
 'May the great chieftain here who springs<br>
 From Das'aratha, best of kings,<br>
 Protected by thy care, fulfil<br>
 His prudent father's royal will.<br>
 When in the forest he has spent<br>
 His fourteen years of banishment,<br>
 With his dear brother and with me<br>
 His home again my lord shall see,<br>
 Returning on that blissful day.<br>
 I will to thee mine offerings pay,<br>
 Dear Queen, whose waters gently flow,<br>
 Who canst all blessed gifts bestow.<br>
 For, three-pathed Queen, though wandering here,<br>
 Thy waves descend from Brahmá's sphere,<br>
 Spouse of the God o'er floods supreme,<br>
 Though rolling here thy glorious stream.<br>
 To thee, fair Queen, my head shall bend,<br>
 To thee shall hymns of praise ascend,<br>
 When my brave lord shall turn again,<br>
 And, joyful, o'er his kingdom reign.<br>
 To win thy grace, O Queen divine,<br>
 A hundred thousand fairest kine,<br>
 And precious robes and finest meal<br>
 Among the Bráhmans will I deal.<br>
 A hundred jars of wine shall flow,<br>
 When to my home, O Queen, I go;<br>
 With these, and flesh, and corn, and rice,<br>
 Will I, delighted, sacrifice.<br>
 Each hallowed spot, each holy shrine<br>
 That stands on these fair shores of thine,<br>
 Each fane and altar on thy banks<br>
 Shall share my offerings and thanks.<br>
 With me and Lakshman, free from harm,<br>
 May he the blameless, strong of arm,<br>
 Reseek Ayodhyá from the wild,<br>
 O blameless Lady undefiled!'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As, praying for her husband's sake,<br>
 The faultless dame to Gangá spake,<br>
 To the right bank the vessel flew<br>
 With her whose heart was right and true.<br>
 Soon as the bark had crossed the wave,<br>
 The lion leader of the brave,<br>
 Leaving the vessel on the strand,<br>
 With wife and brother leapt to land.<br>
 Then Ráma thus the prince addressed<br>
 Who filled with joy Sumitrá's breast:<br>
 'Be thine alike to guard and aid<br>
 In peopled spot, in lonely shade.<br>
 Do thou, Sumitrá's son, precede:<br>
 Let Sítá walk where thou shalt lead.<br>
 Behind you both my place shall be,<br>
 To guard the Maithil dame and thee.<br>
 For she, to woe a stranger yet,<br>
 No toil or grief till now has met;<br>
 The fair Videhan will assay<br>
 The pains of forest life to-day.<br>
 To-day her tender feet must tread<br>
 Rough rocky wilds around her spread:<br>
 No tilth is there, no gardens grow,<br>
 No crowding people come and go.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The hero ceased: and Lakshman led<br>
 Obedient to the words he said:<br>
 And Sítá followed him, and then<br>
 Came Raghu's pride, the lord of men.<br>
 With Sítá walking o'er the sand<br>
 They sought the forest, bow in hand,<br>
 But still their lingering glances threw<br>
 Where yet Sumantra stood in view.<br>
 Sumantra, when his watchful eye<br>
 The royal youths no more could spy,<br>
 Turned from the spot whereon he stood<br>
 Homeward with Guha from the wood.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_157"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 157</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Still on the brothers forced their way<br>
 Where sweet birds sang on every spray,<br>
 Though scarce the eye a path could find<br>
 Mid flowering trees where creepers twined<br>
 Far on the princely brothers pressed,<br>
 And stayed their feet at length to rest<br>
 Beneath a fig tree's mighty shade<br>
 With countless pendent shoots displayed.<br>
 Reclining there a while at ease,<br>
 They saw, not far, beneath fair trees<br>
 A lake with many a lotus bright<br>
 That bore the name of Lovely Sight.<br>
 Ráma his wife's attention drew,<br>
 And Lakshman's, to the charming view:<br>
 'Look, brother, look how fair the flood<br>
 Glows with the lotus, flower and bud.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 They drank the water fresh and clear,<br>
 And with their shafts they slew a deer.<br>
 A fire of boughs they made in haste,<br>
 And in the flame the meat they placed.<br>
 So Raghu's sons with Sítá shared<br>
 The hunter's meal their hands prepared,<br>
 Then counselled that the spreading tree<br>
 Their shelter and their home should be.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_324"></a><a href="ry130.htm#fr_324">154:1</a>  Daughter of Jahnu, a name of the
 Ganges, See p. 55.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry131.htm">Next: Canto LIII.: Ráma's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>