<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry138.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry140.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXI.: KAUSLAYA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 When, best of all who give delight,<br>
 her rama wandered for from sight,<br>
 Kausaaly'a weeping, sore distressed,<br>
 The king her husband thus addressed;<br>
 'Thy name, O Monarch, far and wid?<br>
 Through the three worlds is glorified:<br>
 Yet Rama has the praying mind.  *<br>
 His speed is true, his heart is kind.<br>
 How will thy sons, good lord, sustain<br>
 With Sita, all their care and pain?<br>
 How in the wild endure distress,<br>
 Nursed in the lap of tenderness?<br>
 How will the dear Videhan bear<br>
 The heat and cold when wandering there<br>
 Bred in the bliss of princely state,<br>
 So young and fair find delicate?<br>
 The large-eyed lady, wont to eat<br>
 The best of finely seasoned meat--<br>
 How will she now her life sustain<br>
 With woodland fare of self-sown grain?<br>
 Will she, with joys encompassed long,<br>
 Who loved the music and the song,<br>
 In the wild wood endure to hear<br>
 The ravening lion's voice of fear?<br>
 Where sleeps my strong-armed hero, where<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_167"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 167</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Like Lord Mahendra's standard, fair?<br>
 Where is, by Lakshman's side, his bed,<br>
 His club-like arm beneath his head?<br>
 When shall I see his flower-like eyes,<br>
 And face that with the lotus vies,<br>
 Feel his sweet lily breath, and view<br>
 His glorious hair and lotus hue?<br>
 The heart within my breast, I feel,<br>
 Is adamant or hardest steel,<br>
 Or, in a thousand fragments split,<br>
 The loss of him had shattered it,<br>
 When those I love, who should be blest,<br>
 Are wandering in the wood distressed,<br>
 Condemned their wretched lives to lead<br>
 In exile, by thy ruthless deed.<br>
 If, when the fourteen years are past,<br>
 Ráma reseeks his home at last,<br>
 I think not Bharat will consent<br>
 To yield the wealth and government.<br>
 At funeral feasts some mourners deal<br>
 To kith and kin the solemn meal,<br>
 And having duly fed them all<br>
 Some Bráhmans to the banquet call.<br>
 The best of Bráhmans, good and wise,<br>
 The tardy summoning despise,<br>
 And, equal to the Gods, disdain<br>
 Cups, e'en of Amrit, thus to drain,<br>
 Nay e'en when Brámans first have fed,<br>
 They loathe the meal for others spread,<br>
 And from the leavings turn with scorn,<br>
 As bulls avoid a fractured horn.<br>
 So Ráma, sovereign lord of men,<br>
 Will spurn the sullied kingship then:<br>
 He born the eldest and the best,<br>
 His younger's leavings will detest,<br>
 Turning from tasted food away,<br>
 As tigers scorn another's prey.<br>
 The sacred post is used not twice,<br>
 Nor elements, in sacrifice.<br>
 But once the sacred grass is spread,<br>
 But once with oil the flame is fed:<br>
 So Ráma's pride will ne'er receive<br>
 The royal power which others leave,<br>
 Like wine when tasteless dregs are left<br>
 Or rites of Soma juice bereft,<br>
 Be sure the pride of Raghu's race<br>
 Will never stoop to such disgrace:<br>
 Ths lordly lion will not bear<br>
 That man should beard him in his lair.<br>
 Were all the worlds against him ranged<br>
 His dauntless soul were still unchanged:<br>
 He, dutiful, in duty strong,<br>
 Would purge the impious world from wrong.<br>
 Could not the hero, brave and bold,<br>
 The archer, with his shafts of gold,<br>
 Burn up the very seas, as doom<br>
 Will in the end all life consume!<br>
 Of lion's might, eyed like a bull,<br>
 A prince so brave and beautiful,<br>
 Thou hast with wicked hate pursued,<br>
 Like sea-born tribes who eat their brood.<br>
 If thou, O Monarch, hadst but known<br>
 The duty all the Twice-born own,<br>
 If the good laws had touched thy mind,<br>
 Which sages in the Scriptures find,<br>
 Thou ne'er hadst driven forth to pine<br>
 This brave, this duteous son of thine.<br>
 First on her lord the wife depends,<br>
 Next on her son and last on friends:<br>
 These three supports in life has she,<br>
 And not a fourth for her may be.<br>
 Thy heart, O King, I have not won;<br>
 In wild woods roams my banished son;<br>
 Far are my friends: ah, hapless me,<br>
 Quite ruined and destroyed by thee.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry140.htm">Next: Canto LXII.: Das'aratha Consoled.</a></center>
 </body>