<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry130.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry132.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIII.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 When evening rites were duly paid,<br>
 Reclined beneath the leafy shade,<br>
 To Lakshman thus spake Ráma, best<br>
 Of those who glad a people's breast:<br>
 'Now the first night has closed the day<br>
 That saw us from our country stray,<br>
 And parted from the charioteer;<br>
 Yet grieve not thou, my brother dear.<br>
 Henceforth by night, when others sleep,<br>
 Must we our careful vigil keep,<br>
 Watching for Sítá's welfare thus,<br>
 For her dear life depends on us.<br>
 Bring me the leaves that lie around,<br>
 And spread them here upon the ground,<br>
 That we on lowly beds may lie,<br>
 And let in talk the night go by.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 So on the ground with leaves o'erspread,<br>
 He who should press a royal bed,<br>
 Ráma with Lakshman thus conversed,<br>
 And many a pleasant tale rehearsed:<br>
 'This night the king,' he cried, 'alas!<br>
 In broken sleep will sadly pass.<br>
 Kaikeyí now content should be,<br>
 For mistress of her wish is she.<br>
 So fiercely she for empire yearns,<br>
 That when her Bharat home returns,<br>
 She in her greed, may even bring<br>
 Destruction on our lord the king.<br>
 What can he do, in feeble eld,<br>
 Reft of all aid and me expelled,<br>
 His soul enslaved by love, a thrall<br>
 Obedient to Kaikeyí's call?<br>
 As thus I muse upon his woe<br>
 And all his wisdoms overthrow,<br>
 Love is, methinks, of greater might<br>
 To stir the heart than gain and right.<br>
 For who, in wisdom's lore untaught.<br>
 Could by a beauty's prayer be bought<br>
 To quit his own obedient son,<br>
 Who loves him, as my sire has done!<br>
 Bharat, Kaikeyí's child, alone<br>
 Will, with his wife, enjoy the throne,<br>
 And blissfully his rule maintain<br>
 O'er happy Kos'ala's domain.<br>
 To Bharat's single lot will fall<br>
 The kingdom and the power and all,<br>
 When fails the king from length of days,<br>
 And Ráma in the forest strays.<br>
 Whoe'er, neglecting right and gain,<br>
 Lets conquering love his soul enchain,<br>
 To him, like Das'aratha's lot,<br>
 Comes woe with feet that tarry not.<br>
 Methinks at last the royal dame,<br>
 Dear Lakshman, has secured her aim,<br>
 To see at once her husband dead,<br>
 Her son enthroned, and Ráma fled.<br>
 Ah me! I fear, lest borne away<br>
 By frenzy of success, she slay<br>
 Kaus'alyá, through her wicked hate<br>
 Of me, bereft, disconsolate;<br>
 Or her who aye for me has striven<br>
 Sumitrá, to devotion given.<br>
 Hence, Lakshman, to Avodhyá speed,<br>
 Returning in the hour of need.<br>
 With Sítá I my steps will bend<br>
 Where Dandak's mighty woods extend.<br>
 No guardian has Kaus'alyá now:<br>
 O, be her friend and guardian thou.<br>
 Strong hate may vile Kaikeyí lead<br>
 To many a base unrighteous deed,<br>
 Treading my mother 'neath her feet<br>
 When Bharat holds the royal seat.<br>
 Sure in some antenatal time<br>
 Were children, by Kausalyá's crime.<br>
 Torn from their mothers' arms away,<br>
 And hence she mourns this evil day.<br>
 She for her child no toil would spare<br>
 Tending me long with pain and care;<br>
 Now in the hour of fruitage she<br>
 Has lost that son, ah, woe is me.<br>
 O Lakshman, may no matron e'er<br>
 A son so doomed to sorrow bear<br>
 As I, my mother's heart who rend<br>
 With anguish that can never end.<br>
 The Sáriká,  <a name="fr_325"></a><a href="#fn_325"><font size="1">1</font></a> methinks, possessed<br>
 More love than glows in Ráma's breast.<br>
 Who, as the tale is told to us.<br>
 Addressed the stricken parrot thus:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_158"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 158</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Parrot, the capturer's talons tear,<br>
 While yet alone thou flutterest there.<br>
 Before his mouth has closed on me:'<br>
 So cried the bird, herself to free.<br>
 Reft of her son, in childless woe,<br>
 My mother's tears for ever flow:<br>
 Ill-fated, doomed with grief to strive.<br>
 What aid can she from me derive?<br>
 Pressed down by care, she cannot rise<br>
 From sorrow's flood wherein she lies.<br>
 In righteous wrath my single arm<br>
 Could, with my bow, protect from harm<br>
 Ayodhyá's town and all the earth:<br>
 But what is hero prowess worth?<br>
 Lest breaking duty's law I sin,<br>
 And lose the heaven I strive to win,<br>
 The forest life today I choose,<br>
 And kingly state and power refuse.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus mourning in that lonely spot<br>
 The troubled chief bewailed his lot,<br>
 And filled with tears, his eyes ran o'er;<br>
 Then silent sat, and spake no more.<br>
 To him, when ceased his loud lament,<br>
 Like fire whose brilliant might is spent.<br>
 Or the great sea when sleeps the wave,<br>
 Thus Lakshman consolation gave:<br>
 'Chief of the brave who bear the bow,<br>
 E'en now Ayodhyá, sunk in woe,<br>
 By thy departure reft of light<br>
 Is gloomy as the moonless night.<br>
 Unfit it seems that thou, O chief.<br>
 Shouldst so afflict thy soul with grief,<br>
 So with thou Sítá's heart consign<br>
 To deep despair as well as mine.<br>
 Not I, O Raghu's son, nor she<br>
 Could live one hour deprived of thee:<br>
 We were, without thine arm to save,<br>
 Like fish deserted by the wave.<br>
 Although my mother dear to meet,<br>
 S'atrughna and the king, were sweet,<br>
 On them, or heaven, to feed mine eye<br>
 Were nothing, if thou wert not by.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sitting at ease, their glances fell<br>
 Upon the beds, constructed well.<br>
 And there the sons of virtue laid<br>
 Their limps beneath the fig tree's shade.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_325"></a><a href="ry131.htm#fr_325">157:1</a>  The <i>Mainá</i> or Gracula religiosa, a
 favourite cage-bird, easily taught to talk.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry132.htm">Next: Canto LIV.: Bharadvája's Hermitage.</a></center>
 </body>