<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry137.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry139.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LX.: KAUS'ALYÁ CONSOLED.</h3>
 <p>
 As Queen Kaus'alyá, trembling much,<br>
 As blighted by a goblin's touch,<br>
 Still lying prostrate, half awoke<br>
 To consciousness,'twas thus she spoke:<br>
 'Bear me away, Sumantra, far,<br>
 Where Ráma, Sítá, Lakshman are.<br>
 Bereft of them I have no power<br>
 To linger on a single hour.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_166"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 166</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Again, I pray, thy steps retrace,<br>
 And me in Dandak forest place,<br>
 For after them I needs must go,<br>
 Or sink to Yama's realms below<br>
     His utterance choked by tears that rolled<br>
 Down from their fountains uncontrolled,<br>
 With suppliant hands the charioteer<br>
 Thus spake, the lady's heart to cheer:<br>
 'Dismiss thy grief, despair, and dread<br>
 That fills thy soul, of sorrow bred,<br>
 For pain and anguish thrown aside.<br>
 Will Rama in the wood abide.<br>
 And Lakshman, with unfailing care<br>
 Will guard the feet of Rama there,<br>
 Earning, with governed sense, the prize<br>
 That waits on duty in the skies.<br>
 And Sita in the wild as well<br>
 As in her own dear home will dwell;<br>
 To Rama all her heart she gives,<br>
 And free from doubt and terror lives.<br>
 No faintest sign of care or woe<br>
 The features of the lady show:<br>
 Rethinks Videha's pride was made<br>
 For exile in the forest shade.<br>
 E'en as of old she used to rove<br>
 Delighted in the city's grove,<br>
 Thus, even thus she joys to tread<br>
 The woodlands uninhabited.<br>
 Like a young child, her face as fair<br>
 As the young moon, she wanders there.<br>
 What though in lonely woods she stray<br>
 Still Rama is her joy and stay:<br>
 All his the heart no sorrow bends,<br>
 Her very life on him depends.<br>
 For, if her lord she might not see,<br>
 Ayodhy'a like the wood would be.<br>
 She bids him, as she roams, declare<br>
 The names of towns and hamlets there,<br>
 Marks various trees that meet her eye,<br>
 And many a brook that hurries by,<br>
 And Janak's daughter seems home<br>
 When Rama or his brother spanks<br>
 And gives the answer that she seeks.<br>
 This, Lady, I remember well,<br>
 Nor angry words have to tell:<br>
 Reproaches at Kaikey'i shot,<br>
 Such, queen, my mind remembers not.'<br>
 The speech when Sita's wrath was high,<br>
 Sumantra passed in silence by,<br>
 That so his pleasant words might<br>
 With sweet report Kaulay'a's ear.<br>
 Her moonlike beauty suffers not<br>
 Though winds be rude and suns be hot:<br>
 The way, the danger, and the toil<br>
 Her gentle lustre may not soil.<br>
 Like the red liiy's leafy crown<br>
 Or as the fair full moon looks down,<br>
 So the Videhan lady's face<br>
 Still shines with undimmished grace.<br>
 What if the borrowed colours throw<br>
 
 </p><p>
 O'er her fine feet no row glow,<br>
 Still with their natural tints they spread<br>
 A lotus glory where they tread.<br>
 In sportive grace she walks the ground<br>
 And sweet her chiming anklets sound.<br>
 No jewels clasp the faultless limb:<br>
 She leaves them all for love of him.<br>
 If in the woods her gentle eye<br>
 A lion sees, or tiger nigh,<br>
 Or elephant, she fears no ill<br>
 For Rama's arm supports her still,<br>
 No longer be their fate deplored,<br>
 Nor thine, nor that of Kosal's lord,<br>
 For conduct such as theirs shall buy<br>
 Wide glory that can never die.<br>
 For casting grief and care away,<br>
 Delighting in the forest, they<br>
 With joyful spirits, blithe and gay,<br>
 Set forward on the ancient way<br>
     Where mighty saints have led:<br>
 Their highest aim, their dearest care<br>
 To keep their father's honour fair,<br>
 Observing still the oath he sware,<br>
     They roam, on wild fruit fed.'<br>
 Thus with persuasive art he tried<br>
 To turn her from her grief aside,<br>
     By soothing fancies won.<br>
 But still she gave her sorrow vent:<br>
 'Ah Rama,' was her shrill lament,<br>
 'My love, my son, my son!'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_334"></a><a href="ry137.htm#fr_334">165:1</a>  The lines containing this heap of forced
 metaphors are marked as spurious by
 Schlegel.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry139.htm">Next: Canto LXI.: Kauslaya's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>