<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry140.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry142.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIII.: THE HERMIT'S SON.</h3>
 <p>
 But soon by rankling grief oppressed<br>
 The king awoke from troubled rest,<br>
 And his sad heart was tried again<br>
 With anxious thought where all was pain.<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman's mournful fate<br>
 On Das'aratha, good and great<br>
 As Indra, pressed with crushing weight,<br>
 As when the demon's might assails<br>
 The Sun-God, and his glory pales.<br>
 Ere yet the sixth long night was spent.<br>
 Since Rama to the woods was sent,<br>
 The king at midnight sadly thought<br>
 Of the old crime his hand had wrought,<br>
 And thus to Queen Kausalyá cried<br>
 Who still for Ráma moaned and sighed:<br>
 'If thou art waking, give, I pray,<br>
 Attention to the words I say.<br>
 Whate'er the conduct men pursue,<br>
 Be good or ill the acts they do,<br>
 Be sure, dear Queen, they find the meed<br>
 Of wicked or of virtuous deed.<br>
 A heedless child we call the man<br>
 Whose feeble judgment fails to scan<br>
 The weight of what his hands may do,<br>
 Its lightness, fault, and merit too.<br>
 One lays the Mango garden low,<br>
 And bids the gay Palás'as grow:<br>
 Longing for fruit their bloom he sees,<br>
 But grieves when fruit should bend the trees.<br>
 Cut by my hand, my fruit-trees fell,<br>
 Palás'a trees I watered well.<br>
 My hopes this foolish heart deceive,<br>
 And for my banished son I grieve.<br>
 Kaus'alyá, in my youthful prime<br>
 Armed with my bow I wrought the crime,<br>
 Proud of my skill, my name renowned,<br>
 An archer prince who shoots by sound.<br>
 The deed this hand unwitting wrought<br>
 This misery on my soul has brought,<br>
 As children seize the deadly cup<br>
 And blindly drink the poison up.<br>
 As the unreasoning man may be<br>
 Charmed with the gay Palás'a tree,<br>
 I unaware have reaped the fruit<br>
 Of joying at a sound to shoot.<br>
 As regent prince I shared the throne.<br>
 Thou wast a maid to me unknown.<br>
 The early Rain-time duly came,<br>
 And strengthened love's delicious flame.<br>
 The sun had drained the earth that lay<br>
 All glowing 'neath the summer day,<br>
 And to the gloomy clime had fled<br>
 Where dwell the spirits of the dead.  <a name="fr_335"></a><a href="#fn_335"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The fervent heat that moment ceased.<br>
 The darkening clouds each hour increased<br>
 And frogs and deer and peacocks all<br>
 Rejoiced to see the torrents fall.<br>
 Their bright wings heavy from the shower,<br>
 The birds, new-bathed, had scarce the power<br>
 To reach the branches of the trees<br>
 Whose high tops swayed beneath the breeze.<br>
 The fallen rain, and falling still,<br>
 Hung like a sheet on every hill,<br>
 Till, with glad deer, each flooded steep<br>
 Showed glorious as the mighty deep.<br>
 The torrents down its wooded side<br>
 Poured, some unstained, while others dyed<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_169"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 169</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Gold, ashy, silver, ochre, bore<br>
 The tints of every mountain ore.<br>
 In that sweet time, when all are pleased,<br>
 My arrows and my bow I seized;<br>
 Keen for the chase, in field or grove,<br>
 Down Sarjú's bank my car I drove.<br>
 I longed with all my lawless will<br>
 Some elephant by night to kill,<br>
 Some buffalo that came to drink,<br>
 Or tiger, at the river's brink.<br>
 When all around was dark and still,<br>
 I heard a pitcher slowly fill,<br>
 And thought, obscured in deepest shade,<br>
 An elephant the sound had made.<br>
 I drew a shaft that glittered bright,<br>
 Fell as a serpent's venomed bite;<br>
 I longed to lay the monster dead,<br>
 And to the mark my arrow sped.<br>
 Then in the calm of morning, clear<br>
 A hermit's wailing smote my ear:<br>
 'Ah me, ah me,' he cried, and sank,<br>
 Pierced by my arrow, on the bank.<br>
 E'en as the weapon smote his side,<br>
 I heard a human voice that cried:<br>
 'Why lights this shaft on one like me,<br>
 A poor and harmless devotee?<br>
 I came by night to fill my jar<br>
 From this lone stream where no men are.<br>
 Ah, who this deadly shaft has shot<br>
 Whom have I wronged, and knew it not?<br>
 Why should a boy so harmless feel<br>
 The vengeance of the winged steel?<br>
 Or who should slay the guiltless son<br>
 Of hermit sire who injures none,<br>
 Who dwells retired in woods, and there<br>
 Supports his life on woodland fare?<br>
 Ah me, ah me, why am I slain,<br>
 What booty will the murderer gain?<br>
 In hermit coils I bind my hair,<br>
 Coats made of skin and bark I wear.<br>
 Ah, who the cruel deed can praise<br>
 Whose idle toil no fruit repays,<br>
 As impious as the wretch's crime<br>
 Who dares his master's bed to climb?<br>
 Nor does my parting spirit grieve<br>
 But for the life which thus I leave:<br>
 Alas, my mother and my sire,--<br>
 I mourn for them when I expire.<br>
 Ah me, that aged, helpless pair,<br>
 Long cherished by my watchful care,<br>
 How will it be with them this day<br>
 When to the Five <a name="fr_336"></a><a href="#fn_336"><font size="1">1</font></a> I pass away?<br>
 Pierced by the self-same dust we die,<br>
 Mine aged mother, sire, and I.<br>
 Whose mighty hand, whose lawless mind<br>
 Has all the three to death consigned!'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When I, by love of duty stirred,<br>
 That touching lamentation heard,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Pierced to the heart by sudden woe,<br>
 I threw to earth my shafts and bow.<br>
 My heart was full of grief and dread<br>
 As swiftly to the place I sped,<br>
 Where, by my arrow wounded sore,<br>
 A hermit lay on Sarjú's shore.<br>
 His matted hair was all unbound.<br>
 His pitcher empty on the ground,<br>
 And by the fatal arrow pained,<br>
 He lay with dust and gore distained.<br>
 I stood confounded and amazed:<br>
 His dying eyes to mine he raised,<br>
 And spoke this speech in accents stern,<br>
 As though his light my soul would burn:<br>
 'How have I wronged thee, King, that I<br>
 Struck by thy mortal arrow die?<br>
 The wood my home, this jar I brought,<br>
 And water for my parents sought.<br>
 This one keen shaft that strikes me through<br>
 Slays sire and aged mother too.<br>
 Feeble and blind, in helpless pain,<br>
 They wait for me and thirst in vain.<br>
 They with parched lips their pangs must bear,<br>
 And hope will end in blank despair.<br>
 Ah me, there seems no fruit in store<br>
 For holy zeal or Scripture lore,<br>
 Or else ere now my sire would know<br>
 That his dear son is lying low.<br>
 Yet, if my mournful fate he knew,<br>
 What could his arm so feeble do?<br>
 The tree, firm-rooted, ne'er may be<br>
 The guardian of a stricken tree.<br>
 Haste to my father, and relate<br>
 While time allows, my sudden fate,<br>
 Lest he consume thee as the fire<br>
 Burns up the forest, in his ire.<br>
 This little path, O King, pursue:<br>
 My father's cot thou soon wilt view.<br>
 There sue for pardon to the sage.<br>
 Lest he should curse thee in his rage.<br>
 First from the wound extract the dart<br>
 That kills me with its deadly smart,<br>
 E'en as the flushed impetuous tide<br>
 Eats through the river's yielding side.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 I feared to draw the arrow out,<br>
 And pondered thus in painful doubt:<br>
 'Now tortured by the shaft he lies,<br>
 But if I draw it forth he dies.'<br>
 Helpless I stood, faint, sorely grieved:<br>
 The hermit's son my thought perceived;<br>
 As one  o'ercome by direst pain<br>
 He scarce had strength to speak again.<br>
 With writhing limb and struggling breath,<br>
 Nearer and ever nearer death<br>
 My senses undisturbed remain,<br>
 And fortitude has conquered pain:<br>
 Now from  one tear thy soul be freed.<br>
 Thy hand has made a Bráhman bleed.<br>
 Let not this pang thy bosom wring:<br>
 No twice-born youth am I, O King,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_170"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 170</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 For of a Vais'ya sire I came,<br>
 Who wedded with a S'udrá dame.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 These words the boy could scarcely say,<br>
 As tortured by the shaft he lay.<br>
 Twisting his helpless body round,<br>
 Then trembling senseless on the ground.<br>
 Then from his bleeding side I drew<br>
 The rankling shaft that pierced him through.<br>
 With death's last fear my face he eyed,<br>
 And, rich in store of penance, died.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_335"></a><a href="ry141.htm#fr_335">168:1</a>  The southern region is the abode of
 Yama the Indian Pluto, and of departed
 spirits.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_336"></a><a href="ry141.htm#fr_336">169:1</a>  The five elements of which the body
 consists, and to which it returns.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry142.htm">Next: Canto LXIV.: Das'aratha's Death.</a></center>
 </body>