<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry139.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry141.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXII.: DAS'ARATHA CONSOLED.</h3>
 <p>
 The queen's stern speech the monarch heard,<br>
 As rage and grief her bosom stirred,<br>
 And by his anguish sore oppressed<br>
 Reflected in his secret breast.<br>
 Fainting and sad, with woe distraught.<br>
 He wandered in a maze of thought;<br>
 At length the queller of the foe<br>
 Grew conscious, rallying from his woe.<br>
 When consciousness returned anew<br>
 Long burning sighs the monarch drew.<br>
 Again immersed in thought he eyed<br>
 Kaus'alyá standing by his side.<br>
 Back to his pondering soul was brought<br>
 The direful deed his hand had wrought,<br>
 When, guiltless of the wrong intent,<br>
 His arrow at a sound was sent.<br>
 Distracted by his memory's sting,<br>
 And mourning for his son, the king<br>
 To two consuming griefs a prey,<br>
 A miserable victim lay.<br>
 The double woe devoured him fast,<br>
 As on the ground his eyes he cast,<br>
 Joined suppliant hands, her heart to touch.<br>
 And spake in the answer, trembling much:<br>
 'Kaus'alyá, for thy grace I sue,<br>
 Joining these hands as suppliants do.<br>
 Thou e'en to foes hast ever been<br>
 A gentle, good, and loving queen.<br>
 Her lord, with noble virtues graced,<br>
 Her lord, by lack of all debased,<br>
 Is still a God in woman's eyes,<br>
 If duty's law she hold and prize.<br>
 Thou, who the right hast aye pursued,<br>
 Life's changes and its chances viewed,<br>
 Shouldst never launch, though sorrow-stirred,<br>
 At me distressed, one bitter word.'<br>
     She listened, as with sorrow faint<br>
 He murmured forth his sad complaint:<br>
 Her brimming eyes with tears ran o'er,<br>
 As spouts the new fallen water pour;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_168"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 168</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 His suppliant hands, with fear dismayed<br>
 She gently clasped in hers, and laid,<br>
 Like a fair lotus, on her head,<br>
 And faltering in her trouble said:<br>
 'Forgive me; at thy feet I lie,<br>
 With low bent head to thee I cry.<br>
 By thee besought, thy guilty dame<br>
 Pardon from thee can scarcely claim.<br>
 She merits not the name of wife<br>
 Who cherishes perpetual strife<br>
 With her own husband good and wise,<br>
 Her lord both here and in the skies.<br>
 I know the claims of duty well,<br>
 I know thy lips the truth must tell.<br>
 All the wild words I rashly spoke,<br>
 Forth from my heart, through anguish, broke;<br>
 For sorrow bends the stoutest soul,<br>
 And cancels Scripture's high control.<br>
 Yea, sorrow's might all else o'erthrows<br>
 The strongest and the worst of foes.<br>
 'Tis thus with all: we keenly feel,<br>
 Yet bear the blows our foemen deal,<br>
 But when a slender woe assails<br>
 The manifest spirit bends and quails.<br>
 The fifth long night has now begun<br>
 Since the wild woods have lodged my son:<br>
 To me whose joy is drowned in tears,<br>
 Each day a dreary year appears.<br>
 While all my thoughts on him are set<br>
 Grief at my heart swells wilder yet:<br>
 With doubled might thus Ocean raves<br>
 When rushing floods increase his waves.'<br>
     As from Kaus'alyá reasoning well<br>
 The gentle words of wisdom fell,<br>
 The sun went down with dying flame,<br>
 And darkness o'er the landscape came.<br>
 His lady's soothing words in part<br>
 Relieved the monarch's aching heart,<br>
 Who, wearied out by all his woes,<br>
 Yielded to sleep and took repose.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry141.htm">Next: Canto LXIII.: The Hermit's Son.</a></center>
 </body>