<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry148.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry150.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXI.: BHARAT'S RETURN.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Bharat's face was eastward bent<br>
 As from the royal town he went.<br>
 He reached Sudámá's farther side,<br>
 And glorious, gazed upon the tide;<br>
 Passed Hládiní, and saw her toss<br>
 Her westering billows hard to cross.<br>
 Then old Ikshváku's famous son<br>
 O'er S'atadrú <a name="fr_348"></a><a href="#fn_348"><font size="1">1</font></a> his passage won,<br>
 Near Ailadhána on the strand,<br>
 And came to Aparparyat's land.<br>
 O'er S'ilás flood he hurried fast,<br>
 Akurvatí's fair stream he passed,<br>
 Crossed o'er A'gneya's rapid rill,<br>
 And S'alyakartan onward still.<br>
 S'ilávahá's swift stream he eyed,<br>
 True to his vows and purified.<br>
 Then crossed the lofty hills, and stood<br>
 In Chaitraratha's mighty wood.<br>
 He reached the confluence where meet<br>
 Sarasvatí <a name="fr_349"></a><a href="#fn_349"><font size="1">2</font></a> and Gangá fleet,<br>
 And through Bhárunda forest, spread<br>
 Northward of Víramatsya, sped.<br>
 He sought Kalinda's child, who fills<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_179"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 179</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The soul with joy, begirt by hills,<br>
 Reached Yamuná and passing o'er,<br>
 Rested his army on the shore:<br>
 He gave his horses food and rest,<br>
 Bathed reeking limb and drooping crest.<br>
 They drank their fill and bathed them there,<br>
 And water for their journey bare.<br>
 Thence through a mighty wood he sped<br>
 All wild and uninhabited,<br>
 As in fair chariot through the skies,<br>
 Most fair in shape a Storm-God flies.<br>
 At Ans'udhána Gangá, hard<br>
 To cross, his onward journey barred,<br>
 So turning quickly thence he came<br>
 To Prágvat's city dear to fame.<br>
 There having gained the farther side<br>
 To Kutikoshtiká he hied:<br>
 The stream he crossed, and onward then<br>
 To Dharmavardhan brought his men.<br>
 Thence, leaving Toran on the north.<br>
 To Jambuprastha journeyed forth.<br>
 Then onward to a pleasant grove<br>
 By fair Varúha's town he drove,<br>
 And when a while he there had stayed,<br>
 Went eastward from the friendly shade.<br>
 Eastward of Ujjiháná where<br>
 The Priyak trees are tall and fair,<br>
 He passed, and rested there each steed<br>
 Kxhausted with the journey's speed.<br>
 There orders to his men addressed,<br>
 With quickened pace he onward pressed,<br>
 A while at Sarvatirtha spent,<br>
 Then o'er Uttániká he went.<br>
 O'er many a stream beside he sped<br>
 With coursers on the mountains bred,<br>
 And passing Hastiprishthak, took<br>
 The road o'er Kutikás fair brook.<br>
 Then, at Lohitya's village, he<br>
 Crossed o'er the swift Kapívatí,<br>
 Then passed, where Ekas'ála stands,<br>
 The Sthánumatís flood and sands,<br>
 And Gomatí of fair renown<br>
 By Vinata's delightful town.<br>
 When to Kalinga near he drew,<br>
 A wood of Sal trees charmed the view;<br>
 That passed, the sun began to rise,<br>
 And Bharat saw with happy eyes,<br>
 Ayodhá's city, built and planned<br>
 By ancient Manu's royal hand,<br>
 Seven nights upon the road had passed,<br>
 And when he saw the town at last<br>
 Before him in her beauty spread,<br>
 Thus Bharat to the driver said:<br>
 'This glorious city from afar,<br>
 Wherein pure groves and gardens are,<br>
 Seems to my eager eyes to-day<br>
 A lifeless pile of yellow clay.<br>
 Through all her streets where erst a throng<br>
 Of men and women streamed along,<br>
 Uprose the multitudinous roar:<br>
 To-day I hear that sound no more.<br>
 No longer do mine eyes behold<br>
 The leading people, as of old,<br>
 On elephants, cars, horses, go<br>
 Abroad and homeward, to and fro.<br>
 The brilliant gardens, where we heard<br>
 The wild note of each rapturous bird.<br>
 Where men and women loved to meet,<br>
 In pleasant shades, for pastime sweet,--<br>
 These to my eyes this day appear<br>
 Joyless, and desolate, and drear;<br>
 Each tree that graced the garden grieves,<br>
 And every path is spread with leaves.<br>
 The merry cry of bird and beast,<br>
 That spake aloud their joy has ceased:<br>
 Still is the long melodious note<br>
 That charmed us from each warbling throat,<br>
 Why blows the blessed air no more,<br>
 The incense-breathing air that bore<br>
 Its sweet incomparable scent<br>
 Of sandal and of aloe blent?<br>
 Why are the drum and tabour mute?<br>
 Why is the music of the lute<br>
 That woke responsive to the quill,<br>
 Loved by the happy, hushed and still?<br>
 My boding spirit gathers hence<br>
 Dire sins of awful consequence,<br>
 And omens, crowding on my sight,<br>
 Weigh down my soul with wild affright<br>
 Scarce shall I find my friends who dwell<br>
 Here in Ayodhyá safe and well:<br>
 For surely not without a cause<br>
 This crushing dread my soul o'erawes.<br>
     Heart sick, dejected, every sense<br>
 Confused by terror's influence,<br>
 On to the town he quickly swept<br>
 Which King Ikshváku's children kept.<br>
 He passed through Vaijayanta's gate,<br>
 With weary steeds, disconsolate.<br>
 And all who near their station held,<br>
 His escort. crying Victory, swelled,<br>
 With heart distracted still he bowed<br>
 Farewell to all the following crowd,<br>
 Turned to the driver and began<br>
 To question thus the weary man:.<br>
 'Why was I brought, O free from blame,<br>
 So fast, unknown for what I came?<br>
 Yet fear of ill my heart appals,<br>
 And all my wonted courage falls.<br>
 For I have heard in days gone by<br>
 The changes seen when monarchs die;<br>
 And all those signs. O charioteer,<br>
 I see today surround me here:<br>
 Each kinsman's house looks dark and grim,<br>
 No hand delights to keep it trim:<br>
 The beauty vanished. and the pride,<br>
 The doors, unkept, stand open wide.<br>
 No morning rites are offered there,<br>
 No grateful incense loads the air,<br>
 And all therein, with brows o'ercast,<br>
 Sit joyless on the ground and fast.<br>
 Their lovely chaplets dry and dead,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_180"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 180</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Their courts unswept, with dust o'erspread,<br>
 The temples of the Gods to-day<br>
 No more look beautiful and gay.<br>
 Neglected stands each holy shrine,<br>
 Each image of a Lord divine.<br>
 No shop where flowery wreaths are sold<br>
 Is bright and busy as of old.<br>
 The women and the men I mark<br>
 Absorbed in fancies dull and dark,<br>
 Their gloomy eyes with tears bedewed,<br>
 A poor afflicted multitude.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 His mind oppressed with woe and dread,<br>
 Thus Bharat to his driver said,<br>
 Viewed the dire signs Ayodhyá showed,<br>
 And onward to the palace rode.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_348"></a><a href="ry149.htm#fr_348">178:1</a>  'The S'atadrú, 'the hundred-channeled'
 --the Zaradrus of Ptolemy, Hesydrus
 of Pliny--is the Sutlej.' WILSON'S <i>Vishnu
 Purána</i>, Vol. II. p. 130.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_349"></a><a href="ry149.htm#fr_349">178:2</a>  The Sarasvatí or Sursooty is a
 tributary of the Caggar or Guggur in Sirhind.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry150.htm">Next: Canto LXXII.: Bharat's Inquiry.</a></center>
 </body>