<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry142.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry144.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXV.: THE WOMEN'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 And now the night had past away,<br>
 And brightly dawned another day;<br>
 The minstrels, trained to play and sing,<br>
 Flocked to the chamber of the king:<br>
 Bards, who their gayest raiment wore,<br>
 And heralds famed for ancient lore:<br>
 And singers, with their songs of praise,<br>
 Made music in their several ways.<br>
 There as they poured their blessings choice.<br>
 And hailed their king with hand and voice,<br>
 Their praises with a swelling roar<br>
 Echoed through court and corridor.<br>
 Then as the bards his glory sang,<br>
 From beaten palms loud answer rang,<br>
 As glad applauders clapped their hands,<br>
 And told his deeds in distant lands.<br>
 The swelling concert woke a throng<br>
 Of sleeping birds to life and song:<br>
 Some in the branches of the trees,<br>
 Some caged in halls and galleries.<br>
 Nor was the soft string music mute;<br>
 The gentle whisper of the lute,<br>
 And blessings sung by singers skilled<br>
 The palace of the monarch filled.<br>
 Eunuchs and dames of life unstained,<br>
 Each in the arts of waiting trained,<br>
 Drew near attentive as before,<br>
 And crowded to the chamber door:<br>
 These skilful when and how to shed<br>
 The lustral stream o'er limb and head,<br>
 Others with golden ewers stood<br>
 Of water stained with sandal wood.<br>
 And many a maid, pure, young, and fair,<br>
 Her load of early offerings bare,<br>
 Cups of the flood which all revere,<br>
 And sacred things, and toilet gear.<br>
 Each several thing was duly brought<br>
 As rule of old observance taught,<br>
 And lucky signs on each impressed<br>
 Stamped it the fairest and the best.<br>
 There anxious, in their long array,<br>
 All waited till the shine of day:<br>
 But when the king nor rose nor spoke,<br>
 Doubt and alarm within them woke.<br>
 Forthwith the dames, by duty led,<br>
 Attendants on the monarch's bed,<br>
 Within the royal chamber pressed<br>
 To wake their master from his rest.<br>
 Skilled in the lore of dreaming, they<br>
 First touched the bed on which he lay.<br>
 But none replied; no sound was heard.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_173"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 173</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Nor hand, nor head, nor body stirred.<br>
 They trembled, and their dread increased,<br>
 Fearing his breath of life had ceased,<br>
 And bending low their heads, they shook<br>
 Like the tall reeds that fringe the brook,<br>
 In doubt and terror down they knelt,<br>
 Looked on his face, his cold hand felt,<br>
 And then the gloomy truth appeared<br>
 Of all their hearts had darkly feared.<br>
 Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá, worn<br>
 With weeping for their sons, forlorn,<br>
 Woke not, but lay in slumber deep<br>
 And still as death's unending sleep.<br>
 Bowed down by grief, her colour fled,<br>
 Her wonted lustre dull and dead,<br>
 Kaus'alyá shone not, like a star<br>
 Obscured behind a cloudy bar.<br>
 Beside the king's her couch was spread,<br>
 And next was Queen Sumitrá's bed,<br>
 Who shone no more with beauty's glow,<br>
 Her face bedewed with tears of woe.<br>
 There lapped in sleep each wearied queen,<br>
 There as in sleep, the king was seen;<br>
 And swift the troubling thought came o'er<br>
 Their spirits that he breathed no more.<br>
 At once with wailing loud and high<br>
 The matrons shrieked a bitter cry,<br>
 As widowed elephants bewail<br>
 Their dead lord in the woody vale.<br>
 At the loud shriek that round them rang,<br>
 Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá sprang<br>
 Awakened from their beds, with eyes<br>
 Wide open in their first surprise.<br>
 Quick to the monarch's side they came,<br>
 And saw and touched his lifeless frame;<br>
 One cry, O husband! forth they sent,<br>
 And prostrate to the ground they went.<br>
 The king of Kosal's daughter  <a name="fr_338"></a><a href="#fn_338"><font size="1">1</font></a> there<br>
 Writhed, with the dust on limb and hair<br>
 Lustreless, as a star might lie<br>
 Hurled downward from the glorious sky.<br>
 When the king's voice in death was stilled,<br>
 The women who the chamber filled<br>
 Saw, like a widow elephant slain,<br>
 Kaus'alyá prostrate in her pain.<br>
 Then all the monarch's ladies led<br>
 By Queen Kaikeyí at their head,<br>
 Poured forth their tears, and weeping so,<br>
 Sank on the ground, consumed by woe.<br>
 The cry of grief so long and loud<br>
 Went up from all the royal crowd,<br>
 That, doubled by the matron train,<br>
 It made the palace ring again.<br>
 Filled with dark fear and eager eyes,<br>
 Anxiety and wild surmise;<br>
 Echoing with the cries of grief<br>
 Of sorrowing friends who mourned their chief,<br>
 Dejected, pale with deep distress,<br>
 Hurled from their height of happiness:<br>
 Such was the look the palace wore<br>
 Where lay the king who breathed no more.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_338"></a><a href="ry143.htm#fr_338">173:1</a>  Kausalya, daughter of the king of
 another Kos'al.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry144.htm">Next: Canto LXVI.: The Embalming.</a></center>
 </body>