<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry146.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry148.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIX.: BHARAT'S DREAM.</h3>
 <p>
 The night those messengers of state<br>
 Had past within the city's gate,<br>
 In dreams the slumbering Bharat saw<br>
 A sight that chilled his soul with awe.<br>
 The dream that dire events foretold<br>
 Left Bharat's heart with horror cold,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_177"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 177</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And with consuming woes distraught,<br>
 Upon his aged sire he thought.<br>
 His dear companions, swift to trace<br>
 The signs of anguish on his face,<br>
 Drew near, his sorrow to expel,<br>
 And pleasant tales began to tell.<br>
 Some woke sweet music's cheering sound,<br>
 And others danced in lively round.<br>
 With joke and jest they strove to raise<br>
 His spirits, quoting ancient plays;<br>
 But Bharat still, the lofty-souled,<br>
 Deaf to sweet tales his fellows told,<br>
 Unmoved by music, dance, and jest,<br>
 Sat silent, by his woe oppressed,<br>
 To him, begirt by comrades near,<br>
 Thus spoke the friend he held most dear:<br>
 'Why ringed around by friends, art thou<br>
 So silent and so mournful now?'<br>
 'Hear thou,' thus Bharat made reply,<br>
 'What chills my heart and dims mine eye,<br>
 I dreamt I saw the king my sire<br>
 Sink headlong in a lake of mire<br>
 Down from a mountain high in air,<br>
 His body soiled, and loose his hair.<br>
 Upon the miry lake he seemed<br>
 To lie and welter, as I dreamed;<br>
 With hollowed hands full many a draught<br>
 Of oil he took, and loudly laughed.<br>
 With head cast down I saw him make<br>
 A meal on sesamum and cake;<br>
 The oil from every member dripped,<br>
 And in its clammy flood he dipped.<br>
 The ocean's bed was bare and dry,<br>
 The moon had fallen from the sky,<br>
 And all the world lay still and dead,<br>
 With whelming darkness overspread.<br>
 The earth was rent and opened wide,<br>
 The leafy trees were scorched, and died;<br>
 I saw the seated mountains split.<br>
 And wreaths of rising smoke emit.<br>
 The stately beast the monarch rode<br>
 His long tusks rent and splintered showed;<br>
 And flames that quenched and cold hadlain<br>
 Blazed forth with kindled light again.<br>
 I looked, and many a handsome dame,<br>
 Arrayed in brown and sable came<br>
 And bore about the monarch, dressed,<br>
 On iron stool, in sable vest.<br>
 And then the king, of virtuous mind,<br>
 A blood-red wreath around him twined,<br>
 Forth on an ass-drawn chariot sped,<br>
 As southward still he bent his head.<br>
 Then, crimson-clad, a dame appeared<br>
 Who at the monarch laughed and jeered;<br>
 And a she-monster, dire to view,<br>
 Her hand upon his body threw.<br>
 Such is the dream I dreamt by night,<br>
 Which chills me yet with wild affright:<br>
 Either the king or Ráma, I<br>
 Or Lakshman now must surely die.<br>
 For when an ass-drawn chariot seems<br>
 To bear away a man in dreams,<br>
 Be sure above his funeral pyre<br>
 The smoke soon rears its cloudy spire.<br>
 This makes my spirit low and weak.<br>
 My tongue is slow and both to speak:<br>
 My lips and throat are dry for dread,<br>
 And all my soul disquieted.<br>
 My lips, relaxed, can hardly speak,<br>
 And chilling dread has changed my cheek<br>
 I blame myself in aimless fears,<br>
 And still no cause of blame appears,<br>
 I dwell upon this dream of ill<br>
         Whose changing scenes I viewed,<br>
     And on the startling horror still<br>
         My troubled thoughts will brood.<br>
     Still to my soul these terrors cling,<br>
         Reluctant to depart,<br>
     And the strange vision of the king<br>
         Still weighs upon my heart.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_347"></a><a href="ry146.htm#fr_347">176:1b</a>  It would be lost labour to attempt to
 verify all the towns and streams mentioned
 in Cantos LXVIII and LXXII.
 Professor Wilson observes (<i>Vishnu Purána</i>,
 p. 139. Dr. Hall's Edition) 'States, and
 tribes, and cities have disappeared, even
 from recollection; and some of the natural
 features of the country, especially the
 rivers, have undergone a total alteration.
 
 </p><p>
 Notwithstanding these impediments, however,
 we should be able to identify at least
 mountains and rivers, to a much greater
 extent than is now practicable, if our
 maps were not so miserably defective in
 their nomenclature. None of our surveyors
 or geographers have been oriental
 scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have been conversant with the spoken language of the country. They have, consequently, put down names at random, according to their own inaccurate appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and
 corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are crowded with appellations which bear no similitude whatever either to past
 or present denominations. "We need not wonder that we cannot discover Sanskrit names in English maps, when, in the immediate vicinity of Calcutta, Barnagore represents Barahanagar, Dakshineswar is
 metamorphosed into Duckinsore, Ulubaria into Willoughbury.......There is scarcely a name in our Indian maps that does not afford proof of extreme indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is, in some degree, perhaps,
 a national defect.'
 
 </p><p>
 For further information regarding the road from Ayodhya to Rajagriha, see <i>Additional Notes</i>.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry148.htm">Next: Canto LXX.: Bharat's Departure.</a></center>
 </body>