<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry141.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry143.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIV.: DAS'ARATHA'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 The son of Raghu to his queen<br>
 Thus far described the unequalled scene,<br>
 And, as the hermit's death he rued,<br>
 The mournful story thus renewed:<br>
 'The deed my heedless hand had wrought<br>
 Perplexed me with remorseful thought,<br>
 And all alone I pondered still<br>
 How kindly deed might salve the ill.<br>
 The pitcher from the ground I took,<br>
 And filled it from that fairest brook,<br>
 Then, by the path the hermit showed,<br>
 I reached his sainted sire's abode.<br>
 I came, I saw: the aged pair,<br>
 Feeble and blind, were sitting there,<br>
 Like birds with clipped wings, side by side,<br>
 With none their helpless steps to guide.<br>
 Their idle hours the twain beguiled<br>
 With talk of their returning child,<br>
 And still the cheering hope enjoyed,<br>
 The hope, alas, by me destroyed.<br>
 Then spoke the sage, as drawing near<br>
 The sound of footsteps reached his ear:<br>
 'Dear son, the water quickly bring;<br>
 Why hast thou made this tarrying?<br>
 Thy mother thirsts, and thou hast played,<br>
 And bathing in the brook delayed.<br>
 She weeps because thou camest not;<br>
 Haste, O my son, within the cot.<br>
 If she or I have ever done<br>
 A thing to pain thee, dearest son,<br>
 Dismiss the memory from thy mind:<br>
 A hermit thou, be good and kind.<br>
 On thee our lives, our all, depend:<br>
 Thou art thy friendless parents' friend.<br>
 The eyeless couple's eye art thou:<br>
 Then why so cold and silent now?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With sobbing voice and bosom wrung<br>
 I scarce could move my faltering tongue,<br>
 And with my spirit filled with dread<br>
 I looked upon the sage, and said,<br>
 While mind, and sense, and nerve I strung<br>
 To fortify my trembling tongue,<br>
 And let the aged hermit know<br>
 His son's sad fate, my fear and woe:<br>
 'High-minded Saint, not I thy child,<br>
 A warrior, Das'aratha styled.<br>
 I bear a grievous sorrow's weight<br>
 Born of a deed which good men hate.<br>
 My lord, I came to Sarj?s shore,<br>
 And in my hand my bow I bore<br>
 For elephant or beast of chase<br>
 That seeks by night his drinking place,<br>
 There from the stream a sound I heard,<br>
 As if a jar the water stirred,<br>
 An elephant, I thought, was nigh:<br>
 I aimed, and let an arrow fly.<br>
 Swift to the place I made my way,<br>
 And there a wounded hermit lay<br>
 Gasping for breath: the deadly dart<br>
 Stood quivering in his youthful heart.<br>
 I hastened near with pain oppressed;<br>
 He faltered out his last behest.<br>
 And quickly, as he bade me do,<br>
 From his pierced side the shaft I drew.<br>
 I drew the arrow from the rent,<br>
 And up to heaven the hermit went,<br>
 Lamenting, as from earth he passed,<br>
 His aged parents to the last.<br>
 Thus, unaware, the deed was done:<br>
 My hand, unwitting killed thy son.<br>
 For what remains, O, let me win<br>
 Thy pardon for my heedless sin.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As the sad tale of sin I told<br>
 The hermit's grief was uncontrolled.<br>
 With flooded eyes, and sorrow-faint,<br>
 Thus spake the venerable saint:<br>
 I stood with hand to hand applied,<br>
 And listened as he spoke and sighed:<br>
 'If thou, O King, hadst left unsaid<br>
 By thine own tongue this tale of dread,<br>
 Thy head for hideous guilt accursed<br>
 Had in a thousand pieces burst.<br>
 A hermits blood by warrior spilt,<br>
 In such a case, with purposed guilt,<br>
 Down from his high estate would bring<br>
 Even the thunder's mighty King<br>
 And he a dart who (<i>illegible</i>) sends<br>
 Against the devotee who spends<br>
 His pure life by the law of heaven--<br>
 That sinner's head will split in seven.<br>
 Thou livest, for thy heedless hand<br>
 Has wrought a deed thou hast not planned,<br>
 Else thou and all of Raghu's line<br>
 Had perished by this act of thine.<br>
 Now guide us,' thus the hermit said,<br>
 'Forth to the spot where he lies dead.<br>
 Guide us, this day, O Monarch, we<br>
 For the last time our son would see:<br>
 The hermit dress of skin he wore<br>
 Rent from his limbs distained with gore;<br>
 His senseless body lying slain,<br>
 His soul in Yama's dark domain.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Alone the mourning pair I led,<br>
 Their souls with woe disquieted,<br>
 And let the dame and hermit lay<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_171"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 171</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Their hands upon the breathless clay.<br>
 The father touched his son, and pressed<br>
 The body to his aged breast;<br>
 Then falling by the dead boy's side,<br>
 He lifted up his voice, and cried:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Hast thou no word, my child, to say?<br>
 No greeting for thy sire to-day?<br>
 Why art thou angry, darling? why<br>
 Wilt thou upon the cold earth lie?<br>
 If thou, my son, art wroth with me,<br>
 Here, duteous child, thy mother see.<br>
 What! no embrace for me, my son?<br>
 No word of tender love--not one?<br>
 Whose gentle voice, so soft and clear,<br>
 Soothing my spirit, shall I hear<br>
 When evening comes, with accents sweet<br>
 Scripture or ancient lore repeat?<br>
 Who, having fed the sacred fire,<br>
 And duly bathed, as texts require.<br>
 Will cheer, when evening rites are done,<br>
 The father mourning for his son?<br>
 Who will the daily meal provide<br>
 For the poor wretch who lacks a guide,<br>
 Feeding the helpless with the best<br>
 Berries and roots, like some dear guest?<br>
 How can these hands subsistence find<br>
 For thy poor mother, old and blind?<br>
 The wretched votaress how sustain,<br>
 Who mourns her child in ceaseless pain?<br>
 Stay yet a while, my darling, stay,<br>
 Nor fly to Yama's realm to-day.<br>
 To-morrow I thy sire and she<br>
 Who bare thee, child, will go with, thee. <a name="fr_337"></a><a href="#fn_337"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Then when I look on Yama, I<br>
 To great Vivasvat's son will cry:<br>
 'Hear, King of justice, and restore<br>
 Our child to feed us, I implore.<br>
 Lord of the world, of mighty fame,<br>
 Faithful and just, admit my claim,<br>
 And grant this single boon to free<br>
 My soul from fear, to one like me.'<br>
 Because, my son, untouched by stain,<br>
 By sinful hands thou fallest slain<br>
 Win, through thy truth, the sphere where those<br>
 Who die by hostile darts repose.<br>
 Seek the blest home prepared for all<br>
 The valiant who in battle fall,<br>
 Who face the foe and scorn to yield,<br>
 In glory dying on the field.<br>
 Rise to the heaven where Dhundhumar<br>
 And Nahush, mighty heroes, are,<br>
 Where Janamejay and the blest<br>
 Dilípa, Sagar, S'alvya, rest:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Home of all virtuous spirits, earned<br>
 By fervent rites and Scripture learned:<br>
 By those whose sacred fires have glowed.<br>
 Whose liberal hands have fields bestowed:<br>
 By givers of a thousand cows,<br>
 By lovers of one faithful spouse:<br>
 By those who serve their masters well.<br>
 And cast away this earthly shell.<br>
 None of my race can ever know<br>
 The bitter pain of lasting woe.<br>
 But doomed to that dire fate is he<br>
 Whose guilty hand has slaughtered thee.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus with wild tears the aged saint<br>
 Made many a time his piteous plaint,<br>
 Then with his wife began to shed<br>
 The funeral water for the dead.<br>
 But in a shape celestial clad,<br>
 Won by the merits of the lad.<br>
 The spirit from the body brake<br>
 And to the mourning parents spake:<br>
 'A glorious home in realms above<br>
 Rewards my care and filial love.<br>
 You, honoured parents, soon shall be<br>
 Partakers of that home with me.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spake, and swiftly mounting high,<br>
 With Indra near him, to the sky<br>
 On a bright car, with flame that glowed,<br>
 Sublime the duteous hermit rode.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The father, with his consort's aid.<br>
 The funeral rites with water paid,<br>
 And thus his speech to me renewed<br>
 Who stood in suppliant attitude:<br>
 'Slay me this day, O, slay me, King,<br>
 For death no longer has a sting.<br>
 Childless am I: thy dart has done<br>
 To death my dear, my only son.<br>
 Because the boy I loved so well<br>
 Slain by thy heedless arrow fell,<br>
 My curse upon thy soul shall press<br>
 With bitter woe and heaviness.<br>
 I mourn a slaughtered child, and thou<br>
 Shalt feel the pangs that kill me now.<br>
 Bereft and suffering e'en as I,<br>
 So shalt thou mourn thy son, and die.<br>
 Thy hand unwitting dealt the blow<br>
 That laid a holy hermit low,<br>
 And distant, therefore, is the time<br>
 When thou shalt suffer for the crime.<br>
 The hour shall come when, crushed by woes<br>
 Like these I feel, thy life shall close:<br>
 A debt to pay in after days<br>
 Like his the priestly fee who pays."<br>
 
 </p><p>
 This curse on me the hermit laid,<br>
 Nor yet his tears and groans were stayed.<br>
 Then on the pire their bodies cast<br>
 The pair; and straight to heaven they passed.<br>
 As in sad thought I pondered long<br>
 Back to my memory came the wrong<br>
 Done in wild youth, O lady dear.<br>
 When 'twas my boast to shoot by ear.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_172"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 172</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The deed has borne the fruit, which now<br>
 Hangs ripe upon the bending bough:<br>
 Thus dainty meats the palate please,<br>
 And lure the weak to swift disease.<br>
 Now on my soul return with dread<br>
 The words that noble hermit said,<br>
 That I for a dear son should grieve,<br>
 And of the woe my life should leave.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spake the king with many a tear;<br>
 Then to his wife he cried in fear:<br>
 'I cannot see thee, love; but lay<br>
 Thy gentle hand in mine, I pray.<br>
 Ah me, if Ráma touched me thus,<br>
 If once, returning home to us,<br>
 He bade me wealth and lordship give,<br>
 Then, so I think, my soul would live.<br>
 Unlike myself, unjust and mean<br>
 Have been my ways with him, my Queen,<br>
 But like himself is all that he,<br>
 My noble son, has done to me.<br>
 His son, though far from right he stray,<br>
 What prudent sire would cast away?<br>
 What banished son would check his ire,<br>
 Nor speak reproaches of his sire?<br>
 I see thee not: these eyes grow blind,<br>
 And memory quits my troubled mind.<br>
 Angels of Death are round me: they<br>
 Summon my soul with speed away.<br>
 What woe more grievous can there be,<br>
 That, when from light and life I flee,<br>
 I may not, ere I part, behold<br>
 My virtuous Ráma, true and bold?<br>
 Grief for my son, the brave and true,<br>
 Whose joy it was my will to do,<br>
 Dries up my breath, as summer dries<br>
 The last drop in the pool that lies.<br>
 Not men, but blessed Gods, are they<br>
 Whose eyes shall see his face that day;<br>
 See him, when fourteen years are past,<br>
 With earrings decked return at last.<br>
 My fainting mind forgets to think:<br>
 Low and more low my spirits sink.<br>
 Each from its seat, my senses steal:<br>
 I cannot hear, or taste, or feel.<br>
 This lethargy of soul o'ercomes<br>
 Each organ, and its function numbs:<br>
 So when the oil begins to fail,<br>
 The torch's rays grow faint and pale.<br>
 This flood of woe caused by this hand<br>
 Destroys me helpless and unmanned,<br>
 Resistless as the floods that bore<br>
 A passage through the river shore.<br>
 Ah Raghu's son, ah mighty-armed,<br>
 By whom my cares were soothed and charmed,<br>
 My son in whom I took delight,<br>
 Now vanished from thy father's sight!<br>
 Kaus'alyá, ah, I cannot see;<br>
 Sumitrá, gentle devotee!<br>
 Alas, Kaikeyí, cruel dame,<br>
 My bitter foe, thy father's shame!'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá kept<br>
 Their watch beside him as he wept.<br>
 And Das'aratha moaned and sighed,<br>
 And grieving for his darling died.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_337"></a><a href="ry142.htm#fr_337">171:1</a> 
 So dying York cries over the body of
 Suffolk:
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
                   'Tarry, dear cousin Suffolk!<br>
     My soul shall thine keep company to heaven.<br>
     Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast.'<br>
                                                   <i>King Henry V, Act IV, 6</i><br>
 </dir>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry143.htm">Next: Canto LXV.: The Women's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>