<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry144.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry146.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVII.: THE PRAISE OF KINGS.</h3>
 <p>
 That night of sorrow passed away,<br>
 And rose again the God of Day.<br>
 Then all the twice-born peers of state<br>
 Together met for high debate.<br>
 Jáválí, lord of mighty fame.<br>
 And Gautam, and Kátyáyan came,<br>
 And Márkandeya's reverend age,<br>
 And Vámadeva, glorious sage:<br>
 Sprung from Mudgalya's seed the one,<br>
 The other ancient Kas'yap's son.<br>
 With lesser lords these Bráhmans each<br>
 Spoke in his turn his several speech,<br>
 And turning to Vas'ishtha, best<br>
 Of household priests him thus addressed:<br>
 The night of bitter woe has past,<br>
 Which seemed a hundred years to last,<br>
 Our king, in sorrow for his son,<br>
 Reunion with the Five has won.<br>
 His soul is where the blessed are,<br>
 While Ráma roams in woods afar,<br>
 And Lakshman, bright in glorious deeds,<br>
 Goes where his well-loved brother leads.<br>
 And Bharat and S'atrughna, they<br>
 Who smite their foes in battle fray,<br>
 Far in the realm of Kekaya stay,<br>
 Where their maternal grandsire's care<br>
 Keeps Rájagriha's city fair.<br>
 Let one of old Ikshváku's race<br>
 Obtain this day the sovereign's place,<br>
 Or havoc and destruction straight<br>
 Our kingless land will devastate.<br>
 In kingless lands no thunder's voice,<br>
 No lightning wreaths the heart rejoice,<br>
 Nor does Parjanya's heavenly rain<br>
 Descend upon the burning plain.<br>
 Where none is king, the sower's hand<br>
 Casts not the seed upon the land;<br>
 The son against the father strives.<br>
 And husbands fail to rule their wives.<br>
 In kingless realms no princes call<br>
 Their friends to meet in crowded hall;<br>
 No joyful citizens resort<br>
 To garden trim or sacred court.<br>
 In kingless realms no Twice-born care<br>
 To sacrifice with text and prayer,<br>
 Nor Bráhmans, who their vows maintain,<br>
 The great solemnities ordain.<br>
 The joys of happier days have ceased:<br>
 No gathering, festival, or feast<br>
 Together calls the merry throng<br>
 Delighted with the play and song.<br>
 In kingless lands it ne'er is well<br>
 With sons of trade who buy and sell:<br>
 No men who pleasant tales repeat<br>
 Delight the crowd with stories sweet.<br>
 In kingless realms we ne'er behold<br>
 Young maidens decked with gems and gold,<br>
 Flock to the gardens blithe and gay<br>
 To spend their evening hours in play.<br>
 No lover in the flying car<br>
 Rides with his love to woods afar.<br>
 In kingless lands no wealthy swain<br>
 Who keeps the herd and reaps the grain,<br>
 Lies sleeping, blest with ample store,<br>
 Securely near his open door.<br>
 Upon the royal roads we see<br>
 No tusked elephant roaming free,<br>
 Of three-score years, whose head and neck<br>
 Sweet tinkling bells of silver deck.<br>
 We hear no more the glad applause<br>
 When his strong bow each rival draws,<br>
 No clap of hands, no eager cries<br>
 That cheer each martial exercise.<br>
 In kingless realms no merchant bands<br>
 Who travel forth to distant lands,<br>
 With precious wares their wagons load.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_175"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 175</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And fear no danger on the road,<br>
 No sage secure in self-control,<br>
 Brooding on God with mind and soul,<br>
 In lonely wanderings finds his home<br>
 Where'er at eve his feet may roam.<br>
 In kingless realms no man is sure<br>
 He holds his life and wealth secure.<br>
 In kingless lands no warriors smite<br>
 The foeman's host in glorious fight.<br>
 In kingless lands the wise no more.<br>
 Well trained in Scripture's holy lore.<br>
 In shady groves and gardens meet<br>
 To argue in their calm retreat.<br>
 No longer, in religious fear,<br>
 Do they who pious vows revere,<br>
 Bring dainty cates and wreaths of flowers<br>
 As offerings to the heavenly powers.<br>
 No longer, bright as trees in spring,<br>
 Shine forth the children of the king<br>
 Resplendent in the people's eyes<br>
 With aloe wood and sandal dyes.<br>
 A brook where water once has been,<br>
 A grove where grass no more is green,<br>
 Kine with no herdsman's guiding hand--<br>
 So wretched is a kingless land.<br>
 The car its waving banner rears,<br>
 Banner of fire the smoke appears:<br>
 Our king, the banner of our pride,<br>
 A God with Gods is glorified.<br>
 In kingless lands no law is known,<br>
 And none may call his wealth his own,<br>
 Each preys on each from hour to hour,<br>
 As fish the weaker fish devour.<br>
 Then fearless, atheists overleap<br>
 The bounds of right the godly keep,<br>
 And when no royal powers restrain,<br>
 Pre?inence and lordship gain.<br>
 As in the frame of man the eye<br>
 Keeps watch and ward, a careful spy,<br>
 The monarch in his wide domains<br>
 Protects the truth, the right maintains.<br>
 He is the right, the truth is he,<br>
 Their hopes in him the well-born see.<br>
 On him his people's lives depend,<br>
 Mother is he, and sire, nnd friend.<br>
 The world were veiled in blinding night,<br>
 And none could see or know aright,<br>
 Ruled there no king in any state<br>
 The good and ill to separate.<br>
 We will obey thy word and will<br>
 As if our king were living still:<br>
 As keeps his bounds the faithful sea,<br>
 So we observe thy high decree.<br>
 O best of Brámans, first in place,<br>
     Our kingless land lies desolate:<br>
 Some scion of Ikshváku's race<br>
     Do thou as monarch consecrate.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry146.htm">Next: Canto LXVIII.: The Envoys.</a></center>
 </body>