<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry143.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry145.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVI.: THE EMBALMING.</h3>
 <p>
 Kaus'alyá's eyes with tears o'erflowed.<br>
 Weighed down by varied sorrows's load;<br>
 On her dead lord her gaze she bent,<br>
 Who lay like fire whose might is spent,<br>
 Like the great deep with waters dry,<br>
 Or like the clouded sun on high.<br>
 Then on her lap she laid his head.<br>
 And on Kaikeyí looked and said:<br>
 'Triumphant now enjoy thy reign<br>
 Without a thorn thy side to pain.<br>
 Thou hast pursued thy single aim,<br>
 And lulled the king, O wicked dame.<br>
 Far from my sight my Ráma flies,<br>
 My perished lord has sought the skies.<br>
 No friend, no hope my life to cheer,<br>
 I cannot tread the dark path here.<br>
 Who would forsake her husband, who<br>
 That God to whom her love is due,<br>
 And wish to live one hour, but she<br>
 Whose heart no duty owns, like thee?<br>
 The ravenous sees no fault: his greed<br>
 Will e'en on poison blindly feed.<br>
 Kaikeyí, through a hump-back maid,<br>
 This royal house in death has laid.<br>
 King Janak, with his queen, will hear<br>
 Heart rent like me the tidings drear<br>
 Of Ráma banished by the king,<br>
 Urged by her impious counselling.<br>
 No son has he, his age is great,<br>
 And sinking with the double weight,<br>
 He for his darling child will pine,<br>
 And pierced with woe his life resign.<br>
 Sprung from Videha's monarch, she<br>
 A sad and lovely devotee,<br>
 Roaming the wood, unmeet for woe,<br>
 Will toil and trouble undergo.<br>
 She in the gloomy night with fear<br>
 The cries of beast and bird will hear,<br>
 And trembling in her wild alarm<br>
 Will cling to Ráma's sheltering arm.<br>
 Ah, little knows my duteous son<br>
 That I am widowed and undone--<br>
 My Ráma of the lotus eye,<br>
 Gone hence, gone hence, alas, to die.<br>
 Now, as a living wife and true,<br>
 I, e'en this day, will perish too:<br>
 Around his form these arms will throw.<br>
 And to the fire with him will go.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Clasping her husband's lifeless clay<br>
 A while the weeping votaress lay,<br>
 Till chamberlains removed her thence<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_174"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 174</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 O'ercome by sorrow's violence.<br>
 Then in a cask of oil they laid<br>
 Him who in life the world had swayed,<br>
 And finished, as the lords desired,<br>
 All rites for parted souls required.<br>
 The lords, all-wise, refused to burn<br>
 The monarch ere his son's return;<br>
 So for a while the corpse they set<br>
 Embalmed in oil, and waited yet.<br>
 The women heard: no doubt remained,<br>
 And wildly for the king they plained.<br>
 With gushing tears that drowned each eye<br>
 Wildly they waved their arms on high,<br>
 And each her mangling nails impressed<br>
 Deep in her head and knee and breast:<br>
 'Of Ráma reft,--who ever spake<br>
 The sweetest words the heart to take,<br>
 Who firmly to the truth would cling,--<br>
 Why dost thou leave us, mighty King?<br>
 How can the consorts thou hast left<br>
 Widowed, of Raghu's son bereft,<br>
 Live with our foe Kaikeyí near,<br>
 The wicked queen we hate and fear?<br>
 She threw away the king, her spite<br>
 Drove Ráma forth and Lakshman's might,<br>
 And gentle Sítá: how will she<br>
 Spare any, whosoe'er it be?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Oppressed with sorrow, tear-distained,<br>
 The royal women thus complained.<br>
 Like night when not a star appears,<br>
 Like a sad widow drowned in tears,<br>
 Ayodhyá's city, dark and dim,<br>
 Reft of her lord was sad for him.<br>
 When thus for woe the king to heaven had fled,<br>
     And still on earth his lovely wives remained.<br>
 With dying light the sun to rest had sped,<br>
     And night triumphant o'er the landscape reigned.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry145.htm">Next: Canto LXVII.: The Praise of Kings.</a></center>
 </body>