<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry153.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry155.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXVI.: THE FUNERAL</h3>
 <p>
 The saint Vas'ishtha, best of all<br>
 Whose words with moving wisdom fall,<br>
 Bharat, Kaikeyí's son, addressed,<br>
 Whom burning *?fires of grief distressed:<br>
 'O Prince, whose fame is widely spread,<br>
 Enough of grief: be comforted.<br>
 The time is come: arise, and lay<br>
 Upon the pyre the monarch's clay.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 He heard the words Vas'ishtha spoke,<br>
 And slumbering resolution woke.<br>
 Then skilled in all the laws declare,<br>
 He bade his friends the rites prepare<br>
 They raised, the body from the oil,<br>
 And placed it, dripping, on the soil;<br>
 Then laid it on a bed, whereon<br>
 Wrought gold and precious jewels shone.<br>
 There, pallor o'er his features spread,<br>
 The monarch, as in sleep, lay dead.<br>
 Then Bharat sought his father's side,<br>
 And lifted up his voice and cried:<br>
 'O King, and has thy heart designed<br>
 To part and leave thy son behind?<br>
 Make Ráma flee, who loves the right,<br>
 And Lakshman of the arm of might?<br>
 Whither, great Monarch, wilt thou go<br>
 And leave this people in their woe.<br>
 Mourning their hero, wild with grief,<br>
 Of Ráma reft, their lion chief?<br>
 Ah, who will guard the people well<br>
 Who in Ayodhyá's city dwell,<br>
 When thou, my sire, hast sought the sky,<br>
 And Ráma has been forced to fly?<br>
 In widowed woe, bereft of thee,<br>
 The land no more is fair to *see*<br>
 The city, to my aching sight,<br>
 Is gloomy as a moonless night.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus, with o'erwhelming sorrow pained,<br>
 Sad Bharat by the bed complained:<br>
 And thus Vas'ishtha, holy sage,<br>
 Spoke his deep anguish to assuage:<br>
 'O Lord of men, no longer stay;<br>
 The last remaining duties pay:<br>
 Haste, mighty-armed, as I advise,<br>
 The funeral rites to solemnize.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And Bharat heard Vas'ishtha's rede<br>
 With due attention and agreed.<br>
 He summoned straight from every side<br>
 Chaplain, and priest, and holy guide.<br>
 The sacred fires he bade them bring<br>
 Forth from the ohapel of the king,<br>
 Wherein the priests in order due,<br>
 And ministers, the offerings threw,<br>
 Distraught in mind, with sob and tear,<br>
 They laid the body on a bier,<br>
 And servants, while their eyes brimmed o'er<br>
 The monarch from the palace bore,<br>
 Another band of mourners led<br>
 The long procession of the dead:<br>
 Rich garments in the way they cast,<br>
 And gold and silver, as they passed,<br>
 Then other hands the corse bedewed<br>
 With fragrant juices that exude<br>
 From sandal, cedar, aloe, pine,<br>
 And every perfume rare and fine.<br>
 Then priestly hands the mighty dead<br>
 Upon the pyre deposited.<br>
 The sacred fires they tended next,<br>
 And muttered low each funeral text;<br>
 And priestly singers who rehearse<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_186"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 186</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The S'aman  <a name="fr_352"></a><a href="ry155.htm#fn_352"><font size="1">1</font></a> sang their holy verse.<br>
 Forth from the town in litters came,<br>
 Or chariots, many a royal dame,<br>
 And honoured so the funeral ground,<br>
 With aged followers ringed around.<br>
 With steps in inverse order bent,  <a name="fr_353"></a><a href="ry155.htm#fn_353"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 The priests in sad procession went<br>
 Around the monarch's burning pyre<br>
 Who well had nursed each sacred fire:<br>
 With Queen Kaus'alyá and the rest,<br>
 Their tender hearts with woe distressed,<br>
 The voice of women, shrill and clear<br>
 As screaming curlews, smote the ear,<br>
 As from a thousand voices rose<br>
 The shriek that tells of woman's woes.<br>
 Then weeping, faint, with loud lament,<br>
 Down Sarjú's shelving bank they went.<br>
     There standing on the river side<br>
         With Bharat, priest, and peer,<br>
     Their lips the women purified<br>
         With water fresh and clear.<br>
     Returning to the royal town,<br>
         Their eyes with tear-drops filled,<br>
     Ten days on earth they laid them down,<br>
         And wept till grief was stilled.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_351"></a><a href="ry153.htm#fr_351">185:1</a>  Bharat does not intend these curses
 for any particular person: he merely
 wishes to prove his own innocence by invoking
 them on his own head if he had
 any share in banishing Ráma.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry155.htm">Next: Canto LXXVII.: The Gathering of The Ashes.</a></center>
 </body>