<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry157.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry159.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXX.: THE WAY PREPARED.</h3>
 <p>
 All they who knew the joiner's art,<br>
 Or distant ground in every part;<br>
 Each busied in his several trade,<br>
 To work machines or ply the spade;<br>
 Deft workmen skilled to frame the wheel,<br>
 Or with the ponderous engine deal;<br>
 Guides of the way, and craftsmen skilled,<br>
 To sink the well, make bricks, and build;<br>
 And those whose hands the tree could hew,<br>
 And work with slips of cut bamboo,<br>
 Went forward, and to guide them, they<br>
 Whose eyes before had seen the way.<br>
 Then onward in triumphant mood<br>
 Went all the mighty multitude.<br>
 Like the great sea whose waves leap high<br>
 When the full moon is in the sky.<br>
 Then, in his proper duty skilled,<br>
 Each joined him to his several guild,<br>
 And onward in advance they went<br>
 With every tool and implement.<br>
 Where bush and tangled creeper lay<br>
 With trenchant steel they made the way;<br>
 They felled each stump, removed each stone,<br>
 And many a tree was overthrown.<br>
 In other spots, on desert lands,<br>
 Tall trees were reared by busy hands.<br>
 Where'er the line of road they took,<br>
 They plied the hatchet, axe, and hook.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_189"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 189</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Others, with all their strength applied,<br>
 Cast vigorous plants and shrubs aside,<br>
 In shelving valleys rooted deep,<br>
 And levelled every dale and steep.<br>
 Each pit and hole that stopped the way<br>
 They filled with stones, and mud, and clay.<br>
 And all the ground that rose and fell<br>
 With busy care was levelled well.<br>
 They bridged ravines with ceaseless toil,<br>
 And pounded fine the flinty soil.<br>
 Now here, now there, to right and left,<br>
 A passage through the ground they cleft,<br>
 And soon the rushing flood was led<br>
 Abundant through the new-cut bed,<br>
 Which by the running stream supplied<br>
 With ocean's boundless waters vied.<br>
 In dry and thirsty spots they sank<br>
 Full many a well and ample tank,<br>
 And altars round about them placed<br>
 To deck the station in the waste.<br>
 With well-wrought plaster smoothly spread,<br>
 With bloomy trees that rose o'erhead,<br>
 With banners waving in the air,<br>
 And wild birds singing here and there,<br>
 With fragrant sandal-water wet,<br>
 With many a flower beside it set,<br>
 Like the Gods' heavenly pathway showed<br>
 That mighty host's imperial road.<br>
 Deft workmen, chosen for their skill<br>
 To do the high-souled Bharat's will,<br>
 In every pleasant spot where grew<br>
 Trees of sweet fruit and fair to view,<br>
 As he commanded, toiled to grace<br>
 With all delights his camping-place.<br>
 And they who read the stars, and well<br>
 Each lucky sign and hour could tell,<br>
 Raised carefully the tented shade<br>
 Wherein high-minded Bharat stayed.<br>
 With ample space of level ground,<br>
 With broad deep moat encompassed round;<br>
 Like Mandar in his towering pride,<br>
 With streets that ran from side to side;<br>
 Enwreathed with many a palace tall<br>
 Surrounded by its noble wall;<br>
 With roads by skilful workmen made.<br>
 Where many a glorious banner played;<br>
 With stately mansions, where the dove<br>
 Sat nestling in her cote above.<br>
 Rising aloft supremely fair<br>
 Like heavenly cars that float in air,<br>
 Each camp in beauty and in bliss<br>
 Matched Indra's own metropolis.<br>
   As shines the heaven on some fair night,<br>
     With moon and constellations filled.<br>
   The prince's royal road was bright,<br>
     Adorned by art of workmen skilled.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_356"></a><a href="ry157.htm#fr_356">188:1</a>  I follow in this stanza the Bombay
 edition in preference to Schlegel's which
 gives the tears of joy to the courtiers.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry159.htm">Next: Canto LXXXI.: The Assembly.</a></center>
 </body>