<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry149.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry151.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXII.: BHARAT'S INQUIRY.</h3>
 <p>
 He entered in, he looked around,<br>
 Nor in the house his father found;<br>
 Then to his mother's dwelling, bent<br>
 To see her face, he quickly went.<br>
 She saw her son, so long away,<br>
 Returning after many a day,<br>
 And from her golden seat in joy<br>
 Sprung forward to her darling boy.<br>
 Within the bower, no longer bright,<br>
 Came Bharat lover of the right,<br>
 And bending with observance sweet<br>
 Clasped his dear mother's lovely feet.<br>
 Long kisses on his brow she pressed,<br>
 And held her hero to her breast,<br>
 Then fondly drew him to her knees,<br>
 And questioned him in words like these:<br>
 'How many nights have fled, since thou<br>
 Leftest thy grandsire's home, till now?<br>
 By flying steeds so swiftly borne,<br>
 Art thou not weak and travel-worn?<br>
 How fares the king my father, tell:<br>
 Is Yudhájit thine uncle well?<br>
 And now, my son, at length declare<br>
 The pleasure of the visit there.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus to the offspring of the king<br>
 She spake with tender questioning,<br>
 And to his mother made reply<br>
 Young Bharat of the lotus eye:<br>
 'The seventh night has come and fled<br>
 Since from my grandsire's home I sped:<br>
 My mother's sire is well, and he,<br>
 Yudhájit, from all trouble free.<br>
 The gold and every precious thing<br>
 Presented by the conqueror king,<br>
 The slower guards behind convey:<br>
 I left them weary on the way.<br>
 Urged by the men my father sent,<br>
 My hasty course I hither bent:<br>
 Now, I implore, an answer deign,<br>
 And all I wish to know, explain.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Unoccupied I now behold<br>
 This couch of thine adorned with gold,<br>
 And each of King Ikshváku's race<br>
 Appears with dark and gloomy face.<br>
 The king is aye, my mother dear,<br>
 Most constant in his visits here.<br>
 To meet my sire I sought this spot:<br>
 How is it that I find him not?<br>
 I long to clasp my father's feet:<br>
 Say where he lingers, I entreat.<br>
 Perchance the monarch may be seen<br>
 Where dwells Kaus'alyá, eldest queen.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 His father's fate, from him concealed.<br>
 Kaikeyí to her son revealed:<br>
 Told as glad news the story sad,<br>
 For lust of sway had made her mad:<br>
 'Thy father, O my darling, know,<br>
 Has gone the way all life must go:<br>
 Devout and famed, of lofty thought,<br>
 In whom the good their refuge sought.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When Bharat pious, pure, and true,<br>
 Heard the sad words which pierced him through,<br>
 Grieved for the sire he loved so well<br>
 Prostrate upon the ground he fell:<br>
 Down fell the strong-armed hero, high<br>
 Tossing his arms, and a sad cry,<br>
 'Ah, woe is me, unhappy, slain!'<br>
 Burst from his lips again, again,<br>
 Afflicted for his father's fate<br>
 By grief's intolerable weight,<br>
 With every sense amazed and cowed<br>
 The splendid hero wailed aloud:<br>
 'Ah me, my royal father's bed<br>
 Of old a gentle radiance shed,<br>
 Like the pure sky when clouds are past,<br>
 And the moon's light is o'er it cast:<br>
 Ah, of its wisest lord bereft,<br>
 It shows to-day faint radiance left,<br>
 As when the moon has left the sky.<br>
 Or mighty Ocean's depths are dry.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With choking sobs, with many a tear.<br>
 Pierced to the heart with grief sincere,<br>
 The best of conquerors poured his sighs,<br>
 And with his robe veiled face and eyes.<br>
 Kaikeyí saw him fallen there,<br>
 Godlike, afflicted, in despair,<br>
 Used every art to move him thence,<br>
 And tried him thus with eloquence:<br>
 'Arise, arise, my dearest; why<br>
 Wilt thou, famed Prince, so lowly lie?<br>
 Not by such grief as this are moved<br>
 Good men like thee, by all approved.<br>
 The earth thy father nobly swayed,<br>
 And rites to Heaven he duly paid.<br>
 At length his race of life was run:<br>
 Thou shouldst not mourn for him, my son.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Long on the ground he wept, and rolled<br>
 From side to side, still unconsoled,<br>
 And then, with bitter grief oppressed,<br>
 His mother with those words addressed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_181"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 181</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'This joyful hope my bosom fed<br>
 When from my grandsire's halls I sped--<br>
 'The king will throne his eldest son,<br>
 And sacrifice, as should be done.'<br>
 But all is changed, my hope was vain,<br>
 And this sad heart is rent in twain,<br>
 For my dear father's face I miss,<br>
 Who ever sought his loved ones' bliss.<br>
 But in my absence, mother, say,<br>
 What sickness took my sire away?<br>
 Ah, happy Ráma, happy they<br>
 Allowed his funeral rites to pay!<br>
 The glorious monarch has not learned<br>
 That I his darling have returned,<br>
 Or quickly had he hither sped,<br>
 And pressed his kisses on my head.<br>
 Where is that hand whose gentle touch,<br>
 Most soft and kind I loved so much,<br>
 The hand that loved to brush away<br>
 The dust that on his darling lay?<br>
 Quick, bear the news to Ráma's ear;<br>
 Tell the great chief that I am here:<br>
 Brother, and sire, and friend, and all<br>
 Is he, and I his trusty thrall,<br>
 For noble hearts, to virtue true,<br>
 Their sires in elder brothers view.<br>
 To clasp his feet I fain would bow:<br>
 He is my hope and refuge now.<br>
 What said my glorious sire, who knew<br>
 Virtue and vice, so brave and true?<br>
 Firm in his vows, dear lady, say,<br>
 What said he ere he passed away?<br>
 What was his rede to me? I crave<br>
 To hear the last advice he gave.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus closely questioned by the youth,<br>
 Kaikeyi spoke the mournful truth:<br>
 'The high-souled monarch wept and sighed,<br>
 For Ráma, Sítá, Lakshman, cried,<br>
 Then, best of all who go to bliss,<br>
 Passed to the world which follows this.<br>
 'Ah, blessed are the people who<br>
 Shall Ráma and his Sítá view,   <br>
 And Lakshman of the mighty arm,<br>
 Returning free from scathe and harm.'<br>
 Such were the words, the last of all,<br>
 Thy father, ere he died, let fall,<br>
 By Fate and Death's dread coils enwound,<br>
 As some great elephant is bound.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He heard, yet deeper in despair,<br>
 Her lips this double woe declare,<br>
 And with sad brow that showed his pain<br>
 Questioned his mother thus again:<br>
 'But where is he, of virtue tried,<br>
 Who fills Kaus'alyá's heart with pride,<br>
 Where is the noble Ráma? where<br>
 Is Lakshman brave, and Sítá fair?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus pressed, the queen began to tell<br>
 The story as each thing befell,<br>
 And gave her son in words like these,<br>
 The mournful news she meant to please:<br>
 'The prince is gone in hermit dress<br>
 To Dandak's mighty wilderness,<br>
 And Lakshman brave and Sítá share<br>
 The wanderings of the exile there.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Bharat's soul with fear was stirred<br>
 Lest Ráma from the right had erred,<br>
 And jealous for ancestral fame,<br>
 He put this question to the dame:<br>
 'Has Ráma grasped with lawless hold<br>
 A Bráhman's house, or land, or gold?<br>
 Has Ráma harmed with ill intent<br>
 Some poor or wealthy innocent?<br>
 Was Ráma, faithless to his vows,<br>
 Enamoured of anothers spouse?<br>
 Why was he sent to Dandak's wild,<br>
 Like one who kills an unborn child?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He questioned thus: and she began<br>
 To tell her deeds and crafty plan.<br>
 Deceitful-hearted, fond, and blind<br>
 As is the way of womankind:<br>
 'No Bráhman's wealth has Ráma seized,<br>
 No dame his wandering fancy pleased;<br>
 His very eyes he ne'er allows<br>
 To gaze upon a neighbour's spouse,<br>
 But when I heard the monarch planned<br>
 To give the realm to Ráma's hand,<br>
 I prayed that Ráma hence might flee,<br>
 And claimed the throne, my son, for thee.<br>
 The king maintained the name he bare,<br>
 And did according to my prayer.<br>
 And Ráma, with his brother, sent,<br>
 And Sítá, forth to banishment.<br>
 When his dear son was seen no more,<br>
 The lord of earth was troubled sore:<br>
 Too feeble with his grief to strive,<br>
 He joined the elemental Five.<br>
 Up then, most dutiful! maintain<br>
 The royal state, arise, and reign.<br>
 For thee, my darling son, for thee<br>
 All this was planned and wrought by me.<br>
 Come, cast thy grief and pain aside,<br>
 With manly courage fortified.<br>
 This town and realm are all thine own,<br>
 And fear and grief are here unknown.<br>
 Come, with Vas'ishtha's guiding aid,<br>
     And priests in ritual skilled<br>
 Let the king's funeral dues be paid,<br>
     And every claim fulfilled.<br>
 Perform his obsequies with all<br>
     That suits his rank and worth,<br>
 Then give the mandate to install<br>
     Thyself as lord of earth.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry151.htm">Next: Canto LXXIII.: Kaikeyí Reproached.</a></center>
 </body>