<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry150.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry152.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXIII.: KAIKEYÍ REPROACHED.</h3>
 <p>
 But when he heard the queen relate<br>
 His brothers' doom, his father's fate,<br>
 Thus Bharat to his mother said<br>
 With burning grief disquieted:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_182"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 182</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Alas, what boots it now to reign,<br>
 Struck down by grief and well-nigh slain?<br>
 Ah, both are gone, my sire, and he<br>
 Who was a second sire to me.<br>
 Grief upon grief thy hand has made,<br>
 And salt upon gashes laid:<br>
 For my dear sire has died through thee,<br>
 And Ráma roams a devotee.<br>
 Thou camest like the night of Fate<br>
 This royal house to devastate.<br>
 Unwitting ill, my hapless sire<br>
 Placed in his bosom coals of fire,<br>
 And through thy crimes his death he met,<br>
 O thou whose heart on sin is set.<br>
 Shame of thy house! thy senseless deed<br>
 Has reft all joy from Raghu's seed.<br>
 The truthful monarch, dear to fame,<br>
 Received thee as his wedded dame,<br>
 And by thy act to misery doomed<br>
 Has died by flames of grief consumed.<br>
 Kaus'alyá and Sumitrá too<br>
 The coming of my mother rue.<br>
 And if they live oppressed by woe,<br>
 For their dear sons their sad tears flow.<br>
 Was he not ever good and kind,--<br>
 That hero of the duteous mind?<br>
 Skilled in all filial duties, he<br>
 As a dear mother treated thee.<br>
 Kaus'alyá too, the eldest queen,<br>
 Who far foresees with insight keen,<br>
 Did she not ever show thee all<br>
 A sister's love at duty's call?<br>
 And hast thou from the kingdom chased<br>
 Her son, with bark around his waist,<br>
 To the wild wood, to dwell therein,<br>
 And dost not sorrow for thy sin?<br>
 The love bare to Raghu's son<br>
 Thou knewest not, ambitious one,<br>
 If thou hast wrought this impious deed<br>
 For royal sway, in lawless greed.<br>
 With him and Lakshman far away,<br>
 What power have I the realm to sway?<br>
 What hope will fire my bosom when<br>
 I see no more these lords of men?<br>
 The holy king who loved the right<br>
 Relied on Ráma's power and might,<br>
 His guardian and his glory, so<br>
 (<i>illegible</i>) Meru in his woods below.<br>
 How can I bear, a steer untrained,<br>
 The load his mightier strength sustained?<br>
 What power have I to brook alone<br>
 This weight on feeble shoulders thrown?<br>
 For if the needful power were bought<br>
 By strength of mind and brooding thought,<br>
 No triumph shall attend the dame<br>
 Who dooms her son to lasting shame.<br>
 Now should no doubt that son prevent<br>
 From quitting thee on evil bent.<br>
 But Ráma's love o'erpowers my will,<br>
 Who holds thee as his mother still.<br>
 Whence did the thought, O thou whose eyes<br>
 Are turned to sinful deeds, arise--<br>
 A plan our ancient sires would hate,<br>
 O fallen from thy virtuous state?<br>
 For in the line from which we spring<br>
 The eldest is anointed king:<br>
 No monarchs from the rule decline,<br>
 And, least of all. lkshváku's line.<br>
 Our holy sires, to virtue true,<br>
 Upon our race a lustre threw,<br>
 But with subversive frenzy thou<br>
 Hast marred our lineal honour now,<br>
 Of lofty birth, a noble line<br>
 Of previous kings is also thine:<br>
 Then whence this hated folly? whence<br>
 This sudden change that steals thy sense?<br>
 Thou shalt not gain thine impious will,<br>
 O thou whose thoughts are bent on ill,<br>
 Thou from whose guilty hand descend<br>
 These sinful blows my life to end.<br>
 Now to the forest will I go,<br>
 Thy cherished plans to overthrow,<br>
 And bring my brother, free from stain,<br>
 His people's darling, home again,<br>
 And Ráma, when again he turns,<br>
 Whose glory like a beacon burns,<br>
 In me a faithful slave shall find<br>
 To serve him with contented mind.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry152.htm">Next: Canto LXXIV.: Bharat's Lamest.</a></center>
 </body>