<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry163.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry165.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXXVI.: GUHA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Guha the king, acquainted well<br>
 With all that in the wood befell,<br>
 To Bharat the unequalled told<br>
 The tale of Lakshman mighty-souled:<br>
 'With many an earnest word I spake<br>
 To Lakshman as he stayed awake,<br>
 And with his bow and shaft in hand<br>
 To guard his brother kept his stand:<br>
 'Now sleep a little, Lakshman, see<br>
 This pleasant bed is strewn for thee:<br>
 Hereon thy weary bodv lay,<br>
 And strengthen thee with rest, I pray,<br>
 Inured to toil are men like these,<br>
 But thou hast aye been nursed in ease.<br>
 Rest, duteous-minded! I will keep<br>
 My watch while Ráma lies asleep:<br>
 For in the whole wide world is none<br>
 Dearer to me than Raghu's son.<br>
 Harbour no doubt or jealous fear:<br>
 I speak the truth with heart sincere:<br>
 For from the grace which he has shown<br>
 Will glory on my name be thrown:<br>
 Great store of merit shall I gain,<br>
 And duteous, form no wish in vain.<br>
 Let me enforced by many a row<br>
 Of followers, armed with shaft and bow<br>
 For well-loved Ráma's weal provide<br>
 Who lies asleep by Sitá's side.<br>
 For through this wood I often go,<br>
 And all its shades conceal I know:<br>
 And we with conquering arms can meet<br>
 A four-fold host arrayed complete.'<br>
 With words like these I spoke, designed<br>
 To move the high-souled Bharat's mind,<br>
 But he upon his duty bent,<br>
 Plied his persuasive argument:<br>
 'O, how can slumber close mine eyes<br>
 When lowly couched with Sitá lies<br>
 The royal Ráma? can I give<br>
 My heart to joy, or even live?<br>
 He whom no mighty demon, no,<br>
 Nor heavenly God can overthrow,<br>
 See, Guha, how he lies, alas,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_194"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 194</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With Sítá couched on gathered grass.<br>
 By varied labours, long, severe,<br>
 By many a prayer and rite austere,<br>
 He, Das'aratha's cherished son,<br>
 By Fortune stamped, from Heaven was won.<br>
 Now as his son is forced to fly,<br>
 The king ere long will surely die:<br>
 Reft of his guardian hand, forlorn<br>
 In widowed grief this land will mourn,<br>
 E'en now perhaps, with toil o'erspent,<br>
 The women cease their loud lament,<br>
 And cries of woe no longer ring<br>
 Throughout the palace of the king.<br>
 But ah for sad Kaus'alyá! how<br>
 Fare she and mine own mothef now?<br>
 How fares the king? this night, I think,<br>
 Some of the three in death will sink.<br>
 With hopes upon S'atrughna set<br>
 My mother may survive as yet,<br>
 But the sad queen will die who bore<br>
 The hero, for her grief is sore.<br>
 His cherished wish that would have made<br>
 Dear Ráma king, so long delayed,<br>
 'Too late! too late!' the king will cry,<br>
 And conquered by his misery die.<br>
 When Fate has brought the mournful day<br>
 Which sees my father pass away,<br>
 How happy in their lives are they<br>
 Allowed his funeral rites to pay.<br>
 Our exile o'er, with him who ne'er<br>
 Turns from the oath his lips may swear,<br>
 May we returning safe and well<br>
 Again in fair Ayodhyá dwell.'<br>
 Thus Bharat stood with many a sigh<br>
 Lamenting, and the night went by.<br>
 Soon as the morning light shone fair<br>
 In votive coils both bound their hair.<br>
 And then I sent them safely o'er<br>
 And left them on the farther shore.<br>
 With Sítá then they onward passed,<br>
 Their coats of bark about them cast,<br>
     Their locks like hermits' bound,<br>
 The mighty tamers of the foe,<br>
 Each with his arrows and his bow,<br>
 Went over the rugged ground,<br>
 Proud in their strength and undeterred<br>
 Like elephants that lead the herd,<br>
 And gazing oft around.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry165.htm">Next: Canto LXXXVII.: Guha's Story.</a></center>
 </body>