<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry165.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry167.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXXVIII.: THE INGUDÍ TREE.</h3>
 <p>
 When Bharat with each friend and peer<br>
 Had heard that tale so full and clear,<br>
 They went together to the tree<br>
 The bed which Ráma pressed to see.<br>
 Then Bharat to his mothers said:<br>
 'Behold the high-souled hero's bed:<br>
 These tumbled heaps of grass betray<br>
 Where he that night with Sitá lay:<br>
 Unmeet, the heir of fortune high<br>
 Thus on the cold bare earth should lie,<br>
 The monarch's son, in counsel sage,<br>
 Of old imperial lineage.<br>
 That lion-lord whose noble bed<br>
 With finest skins of deer was spread,--<br>
 How can he now endure to press<br>
 The bare earth, cold and comfortless!<br>
 This sudden fall from bliss to grief<br>
 Appears untrue, beyond belief:<br>
 My senses are distraught: I seem<br>
 To view the fancies of a dream.<br>
 There is no deity so great,<br>
 No power in heaven can master Fate,<br>
 If Ráma, Das'aratha's heir,<br>
 Lay on the ground and slumbered there;<br>
 And lovely Sitá, she who springs<br>
 From fair Videha's ancient kings,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Ráma's dear wife, by all adored,<br>
 Lay on the earth beside her lord.<br>
 Here was his couch, upon this heap<br>
 He tossed and turned in restless sleep:<br>
 On the hard soil each manly limb<br>
 Has stamped the grass with signs of him,<br>
 That night, it seems, fair Sitá spent<br>
 Arrayed in every ornament,<br>
 For here and there my eyes behold<br>
 Small particles of glistering gold.<br>
 She laid her outer garment here,<br>
 For still some silken threads appear,<br>
 How dear in her devoted eyes<br>
 Must be the bed where Ráma lies,<br>
 Where she so tender could repose<br>
 And by his side forget her woes.<br>
 Alas, unhappy, guilty me!<br>
 For whom the prince was forced to flee,<br>
 And chief of Raghu's sons and best,<br>
 A bed like this with Sitá pressed.<br>
 Son of a royal sire whose hand<br>
 Ruled paramount o'er every land,<br>
 Could he who every joy bestows,<br>
 Whose body like the lotus shows,<br>
 The friend of all, who charms the sight,<br>
 Whose flashing eyes are darkly bright.<br>
 Leave the dear kingdom, his by right,<br>
 Unmeet for woe, the heir of bliss,<br>
 And lie upon a bed like this?<br>
 Great joy and happy fate are thine,<br>
 O Lakshman, marked with each fair sign,<br>
 Whose faithful footsteps follow still<br>
 Thy brother in his hour of ill.<br>
 And blest is Sitá, nobly good,<br>
 Who dwells with Ráma in the wood.<br>
 Ours is, alas, a doubtful fate<br>
 Of Ráma reft and desolate.<br>
 My royal sire has gained the skies,<br>
 In woods the high-souled hero lies;<br>
 The state is wrecked and tempest-tossed,<br>
 A vessel with her rudder lost.<br>
 Yet none in secret thought has planned<br>
 With hostile might to seize the land:<br>
 Though forced in distant wilds to dwell,<br>
 The hero's arm protects it well.<br>
 Unguarded, with deserted wall,<br>
 No elephant or steed in stall,<br>
 My father's royal city shows<br>
 Her portals open to her foes,<br>
 Of bold protectors reft and bare,<br>
 Defenceless in her dark despair:<br>
 But still her foes the wish restrain,<br>
 As men from poisoned cates refrain.<br>
 I from this hour my nights will pass<br>
 Couched on the earth or gathered grass,<br>
 Eat only fruit and roots, and wear<br>
 A coat of bark, and matted hair.<br>
 I in the woods will pass, content,<br>
 For him the term of banishment;<br>
 So shall I still unbroken save<br>
 The promise which the hero gave.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_196"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 196</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 While I remain for Ráma there,<br>
 S'atrnghna will my exile share,<br>
 And Ráma in his home again,<br>
 With Lakshman, o'er Ayodhyá reign,<br>
 for him, to rule and guard the state,<br>
 The twice-born men shall consecrate.<br>
 O, may the Gods I serve incline<br>
 To grant this earnest wish of mine!<br>
 If when I bow before his feet<br>
 And with all moving arts entreat,<br>
     He still deny my prayer,<br>
 Then with my brother will I live:<br>
 He must, he must permission give,<br>
     Roaming in forests there.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_362"></a><a href="ry165.htm#fr_362">195:1</a>  Ráma, Lakshman, and Sumantra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry167.htm">Next: Canto LXXXIX.: The Passage of Gangá.</a></center>
 </body>