<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry167.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry169.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XC.: THE HERMITAGE.</h3>
 <p>
 The prince of men a league away<br>
 Saw where the hermit's dwelling lay,<br>
 Then with his lords his path pursued,<br>
 And left his warrior multitude.<br>
 On foot, as duty taught his mind,<br>
 He left his warlike gear behind:<br>
 Two robes of linen cloth he wore,<br>
 And bade Vas'ishtha walk before.<br>
 Then Bharat from his lords withdrew<br>
 When Bharadvája came in view,<br>
 And toward the holy hermit went<br>
 Behind Vas'ishtha, reverent.<br>
 When Bharadvája, saint austere,<br>
 Saw good Vis'ishtha drawing near,<br>
 He cried, upspringing from his seat,<br>
 'The grace-gift bring, my friend to greet.'<br>
 When Saint Vas'ishtha near him drew,<br>
 And Bharat paid the reverence due,<br>
 The glorious hermit was aware<br>
 That Das'aratha's son was there.<br>
 The grace-gift, water for their feet<br>
 He gave, and offered fruit to eat;<br>
 Then, duty-skilled, with friendly speech<br>
 In seemly order questioned each:<br>
 'How fares it in Ayodhvá now<br>
 With treasury and army? how<br>
 With kith and kin and friends most dear,<br>
 With councillor, and prince, and peer?'<br>
 But, for be knew the king was dead,<br>
 Of Das'aratha naught he said.<br>
 Vas'ishtha and the prince in turn<br>
 Would of the hermits welfare learn:<br>
 Of holy fires they fain would hear,<br>
 Of pupils, trees, and birds, and deer.<br>
 The glorious saint his answer made<br>
 That all was well in holy shade:<br>
 Then love of Ráma moved his breast,<br>
 And thus he questioned of his guest:<br>
 Why art thou here, O Prince, whose band<br>
 With kingly sway protects the land;<br>
 Declare the cause, explain the whole.<br>
 For yet some doubt disturbs my soul.<br>
 He whom Kaus'alyá bare, whose might<br>
 The foemen slays, his line's delight,<br>
 He who with wife and brother sent<br>
 Afar now roam in banishment.<br>
 Famed prince, to whom his father spake<br>
 This order for a woman's sake:<br>
 'Away! and in the forest spend<br>
 Thy life till fourteen years shall end'--<br>
 Has thou the wish to harm him, bent<br>
 On sin against the innocent?<br>
 Wouldst thou thine elder's realm enjoy<br>
 Without a thorn that can annoy?'<br>
     With sobbing voice and tearful eye<br>
 Thus Bharat sadly made reply:<br>
 'Ah lost am I, if thou, O Saint,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Canst thus in thought my heart attaint:<br>
 No warning charge from thee I need;<br>
 Ne'er could such crime from me proceed.<br>
 The words my guilty mother spake<br>
 When fondly jealous for my sake--<br>
 Think not that I, to triumph moved,<br>
 Those words approve or e'er approved.<br>
 O Hermit, I have sought this place<br>
 To win the lordly hero's grace,<br>
 To throw me at my brother's feet<br>
 And lead him to his royal seat.<br>
 To this, my journey's aim and end,<br>
 Thou shouldst, O Saint, thy favour lend:<br>
 Where is the lord of earth? do thou,<br>
 Most holy, say, where roams he now?<br>
     Then, by the saint Vas'ishtha pressed,<br>
         And all the gathered priests beside,<br>
     To Bharat's dutiful request<br>
         The hermit graciously replied:<br>
 'Worthy of thee, O Prince, this deed,<br>
 True son of Raghu's ancient seed.<br>
 I know thee reverent, well-controlled,<br>
 The glory of the good of old.<br>
 I grant thy prayer: in this pursuit<br>
 I know thy heart is resolute.<br>
 'Tis for thy sake those words I said<br>
 That wider still thy fame may spread.<br>
 I know where Ráma, duty-tried,<br>
 His brother, and his wife abide.<br>
 Where Chitrakúta's heights arise<br>
 Thy brother Ráma's dwelling lies.<br>
 Go thither with the morning's light,<br>
 And stay with all thy lords tonight:<br>
 For I would show thee honour high,<br>
 And do not thou my wish deny.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry169.htm">Next: Canto XCI.: Bharadvája's Feast.</a></center>
 </body>