<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry164.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry166.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXXVII.: GUHA'S STORY.</h3>
 <p>
 That speech of Guha Bharat heard<br>
 With grief and tender pity stirred,<br>
 And as his ears the story drank,<br>
 Deep in his thoughtful heart it sank.<br>
 His large full eyes in anguish rolled,<br>
 His trembling limbs grew stiff and cold;<br>
 Then fell he, like a tree upturn,<br>
 In woe too grievous to be borne.<br>
 When Guha saw the long-armed chief<br>
 Whose eye was like a lotus leaf,<br>
 With lion shoulders strong and fair,<br>
 High-mettled, prostrate in despair,--<br>
 Pale, bitterly afflicted, he<br>
 Reeled as in earthquake reels a tree.<br>
 But when S'atrughna standing nigh<br>
 Saw his dear brother helpless lie,<br>
 Distraught with woe his head he bowed,<br>
 Embraced him oft and wept aloud.<br>
 Then Bharat's mothers came, forlorn<br>
 Of their dear king, with fasting worn,<br>
 And stood with weeping eyes around<br>
 The hero prostrate on the ground.<br>
 Kaus'alyá, by her woe oppressed,<br>
 The senseless Bharat's limbs caressed<br>
 As a fond cow in love and fear<br>
 Caresses oft her youngling dear:<br>
 Then yielding to her woe she said,<br>
 Weeping and sore disquieted:<br>
 'What torments, O my son, are these<br>
 Of sudden pain or swift disease?<br>
 The lives of us and all the line<br>
 Depend, dear child, on only thine.<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman forced to flee,<br>
 I live by naught but seeing thee:<br>
 For as the king has past away<br>
 Thou art my only help to-day.<br>
 Hast thou, perchance, heard evil news<br>
 Of Lakshman, which thy soul subdues,<br>
 Or Ráma dwelling with his spouse--<br>
 My all is he--neath forest boughs?'<br>
     Then slowly gathering sense and strength<br>
 The weeping hero rose at length,<br>
 And words like these to Guha spake,<br>
 That bade Kaus'alyá comfort take:<br>
 'Where lodged the prince that night? and where<br>
 Lakshman the brave, and Sítá fair?<br>
 Show me the couch whereon he lay,<br>
 Tell me the food he ate, I pray.'<br>
     Then Guha the Nishádas' king<br>
 Replied to Bharat's questioning:<br>
 'Of all I had I brought the best<br>
 To serve my good and honoured guest<br>
 Food of each varied kind I chose,<br>
 And every fairest fruit that grows.<br>
 Ráma the hero truly brave<br>
 Declined the gift I humbly gave:<br>
 His Warrior part he ne'er forgot,<br>
 And what I brought accepted not:<br>
 'No gifts, my friend, may we accept:<br>
 Our law is, Give, and must be kept."<br>
 'The high-souled chief, O Monarch, thus<br>
 With gracious words persuaded us.<br>
 Then calm and still, absorbed in thought,<br>
 He drank the water Lakshman brought,<br>
 And then, obedient to his vows,<br>
 He fasted with his gentle spouse.<br>
 So Lakshman too from food abstained,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_195"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 195</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And sipped the water that remained:<br>
 Then with ruled lips, devoutly staid,<br>
 The three  <a name="fr_362"></a><a href="ry166.htm#fn_362"><font size="1">1</font></a> their evening worship paid.<br>
 Then Lakshman with unwearied care<br>
 Brought heaps of sacred grass, and there<br>
 With his own hands he quickly spread,<br>
 For Ráma's rest, a pleasant bed,<br>
 And faithful Sitá's too, where they<br>
 Reclining each by other lay.<br>
 Then Lakshman bathed their feet, and drew<br>
 A little distance from the two.<br>
 Here stands the tree which lent them shade,<br>
 Here is the grass beneath it laid,<br>
 Where Ráma and his consort spent<br>
 The night together ere they went.<br>
 Lakshman, whose arms the foeman quell,<br>
 Watched all the night as sentinel,<br>
     And kept his great bow strung:<br>
 His hand was gloved, his arm waa braced,<br>
 Two well-filled quivers at his waist,<br>
     With deadly arrows, hung.<br>
 I took my shafts and trusty bow,<br>
 And with that tamer of the foe<br>
     Stood ever wakeful near,<br>
 And with my followers, bow in hand,<br>
 Behind me ranged, a ready band,<br>
     Kept watch o'er Indra's peer.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry166.htm">Next: Canto LXXXVIII.: The Ingudí Tree.</a></center>
 </body>