<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry168.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry170.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCI.: BHARADVÁJA'S FEAST.</h3>
 <p>
 Soon as he saw the prince's mind<br>
 To rest that day was well inclined,<br>
 He sought Kaikeyí's son to please<br>
 With hospitable courtesies.<br>
 Then Bharat to the saint replied:<br>
 'Our wants are more than satisfied.<br>
 The gifts which honoured strangers greet,<br>
 And water for our weary feet<br>
 Hast thou bestowed with friendly care,<br>
 And every choice of woodland fare.'<br>
     Then Bharadvája spoke, a smile<br>
 Playing upon his lips the while:<br>
 'I know, dear Prince, thy friendly mind<br>
 Will any fare sufficient find,<br>
 But gladly would I entertain<br>
 And banquet all thine armed train:<br>
 Such is my earnest wish: do thou<br>
 This longing of my heart allow,<br>
 Why host thou hither bent thy way,<br>
 And made thy troops-behind thee stay?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_198"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 198</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Why unattended? couldst thou not<br>
 With friends and army seek this spot?'<br>
     Bhharat, with reverent hands raised high,<br>
 To that great hermit made reply:<br>
 'My troops, for awe of thee, O Sage,<br>
 I brought not to thy hermitage:<br>
 Troops of a king or monarch's son<br>
 A hermit's home should ever shun.<br>
 Behind me comes a mighty train<br>
 Wide spreading o'er the ample plain,<br>
 Where every chief and captain leads<br>
 Men, elephants, and mettled steeds<br>
 I feared, O reverend Sage, lest these<br>
 Might harm the holy ground and trees,<br>
 Springs might be marred and cots o'er-thrown,<br>
 So with the priests I came alone.'<br>
     'Bring all thy host,' the hermit cried,<br>
 And Bharat, to his joy, complied.<br>
 Then to the chapel went the sire,<br>
 Where ever burnt the sacred fire,<br>
 And first, in order due, with sips<br>
 Of water purified his lips:<br>
 To Visvakarmá, then he prayed,<br>
 His hospitable feast to aid:<br>
 'Let Vis'vakarmá hear my call,<br>
 The God who forms and fashions all:<br>
 A mighty banquet I provide,<br>
 Be all my wants this day supplied.<br>
 Lord Indra at their head, the three  <a name="fr_365"></a><a href="#fn_365"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Who guard the worlds I call to me:<br>
 A mighty host this day I feed,<br>
 Be now supplied my every need.<br>
 Let all the streams that eastward go,<br>
 And those whose waters westering flow,<br>
 Both on the earth and in the sky,<br>
 Flow hither and my wants supply.<br>
 Be some with ardent liquor filled,<br>
 And some with wine from flowers distilled,<br>
 While some their fresh cool streams retain<br>
 Sweet as the juice of sugar-cane,<br>
 I call the Gods I call the band<br>
 Of minstrels that around them stand:<br>
 I call the Háhá and Huhú,<br>
 I call the sweet Vis'vása<br>
 I call the heavenly wives of these<br>
 With all the bright Apsarases,<br>
 Alambushe of beauty rare,<br>
 The charmer of the tangled hair,<br>
 Ghritáchí And Vis'váchi fair,<br>
 Hemá and Bhímá sweet to view,<br>
 And lovely Nágadantá too,<br>
 And all the sweetest nymphs who stand<br>
 By Indra or by Brahmá's hand--<br>
 I summon these with all their train<br>
 And Tumburu to lead the strain.<br>
 Here let Kuvera's garden rise<br>
 Which far in Northern Kuru  <a name="fr_366"></a><a href="#fn_366"><font size="1">2</font></a> lies:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 For leaves let cloth and gems entwine,<br>
 And let its fruit be nymphs divine.<br>
 Let Soma  <a name="fr_367"></a><a href="#fn_367"><font size="1">1b</font></a> give the noblest food<br>
 To feed the mighty multitude,<br>
 Of every kind, for tooth and lip,<br>
 To chew, to lick, to suck, and sip.<br>
 Let wreaths, where fairest flowers abound,<br>
 Spring from the trees that bloom around.<br>
 Each sort of wine to woo the taste,<br>
 And meats of every kind be placed.'<br>
     Thus spake the hermit sulf-restrained,<br>
 With proper tone by rules ordained,<br>
 On deepest meditation bent,<br>
 In holy might predominent.<br>
 Then as with hands in reverence raised<br>
 Absorbed in thought he eastward gazed,<br>
 The deities be thus addreased<br>
 Came each in semblance manifest.<br>
 Delicious gales that cooled the frame<br>
 From Malaya and Dardar came,<br>
 That kissed those scented hills and threw<br>
 Auspicious fragrance where they blew.<br>
 Then falling fast in sweetest showers<br>
 Came from the sky immortal flowers,<br>
 And all the airy region round<br>
 With heavenly drums was made to sound.<br>
 Then breathed a soft celestial breeze,<br>
 Then danced the bright Apsarases,<br>
 The minstrels and the Gods advanced,<br>
 And warbling lutes the soul entranced.<br>
 The earth and sky that music filled,<br>
 And through each ear it softly thrilled,<br>
 As from the heavenly quills it fell<br>
 With time and tune attempered well.<br>
 Soon as the minstrels ceased to play<br>
 And airs celestial died away.<br>
 The troops of Bharat saw amazed<br>
 What Vis'vakarmá's art had raised.<br>
 On every side, five leagues around,<br>
 All smooth and level lay the ground,<br>
 With fresh green grass that charmed the sight<br>
 Like sapphires blent with lazulite.<br>
 There the Wood-apple hung the head,<br>
 The Mango and the Citron glowed<br>
 The Bel and scented Jak were there,<br>
 And Amlá with fruitage fair.<br>
 There, brought from Northern Kuru, stood<br>
 Rich in delights, the glorious wood,<br>
 And many a stream was seen to glide<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_199"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 199</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With flowering trees along its side.<br>
 There mansions rose with four wide halls,<br>
 And elephants and chargers' stalls,<br>
 And many a house of royal state,<br>
 Triumphal are and bannered gate.<br>
 With noble doorways, sought the sky,<br>
 Like a pale cloud, a palace high,<br>
 Which far and wide rare fragrance shed,<br>
 With wreaths of white engarlanded.<br>
 Square was its shape, its halls were wide,<br>
 With many a seat and couch supplied,<br>
 Drink of all kinds, and every meat<br>
 Such as celestial Gods might eat.<br>
 Then at the bidding of the seer<br>
 Kaikeyi''s strong-armed son drew near.<br>
 And passed within that fair abode<br>
 Which with the noblest jewels glowed.<br>
 Then, as Vas'ishtha led the way,<br>
 The councillors, in due array.<br>
 Followed delighted and amazed<br>
 And on the glorious structure gazed.<br>
 Then Bharat, Raghu's son, drew near<br>
 The kingly throne, with prince and peer,<br>
 Whereby the chouri in the shade<br>
 Of the white canopy was laid.<br>
 Before the throne he humbly bent<br>
 And honoured Ráma, reverent,<br>
 Then in his hand the chouri bore,<br>
 And sat where sits a councillor,<br>
 His ministers and household priest<br>
 Sat by degrees from chief to least,<br>
 Then sat the captain of the host<br>
 And all the men he honoured most.<br>
 Then when the saint his order gave,<br>
 Each river with enchanted wave<br>
 Rolled milk and curds divinely sweet<br>
 Before the princely Bharat's feet;<br>
 And dwellings fair on either side,<br>
 With gay white plaster beautified.<br>
 Their heavenly roofs were seen to lift,<br>
 The Bra'hman Bharady'aja's gift,<br>
 Then straight by Lord Kuvera sent,<br>
 Gay with celestial ornament<br>
 Of bright attire and jewels' shine.<br>
 Came twenty thousand nymphs divine:<br>
 The man on whom those beauties glanced<br>
 That moment felt his soul entranced.<br>
 With them from Nandan's blissful shades<br>
 Came twenty thousand heavenly maids.<br>
 Tumburu, Na'rad, Gopa came,<br>
 And Sutanu, like radiant flame.<br>
 The kings of the Gandharva throng,<br>
 And ravished Bharat with their song.<br>
 Then spoke the saint, and swift obeyed<br>
 Alambusb'a, the fairest maid,<br>
 And Mis'rakes'i bright to view,<br>
 Ramana, Pundarik'a too,<br>
 And danced to him with graceful ease<br>
 The dances of Apsarases.<br>
 All deplete that by Gods are worn,<br>
 Or Chaitraratha's graves adorn,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Bloomed by the saint's command arrayed<br>
 On branches in Praya'ga's shade.<br>
 When at the saint's command the breeze<br>
 Made music with the Vilva trees,<br>
 To wave in rhythmic beat began<br>
 The boughs of each Myrobolan,<br>
 And holy fig-trees wore the look<br>
 Of dancers, as their leaflets shook.<br>
 The fair Tama'la, palm, and pine,<br>
 With trees that tower and plants that twine,<br>
 The sweetly varying forms displayed<br>
 Of stately dame or bending maid.<br>
 Here men the foaming winecup quaffed,<br>
 Here drank of milk full many a draught,<br>
 And tasted meats of every kind,<br>
 Well dressed, whatever pleased their mind.<br>
 Then beauteous women, seven or eight,<br>
 Stood ready by each man to wait:<br>
 Beside the stream his limbs they stripped<br>
 And in the cooling water dipped.<br>
 And then the fair ones, sparkling eyed,<br>
 With soft hands rubbed his limbs and dried.<br>
 And sitting on the lovely bank<br>
 Held up the winecup as he drank.<br>
 Nor did the grooms forget to feed<br>
 Camel and mule and ox and steed,<br>
 For there were stores of roasted grain,<br>
 Of honey and of sugar-cane.<br>
 So fast the wild excitement spread<br>
 Among the warriors Bharat led,<br>
 That all the mighty army through<br>
 The groom no more his charger knew,<br>
 And he who drove might seek in vain<br>
 To tell his elephant again.<br>
 With every joy and rapture fired,<br>
 Entranced with all the heart desired,<br>
 The myriads of the host that night<br>
 Revelled delirious with delight.<br>
 Urged by the damsels at their side<br>
 In wild delight the warriors cried:<br>
 'Ne'er will we seek Ayodhya', no,<br>
 Nor yet to Dandak forest go:<br>
 Here will we stay: may happy fate<br>
 On Bharat and on Ráma wait'<br>
 Thus cried the army gay and free<br>
 Exulting in their lawless glee,<br>
 Both infantry and those who rode<br>
 On elephants, or steeds bestrode,<br>
 Ten thousand voices shouting, 'This<br>
 Is heaven indeed for perfect bliss.'<br>
 With garlands decked they idly strayed,<br>
 And danced and laughed and sang and played.<br>
 At length as every soldier eyed,<br>
 With food like Amrit satisfied.<br>
 Bach dainty cate and tempting meat,<br>
 No longer had he care to eat.<br>
 Thus soldier, servant, dame, and slave<br>
 Received whate'er the wish might crave.<br>
 As each in new-wrought clothes arrayed<br>
 Enjoyed the feast before him laid.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_200"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 200</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Each man was seen in white attire<br>
 Unstained by spot or speck of mire:<br>
 None was athirst or hungry there,<br>
 And none had dust upon his hair.<br>
 On every side in woody dells<br>
 Was milky food in bubbling wells,<br>
 And there were all-supplying cows<br>
 And honey dropping from the boughs.<br>
 Nor wanted lakes of flower-made drink<br>
 With piles of meat upon the brink,<br>
 boiled, stewed, and roasted, varied cheer,<br>
 Peachick and jungle-fowl and deer,<br>
 There was the flesh of kid and boar,<br>
 And dainty sauce in endless store,<br>
 With juice of flowers concocted well,<br>
 And soup that charmed the taste and smell,<br>
 And pounded fruits of bitter taste,<br>
 And many a bath was ready placed<br>
 Down by each river's shelving side<br>
 There stood great basins well supplied,<br>
 And laid therein, of dazzling sheen,<br>
 White brushes for the teeth were seen,<br>
 And many a covered box wherein<br>
 Was sandal powdered for the skin.<br>
 And mirrors bright with constant care,<br>
 And piles of new attire were there,<br>
 And store of sandals and of shoes,<br>
 Thousands of pairs, for all to choose:<br>
 Eye-unguents, combs for hair and beard,<br>
 Umbrellas fair and bows appeared.<br>
 Lakes gleamed, that lent digestive aid, <a name="fr_368"></a><a href="ry170.htm#fn_368"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And some for pleasant bathing made,<br>
 With waters fair, and smooth incline<br>
 For camels, horses, mules, and kine.<br>
 There saw they barley heaped on high<br>
 The coutless cattle to supply:<br>
 The golden grain shone fair and bright<br>
 As sapphires or the lazulite.<br>
 To all the gathered host it seemed<br>
 As if that magic scene they dreamed,<br>
 And wonder, as they gazed, increased<br>
 At Bharadvája's glorious feast.<br>
     Thus in the hermit's grove they spent<br>
 That night in joy and merriment,<br>
 Blest as the Gods who take their ease<br>
 Under the shade of Nandan's trees.<br>
 Each minstrel bade the saint adieu,<br>
 And to his blissful mansion flew,<br>
 Aiid every stream and heavenly dame<br>
 Ktturned as swiftly as she came.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_365"></a><a href="ry169.htm#fr_365">198:1</a>  Yama, Varuna and Kuvera.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_366"></a><a href="ry169.htm#fr_366">198:2</a>  A happy land in the remote north
 where the inhabitants enjoy a natural pefection
 attended with complete happiness
 obtained without exertion. There is there
 no vicissitude, nor decrepitude, nor death,
 nor fear: no distinction of virtue and
 vice, none of the inequalities denoted by
 the words best, worst, and intermediate,
 nor any change resulting from the succssion
 of the four Yugas.' Sea MUIR'S.
 <i>Sanskrit Texts</i>, Vol I, p. 402.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_367"></a><a href="ry169.htm#fr_367">198:1b</a>  The Moon.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry170.htm">Next: Canto XCII.: Bharat's Farewell.</a></center>
 </body>