<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry162.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry164.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXXV.: GUHA AND BHARAT.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus tho Nishadas' king besought:<br>
 The prince with spirit wisdom-fraught<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_193"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 193</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Replied in seemly words that blent<br>
 Deep matter with the argument:<br>
 'Thou, friend of him whom I revere,<br>
 With honours high hast met me here,<br>
 For thou alone wouldst entertain<br>
 Aud feed to-day so vast a train."<br>
 In such fair words the prince replied,<br>
 Then, pointing to the path he cried:<br>
 'Which way aright will lead my feet<br>
 To Bharadvája's calm retreat;<br>
 For all this land near Gangá's streams<br>
 Pathless and hard to traverse seems?'<br>
     Thus spoke the prince: King Guha heard<br>
 Delighted every prudent word,<br>
 And gazing on that forest wide,<br>
 Raised suppliant hands, and thus replied:<br>
 'My servants, all the ground who know,<br>
 O glorious Prince, with thee shall go<br>
 With constant care thy way to guide,<br>
 And I will journey by thy side.<br>
 But this thy host so wide dispread<br>
 Wakes in my heart one doubt and dread,<br>
 Lest, threatening Ráma good and great,<br>
 Ill thoughts thy journey stimulate."<br>
     But wheu King Guha, ill at ease,<br>
 Declared his fear in words like these,<br>
 As pure as is the cloudless sky<br>
 With soft voice Bharat made reply:<br>
 'Suspect me not: ne'er come the time<br>
 For me to plot so foul a crime!<br>
 He is my eldest brother, he<br>
 Is like a father dear to me.<br>
 I go to lead my brother thence<br>
 Who makes the wood his residence.<br>
 No thought but this thy heart should frame:<br>
 This simple truth my lips proclaim.'<br>
     Then with glad cheer King Guha cried,<br>
 With Bharat's answer gratified:<br>
 'Blessed art thou: on earth I see<br>
 None who may vie, O Prince, with thee,<br>
 Who canst of thy free will resign<br>
 The kingdom which unsought is thine.<br>
 For this, a name that ne'er shall die,<br>
 Thy glory through the worlds shall fly,<br>
 Who fain wouldst balm thy brother's pain<br>
 And lead the exile home again.'<br>
     As Guha thus, and Bharat, each<br>
 To other spoke in friendly speech,<br>
 The Day God sank with glory dead,<br>
 And night o'er all the sky was spread.<br>
 Soon as King Guha's thoughtful care<br>
 Had quartered all the armv there,<br>
 Well honoured, Bharat laid his head<br>
 Beside S'atrughna on a bed.<br>
 But grief for Ráma yet oppressed<br>
 High-minded Bharat's faithful breast--<br>
 Such torment little was deserved<br>
 By him who ne'er from duty swerved.<br>
 The fever raged through every vein<br>
 And burnt him with its inward pain:<br>
 So when in woods the flames leap free<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The fire within consumes the tree.<br>
 From heat of burning anguish sprung<br>
 The sweat upon his body hung,<br>
 As when the sun with fervid glow<br>
 On high Himalaya melts the snow.<br>
 As, banished from the herd, a bull<br>
 Wanders alone and sorrowful.<br>
     Thus sighing and distressed,<br>
 In misery and bitter grief,<br>
 With fevered heart that mocked relief,<br>
 Distracted in his mind, the chief<br>
     Still mourned and found no rest.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry164.htm">Next: Canto LXXXVI.: Guha's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>