<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry161.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry163.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXXIV.: GUHA'S ANGER.</h3>
 <p>
 King Guha saw the host spread o'er<br>
 The wide expanse of Gangá's shore,<br>
 With waving flag and pennon graced,<br>
 And to his followers spoke in haste:<br>
 'A mighty army meets my eyes,<br>
 That rivals Ocean's self in size:<br>
 Where'er I look my very mind<br>
 No limit to the host can find.<br>
 Sure Bharat with some evil thought<br>
 His army to our land has brought.<br>
 See, huge of form, his flag he rears,<br>
 That like an Ebony-tree appears.<br>
 He comes with bonds to take and chain,<br>
 Or triumph o'er our people slain:<br>
 And after, Ráma will be slay,--<br>
 Him whom his father drove away:<br>
 The power complete he longs to gain.<br>
 And--task too hard--usurp the reign.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 So Bharat comes with wicked will<br>
 His brother Rama's blood to spill.<br>
 But Ráma's slave and friend am I;<br>
 He is my lord and dear ally.<br>
 Keep here your watch in arms arrayed<br>
 Near Gangá's flood to lend him aid,<br>
 And let my gathered servants stand<br>
 And line with troops the river strand.<br>
 Here let the river keepers meet.<br>
 Who flesh and roots and berries eat;<br>
 A hundred fishers man each boat<br>
 Of the five hundred here afloat,<br>
 And let the youthful and the strong<br>
 Assemble in defensive throng.<br>
 But yet, if, free from guilty thought<br>
 'Gainst Ráma, he this land have sought,<br>
 The prince's happy host to day<br>
 Across the flood shall make its way.'<br>
     He spoke: then bearing in a dish<br>
 A gift of honey, meat, and fish,<br>
 The king of the Nishadas drew<br>
 Toward Bharat for an interview.<br>
 When Bharat's noble charioteer<br>
 Observed the monarch hastening near,<br>
 He duly, skilled in courteous lore,<br>
 The tidings to his master bore:<br>
 'This aged prince who hither bends<br>
 His footsteps with a thousand friends,<br>
 Knows, firm ally of Ráma, all<br>
 That may in Danduk wood befall:<br>
 Therefore, Kakutstha's son, admit<br>
 The monarch, as is right and fit:<br>
 For doubtless he can clearly tell<br>
 Where Ráma now and Lakshman dwell.'<br>
     When Bharat heard Sumantra's rede,<br>
 To his fair words the prince agreed:<br>
 'Go quickly forth,' he cried, 'and bring<br>
 Before my face the aged king.'<br>
 King Guha, with his kinsmen near,<br>
 Rejoiced the summoning to hear:<br>
 He nearer drew, bowed low his head,<br>
 And thus to royal Bharat said:<br>
 'No mansions can our country boast,<br>
 And unexpected comes thy host:<br>
 But what we have I give thee all:<br>
 Rest in the lodging of thy thrall.<br>
 See, the Nishadas here have brought<br>
 The fruit and roots their hands have sought:<br>
 And we have woodland fare beside.<br>
 And store of meat both fresh and dried.<br>
 To rest their weary limbs, I pray<br>
 This night at least thy host may stay:<br>
 Then cheered with all we can bestow<br>
 To-morrow thou with it mayst go.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_361"></a><a href="ry161.htm#fr_361">192:1</a>  Now Sungroor, in the Allahabad
 district.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry163.htm">Next: Canto LXXXV.: Guha And Bharat.</a></center>
 </body>