<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry178.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry180.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CI.: BHARAT QUESTIONED.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Rama gazed, and scarcely knew<br>
 Bharat so worn and changed in hue.<br>
 He raised him, kissed him on the head,<br>
 Embraced him, and thus kindly said;<br>
 'Where was thy father, brother dear,<br>
 That thou art come to seek me here?<br>
 Unmeet, if he be living yet,<br>
 Thy feet within the wood to set.<br>
 I pray thee now the cause declare<br>
 Why thou hast left the kingdom there,<br>
 With matted locks and deerskin dress<br>
 To roam the distant wilderness.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus questioned by the prince, at length<br>
 Kaikeyi's son regained his strength,<br>
 And hand to hand in reverence laid,<br>
 To Rama thus his answer made:<br>
 'The great-armed monarch, O my lard,<br>
 Has dared to do a thing abhorred,<br>
 Left us, and grieving for his son,<br>
 A home among the Gods has won.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 My mother Queen Kaikeyf gave<br>
 The order to the king her slave,<br>
 And at the bidding of the dame<br>
 He wrought the sin which mars his fame.<br>
 Athirst for sway, her hopes are crossed,<br>
 She mourns her son, her husband lost,<br>
 And through her impious crime will go<br>
 For punishment to hell below.<br>
 Now O my lord, forgive me all;<br>
 Be gracious to thy lowly thrall:<br>
 Anointed king, accept to-day<br>
 Like Iudra's self, the royal sway.<br>
 Be gracious, Prince, to lord and peer,<br>
 And widowed queens who seek thee here<br>
 Accept the kingdom thine by right.<br>
 And so thy faithful friends delight.<br>
 Let the broad land no longer be<br>
 All widowed and forlorn of thee:<br>
 Let the full moon of autumn reign<br>
 Triumphant o'er the night again.<br>
 These lords and I before thee bend:<br>
 O Rama, to Our prayer attend.<br>
 O do not thou this grace deny:<br>
 Thy brother, pupil, slave am I.<br>
 Look on this venerable ring,<br>
 Advisers of our sire the king.<br>
 From age to age so honoured: thou<br>
 Shouldst grant their supplication now?<br>
     As weeping thus the hero prayed,<br>
 His head at Rama's feet he laid.<br>
 Like a mad elephant he sighed:<br>
 And Rama, gazed and thus replied:<br>
 'How, brother, Can a man of worth,<br>
 True to his vows, of noble birth-<br>
 A man like me, commit a sin<br>
 The lordship of the land to win?<br>
 No slightest shade of fault I see,<br>
 O tamer of thy foes, in thee.<br>
 But ne'er shouldst thou in childish thought<br>
 The queen thy mother blame in aught,<br>
 O brother wise and sinless, know<br>
 The sacred laws would have it so,<br>
 That from good wife and son require<br>
 Obedience to their lord and sire.<br>
 And we are all the king's, for thus<br>
 The virtuous ever reckon us:<br>
 Yea brother, be it known to thee,<br>
 His wives, and sons, and pupils we.<br>
 His is the right, if he deem fit,<br>
 To bid me, throned as monarch, sit,<br>
 Or in a coat of bark expel,<br>
 And deerskin, in the wood to dwell.<br>
 And O remember, best of all<br>
 Who act as claims of duty call,<br>
 As to a virtuous sire is due,<br>
 Such honour claims a mother too.<br>
 So they whose lives have ever been<br>
 By duty led, the king and queen,<br>
 Said,'Rama, seek the forest shade:'<br>
 And I (what could I else?) obeyed.<br>
 Thou must the royal power retain,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_211"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 211</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And o'er the famed Ayodhyá reign:<br>
 I dressed in bark my days will spent<br>
 Where Dandak'a forest wilds extend.<br>
 So Das'aratha spoke, our king,<br>
 His share to each apportioning<br>
 Before his honoured servants, eyes:<br>
 Then, heir of bliss, he sought the skies.<br>
 The righteous monarch's honoured will,<br>
 Whom all revered, must guide thee still,<br>
 And thou must still enjoy the share<br>
 Assigned thee by our father's care.<br>
 So I till twice seven years are spent<br>
 Will roam this wood in banishment,<br>
 Contented with the lot which he,<br>
 My high-souled sire, has given me.<br>
 The charge the monarch gave, endeared<br>
 To all mankind, by all revered,<br>
     Peer of the Lord Supreme,<br>
 Far better, richer far in gain<br>
 Of every blessing than to reign<br>
     O'er all the worlds I deem.'<br>
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry180.htm">Next: Canto CII.: Bharat's Tidings.</a></center>
 </body>