<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry172.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry174.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCV.: MANDÁKINÍ.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma, like the lotus eyed,<br>
 Descended from the mountain side,<br>
 And to the Maithil lady showed<br>
 The lovely stream that softly flowed.<br>
 And thus Ayodhyá's lord addressed<br>
 His bride, of dames the loveliest,<br>
 Child of Videha's king, her face<br>
 Bright with the fair moon's tender grace:<br>
 'How sweetly glides, O darling, look,<br>
 Mandákiní's delightful brook,<br>
 Adorned with islets, blossoms gay,<br>
 And s'arases and swans at play!<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_204"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 204</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The trees with which her banks are lined<br>
 Show flowers and fruit of every kind:<br>
 The match in radiant sheen is she<br>
 Of King Kuvera's Nalini.  <a name="fr_373"></a><a href="#fn_373"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 My heart exults with pleasure new<br>
 The shelving hand and ford to view,<br>
 Where gathering herds of thirsty deer<br>
 Disturb the wave that ran so clear.<br>
 Now look, those holy hermits mark<br>
 In skins of deer and coats of bark;<br>
 With twisted coils of matted hair,<br>
 The reverend men are bathing there,<br>
 And as they lift their arms on high<br>
 The Lord of Day they glorify:<br>
 These best of saints, my large-eyed spouse,<br>
 Are constant to their sacred vows.<br>
 The mountain dances while the trees<br>
 Bend their proud summits to the breeze,<br>
 And scatter many a flower and bud<br>
 From branches that o'erhang the flood.<br>
 There flows the stream like lucid pearl,<br>
 Round islets here the currents whirl,<br>
 And perfect saints from middle air<br>
 Are flocking to the waters there.<br>
 See, there lie flowers in many a heap<br>
 From boughs the whistling breezes sweep,<br>
 And others wafted by the gale<br>
 Down the swift current dance and sail.<br>
 Now see that pair of wild-fowl rise,<br>
 Exulting with their joyful cries:<br>
 Hark, darling, wafted from afar<br>
 How soft their pleasant voices are.<br>
 To gaze on Churakuta's hill,<br>
 To look upon this lovely rill,<br>
 To bend mine eyes on thee, dear wife,<br>
 Is sweeter than my city life.<br>
 Come, bathe we in the pleasant rill<br>
 Whose dancing waves are never still,<br>
 Stirred by those beings pure from sin,<br>
 The sanctities who bathe therein:<br>
 Come, dearest, to the stream descend,<br>
 Approach her as a darling friend,<br>
 And dip thee in the silver flood<br>
 Which lotuses and lilies stud.<br>
 Let this fair hill Ayodhya seem,<br>
 Its silvan things her people deem,<br>
 And let these waters as they flow<br>
 Our own beloved Sarju show.<br>
 How blest, mine own dear love, am I;<br>
 Thou, fond and true, art ever nigh,<br>
 And duteous, faithful Lakshman stays<br>
 Beside me, and my word obeys.<br>
 Here every day I bathe me thrice,<br>
 Fruit, honey, roots for food suffice,<br>
 And ne'er my thoughts with longing stray<br>
 To distant home or royal sway.<br>
 For who this charming brook can see<br>
 Where herds of roedeer wander free,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 And on the flowery-wooded brink<br>
 Apes, elephants, and lions drink,<br>
     Nor feel all sorrow fly?'<br>
 Thus eloquently spoke the pride<br>
 Of Raghu's children to his bride,<br>
 And wandered happy by her side<br>
 Where Chitrakuta azure-dyed<br>
     Uprears his peaks on high.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_371"></a><a href="ry172.htm#fr_371">203:1b</a>  A lake attached either to Amaravati
 the residence of Indra, or Alaká that of
 Kuvera.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_372"></a><a href="ry172.htm#fr_372">203:2b</a>  The Ganges of heaven.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_373"></a><a href="ry173.htm#fr_373">204:1</a>  Nalini, as here, may be the name of any lake covered with lotuses.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry174.htm">Next: Canto XCVI. : The Magic Shaft.</a></center>
 </body>