<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry174.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry176.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCVII.: LAKSHMAN'S ANGER.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Ráma showed his love the rill<br>
 Whose waters ran beneath the hill,<br>
 Then resting on his mountain seat<br>
 Refreshed her with the choicest meat.<br>
 So there reposed the happy two:<br>
 Then Bharat's army nearer drew:<br>
 Rose to the skies a dusty cloud,<br>
 The sound of trampling feet was loud.<br>
 The swelling roar of marching men<br>
 Drove the roused tiger from his den,<br>
 And scared amain the serpent race<br>
 Flying to hole and hiding-place.<br>
 The herds of deer in terror fled,<br>
 The air was filled with birds o'erhead,<br>
 The bear began to leave his tree,<br>
 The monkey to the cave to flee.<br>
 Wild elephants were all amazed<br>
 As though the wood around them blazed.<br>
 The lion oped his ponderous jaw,<br>
 The buffalo looked round in awe.<br>
 The prince, who heard the deafening sound.<br>
 And saw the silvan creatures round<br>
 Fly wildly startled from their rest,<br>
 The glorious Lakshman thus addressed:<br>
 'Sumitrá's noble son most dear,<br>
 Hark, Lakshman, what a roar I hear,<br>
 The tumult of a coming crowd.<br>
 Appalling, deafening, deep, and loud!<br>
 The din that yet more fearful grows<br>
 Scares elephants and buffaloes,<br>
 Or frightened by the lions, deer<br>
 Are flying through the wood in fear.<br>
 I fain would know who seeks this place:<br>
 Comes prince or monarch for the chase?<br>
 Or does some mighty beast of prey<br>
 Frighten the silvan herds away?<br>
 Tis hard to reach this mountain height,<br>
 Yea, e'en for birds in airy flight.<br>
 Then fain, O Lakshman, would I know<br>
 What cause disturbs the forest so.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Lakshman in haste, the wood to view.<br>
 Climbed a high Sál that near him grew,<br>
 The forest all around he eyed,<br>
 First gazing on the eastern side.<br>
 Then northward when his eyes he bent<br>
 He saw a mighty armament<br>
 Of elephants, and cars, and horse,<br>
 And men on foot, a mingled force,<br>
 And banners waving in the breeze,<br>
 And spoke to Ráma words like these:<br>
 'Quick, quick, my lord, put out the fire,<br>
 Let Sítá to the cave retire.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_207"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 207</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thy coat of mail around thee throw,<br>
 Prepare thine arrows and thy bow.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 In eager haste thus Lakshman cried,<br>
 And Ráma, lion lord, replied:<br>
 'Still closer be the army scanned,<br>
 And say who leads the warlike band.'<br>
 Lakshman his answer thus returned,<br>
 As furious rage within him burned,<br>
 Exciting him like kindled fire<br>
 To scorch the army in his ire:<br>
 'Tis Bharat: be has made the throne<br>
 By consecrating rites his own:<br>
 To gain the whole dominion thus<br>
 He comes in arms to slaughter us.<br>
 I mark tree-high upon his car<br>
 His flagstaff of the Kovídár,  <a name="fr_376"></a><a href="#fn_376"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 I see his glittering banner glance,<br>
 I see his chivalry advance:<br>
 I see his eager warriors shine<br>
 On elephants in lengthened line.<br>
 Now grasp we each the shafts and bow,<br>
 And higher up the mountain go.<br>
 Or in this place, O hero, stand<br>
 With weapons in each ready hand.<br>
 Perhaps beneath our might may fall<br>
 This leader of the standard tall,<br>
 And Bharat I this day may see<br>
 Who brought this mighty woe on thee,<br>
 Sítá, and me, who drove away<br>
 My brother from the royal sway.<br>
 Bharat our foe at length is nigh,<br>
 And by this hand shall surely die:<br>
 Brother, I see no sin at all<br>
 If Bharat by my weapon fall.<br>
 No fault is his who slays the foe<br>
 Whose hand was first to strike the blow:<br>
 With Bharat now the crime begins<br>
 Who against thee and duty sins.<br>
 The queen athirst for royal sway<br>
 Will see her darling son to-day<br>
 Fall by this hand, like some fair tree<br>
 Struck by an elephant, slain by me.<br>
 Kaikeyí's self shall perish too<br>
 With kith and kin and retinue,<br>
 And earth by my avenging deed<br>
 Shall from this mass of sin be freed.<br>
 This day my wrath, too long restrained,<br>
 Shall fall upon the foe, unchained,<br>
 Mad as the kindled flame that speeds<br>
 Destroying through the grass and reeds.<br>
 This day mine arrows keen and fierce<br>
 The bodies of the foe shall pierce;<br>
 The woods on Chitrakúta's side<br>
 Shall run with torrents crimson-dyed.<br>
 The wandering beasts of prey shall feed<br>
 On heart-cleft elephant and steed,<br>
 And drag to mountain caves away<br>
 The bodies that my arrows slay.<br>
 Doubt not that Bharat and his train<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Shall in this mighty wood be slain:<br>
 So shall I pay the debt my bow<br>
 And these my deadly arrows owe.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_376"></a><a href="ry175.htm#fr_376">207:1</a>  Bauhinea variegata, a species of ebony.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry176.htm">Next: Canto XCVIII: Lakshman Calmed.</a></center>
 </body>