<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry175.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry177.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCVIII: LAKSHMAN CALMED.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma nobly calm allayed<br>
 The wrath that Lakshman's bosom swayed:<br>
 'What need have we the sword to wield,<br>
 To bend the bow or lift the shield,<br>
 If Bharat brave, and wise, and good,<br>
 Himself has sought this sheltering wood?<br>
 I sware my father's will to do,<br>
 And if I now my brother slew<br>
 What gain in kingship should I find,<br>
 Despised and scorned by all mankind?<br>
 Believe me, e'en as I would shrink<br>
 From poisoned meat or deadly drink,<br>
 No power or treasure would I win<br>
 By fall of friend or kith or kin.<br>
 Brother, believe the words I speak:<br>
 For your dear sakes alone I seek<br>
 Duty and pleasure, wealth and gain:<br>
 A holy life, a happy reign.<br>
 If royal sway my heart desires,<br>
 My brothers' weal the wish inspires:<br>
 Their bliss and safety is my care,<br>
 By this uplifted bow I swear.<br>
 'Twere not so hard for me to gain<br>
 This broad land girdled by the main,<br>
 But even Indra's royal might<br>
 Should ne'er be mine in duty's spite,<br>
 If any bliss my soul can see<br>
 Deprived of dear S'atrughna, thee,<br>
 And Bharat, may the flame destroy<br>
 With ashy gloom the selfish joy.<br>
 Far dearer than this life of mine,<br>
 Knowing the custom of our line,<br>
 His heart with fond affection fraught,<br>
 Bharat Ayodhyá's town resought,<br>
 And hearing when he came that I,<br>
 With thee and Sítá, forced to fly<br>
 With matted hair and hermit dress<br>
 Am wandering in the wilderness.<br>
 While grief his troubled senses storms,<br>
 And tender love his bosom warms,<br>
 From every thought of evil clear,<br>
 Is come to meet his brother here.<br>
 Some grievous words perchance he spoke<br>
 Kaikeyí's anger to provoke,<br>
 Then won the king, and comes to lay<br>
 Before my feet the royal sway.<br>
 Hither, methinks, in season due<br>
 Comes Bharat for an interview,<br>
 Nor in his secret heart has he<br>
 One evil thought 'gainst thee or me.<br>
 What has he done ere now, reflect!<br>
 How failed in love or due respect<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_208"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 208</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To make thee doubt his faith and lay<br>
 This evil to his charge to-day?<br>
 Thou shouldst not join with Bharat's name<br>
 So harsh a speech and idle blame.<br>
 The blows thy tongue at Bharat deals,<br>
 My sympathizing bosom feels.<br>
 How, urged by stress of any ill,<br>
 Should sons their father's life-blood spill,<br>
 Or brother slay in impious strife<br>
 A brother dearer than his life?<br>
 If thou these cruel words hast said<br>
 By strong desire of empire led,<br>
 My brother Bharat will I pray<br>
 To give to thee the kingly sway.<br>
 'Give him the realm', my speech shall be,<br>
 And Bharat will, methinks, agree.'<br>
     Thus spoke the prince whose chief delight<br>
 Was duty, and to aid the right:<br>
 And Lakshman keenly felt the blame,<br>
 And shrank within himself for shame:<br>
 And then his answer thus returned,<br>
 With downcast eye and cheek that burned:<br>
 'Brother, I weep, to see thy face<br>
 Our sire himself has sought this place.'<br>
 Thus Lakshman spoke and stood ashamed,<br>
 And Rama saw and thus exclaimed:<br>
 'It is the strong-armed monarch: he<br>
 Is come, methinks, his sons to see,<br>
 To bid us both the forest quit<br>
 For joys for which he deems us fit:<br>
 He thinks on all our care and pain,<br>
 And now would lead us home again.<br>
 My glorious father hence will bear<br>
 Sita who claims all tender care.<br>
 I see two coursers fleet as storms,<br>
 Of noble breed and lovely forms.<br>
 I see the beast of mountain size<br>
 Who bears the king our father wise,<br>
 The aged Victor, march this way<br>
 In front of all the armed array.<br>
 But doubt and fear within me rise,<br>
 For when I look with eager eyes<br>
 I see no white umbrella spread,<br>
 World-famous, o'er the royal head.<br>
 Now, Lakshman, from the tree descend,<br>
 And to my words attention lend.<br>
     Thus spoke the pious prince: and he<br>
 Descended from the lofty tree,<br>
 And reverent hand to hand applied,<br>
 Stood humbly by his brother's side.<br>
     The host, compelled by Bharat's care,<br>
 The wood from trampling feet to spare,<br>
 Dense crowding half a league each way<br>
 Encamped around the mountain lay.<br>
 Below the tall hill's shelving side<br>
 Gleamed the bright army far and wide<br>
     Spread o'er the ample space,<br>
 By Bharat led who firmly true<br>
 In duty from his bosom threw<br>
 All pride, and near his brother drew<br>
 To win the hero's grace.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry177.htm">Next: Canto XCIX.: Bharat's Approach.</a></center>
 </body>