<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry170.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry172.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCIII.: CHITRAKÚTA IN SIGHT.</h3>
 <p>
 As through the woods its way pursued<br>
 That mignty bannered multitude,<br>
 Wild elephants in terror fled<br>
 With all the startled herds they led,<br>
 And bears and deer were seen on hill,<br>
 In forest glade, by every rill.<br>
 Wide as the sea from coast to coast,<br>
 The high-souled Bharat's mighty host<br>
 Covered the earth as cloudy trains<br>
 Obscure the sky when fall the rains.<br>
 The stately elephants he led,<br>
 And countless steeds the land o'erspread,<br>
 So closely crowded that between<br>
 Their serried ranks no ground was seen.<br>
 Then when the host had travelled far,<br>
 And steeds were worn who drew the car,<br>
 The glorious Bharat thus addressed<br>
 Vas'ishtha, of his lords the best:<br>
 'The spot, methinks, we now behold<br>
 Of which the holy hermit told,<br>
 For, as his words described, I trace<br>
 Each several feature of the place:<br>
 Before us Chitrakúta shows,<br>
 Mandákiní beside us flows:<br>
 Afar umbrageous woods arise<br>
 Like darksome clouds that veil the skies.<br>
 Now tread these mountain-beasts of mine<br>
 On Chitrakúta's fair incline.<br>
 The trees their rain of blossoms shed<br>
 On table-lands beneath them spread,<br>
 As from black clouds the floods descend<br>
 When the hot days of summer end.<br>
 S'atrughna, look, the mountain see<br>
 Where heavenly minstrels wander free,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_202"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 202</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And horses browse beneath the steep.<br>
 Countless as monsters in the deep.<br>
 Scared by my host the mountain deer<br>
 Starting with tempest speed appear<br>
 Like the long lines of cloud that fly<br>
 In autumn through the windy sky.<br>
 See, every warrior shows his head<br>
 With fragrant blooms engarlanded;<br>
 All look like southern soldiers who<br>
 Lift up their shields of azure hue.<br>
 This lonely wood beneath the hill.<br>
 That was so dark and drear and still,<br>
 Covered with men in endless streams<br>
 Now like Ayodhyá's city seems.<br>
 The dust which countless hoofs excite<br>
 Obscures the sky and veils the light;<br>
 But see, swift winds those clouds dispel<br>
 As if they strove to please me well.<br>
 See, guided in their swift career<br>
 By many a skilful charioteer,<br>
 Those cars by fleetest coursers drawn<br>
 Race onward over glade and lawn.<br>
 Look, startled as the host comes near<br>
 The lovely peacocks fly in fear,<br>
 Gorgeous as if the fairest blooms<br>
 Of earth had glorified their plumes.<br>
 Look where the sheltering covert shows<br>
 The trooping deer, both bucks and does,<br>
 That occupy in countless herds<br>
 This mountain populous with birds.<br>
 Most lovely to my mind appears<br>
 This place which every charm endears:<br>
 Fair as the road where tread the Blest;<br>
 Here holy hermits take their rest,<br>
 Then let the army onward press<br>
 And duly search each green recess<br>
 For the two lion-lords, till we<br>
 Ráma once more and Lakshman see.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus Bharat spoke: and hero bands<br>
 Of men with weapons in their hands<br>
 Entered the tangled forest: then<br>
 A spire of smoke appeared in ken.<br>
 Soon as they saw the rising smoke<br>
 To Bharat they returned and spoke:<br>
 'No fire where men are not: 'tis clear<br>
 That Raghu's sons are dwelling here.<br>
 Or if not here those heros dwell<br>
 Whose mighty arms their foeman quell,<br>
 Still other hermits here must be<br>
 Like Ráma, true and good as he.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 His ears attentive Bharat lent<br>
 To their resistless argument,<br>
 Then to his troops the chief who broke<br>
 His foe's embattled armies spoke:<br>
 'Here let the troops in silence stay;<br>
 One step beyond they must not stray.<br>
 Come Dhrishti and Sumantra, you<br>
 With me alone the path pursue.'<br>
 Their leader's speech the warriors heard,<br>
 And from his place no soldier stirred,<br>
 And Bharat beat his eager eyes<br>
 Where curling smoke was seen to rise.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The host his order well obeyed,<br>
 And halting there in silence stayed<br>
 Watching where from the thicket's shade<br>
     They saw the smoke appear.<br>
 And joy through all the army ran,<br>
 'Soon shall we meet,' thought every man,<br>
     'The prince we hold so dear.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry172.htm">Next: Canto XCIV.: Chitrakúta.</a></center>
 </body>