<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry171.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry173.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCIV.: CHITRAKÚTA.</h3>
 <p>
 There long the son of Raghu dwelt<br>
 And love for hill and wood he felt.<br>
 Then his Videhan spouse to please<br>
 And his own heart of woe to ease,<br>
 Like some Immortal--Indra so<br>
 Might Swarga's charms to S'achi show--<br>
 Drew her sweet eyes to each delight<br>
 Of Chitrakúta's lovely height:<br>
 'Though reft of power and kingly sway,<br>
 Though friends and home are far away,<br>
 I cannot mourn my altered lot,<br>
 Enamoured of this charming spot.<br>
 Look, darling, on this noble hill<br>
 Which sweet birds with their music fill.<br>
 Bright with a thousand metal dyes<br>
 His lofty summits cleave the skies.<br>
 See, there a silvery sheen is spread,<br>
 And there like blood the rooks are red.<br>
 There shows a streak of emerald green,<br>
 And pink and yellow glow between.<br>
 There where the higher peaks ascend,<br>
 Crystal and flowers and topaz blend.<br>
 And others flash their light afar<br>
 Like mercury or some fair star:<br>
 With such a store of metals dyed<br>
 The king of hills is glorified.<br>
 There through the wild birds' populous home<br>
 The harmless bear and tiger roam:<br>
 Hyaenas range the woody slopes<br>
 With herds of deer and antelopes.<br>
 See, love, the trees that clothe his side<br>
 All lovely in their summer pride,<br>
 In richest wealth of leaves arrayed,<br>
 With flower and fruit and light and shade,<br>
 Look where the young Rose-apple glows;<br>
 What loaded boughs the Mango shows;<br>
 See, waving in the western wind<br>
 The light leaves of the Tamarind,<br>
 And mark that giant Peepul through<br>
 The feathery clump of tall bamboo.  <a name="fr_369"></a><a href="#fn_369"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_203"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 203</font></a><br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 Look, on the level lands above,<br>
 Delighting in successful love<br>
 In sweet enjoyment many a pair<br>
 Of heavenly minstrels revels there,<br>
 While overhanging boughs support<br>
 Their swords and mantles as they sport:<br>
 Then see that pleasant shelter where<br>
 Play the bright Daughters of the Air. <a name="fr_370"></a><a href="#fn_370"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The mountain seems with bright cascade<br>
 And sweet rill bursting from the shade,<br>
 Like some majestic elephant o'er<br>
 Whose burning head the torrents pour.<br>
 Where breathes the man who would not feel<br>
 Delicious languor o'er him steal,<br>
 As the young morning breeze that springs<br>
 From the cool cave with balmy wings,<br>
 Breathes round him laden with the scent<br>
 Of bud and blossom dew-besprent?<br>
 If many autumns here I spent<br>
 With thee, my darling innocent;<br>
 And Lakshman, I should never know<br>
 The torture of the fires of woe,<br>
 This varied scene so charms my sight,<br>
 This mount so fills me with delight,<br>
 Where flowers in wild profusion spring,<br>
 And ripe fruits glow and sweet birds sing.<br>
 My beauteous one, a double good<br>
 Springs from my dwelling in the wood:<br>
 Loosed is the bond my sire that tied<br>
 And Bharat too is gratified.<br>
 My darling, dost thou feel with me<br>
 Delight from every charm we see,<br>
 Of which the mind and every sense<br>
 Feel the enchanting influence?<br>
 My fathers who have passed away,<br>
 The royal saints, were wont to say<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 That life in woodland shades like this<br>
 Secures a king immortal bliss.<br>
 See, round the hill at random thrown.<br>
 Huge masses lie of rugged stone<br>
 Of every shape and many a hue,<br>
 Yellow and white and red and blue.<br>
 But all is fairer still by night:<br>
 Each rock reflects a softer light,<br>
 When the whole mount from foot to crest<br>
 In robes of lambent flame is dressed;<br>
 When from a million herbs a blaze<br>
 Of their own luminous glory plays,<br>
 And clothed in fire each deep ravine,<br>
 Each pinnacle and crag is seen.<br>
 Some parts the look of mansions wear,<br>
 And others are as gardens fair,<br>
 While others seem a massive block<br>
 Of solid undivided rock.<br>
 Behold those pleasant beds o'erlaid<br>
 With lotus leaves, for lovers made,<br>
 Where mountain birch and *costus throw<br>
 Cool shadows on the pair below.<br>
 See where the lovers in their play<br>
 Have cast their flowery wreaths away,<br>
 And fruit and lotus buds that crowned<br>
 Their brows lie trodden on the ground.<br>
 North Kuru's realm is fair to see,<br>
 Vasvaukasárá, <a name="fr_371"></a><a href="ry173.htm#fn_371"><font size="1">1b</font></a> Naliní, <a name="fr_372"></a><a href="ry173.htm#fn_372"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 But rich in fruit and blossom still<br>
 More fair is Chitrakúta's hill.<br>
 Here shall the years appointed glide<br>
 With thee, my beauty, by my side,<br>
     And Lakshman ever near;<br>
 Here shall I live in all delight,<br>
 Make my ancestral fame more bright,<br>
 Tread in their path who walk aright,<br>
     And to my oath adhere.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_369"></a><a href="ry172.htm#fr_369">202:1</a>  These ten lines are a substitution for,
 and not a translation of the text which
 Carey and Marshman thus render: 'This
 mountain adorned with mango,(1) jumboo,(2)
 usuna,(3) lodhra, (4) piala, (5) punusa, (6) dhava, (7) <a name="page_203"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 203</font></a> unkotha, (8) bhuvya,(9) tinisha, (10) vilwa, (11)
 tindooka, (12) bamboo,(13) kashmaree,(14) urista,(l5)
 vuruna,(16) madhooka,(17) tilaka, (18)
 vuduree,(l9) amluka,(20) nipa,(21) vetra,(22)
 dhunwuna,(23) veejaka,(24) and other trees
 affording flowers, and fruits, and the most
 delightful shade, how charming does it
 appear!'
 
 </p><p>
     1 Mangifera Indica. 2 Eugenia Jambolifera,
 3 Terminalialata tomentosa. 4 This
 tree is not ascertained. 5 Chironjia Sapida.
 6 Artocarpus integrifolia. 7 Grislea
 tomentosa. 8 Allangium hexapetalum. 9 Averrhoa
 carimbola. 10 Dalbergia Oujeinensis.
 11 Ægle marmelos. 12 Diospyrus melanoxylon.
 13 Well known. 14 Gmelina Arborea.
 15 Sapindus Saponaria. 16 Cratoeva tapia.
 l7 Bassia la tifolia. 18 Not yet ascertained.
 19 Zizyphus jujuba. 20 Phyllanthus emblica.
 21 Nauclea Orientalis. 22 Calamusrotang.
 23 Echites antidysenterica. 34 The
 citron tree.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_370"></a><a href="ry172.htm#fr_370">203:1</a>  <i>Vidyadharis</i>, Spirits of Air, sylphs.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry173.htm">Next: Canto XCV.: Mandákiní.</a></center>
 </body>