<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry176.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry178.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCIX.: BHARAT'S APPROACH.</h3>
 <p>
 Soon as the warriors took their rest<br>
 Obeying Bharat's high behest,<br>
 Thus Bharat to Satrughna spake:<br>
 'A band of soldiers with thee take,<br>
 And with these hunters o'er and o'er<br>
 The thickets of the wood explore.<br>
 With bow, sword, arrows in their hands<br>
 Let Guba with his kindred bands<br>
 Within this grove remaining trace<br>
 The children of Kakutstha's race.<br>
 And I meanwhile on foot will through<br>
 This neighbouring wood my way pursue,<br>
 With elders and the twice-born men,<br>
 And every lord and citizen.<br>
 There is, I feel, no rest for me<br>
 Till Rama's face again I see,<br>
 Lakshman, in arms and glory great,<br>
 And Sita born to happy fate:<br>
 No rest, until his cheek as bright<br>
 As the fair moon rejoice my sight,<br>
 No rest until I see the eye<br>
 With which the lotus petals vie;<br>
 Till on my head those dear feet rest<br>
 With signs of royal rank impressed;<br>
 None, till my kingly brother gain<br>
 His old hereditary reign,<br>
 Till o'er his limbs and noble head<br>
 The consecrating drops be shed.<br>
 How blest is Janak's daughter, true<br>
 To every wifely duty, who<br>
 Cleaves faithful to her husband's side<br>
 Whose realm is girt by Ocean's tide!<br>
 This mountain too above the rest<br>
 E'en as the King of Hills is blest,--<br>
 Whose shades Kakutstha's scion hold<br>
 As Nandan charms the Lord of Gold.<br>
 Yea, happy is this tangled grove<br>
 Where savage beasts unnumbered rove,<br>
 Where, glory of the Warrior race,<br>
 King Rama finds a dwelling-place.'<br>
     Thus Bharat, strong-armed hero spake,<br>
 And walked within the pathless brake.<br>
 O'er plains where gay trees bloomed he went,<br>
 Through boughs in tangled net-work bent,<br>
 And then from Rama's cot appeared<br>
 The banner which the flame upreared.<br>
 And Bharat joyed with every friend<br>
 To mark those smokv wreaths ascend:<br>
 'Here Rama dwells,' he thought; 'at last<br>
 The ocean of our toil is passed.'<br>
     Then sure that Rama's hermit cot<br>
         Was on the mountain's side<br>
     He stayed his army on the spot,<br>
         And on with Guha hied.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_209"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 209</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry178.htm">Next: Canto C.: The Meeting.</a></center>
 </body>