<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry179.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry181.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CII.: BHARAT'S TIDINGS.</h3>
 <p>
 He spoke: and Bharat thus replied;<br>
 'If, false to every claim beside,<br>
 I ne'er in kingly duties fail,<br>
 What will my royal life avail?<br>
 Still should the custom be observed,<br>
 From which our line has never swerved,<br>
 Which to the younger son ne'er gives<br>
 The kingdom while the elder lives.<br>
 Now to Ayodhya rich and fair<br>
 With me, O Raghu's son, repair,<br>
 And to protect and gladden all<br>
 Our house, thyself as king install,<br>
 A king the world's opinion deems<br>
 A man: to me a God he seems,<br>
 Whose life in virtuous thoughts and deeds<br>
 The lives of other men exceeds.<br>
 When I in distant Kekaya stayed,<br>
 And thou hadst sought the forest shade,<br>
 Our father died, the saints' delight,<br>
 So constant in each holy rite.<br>
 Scarce with thy wife and Lakshman thou<br>
 Hadst journeyed forth to keep the vow,<br>
 When mourning for his son, forspent,<br>
 To heavenly rest the monarch went,<br>
 Then up, O lord of men, away!<br>
 His funeral rites of water pay:<br>
 I and S'atrughna, ere we came,<br>
 Neglected not the sacred claim.<br>
 But in the spirit-world, they say,<br>
 That gift alone is fresh for aye<br>
 Which best beloved hands have poured;<br>
 And thou his dearest art, my lord.<br>
 For thee he longed, for thee he grieved,<br>
     His every thought on thee was bent,<br>
 And crushed by woe, of thee bereaved,<br>
     He thought of thee as hence he went.'<br>
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry181.htm">Next: Canto CIII.: The Funeral Libation.</a></center>
 </body>