<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry183.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry185.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CVI.: BHARAT'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Good Bharat, by the river side,<br>
 To virtuous Ráma's speech replied,<br>
 And thus with varied lore addressed<br>
 The prince, while nobles round him pressed:<br>
 'In all this world whom e'er can we<br>
 Find equal, scourge of foes, to thee?<br>
 No ill upon thy bosom weighs.<br>
 No thoughts of joy thy spirit raise.<br>
 Approved art thou of sages old,<br>
 To whom thy doubts are ever told.<br>
 Alike in death and life, to thee<br>
 The same to be and not to be.<br>
 The man who such a soul can gain<br>
 Can ne'er be crushed by woe or pain.<br>
 Pure as the Gods, high-minded, wise,<br>
 Concealed from thee no secret lies.<br>
 Such glorious gifts are all thine own,<br>
 And birth and death to thee are known,<br>
 That ill can ne'er thy soul depress<br>
 With all-subduing bitterness.<br>
 O let my prayer, dear brother, win<br>
 Thy pardon for my mother's sin.<br>
 Wrought for my sake who willed it not<br>
 When absent in a distant spot.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Duty alone with binding chains<br>
 The vengeancs due to crime restrains,<br>
 Or on the sinner I should lift<br>
 My hand in retribution swift.<br>
 Can I who know the right, and spring<br>
 From Das'aratha, purest king--<br>
 Can I commit a heinous crime,<br>
 Abhorred by all through endless time?<br>
 The aged king I dare not blame,<br>
 Who died so rich in holy fame,<br>
 My honoured sire, my parted lord,<br>
 E'en as a present God adored.<br>
 Yet who in lore of duty skilled<br>
 So foul a crime has ever willed,<br>
 And dared defy both gain and right<br>
 To gratify a woman's spite?<br>
 When death draws near, so people say,<br>
 The sense af creatures dies away;<br>
 And he has proved the ancient saw<br>
 By acting thus in spite of law.<br>
 But O my honoured lord, be kind.<br>
 Dismiss the trespass from thy mind,<br>
 The sin the king committed, led<br>
 By haste, his consort's wrath, and dread.<br>
 For he who veils his sire's offence<br>
 With tender care and reverence--<br>
 His sons approved by all shall live:<br>
 Not so their fate who ne'er forgive.<br>
 Be thou, my lord, the noble son,<br>
 And the vile deed my sire has done,<br>
 Abhorred by all the virtuous, ne'er<br>
 Resent, lest thou the guilt too share.<br>
 Preserve us, for on thee we call.<br>
 Our sire, Kaikeyi, me and all<br>
 Thy citizens, thy kith and kin;<br>
 Preserve us and reverse the sin.<br>
 To live in woods a devotee<br>
 Can scarce with royal tasks agree,<br>
 Nor can the hermit's matted hair<br>
 Suit fitly with a ruler's care.<br>
 Do not, my brother, do not still<br>
 Pursue this life that suits thee ill.<br>
 Mid duties, of a king we count<br>
 His consecration paramount,<br>
 That he with ready heart and hand<br>
 May keep his people and his land.<br>
 What Warrior born to royal sway<br>
 From certain good would turn away,<br>
 A doubtful duty to pursue,<br>
 That mocks him with the distant view?<br>
 Thou wouldst to duty cleave, and gain<br>
 The meed that follows toil and pain.<br>
 In thy great task no labour spare:<br>
 Rule the four castes with justest care.<br>
 Mid all the four, the wise prefer<br>
 The order of the householder: <a name="fr_383"></a><a href="#fn_383"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_216"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 216</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Canst thou, whose thoughts to duty cleave,<br>
 The best of all the orders leave?<br>
 My better thou in lore divine,<br>
 My birth, my sense must yield to thine:<br>
 While thou, my lord, art here to reign,<br>
 How shall my hands the rule maintain?<br>
 O faithful lover of the right,<br>
 Take with thy friends the royal might,<br>
 Let thy sires' realm, from trouble free,<br>
 Obey her rightful king in thee.<br>
 Here let the priests and lords of state<br>
 Our monatch duly consecrate,<br>
 With prayer and holy verses blessed<br>
 By saint Vas'ishtha and the rest.<br>
 Anointed king by us, again<br>
 Seek fair Ayodhvá there to reign,<br>
 And like imperial Indra girt<br>
 By Gods of Storm, thy might assert.<br>
 From the three debts <a name="fr_384"></a><a href="#fn_384"><font size="1">1</font></a> acquittance earn,<br>
 And with thy wrath the wicked burn,<br>
 O'er all of us thy rule extend,<br>
 And cheer with boons each faithful friend.<br>
 Let thine enthronement, lord, this day<br>
 Make all thy lovers glad and gay,<br>
 And let all those who hate thee flee<br>
 To the ten winds for fear of thee.<br>
 Dear lord, my mother's words of hate<br>
 With thy sweet virtues expiate,<br>
 And from the stain of folly clear<br>
 The father whom we both revere.<br>
 Brother, to me compassion show,<br>
 I pray thee with my head bent low,<br>
 And to these friends who on thee call,--<br>
 As the Great Father pities all.<br>
 But if my tears and prayers be vain,<br>
 And thou in woods wilt still remain,<br>
 I will with thee my path pursue<br>
 And make my home in forests too.'<br>
     Thus Bharat strove to bend his will<br>
     With suppliant head, but he,<br>
 Earth's lord, inexorable still<br>
     Would keep his sire's decree.<br>
 The firmness of the noble chief<br>
     The wondering people moved,<br>
 And rapture mingling with their grief,<br>
     All wept and all approved.<br>
 'How firm his steadfast will,' they cried,<br>
   'Who Keeps his promise thus!<br>
 Ah, to Ayodhyá's town,' they sighed,<br>
   'He comes not back with us'<br>
 The holy priest, the swains who tilled<br>
   The earth, the sons of trade,<br>
 And e'en the mournful queens were filled<br>
   With joy as Bharat prayed,<br>
 And bent their heads, then weeping stilled<br>
   A while, his prayer to aid.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_383"></a><a href="ry184.htm#fr_383">215:1</a>  The four religious orders, referable
 to different times of life are, that of the
 student, that of the householder, that of
 the anchourite, and that of the mendicant.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_384"></a><a href="ry184.htm#fr_384">216:1</a>  To Gods, Men, and Manes.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry185.htm">Next: Canto CVII.: Ráma's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>