<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry181.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry183.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CIV.: THE MEETING WITH THE QUEENS.</h3>
 <p>
 Vas'ishtha with his soul athirst<br>
 To look again on Rama, first<br>
 In line the royal widows placed,<br>
 And then the way behind them traced.<br>
 The ladies moving, faint and slow,<br>
 Saw the fair stream before them flow,<br>
 And by the bank their steps were led<br>
 Which the two brothers visited.<br>
 Kausalya with her faded cheek<br>
 Arid weeping eyes began to speak,<br>
 And thus in mournful tones addressed<br>
 The queen Sumitra and the rest:<br>
 'See in the wood the bank's descent,<br>
 Which the two orphan youths frequent,<br>
 Whose noble spirits never fall,<br>
 Though woes surround them, reft of all.<br>
 Thy son with love that never tires<br>
 Draws water hence which mine requires,<br>
 This day, for lowly toil unfit.<br>
 His pious task thy son should quit.'<br>
     As on the long-eyed lady strayed,<br>
 On holy grass, whose points were laid<br>
 Directed to the southern sky,<br>
 When Rama's humble gift she spied<br>
 Thus to the queens Kausalya cried:<br>
 'The gift of Rama's hand behold,<br>
 His tribute to the king high-souled,<br>
 Offered to him, as texts require,<br>
 Lord of Ikshhvaku's line, his sire!<br>
 Not such I deem the funeral food<br>
 Of kings with godlike might endued.<br>
 Can he who knew all pleasuies, he<br>
 Who ruled the earth from sea to sea,<br>
 The mighty lord of monarchs, feed<br>
 On Ingudi's extracted seed?<br>
 In all the world there cannot be<br>
 A woe, I ween, more sad to see,<br>
 Than that my glorious son should make<br>
 His funeral gilt of such a cake.<br>
 The ancient text I oft have heard<br>
 This day is true in every word:<br>
 'Ne'er do the blessed Gods refuse<br>
 To eat the food their children use.'<br>
     The ladies soothed the weeping dame:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To Rama's hermitage they came,<br>
 And there the hero met their eyes<br>
 Like a God fallen from the skies.<br>
 Him joyless, reft of all, they viewed,<br>
 And tears their mournful eyes bedewed.<br>
 The truthful hero left his seat,<br>
 And clasped the ladies' lotus feet,<br>
 And they with soft hands brushed away<br>
 The dust that on his shoulders lay.<br>
 Then Lakshman, when he saw each queen<br>
 With weeping eyes and troubled mien,<br>
 Near to the royal ladies drew<br>
 And paid them gentle reverence too.<br>
 He, Das'aratha's offspring, signed<br>
 The heir of bliss by Fortune kind,<br>
 Received from every dame no less<br>
 Each mark of love and tenderness.<br>
 And Sita came and bent before<br>
 The widows, while her eyes ran o'er,<br>
 And pressed their feet with many a tear.<br>
 They when they saw the lady dear<br>
 Pale, worn with dwelling in the wild.<br>
 Embraced her as a darling child:<br>
 Daughter of royal Janak, bride<br>
 Of Das'aratha's son, they cried,<br>
 'How couldst thou, offering of a king,<br>
 Endure this woe and suffering<br>
 In the wild forest? When I trace<br>
 Each sign of trouble on thy face-<br>
 That lotus which the sun has dried,<br>
 That lily by the tempest tried,<br>
 That gold whereon the dust is spread,<br>
 That moon whence all the light is fled--<br>
 Sorrow assails my heart, alas!<br>
 As fire consumes the wood and grass.'<br>
     Then Rama, as she spoke distressed,<br>
 The feet of Saint Vas'ishtha pressed,<br>
     Touched them with reverential love,<br>
         Then near him took his seat:<br>
     Thus Indra clasps in realms above<br>
         The Heavenly Teacher's  <a name="fr_380"></a><a href="#fn_380"><font size="1">1</font></a> feet.<br>
     Then with each counsellor and peer,<br>
         Bharat of duteous mind,<br>
     With citizens and captains near,<br>
         Sat humbly down behind.<br>
     When with his hands to him upraised,<br>
         In devotee's attire.<br>
     Bharat upon his brother gazed<br>
         Whose glory shone like fire,<br>
     As when the pure Maheridra bends<br>
         To the great Lord of Life,<br>
     Among his noble crowd of friends<br>
         This anxious thought was rife:<br>
     'What words to Raghu's son to-day<br>
         Will royal Bharat speak,<br>
     Whose heart has been so prompt to pay<br>
         Obeisance fond and meek?'<br>
     Then steadfast Rama, Lakshman wise,<br>
         Bharat for truth renowned,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_214"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 214</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Shone like three fires that heavenward rise<br>
     With holy priests around.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_380"></a><a href="ry182.htm#fr_380">213:1</a>  Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the Gods.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry183.htm">Next: Canto CV.: Rama's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>