<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry185.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry187.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CVIII.: JÁVÁLI'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Ráma soothed his brother's grief:<br>
 Then virtuous Jáváli, chief<br>
 Of twice-born sages, thus replied<br>
 In words that virtue's law defied:<br>
 'Hail, Raghu's princely son, dismiss<br>
 A thought so weak and vain as this.<br>
 Canst thou, with lofty heart endowed,<br>
 Think with the dull ignoble crowd?<br>
 For what are ties of kindred? can<br>
 One profit by a brother man?<br>
 Alone the babe first opes his eyes,<br>
 And all alone at last he dies.<br>
 The man, I ween, has little sense<br>
 Who looks with foolish reverence<br>
 On father's or on mother's name:<br>
 In others, none a right may claim.<br>
 E'en as a man may leave his home<br>
 And to a distant village roam,<br>
 Then from his lodging turn away<br>
 And journey on the following day,<br>
 Such brief possession mortals hold<br>
 In sire and mother, house and gold,<br>
 And never will the good and wise<br>
 The brief uncertain lodging prize.<br>
 Nor, best of men, shouldst thou disown<br>
 Thy sire's hereditary throne,<br>
 And tread the rough and stony ground<br>
 Where hardship, danger, woes abound.<br>
 Come, let Ayodhyá rich and bright<br>
 See thee enthroned with every rite:<br>
 Her tresses bound in single braid  <a name="fr_387"></a><a href="ry187.htm#fn_387"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 She waits thy coming long delayed.<br>
 O come, thou royal Prince, and share<br>
 The kingly joys that wait thee there,<br>
 And live in bliss transcending price<br>
 As Indra lives in Paradise.<br>
 The parted king is naught to thee,<br>
 Nor right in living man has he:<br>
 The king is one; thou, Prince of men,<br>
 Another art: be counselled then.<br>
 Thy royal sire, O chief, has sped<br>
 On the long path we all must tread.<br>
 The common lot of all is this,<br>
 And thou in vain art robbed of bliss.<br>
 For those--and only those--I weep<br>
 Who to the path of duty keep;<br>
 For here they suffer ceaseless woe,<br>
 And dying to destruction go.<br>
 With pious care, each solemn day,<br>
 Will men their funeral offerings pay:<br>
 See, how the useful food they waste:<br>
 He who is dead no more can taste.<br>
 If one is fed, his strength renewed<br>
 Whene'er his biother takes his food,<br>
 Then offerings to the parted pay;<br>
 Scarce will they serve him on his way.<br>
 By crafty knaves these rites were framed,<br>
 And to enforce men's gifts proclaimed;<br>
 'Give, worship, lead a life austere,<br>
 Keep lustral rites, quit pleasures here.'<br>
 There is no future life: be wise,<br>
 And do, O Prince, as I advise.<br>
 Enjoy, my lord, thy present bliss,<br>
 And things unseen from thought dismiss.<br>
 Let this advice thy bosom move,<br>
 The counsel sage which all approve;<br>
 To Bharat's earnest prayer incline,<br>
 And take the rule so justly thine.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry187.htm">Next: Canto CIX.: The Praises of Truth.</a></center>
 </body>