<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry187.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry189.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CX.: THE SONS OF IKSHVA'KU. <a name="fr_389"></a><a href="#fn_389"><font size="1">2</font></a></h3>
 <p>
 Then spake Vasishtha who perceived<br>
 That Ráma's soul was wroth and grieved:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 ' Well knows the sage J'av'ali all<br>
 The changes that the world befall;<br>
 And but to lead thee to revoke<br>
 Thy purpose were the words he spoke.<br>
 Lord of the world, now hear from me<br>
 How first this world began to be.<br>
 First water was, and naught beside;<br>
 There earth was formed that stretches wide.<br>
 Then with the Gods from out the same<br>
 The Self-existent Brahm'a came.<br>
 Then Brahm'a  <a name="fr_390"></a><a href="#fn_390"><font size="1">1b</font></a> in a boar's disguise<br>
 Bade from the deep this earth arise;<br>
 Then, with his sons of tranquil soul,<br>
 He made the world and framed the whole,<br>
 From subtlest ether Brahm'a rose:<br>
 No end, no loss, no change he knows.<br>
 A son had he, Mar'ichi styled,<br>
 And Ka'syap was Mar'ichi's child.<br>
 From him Vivasvat sprang: from him<br>
 Manu, whose fame shall ne'er be dim.<br>
 Manu, who life to mortals gave,<br>
 Begot Ikshv'aku good and brave:<br>
 First of Ayodhya's kings was he,<br>
 Pride of her famous dynasty.<br>
 From him the glorious Kukshi sprang,<br>
 Whose fame through all the regions rang,<br>
 Rival of Kukshi's ancient fame.<br>
 His heir the great Vikukshi came.<br>
 His son was V'ana, lord of might,<br>
 His Anaranya, strong in fight.<br>
 No famine marred his blissful reign,<br>
 No drought destroyed the kindly grain;<br>
 Amid the sons of virtue chief,<br>
 His happy realm ne'er held a thief,<br>
 His son was Prithn, glorious name,<br>
 From him the wise Tri'sanku came:<br>
 Embodied to the skies he went<br>
 For love of truth preeminent.<br>
 He left a son renowned afar,<br>
 Known by the name of Dhundhum'ar,<br>
 His son succeeding bore the name<br>
 Of Yuvan'as'va dear to fame.<br>
 He passed away. Him followed then<br>
 His son M'andh'at'a, king of men.<br>
 His son was blest in high emprise,<br>
 Susandhi, fortunate and wise.<br>
 Two noble sons had he, to wit<br>
 Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit,<br>
 Bharat was Dhruvasandhi's son:<br>
 His glorious arm the conquest won,<br>
 Against his son King Asit, rose<br>
 In fierce array his royal foes,<br>
 Haihayas, T'alajanghas styled,<br>
 And S'as'ivindhus fierce and wild.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_220"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 220</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Long time he strove, but forced to yield<br>
 Fled from his kingdom and the field.<br>
 The wives he left had both conceived--<br>
 So is the ancient tale believed:--<br>
 One, of her rival's hopes afraid,<br>
 Fell poison in the viands laid.<br>
 It chanced that Chyavan, Bhrigu's child,<br>
 Had wandered to the pathless wild<br>
 Where proud Hima'laya's lovely height<br>
 Detained him with a strange delight.<br>
 Then came the other widowed queen<br>
 With lotus eyes and beauteous mien,<br>
 Longing a noble son to bear,<br>
 And wooed the saint with earnest prayer.<br>
 When thus Kal'indi', fairest dame<br>
 With reverent supplication came,<br>
 To her the holy sage replied:<br>
 'O royal lady, from thy side<br>
 A glorious son shall spring ere long,<br>
 Righteous and true and brave and strong;<br>
 He, scourge of foes and lofty-souled,<br>
 His ancient race shall still uphold.'<br>
     Then round the sage the lady went,<br>
 And bade farewell, most reverent.<br>
 Back to her home she turned once more,<br>
 And there her promised son she bore.<br>
 Because her rival mixed the bane<br>
 To render her conception vain,<br>
 And her unripened fruit destroy,<br>
 Sagar she called her rescued boy. <a name="fr_391"></a><a href="#fn_391"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 He, when he paid that solemn rite, <a name="fr_392"></a><a href="#fn_392"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Filled living creatures with affright:<br>
 Obedient to his high decree<br>
 His countless sons dug out the sea.<br>
 Prince Asamanj was Sagar's child:<br>
 But him with cruel sin defiled<br>
 And loaded with the people's hate<br>
 His father banished from the state.<br>
 To Asamanj his consort bare<br>
 Bright Ans'uma'n his valiant heir.<br>
 Ans'uma'n's son, Dili'pa famed,<br>
 Begot a son Bhagi'rath named.<br>
 From him renowned Kakutstha came:<br>
 Thou bearest still the lineal name,<br>
 Kakutstha's son was Raghu: thou<br>
 Art styled the son of Raghu now,<br>
 From him came Purusha'dak bold,<br>
 Fierce hero of gigantic mould:<br>
 Kalma'shapa'da s name he bore,<br>
 Because his feet were spotted o'er.<br>
 Sankhan his son, to manhood grown,<br>
 Died sadly with his host o'erthrown,<br>
 But ere he perished sprang from him<br>
 Sudars'an fair in face and limb.<br>
 From beautiful Sudarsa'n came<br>
 Prince Agnivarna, bright as flame.<br>
 His son was S'ighragn, for speed<br>
 Unmatched; and Maru was his seed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Prasusruka was Maru's child:<br>
 His son was Ambari'sha styled.<br>
 Nahush was Ambari'sha's heir<br>
 With hand to strike and heart to dare.<br>
 His son was good Na'bha'g, from youth<br>
 Renowned for piety and truth.<br>
 From great Na'bha'g sprang children two<br>
 Aja and Suvrat pure and true.<br>
 From Aja Das'aratha came,<br>
 Whose virtuous life was free from blame<br>
 His eldest son art thou: his throne,<br>
 O famous Kama, is thine own.<br>
 Accept the sway so justly thine.<br>
 And view the world with eyes benign.<br>
 For ever in Iksava'ku's race<br>
 The eldest takes his father's place,<br>
 And while he lives no son beside<br>
 As lord and king is sanctified.<br>
     The rule by Raghu's children kept<br>
         Thou must not spurn to-day.<br>
     This realm of peerless wealth accept,<br>
         And like thy father sway.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_388"></a><a href="ry187.htm#fr_388">219:1</a>  The verses in a different metre with
 which some cantos end are all to be regarded
 with suspicion. Schlegel regrets that
 he did not exclude them all from his
 edition. These lines are manifestly spurious.
 See Additional Notes.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_389"></a><a href="ry188.htm#fr_389">219:2</a>  This genealogy is a repetition with
 slight variation of that given in Book I.
 Canto LXX.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_390"></a><a href="ry188.htm#fr_390">219:1b</a>  In Gorresio's recension identified with
 Vishnu. See Muir's <i>Sanskrit Texts, Vol.IV
 pp 29, 30.</i></p>
 <p><a name="fn_391"></a><a href="ry188.htm#fr_391">220:1</a>  From sa with, and aara poison.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_392"></a><a href="ry188.htm#fr_392">220:2</a>  See Book I. Canto XL.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry189.htm">Next: Canto CXI.: Counsel To Bharat.</a></center>
 </body>