<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry190.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry192.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXIII.: BHARAT'S BETURN.</h3>
 <p>
 Bearing the sandals on his head<br>
 Away triumphant Bharat sped,<br>
 And clomb, S'atrughna by his side,<br>
 The car wherein he wont to ride.<br>
 Before the mighty army went<br>
 The lords for counsel eminent,<br>
 Vas'ishtha, Vámadeva next,<br>
 Jáváli, pure with prayer and text.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_223"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 223</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then from that lovely river they<br>
 Turned eastward on their homeward way:<br>
 With reverent steps from left to right<br>
 They circled Chitrakúta's height,<br>
 And viewed his peaks on every side<br>
 With stains of thousand metals dyed.<br>
 Then Bharat saw, not far away,<br>
 Where Bharadwája's dwelling lay,<br>
 And when the chieftain bold and sage<br>
 Had reached that holy hermitage,<br>
 Down from the car he sprang to greet<br>
 The saint, and bowed before his feet.<br>
 High rapture filled the hermit's breast,<br>
 Who thus the royal prince addressed:<br>
 'Say, Bharat, is thy duty done?<br>
 Hast thou with Ráma met, my son?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The chief whose soul to virtue clave<br>
 This answer to the hermit gave:<br>
 'I prayed him with our holy guide:<br>
 But Raghu's son our prayer denied,<br>
 And long besought by both of us<br>
 He answered Saint Vas'ishtha thus:<br>
 'True to my vow, I still will be<br>
 Observant of my sire's decree:<br>
 Till fourteen years complete their course<br>
 That promise shall remain in force.'<br>
 The saint in highest wisdom caught,<br>
 These solemn words with wisdom fraught,<br>
 To him in lore of language learned<br>
 Most eloquent himself returned:<br>
 'Obey my rede: let Bharat hold<br>
 This pair of sandals decked with gold:<br>
 They in Ayodhyá shall ensure<br>
 Our welfare, and our bliss secure.'<br>
 When Ráma heard the royal priest<br>
 He rose, and looking to the east<br>
 Consigned the sandals to my hand<br>
 That they for him might guard the land.<br>
 Then from the high-souled chief's abode<br>
 I turned upon my homeward road,<br>
 Dismissed by him, and now this pair<br>
 Of sandals to Ayodhyá bear.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To him the hermit thus replied,<br>
 Bv Bharat's tidings gratified:<br>
 'No marvel thoughts so just and true,<br>
 Thou best of all who right pursue,<br>
 Should dwell in thee, O Prince of men,<br>
 As waters gather in the glen.<br>
 He is not dead,we mourn in vain:<br>
 Thy blessed father lives again,<br>
 Whose noble son we thus behold<br>
 Like Virtue's self in human mould.'<br>
 He ceased: before him Bharat fell<br>
 To clasp his feet, and said farewell:<br>
 His reverent steps around him bent,<br>
 And onward to Ayodhyá went.<br>
 His host of followers stretching far<br>
 With many an elephant and car,<br>
 Waggon and steed, and mighty train,<br>
 Traversed their homeward way again.<br>
 O'er holy Yamuná they sped,<br>
 Fair stream, with waves engarlanded,<br>
 And then once more the rivers' queen,<br>
 The blessed Gangá's self was seen.<br>
 Then making o'er that flood his way,<br>
 Where crocodiles and monsters lay,<br>
 The king to S'ringavera drew<br>
 His host and royal retinue.<br>
 His onward way he thence pursued,<br>
 And soon renowned Ayodhyá viewed.<br>
 Then burnt by woe and sad of cheer<br>
 Bharat addressed the charioteer:<br>
 'Ah, see, Ayodhyá dark and sad,<br>
 Her glory gone, once bright and glad:<br>
 Of joy and beauty reft, forlorn,<br>
 In silent grief she seems to mourn.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry192.htm">Next: Canto CXIV.: Bharat's Departure.</a></center>
 </body>