<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry198.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry200.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO I.: THE HERMITAGE.</h3>
 <p>
 When Ráma, valiant hero, stood<br>
 In the vast shade of Dandak wood,<br>
 His eyes on every side he bent<br>
 And saw a hermit settlement,<br>
 Where coats of bark were hung around,<br>
 And holy grass bestrewed the ground.<br>
 Bright with Bráhmanic lustre glowed<br>
 That circle where the saints abode:<br>
 Like the hot sun in heaven it shone,<br>
 Too dazzling to be looked upon.<br>
 Wild creatures found a refuge where<br>
 The court, well-swept, was bright and fair:<br>
 And countless birds and roedeer made<br>
 Their dwelling in the friendly shade.<br>
 Beneath the boughs of well-loved trees<br>
 Oft danced the gay Apsarases.  <a name="fr_401"></a><a href="#fn_401"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Around was many an ample shed<br>
 Wherein the holy fire was fed;<br>
 With sacred grass and skins of deer,<br>
 Ladles and sacrificial gear,<br>
 And roots and fruit, and wood to burn,<br>
 And many a brimming water-urn.<br>
 Tall trees their hallowed branches spread,<br>
 Laden with pleasant fruit, o'erhead;<br>
 And gifts which holy laws require,  <a name="fr_402"></a><a href="#fn_402"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 And solemn offerings burnt with fire,  <a name="fr_403"></a><a href="#fn_403"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 And Veda chants on every side<br>
 That home of hermits sanctified.<br>
 There many a flower its odour shed,<br>
 And lotus blooms the lake o'erspred.<br>
 There, clad in coats of bark and hide,--<br>
 Their food by roots and fruit supplied,--<br>
 Dwelt many an old and reverend sire<br>
 Bright as the sun or Lord of Fire,<br>
 All with each worldly sense subdued,<br>
 A pure and saintly multitude.<br>
 The Veda chants, the saints who trod<br>
 The sacred ground and mused on God,<br>
 Made that delightful grove appear<br>
 Like Brahmá's own most glorious sphere.<br>
 As Raghu's splendid son surveyed<br>
 That hermit home and tranquil shade,<br>
 He loosed his mighty bow-string, then<br>
 Drew nearer to the holy men.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_230"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 230</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With keen celestial sight endued<br>
 Those mighty saints the chieftain viewed,<br>
 With joy to meet the prince they came,<br>
 And gentle Sítá dear to fame.<br>
 They looked on virtuous Ráma, fair<br>
 As Soma  <a name="fr_404"></a><a href="#fn_404"><font size="1">1</font></a> in the evening air,<br>
 And Lakshman by his brother's side,<br>
 And Sítá long in duty tried,<br>
 And with glad blessings every sage<br>
 Received them in the hermitage.<br>
 Then Ráma's form and stature tall<br>
 Entranced the wondering eyes of all,--<br>
 His youthful grace, his strength of limb,<br>
 And garb that nobly sat on him.<br>
 To Lakshman too their looks they raised,<br>
 And upon Sítá's beauty gazed<br>
 With eyes that closed not lest their sight<br>
 Should miss the vision of delight.<br>
 Then the pure hermits of the wood,<br>
 Rejoicing in all creatures' good,<br>
 Their guest, the glorious Ráma, led<br>
 Within a cot with leaves o'erhead.<br>
 With highest honour all the best<br>
 Of radiant saints received their guest,<br>
 With kind observance, as is meet,<br>
 And gave him water for his feet.<br>
 To highest pitch of rapture wrought<br>
 Their stores of roots and fruit they brought.<br>
 They poured their blessings on his head,<br>
 And 'All we have is thine,' they said.<br>
 Then, reverent hand to hand applied,  <a name="fr_405"></a><a href="#fn_405"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Each duty-loving hermit cried:<br>
 'The king is our protector, bright<br>
 In fame, maintainer of the right.<br>
 He bears the awful sword, and hence<br>
 Deserves an elder's reverence.<br>
 One fourth of Indra's essence, he<br>
 Preserves his realm from danger free,<br>
 Hence honoured by the world of right<br>
 The king enjoys each choice delight.<br>
 Thou shouldst to us protection give,<br>
 For in thy realm, dear lord, we live:<br>
 Whether in town or wood thou be,<br>
 Thou art our king, thy people we,<br>
 Our wordly aims are laid aside,<br>
 Our hearts are tamed and purified.<br>
 To thee our guardian, we who earn<br>
 Our only wealth by penance turn.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then the pure dwellers in the shade<br>
 To Raghu's son due honour paid,<br>
 And Lakshman, bringing store of roots,<br>
 And many a flower, and woodland fruits.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 And others strove the prince to please<br>
 With all attentive courtesies.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_401"></a><a href="ry199.htm#fr_401">229:1</a>  Heavenly nymphs.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_402"></a><a href="ry199.htm#fr_402">229:2</a>  The (<i>illegible</i>) present food to all
 created beings.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_403"></a><a href="ry199.htm#fr_403">229:3</a>  The clarified butter &amp;c. cast into the
 sacred fire.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_404"></a><a href="ry199.htm#fr_404">230:1</a>  The Moon-God: 'he is,' says the commentator,
 'the special deity of bráhmans.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_405"></a><a href="ry199.htm#fr_405">230:2</a>  Because he was an incarnation of the
 deity,' says the commentator, 'otherwise
 such honour paid by men of the sacerdotal
 caste to one of the military would be improper.'</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry200.htm">Next: Canto II.: Virádha.</a></center>
 </body>