<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry194.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry196.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXVII.: ANASÚYÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 But dwelling in that lonely spot<br>
 Left by the hermits pleased him not.<br>
 'I met the faithful Bharat here,<br>
 The townsmen, and my mother dear:<br>
 The painful memory lingers yet,<br>
 And stings me with a vain regret.<br>
 And here the host of Bharat camped,<br>
 And many a courser here has stamped,<br>
 And elephants with ponderous feet<br>
 Have trampled through the calm retreat.'<br>
 So forth to seek a home he hied,<br>
 His spouse and Lakshman by his side.<br>
 He came to Atri's pure retreat.<br>
 Paid reverence to his holy feet,<br>
 And from the saint such welcome won<br>
 As a fond father gives his son.<br>
 The noble prince with joy unfeigned<br>
 As a dear guest he entertained,<br>
 And cheered the glorious Lakshman too<br>
 And Sítá with observance due.<br>
 Then Anasúyá at the call<br>
 Of him who sought the good of all,<br>
 His blameless venerable spouse,<br>
 Delighting in her holy vows,<br>
 Came from her chamber to his side:<br>
 To her the virtuous hermit cried:<br>
 'Receive, I pray, with friendly grace<br>
 This dame of Maithil monarchs' race:<br>
 To Ráma next made known his wife,<br>
 The devotee of saintliest life:<br>
 'Ten thousand years this votaress bent<br>
 On sternest rites of penance spent;<br>
 She when the clouds withheld their rain,<br>
 And drought ten years consumed the plain,<br>
 Caused grateful roots and fruit to grow<br>
 And ordered Gangá here to flow:<br>
 So from their cares the saints she freed,<br>
 Nor let these checks their rites impede,<br>
 She wrought in Heaven's behalf, and made<br>
 Ten nights of one, the Gods to aid:  <a name="fr_400"></a><a href="#fn_400"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Let holy Anasúyá be<br>
 An honoured mother, Prince, to thee.<br>
 Let thy Videhan spouse draw near<br>
 To her whom all that live revere,<br>
 Stricken in years, whose loving mind<br>
 Is slow to wrath and ever kind.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: and Ráma gave assent,<br>
 And said, with eyes on Sítá bent:<br>
 'O Princess, thou hast heard with me<br>
 This counsel of the devotee:<br>
 Now that her touch thy soul may bless,<br>
 Approach the saintly votaress:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Come to the venerable dame,<br>
 Far known by Anasúyá's name:<br>
 The mighty things that she has done<br>
 High glory in the world have won.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spoke the son of Raghu: she<br>
 Approached the saintly devotee,<br>
 Who with her white locks, old and frail,<br>
 Shook like a plantain in the gale.<br>
 To that true spouse she bowed her head,<br>
 And 'Lady, I am Sítá,' said:<br>
 Raised suppliant hands and prayed her tell<br>
 That all was prosperous and well.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The aged matron, when she saw<br>
 Fair Sítá true to duty's law,<br>
 Addressed her thus: ' High fate is thine<br>
 Whose thoughts to virtue still incline.<br>
 Thou, lady of the noble mind,<br>
 Hast kin and state and wealth resigned<br>
 To follow Ráma forced to tread<br>
 Where solitary woods are spread.<br>
 Those women gain high spheres above<br>
 Who still unchanged their husbands love,<br>
 Whether they dwell in town or wood,<br>
 Whether their hearts be ill or good.<br>
 Though wicked, poor, or led away<br>
 In love's forbidden paths to stray,<br>
 The noble matron still will deem<br>
 Her lord a deity supreme.<br>
 Regarding kin and friendship, I<br>
 Can see no better, holier tie,<br>
 And every penance-rite is dim<br>
 Beside the joy of serving him.<br>
 But dark is this to her whose mind<br>
 Promptings of idle fancy blind,<br>
 Who led by evil thoughts away<br>
 Makes him who should command obey.<br>
 Such women, O dear Maithil dame,<br>
 Their virtue lose and honest fame,<br>
 Enslaved by sin and folly, led<br>
 In these unholy paths to tread.<br>
 But they who good and true like thee<br>
 The present and the future see,<br>
 Like men by holy deeds will rise<br>
 To mansions in the blissful skies.<br>
     So keep thee pure from taint of sin,<br>
         Still to thy lord be true,<br>
     And fame and merit shalt thou win,<br>
         To thy devotion due.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_400"></a><a href="ry195.htm#fr_400">226:1</a>  When the saint Mándavya had doomed
 some saint's wife, who was Anasúyá's
 friend, to become a widow on the morrow.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry196.htm">Next: Canto CXVIII.: Anasúyá's Gifts.</a></center>
 </body>