<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry192.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry194.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXV.: NANDIGRÁM.  <a name="fr_398"></a><a href="#fn_398"><font size="1">2</font></a></h3>
 <p>
 Then when the pious chief had seen<br>
 Lodged in her home each widowed queen,<br>
 Still with his burning grief oppressed<br>
 His holy guides he thus addressed:<br>
 'I go to Nandigrám: adieu,<br>
 This day, my lords to all of you:<br>
 I go, my load of grief to bear,<br>
 Reft of the son of Raghu, there.<br>
 The king my sire, alas, is dead.<br>
 And Ráma to the forest fled;<br>
 There will I wait till he, restored,<br>
 Shall rule the realm, its lightful lord.'<br>
     They heard the high-souled prince's speech,<br>
 And thus with ready answer each<br>
 Of those great lords their chief addressed.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 With saint Vas'ishtha and the rest:<br>
 'Good are the words which thou hast said,<br>
 By brotherly affection led,<br>
 Like thine own self, a faithful friend,<br>
 True to thy brother to the end:<br>
 A heart like thine must all approve,<br>
 Which naught from virtue's path can move,'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Soon as the words he loved to hear<br>
 Fell upon Bharat's joyful ear,<br>
 Thus to the charioteer he spoke:<br>
 'My car witn speed, Sumantra, yoke.'<br>
 Tnen Bharat with delighted mien<br>
 Obeisance paid to every queen,<br>
 And with S'atrughna by his side<br>
 Mounting the car away he hied.<br>
 With lords, and priests in long array<br>
 Tne brothers hastened on their way.<br>
 And the great pomp the Bráhmans led<br>
 With Saint Vas'ishtha at their head.<br>
 Then every face was eastward bent<br>
 As on to Nundigrám they went.<br>
 Behind the army followed, all<br>
 Unsummoned by their leader's call,<br>
 And steeds and elephants and men<br>
 Streamed forth with every citizen.<br>
 As Bharat in his chariot rode<br>
 His heart with love fraternal glowed,<br>
 And with the sandals on his head<br>
 To Nundigrám he quickly sped.<br>
 Within the town he swiftly pressed,<br>
 Alighted, and his guides addressed:<br>
 'To me in trust my brother's hand<br>
 Consigned the lordship of the land,<br>
 When he these gold-wrought sandals gave<br>
 As emblems to protect and save.'<br>
 Then Bharat bowed, and from his head<br>
 The sacred pledge deposited,<br>
 And thus to all the people cried<br>
 Who ringed him round on every side:<br>
 'Haste, for these sandals quickly bring<br>
 The canopy that shades the king.<br>
 Pay ye to them all reverence meet<br>
 As to my elder brother's feet,<br>
 For they will right and law maintain<br>
 Until King Ráma come again.<br>
 My brother with a loving mind<br>
 These sandals to my charge consigned:<br>
 I till he come will guard with care<br>
 The sacred trust for Raghu's heir.<br>
 My watchful task will soon be done,<br>
 The pledge restored to Raghu's son;<br>
 Then shall I see, his wanderings o'er,<br>
 These sandals on his feet once more.<br>
 My brother I shall meet at last,<br>
 The burthen from my shoulders cast,<br>
 To Ráma's hand the realm restore<br>
 And serve my elder as before.<br>
 When Rama takes again this pair<br>
 Of sandals kept with pious care,<br>
 And here his glorious reign begins,<br>
 I shall be cleansed from all my sins,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_225"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 225</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 When the glad people's voices ring<br>
 With welcome to the new-made king,<br>
 Joy will be mine four-fold as great<br>
 As if supreme I ruled the state.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus humbly spoke in sad lament<br>
 The chief in fame preëminent:<br>
 Thus, by his reverent lords obeyed,<br>
 At Nandigrám the kingdom swayed.<br>
 With hermit's dress and matted hair<br>
 He dwelt with all his army there.<br>
 The sandals of his brother's feet<br>
 Installed upon the royal seat,<br>
 He, all his powers to them referred,<br>
 Affairs of state administered.<br>
     In every care, in every task,<br>
         When golden store was brought,<br>
     He first, as though their rede to ask,<br>
       Those royal sandals sought.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_397"></a><a href="ry192.htm#fr_397">224:1</a>  'Once,' says the Commentator Tirtha,
 'in the battle between the Gods and demons
 the Gods were vanquished, and the sun
 was overthrown by Ráhu. At the request
 of the Gods Atri undertook the management
 of the sun for a week.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_398"></a><a href="ry193.htm#fr_398">224:2</a>  Now Nundgaon, in Oudh.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry194.htm">Next: Canto CXVI.: The Hermit's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>