<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry193.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry195.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXVI.: THE HERMIT'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 When Bharat took his homeward road<br>
 Still Ráma in the wood abode:<br>
 But soon he marked the fear and care<br>
 That darkened all the hermits there.<br>
 For all who dwelt before the hill<br>
 Were sad with dread of coming ill:<br>
 Each holy brow was lined by thought,<br>
 And Ráma's side they often sought.<br>
 With gathering frowns the prince they eyed,<br>
 And then withdrew and talked aside.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Raghu's son with anxious breast<br>
 The leader of the saints addressed:<br>
 'Can aught that I have done displease,<br>
 O reverend Sage, the devotees?<br>
 Why are their loving looks, O say,<br>
 Thus sadly changed or turned away?<br>
 Has Lakshman through his want of heed<br>
 Offended with unseemly deed!<br>
 Or is the gentle Sítá, she<br>
 Who loved to honour you and me--<br>
 Is she the cause of this offence,<br>
 Failing in lowly reverence?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 One sage, o'er whom, exceeding old,<br>
 Had many a year of penance rolled,<br>
 Trembling in every aged limb<br>
 Thus for the rest replied to him:<br>
 'How could we, O beloved, blame<br>
 Thy lofty-souled Videhan dame,<br>
 Who in the good of all delights,<br>
 And more than all of anchorites?<br>
 But yet through thee a numbing dread<br>
 Of fiends among our band has spread;<br>
 Obstructed by the demons' art<br>
 The trembling hermits talk apart.<br>
 For Rávan's brother, overbold,<br>
 Named Khara, of gigantic mould,<br>
 Vexes with fury fierce and fell<br>
 All those in Janasthán  <a name="fr_399"></a><a href="#fn_399"><font size="1">1</font></a> who dwell.<br>
 Resistless in his cruel deeds,<br>
 On flesh of men the monster feeds:<br>
 Sinful and arrogant is he,<br>
 And looks with special hate on thee.<br>
 Since thou, beloved son, hast made<br>
 Thy home within this holy shade,<br>
 The fiends have vexed with wilder rage<br>
 The dwellers of the hermitage.<br>
 In many a wild and dreadful form<br>
 Around the trembling saints they swarm,<br>
 With hideous shape and foul disguise<br>
 They terrify our holy eyes.<br>
 They make our loathing souls endure<br>
 Insult and scorn and sights impure,<br>
 And flocking round the altars stay<br>
 The holy rites we love to pay.<br>
 In every spot throughout the grove<br>
 With evil thoughts the monsters rove,<br>
 Assailing with their secret might<br>
 Each unsuspecting anchorite.<br>
 Ladle and dish away they fling,<br>
 Our fires with floods extinguishing,<br>
 And when the sacred flame should burn<br>
 They trample on each water-urn.<br>
 Now when they see their sacred wood<br>
 Plagued by this impious brotherhood,<br>
 The troubled saints away would roam<br>
 And seek in other shades a home:<br>
 Hence will we fly, O Ráma, ere<br>
 The cruel fiends our bodies tear.<br>
 Not far away a forest lies<br>
 Rich in the roots and fruit we prize,<br>
 To this will I and all repair<br>
 And join the holy hermits there;<br>
 Be wise, and with us thither flee<br>
 Before this Khara injure thee.<br>
 Mighty art thou, O Ráma, yet<br>
 Each day with peril is beset.<br>
 If with thy consort by thy side<br>
 Thou in this wood wilt still abide.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: the words the hero spake<br>
 The hermit's purpose failed to break:<br>
 To Raghu's son farewell he said,<br>
 And blessed the chief and comforted;<br>
 Then with the rest the holy sage<br>
 Departed from the hermitage.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 So from the wood the saints withdrew,<br>
 And Ráma bidding all adieu<br>
     In lowly reverence bent:<br>
 Instructed by their friendly speech,<br>
 Blest with the gracious love of each,<br>
     To his pure home he went.<br>
 Nor would the son of Raghu stray<br>
 A moment from that grove away<br>
     From which the saints had fled.<br>
 And many a hermit thither came<br>
 Attracted by his saintly fame<br>
     And the pure life he led.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_226"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 226</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_399"></a><a href="ry194.htm#fr_399">225:1</a>  A part of the great Dandak forest.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry195.htm">Next: Canto CXVII.: Anasúyá.</a></center>
 </body>