<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry191.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry193.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXIV.: BHARAT'S DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 Deep, pleasant was the chariot's sound<br>
 As royal Bharat, far renowned,<br>
 Whirled by his mettled coursers fast<br>
 Within Ayodhyá's city passed.<br>
 There dark and drear was every home<br>
 Where cats and owls had space to roam,<br>
 As when the shades of midnight fall<br>
 With blackest gloom, and cover all:<br>
 As Rohiní, dear spouse of him<br>
 Whom Rahu  <a name="fr_396"></a><a href="#fn_396"><font size="1">1</font></a> hates, grows faint and dim,<br>
 When, as she shines on high alone<br>
 The demon's shade is o'er her thrown:<br>
 As burnt by summer's heat a rill<br>
 Scarce trickling from her parent hill,<br>
 With dying fish in pools half dried,<br>
 And fainting birds upon her side:<br>
 As sacrificial flames arise<br>
 When holy oil their food supplies,<br>
 But when no more the fire is fed<br>
 Sink lustreless and cold and dead:<br>
 Like some brave host that filled the plain,<br>
 With harness rent and captains slain,<br>
 When warrior, elephant, and steed<br>
 Mingled in wild confusion bleed:<br>
 As when, all spent her store of worth,<br>
 Rocks from her base the loosened earth:<br>
 Like a sad fallen star no more<br>
 Wearing the lovely light it wore:<br>
 So mournful in her lost estate<br>
 Was that sad town disconsolate.<br>
 Then car-borne Bharat, good and brave,<br>
 Thus spake to him the steeds who drave:<br>
 'Why are Ayodhyá's streets so mute!<br>
 Where is the voice of lyre and lute?<br>
 Why sounds not, as of old, to-day<br>
 The music of the minstrel's lay?<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_224"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 224</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Where are the wreaths they used to twine?<br>
 Where are the blossoms and the wine?<br>
 Where is the cool refreshing scent<br>
 Of sandal dust with aloe blent?<br>
 The elephant's impatient roar,<br>
 The din of cars, I hear no more:<br>
 No more the horse's pleasant neigh<br>
 Rings out to meet me on my way.<br>
 Ayodhyá's youths, since Ráma's flight,<br>
 Have lost their relish for delight:<br>
 Her men roam forth no more, nor care<br>
 Bright garlands round their necks to wear.<br>
 All grieve for banished Ráma: feast,<br>
 And revelry and song have ceased:<br>
 Like a black night when floods pour down,<br>
 So dark and gloomy is the town.<br>
 When will he come to make them gay<br>
 Like some auspicious holiday?<br>
 When will my brother, like a cloud<br>
 At summer's close, make glad the crowd?'<br>
     Then through the streets the hero rode,<br>
 And passed within his sire's abode,<br>
 Like some deserted lion's den,<br>
 Forsaken by the lord of men.<br>
 Then to the inner bowers he came,<br>
 Once happy home of many a dame,<br>
     Now gloomy, sad, and drear,<br>
 Dark as of old that sunless day<br>
 When wept the Gods in wild dismay; <a name="fr_397"></a><a href="ry193.htm#fn_397"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
     There poured he many a tear.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_396"></a><a href="ry192.htm#fr_396">223:1</a>  The spouse of Rohini is the Moon:
 Rahu is the demon who causes eclipses.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry193.htm">Next: Canto CXV.: Nandigrám. </a></center>
 </body>