<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry189.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry191.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXII.: THE SANDALS.</h3>
 <p>
 High wonder mingled with delight<br>
 Took the great sages at the sight.<br>
 Thrilling their breasts who came to view<br>
 The meeting of the peerless two.<br>
 The saints and sages' holy train<br>
 Departed to their home again.<br>
 And high each holy voice was raised,<br>
 And thus the glorious brothers praised.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'High fate is his, the sire of two<br>
 Most virtuous sous, so brave and true:<br>
 With wonder and with joy intense<br>
 Our ears have heard their conference.<br>
 Then the great sages, longing all<br>
 To see the ten-necked tyrant  <a name="fr_395"></a><a href="#fn_395"><font size="1">1b</font></a> fall,<br>
 To Bharat, bravest of the brave,<br>
 Their salutary counsel gave:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'O thou of lofty lineage born,<br>
 Whom wisdom, conduct, fame adorn,<br>
 Thou for thy honoured father's sake<br>
 Shouldst Ráma's righteous counsel take.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_222"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 222</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 All debts to Queen Kaikeyí paid,<br>
 Thy sire his home in heaven has made,<br>
 So virtuous Ráma we would see<br>
 From filial obligation free.'<br>
 Thus gave each royal sage advice,<br>
 High saint, and bard of Paradise;<br>
 Then quickly vanishing from view<br>
 Each to his proper home withdrew.<br>
 Then Ráma's face his rapture showed,<br>
 And his full heart with joy o'erflowed,<br>
 While, as the sages parted thence,<br>
 He paid his humble reverence.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Bharat shook in every limb<br>
 As suppliant thus he spake to him:<br>
 'The duty of a king respect,<br>
 Held by our race in high respect:<br>
 And O, thy gracious ear incline<br>
 To heed my mother's prayer and mine.<br>
 The mighty realm to rule and guard<br>
 For me alone is task too hard.<br>
 No power have I the love to gain<br>
 Of noble, citizen, and swain.<br>
 All those who know thee, warrior, friend,<br>
 On thee their eager glances bend,<br>
 As labouring hinds who till the plain<br>
 Look fondly for the Lord of Rain.<br>
 O wisest Prince, thy realm secure,<br>
 And make its firm foundations sure.<br>
 Kakutstha's son, thy mighty arm<br>
 Can keep the nation free from harm.'<br>
 He spoke, and fell in sorrow drowned<br>
 At Ráma's feet upon the ground,<br>
 And there the hero sued and sighed,<br>
 And 'Hear me, Raghu's son,' he cried.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma raised him up, and pressed<br>
 His brother to his loving breast,<br>
 And sweetly as a wild swan cried<br>
 To Bharat dark and lotus-eyed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'So just and true thy generous soul,<br>
 Thy hand may well this earth control:<br>
 But many a sage his aid will lend.<br>
 With counsellor, and peer, and friend:<br>
 With these advise: their counsel ask,<br>
 And so perform thy arduous task.<br>
 The moon his beauty may forgo,<br>
 The cold forsake the Hills of Snow,<br>
 And Ocean o'er his banks may sweep,<br>
 But I my father's word will keep.<br>
 Now whether love of thee or greed<br>
 Thy mother led to plan the deed,<br>
 Forth from thy breast the memory throw,<br>
 And filial love and reverence show.'<br>
 Thus spake Kaus'alyá's son: again<br>
 Bharat replied in humble strain<br>
 To him who matched the sun in might<br>
 And lovely as the young moon's light:<br>
 'Put, noble brother, I entreat,<br>
 These sandals on thy blessed feet:<br>
 These, lord of men, with gold bedecked,<br>
 The realm and people will protect.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma, as his brother prayed<br>
 Beneath his feet the sandals laid,<br>
 And these with fond affection gave<br>
 To Bharat's hand, the good and brave.<br>
 Then Bharat bowed his reverent head<br>
 And thus again to Ráma said:<br>
 'Through fourteen seasons will I wear<br>
 The hermit's dress and matted hair:<br>
 With fruit and roots my life sustain,<br>
 And still beyond the realm remain,<br>
 Longing for thee to come again.<br>
 The rule and all affairs of state<br>
 I to these shoes will delegate.<br>
 And if, O tamer of thy foes,<br>
 When fourteen years have reached their close,<br>
 I see thee not that day return,<br>
 The kindled fire my frame shall burn.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma to his bosom drew<br>
 Dear Bharat and S'atrughna too:<br>
 'Be never wroth,' he cried, 'with her,<br>
 Kaikeyí's guardian minister:<br>
 This, glory of Ikshváku's line,<br>
 Is Sítá's earnest prayer and mine.'<br>
 He spoke, and as the big tears fell,<br>
 To his dear brother bade farewell.<br>
 Round Ráma, Bharat strong and bold<br>
         In humble reverence paced,<br>
     When the bright sandals wrought with gold<br>
         Above his brows were placed.<br>
     The royal elephant who led<br>
         The glorious pomp he found,<br>
     And on the monster's mighty head<br>
         Those sandals duly bound.<br>
     Then noble Rama, born to swell<br>
         The glories of his race,<br>
     To all in order bade farewell<br>
         With love and tender grace--<br>
     To brothers, counsellers, and peers,--<br>
         Still firm, in duty proved,<br>
     Firm, as the Lord of Snow uprears<br>
         His mountains unremoved.<br>
     No queen, for choking sobs and sighs,<br>
         Could say her last adieu:<br>
     Then Ráma bowed, with flooded eyes,<br>
         And to his cot withdrew.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_395"></a><a href="ry190.htm#fr_395">221:1b</a>  Ten-headed, ten-necked, ten faced, are
 common epithets of Rávan the great king
 of Lanká.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry191.htm">Next: Canto CXIII.: Bharat's Beturn.</a></center>
 </body>