<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry196.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry198.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXIX.: THE FOREST.</h3>
 <p>
 When Anasúyá, virtuous-souled,<br>
 Had heard the tale by Sítá told,<br>
 She kissed the lady's brow and laced<br>
 Her loving arms around her waist.<br>
 'With sweet-toned words distinct and clear<br>
 Thy pleasant tale has charmed mine ear,<br>
 How the great king thy father held<br>
 That Maiden's Choice unparalleled.<br>
 But now the sun has sunk from sight,<br>
 And left the world to holy Night.<br>
 Hark! how the leafy thickets sound<br>
 With gathering birds that twitter round:<br>
 They sought their food by day, and all<br>
 Flock homeward when the shadows fall.<br>
 See, hither comes the hermit band,<br>
 Each with his pitcher in his hand:<br>
 Fresh from the bath, their locks are wet,<br>
 Their coats of bark are dripping yet.<br>
 Here saints their fires of worship tend,<br>
 And curling wreaths of smoke ascend:<br>
 Borne on the flames they mount above,<br>
 Dark as the brown wings of the dove.<br>
 The distant trees, though well-nigh bare,<br>
 Gloom thickenend by the evening air,<br>
 And in the faint uncertain light<br>
 Shut the horizon from our sight.<br>
 The beasts that prowl in darkness rove<br>
 On every side about the grove,<br>
 And the tame deer, at ease reclined<br>
 Their shelter near the altars find.<br>
 The night o'er all the sky is spread,<br>
 With lunar stars engarlanded,<br>
 And risen in his robes of light<br>
 The moon is beautifully bright,<br>
 Now to thy lord I bid thee go:<br>
 Thy pleasant tale has charmed me so:<br>
 One thing alone I needs must pray,<br>
 Before me first thyself array:<br>
 Here in thy heavenly raiment shine,<br>
 And glad, dear love, these eyes of mine.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_229"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 229</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then like a heavenly Goddess shone<br>
 Fair Sítá with that raiment on.<br>
 She bowed her to the matron's feet,<br>
 Then turned away her lord to meet.<br>
 The hero prince with joy surveyed<br>
 His Sítá, in her robes arrayed,<br>
 As glorious to his arms she came<br>
 With love-gifts of the saintly dame.<br>
 She told him how the saint to show<br>
 Her fond affection would bestow<br>
 That garland of celestial twine,<br>
 Those ornaments and robes divine.<br>
 Then Ráma's heart, nor Lakshman's less,<br>
 Was filled with pride and happiness,<br>
 For honours high had Sítá gained,<br>
 Which mortal dames have scarce obtained.<br>
 There honoured by each pious sage<br>
 Who dwelt within the hermitage,<br>
 Beside his darling well content<br>
 That sacred night the hero spent.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The princes, when the night had fled,<br>
 Farewell to all the hermits said,<br>
 Who gazed upon the distant shade,<br>
 Their lustral rites and offerings paid.<br>
 The saints who made their dwelling there<br>
 In words like these addressed the pair:<br>
 'O Princes, monsters fierce and fell<br>
 Around that distant forest dwell:<br>
 On blood from human veins they feed,<br>
 And various forms assume at need,<br>
 With savage beasts of fearful power<br>
 That human flesh and blood devour.<br>
 Our holy saints they rend and tear<br>
 When met alone or unaware,<br>
 And eat them in their cruel joy:<br>
 These chase, O Ráma, or destroy.<br>
 By this one path our hermits go<br>
 To fetch the fruits that yonder grow:<br>
 By this, O Prince, thy feet should stray<br>
 Through pathless forests far away.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus by the reverent saints addressed,<br>
 And by their prayers auspicious blessed,<br>
     He left the holy crowd:<br>
 His wife and brother by his side,<br>
 Within the mighty wood he hied.<br>
 So sinks the Day-God in his pride<br>
     Beneath a bank of cloud.<br>
 
 <br>
 </p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry198.htm">Next: Book III</a></center>
 </body>