<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry204.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry206.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VII.: SUTÍKSHNA.</h3>
 <p>
 So Raghu's son, his foemen's dread,<br>
 With Sítá and his brother sped,<br>
 Girt round by many a twice-born sage,<br>
 To good Sutikshna's hermitage.  <a name="fr_420"></a><a href="#fn_420"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Through woods for many a league he passed,<br>
 O'er rushing rivers full and fast,<br>
 Until a mountain fair and bright<br>
 As lofty Meru rose in sight.<br>
 Within its belt of varied wood<br>
 Ikshváku'a sons and Sítá stood,<br>
 Where trees of every foliage bore<br>
 Blossom and fruit in endless store.<br>
 There coats of bark, like garlands strung,<br>
 Before a lonely cottage hung,<br>
 And there a hermit, dust-besmeared,<br>
 A lotus on his breast, appeared.<br>
 Then Ráma with obeisance due<br>
 Addressed the sage, as near he drew:<br>
 'My name is Ráma, lord; I seek<br>
 Thy presence, saint, with thee to speak.<br>
 O sage, whose merits ne'er decay,<br>
 Some word unto thy servant say.'<br>
     The sage his eyes on  Ráma bent,<br>
 Of virtue's friends preëminent;<br>
 Then words like these he spoke, and pressed<br>
 The son of Raghu to his breast:<br>
 'Welcome to thee, illustrious youth,<br>
 Best champion of the rights of truth!<br>
 By thine approach this holy ground<br>
 A worthy lord this day has found.<br>
 I could not quit this mortal frame<br>
 Till thou shouldst, come, O dear to fame:<br>
 To heavenly spheres I would not rise,<br>
 Expecting thee with eager eyes.<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><p>
 I knew that thou, unkinged, hadst made<br>
 Thy home in Chitrakúta's shade.<br>
 E'en now, O Ráma, Indra, lord<br>
 Supreme by all the Gods adored,<br>
 King of the Hundred Offerings,  <a name="fr_421"></a><a href="#fn_421"><font size="1">1b</font></a> said,<br>
 When he my dwelling visited,<br>
 That the good works that I have done<br>
 My choice of all the worlds have won.<br>
 Accept this meed of holy vows,<br>
 And with thy brother and thy spouse,<br>
 Roam, through my favour, in the sky<br>
 Which saints celestial glorify.'<br>
     To that bright sage, of penance stern,<br>
 The high-souled Ráma spake in turn,<br>
 As Vásava  <a name="fr_422"></a><a href="#fn_422"><font size="1">2b</font></a> who rules the skies<br>
 To Brahmá's gracious speech replies:<br>
 I of myself those worlds will win,<br>
 O mighty hermit pure from sin:<br>
 But now, O saint, I pray thee tell<br>
 Where I within this wood may dwell:<br>
 For I by S'arabhanga old,<br>
 The son of Gautama, was told<br>
 That thou in every lore art wise,<br>
 And seest all with loving eyes.'<br>
     Thus to the saint, whose glories high<br>
 Filled all the world, he made reply:<br>
 And thus again the holy man<br>
 His pleasant speech with joy began:<br>
 'This calm retreat, O Prince, is blest<br>
 With many a charm: here take thy rest.<br>
 Here roots and kindly fruits abound,<br>
 And hermits love the holy ground.<br>
 Fair silvan beasts and gentle deer<br>
 In herds unnumbered wander here:<br>
 And as they roam, secure from harm,<br>
 Our eyes with grace and beauty charm:<br>
 Except the beasts in thickets bred,<br>
 This grove of ours has naught to dread."<br>
     The hermit's speech when Ráma heard,--<br>
 The hero ne'er by terror stirred,--<br>
 On his great bow his hand he laid,<br>
 And thus in turn his answer made:<br>
 'O saint, my darts of keenest steel,<br>
 Armed with their murderous barbs, would deal<br>
 Destruction mid the silvan race<br>
 That flocks around thy dwelling-place.<br>
 Most wretched then my fate would be<br>
 For such dishonour shown to thee:<br>
 And only for the briefest stay<br>
 Would I within this grove delay.'<br>
     He spoke and ceased. With pious care<br>
 He turned him to his evening prayer,<br>
 Performed each customary rite,<br>
 And sought his lodging for the night,<br>
 With Sítá and his brother laid<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_237"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 237</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Beneath the grove's delightful shade,<br>
 First good Sútíkshnu, when he saw<br>
 The shades of night around them draw,<br>
     With hospitable care<br>
 The princely chieftains entertained<br>
 With store of choicest food ordained<br>
     For holy hermit's fare.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_420"></a><a href="ry205.htm#fr_420">236:1</a>  Near the celebrated Rámagiri or
 Ráma's Hill, now Rám-tek, near Nagpore
 --the scene of the Yaksha's exile in the
 <i>Messenger Cloud</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_421"></a><a href="ry205.htm#fr_421">236:1b</a>  A hundred <i>As'vamedhas</i> or sacrifices of
 a horse raise the sacrificer to the dignity
 of Indra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_422"></a><a href="ry205.htm#fr_422">236:2b</a>  Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry206.htm">Next: Canto VIII.: The Hermitage.</a></center>
 </body>