<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry201.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry203.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO IV.: VIRÁDHA'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 But Sítá viewed with wild affright<br>
 The heroes hurried from her sight.<br>
 She tossed her shapely arms on high,<br>
 And shrieked aloud her bitter cry:<br>
 'Ah, the dread giant bears away<br>
 The princely Ráma as his prey,<br>
 Truthful and pure, and good and great,<br>
 And Lakshman shares his brother's fate.<br>
 The brindled tiger and the bear<br>
 My mangled limbs for food will tear.<br>
 Take me, O best of giants, me,<br>
 And leave the sons of Raghu free.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then, by avenging fury spurred,<br>
 Her mournful cry the heroes heard,<br>
 And hastened, for the lady's sake,<br>
 The wicked monster's life to take.<br>
 Then Lakshman with resistless stroke<br>
 The foe's left arm that held him broke,<br>
 And Rama too, as swift to smite,<br>
 Smashed with his heavy hand the right.<br>
 With broken arms and tortured frame<br>
 To earth the fainting giant came,<br>
 Like a huge cloud, or mighty rock<br>
 Bent, sundered by the levin's shock.<br>
 Then rushed they  on, and crushed and bent<br>
 Their foe with arms and fists and feet,<br>
 And nerved each mighty limb to pound<br>
 And bray him on the level ground.<br>
 Keen arrows and each biting blade<br>
 Wide rents in breast and side had made;<br>
 But crushed and torn and mangled, still<br>
 The monster lived they could not kill.<br>
 When Ráma saw no arms might slay<br>
 The fiend who like a mountain lay,<br>
 The glorious hero, swift to save<br>
 In danger, thus his counsel gave:<br>
 ' O Prince of men, his charmed life<br>
 No arms may take in battle strife:<br>
 Now dig we in this grove a pit<br>
 His elephantine bulk to fit,<br>
 And let the hollowed earth enfold<br>
 The monster of gigantic mould.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 This said, the son of Raghu pressed<br>
 His foot upon the giant's breast.<br>
 With joy the prostrate monster heard<br>
 Victorious Ráma's welcome word,<br>
 And straight Kakutstha's son, the best<br>
 Of men, in words like these addressed:<br>
 'I yield, O chieftain, overthrown<br>
 By might that vies with Indra's own.<br>
 Till now my folly-blinded eyes<br>
 Thee, hero, failed to recognize.<br>
 Happy Kaus'alyá! blest to be<br>
 The mother of a son like thee!<br>
 I know thee well, O chieftain, now:<br>
 Ráma, the prince of men, art thou.<br>
 There stands the high-born Maithil dame,<br>
 There Lakshman, lord of mighty fame.<br>
 My name was Tumburu  <a name="fr_408"></a><a href="#fn_408"><font size="1">1</font></a>, for song<br>
 Renowned among the minstrel throng:<br>
 Cursed by Kuvera's stern decree<br>
 I wear the hideous shape you see.<br>
 But when I sued, his grace to crave,<br>
 The glorious God this answer gave:<br>
 'When Ráma, Das'aratha's son,<br>
 Destroys thee and the light is won,<br>
 Thy proper shape once more assume,<br>
 And heaven again shall give thee room.'<br>
 When thus the angry God replied,<br>
 No prayers could turn his wrath aside,<br>
 And thus on me his fury fell<br>
 For loving Rambhá's  <a name="fr_409"></a><a href="#fn_409"><font size="1">2</font></a> charms too well.<br>
 Now through thy favour am I freed<br>
 From the stern fate the God decreed,<br>
 And saved, O tamer of the foe,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_233"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 233</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 By thee, to heaven again shall go.<br>
 A league, O Prince, beyond this spot<br>
 Stands holy S'arabhanga's cot:<br>
 The very sun is not more bright<br>
 Than that most glorious anchorite:<br>
 To him, O Ráma, quickly turn,<br>
 And blessings from the hermit earn.<br>
 First under earth my body throw,<br>
 Then on thy way rejoicing go.<br>
 Such is the law ordained of old<br>
 For giants when their days are told:<br>
 Their bodies laid in earth, they rise<br>
 To homes eternal in the skies.'<br>
     Thus, by the rankling dart oppressed,<br>
 Kakutstha's offspring he addressed:<br>
 In earth his mighty body lay,<br>
 His spirit fled to heaven away.<br>
     Thus spake Virádha ere he died;<br>
 And Ráma to his brother cried:<br>
 'Now dig we in this grove a pit<br>
 His elephantine bulk to fit.<br>
 And let the hollowed earth enfold<br>
 This mighty giant fierce and bold.'<br>
     This said, the valiant hero put<br>
 Upon the giant's neck his foot.<br>
 His spade obedient Lakshman plied,<br>
 And dug a pit both deep and wide<br>
 By lofty souled Virádha's side.<br>
 Then Raghu's son his foot withdrew,<br>
 And down the mighty form they threw;<br>
 One awful shout of joy he gave<br>
 And sank into the open grave.<br>
 The heroes, to their purpose true,<br>
 In fight the cruel demon slew,<br>
     And radiant with delight<br>
 Deep in the hollowed earth they cast<br>
 The monster roaring to the last,<br>
     In their resistless might.<br>
 Thus when they saw the warrior's steel<br>
 No life-destroying blow might deal,<br>
     The pair, for lore renowned,<br>
 Deep in the pit their hands had made<br>
 The unresisting giant laid,<br>
     And killed him neath the ground.<br>
 Upon himself the monster brought<br>
 From Ráma's hand the death he sought<br>
     With strong desire to gain:<br>
 And thus the rover of the night<br>
 Told Ráma, as they strove in fight,<br>
 That swords might rend and arrows smite<br>
     Upon his breast in vain.<br>
 Thus Ráma, when his speech he heard,<br>
 The giant's mighty form interred,<br>
     Which mortal arms defied.<br>
 With thundering crash the giant fell,<br>
 And rock and cave and forest dell<br>
     With echoing roar replied.<br>
 The princes, when their task was done<br>
 And freedom from the peril won,<br>
     Rejoiced to see him die.<br>
 Then in the boundless wood they strayed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Like the great sun and moon displayed<br>
     Triumphant in the sky. <a name="fr_410"></a><a href="ry203.htm#fn_410"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
               *        *        *        *        *<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_408"></a><a href="ry202.htm#fr_408">232:1</a>  Somewhat inconsistently with this part
 of the story Tumburu is mentioned in Book
 II, Canto XII as one of the Gandharvas
 or heavenly minstrels summoned to perform at Bharadvája's feast.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_409"></a><a href="ry202.htm#fr_409">232:2</a>  Rambhá appears in Book I, Canto
 LXIV as the temptress of Visvámitra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry203.htm">Next: Canto V.: S'arabhanga.</a></center>
 </body>