<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry203.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry205.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VI.: RÁMA'S PROMISE.</h3>
 <p>
 When he his heavenly home had found,<br>
 The holy men who dwelt around<br>
 To Ráma flocked, whose martial fame<br>
 Shone glorious as the kindled flame:<br>
 Vaikhánasas  <a name="fr_415"></a><a href="#fn_415"><font size="1">1</font></a> who love the wild.<br>
 Pure hermits Bálakhilyas  <a name="fr_416"></a><a href="#fn_416"><font size="1">2</font></a> styled,<br>
 Good Samprakshálas,  <a name="fr_417"></a><a href="#fn_417"><font size="1">3</font></a> saints who live<br>
 On rays which moon and daystar give:<br>
 Those who with leaves their lives sustain<br>
 And those who pound with stones their grain:<br>
 And they who lie in pools, and those<br>
 Whose corn, save teeth, no winnow knows:<br>
 Those who for beds the cold earth use,<br>
 And those who every couch refuse:<br>
 And those condemned to ceaseless pains,<br>
 Whose single foot their weight sustains:<br>
 And those who sleep neath open skies,<br>
 Whose food the wave or air supplies,<br>
 And hermits pure who spend their nights<br>
 On ground prepared for sacred rites;<br>
 Those who on hills their vigil hold,<br>
 Or dripping clothes around them fold:<br>
 The devotees who live for prayer,<br>
 Or the five fires  <a name="fr_418"></a><a href="#fn_418"><font size="1">4</font></a> unflinching bear.<br>
 On contemplation all intent,<br>
 With light that heavenly knowledge lent,<br>
 They came to Ráma, saint and sage,<br>
 In S'arabhaga's hermitage.<br>
 The hermit crowd around him pressed,<br>
 And thus the virtuous chief addressed:<br>
 'The lordship of the earth is thine,<br>
 O Prince of old Ikshváku's line.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Lord of the Gods is Indra, so<br>
 Thou art our lord and guide below.<br>
 Thy name, the glory of thy might,<br>
 Throughout the triple world are bright:<br>
 Thy filial love so nobly shown.<br>
 Thy truth and virtue well are known.<br>
 To thee, O lord, for help we fly,<br>
 And on thy love of right rely:<br>
 With kindly patience hear us speak,<br>
 And grant the boon we humbly seek.<br>
 That lord of earth were most unjust,<br>
 Foul traitor to his solemn trust,<br>
 Who should a sixth of all  <a name="fr_419"></a><a href="#fn_419"><font size="1">1b</font></a> require,<br>
 Nor guard his people like a sire.<br>
 But he who ever watchful strives<br>
 To guard his subjects' wealth and lives,<br>
 Dear as himself or, dearer still,<br>
 His sons, with earnest heart and will,--<br>
 That king, O Raghu's son, secures<br>
 High fame that endless years endures,<br>
 And he to Brahmá's world shall rise,<br>
 Made glorious in the eternal skies,<br>
 Whate'er, by duty won, the meed<br>
 Of saints whom roots and berries feed,<br>
 One fourth thereof, for tender care<br>
 Of subjects, is the monarch's share.<br>
 These, mostly of the Bráhman race,<br>
 Who make the wood their dwelling-place,<br>
 Although a friend in thee they view,<br>
 Fall friendless neath the giant crew.<br>
 Come, Ráma, come, and see hard by<br>
 The holy hermits' corpses lie,<br>
 Where many a tangled pathway shows<br>
 The murderous work of cruel foes.<br>
 These wicked fiends the hermits kill--<br>
 Who live on Chitrakúta's hill,<br>
 And blood of slaughtered saints has dyed<br>
 Mandákiní and Pampá's side.<br>
 No longer can we bear to see<br>
 The death of saint and devotee<br>
 Whom through the forest day by day<br>
 These Rákshases unpitying slay.<br>
 To thee, O Prince, we flee, and crave<br>
 Thy guardian help our lives to save.<br>
 From these fierce rovers of the night<br>
 Defend each stricken anchorite.<br>
 Throughout the world 'twere vain to seek<br>
 An arm like thine to aid the weak.<br>
 O Prince, we pray thee hear our call,<br>
 And from these fiends preserve us all.'<br>
     The son of Raghu heard the plaint<br>
 Of penance-loving sage and saint,<br>
 And the good prince his speech renewed<br>
 To all the hermit multitude:<br>
     'To me, O saints, ye need not sue:<br>
 I wait the hests of all of you.<br>
 I by mine own occasion led<br>
 This mighty forest needs must tread,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_236"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 236</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And while I keep my sire's decree<br>
 Your lives from threatening foes will free.<br>
 I hither came of free accord<br>
 To lend the aid by you implored,<br>
 And richest meed my toil shall pay,<br>
 While here in forest shades I stay.<br>
 I long in battle strife to close.<br>
 And slay these fiends, the hermits' foes,<br>
 That saint and sage may learn aright<br>
 My prowess and my brother's might.'<br>
     Thus to'the saints his promise gave<br>
 That prince who still to virtue clave<br>
     With never-wandering thought:<br>
 And then with Lakshman by his side,<br>
 With penance-wealthy men to guide,<br>
     Sutíkshna's home he sought.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_415"></a><a href="ry204.htm#fr_415">235:1</a>  Hermits who live upon roots which they dig out of the earth: literally <i>diggers</i>, derived from the prefix <i>vi</i> and <i>khan</i> to dig.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_416"></a><a href="ry204.htm#fr_416">235:2</a>  Generally, divine personages of the height of a man's thumb, produced from Brahmá's hair: here, according to the commentator followed by Gorresio, hermits who when they have obtained fresh food throw away what they had laid up before.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_417"></a><a href="ry204.htm#fr_417">235:3</a>  Sprung from the washings of Vishnu's feet.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_418"></a><a href="ry204.htm#fr_418">235:4</a>  Four fires burning round them, and the sun above.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_419"></a><a href="ry204.htm#fr_419">235:1b</a>  The tax allowed to the king by the Laws of Manu.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry205.htm">Next: Canto VII.: Sutíkshna.</a></center>
 </body>