<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry217.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry219.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XX.: THE GIANTS' DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 Fierce S'úrpanakhá with her train<br>
 To Ráma's dwelling came again,<br>
 And to the eager giants showed<br>
 Where Sítá and the youths abode.<br>
 Within the leafy cot they spied<br>
 The hero by his consort's side,<br>
 And faithful Lakshman ready still<br>
 To wait upon his brother's will.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_253"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 253</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then noble Ráma raised his eye<br>
 And saw the giants standing nigh,<br>
 And then, as nearer still they pressed.<br>
 His glorious brother thus addressed,<br>
 'Be thine a while, my brother dear,<br>
 To watch o'er Sítá's safety here,<br>
 And I will slay these creatures who<br>
 The footsteps of my spouse pursue.'<br>
     He spoke, and reverent Lakshman heard<br>
 Submissive to his brother's word.<br>
 The son of Raghu, virtuous-souled,<br>
 Strung his great bow adorned with gold,<br>
 And, with the weapon in his hand,<br>
 Addressed him to the giant band:<br>
 'Ráma and Lakshman we, who spring<br>
 From Das'aratha, mighty King;<br>
 We dwell a while with Sítá here<br>
 In Dandak forest wild and drear.<br>
 On woodland roots and fruit we feed,<br>
 Aud lives of strictest rule we lead.<br>
 Say why would ye our lives oppress<br>
 Who sojourn in the wilderness.<br>
 Sent hither by the hermits' prayer<br>
 With bow and darts unused to spare,<br>
 For vengeance am I come to slay<br>
 Your sinful band in battle fray.<br>
 Rest as ye are: remain content,<br>
 Nor try the battle's dire event.<br>
 Unless your offered lives ye spurn,<br>
 O rovers of the night, return.'<br>
     They listened while the hero spoke,<br>
 Aud fury in each breast awoke.<br>
 The Bráhman-slayers raised on high<br>
 Their mighty spears and made reply:<br>
 They spoke with eyes aglow with ire,<br>
 While Ráma's burnt with vengeful tire,<br>
 Aud answered thus, in fury wild,<br>
 That peerless chief whose tones were mild:<br>
     'Nay thou hast angered, overbold,<br>
 Khara our lord, the mighty-souled,<br>
 And for thy sin, in battle strife<br>
 Shalt yield to us thy forfeit life.<br>
 No power hast thou alone to stand<br>
 Against the numbers of our band.<br>
 'Twere vain to match thy single might<br>
 Against us in the front of fight.<br>
 When we equipped for fight advance<br>
 With brandished pike and mace and lance,<br>
 Thou, vanquished in the desperate field,<br>
 Thy bow, thy strength, thy life shalt yield.'<br>
     With bitter words and threatening mien<br>
 Thus furious spoke the fierce fourteen,<br>
 And raising scymitar and spear<br>
 On Ráma rushed in wild career.<br>
 Their levelled spears the giant crew<br>
 Against the matchless hero threw.<br>
 His bow the son of Raghu bent,<br>
 And twice seven shafts to meet them sent,<br>
 And every javelin sundered fell<br>
 By the bright darts he aimed so well.<br>
     The hero saw: his anger grew<br>
 To fury: from his side he drew<br>
 Fresh sunbright arrows pointed keen,<br>
 In number, like his foes, fourteen.<br>
 His bow he grasped, the string he drew,<br>
 And gazing on the giant crew,<br>
 As Indra casts the levin, so<br>
 Shot forth his arrrows at the foe.<br>
 The hurtling arrows, stained with gore,<br>
 Through the fiends' breasts a passage tore,<br>
 And in the earth lay buried deep<br>
 As serpents through an ant-hill creep<br>
 Like trees uptorn by stormy blast<br>
 The shattered fiends to earth were cast,<br>
 And there with mangled bodies they,<br>
 Bathed in their blood and breathless, lay.<br>
     With fainting heart and furious eye<br>
 The demon saw her champions die.<br>
 With drying wounds that scarcely bled<br>
 Back to her brother's home she fled.<br>
 Oppressed with pain, with loud lament<br>
 At Khara's feet the monster bent.<br>
 There like a plant whence slowly come<br>
 The trickling drops of oozy gum,<br>
 With her grim features pale with pain<br>
 She poured her tears in ceaseless rain,<br>
 There routed S'úrpanakhá lay,<br>
     And told her brother all,<br>
 The issue of the bloody fray,<br>
     Her giant champions' fall.<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *        *        *        *        *<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_460"></a><a href="ry217.htm#fr_460">252:1b</a>  Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_461"></a><a href="ry217.htm#fr_461">252:2b</a>  Titanic.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry219.htm">Next: Canto XXI.: The Rousing of Khara.</a></center>
 </body>