<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry211.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry213.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIV.: JATÁYUS.</h3>
 <p>
 Then as the son of Raghu made<br>
 His way to Panchavatí's shade,<br>
 A mighty vulture he beheld<br>
 Of size and strength unparalleled.<br>
 The princes, when the bird they saw,<br>
 Approached with reverence and awe,<br>
 And as his giant form they eyed,<br>
 'Tell who thou art,' in wonder cried.<br>
 The bird, as though their hearts to gain,<br>
 Addressed them thus in gentlest strain;<br>
 'In me, dear sons, the friend behold<br>
 Your royal father loved of old.'<br>
     He spoke: nor long did Ráma wait<br>
 His sire's dear friend to venerate:<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 He bade the bird declare his name<br>
 And the high race of which he came.<br>
 When Raghu's son had spoken, he<br>
 Declared his name and pedigree,<br>
 His words prolonging to disclose<br>
 How all the things that be arose:<br>
     'List while I tell, O Raghu's son,<br>
 The first-born Fathers, one by one,<br>
 Great Lords of Life, whence all in earth<br>
 And all in heaven derive their birth.<br>
 First Kardam heads the glorious race<br>
 Where Vikrit holds the second place,<br>
 With S'esha, Sans'ray next in line,<br>
 And Bahuputra's might divine.<br>
 Then Sthánu and Maríchi came,<br>
 Atri, and Kratu's forceful frame.<br>
 Pulastya followed, next to him<br>
 Angiras' name shall ne'er be dim.<br>
 Prachetas, Pulah next, and then<br>
 Daksha, Vivasvat praised of men:<br>
 Aríshtanemi next, and last<br>
 Kas'yap in glory unsurpassed.<br>
 From Daksha,--fame the tale has told--<br>
 Three-score bright daughters sprang of old.<br>
 Of these fair-waisted nymphs the great<br>
 Lord Kas'yap sought and wedded eight,<br>
 Aditi, Diti, Kálaká,<br>
 Támrá, Danú, and Analá,<br>
 And Krodhavasá swift to ire,<br>
 And Manu  <a name="fr_443"></a><a href="#fn_443"><font size="1">1b</font></a> glorious as her sire.<br>
 Then when the mighty Kas'yap cried<br>
 Delighted to each tender bride:<br>
 'Sons shalt thou bear, to rule the three<br>
 Great worlds, in might resembling me,'<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_246"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 246</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Aditi, Diti, and Danú<br>
 Obeyed his will as consorts true,<br>
 And Kálaká; but all the rest<br>
 Refused to hear their lord's behest.<br>
 First Aditi conceived, and she,<br>
 Mother of thirty Gods and three,<br>
 The Vasus and A'dityas bare,<br>
 Kudras, and A'svins, heavenly pair.<br>
 Of Diti sprang the Daityas: fame<br>
 Delights to laud their ancient name.<br>
 In days of yore their empire dread<br>
 O'er earth and woods and ocean spread.<br>
 Danú was mother of a child,<br>
 O hero, As'vagríva styled,<br>
 And Narak next and Kálak came<br>
 Of Kálaká, celestial dame.<br>
 Of Támrá, too, five daughters bright<br>
 In deathless glory sprang to light.<br>
 Ennobling fame still keeps alive<br>
 The titles of the lovely five:<br>
 Immortal honour still she claims<br>
 For Kraunchí, Bhasí, S'yení's names.<br>
 And wills not that the world forget<br>
 S'ukí or Dhritaráshtrí yet.<br>
 Then Kraunchí bare the crane and owl,<br>
 And Bhásí tribes of water fowl:<br>
 Vultures and hawks that race through air<br>
 With storm-fleet pinions S'yení bare.<br>
 All swans and geese on mere and brook<br>
 Their birth from Dhritaráshtrí took,<br>
 And all the river-haunting brood<br>
 Of ducks, a countless multitude.<br>
 From S'ukí Nalá sprang, who bare<br>
 Dame Vinatá surpassing fair.<br>
 From fiery Krodhavas'á, ten<br>
 Bright daughters sprang, O King of men:<br>
 Mrigí and Mrigamadá named,<br>
 Hari and Bhadiamadá famed,<br>
 S'árdúlí, S'vetá fair to see,<br>
 Mátangi bright, and Surabhi,<br>
 Surasá marked with each fair sign,<br>
 And Kadrumá, all maids divine.<br>
 Mrigí, O prince without a peer,<br>
 Was mother of the herds of deer,<br>
 The bear, the yak, the mountain roe<br>
 Their birth to Mrigamandá owe;<br>
 And Bhadramadá joyed to be<br>
 Mother of fair Irávatí,<br>
 Who bare Airávat,  <a name="fr_444"></a><a href="#fn_444"><font size="1">1</font></a> huge of mould,<br>
 Mid warders of the earth enrolled,<br>
 From Harí lordly lions trace,<br>
 With monkeys of the wild, their race.<br>
 From the great dame S'árdúlí styled<br>
 Sprung pards, Lángúrs, <a name="fr_445"></a><a href="#fn_445"><font size="1">2</font></a> and tigers wild.<br>
 Mátangi, Prince, gave birth to all<br>
 Mátangas, elephants strong and tall,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And S'vet'a bore the beasts who stand<br>
 One at each wind, earth's warder band.  <a name="fr_446"></a><a href="#fn_446"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Next Surabhí the Goddess bore<br>
 Two heavenly maids, O Prince, of yore,<br>
 Gandharvi--dear *as fa??* is she--<br>
 And her sweet sister Rohiní.<br>
 With kine this daughter filled each mead,<br>
 And bright Gandharví bore the steed.  <a name="fr_447"></a><a href="#fn_447"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Surasá bore the serpents:  <a name="fr_448"></a><a href="#fn_448"><font size="1">3b</font></a> all<br>
 The snakes Kadrú their mother call.<br>
 Then Manu, high-souled Kas'yap's  <a name="fr_449"></a><a href="#fn_449"><font size="1">4b</font></a> wife,<br>
 To all the race of men gave life,<br>
 The Bráhmans first, the Kshatriya caste,<br>
 Then Vais'yas, and the S'údras last.<br>
 Sprang from her mouth the Brahman race;<br>
 Her chest the Kshatriyas' natal place:<br>
 The Vais'yas from her thighs,'tis said,<br>
 The S'údras from her feet were bred.<br>
 From Analá all trees that hang<br>
 Their fair fruit-laden branches sprang.<br>
 The child of beauteous S'ukí bore<br>
 Vinatá, as I taught before:<br>
 And Surasá and Kadrú were<br>
 Born of one dame, a noble pair.<br>
 Kadrú gave birth to countless snakes<br>
 That roam the earth in woods and brakes.<br>
 Arun and Garud swift of flight<br>
 By V'inatá were given to light,<br>
 And sons' of Arun red as morn<br>
 Sampati first, then I was born,<br>
 Me then, O tamer of the toe,<br>
 Jutáyus, son of S'yení, know.<br>
 Thy ready helper will I be,<br>
 And guard thy house, if thou agree:<br>
 When thou and Lakshman urge the chase<br>
 By Sítá's side shall be my place.'<br>
     With courteous thanks for promised aid,<br>
         The prince, to rapture stirred,<br>
     Bent low, and due obeisance paid,<br>
         Embraced the royal bird.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_247"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 247</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He often in the days gone by<br>
     Had heard his father tell<br>
 How, linked with him in friendship's tie,<br>
     He loved Jatáyus well.<br>
 He hastened to his trusted friend<br>
     His darling to confide,<br>
 And through the wood his steps to bend<br>
     By strong Jatáyus' side.<br>
 On to the grove, with Lakshman near,<br>
     The prince his way pursued<br>
 To free those pleasant shades from fear<br>
     And slay the giant brood.<br>
 
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_442"></a><a href="ry211.htm#fr_442">245:1</a>  The Madhúka, or, as it is now called,
 Mahuwá, is the Bassia latifolia, a tree
 from whose blossoms a spirit is extracted.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_443"></a><a href="ry212.htm#fr_443">245:1b</a>  'I should have doubted whether Manu
 could have been the right reading here,
 but that it occurs again in verse 29, where
 it is in like manner followed in verse 31
 by Analá, so that it would certainly seem
 that the name Manu is intended to stand
 for a female, the daughter of Daksha.
 The Gauda recension, followed by Signor
 Gorresio (III 20, 12), adopts an entirely
 different reading at the end of the line,
 viz.  <i>Balám Atibalám api</i>, "Balá and
 Atibilá," instead of Manu and Analá.
 I see that Professor Roth s.v. adduces the
 authority of the Amara Kosha and of the
 Commentator on Pánini for stating that
 the word sometimes means "the wife of
 Manu." In the following text of the
 Mahábhárata I. 2553. also, Manu appears
 to be the name of a female: <i>Anaradyam,
 Manum, Vansám, Asurám, Márganapriyám,
 Anúpám, Subhagdm, Bhásím iti
 Prádhá vyajayata</i>. "Prádhá (daughter
 of Daksha) bore Anavadyá, Manu, Vans'á,
 Márganaprivá, Anúpá, Subhagá. and
 Bhásí."' <i>Muir's  Sanskrit Text</i>, Vol. I. p.
 116.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_444"></a><a href="ry212.htm#fr_444">246:1</a>  The elephant of Indra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_445"></a><a href="ry212.htm#fr_445">246:2</a>  <i>Golingúlas</i>, described as a kind of
 monkey, of a black colour, and having a
 tail like a cow.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_446"></a><a href="ry212.htm#fr_446">246:1b</a>  Eight elephants attached to the four
 quarters and intermediate points of the
 compass, to support and guard the earth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_447"></a><a href="ry212.htm#fr_447">246:2b</a>  Some scholars identify the centaurs
 with the Gandharvas.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_448"></a><a href="ry212.htm#fr_448">246:3b</a>  The hooded serpents, says the commentator
 Tírtha, were the offspring of
 Surasá: all others of Kadrú.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_449"></a><a href="ry212.htm#fr_449">246:4b</a>  The text reads Kás'yapa, "a descendant
 of Kas'yapa," who according to Rám.
 II. l0, 6, ought to be Vivasvat. But as it
 is stated in the preceding part of this
 passage III. 14, 11 f. that Manu was one
 of Kasyapa's eight wives, we must here
 read Kasyapa. The Ganda recension
 reads (III, 20, 30) <i>Manur manushyams cha
 tutha janayámása Raghana**</i>, instead of
 the corresponding line in the Bombay edition.'
 <i>Muir's Sanskrit Text, Vol I, p. 117.</i></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry213.htm">Next: Canto XV.: Panchavatt.</a></center>
 </body>