<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry213.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry215.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVI.: WINTER.</h3>
 <p>
 While there the high-souled hero spent<br>
 His tranquil hours in sweet content,<br>
 The glowing autumn passed, and then<br>
 Came winter so beloved of men.<br>
     One morn, to bathe, at break of day<br>
 To the fair stream he took his way.<br>
 Behind him, with the Maithil dame<br>
 Bearing a pitcher Lakshman came,<br>
 And as he went the mighty man<br>
 Thus to his brother chief began:<br>
     'The time is come, to thee more dear<br>
 Than all the months that mark the year<br>
 The gracious seasons' joy and pride,<br>
 By which the rest are glorified.<br>
 A robe of hoary rime is spread<br>
 O'er earth, with cold engarlanded.<br>
 The streams we loved no longer please,<br>
 But near the fire we take our ease,<br>
 Now pious men to God and shade<br>
 Offer young corn's fresh sprouted blade,<br>
 And purge away their sins with fire<br>
 Bestowed in humble sacrifice.<br>
 Rich stores of milk delight the swain,<br>
 And hearts are cheered that longed for gain.<br>
 Proud kings whose breasts for conquests glow<br>
 Lead bannered troops to smite the foe.<br>
 Dark is the north: the Lord of Day<br>
 To Yama's south  <a name="fr_452"></a><a href="#fn_452"><font size="1">1</font></a> has turned away:<br>
 And she--sad widow--shines no more,<br>
 Reft of the bridal mark  <a name="fr_453"></a><a href="#fn_453"><font size="1">2</font></a> she wore.<br>
 Himálaya's hill, ordained of old<br>
 The treasure-house of frost and cold,<br>
 Scarce conscious of the feebler glow,<br>
 Is truly now the Lord of Snow.<br>
 Warmed by the noontide's genial rays<br>
 Delightful are the glorious days:<br>
 But how we shudder at the chill<br>
 Of evening shadows and the rill!<br>
 How weak the sun, how cold the breeze!<br>
 How white the rime on grass and trees!<br>
 The leaves are sere, the woods have lost<br>
 Their blossoms killed by nipping frost.<br>
 Neath open skies we sleep no more:<br>
 December's nights with rime are hoar:<br>
 Their triple watch  <a name="fr_454"></a><a href="#fn_454"><font size="1">3</font></a> in length extends<br>
 With hours the shortened daylight lends.<br>
 No more the moon's sun-borrowed rays<br>
 Are bright, involved in misty haze,<br>
 As when upon the mirror's sheen<br>
 The breath's obscuring cloud is seen.<br>
 E'en at the full the faint beams fail<br>
 To struggle through the darksome veil:<br>
 Changed like her hue, they want the grace<br>
 That parts not yet from Sítá's face.<br>
 Cold is the western wind, but how<br>
 Its piercing chill is heightened now,<br>
 Blowing at early morning twice<br>
 As furious with its breath of ice!<br>
 See how the dewy tears they weep<br>
 The barley, wheat, and woodland steep,<br>
 Where, as the sun goes up the sky.<br>
 The curlew and the sáras cry.<br>
 See where the rice plants scarce uphold<br>
 Their full ears tinged with paly gold,<br>
 Bending their ripe heads slowly down<br>
 Fair as the date tree's flowery crown.<br>
 Though now the sun has mounted high<br>
 Seeking the forehead of the sky,<br>
 Such mist obscures his struggling beams,<br>
 No bigger than the moon he seems.<br>
 Though weak at first, his rays at length<br>
 Grow pleasant in their noonday strength,<br>
 And where a while they chance to fall<br>
 Fling a faint splendour over all.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_249"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 249</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 See, o'er the woods where grass is wet<br>
 With hoary drops that cling there yet,<br>
 With soft light clothing earth and bough<br>
 There steals a tender glory now.<br>
 Yon elephant who longs to drink,<br>
 Still standing on the river's brink,<br>
 Plucks back his trunk in shivering haste<br>
 From the cold wave he fain would taste.<br>
 The very fowl that haunt the mere<br>
 Stand doubtful on the bank, and fear<br>
 To dip them in the wintry wave<br>
 As cowards dread to meet the brave.<br>
 The frost of night, the rime of dawn<br>
 Bind flowerless trees and glades of lawn:<br>
 Benumbed in apathetic chill<br>
 Of icy chains they slumber still.<br>
 You hear the hidden sáras cry<br>
 From floods that wrapped in vapour lie,<br>
 And frosty-shining sands reveal<br>
 Where the unnoticed rivers steal.<br>
 The hoary rime of dewy night,<br>
 And suns that glow with tempered light<br>
 Lend fresh cool flavours to the rill<br>
 That sparkles from the tompost hill.<br>
 The cold has killed the lily's pride:<br>
 Leaf, filament, and flower have died:<br>
 With chilling breath rude winds have blown,<br>
 The withered stalk is left alone.<br>
 At this gay time, O noblest chief,<br>
 The faithful Bharat, worn by grief,<br>
 Lives in the royal town where he<br>
 Spends weary hours for love of thee.<br>
 From titles, honour, kingly sway,<br>
 From every joy he turns away:<br>
 Couched on cold earth, his days are passed<br>
 With scanty fare and hermit's fast.<br>
 This moment from his humble bed<br>
 He lifts, perhaps, his weary head,<br>
 And girt by many a follower goes<br>
 To bathe where silver Sarjú flows.<br>
 How, when the frosty morn is dim,<br>
 Shall Sarjú be a bath for him<br>
 Nursed with all love and tender care,<br>
 So delicate and young and fair.<br>
 How bright his hue! his brilliant eye<br>
 With the broad lotus leaf may vie.<br>
 By fortune stamped for happy fate,<br>
 His graceful form is tall aud straight.<br>
 In duty skilled, his words are truth:<br>
 He proudly rules each lust of youth.<br>
 Though his strong arm smites down the foe,<br>
 In gentle speech his accents flow.<br>
 Yet every joy has he resigned<br>
 And cleaves to thee with heart and mind.<br>
 Thus by the deeds that he has done<br>
 A name in heaven has Bharat won,<br>
 For in his life he follows yet<br>
 Thy steps, O banished anchoret.<br>
 Thus faithful Bharat, nobly wise,<br>
 The proverb of the world belies:<br>
 'No men, by mothers' guidance led,<br>
 The footsteps of their fathers tread.'<br>
 How could Kaikeyí, blest to be<br>
 Spouse of the king our sire, and see<br>
 A son like virtuous Bharat, blot<br>
 Her glory with so foul a plot!'<br>
     Thus in fraternal love he spoke,<br>
 And from his lips reproaches broke:<br>
 But Ráma grieved to hear him chide<br>
 The absent mother, and replied:<br>
     'Cease, O beloved, cease to blame<br>
 Our royal father's second dame.<br>
 Still speak of Bharat first in place<br>
 Of old Ikshváku's princely race.<br>
 My heart, so firmly bent but now<br>
 To dwell in woods and keep my vow,<br>
 Half melting as I hear thee speak<br>
 Of Bharat's love, grows soft and weak,<br>
 With tender joy I bring to mind<br>
 His speeches ever sweet and kind.<br>
 That dear as Amrit took the sense<br>
 With most enchanting influence.<br>
 Ah, when shall I, no more to part,<br>
 Meet Bharat of the mighty heart?<br>
 When, O my brother, when shall we<br>
 The good and brave S'atrughna see?'<br>
 Thus as he poured his fond lament<br>
 The son of Raghu onward went:<br>
 They reached the river, and the three<br>
 Bathed them in fair Godávarí.<br>
 Libations of the stream they paid<br>
 To every deity and shade,<br>
 With hymns of praise, the Sun on high<br>
 And sinless Gods to glorify.<br>
 Fresh from the purifying tide<br>
     Resplendent Ráma came,<br>
 With Lakshman ever by his side,<br>
     And the sweet Maithil dame.<br>
 So Rudra shines by worlds adored,<br>
     In glory undefiled,<br>
 When Nandi  <a name="fr_455"></a><a href="ry215.htm#fn_455"><font size="1">1</font></a> stands beside his lord,<br>
 And King Himálaya's child.  <a name="fr_456"></a><a href="ry215.htm#fn_456"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_452"></a><a href="ry214.htm#fr_452">248:1</a>  The south is supposed to be the residence
 of the departed.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_453"></a><a href="ry214.htm#fr_453">248:2</a>  The sun.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_454"></a><a href="ry214.htm#fr_454">248:3</a>  The night is divided into three watches
 of four hours each.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry215.htm">Next: Canto XVII.: S'u'panakha'</a></center>
 </body>