<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry210.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry212.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIII.: AGASTYA'S COUNSEL.</h3>
 <p>
 'O Ráma, great delight I feel,<br>
 Pleased, Lakshman, with thy faithful zeal,<br>
 That you within these shades I see<br>
 Vith Sitá come to honour me.<br>
 But wandering through the rough rude wild<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Has wearied Janak'a gentle child:<br>
 With labours of the way oppressed<br>
 The Maithil lady Iongs for rest.<br>
 Young, delicate, und soft, and fair,<br>
 Such toils as these untrained to bear,<br>
 Her wifely love the dame has led<br>
 The forest's troubled ways to tread.<br>
 Here, Ráma, see that naught annoy<br>
 Her easy hours of tranquil joy:<br>
 A glorious task has she assayed,<br>
 To follow thee through woodland shade.<br>
 Since first from Nature's hand she came,<br>
 A woman's mood is still the same,<br>
 When Fortune smiles, her love to show,<br>
 And leave her lord in want and woe.<br>
 No pity then her heart can feel,<br>
 She arms her soul with warrior's steel,<br>
 Swift as the storm or Feathered King,<br>
 Uncertain as the lightning's wing.<br>
 Not so thy spouse: her purer mind<br>
 Shrinks from the faults of womankind;<br>
 Like chaste Arundhatí  <a name="fr_441"></a><a href="#fn_441"><font size="1">1</font></a> above,<br>
 A paragon of faithful love.<br>
 Let these blest shades, dear Ráma, be<br>
 A home for Lakshman, her, and thee.'<br>
 With raised hands reverently meek<br>
 He heard the holy hermit speak,<br>
 And humbly thus addressed the sire<br>
 Whose glory shone like kindled fire:<br>
     'How blest am I, what thanks I owe<br>
 That our great Master deigns to show<br>
 His favour, that his heart can be<br>
 Content with Lakshman, Sitá, me.<br>
 Show me, I pray, some spot of ground<br>
 Where thick trees wave aud springs abound,<br>
 That I may raise my hermit cell<br>
 And there in tranquil pleasure dwell.'<br>
 Then thus replied Agaatya, best<br>
 Of hermits, to the chief's request:<br>
 When for a little he had bent<br>
 His thoughts, upon that prayer intent:<br>
     'Beloved son, four leagues away<br>
 Is Panchavati bright and gay:<br>
 Thronged with its deer, most fair it looks<br>
 With berries, fruit, and water-brooks.<br>
 There build thee with thy brother's aid<br>
 A cottage in the quiet shade,<br>
 And faithful to thy sire's behest,<br>
 Obedient to the sentence, rest.<br>
 For well, O sinless chieftain, well<br>
 I know thy tale, how all befell:<br>
 Stern penance and the love I bore<br>
 Thy royal sire supply the lore.<br>
 To me long rites and fervid zeal<br>
 The wish that stirs thy heart reveal,<br>
 And hence my guest I bade thee be,<br>
 That this pure grove might shelter thee.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_245"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 245</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 So now, thereafter, thus I speak:<br>
 The shades of Panchavatí seek;<br>
 That tranquil spot is bright and fair,<br>
 And Sítá will be happy there.<br>
 Not far remote from here it lies,<br>
 A grove to charm thy loving eyes,<br>
 Godávarí's pure stream is nigh:<br>
 There Sítá's days will sweetly fly.<br>
 Pure, lovely, rich in many a charm,<br>
 O hero of the mighty arm,<br>
 'Tis gay with every plant and fruit,<br>
 And throngs of gay buds never mute.<br>
 Thou, true to virtue's path, hast might<br>
 To screen each trusting anchorite,<br>
 And wilt from thy new home defend<br>
 The hermits who on thee depend.<br>
 Now yonder, Prince, direct thine eyes<br>
 Where dense Madhúka  <a name="fr_442"></a><a href="ry212.htm#fn_442"><font size="1">1</font></a> woods arise:<br>
 Pierce their dark shade, and issuing forth<br>
 Turn to a fig-tree on the north:<br>
 Then onward up a sloping mead<br>
 Flanked by a hill the way will lead:<br>
 There Panchavatí, ever gay<br>
 With ceaseless bloom, thy steps will stay,'<br>
     The hermit ceased: the princely two<br>
 With seemly honours bade adieu:<br>
 With reverential awe each youth<br>
 Bowed to the saint whose word was truth,<br>
 And then, dismissed with Sítá, they<br>
 To Panchavatí took their way.<br>
 Thus when each royal prince had grasped<br>
 His warrior's mighty bow, and clasped<br>
     His quiver to his side,<br>
 With watchful eyes along the road<br>
 The glorious saint Agastya showed,<br>
 Dauntless in fight the brothers strode,<br>
     And Sítá with them hied.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_441"></a><a href="ry211.htm#fr_441">244:1</a>  One of the Pleiades generally regarded
 as the model of wifely excellence.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry212.htm">Next: Canto XIV.: Jatáyus.</a></center>
 </body>