<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry212.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry214.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XV.: PANCHAVATT.</h3>
 <p>
 Arrived at Panchavatí's shade<br>
 Where silvan life and serpents strayed,<br>
 Ráma in words like these addressed<br>
 Lakshman of vigour unrepressed:<br>
     'Brother, our home is here: behold<br>
 The grove of which the hermit told:<br>
 The bowers of Panchavatí see<br>
 Made fair by every blooming tree.<br>
 Now, brother, bend thine eyes around;<br>
 With skilful glance survey the grouud:<br>
 Here be some spot selected, best<br>
 Approved for gentle hermits' rest,<br>
 Where thou, the Maithil dame, and I<br>
 May dwell while seasons sweetly fly.<br>
 Some pleasant spot be chosen where<br>
 Pure waters gleam and trees are fair,<br>
 Some nook where flowers and wood are found<br>
 And sacred grass and springs abound.'<br>
     Then Lakshman, Sitá standing by,<br>
 Raised reverent hands, and made reply:<br>
     'A hundred years shall flee, and still<br>
 Will I obey my brothers will:<br>
 Select thyself a pleasant spot;<br>
 Be mine the care to rear the cot.'<br>
 The glorious chieftain, pleased to hear<br>
 That loving speech that soothed his ear,<br>
 Selected with observant care<br>
 A spot with every charm most fair.<br>
 He stood within that calm retreat,<br>
 A shade for hermits' home most meet,<br>
 And thus Sumitrá's son addressed,<br>
 While his dear hand in his he pressed:<br>
     'See, see this smooth and lovely glade<br>
 Which flowery trees encircling shade:<br>
 Do thou, beloved Lakshman rear<br>
 A pleasant cot to lodge us here.<br>
 I see beyond that feathery brake<br>
 The gleaming of a lilied lake,<br>
 Where flowers in sunlike glory throw<br>
 Fresh odours from the wave below.<br>
 Agastva's words now find we true,<br>
 He told the charms which here we view:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Here are the trees that blossom o'er<br>
 Godávarí's most lovely shore.<br>
 Whose pleasant flood from side to side<br>
 With swans and geese is beautified,<br>
 And fair banks crowded with the deer<br>
 That steal from every covert near.<br>
 The peacock's cry is loud and shrill<br>
 From many a tall and lovely hill,<br>
 Green-belted by the trees that wave<br>
 Full blossoms o'er the rock and cave.<br>
 Like elephants whose huge fronts glow<br>
 With painted streaks, the mountains show<br>
 Long lines of gold and silver sheen<br>
 With copper's darker hues between.<br>
 With every tree each hill is graced,<br>
 Where creepers blossom interlaced.<br>
 Look where the Sál's long branches sway,<br>
 And palms their fanlike leaves display;<br>
 The date-tree And the Jak are near,<br>
 And their long stems Tamálas rear.<br>
 See the tall Mango lift his head,<br>
 As'okas all their glory spread,<br>
 The Ketak her sweet buds unfold,<br>
 And Champacs hang their cups of gold.  <a name="fr_450"></a><a href="#fn_450"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The spot is pure and pleasant here<br>
 Are multitudes of birds and deer.<br>
 O Lakshman, with our father's friend<br>
 What happy hours we here shall spend!'<br>
     He spoke: the conquering Lakshman heard.<br>
 Obedient to his brother's word.<br>
 Raised by his toil a cottage stood<br>
 To shelter Ráma in the wood<br>
 Of ample size, with leaves o'erlaid,<br>
 Of hardened earth the walls were made.<br>
 The strong bamboos his hands had felled<br>
 For pillars fair the roof upheld,<br>
 And rafter, beam, and lath supplied<br>
 Well interwrought from side to side.<br>
 Then Samí  <a name="fr_451"></a><a href="#fn_451"><font size="1">2</font></a> boughs he deftly spread<br>
 Enlaced with knotted cord o'erhead,<br>
 Well thatched above from ridge to eaves<br>
 With holy grass, and reed, and leaves.<br>
 The mighty chief with careful toil<br>
 Had cleared the ground and smoothed the soil<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_248"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 248</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Where now, his loving labour done,<br>
 Rose a fair home for Raghu's son.<br>
 Then when his work was duly wrought,<br>
 Godávarís sweet stream he sought,<br>
 Bathed, plucked the lilies, and a store<br>
 Of fruit and berries homeward bore.<br>
 Then sacrifice he duly paid,<br>
 And wooed the Gods their hopes to aid,<br>
 And then to Ráma proudly showed<br>
 The cot prepared for his abode,<br>
 Then Raghu's son with Sítá gazed<br>
 Upon the home his hands had raised,<br>
 And transport thrilled his bosom through<br>
 His leafy hermitage to view.<br>
 The glorious son of Raghu round<br>
 His brother's neck his arms enwound,<br>
 And thus began his sweet address<br>
 Of deep-felt joy and gentleness:<br>
 'Well pleased am I, dear lord, to see<br>
 This noble work performed by thee.<br>
 For this,--sole grace I can bestow,--<br>
 About thy neck mine arms I throw.<br>
 So wise art thou, thy breast is filled<br>
 With grateful thoughts, in duty skilled,<br>
 Our mighty father, free from stain,<br>
 In thee, his offspring, lives again.'<br>
     Thus spoke the prince, who lent a grace<br>
 To fortune, pride of Raghu's race;<br>
 Then in that spot whose pleasant shade<br>
 Gave store of fruit, content he stayed.<br>
 With Lakshman and his Maithil spouse<br>
 He spent his day's neath sheltering boughs,<br>
 As happy as a God on high<br>
 Lives in his mansion in the sky.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_450"></a><a href="ry213.htm#fr_450">247:1</a>  The original verses merely name the
 trees. I have been obliged to amplify
 slightly and to omit some quas versu
 dicere non est; e.g. the <i>tinis'a</i> (Dalbergia
 ougeiniensis), <i>punnága</i> (Rottleria tinctoria)
 <i>tilaka</i> (not named), <i>syandana</i> (Dalbergia
 ougeiniensis again) <i>vandana</i> (unknown)
 <i>nipa</i> (Nauclea Kadamba) <i>lakucha</i>
 (Artoearpus lacucha), <i>dhava</i> (Grislea tomentosa),
 As'vakarna (another name for
 the Sál), <i>S'amí</i> (Acacia Suma) <i>khad*ra</i>
 (Mimosa*catechu) <i>kins'*ka</i> (Buteafrondosa)
 <i>pátala</i> (Bignonia suaveolens).</p>
 <p><a name="fn_451"></a><a href="ry213.htm#fr_451">247:2</a>  Acacia Suma.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry214.htm">Next: Canto XVI.: Winter.</a></center>
 </body>