<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry215.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry217.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVIII.: THE MUTILATION.</h3>
 <p>
 On her ensnared in Ráma's net<br>
 His eyes the royal Rama set,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_251"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 251</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And thus, her passion to beguile,<br>
 Addressed her with a gentle smile:<br>
     'I have a wife: behold her here,<br>
 My Sítá ever true and dear:<br>
 And one like thee will never brook<br>
 Upon a rival spouse to look.<br>
 But there my brother Lakshman stands:<br>
 Unchained is he by nuptial bands:<br>
 A youth heroic, loved of all,<br>
 Gracious and gallant, fair and tall.<br>
 With winning looks, most nobly bred,<br>
 Unmatched till now, he longs to wed.<br>
 Meet to enjoy thy youthful charms,<br>
 O take him to thy loving arms.<br>
 Enamoured on his bosom lie,<br>
 Fair damsel of the radiant eye,<br>
 As the warm sunlight loves to rest<br>
 Upon her darling Meru's breast.'<br>
     The hero spoke, the monster heard,<br>
 While passion still her bosom stirred.<br>
 Away from Ráma's side she broke,<br>
 And thus in turn to Lakshman spoke:<br>
 'Come, for thy bride take me who shine<br>
 In fairest grace that suits with thine.<br>
 Thou by my side from grove to grove<br>
 Of Dandak's wild in bliss shalt rove.'<br>
     Then Lakshman, skilled in soft address,<br>
 Wooed by the amorous giantess,<br>
 With art to turn her love aside,<br>
 To Súrpanakhí thus replied:<br>
     'And can so high a dame agree<br>
 The slave-wife of a slave to be?<br>
 I, lotus-hued! in good and ill<br>
 Am bondsman to my brother's will.<br>
 Be thou, fair creature radiant-eyed,<br>
 My honoured brother's younger bride:<br>
 With faultless tint and dainty limb,<br>
 A happy wife, bring joy to him.<br>
 He from his spouse grown old and grey,<br>
 Deformed, untrue, will turn away,<br>
 Her withered charms will gladly leave,<br>
 And to his fair young darling cleave.<br>
 For who could be so fond and blind,<br>
 O loveliest of all female kind,<br>
 To love another dame and slight<br>
 Thy beauties rich in all delight?'<br>
     Thus Lakshman praised in scornful jest<br>
 The long-toothed fiend with loathly breast,<br>
 Who fondly heard his speech, nor knew<br>
 His mocking words were aught but true.<br>
 Again inflamed with love she fled<br>
 To Ráma, in his leafy shed<br>
 Where Sítá rested by his side,<br>
 And to the mighty victor cried:<br>
     'What, Ráma, canst thou blindly cling<br>
 To this old false misshapen thing?<br>
 Wilt thou refuse the charms of youth<br>
 For withered breast and grinning tooth!<br>
 Canst thou this wretched creature prize<br>
 And look on me with scornful eyes?<br>
 This aged crone this very hour<br>
 Before thy face will I devour:<br>
 Then joyous, from all rivals free.<br>
 Through Dandak will I stray with thee.'<br>
     She spoke, and with a glance of flame<br>
 Rushed on the fawn-eyed Maithil dame:<br>
 So would a horrid meteor mar<br>
 Fair Rohiní's soft beaming star.<br>
 But as the furious fiend drew near,<br>
 Like Death's dire noose which chills with fear,<br>
 The mighty chief her purpose stayed,<br>
 And spoke, his brother to upbraid:<br>
 'Ne'er should we jest with creatures rude.<br>
 Of savage race and wrathful mood.<br>
 Think, Lakshman, think how nearly slain<br>
 My dear Videhan breathes again.<br>
 Let not the hideous wretch escape<br>
 Without a mark to mar her shape.<br>
 Strike, lord of men, the monstrous fiend,<br>
 Deformed, and foul, and evil-miened.'<br>
     He spoke: then Lakshman's wrath rose high,<br>
 And there before his brother's eye,<br>
 He drew that sword which none could stay,<br>
 And cleft her nose and ears away.<br>
 Noseless and earless, torn and maimed,<br>
 With fearful shrieks the fiend exclaimed,<br>
 And frantic in her wild distress<br>
 Resought the distant wilderness.<br>
 Deformed, terrific, huge, and dread.<br>
 As on she moved, her gashes bled,<br>
 And groan succeeded groan as loud<br>
 As roars, ere rain, the thunder cloud.<br>
 Still on the fearful monster passed,<br>
 While streams of blood kept falling fast,<br>
 And with a roar, and arms outspread<br>
 Within the boundless wood she fled.<br>
 To Janasthán the monster flew;<br>
     Fierce Khara there she found,<br>
 With chieftains of the giant crew<br>
     In thousands ranged around.<br>
 Before his awful feet she bent<br>
     And fell with piercing cries,<br>
 As when a bolt in swift descent<br>
     Comes flashing from the skies.<br>
 There for a while with senses dazed<br>
     Silent she lay and scared:<br>
 At length her drooping head she raised,<br>
     And all the tale declared,<br>
 How Ráma, Lakshman, and the dame<br>
     Had reached that lonely place:<br>
 Then told her injuries and shame,<br>
     And showed her bleeding face.<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *        *        *        *        *<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry217.htm">Next: Canto XIX.: The Rousing of Khara.</a></center>
 </body>