<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry216.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry218.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIX.: THE ROUSING OF KHARA.</h3>
 <p>
 When Khara saw his sister lie<br>
 With blood-stained limbs and troubled eye,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_252"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 252</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Wild fury in his bosom woke,<br>
 And thus the monstrous giant spoke;<br>
     'Arise, my sister; cast away<br>
 This numbing terror and dismay,<br>
 And straight the impious hand declare<br>
 That marred those features once so fair.<br>
 For who his finger tip will lay<br>
 On the black snake in childish play,<br>
 And unattacked, with idle stroke<br>
 His poison-laden fang provoke?<br>
 Ill-fated fool, he little knows<br>
 Death's noose around his neck he throws,<br>
 Who rashly met thee, and a draught<br>
 Of life-destroying poison quaffed.<br>
 Strong, fierce as death, 'twas thine to choose<br>
 Thy way at will, each shape to use;<br>
 In power and might like one of us:<br>
 What hand has maimed and marred thee thus?<br>
 What God or fiend this deed has wrought,<br>
 What bard or sage of lofty thought<br>
 Was armed with power supremely great<br>
 Thy form to mar and mutilate?<br>
 In all the worlds not one I see<br>
 Would dare a deed to anger me:<br>
 Not Indra's self, the Thousand-eyed,<br>
 Beneath whose hand fierce Páka  <a name="fr_459"></a><a href="#fn_459"><font size="1">1</font></a> died.<br>
 My life-destroying darts this day<br>
 His guilty breath shall rend away,<br>
 E'en as the thirsty wild swan drains<br>
 Each milk-drop that the wave retains.<br>
 Whose blood in foaming streams shall burst<br>
 O'er the dry ground which lies athirst,<br>
 When by my shafts transfixed and slain<br>
 He falls upon the battle plain?<br>
 From whose dead corpse shall birds of air<br>
 The mangled flesh and sinews tear,<br>
 And in their gory feast delight,<br>
 When I have slain him in the fight?<br>
 Not God or bard or wandering ghost,<br>
 No giant of our mighty host<br>
 Shall step between us, or avail<br>
 To save the wretch when I assail.<br>
 Collect each scattered sense, recall<br>
 Thy troubled thoughts, and tell me all.<br>
 What wretch attacked thee in the way,<br>
 And quelled thee in victorious fray?'<br>
     His breast with burning fury fired,<br>
 Thus Khara of the fiend inquired:<br>
 And then with many a tear and sigh<br>
 Thus S'úrpanakhá made reply:<br>
     ''Tis Das'aratha's sons, a pair<br>
 Strong, resolute, and young, and fair:<br>
 In coats of dark and blackdeer's hide,<br>
 And like the radiant lotus eyed:<br>
 On berries roots and fruit they feed,<br>
 And lives of saintly virtue lead:<br>
 With ordered senses undefiled,<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman are they styled.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Fair as the Minstrels' King  <a name="fr_460"></a><a href="ry218.htm#fn_460"><font size="1">1b</font></a> are they,<br>
 And stamped with signs of regal sway.<br>
 I know not if the heroes trace<br>
 Their line from Gods or Dánav <a name="fr_461"></a><a href="ry218.htm#fn_461"><font size="1">2b</font></a> race.<br>
 There by these wondering eyes between<br>
 The noble youths a dame was seen,<br>
 Fair, blooming, young, with dainty waist,<br>
 And all her bright apparel graced.<br>
 For her with ready heart and mind<br>
 The royal pair their strength combined,<br>
 And brought me to this last distress,<br>
 Like some lost woman, comfortless.<br>
 Perfidious wretch! my soul is fain<br>
 Her foaming blood and theirs to drain.<br>
 O let me head the vengeful fight,<br>
 And with this hand my murderers smite.<br>
 Come, brother, hasten to fulfil<br>
 This longing of my eager will.<br>
 On to the battle! Let me drink<br>
 Their lifeblood as to earth they sink.'<br>
     Then Khara, by his sister pressed,<br>
 Inflamed with fury, gave his hest<br>
 To twice seven giants of his crew,<br>
 Fierce as the God of death to view:<br>
     'Two men equipped with arms, who wear<br>
 Deerskin and bark and matted hair,<br>
 Leading a beauteous dame, have strayed<br>
 To the wild gloom of Dandak's shade.<br>
 These men, this cursed woman slay,<br>
 And hasten back without delay,<br>
 That this my sister's lips may be<br>
 Red with the lifeblood of the three.<br>
 Giants, my wounded sister longs<br>
 To take this vengeance for her wrongs.<br>
 With speed her dearest wish fulfil,<br>
 And with your might these creatures kill.<br>
 Soon as your matchless strength shall lay<br>
 These brothers dead in battle fray,<br>
 She in triumphant joy will laugh,<br>
 And their hearts' blood delighted quaff.'<br>
     The giants heard the words he said,<br>
 And forth with S'úrpanakhá sped,<br>
 As mighty clouds in autumn fly<br>
 Urged by the wind along the sky.<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *        *        *        *        *<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_459"></a><a href="ry217.htm#fr_459">252:1</a>  A demon slain by Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry218.htm">Next: Canto XX.: The Giants' Death.</a></center>
 </body>