<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry224.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry226.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVII.: THE DEATH OF TRIS'IRAS.</h3>
 <p>
 But Tris'iras, <a name="fr_472"></a><a href="#fn_472"><font size="1">2</font></a> a chieftain dread,<br>
 Marked Khara as he onward sped.<br>
 And met his car and cried, to stay<br>
 The giant from the purposed fray:<br>
 'Mine be the charge: let me attack,<br>
 And turn thee from the contest back.<br>
 Let me go forth, and thou shalt see<br>
 The strong-armed Ráma slain by me.<br>
 True are the words I speak, my lord:<br>
 I swear it as I touch my sword:<br>
 That I this Ráma's blood will spill,<br>
 Whom every giant's hand should kill.<br>
 This Ráma will I slay, or he<br>
 In battle fray shall conquer me.<br>
 Restrain thy spirit: check thy car,<br>
 And view tne combat from afar.<br>
 Thou, joying o'er the prostrate foe,<br>
 To Janasthán again shalt go,<br>
 Or, if I fall in battle's chance,<br>
 Against my conqueror advance.'<br>
     Thus Tris'iras for death who yearned:<br>
 And Khara from the conflict turned,<br>
 'Go forth to battle,' Khara cried;<br>
 And toward his foe the giant hied.<br>
 Borne on a car of glittering hue<br>
 Which harnessed coursers fleetly drew,<br>
 Like some huge hill with triple peak<br>
 He onward rushed the prince to seek,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_261"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 261</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Still, like a big cloud, sending out<br>
 His arrowy rain with many a shout<br>
 Like the deep sullen roars that come<br>
 Discordant from a moistened drum.<br>
 But Raghu's son, whose watchful eye<br>
 Beheld the demon rushing nigh,<br>
 From the great bow he raised and bent<br>
 A shower of shafts to meet him sent.<br>
 Wild grew the fight and wilder yet<br>
 As fiend and man in combat met,<br>
 As when in some dark wood's retreat<br>
 An elephant and a lion meet.<br>
     The giant bent his bow, and true<br>
 To Ráma's brow three arrows flew.<br>
 Then, raging as he felt the stroke,<br>
 These words in anger Ráma spoke:<br>
 'Heroic chief! is such the power<br>
 Of fiends who rove at midnight hour?<br>
 Soft as the touch of flowers I feel<br>
 The gentle blows thine arrows deal.<br>
 Receive in turn my shafts, and know<br>
 What arrows fly from Ráma's bow.'<br>
 Thus as he spoke his wrath grew hot.<br>
 And twice seven deadly shafts he shot,<br>
 Which, dire as serpent's deadly fang,<br>
 Straight to the giant's bosom sprang.<br>
 Four arrows more,--each shaped to deal<br>
 A mortal wound with barbèd steel,--<br>
 The glorious hero shot, and slew<br>
 The four good steeds the car that drew.<br>
 Eight other shafts flew straight and fleet,<br>
 And hurled the driver from his seat,<br>
 And in the dust the banner laid<br>
 That proudly o'er the chariot played.<br>
 Then as the fiend prepared to bound<br>
 Forth from his useless car to ground,<br>
 The hero smote him to the heart,<br>
 And numbed his arm with deadly smart.<br>
 Again the chieftain, peerless-souled,<br>
 Seat forth three rapid darts, and rolled<br>
 With each keen arrow, deftly sped,<br>
 Low in the dust a monstrous head.<br>
 Then yielding to each deadly stroke,<br>
 Forth spouting streams of blood and smoke,<br>
 The headless trunk bedrenched with gore<br>
 Fell to the ground and moved no more.<br>
 The fiends who yet were left with life,<br>
 Routed and crushed in battle strife,<br>
 To Khara's side, like trembling deer<br>
 Scared by the hunter, fled in fear.<br>
 King Khara saw with furious eye<br>
 His scattered giants turn and fly;<br>
 Then rallying his broken train<br>
 At Raghu's son he drove amain,<br>
 Like Ráhu  <a name="fr_473"></a><a href="#fn_473"><font size="1">1</font></a> when his deadly might<br>
 Comes rushing on the Lord of Night.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_471"></a><a href="ry224.htm#fr_471">260:1</a>  Tris'iras.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_472"></a><a href="ry225.htm#fr_472">260:2</a>  The Three-headed.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_473"></a><a href="ry225.htm#fr_473">261:1</a>  The demon who causes eclipses.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry226.htm">Next: Canto XXVIII.: Khara Dismounted.</a></center>
 </body>