<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry223.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry225.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVI.: DÚSHAN'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 When Dúshan saw his giant band<br>
 Slaughtered by Ráma's conquering hand,<br>
 He called five thousand fiends, and gave<br>
 His orders. Bravest of the brave,<br>
 Invincible, of furious might,<br>
 Ne'er had they turned their backs in flight.<br>
 They, as their leader bade them seize<br>
 Spears, swords, and clubs, and rocks, and trees.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Poured on the dauntless prince again<br>
 A ceaseless shower of deadly rain.<br>
 The virtuous Ráma, undismayed.<br>
 Their missiles with his arrows stayed,<br>
 And weakened, ere it fell, the shock<br>
 Of that dire hail of tree and rock,<br>
 And like a bull with eyelids closed,<br>
 The pelting of the storm opposed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then blazed his ire: he longed to smite<br>
 To earth the rovers of the night.<br>
 The wrath that o'er his spirit came<br>
 Clothed him with splendour as of flame,<br>
 While showers of mortal darts he poured<br>
 Fierce on the giants and their lord.<br>
 Dúshan, the foeman's dusky dread,<br>
 By frenzied rage inspirited,<br>
 On Raghu's son his missiles cast<br>
 Like Indra's bolts which rend and blast.<br>
 But Ráma with a trenchant dart<br>
 Cleft Dúshan's ponderous bow apart.<br>
 And then the gold-decked steeds who drew<br>
 The chariot, with four shafts he slew.<br>
 One crescent dart he aimed which shred<br>
 Clean from his neck the driver's head;<br>
 Three more with deadly skill addressed<br>
 Stood quivering in the giant's breast.<br>
 Hurled from his car, steeds, driver slain,<br>
 The bow he trusted cleft in twain,<br>
 He seized his mace, strong, heavy, dread,<br>
 High as a mountain's towering head.<br>
 With plates of gold adorned and bound,<br>
 Embattled Gods it crushed and ground.<br>
 Its iron spikes yet bore the stains<br>
 Of mangled foemen's blood and brains.<br>
 Its heavy mass of jagged steel<br>
 Was like a thunderbolt to feel,<br>
 It shattered, as on foes it fell,<br>
 The city where the senses dwell. <a name="fr_470"></a><a href="#fn_470"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Fierce Dúshan seized that ponderous mace<br>
 Like monstrous form of serpent race,<br>
 And all his savage soul aglow<br>
 With fury, rushed upon the foe.<br>
 But Raghu's son took steady aim,<br>
 And as the rushing giant came,<br>
 Shore with two shafts the arms whereon<br>
 The demon's glittering bracelets shone.<br>
 His arm at each huge shoulder lopped,<br>
 The mighty body reeled and dropped.<br>
 And the great mace to earth was thrown<br>
 Like Indra's staff when storms have blown,<br>
 As some vast elephant who lies<br>
 Shorn of his tusks, and bleeding dies,<br>
 So, when his arms were rent away,<br>
 Low on the ground the giant lay.<br>
 The spirits saw the monster die,<br>
 And loudly rang their joyful cry,<br>
 'Honour to Ráma! nobly done!<br>
 Well hast thou fought, Kakutstha's son!<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_260"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 260</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     But the great three, the host who led,<br>
 Enraged to see their chieftain dead,<br>
 As though Death's toils were round them cast,<br>
 Rushed upon Ráma fierce and fast,<br>
 Mahákapála seized, to strike<br>
 His foeman down, a ponderous pike:<br>
 Sthúláksha charged with spear to fling,<br>
 Pramáthi with his axe to swing.<br>
 When Ráma saw, with keen darts he<br>
 Received the onset of the three,<br>
 As calm as though he hailed a guest<br>
 In each, who came for shade and rest.<br>
 Mahákapála's monstrous head<br>
 Fell with the trenchant dart he sped.<br>
 His good right hand in battle skilled<br>
 Sthúláksha's eyes with arrows tilled,<br>
 And trusting still his ready bow<br>
 He laid the fierce Pramathi low,<br>
 Who sank as some tall tree falls down<br>
 With bough and branch and leafy crown.<br>
 Then with five thousand shafts he slew<br>
 The rest of Dúshan's giant crew:<br>
 Five thousand demons, torn and rent,<br>
 To Yama's gloomy realm he sent.<br>
     When Khara knew the fate of all<br>
 The giant band and Dúshan's fall,<br>
 He called the mighty chiefs who led<br>
 His army, and in fury said:<br>
     'Now Dúshan and his armed train<br>
 Lie prostrate on the battle plain.<br>
 Lead forth an army mightier still,<br>
 Ráma this wretched man, to kill.<br>
 Fight ye with darts of every shape,<br>
 Nor let him from your wrath escape.'<br>
     Thus spoke the fiend, by rage impelled,<br>
 And straight his course toward Ráma held.<br>
 With S'yenagámí and the rest<br>
 Of his twelve chiefs he onward pressed,<br>
 And every giant as he went<br>
 A storm of well-wrought arrows sent.<br>
 Then with his pointed shafts that came<br>
 With gold and diamond bright as flame,<br>
 Dead to the earth tht hero threw<br>
 The remnant of the demon crew.<br>
 Those shafts with feathers bright as gold,<br>
 Like flames which wreaths of smoke enfold,<br>
 Smote down the fiends like tall trees rent<br>
 By red bolts from the firmament.<br>
 A hundred shafts be pointed well:<br>
 By their keen barbs a hundred fell:<br>
 A thousand,--and a thousand more<br>
 In battle's front lay drenched in gore.<br>
 Of all defence and guard bereft,<br>
 With sundered bows and harness cleft.<br>
 Their bodies red with bloody stain<br>
 Fell the night-rovers on the plain,<br>
 Which, covered with the loosened hair<br>
 Of bleeding giants prostrate there,<br>
 Like some great altar showed, arrayed<br>
 For holy rites with grass o'erlaid.<br>
 The darksome wood, each glade and dell<br>
 Where the wild demons fought and fell<br>
 Was like an awful hell whose floor<br>
 Is thick with mire and flesh and gore.<br>
     Thus twice seven thousand fiends, a band<br>
 With impious heart and bloody hand,<br>
 By Raghu's son were overthrown,<br>
 A man, on foot, and all alone.<br>
 Of all who met on that fierce day,<br>
 Khara, great chief, survived the fray,<br>
 The monster of the triple head, <a name="fr_471"></a><a href="ry225.htm#fn_471"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And Raghu's son, the foeman'a dread.<br>
 The other demon warriors, all<br>
 Skilful and brave and strong and tall,<br>
 In front of battle, side by side,<br>
 Struck down by Lakshman's brother died.<br>
     When Khara saw the host he led<br>
         Triumphant forth to fight<br>
     Stretched on the earth, all smitten dead,<br>
         By Ráma's nobler might,<br>
     Upon his foe he fiercely glared,<br>
         And drove against him fast,<br>
     Like Indra when his arm is bared<br>
         His thundering bolt to cast.<br>
 
 </p><p>
               *        *        *        *        *<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_469"></a><a href="ry223.htm#fr_469">259:1</a>  One of the mysterious weapons given
 to Ráma.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_470"></a><a href="ry224.htm#fr_470">259:1b</a>  A periphrasis for the body.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry225.htm">Next: Canto XXVII.: The Death of Tris'iras.</a></center>
 </body>