<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry221.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry223.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIV.: THE HOST IN SIGHT.</h3>
 <p>
 While Khara urged by valiant rage,<br>
 Drew near that little hermitage,<br>
 Those wondrous signs in earth and sky<br>
 Smote on each prince's watching rye.<br>
 When Rama saw those signs of woe<br>
 Fraught with destruction to the foe,<br>
 With bold impatience scarce repressed<br>
 His brother chief he thus addressed:<br>
     'These fearful signs, my brother bold,<br>
 Which threaten all our foes, behold:<br>
 All laden, as they strike the view,<br>
 With ruin to the fiendish crew.<br>
 The angry clouds are gathering fast,<br>
 Their skirts with dusty gloom o'ercast,<br>
 And harsh with loud-voiced thunder, rain<br>
 Thick drops of blood upon the plain.<br>
 See, burning for the coming light,<br>
 My shafts with wreaths of smoke are white,<br>
 And my great bow embossed with gold<br>
 Throbs eager for the master's hold.<br>
 Each bird that through the forest flies<br>
 Sends out its melancholy cries.<br>
 All signs foretell the dangerous strife,<br>
 The jeopardy of limb and life.<br>
 Each sight, each sound gives warning clear<br>
 That foemen meet and death is near.<br>
 But courage, valiant brother! well<br>
 The throbbings of mine arm foretell<br>
 That ruin waits the hostile powers,<br>
 And triumph in the fight is ours.<br>
 I hail the welcome omen: thou<br>
 Art bright of lace and clear of brow.<br>
 For Lakshman, when the eye can trace<br>
 A cloud upon the warrior's face<br>
 Stealing the cheerful light away,<br>
 His life is doomed in battle fray.<br>
 List, brother, to that awful cry:<br>
 With shout and roar the fiends draw nigh.<br>
 With thundering beat of many a drum<br>
 The savage-hearted giants come.<br>
 The wise who value safety know<br>
 To meet, prepared, the coming blow:<br>
 In paths of prudence trained aright<br>
 They watch the stroke before it smite.<br>
 Take thou thine arrows and thy bow,<br>
 Aud with the Maithil lady go<br>
 For shelter to the mountain cave<br>
 Where thickest trees their branches wave.<br>
 I will not have thee, Lakshman, say<br>
 One word in answer, but obey.<br>
 By all thy honour for these feet<br>
 Of mine, dear brother, I entreat.<br>
 Thy warlike arm, I know could, smite<br>
 To death these rovers of the night;<br>
 But I this day would fight alone<br>
 Till all the fiends be overthrown.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_257"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 257</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spake: and Lakshman answered naught:<br>
 His arrows and his bow he brought,<br>
 And then with Sítá following hied<br>
 For shelter to the mountain side.<br>
 As Lakshman and the lady through<br>
 The forest to'the cave withdrew,<br>
 'Tis well,' cried Ráma. Then he braced<br>
 His coat of mail around his waist.<br>
 When, bright as blazing fire, upon<br>
 His mighty limbs that armour shone,<br>
 The hero stood like some great light<br>
 Uprising in the dark of night.<br>
 His dreadful shafts were by his side;<br>
 His trusty bow he bent and plied.<br>
 Prepared he stood: the bowstring rang,<br>
 Filling the welkin with the clang.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The high-souled Gods together drew<br>
 The wonder of the fight to view,<br>
 The saints made free from spot and stain,<br>
 And bright Gandharvas' heavenly train.<br>
 Each glorious sage the assembly sought,<br>
 Each saint divine of loftiest thought,<br>
 And filled with zeal for Ráma's sake.<br>
 Thus they whose deeds were holy spake:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Now be it well with Bráhmans, now<br>
 Well with the worlds and every cow!<br>
 Let Ráma in the deadly fray<br>
 The fiends who walk in darkness slay,<br>
 As He who bears the discus <a name="fr_465"></a><a href="#fn_465"><font size="1">1</font></a> slew<br>
 The chieftains of the Asur crew.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then each with anxious glances viewed<br>
 His fellow and his speech renewed:<br>
 'There twice seven thousand giants stand<br>
 With impious heart and cruel hand:<br>
 Here Ráma stands, by virtue known:<br>
 How can the hero fight alone?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus royal sage and Bráhman saint,<br>
 Spirit, and Virtue free from taint,<br>
 And all the Gods of heaven who rode<br>
 On golden cars, their longing showed.<br>
 Their hearts with doubt and terror rent,<br>
 They saw the giants' armament,<br>
 And Ráma clothed in warrior might,<br>
 Forth standing in the front of fight.<br>
 Lord of the arm no toil might tire,<br>
 He stood majestic in his ire,<br>
 Matchless in form as Rudra <a name="fr_466"></a><a href="#fn_466"><font size="1">2</font></a> when<br>
 His wrath is fierce on Gods or men.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 While Gods and saints in close array<br>
 Held converse of the coming fray,<br>
 The army of the fiends drew near<br>
 With sight and sound that counselled fear.<br>
 Long, loud and deep their war-cry pealed,<br>
 As on they rushed with flag and shield,<br>
 Each, of his proper valour proud,<br>
 Urging to fight the demon crowd.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 His ponderous bow each warrior tried,<br>
 And swelled his bulk with martial pride.<br>
 'Mid shout and roar and trampling feet.<br>
 And thunder of the drums they beat,<br>
 Loud and more loud the tumult went<br>
 Throughout the forest's vast extent,<br>
 And all the life that moved within<br>
 The woodland trembled at the din.<br>
 In eager haste all fled to find<br>
 Some tranquil spot, nor looked behind.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With every arm of war supplied,<br>
 On-rushing wildly like the tide<br>
 Of some deep sea, the giant host<br>
 Approached where Ráma kept his post.<br>
 Then he, in battle skilled and tried,<br>
 Bent his keen eye on every side,<br>
 And viewed the host of Khara face<br>
 To face before his dwelling-place.<br>
 He drew his arrows forth, and reared<br>
 And strained that bow which foemen feared,<br>
 And yielded to the vengeful sway<br>
 Of fierce desire that host to slay.<br>
 Terrific as the ruinous fire<br>
 That ends the worlds, he glowed in ire;<br>
 And his tremendous form dismayed<br>
 The Gods who roam the forest shade.<br>
 For in the furious wrath that glowed<br>
 Within his soul the hero showed<br>
 Like S'iva when his angry might<br>
 Stayed Daksha's sacrificial rite. <a name="fr_467"></a><a href="ry223.htm#fn_467"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Like some great cloud at dawn of day<br>
     When first the sun upsprings,<br>
 And o'er the gloomy mass each ray<br>
     A golden radiance flings:<br>
 Thus showed the children of the night,<br>
     Whose mail and chariots threw,<br>
 With gleam of bows and armlets bright,<br>
     Flashes of flamy hue.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_465"></a><a href="ry222.htm#fr_465">257:1</a>  Vishnu, who bears a <i>chakra</i> or discus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_466"></a><a href="ry222.htm#fr_466">257:2</a>  S'iva.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry223.htm">Next: Canto XXV.: The Battle.</a></center>
 </body>