<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry227.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry229.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXX.: KHARA'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 When Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,<br>
 Virtue's dear son, had cleft the mace,<br>
 Thus with superior smile the best<br>
 Of chiefs the furious fiend addressed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Thou, worst of giant blood, at length<br>
 Hast shown the utmost of thy strength,<br>
 And forced by greater might to bow,<br>
 Thy vaunting threats are idle now.<br>
 My shafts have cut thy club in twain:<br>
 Useless it lies upon the plain,<br>
 And all thy pride and haughty trust<br>
 Lie with it levelled in the dust.<br>
 The words that thou hast said to-day,<br>
 That thou wouldst wipe the tears away<br>
 Of all the giants I have slain,<br>
 My deeds shall render void and vain.<br>
 Thou meanest of the giants' breed,<br>
 Evil in thought and word and deed.<br>
 My hand shall take that life of thine<br>
 As Garud <a name="fr_477"></a><a href="#fn_477"><font size="1">1</font></a> seized the juice divine.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_264"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 264</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thou, rent by shafts, this day shalt die:<br>
 Low on the ground thy corse shall lie,<br>
 And bubbles from the cloven neck<br>
 With froth and blood thy skin shall deck,<br>
 With dust and mire all rudely dyed,<br>
 Thy torn arms lying by thy side,<br>
 While streams of blood each limb shall steep,<br>
 Thou on earth's breast shalt take thy sleep<br>
 Like a fond lover when he strains<br>
 The beauty whom at length he gains.<br>
 Now when thy heavy eyelids close<br>
 For ever in thy deep repose,<br>
 Again shall Dandak forest be<br>
 Safe refuge for the devotee.<br>
 Thou slain, and all thy race who held<br>
 The realm of Janasthán expelled,<br>
 Again shall happy hermits rove,<br>
 Fearing no danger, through the grove.<br>
 Within those bounds, their brethren slain,<br>
 No giant shall this day remain,<br>
 But all shall fly with many a tear<br>
 And fearing, rid the saints of fear,<br>
 This bitter day shall misery bring<br>
 On all the race that calls thee king.<br>
 Fierce as their lord, thy dames shall know,<br>
 Bereft of joys, the taste of woe.<br>
 Base, cruel wretch, of evil mind,<br>
 Plaguer of Bráhmans and mankind,<br>
 With trembling hands each devotee<br>
 Feeds holy tires in dread of thee.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus with wild fury unrepressed<br>
 Raghu's brave son the fiend addressed;<br>
 And Khara, as his wrath grew high,<br>
 Thus thundered forth his fierce reply:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'By senseless pride to madness wrought,<br>
 By danger girt thou fearest naught,<br>
 Nor heedest, numbered with the dead,<br>
 What thou shouldst say and leave unsaid.<br>
 When Fate's tremendous coils enfold<br>
 The captive in resistless hold,<br>
 He knows not right from wrong, each sense<br>
 Numbed by that deadly influence.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke, and when his speech was done<br>
 Bent his fierce brows on Raghu's son.<br>
 With eager eyes he looked around<br>
 If lethal arms might yet be found.<br>
 Not far away and full in view<br>
 A Sál-tree towering upward grew.<br>
 His lips in mighty strain compressed,<br>
 He tore it up with root and crest,<br>
 With huge arms waved it o'er his head<br>
 And hurled it shouting, Thou art dead.<br>
 But Ráma, unsurpassed in might.<br>
 Stayed with his shafts its onward flight,<br>
 And furious longing seized his soul<br>
 The giant in the dust to roll.<br>
 Great drops of sweat each limb bedewed,<br>
 His red eyes showed his wrathful mood.<br>
 A thousand arrows, swiftly sent,<br>
 The giant's bosom tore and rent<br>
 From every gash his body showed<br>
 The blood in foamy torrents flowed,<br>
 As springing from their caverns leap<br>
 Swift rivers down the mountain steep.<br>
 When Khara felt each deadened power<br>
 Yielding beneath that murderous shower,<br>
 He charged, infuriate with the scent<br>
 Of blood, in dire bewilderment.<br>
 But Ráma watched, with ready bow,<br>
 The onset of his bleeding foe,<br>
 And ere the monster reached him, drew<br>
 Backward in haste a yard or two.<br>
 Then from his side a shaft be took<br>
 Whose mortal stroke no life might brook:<br>
 Of peerless might, it bore the name<br>
 Of Brahmá's staff, and glowed with flame:<br>
 Lord Indra, ruler of the skies,<br>
 Himself had given the glorious prize,<br>
 His bow the virtuous hero drew,<br>
 And at the fiend the arrow flew.<br>
 Hissing and roaring like the blast<br>
 Of tempest through the air it passed,<br>
 And fixed, by Ráma's vigour sped,<br>
 In the foe's breast its pointed head.<br>
 Then fell the fiend: the quenchless flame<br>
 Burnt furious in his wounded frame.<br>
 So burnt by Rudra Andhak <a name="fr_478"></a><a href="#fn_478"><font size="1">1</font></a> fell<br>
 In S'vetáranya's silvery dell:<br>
 So Namuchi and Vritra <a name="fr_479"></a><a href="#fn_479"><font size="1">2</font></a> died<br>
 By steaming bolts that tamed their pride:<br>
 So Bala <a name="fr_480"></a><a href="#fn_480"><font size="1">3</font></a> fell by lightning sent<br>
 By Him who rules the firmament.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then all the Gods in close array<br>
 With the bright hosts who sing and play,<br>
 Filled full of rapture and amaze,<br>
 Sang hymns of joy in Ráma's praise,<br>
 Beat their celestial drums and shed<br>
 Rain of sweet flowers upon his head.<br>
 For three short hours had scarcely flown,<br>
 And by his pointed shafts o'erthrown<br>
 The twice seven thousand fiends, whose will<br>
 Could change their shapes, in death were still,<br>
 With Tris'iras and Dúshan slain,<br>
 And Khara, leader of the train.<br>
 'O wondrous deed,' the bards began,<br>
 'The noblest deed of virtuous man!<br>
 Heroic strength that stood alone,<br>
 And firmness e'en as Vishnu's own!'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus having sung, the shining train<br>
 Turned to their heavenly homes again.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_265"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 265</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then the high saints of royal race<br>
 And loftiest station sought the place,<br>
 And by the great Agastya led,<br>
 With reverence to Ráma said:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'For this, Lord Indra, glorious sire,<br>
 Majestic as the burning fire,<br>
 Who crushes cities in his rage,<br>
 Sought S'arabhanga's hermitage.<br>
 Thou wast, this great design to aid,<br>
 Led by the saints to seek this shade,<br>
 And with thy mighty arm to kill<br>
 The giants who delight in ill.<br>
 Thou Das'aratha's noble son,<br>
 The battle for our sake hast won,<br>
 And saints in Dandak's wild who live<br>
 Their days to holy tasks can give.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Forth from the mountain cavern came<br>
 The hero Lakshman with the dame.<br>
 And rapture beaming from his face.<br>
 Besought the hermit dwelling-place.<br>
 Then when the mighty saints had paid<br>
 Due honour for the victor's aid,<br>
 The glorious Ráma honoured too<br>
 By Lakshman to his cot withdrew.<br>
 When Sitá looked upon her lord,<br>
 His foemen slain, the saints restored,<br>
 In pride and rapture uncontrolled<br>
 She clasped him in her loving hold.<br>
 On the dead fiends her glances fell:<br>
 She saw her lord alive and well,<br>
 Victorious after toil and pain,<br>
 And Janak's child was blest again.<br>
 Once more, once more with new delight<br>
 Her tender arms she threw<br>
 Round Ráma whose victorious might<br>
 Had crushed the demon crew.<br>
 Then as his grateful reverence paid<br>
 Each saint of lofty soul,<br>
 O'er her sweet face, all fears allayed,<br>
 The flush of transport stole.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_477"></a><a href="ry228.htm#fr_477">263:1</a>  Garud the King of Birds, carried off
 the *Amrit* or drink of Paradise from
 Indra's custody.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_478"></a><a href="ry228.htm#fr_478">264:1</a>  A demon, son of Kas'yap and Diti, slain
 by Rudra or S'iva when he attempted to
 carry off the tree of Paradise.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_479"></a><a href="ry228.htm#fr_479">264:2</a>  Namuchi and Vritra were two demons
 slain by Indra. Vritra personifies drought,
 the enemy of Indra, who imprisons the
 rain in the cloud.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_480"></a><a href="ry228.htm#fr_480">264:3</a>  Another demon slain by Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry229.htm">Next: Canto XXXI.: Rávan</a></center>
 </body>