<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry233.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry235.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVI.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 'Hear me, Márícha, while I speak,<br>
 And tell thee why thy home I seek.<br>
 Sick and distressed am I, and see<br>
 My surest hope and help in thee.<br>
 Of Janasthán I need not tell,<br>
 Where Súrpanakhá, Khara dwell,<br>
 And Dúshan with the arm of might.<br>
 And Tris'iras, the fierce in fight,<br>
 Who feeds on human flesh and gore,<br>
 And many noble giants more,<br>
 Who roam in dark of midnight through<br>
 The forest, brave and strong and true.<br>
 By my command they live at ease<br>
 And slaughter saints and devotees.<br>
 Those twice seven thousand giants, all<br>
 Obedient to their captain's call,<br>
 Joying in war and ruthless deeds<br>
 Follow where mighty Khara leads.<br>
 Those fearless warrior bands who roam<br>
 Through Janasthán their forest home,<br>
 In all their terrible array<br>
 Met Ráma in the battle fray.<br>
 Girt with all weapons forth they sped<br>
 With Khara at the army's head.<br>
 The front of battle Ráma held:<br>
 With furious wrath his bosom swelled.<br>
 Without a word his hate to show<br>
 He launched the arrows from his bow.<br>
 On the fierce hosts the missiles came,<br>
 Each burning with destructive flame,<br>
 The twice seven thousand fell o'erthrown<br>
 By him, a man, on foot, alone.<br>
 Khara the army's chief and pride,<br>
 And Dúshan, fearless warrior, died,<br>
 And Trisiras the fierce was slain,<br>
 And Dandak wood was free again.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He, banished by his angry sire.<br>
 Roams with his wife in mean attire.<br>
 This wretch, his Warrior tribe's disgrace<br>
 Has slain the best of giant race.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_272"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 272</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Harsh, wicked, fierce and greedy-souled,<br>
 A fool, with senses uncontrolled,<br>
 No thought of duty stirs his breast:<br>
 He joys to see the world distressed.<br>
 He sought the wood with fair pretence<br>
 Of truthful life and innocence,<br>
 But his false hand my sister left<br>
 Mangled, of nose and ears bereft.<br>
 This Ráma's wife who bears the name<br>
 Of Sítá, in her face and frame<br>
 Fair as a daughter of the skies,--<br>
 Her will I seize and bring the prize<br>
 Triumphant from the forest shade:<br>
 For this I seek thy willing aid<br>
 If  thou, O mighty one, wilt lend<br>
 Thy help and stand beside thy friend,<br>
 I with my brothers may defy<br>
 All Gods embattled in the sky.<br>
 Come, aid me now, for thine the power<br>
 To succour in the doubtful hour.<br>
 Thou art in war and time of fear,<br>
 For heart and hand, without a peer.<br>
 For thou art skilled in art and wile,<br>
 A warrior brave and trained in guile.<br>
 With this one hope, this only aim,<br>
 O Rover of the Night, I came.<br>
 Now let me tell what aid I ask<br>
 To back me in my purposed task.<br>
 In semblance of a golden deer<br>
 Adorned with silver spots appear.<br>
 Go, seek his dwelling: in the way<br>
 Of Ráma and his consort stray.<br>
 Doubt not the lady, when she sees<br>
 The wondrous deer amid the trees,<br>
 Will bid her lord and Lakshman take<br>
 The creature for its beauty's sake.<br>
 Then when the chiefs have parted thence,<br>
 And left her lone, without defence,<br>
 As Ráhu storms the moonlight, I<br>
 Will seize the lovely dame and fly.<br>
 Her lord will waste away and weep<br>
 For her his valour could not keep.<br>
 Then boldly will I strike the blow<br>
 And wreak my vengeance on the foe.'<br>
     When wise Márícha heard the tale<br>
 His heart grew faint, his cheek was pale,<br>
 He stared with open orbs, and tried<br>
 To moisten lips which terror dried,<br>
 And grief, like death, his bosom rent<br>
 As on the king his look he bent.<br>
     The monarch's will he strove to stay,<br>
         Distracted with alarm,<br>
     For well he knew the might that lay<br>
         In Ráma's matchless arm.<br>
     With suppliant hands Marícha stood<br>
         And thus began to tell<br>
     His counsel for the tyrant's good,<br>
         And for his own as well.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry235.htm">Next: Canto XXXVII.: Márícha's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>