<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry237.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry239.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XL.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 But Rávan soorned the rede he gave<br>
 In timely words to warn and save,<br>
 E'en as the wretch who hates to live<br>
 Rejects the herb the leeches give.<br>
 By fate to sin and ruin spurred,<br>
 That sage advice the giant heard,<br>
 Then in reproaches hard and stern<br>
 Thus to Márícha spoke in turn:<br>
     'Is this thy counsel, weak and base,<br>
 Unworthy of thy giant race?<br>
 Thy speech is fruitless, vain, thy toil<br>
 Like casting seed on barren soil.<br>
 No words of thine shall drive me back<br>
 From Ráma and the swift attack.<br>
 A fool is he, inured to sin.<br>
 And more, of human origin.<br>
 The craven, at a woman's call<br>
 To leave his sire, his mother, all<br>
 The friends he loved, the power and sway.<br>
 And hasten to the woods away!<br>
 But now his anger will I rouse,<br>
 Stealing away his darling spouse.<br>
 I in thy sight will ravish her<br>
 From Khara's cruel murderer.<br>
 Upon this plan my soul is bent,<br>
 And naught shall move my firm intent,<br>
 Not if the way through demons led<br>
 And Gods with Indra at their head.<br>
 'Tis thine, when questioned, to explain<br>
 The hope and fear, the loss and gain,<br>
 And, when thy king thy thoughts would know,<br>
 The triumph or the danger show.<br>
 A prudent counsellor should wait,<br>
 And speak when ordered in debate,<br>
 With hands uplifted, calm and meek,<br>
 If honour and reward he seek.<br>
 Or, when some prudent course he sees<br>
 Which, spoken, may his king displease<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_276"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 276</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He should by hints of dexterous art<br>
 His counsel to his lord impart.<br>
 But prudent words are said in vain<br>
 When the blunt speech brings grief and pain.<br>
 A high-souled king will scarcely thank<br>
 The man who shames his royal rank.<br>
 Five are the shapes that kings assume,<br>
 Of majesty, of grace, and gloom:<br>
 Like Indra now, or Agni, now<br>
 Like the dear Moon, with placid brow:<br>
 Like mighty Varun now they show,<br>
 Now fierce as He who rules below.<br>
 O giant, monarchs lofty-souled<br>
 Are kind and gentle, stern and bold,<br>
 With gracious love their gifts dispense<br>
 And swiftly punish each offence.<br>
 Thus subjects should their rulers view<br>
 With all respect and honour due.<br>
 But folly leads thy heart to slight<br>
 Thy monarch and neglect his right.<br>
 Thou hast in lawless pride addressed<br>
 With bitter words thy royal guest.<br>
 I asked thee not my strength to scan,<br>
 Or [*} and profit in the plan.<br>
 I only spoke to tell the deed<br>
 O mighty one, by me decreed,<br>
 And bid thee in the peril lend<br>
 Thy succour in support thy friend.<br>
 Hear me again, and I will tell<br>
 How thou canst aid my venture well.<br>
 In semblance of a golden deer<br>
 Adorned with silver drops, appear:<br>
 And near the cottage in the way<br>
 Of Ráma and his consort stray.<br>
 Draw nigh, and wandering through the brake<br>
 With thy strange form her fancy take.<br>
 The Maithil dame with wondering eyes<br>
 Will took upon thy fair disguise,<br>
 And quickly bid her husband go<br>
 And bring the deer that charms her so,<br>
 When Raghu's son has left the place,<br>
 Still pressing onward in the chase,<br>
 Cry out, 'O Lakshman! Ah, mine own!'<br>
 With voice resembling Ráma's tone.<br>
 When Lakshman hears his brother's cry,<br>
 Impelled by Sitá he will fly,<br>
 Restless with eager love, to aid<br>
 The hunter in the distant shade.<br>
 When both her guards have left her side,<br>
 Even as Indra, thousand-eyed,<br>
 Clasps Sachi, will I bear away<br>
 The Maithil dame an easy prey.<br>
 When thou, my friend, this aid hast lent,<br>
 Go where thou wilt and live content.<br>
 True servant, faithful to thy vow,<br>
 With [*half?} my realm I thee endow.<br>
 Go forth, may luck thy way attend<br>
 That leads thee to the happy end.<br>
 [I:ii m.,ir v}, will quickly be<br>
 
 </p><p>
 In Dandak wood, and follow thee.<br>
 So will I cheat this Ráma's eyes<br>
 And win without a blow the prize;<br>
 And safe return to Lanká's town<br>
 With thee, my friend, this day shall crown.<br>
 But if thou wilt not aid my will,<br>
 My band this day thy blood shall spill.<br>
 Yea, thou must share the destined task,<br>
 For force will take the help I ask.<br>
 No bliss that rebel's life attends<br>
 Whose stubborn will his lord offends.<br>
     Thy life, if thou the task assay,<br>
         jeopardy may stand;<br>
     Oppose me, and this very day<br>
         Thou diest by this hand.<br>
     Now ponder all that thou hast heard<br>
         Within thy prudent breast:<br>
     Reflect with care on every word,<br>
         And do what seems the best.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry239.htm">Next: Canto XLI.: Márícha's Reply.</a></center>
 </body>