<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry229.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry231.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXII.: RÁVAN ROUSED.</h3>
 <p>
 But Súrpanakhá saw the plain<br>
 Spread with the fourteen thousand slain,<br>
 Doers of cruel deeds o'erthrown<br>
 By Ráma's mighty arm alone,<br>
 Add Tris'iras and Dúshan dead,<br>
 And Khara, with the hosts they led.<br>
 Their death she saw, and mad with pain,<br>
 Roared like a cloud that brings the rain,<br>
 And fled in anger and dismay<br>
 To Lanká, seat of Rávan's sway.<br>
 There on a throne of royal state<br>
 Exalted sat the potentate,<br>
 Begirt with counsellor and peer,<br>
 Like Indra with the Storm-Gods near.<br>
 Bright as the sun's full splendour shone<br>
 The glorious throne he sat upon,<br>
 As when the blazing fire is red<br>
 Upon a golden altar fed.<br>
 Wide gaped his mouth at every breath,<br>
 Tremendous as the jaws of Death.<br>
 With him high saints of lofty thought,<br>
 Gandharvas, Gods, had vainly fought.<br>
 The wounds Were on his body yet<br>
 From wars where Gods and demons met.<br>
 And scars still marked his ample chest<br>
 By fierce Airávat's <a name="fr_485"></a><a href="#fn_485"><font size="1">1</font></a> tusk impressed.<br>
 A score of arms, ten necks, had he,<br>
 His royal gear was brave to see.<br>
 His massive form displayed each sign<br>
 That marks the heir of kingly line.<br>
 In stature like a mountain height,<br>
 His arms were strong, his teeth were white,<br>
 And all his frame of massive mould<br>
 Seemed lazulite adorned with gold.<br>
 A hundred seams impressed each *limb*<br>
 Where Vishnu's arm had wounded him,<br>
 And chest and shoulder bore the print<br>
 Of sword and spear and arrow dint,<br>
 Where every God had struck a blow<br>
 In battle with the giant foe.<br>
 His might to wildest rage could wake<br>
 The sea whose faith naught else can shake,<br>
 Hurl towering mountains to the earth,<br>
 And crush e'en foes of heavenly birth.<br>
 The bonds of law and right he spurned:<br>
 To others' wives his fancy turned.<br>
 Celestial arms he used in fight,<br>
 And loved to mar each holy rite.<br>
 He went to Bhogavatí's town, <a name="fr_486"></a><a href="#fn_486"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Where Vásuki was beaten down,<br>
 And stole, victorious in the strife,<br>
 Lord Takshaka's beloved wife.<br>
 Kailása's lofty crest he sought,<br>
 And when in vain Kuvera fought,<br>
 Stole Pushpak thence,the car that through<br>
 The air, as willed the master, flew.<br>
 Impelled by furious anger, he<br>
 Spoiled Nandan's <a name="fr_487"></a><a href="#fn_487"><font size="1">3</font></a> shade and Naliní,<br>
 And Chaitraratha's heavenly grove,<br>
 The haunts where Gods delight to rove.<br>
 Tall as a hill that cleaves the sky,<br>
 He raised his mighty arms on high<br>
 To check the blessed moon, and stay<br>
 The rising of the Lord of Day.<br>
 Ten thousand years the giant spent<br>
 On dire austerities intent.<br>
 And of his heads an offering, laid<br>
 Before the Self-existent, made.<br>
 No God or fiend his life could take,<br>
 Gandharva, goblin, bird, or snake:<br>
 Safe from all fears of death, except<br>
 From human arm, that life was kept.<br>
 Oft when the priests began to raise<br>
 Their consecrating hymns of praise,<br>
 He spoiled the Soma's sacred juice<br>
 Poured forth by them in solemn use.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_268"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 268</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The sacrifice his hands o'erthrew,<br>
 And cruelly the Bráhmans slew.<br>
 His was a heart that naught oould melt,<br>
 Joying in woes which others felt.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She saw the ruthless monster there,<br>
 Dread of the worlds, unused to spare.<br>
 In robes of heavenly texture dressed,<br>
 Celestial wreaths adorned his breast.<br>
 He sat a shape of terror, like<br>
 Destruction ere the worlds it strike.<br>
 She saw him in his pride of place,<br>
 The joy of old Pulastya's <a name="fr_488"></a><a href="ry231.htm#fn_488"><font size="1">1</font></a> race,<br>
 Begirt by counsellor and peer,<br>
 Rávan, the foeman's mortal fear,<br>
 And terror in her features shown,<br>
 The giantess approached the throne.<br>
     Then Súrpanakhá bearing yet<br>
         Each deeply printed trace<br>
     Where the great-hearted chief had set<br>
         A mark upon her face,<br>
     Impelled by terror and desire,<br>
         Still fierce, no longer bold,<br>
     To Rávan of the eyes of fire<br>
         Her tale, infuriate, told,<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_485"></a><a href="ry230.htm#fr_485">267:1</a>  Indra's elephant.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_486"></a><a href="ry230.htm#fr_486">267:2</a>  Bhogavatí, in Pátála in the regions
 under the earth, is the capital of the serpent
 race whose king is Vásuki.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_487"></a><a href="ry230.htm#fr_487">267:3</a>  The grove of Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry231.htm">Next: Canto XXXIII.: Súrpanakhá's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>