<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry230.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry232.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIII.: SÚRPANAKHÁ'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Burning with anger, in the ring<br>
 Of counsellors who girt their king,<br>
 To Rávan, ravener of man,<br>
 With bitter words she thus began:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Wilt thou absorbed in pleasure, still<br>
 Pursue unchecked thy selfish will:<br>
 Nor turn thy heedless eyes to see<br>
 The coming fate which threatens thee?<br>
 The king who days and hours employs<br>
 In base pursuit of vulgar joys<br>
 Must in his people's sight be vile<br>
 As fire that smokes on funeral pile.<br>
 He who when duty calls him spares<br>
 No time for thought of royal cares,<br>
 Must with his realm and people all<br>
 Involved in fatal ruin fall.<br>
 As elephants in terror shrink<br>
 From the false river's miry brink,<br>
 Thus subjects from a monarch flee<br>
 Whose face their eyes may seldom see,<br>
 Who spends the hours for toil ordained<br>
 In evil courses unrestrained.<br>
 He who neglects to guard and hold<br>
 His kingdom by himself controlled,<br>
 Sinks nameless like a hill whose head<br>
 Is buried in the ocean's bed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Thy foes are calm and strong and wise,<br>
 Fiends, Gods, and warriors of the skies,--<br>
 How, heedless, wicked, weak, and vain,<br>
 Wilt thou thy kingly state maintain?<br>
 Thou, lord of giants, void of sense,<br>
 Slave of each changing influence,<br>
 Heedless of all that makes a king.<br>
 Destruction on thy head wilt bring.<br>
 O conquering chief, the prince, who boasts,<br>
 Of treasury and rule and hosts,<br>
 By others led, though lord of all,<br>
 Is meaner than the lowest thrall.<br>
 For this are monarchs said to be<br>
 Long-sighted, having power to see<br>
 Things far away by faithful eyes<br>
 Of messengers and loyal spies.<br>
 But aid from such thou wilt not seek:<br>
 Thy counsellors are blind and weak,<br>
 Or thou from these hadst surely known<br>
 Thy legions and thy realm o'erthrown.<br>
 Know, twice seven thousand, fierce in might,<br>
 Are slain by Ráma in the fight,<br>
 And they, the giant host who led,<br>
 Khara and Dúshan, both are dead.<br>
 Know, Ráma with his conquering arm<br>
 Has freed the saints from dread of harm,<br>
 Has smitten Janasthán and made<br>
 Asylum safe in Dandak's shade.<br>
 Enslaved and dull of blinded sight,<br>
 Intoxicate with vain delight,<br>
 Thou closest still thy heedless eyes<br>
 To dangers in thy realm that rise.<br>
 A king besotted, mean, unkind,<br>
 Of niggard hand and slavish mind.<br>
 Will find no faithful followers heed<br>
 Their master in his hour of need.<br>
 The friend on whom he most relies,<br>
 In danger, from a monarch flies,<br>
 Imperious in his high estate,<br>
 Conceited, proud, and passionate;<br>
 Who ne'er to state affairs attends<br>
 With wholesome fear when woe impends<br>
 Most weak and worthless as the grass,<br>
 Soon from his sway the realm will pass.<br>
 For rotting wood a use is found,<br>
 For clods and dust that strew the ground,<br>
 But when a king has lost his sway,<br>
 Useless he falls, and sinks for aye.<br>
 As raiment by another worn,<br>
 As faded garland crushed and torn,<br>
 So is, unthroned, the proudest king,<br>
 Though mighty once, a useless thing.<br>
 But he who every sense subdues<br>
 And each event observant views,<br>
 Rewards the good and keeps from wrong,<br>
 Shall reign secure and flourish long.<br>
 Though lulled in sleep his senses lie<br>
 He watches with a ruler's eye,<br>
 Untouched by favour, ire, and hate,<br>
 And him the people celebrate.<br>
 O weak of mind, without a trace<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_269"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 269</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Of virtues that a king should grace,<br>
 Who hast not learnt from watchful spy<br>
 That low in death the giants lie.<br>
 Scorner of others, but enchained<br>
         By every base desire,<br>
     By thee each duty is disdained<br>
         Which time and place require.<br>
     Soon wilt thou, if thou canst not learn,<br>
         Ere yet it be too late,<br>
     The good from evil to discern,<br>
         Fall from thy high estate.'<br>
     As thus she ceased not to upbraid<br>
         The king with cutting speech,<br>
     And every fault to view displayed,<br>
         Naming and marking each,<br>
     The monarch of the sons of night,<br>
         Of wealth and power possessed,<br>
     And proud of his imperial might,<br>
         Long pondered in his breast.   <br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_488"></a><a href="ry230.htm#fr_488">268:1</a>  Pulastya is considered as the ancestor
 of the Rakshases or giants, as he is the
 father of Vis'ravas, the father of Rávan
 and his brethren.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry232.htm">Next: Canto XXXIV.: Sûrpanakhá's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>