<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry234.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry236.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVII.: MÁRÍCHA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Márícha gave attentive ear<br>
 The ruler of the fiends to hear:<br>
 Then, trained in all the rules that teach<br>
 The eloquent, began his speech:<br>
 ''Tis easy task, O King, to find<br>
 Smooth speakers who delight the mind.<br>
 But they who urge and they who do<br>
 Distasteful things and wise, are few.<br>
 Thou hast not learnt, by proof untaught,<br>
 And borne away by eager thought,<br>
 That Ráma, formed for high emprise,<br>
 With Varun or with Indra vies.<br>
 Still let thy people live in peace,<br>
 Nor let their name and lineage cease,<br>
 For Ráma with his vengeful hand<br>
 Can sweep the giants from the land.<br>
 0, let not Janak's daughter bring<br>
 Destruction on the giant king.<br>
 Let not the lady Sítá wake<br>
 A tempest, on thy head to break.<br>
 Still let the dame, by care untried,<br>
 Be happy by her husband's side,<br>
 Lest swift avenging ruin fall<br>
 On glorious Lanká, thee, and all.<br>
 Men such as thou with wills unchained,<br>
 Advised by sin and unrestrained,<br>
 Destroy themselves, the king, the state,<br>
 And leave the people desolate.<br>
 Ráma, in bonds of duty held,<br>
 Was never by his sire expelled.<br>
 He is no wretch of greedy mind,<br>
 Dishonour of his Warrior kind.<br>
 Free from all touch of rancorous spite,<br>
 All creatures' good is his delight.<br>
 He saw his sire of truthful heart<br>
 Deceived by  Queen Kaikeyí's art,<br>
 And said, a true and duteous son,<br>
 'What thou hast promised shall be done.'<br>
 To gratify the lady's will,<br>
 His father's promise to fulfil,<br>
 He left his realm and all delight<br>
 For Dandak wood, an anchorite.<br>
 No cruel wretch, no senseless fool<br>
 Is Ráma, unrestrained by rule.<br>
 This groundless charge has ne'er been heard,<br>
 Nor shouldst thou speak the slanderous word.<br>
 Ráma in truth and goodness bold<br>
 Is Virtue's self in human mould,<br>
 The sovereign of the world confessed<br>
 As Indra rules among the Blest.<br>
 And dost thou plot from him to rend<br>
 The darling whom his arms defend?<br>
 Less vain the hope to steal away<br>
 The glory of the Lord of Day.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_273"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 273</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 O Rávan, guard thee from the fire<br>
 Of vengeful Ráma's kindled ire,--<br>
 Each spark a shaft with deadly aim,<br>
 While bow and falchion feed the flame.<br>
 Cast not away in hopeless strife<br>
 Thy realm, thy bliss, thine own dear life.<br>
 O Rávan of his might beware,<br>
 A God of Death who will not spare.<br>
 That bow he knows so well to draw<br>
 Is the destroyer's flaming jaw,<br>
 And with his shafts which flash and glow<br>
 He slays the armies of the foe.<br>
 Thou ne'er canst win--the thought forego--<br>
 From the safe guard of shaft and bow<br>
 King Janak's child, the dear delight<br>
 Of Ráma unapproached in might.<br>
 The spouse of Raghu's son, confessed<br>
 Lion of men with lion chest,--<br>
 Dearer than life, through good and ill<br>
 Devoted to her husband's will,<br>
 The slender-waisted, still must be<br>
 From thy polluting touches free.<br>
 Far better grasp with venturous hand<br>
 The flame to wildest fury fanned.<br>
 What, King of giants, canst thou gain<br>
 From this attempt so wild and vain?<br>
 If in the fight his eye he bend<br>
 Upon thee, Lord, thy days must end.<br>
 So life and bliss and royal sway,<br>
 Lost beyond hope, will pass away.<br>
 Summon each lord of high estate,<br>
 And chief, Vibhíshan <a name="fr_491"></a><a href="#fn_491"><font size="1">1</font></a> to debate.<br>
 With peers in lore of counsel tried<br>
 Consider, reason, and decide<br>
 Scan strength and weakness, count the cost,<br>
 What may be gained and what be lost.<br>
 Examine and compare aright<br>
 Thy proper power and Ráma's might,<br>
 Then if thy weal be still thy care.<br>
 Thou wilt be prudent and forbear.<br>
 O giant King, the contest shun,<br>
     Thy force is all too weak<br>
 The lord of Kosál's mighty son<br>
     In deadly fray to seek.<br>
 King of the hosts that rove at night,<br>
     O hear what I advise:<br>
 My prudent counsel do not slight;<br>
     Be patient and be wise.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_491"></a><a href="ry235.htm#fr_491">273:1</a>  'The younger brother of the giant
 Rávan; when he and his brother had
 practiced austerities for a long series of
 years, Brahmá appeared to offer them
 boons: Vibhíshana asked that he might
 never meditate any unrighteousness....
 On the death of Rávan Vibhíshana was
 installed as Rája of Lanká.' GARRETT'S
 <i>Classical Dictionary of India</i>.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry236.htm">Next: Canto XXXVIII.: Márícha's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>