<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry235.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry237.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVIII.: MÁRÍCHA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 "Once in my strength and vigour's pride<br>
 I roamed this earth from side to side,<br>
 And towering like a mountain's crest,<br>
 A thousand Nágas' <a name="fr_492"></a><a href="#fn_492"><font size="1">1b</font></a> might possessed.<br>
 Like some vast sable cloud I showed:<br>
 My golden armlets flashed and glowed.<br>
 A crown I wore, an axe I swayed,<br>
 And all I met were sore afraid.<br>
 I roved where Dandak wood is spread;<br>
 On flesh of slaughtered saints I fed.<br>
 Then Vis'vámitra, sage revered.<br>
 Holy of heart, my fury feared.<br>
 To Das'aratha's court he sped<br>
 And went before the king and said: <a name="fr_493"></a><a href="#fn_493"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'With me, my lord, thy Ráma send<br>
 On holy days his aid to lend.<br>
 Márícha fills my soul with dread<br>
 And keeps me sore disquieted.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The monarch heard the saint's request<br>
 And thus the glorious sage addressed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'My boy as yet in arms untrained<br>
 The age of twelve has scarce attained.<br>
 But I myself a host will lead<br>
 To guard thee in the hour of need.<br>
 My host with fourfold troops complete,<br>
 The rover of the night shall meet,<br>
 And I, O best of saints, will kill<br>
 Thy foeman and thy prayer fulfil.'<br>
 The king vouchsafed his willing aid:<br>
 The saint again this answer made:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'By Ráma's might, and his alone,<br>
 Can this great fiend be overthrown.<br>
 I know in days of yore the Blest<br>
 Thy saving help in fight confessed.<br>
 Still of thy famous deeds they tell<br>
 In heaven above, in earth, and hell,<br>
 A mighty host obeys thy hest:<br>
 Here let it still, I pray thee, rest.<br>
 Thy glorious son, though yet a boy,<br>
 Will in the fight that fiend destroy.<br>
 Ráma alone with me shall go:<br>
 Be happv, victor of the foe.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke: the monarch gave assent,<br>
 And Ráma to the hermit lent.<br>
 So to his woodland home in joy<br>
 Went Vis'vámitra with the boy.<br>
 With ready bow the champion stood<br>
 To guard the rites in Dandak wood.<br>
 With glorious eyes, most bright to view,<br>
 Beardless as yet and dark of hue;<br>
 A single robe his only wear,<br>
 His temples veiled with waving hair,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_274"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 274</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Around his neck a chain of gold,<br>
 He grasped the bow he loved to bold;<br>
 And the young hero's presence made<br>
 A glory in the forest shade.<br>
 Thus Ráma with his beauteous mien,<br>
 Like the young rising moon was seen,<br>
 I, like a cloud which tempest brings,<br>
 My arms adorned with golden rings,<br>
 Proud of the boon which lent me might,<br>
 Approached where dwelt the anchorite.<br>
 But Ráma saw me venturing nigh,<br>
 Raising my murderous axe on high;<br>
 He saw, and fearless of the foe,<br>
 Strung with calm hand his trusty bow<br>
 By pride of conscious strength beguiled,<br>
 I scorned him as a feeble child,<br>
 And rushed with an impetuous bound<br>
 On Vis'vámitra's holy ground.<br>
 A keen swift shaft he pointed well,<br>
 The foeman's rage to check and quell,<br>
 And hurled a hundred leagues away<br>
 Deep in the ocean waves I lay.<br>
 He would not kill, but, nobly brave,<br>
 My forfeit life he chose to save.<br>
 So there I lay with wandering sense<br>
 Dazed by that arrow's violence.<br>
 Long in the sea I lay: at length<br>
 Slowly returned my sense and strength,<br>
 And rising from my watery bed<br>
 To Lanká's town again I sped.<br>
 Thus was I spared, but all my band<br>
 Fell slain by Ráma's conquering hand,--<br>
 A boy, untrained in warrior skill,<br>
 Of iron arm and dauntless will.<br>
 If thou with Ráma still, in spite<br>
 Of warning and of prayer, wilt fight,<br>
 I see terrific woes impend,<br>
 And dire defeat thy days will end.<br>
 Thy giants all will feel the blow<br>
 And share the fatal overthrow,<br>
 Who love the taste of joy and play,<br>
 The banquet and the festal day.<br>
 Thine eyes will see destruction take<br>
 Thy Lanká, lost for Sitá's sake,<br>
 And stately pile and palace fall<br>
 With terrace, dome, and jewelled wall.<br>
 The good will die: the crime of kings<br>
 Destruction on the people brings:<br>
 The sinless die, as in the lake<br>
 The fish must perish with the snake.<br>
 The prostrate giants thou wilt see<br>
 Slain for this folly wrought by thee,<br>
 Their bodies bright with precious scent<br>
 And sheen of heavenly ornament;<br>
 Or so the remnant of thy train<br>
 Seek refuge far, when help is vain<br>
 And with their wives, or widowed, fly<br>
 To every quarter of the sky;<br>
 Thy mournful eyes, where'er they turn,<br>
 Will see thy stately city burn,<br>
 When royal homes with fire are red,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And arrowy nets around are spread.<br>
 A sin that tops all sins in shame<br>
 Is outrage to another's dame,<br>
 A thousand wives thy palace fill,<br>
 And countless beauties wait thy will.<br>
 O rest contented with thine own,<br>
 Nor let thy race be overthrown.<br>
 If thou, O King, hast still delight<br>
 In rank and wealth and power and might,<br>
 In noble wives, in troops of friends,<br>
 In all that royal state attends,<br>
 I warn thee, cast not all away,<br>
 Nor challenge Ráma to the fray.<br>
 If deaf to every friendly prayer,<br>
     Thou still wilt seek the strife,<br>
 And from the side of Ráma tear<br>
     His lovely Maithil wife,<br>
 Soon will thy life and empire end<br>
     Destroyed by Ráma's bow,<br>
 And thou, with kith and kin and friend,<br>
 To Yama'a realm must go.'<br>
 
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_492"></a><a href="ry236.htm#fr_492">273:1b</a>  Serpent-gods.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_493"></a><a href="ry236.htm#fr_493">273:2b</a>  See p. 33.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry237.htm">Next: Canto XXXIX.: Márícha's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>