<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry232.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry234.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXV.: RÁVAN'S JOURNEY.</h3>
 <p>
 When Rávan, by her fury spurred,<br>
 That terrible advice had heard,<br>
 He bade his nobles quit his side,<br>
 And to the work his thought applied.<br>
 He turned his anxious mind to scan<br>
 On every side the hardy plan:<br>
 The gain against the risk he laid,<br>
 Each hope and fear with care surveyed,<br>
 And in his heart at length decreed<br>
 To try performance of the deed.<br>
 Then steady in his dire intent<br>
 The giant to the courtyard went.<br>
 There to his charioteer he cried,<br>
 'Bring forth the car whereon I ride.'<br>
 Aye ready at his master's word<br>
 The charioteer the order heard.<br>
 And yoked with active zeal the best<br>
 Of chariots at his lord's behest.<br>
 Asses with heads of goblins drew<br>
 That wondrous car where'er it flew.<br>
 Obedient to the will it rolled<br>
 Adorned with gems and glistering gold.<br>
 Then mounting, with a roar as loud<br>
 As thunder from a labouring cloud,<br>
 The mighty monarch to the tide<br>
 Of Ocean, lord of rivers, hied.<br>
 White was the shade above him spread,<br>
 White chouris waved around his head,<br>
 And he with gold and jewels bright<br>
 Shone like the glossy lazulite.<br>
 Ten necks and twenty arms had he:<br>
 His royal gear was good to see.<br>
 The heavenly Gods' insatiate foe.<br>
 Who made the blood of hermits flow,<br>
 He like the Lord of Hills appeared<br>
 With ten huge heads to heaven upreared.<br>
 In the great car whereon he rode,<br>
 Like some dark cloud the giant showed,<br>
 When round it in their close array<br>
 The cranes 'mid wreaths of lightning play.<br>
 He looked, and saw, from realms of air,<br>
 The rocky shore of ocean, where<br>
 Unnumbered trees delightful grew<br>
 With flower and fiuit of every hue.<br>
 He looked on many a lilied pool<br>
 With silvery waters fresh and cool,<br>
 And shores like spacious altars meet<br>
 For holy hermits' lone retreat,<br>
 The graceful palm adorned the scene,<br>
 The plantain waved her glossy green,<br>
 Where grew the sál and betel, there<br>
 On bending boughs the flowers were fair.<br>
 There hermits dwelt who tamed each sense<br>
 By strictest rule of abstinence:<br>
 Gandharvas, Kinnars, <a name="fr_489"></a><a href="#fn_489"><font size="1">1</font></a> thronged the place,<br>
 Nágas and birds of heavenly race.<br>
 Bright minstrels of the ethereal quire,<br>
 And saints exempt from low desire,<br>
 With Ájas, sons of Brahmá's line,<br>
 Maríchipas of seed divine,<br>
 Vaikhánasas and Máshas strayed,<br>
 And Bálakhilyas <a name="fr_490"></a><a href="#fn_490"><font size="1">2</font></a> in the shade.<br>
 The lovely nymphs of heaven were there,<br>
 Celestial wreaths confined their hair,<br>
 And to each form new grace was lent<br>
 By wealth of heavenly ornament.<br>
 Well skilled was each in play and dance<br>
 And gentle arts of dalliance.<br>
 The glorious wife of many a God<br>
 Those beautiful recesses trod,<br>
 There Gods and Dánavs, all who eat<br>
 The food of heaven, rejoiced to meet.<br>
 The swan and Sáras thronged each bay<br>
 With curlews, ducks, and divers gay,<br>
 Where the sea spray rose soft and white<br>
 O'er rocks of glossy lazulite.<br>
 As his swift way the fiend pursued<br>
 Pale chariots of the Gods he viewed,<br>
 Bearing each lord whose rites austere<br>
 Had raised him to the heavenly sphere.<br>
 Thereon celestial garlands hung,<br>
 There music played and songs were sung.<br>
 Then bright Gandharvas met his view,<br>
 And heavenly nymphs, as on he flew.<br>
 He saw the sandal woods below,<br>
 And precious trees of odorous flow,<br>
 That to the air around them lent<br>
 Their riches of delightful scent;<br>
 Nor failed his roving eye to mark<br>
 Tall aloe trees in grove and park.<br>
 He looked on wood with cassias filled,<br>
 And plants which balmy sweets distilled,<br>
 Where her fair flowers the betel showed<br>
 And the bright pods of pepper glowed.<br>
 The pearls in many a silvery heap<br>
 Lay on the margin of the deep.<br>
 And grey rocks rose amid the red<br>
 Of coral washed from ocean's bed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_271"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 271</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 High soared the mountain peaks that bore<br>
 Treasures of gold and silver ore,<br>
 And leaping down the rocky walls<br>
 Came wild and glorious waterfalls.<br>
 Fair towns which grain and treasure held,<br>
 And dames who every gem excelled,<br>
 He saw outspread beneath him far,<br>
 With steed, and elephant, and car.<br>
 That ocean shore he viewed that showed<br>
 Fair as the blessed Gods' abode<br>
 Where cool delightful breezes played<br>
 O'er levels in the freshest shade.<br>
 He saw a fig-tree like a cloud<br>
 With mighty branches earthward bowed.<br>
 It stretched a hundred leagues and made<br>
 For hermit bands a welcome shade.<br>
 Thither the feathered king of yore<br>
 An elephant and tortoise bore,<br>
 And lighted on a bough to eat<br>
 The captives of his taloned feet.<br>
 The bough unable to sustain<br>
 The crushing weight and sudden strain,<br>
 Loaded with sprays and leaves of spring<br>
 Gave way beneath the feathered king.<br>
 Under the shadow of the tree<br>
 Dwelt man, a saint and devotee,<br>
 Ájas, the sons of Brahmá's line,<br>
 Máshas Maríchipas divine.<br>
 Vaikhánasas, and all the race<br>
 Of Bálakhilyas loved the place.<br>
 But pitying their sad estate<br>
 The feathered monarch raised the weight<br>
 Of the huge bough, and bore away<br>
 The loosened load and captured prey.<br>
 A hundred leagues away he sped,<br>
 Then on his monstrous booty fed,<br>
 And with the bough he smote the lands<br>
 Where dwell the wild Nisháda bands.<br>
 High joy was his because his deed<br>
 From jeopardy the hermits freed.<br>
 That pride for great deliverance wrought<br>
 A double share of valour brought.<br>
 His soul conceived the high emprise<br>
 To snatch the Amrit from the skies.<br>
 He rent the nets of iron first,<br>
 Then through the jewel chamber burst,<br>
 And bore the drink of heaven away<br>
 That watched in Indra's palace lay.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Such was the hermit-sheltering tree<br>
 Which Rávan turned his eye to see.<br>
 Still marked where Garud sought to rest,<br>
 The fig-tree bore the name of Blest.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When Rávan stayed his chariot o'er<br>
 The ocean's heart-enchanting shore,<br>
 He saw a hermitage that stood<br>
 Sequestered in the holy wood.<br>
 He saw the fiend Marícha there<br>
 With deerskin garb, and matted hair<br>
 Coiled up in hermit guise, who spent<br>
 His days by rule most abstinent.<br>
 As guest and host are wont to meet,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 They met within that lone retreat.<br>
 Before the king Márícha placed<br>
 Food never known to human taste.<br>
 He entertained his guest with meat<br>
 And gave him water for his feet,<br>
 And then addressed the giant king<br>
 With timely words of questioning:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Lord, is "it well with thee, and well<br>
 With those in Lanká's town who dwell?<br>
 What sudden thought, what urgent need<br>
 Has brought thee with impetuous speed?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The fiend Márícha thus addressed<br>
 Rávan the king, his mighty guest,<br>
 And he, well skilled in arts that guide<br>
 The eloquent, in turn replied:<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_489"></a><a href="ry233.htm#fr_489">270:1</a>  Beings with the body of a man and the
 head of a horse.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_490"></a><a href="ry233.htm#fr_490">270:2</a>  Ájas, Maríchipas, Vaikhánasas, Máshas,
 and Bálakhilyas are classes of supernatural
 beings who lead the lives of hermits.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry234.htm">Next: Canto XXXVI.: Rávan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>