<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry231.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry233.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIV.: SÛRPANAKHÁ'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then forth the giant's fury broke<br>
 As Súrpanakhá harshly spoke.<br>
 Girt by his lords the demon king<br>
 Looked on her, fiercely questioning:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Who is this Ráma, whence, and where?<br>
 His form, his might, his deeds declare.<br>
 His wandering steps what purpose led<br>
 To Dandak forest, hard to tread?<br>
 What arms are his that he could smite<br>
 In fray the rovers of the night<br>
 And Tris'iras and Dúshan lay<br>
 Low on the earth, and Khara slay?<br>
 Tell all, my sister, and declare<br>
 Who maimed thee thus, of form most fair.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus by the giant king addressed,<br>
 While burnt her fury unrepressed,<br>
 The giantess declared at length<br>
 The hero's form and deeds and strength:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Long are his arms and large his eyes:<br>
 A black deer's skin his dress supplies.<br>
 King Das'aratha's son is he,<br>
 Fair as Kandarpa's self to see.<br>
 Adorned with many a golden band,<br>
 A bow, like Indra's, arms his hand,<br>
 And shoots a flood of arrows fierce<br>
 As venomed snakes to burn and pierce.<br>
 I looked, I looked, but never saw<br>
 His mighty hand the bowstring draw<br>
 That sent the deadly arrows out,<br>
 While rang through air his battle-shout.<br>
 I looked, I looked, and saw too well<br>
 How with that hail the giants fell,<br>
 As falls to earth the golden grain,<br>
 Struck by the blows of Indra's rain.<br>
 He fought, and twice seven thousand, all<br>
 Terrific giants, strong and tall,<br>
 Fell by the pointed shafts o'erthrown<br>
 Which Ráma shot on foot, alone.<br>
 Three little hours had scarcely fled,--<br>
 Khara and Dúshan both were dead,<br>
 And he had freed the saints and made<br>
 Asylum sure in Dandak's shade.<br>
 Me of his grace the victor spared,<br>
 Or I the giants' fate had shared.<br>
 The high-souled Ráma would not deign<br>
 His hand with woman's blood to stain.<br>
 The glorious Lakshman, justly dear,<br>
 In gifts and warrior might his peer,<br>
 Serves his great brother with the whole<br>
 Devotion of his faithful soul:<br>
 Impetuous victor, bold and wise,<br>
 First in each hardy enterprise,<br>
 Still ready by his side to stand,<br>
 A second self or better hand.<br>
 And Ráma has a large-eyed spouse,<br>
 Pure as the moon her cheek and brows,<br>
 Dearer than life in Ráma's sight,<br>
 Whose happiness is her delight.<br>
 With beauteous hair and nose the dame<br>
 From head to foot has naught to blame.<br>
 She shines the wood's bright Goddess, Queen<br>
 Of beauty with her noble mien.<br>
 First in the ranks of women placed<br>
 Is Sítá of the dainty waist.<br>
 In all the earth mine eyes have ne'er<br>
 Seen female form so sweetly fair.<br>
 Goddess nor nymph can vie with her,<br>
 Nor bride of heavenly chorister.<br>
 He who might call this dame his own,<br>
 Her eager arms about him thrown,<br>
 Would live more blest in Sítá's love<br>
 Than Indra in the world above.<br>
 She, peerless in her form and face<br>
 And rich in every gentle grace,<br>
 Is worthy bride, O King, for thee,<br>
 As thou art meet her lord to be.<br>
 I even I, will bring the bride<br>
 In triumph to her lover's side--<br>
 This beauty fairer than the rest,<br>
 With rounded limb and heaving breast.<br>
 Each wound upon my face I owe<br>
 To cruel Lakshman's savage blow.<br>
 But thou, O brother, shalt survey<br>
 Her moonlike loveliness to-day,<br>
 And Ráma's piercing shafts shall smite<br>
 Thine amorous bosom at the sight.<br>
 If in thy breast the longing rise<br>
 To make thine own the beauteous prize.<br>
 Up, let thy better foot begin<br>
 The journey and the treasure win.<br>
 If, giant Lord, thy favouring eyes<br>
 Regard the plan which I advise.<br>
 Up, cast all fear and doubt away<br>
 And execute the words I say<br>
 Come, giant King, this treasure seek,<br>
 For thou art strong and they are weak.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_270"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 270</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Let Sítá of the faultless frame<br>
 Be borne away and be thy dame.<br>
 Thy host in Janasthán who dwelt<br>
     Forth to the battle hied.<br>
 And by the shafts which Ráma dealt<br>
     They perished in their pride.<br>
 Dúshan and Khara breathe no more,<br>
     Laid low upon the plain.<br>
 Arise, and ere the day be o'er<br>
     Take vengeance for the slain.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry233.htm">Next: Canto XXXV.: Rávan's Journey.</a></center>
 </body>