<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry238.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry240.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLI.: MÁRÍCHA'S REPLY.</h3>
 <p>
 Against his judgment sorely pressed<br>
 By his imperious lord's behest,<br>
 Márícha threats of death defied<br>
 And thus with bitter words replied:<br>
 'Ah, who, my King, with sinful thought<br>
 This wild and wicked counsel taught,<br>
 By which destruction soon will fall<br>
 On thee, thy sons, thy realm and all?<br>
 Who is the guilty wretch who sees<br>
 With envious eye thy blissful ease,<br>
 And by this plan, so falsely shown,<br>
 Death's gate for thee has open thrown!<br>
 With souls impelled by mean degire<br>
 Thy foes against thy life conspire.<br>
 They urge thee to destruction's brink,<br>
 And gladly would they see thee sink.<br>
 Who with base thought to work thee woe<br>
 This fatal road has dared to show,<br>
 And, triumph in his wicked eye,<br>
 Would see thee enter io and die!<br>
 To all thy counsellors, untrue,<br>
 The punishment of death is due,<br>
 Who see thee tempt the dangerous way,<br>
 Nor strain each nerve thy foot to stay.<br>
 Wise lords, whose king, by passion led,<br>
 The path of sin begins to tread,<br>
 Restrain him while there yet is time:<br>
 But thine,--they see nor heed the crime.<br>
 These by their master's will obtain<br>
 Mirit and fame and joy and gain.<br>
 "Tis only by their master's grace<br>
 That servaits hold their lofty place.<br>
 But when tbc monarch stoops to sin<br>
 They lose each joy they strive to win,<br>
 And all the people people high and low<br>
 Fall in the common overthrow.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_277"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 277</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Merit and fame and honour spring,<br>
 Best of the mighty, from the king.<br>
 So all should strive with heart and will<br>
 To keep the king from every ill.<br>
 Pride, violence, and sullen hate<br>
 Will ne'er maintain a monarch's state,<br>
 And those who cruel deeds advise<br>
 Must perish when their master dies,<br>
 Like drivers with their cars o'erthrown<br>
 In places rough with root and stone.<br>
 The good whose holy lives were spent<br>
 On duty's highest laws intent,<br>
 With wives and children many a time<br>
 Have perished for another's crime.<br>
 Hapless are they whose sovereign lord,<br>
 Opposed to all, by all abhorred,<br>
 Is cruel-hearted, harsh, severe:<br>
 Thus might a jackal tend the deer.<br>
 Now all the giant race await,<br>
 Destroyed by thee, a speedy fate,<br>
 Ruled by a king so cruel-souled,<br>
 Foolish in heart and uncontrolled.<br>
 Think not I fear the sudden blow<br>
 That threatens now to lay me low:<br>
 I mourn the ruin that I see<br>
 Impending o'er thy host and thee.<br>
 Me first perchance will Ráma kill,<br>
 But soon his hand thy blood will spill.<br>
 I die, and if by Ráma slain<br>
 And not by thee, I count it gain.<br>
 Soon as the hero's face I see<br>
 His angry eyes will murder me,<br>
 And if on her thy hands thou lay<br>
 Thy friends and thou are dead this day.<br>
 If with my help thou still must dare<br>
 The lady from her lord to tear,<br>
 Farewell to all our days are o'er,<br>
 Lanká and giants are no more.<br>
 In vain, in vain, an earnest friend,<br>
         I warn thee, King, and pray.<br>
     Thou wilt not to my prayers attend,<br>
         Or heed the words I say<br>
     So men when life is fleeting fast<br>
         And death's sad hour is nigh,<br>
     Heedless and blinded to the last<br>
         Reject advice and die.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry240.htm">Next: Canto XLII.: Márícha Transformed.</a></center>
 </body>