<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry239.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry241.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLII.: MÁRÍCHA TRANSFORMED.</h3>
 <p>
 Márícha thus in wild unrest<br>
 With bitter words the king addressed.<br>
 Then to his giant lord in dread,<br>
 'Arise, and let us go,' he said.<br>
 'Ah, I have met that mighty lord<br>
 Armed with his shafts and bow and sword,<br>
 And if again that bow he bend<br>
 Our lives that very hour will end.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 For none that warrior can provoke<br>
 And think to fly his deadly stroke.<br>
 Like Yama with his staff is he,<br>
 And his dread hand will slaughter thee.<br>
 What can I more? My words can find<br>
 No passage to thy stubborn mind.<br>
 I go, great King, thy task to share,<br>
 And my success attend thee there.'<br>
     With that reply and bold consent<br>
 The giant king was well content.<br>
 He strained Márícha to his breast<br>
 And thus with joyful words addressed:<br>
 'There spoke a hero dauntless still,<br>
 Obedient to his master's will,<br>
 Márícha's proper self once more:<br>
 Some other took thy shape before.<br>
 Come, mount my jewelled car that flies.<br>
 Will-governed, through the yielding skies,<br>
 These asses, goblin-faced, shall bear<br>
 Us quickly through the fields of air.<br>
 Attract the lady with thy shape,<br>
 Then through the wood, at will, escape.<br>
 And I, when she has no defence,<br>
 Will seize the dame and bear her thence.<br>
 Again Márícha made reply,<br>
 Consent and will to signify.<br>
 With rapid speed the giants two<br>
 From the calm hermit dwelling flew,<br>
 Borne in that wondrous chariot, meet<br>
 For some great God's celestial seat.<br>
 They from their airy path looked down<br>
 On many a wood and many a town,<br>
 On lake and river, brook and rill,<br>
 City and realm and towering hill.<br>
 Soon he whom giant hosts obeyed,<br>
 Márícha by his side, surveyed<br>
 The dark expanse of Dandak wood<br>
 Where Ráma s hermit cottage stood.<br>
 They left the flying car, whereon<br>
 The wealth of gold and jewels shone,<br>
 And thus the giant king addressed<br>
 Márícha as his hand he pressed:<br>
     'Márícha, look! before our eyes<br>
 Round Ráma's home the plantains rise.<br>
 His hermitage is now in view:<br>
 Quick to the work we came to do!'<br>
     Thus Rávan spoke, Márícha heard<br>
 Obedient to his master's word,<br>
 Threw off his giant shape and near<br>
 The cottage strayed a beauteous deer.<br>
 With magic power, by rapid change.<br>
 His borrowed form was fair and strange.<br>
 A sapphire tipped each horn with light;<br>
 His face was black relieved with white.<br>
 The turkis and the ruby shed<br>
 A glory from his ears and head.<br>
 His arching neck was proudly raised,<br>
 And lazuares* beneath it blazed.<br>
 With roseate bloom his flanks were dyed,<br>
 And lotus tints adorned his hide.<br>
 His shape was fair*, compact*, and slight;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_278"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 278</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 His hoofs--were carven lazulite.<br>
 His tail with every changing glow<br>
 Displayed the hues of Indra's bow.<br>
 With glossy skin so strangely flecked,<br>
 With tints of every gem bedecked.<br>
 A light o'er Ráma's home he sent,<br>
 And through the wood, where'er he went.<br>
 The giant clad in that strange dress<br>
 That took the soul with loveliness,<br>
 To charm the fair Videhan's eyes<br>
 With mingled wealth of mineral dyes,<br>
 Moved onward, cropping in his way,<br>
 The grass and grain and tender spray,<br>
 His coat with drops of silver bright,<br>
 A form to gaze on with delight,<br>
 He raised his fair neck as he went<br>
 To browse on bud and filament.<br>
 Now in the Cassia grove he strayed,<br>
 Now by the cot in plantains' shade.<br>
 Slowly and slowly on he came<br>
 To catch the glances of the dame,<br>
 And the tall deer of splendid hue<br>
 Shone full at length in Sítá's view.<br>
 He roamed where'er his fancy chose<br>
 Where Ráma's leafy cottage rose.<br>
 Now near, now far, in careless ease,<br>
 He came and went among the trees.<br>
 Now with light feet he turned to fly,<br>
 Now, reassured, again drew nigh:<br>
 Now gambolled close with leap and bound,<br>
 Now lay upon the grassy ground:<br>
 Now sought the door, devoid of fear,<br>
 And mingled with the troop of deer;<br>
 Led them a little way, and thence<br>
 Again returned with confidence.<br>
 Now flying far, now turning back<br>
 Emboldened on his former track,<br>
 Seeking to win the lady's glance<br>
 He wandered through the green expanse.<br>
 Then thronging round, the woodland deer<br>
 Gazed on his form with wondering fear;<br>
 A while they followed where he led,<br>
 Then snuffed the tainted gale and fled.<br>
 The giant, though he longed to slay<br>
 The startled quarry, spared the prey,<br>
 And mindful of the shape he wore<br>
 To veil his nature, still forbore.<br>
 Then Sítá of the glorious eye,<br>
 Returning from her task drew nigh;<br>
 For she had sought the wood to bring<br>
 Each loveliest flower of early spring.<br>
 Now would the bright-eyed lady choose<br>
 Some gorgeous bud with blending hues,<br>
 Now plucked the mango's spray, and now<br>
 The bloom from an As'oka bough.<br>
 She with her beauteous form, unmeet<br>
 For woodland life and lone retreat,<br>
 That wondrous dappled deer beheld<br>
 Gemmed with rich pearls, unparalleled,<br>
 His silver hair the lady saw,<br>
 His radiant teeth and lips and jaw,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And gazed with rapture as her eyes<br>
 Expanded in their glad surprise.<br>
 And when the false deer's glances fell<br>
 On her whom Ráma loved so well,<br>
 He wandered here and there, and cast<br>
 A luminous beauty as be passed;<br>
 And Janak's child with strange delight<br>
 Kept gazing on the unwonted sight.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry241.htm">Next: Canto XLIII.: The Wondrous Deer.</a></center>
 </body>