<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry242.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry244.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLV.: LAKSHMAN'S DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 But Sitá hearing as she thought,<br>
 Her husband's cry with anguish fraught.<br>
 Called to her guardian, 'Lakshman, run<br>
 And in the wood seek Raghu's son.<br>
 Scarce can my heart retain its throne,<br>
 Scarce can my life be called mine own,<br>
 Assail my powers and senses fail<br>
 At that long loud and bitter wail.<br>
 Haste to the wood with all thy speed<br>
 And save thy brother in his need<br>
 Go, save him in the distant glade<br>
 Where loud he calls, for timely aid.<br>
 He * beneath some giant foe,<br>
 A * whom * overthrown'<br>
     * to her prayer,* step he stirred<br>
 Obedient to his mother's word<br>
 T * Janak's child, with inflamed,<br>
 * scorn *<br>
     Sumitrá's son, a friend *<br>
 * they brother's foe<br>
 W* at such *<br>
 * and neglect *<br>
 * Lakshman, * of me<br>
 * couldst see,<br>
 * thy *<br>
 * thy feet so *<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thou hast no love for Ráma, no<br>
 Thy joy is vice thy thoughts are low<br>
 Hence thus unmoved thou yet canst stay<br>
 While my dear lord is far away.<br>
 If aught of ill my lord betide<br>
 Who led thee here, thy chief and guide<br>
 Ah what will be my hapless fate<br>
 Left in the wild wood desolate!'<br>
     Thus spoke the lady sad with fear.<br>
 With many a sigh and many a tear,<br>
 Still trembling like a captured doe:<br>
 And Lakshman spoke to calm her woe:<br>
   'Videhan Queen, be sure of this,--<br>
 And at the thought thy fear dismiss,--<br>
 Thy husband's mightier power defies<br>
 All Gods and angels of the skies,<br>
 Gandharvas, and the sons of light,<br>
 Serpents, and rovers of the night<br>
 I tell thee, of the sons of earth,<br>
 Of Gods who boast celestial birth,<br>
 Of beasts and birds and giant hosts,<br>
 Of demigods, Gandharvas ghosts,<br>
 Of awful fiends, O thou most fair,<br>
 There lives not one whose heart would dare<br>
 To meet thy Ráma in the fight,<br>
 Like Indra's self unmatched in might.<br>
 Such idle words thou must not say<br>
 Thy Ráma lives whom none may slay.<br>
 I will not, cannot leave thee here<br>
 In the wild wood till he be near.<br>
 The mightiest strength can ne'er withstand<br>
 His eager force, his vigorous hand.<br>
 No, not the triple world allied<br>
 With all the immortal Gods beside.<br>
 Dismiss thy fear, again take heart,<br>
 Let all thy doubt and woe depart.<br>
 Thy lord, be sure, will soon be here<br>
 And bring thee back that best of deer,<br>
 Not his, not his that mournful cry,<br>
 Nor haply came it from the sky.<br>
 Some giant's art was busy there<br>
 And framed a castle based on air<br>
 A precious pledge art thou, consigned<br>
 To me by him of noblest mind,<br>
 Nor can I fairest dame, forsake<br>
 The pledge which Ráma bade me take.<br>
 Upon our heads, O Queen, we drew<br>
 The giants' hate when Ráma slew<br>
 Their chieftain Khara, and the shade<br>
 Of Janasthán in ruin laid.<br>
 Through all this mighty wood they rove<br>
 With varied cries from grove to grove<br>
 On * bent they wander here.<br>
 But O dismiss thy causeless fear.'<br>
     Bright flashed her eye as Lashman spoke<br>
 And forth her words of fury broke<br>
 Upon her truthful guardian, flung<br>
 With bitter taunts that pierced and stung;<br>
 'Shame on such false compassion, base<br>
 * of thy glorious race!<br>
 * joyous sight I ween to thee<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_282"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 282</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 My lord in direst strait to see.<br>
 Thou knowest Ráma sore bested,<br>
 Or word like this thou ne'er hadst said.<br>
 No marvel if we find such sin<br>
 In rivals false to kith and kin.<br>
 Wretches like thee of evil kind,<br>
 Concealing crime with crafty mind.<br>
 Thou, wretch, thine aid wilt still deny,<br>
 And leave my lord alone to die.<br>
 Has love of me unnerved thy hand,<br>
 Or Bharat's art this ruin planned?<br>
 But be the treachery his or thine,<br>
 In vain, in vain the base design.<br>
 For how shall I, the chosen bride<br>
 Of dark-hued Ráma, lotus-eyed,<br>
 The queen who once called Ráma mine,<br>
 To love of other men decline?<br>
 Believe me, Lakshman, Ráma's wife<br>
 Before thine eyes will quit this life,<br>
 And not a moment will she stay<br>
 If her dear lord have passed away.'<br>
     The lady's bitter speech, that stirred<br>
 Each hair upon his frame, he heard.<br>
 With lifted hands together laid,<br>
 His calm reply he gently made:<br>
     'No words have I to answer now:<br>
 My deity, O Queen, art thou.<br>
 But 'tis no marvel, dame, to find<br>
 Such lack of sense in womankind.<br>
 Throughout this world, O Maithil dame,<br>
 Weak women's hearts are still the same.<br>
 Inconstant, urged by envious spite,<br>
 They sever friends and hate the right.<br>
 I cannot brook, Videhan Queen,<br>
 Thy words intolerably keen.<br>
 Mine ears thy fierce reproaches pain<br>
 As boiling water seethes the brain.<br>
 And now to bear me witness all<br>
 The dwellers in the wood I call,<br>
 That, when with words of truth I plead,<br>
 This harsh reply is all my meed.<br>
 Ah, woe is thee! Ah, grief, that still<br>
 Eager to do my brother's will,<br>
 Mourning thy woman's nature, I<br>
 Must see thee doubt my truth and die.<br>
 I fly to Ráma's side, and Oh,<br>
 May bliss attend thee while I go!<br>
 May all attendant wood-gods screen<br>
 Thy head from harm, O large-eyed Queen<br>
 And though dire omens meet my sight<br>
 And fill my soul with wild affright,<br>
 May I return in peace and see<br>
 The son of Raghu safe with thee!'<br>
     The child of Janak heard him speak,<br>
 And the hot tear-drops down her cheek,<br>
 Increasing to a torrent, ran,<br>
 Aa thus once more the dame began:<br>
 'O Lakshman, if I widowed be<br>
 Godávan's** flood shall cover me,<br>
 Or I will die by cord, or leap,<br>
 Life weary, from yon rocky steep;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Or deadly poison will I drink,<br>
 Or 'neath the kindled flames will sink,<br>
 But never, reft of Ráma, can<br>
 Consent to touch a meaner man.'<br>
     The Maithil dame with many sighs,<br>
 And torrents pouring from her eyes,<br>
 The faithful Lakshman thus adressed,<br>
 And smote her hands upon her breast.<br>
 Sumitrá's son, o'erwhelmed by fears,<br>
     Looked on the large-eyed queen:<br>
         He saw that flood of burning tears,<br>
     He saw that piteous mien.<br>
         He yearned sweet comfort to afford,<br>
     He strove to soothe her pain<br>
         But to the brother of her lord<br>
   She spoke no word again.<br>
         His reverent hands once more he raised,<br>
     His head he slightly bent,<br>
         Upon her face he sadly gazed,<br>
     And then toward Ráma went.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry244.htm">Next: Canto XLVI.: The Guest.</a></center>
 </body>