<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry241.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry243.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIV: ARTCHA'S DEATH</h3>
 <p>
 Thus having warned his brother hold<br>
 He grasped his sword with * gold*<br>
 And followed with the *** in went<br>
 His wr* *ght and *<br>
 Then *<br>
 And *<br>
 Soon *<br>
 The *<br>
 
 </p><p>
 A while with trembling heart he fled,<br>
 The * and showed his stately head.<br>
 With sword and bow the chief pursued<br>
 Where'or the fleeing deer he viewed<br>
 Sending* from dell* and lone recess<br>
 The splendid ** his loveliness<br>
 Now full in view the creature stood<br>
 Now vanished in the depth of wood;<br>
 Now running with a languid flight,<br>
 Now like a meteor lost to sight.<br>
 With trembling limbs away he sped;<br>
 Then like the moon with clouds o'erspread<br>
 Gleamed for a moment bright between<br>
 The trees, and was again unseen<br>
 Thus in the magic deer's disguise<br>
 Mancha lured him to the prize,<br>
 And seen a while, then lost to view,<br>
 Far from his cot the hero drew.<br>
 Still by the flying game deceived<br>
 The hunter's heart was wroth and grieved,<br>
 And wearied with the fruitless chase<br>
 He stayed him in a shady place.<br>
 Again the river of the night<br>
 *ged the chieftain* full in sight,<br>
 Slow moving in the coppice near,<br>
 Surrounded by the woodland deer<br>
 Again the hunter sought the game<br>
 That seemed a while to court his aim:<br>
 But seized again with sudden dread,<br>
 Beyond his sight the creature fled.<br>
 Again the hero left the shade,<br>
 Again the deer before him strayed.<br>
 With surer hope and stronger will<br>
 The hunter longed his prey to kill.<br>
 Then as his soul impatient grew,<br>
 An arrow from his side he drew,<br>
 Besplendent at the sunbeam's glow,<br>
 The crusher of the smitten foe,<br>
 With skillful bead the mighty lord<br>
 Fixed well shaft and strained the cord.<br>
 Upon the deer his eyes he bent,<br>
 And like a fiery ** went<br>
 The arrow Brahma's self had framed,<br>
 Alive with sparks that hissed and flamed,<br>
 Like Indra's flashing levin, true<br>
 To the false deer the missile flew<br>
 Cleaving his flesh that wonderous dart<br>
 Stood quivering in Mancha's heart.<br>
 Scarce from the ground one foot he sprang,<br>
 Then stricken fell with deadly pang.<br>
 Ha* **, as he pressed* the ground,<br>
 He gave a roar of awful sound<br>
 And *e the wounded giant died<br>
 He threw his borrowed form aside<br>
 Remembering still his lord's behest<br>
 He pondered in his heart how best<br>
 Sítá's plight ** ** guard away,<br>
 And Ravan seize the helpless prey<br>
 The monster knew the time was nigh.<br>
 And called aloud with eager cry,<br>
 'Hi*, Sítá, Lakshman* and the tone<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_281"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 281</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He borrowed was like Ráma's own<br>
     So by that matchless arrow cleft,<br>
 The deer's bright form Márícha left,<br>
 Resumed his giant shape and size<br>
 And closed in death his languid eyes<br>
 When Ráma saw his awful foe<br>
 Gasp, smeared with blood, in deadly throe,<br>
 His anxious thoughts to Sítá sped,<br>
 And the wise words that Lakshman said,<br>
 That this was false Márícha's art,<br>
 Returned again upon his heart.<br>
 He knew the foe he triumphed o'er<br>
 The name of great Márícha bore.<br>
 'The fiend,' he pondered, 'ere has died,<br>
 'Ho Lakshman! ho, my Sítá!' cried<br>
 Ah, if that cry has reached her ear,<br>
 How dire must be my darling's fear!<br>
 And Lakshman of the mighty arm,<br>
 What thinks he in his wild alarm?<br>
 As thus he thought in sad surmise,<br>
 Each startled hair began to rise,<br>
 And when he saw the giant slain<br>
 And thought upon that cry again,<br>
 His spirit sank and terror pressed<br>
 Full sorely on the hero's breast<br>
 Another deer he chased and struck.<br>
 He bore away the the fallen puck,<br>
 To Janasthán then turned his face<br>
 And hastened to his dwelling place.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry243.htm">Next: Canto XLV.: Lakshman's Departure.</a></center>
 </body>