<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry246.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry248.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIX.: THE RAPE OF SITÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 The Rákshas monarch, thus addressed,<br>
 His hands a while together pressed,<br>
 And straight before her startled eyes<br>
 Stood monstrous in his giant size.<br>
 Then to the lady, with the lore<br>
 Of eloquence, he spoke once more:<br>
 'Thou scarce,' he cried, 'hast heard aright<br>
 The glories of my power and might,<br>
 I borne sublime in air can stand<br>
 And with these arms upheave the land,<br>
 Drink the deep flood of Ocean dry<br>
 And Death with conquering force defy.<br>
 Pierce the great sun with furious dart<br>
 And to her depths cleave earth apart.<br>
 See, thou whom love and beauty blind,<br>
 I wear each form as wills my mind."<br>
     As thus he spake in burning ire,<br>
 His glowing eyes were red with fire.<br>
 His gentle garb aside was thrown<br>
 And all his native shape was shown.<br>
 Terrific, monstrous, wild, and dread<br>
 As the dark God who rules the dead,<br>
 His fiery eyes in fury rolled,<br>
 His limbs were decked with glittering gold.<br>
 Like some dark cloud the monster showed,<br>
 And his fierce breast with fury glowed.<br>
 The ten-faced rover of the night,<br>
 With twenty arms exposed to sight,<br>
 His saintly guise aside had laid<br>
 And all his giant height displayed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_287"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 287</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Attired in robes of crimson dye<br>
 He stood and watched with angry eye<br>
 The lady in her bright array<br>
 Resplendent as the dawn of day<br>
 When from the east the sunbeams break,<br>
 And to the dark-haired lady spake:<br>
 'If thou would call that lord thine own<br>
 Whose fame in every world is known,<br>
 Look kindly on my love, and be<br>
 Bride of a consort meet for thee.<br>
 With me let blissful years be spent,<br>
 For ne'er thy choice shalt thou repent.<br>
 No deed of mine shall e'er displease<br>
 My darling as she lives at ease.<br>
 Thy love for mortal man resign,<br>
 And to a worthier lord incline.<br>
 Ah foolish lady, seeming wise<br>
 In thine own weak and partial eyes,<br>
 By what fair graces art thou held<br>
 To Ráma from his realm expelled?<br>
 Misfortunes all his life attend.<br>
 And his brief days are near their end.<br>
 Unworthy prince, infirm of mind!<br>
 A woman spoke and he resigned<br>
 His home and kingdom and withdrew<br>
 From troops of friends and retinue.<br>
 And sought this forest dark and dread<br>
 By savage beasts inhabited.'<br>
 Thus Rávan urged the lady meet<br>
 For love, whose words were soft and sweet.<br>
 Near and more near the giant pressed<br>
 As love's hot fire inflamed his breast.<br>
 The leader of the giant crew<br>
 His arm around the lady threw:<br>
 Thus Budha  <a name="fr_504"></a><a href="#fn_504"><font size="1">1</font></a> with ill-omened might<br>
 Steals Rohini's delicious light.<br>
 One hand her glorious tresses grasped,<br>
 One with its ruthless pressure clasped<br>
 The body of his lovely prize,<br>
 The Maithil dame with lotus eyes.<br>
 The silvan Gods in wild alarm<br>
 Marked his huge teeth and ponderous arm,<br>
 And from that Death-like presence fled,<br>
 Of mountain size and towering head.<br>
 Then seen was Rávan's magic car<br>
 Aglow with gold which blazed afar,--<br>
 The mighty car which asses drew<br>
 Thundering as it onward flew.<br>
 He spared not harsh rebuke to chide<br>
 The lady as she moaned and cried,<br>
 Then with his arm about her waist<br>
 His captive in the car he placed.<br>
 In vain he threatened: long and shrill<br>
 Rang out her lamentation still,<br>
 O Ráma! which no fear could stay:<br>
 But her dear lord was far away<br>
 Then rose the fiend, and toward the skies<br>
 Bore his poor helpless struggling prize:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Hurrying through the air above<br>
 The dame who loathed his proffered love<br>
 So might a soaring eagle bear<br>
 A serpent's consort through the air.<br>
 As on he bore her through the sky<br>
 She shrieked aloud her bitter cry.<br>
 As when some wretch's lips complain<br>
 In agony of maddening pain;<br>
 'O Lakshman, thou whose joy is still<br>
 To do thine eider brother's will,<br>
 This fiend, who all disguises wears,<br>
 From Ráma's side his darling tears.<br>
 Thou who couldst leave bliss, fortune, all,<br>
 Yea life itselt at duty's call,<br>
 Dost thou not see this outrage done<br>
 To hapless me, O Raghu's son?<br>
 'Tis thine, O victor of the foe,<br>
 To bring the haughtiest spirit low,<br>
 How canst thou such an outrage see<br>
 And let the guilty fiend go free?<br>
 Ah, seldom in a moment's time<br>
 Comes bitter fruit of sin and crime,<br>
 But in the day of harvest pain<br>
 Comes like the ripening of the grain.<br>
 So thou whom fate and folly lead<br>
 To ruin for this guilty deed,<br>
 Shalt die by Ráma's arm ere long<br>
 A dreadful death for hideous wrong.<br>
 Ah, too successful in their ends<br>
 Are Queen Kaikeyí and her friends,<br>
 When virtuous Ráma, dear to fame,<br>
 Is mourning for his ravished dame.<br>
 Ah me, ah me! a long farewell<br>
 To lawn and glade and forest dell<br>
 In Janasthán's wild region, where<br>
 The Cassia trees are bright and fair<br>
 With all your tongues to Ráma say<br>
 That Rávan bears his wife away.<br>
 Farewell, a long farewell to thee,<br>
 O pleasant stream Godávari,<br>
 Whose rippling waves are ever stirred<br>
 By many a glad wild water bird!<br>
 All ye to Ráma's ear relate<br>
 The giant's deed and Sítá's fata.<br>
 O all ye Gods who love this ground<br>
 Where trees of every leaf abound,<br>
 Tell Ráma I am stolen hence,<br>
 I pray you all with reverence.<br>
 On all the living things beside<br>
 That these dark boughs and coverts hide,<br>
 Ye flocks of birds ye troops of deer,<br>
 I call on you my prayer to hear.<br>
 All we to Ráma's ear proclaim<br>
 That Rávan tears away his dame<br>
 Witn forceful arms--his darling wife,<br>
 Dearer to Ráma than his life.<br>
 O, if he knew I dwelt in hell,<br>
 My mighty lord, I know full well,<br>
 Would bring me, conqueror, back to-day,<br>
 Though Yama's self reclaimed his prey.'<br>
 Thus from the air the lady sent<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_288"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 288</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With piteous voice her last lament,<br>
 And as she wept she chanced to see<br>
 The vulture on a lofty tree.<br>
 As Rávan bore her swiftly by,<br>
 On the dear bird she bent her eye,<br>
 And with a voice which woe made faint<br>
 Renewed to him her wild complaint:<br>
 'O see, the king who rules the race<br>
 Of giants, cruel, fierce and base,<br>
 Rávan the spoiler bears me hence<br>
 The helpless prey of violence.<br>
 This fiend who roves in midnight shade<br>
 By thee, dear bird, can ne'er be stayed,<br>
 For he is armed and fierce and strong<br>
 Triumphant in the power to wrong.<br>
 For thee remains one only task,<br>
 To do, kind friend, the thing I ask.<br>
 To Ráma's ear by thee be borne<br>
 How Sítá from her home is torn,<br>
 And to the valiant Lakshman tell<br>
 The giant's deed and what befell.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_504"></a><a href="ry247.htm#fr_504">287:1</a>  Mercury: to be carefully distinguished
 hum Buddha.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry248.htm">Next: Canto L.: Jatáyus.</a></center>
 </body>