<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry243.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry245.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVI.: THE GUEST.</h3>
 <p>
 The angry Lakshman scarce could brook<br>
 Her bitter words, her furious look.<br>
 With dark forebodings in his breast<br>
 To Ráma's side he quickly pressed.<br>
     Then ten necked Rávan saw the time<br>
 Propitious for his purposed crime.<br>
 A mendicant in guise he came<br>
 And stood before the Maithil dame.<br>
 His garb was red, with tufted hair<br>
 And sandalled feet a shade he bare,<br>
 And from the fiend's left shoulder slung<br>
 A staff and water-vessel hung.<br>
 Near to the lovely dame he drew,<br>
 While both the chiefs were far from view,<br>
 As darkness takes the evening air<br>
 When neither sun nor moon is there.<br>
 He bent his eye upon the dame,<br>
 A princess fair, of spotless fame:<br>
 So might some baleful planet be<br>
 Near Moon-forsaken Rohini.  <a name="fr_496"></a><a href="#fn_496"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 As the fierce tyrant nearer drew,<br>
 The trees in Janasthán that grew<br>
 Waved not a leaf for fear and woe,<br>
 And the hushed wind forbore to blow.<br>
 Godávarí's waters as they fled,<br>
 Saw his fierce eye-balls flashing red,<br>
 And from each swiftly-gliding wave<br>
 A melancholy murmur gave.<br>
 Then Rávan, when his eager eye<br>
 Beheld the longed-for moment nigh,<br>
 In mendicant's apparel dressed<br>
 Near to the Maithil lady pressed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_283"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 283</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 In holy guise, a fiend abhorred,<br>
 He found her mourning for her lord.<br>
 Thus threatening draws S'anis'char  <a name="fr_497"></a><a href="#fn_497"><font size="1">1</font></a> nigh<br>
 To Chitrá  <a name="fr_498"></a><a href="#fn_498"><font size="1">2</font></a> in the evening sky:<br>
 Thus the deep well by grass concealed<br>
 Yawns treacherous in the verdant field.<br>
 He stood and looked upon the dame<br>
 Of Ráma, queen of spotless fame<br>
 With her bright teeth and each fair limb<br>
 Like the full moon she seemed to him,<br>
 Sitting within her leafy cot.<br>
 Weeping for woe that left her not.<br>
 Thus, while with joy his pulses beat,<br>
 He saw her in her lone retreat,<br>
 Eyed like the lotus, fair to view<br>
 In bilken robes of amber hue.<br>
 Pierced to the core by Káma's dart<br>
 He murmured texts with lying art,<br>
 And questioned with a soft address<br>
 The lady in her loneliness.<br>
 The fiend essayed with gentle speech<br>
 The heart of that fair dame to reach,<br>
 Pride of the worlds, like Beauty's Queen<br>
 Without her darling lotus seen:<br>
     'O thou whose silken robes enfold<br>
 A form more rare than finest gold,<br>
 With lotus garland on thy head,<br>
 Like a sweet spring with bloom o'erspread,<br>
 Who art thou, fair one, what thy name,<br>
 Beauty, or Honour, Fortune, Fame,<br>
 Spirit, or nymph, or Queen of love<br>
 Descended from thy home above?<br>
 Bright as the dazzling jasmine shine<br>
 Thy small square teeth in level line.<br>
 Like two black stars aglow with light<br>
 Thine eyes are large and pure and bright.<br>
 Thy charms of smile and teeth and hair<br>
 And winning eyes, O thou most fair,<br>
 Steal all my spirit, as the flow<br>
 Of rivers mines the bank below.<br>
 How bright, how fine each flowing trees!<br>
 How firm those orbs beneath thy dress!<br>
 That dainty waist with ease were spanned,<br>
 Sweet lady, by a lover's hand.<br>
 Mine eyes, O beauty, ne'er have seen<br>
 Goddess or nymph so fair of mien,<br>
 Or bright Gandharva's heavenly dame,<br>
 Or woman of so perfect frame.<br>
 In youth's soft prime thy years are few,<br>
 And earth has naught so fair to view.<br>
 I marvel one like thee in face<br>
 Should make the woods her dwelling-place.<br>
 Leave, lady, leave this lone retreat<br>
 In forest wilds for thee unmeet,<br>
 Where giants fierce and strong assume<br>
 All shapes and wander in the gloom.<br>
 These dainty feet were formed to tread<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Some palace floor with carpets spread,<br>
 Or wander in trim gardens where<br>
 Each opening bud perfumes the air<br>
 The richest robe thy form should deck,<br>
 The rarest gems adorn thy neck.<br>
 The sweetest wreath should bind thy hair,<br>
 The noblest lord thy bed should share.<br>
 Art thou akin, O fair of form,<br>
 To Rudras, <a name="fr_499"></a><a href="#fn_499"><font size="1">1b</font></a> or the Gods of storm, <a name="fr_500"></a><a href="#fn_500"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Or to the glorious Vasus  <a name="fr_501"></a><a href="#fn_501"><font size="1">3b</font></a>? How<br>
 Can less than these be bright as thou?<br>
 But never nymph or heavenly maid<br>
 Or Goddess haunts this gloomy shade.<br>
 Here giants roam, a savage race;<br>
 What led thee to so dire a place?<br>
 Here monkeys leap from tree to tree,<br>
 And bears and tigers wander free;<br>
 Here ravening lions prowl, and fell<br>
 Hyenas in the thickets yell,<br>
 And elephants infuriate roam,<br>
 Mighty and fierce, their woodland home.<br>
 Dost thou not dread, so soft and fair,<br>
 Tiger and lion, wolf and bear?<br>
 Hast thou, O beauteous dame, no fear<br>
 In the wild wood so lone and drear?<br>
 Whose and who art thou? whence and why<br>
 Sweet lady, with no guardian nigh,<br>
 Dost thou this awful forest tread<br>
 By giant bands inhabited?'<br>
     The praise the high-souled Rávan spoke<br>
 No doubt within her bosom woke. '<br>
 His saintly look and Bráhman guise<br>
 Deceived the lady's trusting eyes.<br>
 With due attention on the guest<br>
 Her hospitable rites she pressed.<br>
 She bade the stranger to a seat,<br>
 And gave him water for his feet.<br>
 The bowl and water-pot he bare,<br>
 And garb which wandering Bráhmans wear<br>
     Forbade a doubt to rise.<br>
 Won by his holy look she deemed<br>
 The stranger even as he seemed<br>
     To her deluded eyes.<br>
 Intent on hospitable care,<br>
 She brought her best of woodland fare.<br>
     And showed her guest a seat.<br>
 She bade the saintly stranger lave<br>
 His feet in water which she gave,<br>
     And sit and rest and eat.<br>
 He kept his eager glances bent<br>
 On her so kindly eloquent,<br>
 Wife of the noblest king;<br>
 And longed in heart to steal her thence,<br>
 Preparing by the dire offence,<br>
 Death on his head to bring.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_284"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 284</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The lady watched with anxious face<br>
 For Ráma coming from the chase<br>
     With Lakshman by his side:<br>
 But nothing met her wandering glance<br>
 Save the wild forest's green expanse<br>
     Extending far aud wide.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_496"></a><a href="ry244.htm#fr_496">282:1</a>  The favourite wife of the Moon.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_497"></a><a href="ry244.htm#fr_497">283:1</a>  The planet Saturn.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_498"></a><a href="ry244.htm#fr_498">283:2</a>  Another favourite of the Moon; one
 of the lunar mansions.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_499"></a><a href="ry244.htm#fr_499">283:1b</a>  The Rudras, agents in creation, are
 eight in number; they sprang from the
 forehead of Brahmá.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_500"></a><a href="ry244.htm#fr_500">283:2b</a>  Maruts, the attendants of Indra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_501"></a><a href="ry244.htm#fr_501">283:3b</a>  Radiant demi-gods.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry245.htm">Next: Canto XLVII: Rávan's Wooing.</a></center>
 </body>