<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry254.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry256.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVII.: SÍTÁ COMFORTED.</h3>
 <p>
 Soon as the fiend had set her down<br>
 Within his home in Lanká's town<br>
 Triumph and joy filled Indra's breast,<br>
 Whom thus the Eternal Sire addressed:<br>
     'This deed will free the worlds from woe<br>
 And cause the giants' overthrow.<br>
 The fiend has borne to Lanká's isle<br>
 The body of the * smile,<br>
 True consort * to happy fate<br>
 W * and dedicate<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_297"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 297</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 She looks and longs for Ráma's face,<br>
 But sees a crowd of demon race,<br>
 And guarded by the giant's train<br>
 Pines for her lord and weeps in vain,<br>
 But Lanká founded on a steep<br>
 Is girdled by the mighty deep,<br>
 And how will Ráma know his fair<br>
 And blameless wife is prisoned there?<br>
 She on her woe will sadly brood<br>
 And pine away in solitude,<br>
 And heedless of herself, will cease<br>
 To live, despairing of release.<br>
 Yes, pondering on her fate, I see<br>
 Her gentle life in jeopardy.<br>
 Go, Indra, swiftly seek the place,<br>
 And look upon her lovely face.<br>
 Within the city make thy way:<br>
 Let heavenly food her spirit stay.'<br>
     Thus Brahma, spake: and He who slew<br>
 The cruel demon Páka, flew<br>
 Where Lanká's royal city lay,<br>
 And Sleep went with him on his way.<br>
 'Sleep,' cried the heavenly Monarch, 'close<br>
 Each giant's eye in deep repose.'<br>
     Thus Indra spoke, and Sleep fulfilled<br>
 With joy his mandate, as he willed,<br>
 To aid the plan the Gods proposed,<br>
 The demons' eyes in sleep she closed.<br>
 Then Sachi's lord, the Thousand-eyed,<br>
 To the Asoka garden hied.<br>
 He came and stood where Sitá lay,<br>
 And gently thus began to say:<br>
 'Lord of the Gods who hold the sky,<br>
 Dame of the lovely smile, am I.<br>
 Weep no more, lady, weep no more;<br>
 Thy days of woe will soon be o'er.<br>
 I come, O Janak's child, to be<br>
 The helper of thy lord and thee.<br>
 He through my grace, with hosts to aid,<br>
 This sea-girt land will soon invade.<br>
 'Tis by my art that slumbers close<br>
 The eyelids of thy giant foes.<br>
 Now I, with Sleep, this place have sought,<br>
 Videhau lady, and have brought<br>
 A gift of heaven's ambrosial food<br>
 To stay thee in thy solitude.<br>
 Receive it from my hand, and taste,<br>
 O lady of the dainty waist:<br>
 For countless ages thou shall be<br>
 From pangs of thirst and hunger free.'<br>
     But doubt within her bosom woke<br>
 As to the Lord of Gods she spoke:<br>
 'How may I know for truth that thou<br>
 Whose form I see before me now<br>
 Art verily the King adored<br>
 By heavenly Gods, and S'achi's lord?<br>
 With Rhagu's sons I learnt to know<br>
 The certain signs which Godhead show.<br>
 These marks before mine eyes display<br>
 If o'er the Gods thou bear the sway.'<br>
     The heavenly lord of S'achi heard.<br>
 And did according to her word,<br>
 Above the ground his feet were raised;<br>
 With eyelids motionless he gazed.<br>
 No dust upon his raiment lay,<br>
 And his bright wreath was fresh and gay.<br>
 Nor was the lady's glad heart slow<br>
 The Monarch of the Gods to know.<br>
 And while the tears unceasing ran<br>
 From her sweet eyes she thus began:<br>
 'My lord has gained a friend in thee,<br>
 And I this day thy presence see<br>
 Shown clearly to mine eyes, as when<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman, lords of men.<br>
 Beheld it, and their sire the king,<br>
 And Janak too from whom I spring.<br>
 Now I, O Monarch of the Blest,<br>
 Will eat this food at thy behest,<br>
 Which thou hast brought me, of thy grace,<br>
 To aid and strengthen Raghu's race.'<br>
     She spoke, and by his words relieved,<br>
 The food from Indra's hand received,<br>
 Yet ere she ate the balm he brought.<br>
 On Lakshman and her lord she thought.<br>
 'If my brave lord be still alive,<br>
 If valiant Lakshman yet survive,<br>
 May this my taste of heavenly food<br>
 Bring health to them and bliss renewed!'<br>
         She ate, and that celestial food<br>
     Stayed hunger, thirst, and lassitude,<br>
         And all her strength restored.<br>
     Great joy her hopeful spirit stirred<br>
     At the glad tidings newly heard<br>
           Of Lakshman and her lord.<br>
     And Indra's heart was joyful too:<br>
     He bade the Maithil dame adieu,<br>
         His saving errand done.<br>
     With Sleep beside him parting thence<br>
     He sought his heavenly residence<br>
         To prosper Raghu's son.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry256.htm">Next: Canto LVIII.: The Brothers' Meeting.</a></center>
 </body>