<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry250.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry252.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIII.: SITÁ'S THREATS.</h3>
 <p>
 Soon as the Maithil lady knew<br>
 That high through air the giant flew,<br>
 Distressed with grief and sore afraid<br>
 Her troubled spirit sank dismayed.<br>
 Then, as anew the waters welled<br>
 From those red eyes which sorrow swelled,<br>
 Fresh in keen words her passion broke,<br>
 And to the fierce-eyed fiend she spoke:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Canst thou attempt a deed so base.<br>
 Untroubled by the deep disgrace.--<br>
 To steal me from my home and fly,<br>
 When friend or guardian none was nigh!<br>
 Thy craven soul that longed to steal,<br>
 Fearing the blows that warriors deal.<br>
 Upon a magic deer relied<br>
 To lure my husband from my side,<br>
 Friend of his sire, the vulture king<br>
 Lies low on earth with mangled wing,<br>
 Who gave his aged life for me<br>
 And died for her he sought to free.<br>
 Ah, glorious strength indeed is thine,<br>
 Thou meanest of thy giant line,<br>
 Whose courage dared to tell thy name<br>
 And conquer in the fight a dame.<br>
 Does the vile deed that thou hast done<br>
 Cause thee no shame, thou wicked one--<br>
 A woman from her home to rend<br>
 When none was near his aid to lend?<br>
 Through all the worlds, O giant King,<br>
 The tidings of this deed will ring,<br>
 This deed in law and honour's spite<br>
 By one who claims a hero's might.<br>
 Shame on thy boasted valour, shame!<br>
 Thy prowess is an empty name,<br>
 Shame, giant, on this cursed deed<br>
 For which thy race is doomed to bleed!<br>
 Thou fliest swifter than the gale,<br>
 For what can strength like thine avail?<br>
 Stay for one hour, O Rávan, stay;<br>
 Thou shalt not flee with life away.<br>
 Soon as the royal chieftains' sight<br>
 Falls on the thief who roams by night,<br>
 Thou wilt not, tyrant, live one hour<br>
 Though backed by all thy legions' power,<br>
 Ne'er can thy puny strength sustain<br>
 The tempest of their arrowy rain:<br>
 Have e'er the trembling birds withstood<br>
 The wild flames raging in the wood?<br>
 Hear me, O Rávan, let me go,<br>
 And save thy soul from coming woe.<br>
 Or if thou wilt not not me free,<br>
 Wroth for this insult done to me.<br>
 With his brave brother's aid my lord<br>
 Against thy life will raise his sword.<br>
 A guilty hope inflames thy breast<br>
 His wife from Ráma's home to wrest.<br>
 Ah fool, the hope thou hast is vain;<br>
 Thy dreams of bliss shall end in pain!<br>
 If torn from all I love by thee<br>
 Mv godlike lord no more I see,<br>
 Soon will I die and end my woes,<br>
 Nor live the captive of my foes,.<br>
 Ah fool, with blinded eyes to choose<br>
 The evil and the good refuse!<br>
 So the sick wretch with stubborn will<br>
 Turns fondly to the **cates that kill,<br>
 And madly draws his lips away<br>
 From medicine that would check decay.<br>
 About thy neck securely wound<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_293"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 293</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The deadly coil of Fate is bound,<br>
 And thou, O Ravan, dost not fear<br>
 Although the hour of death is near.<br>
 With death-doomed sight thine eyes behold<br>
 The gleaming of the trees of gold,--<br>
 See dread Vaitarani, the flood<br>
 Thatt rolls a stream of foamy blood,--<br>
 See the dark wood by all abhorred--<br>
 Its every leaf a threatening sword.<br>
 The tangled thickets thou shall tread<br>
 Where thorns with iron points are spread,<br>
 For never can thy days be long,<br>
 Base plotter of this shame and wrong<br>
 To Ráma of ihe lofty soul:<br>
 He dies who drinks the poisoned bowl.<br>
 The coils of death around thee lie:<br>
 They hold thee and thou canst not fly.<br>
 Ah whither, tyrant, wouldst thou run<br>
 The vengeance of my lord to shun?<br>
 By his unaided arm alone<br>
 Were twice seven thousand fiends o'er-thrown:<br>
 Yes, in the twinkling of an eye<br>
 He forced thy mightiest fiends to die.<br>
 And shall that lord of lion heart,<br>
 Skilled in the bow and spear and dart,<br>
 Spare thee, O fiend, in battle strife,<br>
 The robber of his darling wife?'<br>
     These were her words, and more beside,<br>
 By wrath and bitter hate supplied.<br>
 Then by her woe and fear o'erthrown<br>
 She wept again and made her moan.<br>
 As long she wept in grief and dread,<br>
 Scarce conscious of the words she said,<br>
 The wicked giant onward fled<br>
     And bore her through the air.<br>
 As firm he held the Maithil dame,<br>
 Still wildly struggling, o'er her frame<br>
 With grief and bitter misery came<br>
     The trembling of despair.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry252.htm">Next: Canto LIV.: Lanká.</a></center>
 </body>