<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry252.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry254.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LV.: SÍTÁ IN PRISON.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Rávan his commandment gave<br>
 To those eight giants strong and brave,<br>
 So thinking in his foolish pride<br>
 Against all dangers to provide.<br>
 Then with his wounded heart aflame<br>
 With love he thought upon the dame,<br>
 And took with hasty steps the way<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To the fair chamber where she lay,<br>
 He saw the gentle lady there<br>
 Weighed down by woe too great to bear,<br>
 Amid the throng of fiends who kept<br>
 Their watch around her as she wept:<br>
 A pinnace sinking neath the wave<br>
 When mighty winds around her rave:<br>
 A lonely herd-forsaken deer,<br>
 When hungry dogs are pressing near,<br>
 Within the bower the giant passed:<br>
 Her mournful looks were downward cast.<br>
 As there she lay with streaming eyes<br>
 The giant bade the lady rise,<br>
 And to the shrinking captive showed<br>
 The glories of his rich abode,<br>
 Where thousand women spent their days<br>
 In palaces with gold ablaze;<br>
 Where wandered birds of every sort,<br>
 And jewels flashed in hall and court.<br>
 Where noble pillars charmed the sight<br>
 With diamond and lazulite,<br>
 And others glorious to behold<br>
 With ivory, crystal, silver, gold.<br>
 There swelled on high the tambour's sound,<br>
 And burnished ore was bright around<br>
 He led the mournful lady where<br>
 Resplendent gold adorned the stair,<br>
 And showed each lattice fair to see<br>
 With silver work and ivory:<br>
 Showed his bright chambers, line on line,<br>
 Adorned with nets of golden twine.<br>
 Beyond he showed the Maithil dame<br>
 His gardens bright as lightning's flame,<br>
 And many a pool and lake he showed<br>
 Where blooms of gayest colour glowed.<br>
 Through all his home from view to view<br>
 The lady sunk in grief he drew.<br>
 Then trusting in her heart to wake<br>
 Desire of all she saw, he spake:<br>
 'Three hundred million giants, all<br>
 Obedient to their master's call,<br>
 Not counting young and weak and old,<br>
 Serve me with spirits fierce and bold.<br>
 A thousand culled from all of these<br>
 Wait on the lord they long to please.<br>
 This glorious power, this pomp and sway,<br>
 Dear lady, at thy feet I lay:<br>
 Yea, with my life I give the whole,<br>
 O dearer than my life and soul.<br>
 A thousand beauties fill my hall:<br>
 Be thou my wife and rule them all.<br>
 O hear my supplication! why<br>
 This reasonable prayer deny?<br>
 Some pity to thy suitor show,<br>
 For love's hot flames within me glow.<br>
 This isle a hundred leagues in length,<br>
 Encompassed by the ocean's strength,<br>
 Would all the Gods and fiends defy<br>
 Though led by Him who rules the sky.<br>
 No God in heaven, no sage on earth,<br>
 No minstrel of celestial birth,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_295"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 295</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 No spirit in the worlds I see<br>
 A match in power and might for me.<br>
 What wilt tbou do with Ráma, him<br>
 Whose days are short, whose light is dim,<br>
 Expelled from home and royal sway,<br>
 Who treads on foot his weary way?<br>
 Leave the poor mortal to his fate.<br>
 And wed thee with a worthier mate.<br>
 My timid love, enjoy with me<br>
 The prime of youth before it flee.<br>
 Do not one hour the hope retain<br>
 To look on Ráma's face again.<br>
 For whom would wildest thought beguile<br>
 To seek thee in the giants' isle?<br>
 Say who is he has power to bind<br>
 In toils of net the rushing wind.<br>
 Whose is the mighty hand will tame<br>
 And hold the glory of the flame?<br>
 In all the worlds above, below.<br>
 Not one, O fair of form, I know<br>
 Who from this isle in fight could rend<br>
 The lady whom these arms defend.<br>
 Fair Queen, o'er Lanka's island reign,<br>
 Sole mistress of the wide domain.<br>
 Gods, rovers of the night like me,<br>
 And all the world thy slaves will be.<br>
 O'er thy fair brows and queenly head<br>
 Let conscerating balm be shed,<br>
 And sorrow banished from thy breast,<br>
 Enjoy my love and take thy rest.<br>
 Here never more thy soul shall know<br>
 The memory of thy former woe,<br>
 And here shall thou enjoy the meed<br>
 Deserved by every virtuous deed.<br>
 Here garlands glow of flowery twine,<br>
 With gorgeous hues and scent divine.<br>
 Take gold and gems and rich attire:<br>
 Enjoy with me thy heart's desire.<br>
 There stand, of chariots far the best,<br>
 The car my brother once possessed.<br>
 Which, victor in the stricken field,<br>
 I forced the Lord of Gold to yield.<br>
 'Tis wide and high and nobly wrought,<br>
 Bright as the sun and swift as thought.<br>
 Therein O Sítá, shalt tbou ride<br>
 Delighted by thy lover's side.<br>
 But sorrow mars with lingering trace<br>
 The splendour of thy lotus face.<br>
 A cloud of woe is o'er it spread,<br>
 And all the light of joy is fled.'<br>
     The lady, by her woe distressed,<br>
 One corner of her raiment pressed<br>
 To her sad cheek like moonlight clear.<br>
 And wiped away a falling tear.<br>
 The rover of the night renewed<br>
 His eager pleading as he viewed<br>
 The lady stand like one distraught,<br>
 Striving to fix her wandering thought:<br>
 ' Think not, sweet Lady, of the shame<br>
 Of broken vows, nor fear the blame.<br>
 The Saints approve with favouring eyes<br>
 
 </p><p>
 This union knit with marriage ties.<br>
 O beauty, at thy radiant feet<br>
 I lay my heads, and thus entreat.<br>
 One word of grace, one look I crave:<br>
 Have pity on thy prostrate slave.<br>
 These idle words I speak are vain,<br>
 Wrung forth by love's consuming pain,<br>
 And ne'er of Rávan be it said<br>
 He wooed a dame with prostrate head.'<br>
 Thus to the Maithil lady sued<br>
 The monarch of the giant brood,<br>
 And 'She is now mine own,' he thought,<br>
 In Death's dire coils already caught.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry254.htm">Next: Canto LVI.: Sítá's Disdain.</a></center>
 </body>