<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry251.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry253.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIV.: LANKÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 He bore her on in rapid flight,<br>
 And not a friend appeared in sight.<br>
 But on a hill that o'er the wood<br>
 Raised its high top five monkeys stood.<br>
 From her fair neck her scarf she drew,<br>
 And down the glittering vesture flew.<br>
 With earring, necklet, chain, and gem,<br>
 Descending in the midst of them:<br>
 'For these,' she thought,'my path may show,<br>
 And tell my lord the way I go.'<br>
 Nor did the fiend, in wild alarm,<br>
 Mark when she drew from neck and arm<br>
 And foot the gems and gold, and sent<br>
 To earth each gleaming ornament.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The monkeys raised their tawny eyes<br>
 That closed not in their first surprise,<br>
 And saw the dark-eyed lady, here<br>
 She shrieked above them in the air.<br>
 High o'er their heads the giant passed<br>
 Holding the weeping lady fast.<br>
 O'er Pampa's flashing flood he sped<br>
 And on to Lanka's city fled.<br>
 He bore awny in senseless joy<br>
 The prize that should his life destroy,<br>
 Like the rash fool who hugs beneath<br>
 His robe a snake with venomed teeth,<br>
 Swift as an arrow from a bow,<br>
 Speeding o'er lands that lay below,<br>
 Sublime in air his course he took<br>
 O'er wood and rook and lake and brook.<br>
 He passed at length the sounding sea<br>
 Where monstrous creatures wander free,--<br>
 Seat of Lord Varun's ancient reign,<br>
 Controller of the eternal main.<br>
 The angry waves were raised and tossed<br>
 As Rávan with the lady crossed,<br>
 And fish and snake in wild unrest<br>
 Showed flashing fin and gleaming crest.<br>
 Then from the blessed troops who dwell<br>
 In air celestial voices fell:<br>
 'O ten-necked King,' they cried, 'attend:<br>
 This guilty deed will bring thine end.'<br>
     Then Rávan speeding like the storm,<br>
 Bearing his death in human form,<br>
 The struggling Sítá, lighted down<br>
 In royal Lanka's glorious town;<br>
 A city bright and rich, that showed<br>
 Well-ordered street and noble road;<br>
 Arranged with just division, fair<br>
 With multitudes in court and square.<br>
 Thus, all his journey done, he passed<br>
 Within his royal home at last.<br>
 There in a queenly bower he placed<br>
 The black-eyed dame with dainty waist:<br>
 Thus in her chamber Maya laid<br>
 The lovely Maya, demon maid.<br>
 Then Rávan gave command to all<br>
 The dread she-fiends who filled the halls<br>
 'This captive lady watch and guard<br>
 From sight of man and woman barred.<br>
 But all the fair one asks beside<br>
 Be with unsparing hand supplied:<br>
 As though 'twere I that asked, withhold<br>
 No pearls or dress or gems or gold.<br>
 And she among you that shall dare<br>
 Of purpose or through want of care<br>
 One word to vex her soul to say,<br>
 'Throws her unvalued life away.'<br>
     Thus spake the monarch of their race<br>
 To those she-fiends who thronged the place,<br>
 And pondering on the course to take<br>
 Went from the chamber as he spake.<br>
 He saw eight giants, strong and dread,<br>
 On flesh of bleeding victims fed,<br>
 Proud in the boon which Brahma gave,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_294"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 294</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And trusting in its power to save.<br>
 He thus the mighty chiefs addressed<br>
 Of glorious power and strength possessed:<br>
 'Arm, warriors, with the spear and bow;<br>
 With all your speed from Lanká go,<br>
 For Janasthán, our own no more,<br>
 Is now defiled with giants' gore;<br>
 The seat of Khara's royal state<br>
 Is left unto us desolate.<br>
 In your brave hearts and might confide,<br>
 And cast ignoble fear aside.<br>
 Go, in that desert region dwell<br>
 Where the fierce giants fought and fell.<br>
 A glorious host that region held,<br>
 For power and might unparalleled,<br>
 By Dúshan and brave Khara led,-<br>
 All, slain by Ráma's arrows, bled.<br>
 Hence boundless wrath that spurns control<br>
 Reigns paramount within my soul,<br>
 And naught but Ráma's death can sate<br>
 The fury of my vengeful hate.<br>
 I will not close my slumbering eyes<br>
 Till by this hand my foeman dies.<br>
 And when mine arm has slain the foe<br>
 Who laid those giant princes low,<br>
 Long will I triumph in the deed,<br>
 Like one enriched in utmost need.<br>
 Now go; that I this end may gain,<br>
 In Janasthán. O chiefs, remain.<br>
 Watch Ráma there with keenest eye,<br>
 And all his deeds and movements spy.<br>
 Go forth, no helping art neglect,<br>
 Be brave and prompt and circumspect,<br>
 And be your one endeavour still<br>
 To aid mine arm this foe to kill.<br>
 Oft have I seen your warrior might<br>
 Proved in the forehead of the fight,<br>
 And sure of strength I know so well<br>
 Send you in Janasthán to dwell.'<br>
     The giants heard with prompt assent<br>
         The pleasant words he said,<br>
     And each before his master bent<br>
         For meet salute, his head.<br>
     Then as he bade, without delay,<br>
         From Lanká's gate they passed,<br>
     And hurried forward on their way<br>
         Invisible and fast.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry253.htm">Next: Canto LV.: Sítá In Prison.</a></center>
 </body>