<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry257.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry259.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LX.: LAKSHMAN REPROVED.</h3>
 <p>
 But Ráma ceased not to upbraid.<br>
 His brother for untimely aid,<br>
 And thus, while anguish wrung his breast,<br>
 The chief with eager question pressed:<br>
 'Why, Lakshman, didst thou hurry hence<br>
 And leave my wife without defence?<br>
 I left her in the wood with thee.<br>
 And deemed her safe from jeopardy.<br>
 When first thy form appeared in view,<br>
 I marked that Sítá come not too.<br>
 With woe my troubled soul was rent,<br>
 Prophetic of the dire event.<br>
 Thy coming steps afar I spied,<br>
 I saw no Sítá by thy side.<br>
 And felt a sudden throbbing dart<br>
 Through my left eye, and arm, and heart.'<br>
     Lakshman, with Fortune's marks impressed,<br>
 His brother mournfully addressed:<br>
 'Not by my heart's free impulse led,<br>
 Leaving thy wife to thee I sped;<br>
 But by her keen reproaches sent,<br>
 O Ráma, to thine aid I went.<br>
 She heard afar a mournful cry,<br>
 'O save me, Lakshman, or I die.'<br>
 The voice that spoke in moving tone<br>
 Smote on her ear and seemed thine own.<br>
 Soon as those accents reached her ear<br>
 She yielded to her woe and fear,<br>
 She wept o'ercome by grief, and cried,<br>
 'Fly, Lakshman, fly to Ráma's side.'<br>
 Though many a time she bade me speed,<br>
 Her urgent prayer I would not heed.<br>
 I bade her in thy strength confide,<br>
 And thus with tender words replied:<br>
 'No giant roams the forest shade<br>
 From whom thy lord need shrink dismayed.<br>
 No human voice, believe me, spoke<br>
 Those words thy causeless fear that woke.<br>
 Can he whose might can save in woe<br>
 The heavenly Gods e'er stoop so low,<br>
 And with those piteous accents call<br>
 For succour like a caitiff thrall?<br>
 And why should wandering giants choose<br>
 The accents of thy lord to use,<br>
 In alien tones my help to crave,<br>
 And cry aloud. O Lakshman, save?<br>
 Now let my words thy spirit cheer.<br>
 Compose thy thoughts and banish fear.<br>
 In hell, in earth, or in the skies<br>
 There is not, and there cannot rise<br>
 A champion whose strong arm can slay<br>
 Thy Ráma in the battle fray.<br>
 To heavenly hosts he ne'er would yield<br>
 Though Indra led them to the field.<br>
 To soothe her thus I vainly sought:<br>
 Her heart with woe was still distraught.<br>
 While from her eyes the waters ran<br>
 Her bitter speech she thus began:<br>
 'Too well I see thy dark intent:<br>
 Thy lawless thoughts on me are bent.<br>
 Thou hopest, but thy hope is vain,<br>
 To win my love, thy brother slain.<br>
 Not love, but Bharat's dark decree<br>
 To share his exile counselled thee,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_300"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 300</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Or hearing now his bitter cry<br>
 Thou surely to his aid wouldst fly.<br>
 For love of me, a stealthy foe<br>
 Thou choosest by his side to go,<br>
 And now thou longest that my lord<br>
 Should die, and wilt no help afford.'<br>
     Such were the words the lady said:<br>
 With angry fire my eyes were red.<br>
 With pale lips quivering in my rage<br>
 I hastened from the hermitage.'<br>
 He ceased; and frenzied by his pain<br>
 The son of Raghu spoke again:<br>
 'O brother, for thy fault I grieve,<br>
 The Maithil dame alone to leave.<br>
 Thou knowest that my arm is strong<br>
 To save me from the giant throng,<br>
 And yet couldst leave the cottage, spurred<br>
 To folly by her angry word.<br>
 For this thy deed I praise thee not,--<br>
 To leave her helpless in the cot,<br>
 And thus thy sacred charge forsake<br>
 For the wild words a woman spake.<br>
 Yea thou art all to blame herein,<br>
 And very grievous is thy sin.<br>
 That anger swayed thy faithless breast<br>
 And made thee false to my behest.<br>
 An arrow speeding from my bow<br>
 Has laid the treacherous giant low,<br>
 Who lured me eager for the chase<br>
 Far from my hermit dwelling-place.<br>
 The string with easy hand I drew,<br>
 The arrow as in pastime flew,<br>
     The wounded quarry bled.<br>
 The borrowed form was cast away,<br>
 Before mine eye a giant lay<br>
     With bright gold braceleted.<br>
 My arrow smote him in the chest:<br>
 The giant by the pain distressed<br>
     Raised his loud voice on high.<br>
 Far rang the mournful sound: mine own,<br>
 It seemed, were accent, voice, and tone,<br>
 They made thee leave my spouse alone<br>
     And to my rescue fly,'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry259.htm">Next: Canto LXI.: Ráma's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>