<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry267.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry269.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXX.: KABANDHA.</h3>
 <p>
 When every rite was duly paid<br>
 The princely brothers onward strayed,<br>
 An eager in the lady's quest<br>
 They turned their footsteps to the west.<br>
 Through lonely woods that round them lay<br>
 Ikshváku's children made their way,<br>
 
 
 </p><p>
 And armed with bow and shaft and brand<br>
 Pressed onward to the southern land.<br>
 Thick trees and shrubs and creepers grew<br>
 In the wild grove they hurried through.<br>
 'Twas dark and drear and hard to pass<br>
 For tangled thorns and matted grass.<br>
 Still onward with a southern course<br>
 They made their way with vigorous force<br>
 And passing through the mazes stood<br>
 Beyond that vast and fearful wood.<br>
 With toil and hardship yet unspent<br>
 Three leagues from Janasthán they went,<br>
 And speeding on their way at last<br>
 Within the wood of Krauncha  <a name="fr_516"></a><a href="#fn_516"><font size="1">1</font></a> passed:<br>
 A fearful forest wild and black<br>
 As some huge pile of cloudy rack,<br>
 Filled with all birds and beasts, where grew<br>
 Bright blooms of every varied hue.<br>
 On Sítá bending every thought<br>
 Through all the mighty wood they sought,<br>
 And at the lady's loss dismayed<br>
 Here for a while and there they stayed.<br>
 Then turning farther eastward they<br>
 Pursued three leagues their weary way,<br>
 Passed Krauncha's wood and reached the grove<br>
 Where elephants rejoiced to rove.<br>
 The chiefs that awful wood surveyed<br>
 Where deer and wild birds filled each glade,<br>
 Where scarce a step the foot could take<br>
 For tangled shrub and tree and brake.<br>
 There in a mountain's woody side<br>
 A cave the royal brothers spied,<br>
 With dread abysses deep as hell,<br>
 Where darkness never ceased to dwell.<br>
 When, pressing on, the lords of men<br>
 Stood near the entrance of the den,<br>
 They saw within the dark recess<br>
 A huge misshapen giantess;<br>
 A thing the timid heart that shook<br>
 With fearful shape and savage look.<br>
 Terrific fiend, her voice was fierce,<br>
 Long were her teeth to rend and pierce.<br>
 The monster gorged her horrid feast<br>
 Of flesh of many a savage beast,<br>
 While her long locks, at random flung,<br>
 Dishevelled o'er her shoulders hung.<br>
 Their eyes the royal brothers raised,<br>
 And on the fearful monster gazed.<br>
 Forth from her den she came and glanced<br>
 At Lakshman as he first advanced,<br>
 Her eager arms to hold him spread,<br>
 And 'Come and be my love' she said,<br>
 Then as she held him to her breast,<br>
 The prince in words like these addressed:<br>
 'Behold thy treasure fond and fair:<br>
 Ayomukhi  <a name="fr_517"></a><a href="#fn_517"><font size="1">2</font></a> the name I bear.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_311"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 311</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 In thickets of each lofty hill,<br>
 On islets of each brook and rill,<br>
 With me delighted shalt thou play,<br>
 And live for many a lengthened day.'<br>
     Enraged he heard the monster woo;<br>
 His ready sword he swiftly drew,<br>
 And the sharp steel that quelled his foes<br>
 Cut through her breast and ear and nose.<br>
 Thus mangled by his vengeful sword<br>
 In rage and pain the demon roared,<br>
 And hideous with her awful face<br>
 Sped to her secret dwelling place.<br>
 Soon as the fiend had fled from sight,<br>
 The brothers, dauntless in their might,<br>
 Beached a wild forest dark and dread<br>
 Whose tangled ways were hard to tread.<br>
 Then bravest Lakshman, virtuous youth,<br>
 The friend of purity and truth,<br>
 With reverent palm to palm applied<br>
 Thus to his glorious brother cried:<br>
     'My arm presaging throbs amain,<br>
 My troubled heart is sick with pain,<br>
 And cheerless omens ill portend<br>
 Where'er my anxious eyes I bend.<br>
 Dear brother, hear my words: advance<br>
 Resolved and armed for every chance,<br>
 For every sign I mark to-day<br>
 Foretells a peril in the way.<br>
 This bird of most ill-omened note,<br>
 Loud streaming with discordant throat,<br>
 Announces with a warning cry<br>
 That strife and victory are nigh.'<br>
     Then as the chiefs their search pursued<br>
 Throughout the dreary solitude,<br>
 They heard amazed a mighty sound<br>
 That broke the very trees around.<br>
 As though a furious tempest passed<br>
 Crashing the wood beneath its blast.<br>
 Then Ráma raised his trusty sword,<br>
 And both the hidden cause explored.<br>
 There stood before their wondering eyes<br>
 A fiend broad-chested, huge of size.<br>
 A vast misshapen trunk they saw<br>
 In height surpassing nature's law.<br>
 It stood before them dire and dread<br>
 Without a neck, without a head.<br>
 Tall as some hill aloft in air,<br>
 Its limbs were clothed with bristling hair,<br>
 And deep below the monster's waist<br>
 His vast misshapen mouth was placed.<br>
 His form was huge, his voice was loud<br>
 As some dark-tinted thunder cloud,<br>
 Forth from his ample chest there came<br>
 A brilliance as of gushing flame.<br>
 Beneath long lashes, dark and keen<br>
 The monster's single eye was seen.<br>
 Deep in his chest, long, fiercely bright,<br>
 It glittered with terrific light.<br>
 He swallowed down his savage fare<br>
 Of lion, bird, and slaughtered bear,<br>
 Aud with huge teeth exposed to view<br>
 
 </p><p>
 O'er his great lips his tongue he drew.<br>
 His arms unshapely, vast and dread,<br>
 A league in length, he raised and spread.<br>
 He seized with monstrous hands a herd<br>
 Of deer and many a bear and bird.<br>
 Among them all he picked and chose,<br>
 Drew forward these, rejected those.<br>
 Before the princely pair he stood<br>
 Barring their passage through the wood.<br>
 A league of shade the chiefs had passed<br>
 When on the fiend their eyes they cast.<br>
 A monstrous shape without a head<br>
 With mighty arms before him spread,<br>
 They saw that hideous trunk appear<br>
 That struck the trembling eye with fear.<br>
 Then, stretching to their full extent<br>
 His awful arms with fingers bent,<br>
 Bound Raghu's princely sons he cast<br>
 Each grasping limb and held them fast.<br>
 Though strong of arm and fierce in fight,<br>
 Each armed with bow and sword to smite,<br>
 The royal brothers, brave and bold,<br>
 Were helpless in the giant's hold.<br>
 Then Raghu's son, heroic still,<br>
 Felt not a pang his bosom thrill;<br>
 But young, with no protection near,<br>
 His brother's heart was sad with fear,<br>
 And thus with trembling tongue he said<br>
 To Ráma, sore disquieted:<br>
     'Ah me, ah me, my days are told:<br>
 O see me in the giant's hold.<br>
 Fly, son of Raghu, swiftly flee,<br>
 And thy dear self from danger free.<br>
 Me to the fiend an offering give;<br>
 Fly at thine ease thyself and live.<br>
 Thou, great Katkutstha's son, I ween,<br>
 Wilt find ere long thy Maithil queen,<br>
 And when thou holdest, throned again,<br>
 Thine old hereditary reign,<br>
 With servants prompt to do thy will,<br>
 O think upon thy brother still.'<br>
 As thus the trembling Lakshman cried,<br>
 The dauntless Ráma thus replied:<br>
 'Brother, from causeless dread forbear.<br>
 A chief like thee should scorn despair.'<br>
 He spoke to soothe his wild alarm:<br>
 Then fierce Kabandha  <a name="fr_518"></a><a href="#fn_518"><font size="1">1</font></a> long of arm,<br>
 Among the Dánavs  <a name="fr_519"></a><a href="#fn_519"><font size="1">2</font></a> first and best,<br>
 The sons of Raghu thus addressed:<br>
 'What men are you, whose shoulders show<br>
 Broad as a bull's, with sword and bow,<br>
 Who roam this dark and horrid place.<br>
 Brought by your fate before my face?<br>
 Declare by what occasion led<br>
 These solitary wilds you tread,<br>
 With swords and bows and shafts to pierce,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_312"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 312</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Like bulls whose horns are strong and fierce.<br>
 Why have you sought this forest land<br>
 Where wild with hunger's pangs I stand?<br>
 Now as your steps my path have crossed<br>
 Esteem your lives already lost?<br>
     The royal brothers heard with dread<br>
 The words which fierce Kabandha said.<br>
 And Ráma to his brother cried,<br>
 Whose cheek by blanching fear was dried.<br>
     'Alas, we fall, O valiant chief,<br>
 From sorrow into direr grief,<br>
 Still mourning her I hold so dear<br>
 We see our own destruction near.<br>
 Mark, brother, mark what power has time<br>
 O'er all that live, in every chime<br>
 Now, lord of men, thyself and me<br>
 Involved in fatal danger see.<br>
 'Tis not, be sure, the might of Fate<br>
 That crushes all with deadly weight.<br>
 Ne'er can the brave and strong, who know<br>
 The use of spear and sword and bow,<br>
 The force of conquering time withstand,<br>
 But fall like barriers built of sand.<br>
     Thus in calm strength which naught could shake<br>
 The son of Das'aratha spake,<br>
     With glory yet unstained<br>
 Upon Sumitrá's son he bent<br>
 His eyes, and firm in his intent<br>
     His dauntless heart maintained.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_516"></a><a href="ry268.htm#fr_516">310:1</a>  Or Curlews' Wood.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_517"></a><a href="ry268.htm#fr_517">310:2</a>  Iron-faced.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_518"></a><a href="ry268.htm#fr_518">311:1</a>  Kabandha means a trunk.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_519"></a><a href="ry268.htm#fr_519">311:2</a>  A class of mythological giants. In the
 Epic period they were probably personifications
 of the aborigines of India.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry269.htm">Next: Canto LXXI.: Kabandha's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>