<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry263.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry265.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVI.: LAKSHMAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 He stood incensed with eyes of flame,<br>
 Still mourning for his ravished dame,<br>
 Determined, like the fire of Fate,<br>
 To leave the wide world desolate.<br>
 His ready bow the hero eyed,<br>
 And as again, again he sighed,<br>
 The triple world would fain consume<br>
 Like Hara  <a name="fr_511"></a><a href="#fn_511"><font size="1">2</font></a> in the day of doom.<br>
 Then Lakshman moved with sorrow viewed<br>
 His brother in unwonted mood,<br>
 And reverent palm to palm applied,<br>
 Thus spoke with lips which terror dried<br>
 'Thy heart was ever soft and kind,<br>
 To every creature's good inclined.<br>
 Cast not thy tender mood away,<br>
 Nor yield to anger's mastering sway.<br>
 The moon for gentle grace is known,<br>
 The sun has splendour all his own,<br>
 The restless wind is free and fast,<br>
 And earth in patience unsurpassed.<br>
 So glory with her noble fruit<br>
 Is thine eternal attribute.<br>
 O, let not, for the sin of one,<br>
 The triple world be all undone.<br>
 I know not whose this car that lies<br>
 In fragments here before our eyes,<br>
 Nor who the chiefs who met and fought,<br>
 Nor what the prize the foemen sought;<br>
 Who marked the ground with hoof and wheel,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_307"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 307</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Or whose the hand that plied the steel<br>
 Which left this spot, the battle o'er,<br>
 Thus sadly dyed with drops of gore.<br>
 Searching with utmost care I view<br>
 The signs of one and not of two.<br>
 Where'er I turn mine eyes I trace<br>
 No mighty host about the place.<br>
 Then mete not out for one offence<br>
 This all-involving recompense,<br>
 For kings should use the sword they bear,<br>
 Put mild in time should learn to spare,<br>
 Thou, ever moved by misery's call,<br>
 Waft the great hope and stay of all<br>
 Throughout the world who would not blame<br>
 This outrage on thy ravished dame?<br>
 Gandharvas, Dánavs, Gods, the trees,<br>
 The rocks, the rivers, and the seas,<br>
 Can ne'er in aught thy soul offend,<br>
 As one whom holiest rites befriend.<br>
 But him who dared to steal the dame<br>
 Pursue, O King, with ceaseless aim,<br>
 With me, the hermits' holy band,<br>
 And thy great bow to arm thy hand<br>
 By every mighty flood we'll seeks,<br>
 Each wood, each hill from base to peak.<br>
 To the fair homes of Gods we'll fly,<br>
 And bright Gandharvas in the sky,<br>
 Until we reach, where'er he be,<br>
 The wretch who stole thy spouse from thee,<br>
 Then if the Gods will not restore<br>
 Thy Sítá when the search is o'er,<br>
 Then, royal lord of Kos'al's land,<br>
 No longer hold thy vengeful hand.<br>
 If meekness, prayer, and right be weak<br>
 To bring thee back the dame we seek,<br>
 Up, brother, with a deadly shower<br>
 Of gold-bright shafts thy foes o'erpower,<br>
 Fierce as the flashing levin sent<br>
 From King Mahendra's firmament.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_510"></a><a href="ry263.htm#fr_510">306:1</a>  An Asur or demon, king of Tripura,
 the modern Tipperah.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_511"></a><a href="ry264.htm#fr_511">306:2</a>  S'iva.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry265.htm">Next: Canto LXVII.: Ráma Appeased.</a></center>
 </body>