<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry260.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry262.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIII.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus for his wife in vain he sought:<br>
 Then, his sad soul with pain distraught,<br>
 The hero of the lotus eyes<br>
 Filled all the air with frantic cries.<br>
 O'erpowered by love's strong influence, he<br>
 His absent wife still seemed to see,<br>
 And thus with accents weak and faint<br>
 Renewed with tears his wild complaint:<br>
 'Thou,fairer than their bloom, my spouse,<br>
 Art hidden by As'oka boughs.<br>
 Those blooms have power to banish care,<br>
 But now they drive me to despair.<br>
 Thine arms are like the plantain's stem:<br>
 Why let the plantain cover them?<br>
 Thou art not hidden, love; thy feet<br>
 betray thee in thy dark retreat.<br>
 Thou runnest in thy girlish sport<br>
 To flowery trees, thy dear resort.<br>
 But cease, O cease, my love, I pray,<br>
 To vex me with thy cruel play.<br>
 Such mockery in a holy spot<br>
 Where hermits dwell beseems thee not.<br>
 Ah, now I see thy fickle mind<br>
 To scornful mood too much inclined,<br>
 Come, large-eyed beauty. I implore;<br>
 Lone is the cot so dear before.<br>
     No, she is slain by giants; they<br>
 Have stolen or devoured their prey,<br>
 Or surely at my mournful cry<br>
 My darling to her lord would fly.<br>
 O Lakshman, see those troops of deer:<br>
 In each sad eye there gleams a tear.<br>
 Those looks of woe too clearly say<br>
 My consort is the giants' prey.<br>
 O noblest, fairest of the fair,<br>
 Where art thou. best of women, where?<br>
 This day will dark Kaikeyí find<br>
 Fresh triumph for her evil mind,<br>
 When I, who with my Sítá came<br>
 Return alone, without my dame.<br>
 But ne'er can I return to see<br>
 Those chambers where my queen should be<br>
 And hear the scornful people speak<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_303"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 303</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Of Ráma as a coward weak.<br>
 For mine will be the coward's shame<br>
 Who let the foeman steal his dame.<br>
 How can I seek my home, or brook<br>
 Upon Videha's king to look?<br>
 How listen, when he bids me tell,<br>
 My wanderings o'er, that all is well?<br>
 He, when I meet his eager view,<br>
 Will mark that Sítá comes not too,<br>
 And when he hears the mournful tale<br>
 His wildered sense will reel and fail.<br>
 'O Das'aratha.' will he cry,<br>
 'Blest in thy mansion in the sky!'<br>
 Ne'er to that town my steps shall bend,<br>
 That town which Bharat's arms defend,<br>
 For e'en the blessed homes above<br>
 Would seem a waste without my love.<br>
 Leave me, my brother, here, I pray;<br>
 To fair Ayodhyá bend thy way.<br>
 Without my love I cannot bear<br>
 To live one hour in blank despair.<br>
 Round Bharat's neck thy fond arms twine,<br>
 And greet him with these words of mine:<br>
 'Dear brother, still the power retain,<br>
 And o'er the land as monarch reign.'<br>
 With salutation next incline<br>
 Before thy mother, his, and mine.<br>
 Still, brother, to my words attend,<br>
 And with all care each dame befriend.<br>
 To my dear mother's ear relate<br>
 My mournful tale and Sítá's fate.'<br>
     Thus Ráma gave his sorrow vent,<br>
 And from a heart which anguish rent,<br>
 Mourned for his wife in loud lament,-<br>
     Her of the glorious hair,<br>
 From Lakshman's cheek the colour fled,<br>
 And o'er his heart came sudden dread,<br>
 Sick, faint, and sore disquieted<br>
     By woe too great to bear.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry262.htm">Next: Canto LXIV.: Rama's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>