<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry265.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry267.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVIII.: JATÁYUS.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus faithful Lakshman strove to cheer<br>
 The prince with counsel wise and clear.<br>
 Who, prompt to seize the pith of all,<br>
 Let not that wisdom idly fall.<br>
 With vigorous effort he restrained<br>
 The passion in his breast that reigned,<br>
 And leaning on his bow for rest<br>
 His brother Lakshman thus addressed:<br>
 'How shall we labour now, reflect;<br>
 Whither again our search direct?<br>
 Brother, what plan canst thou devise<br>
 To bring her to these longing eyes?'<br>
     To him by toil and sorrow tried<br>
 The prudent Lakshman thus replied:<br>
 'Come, though our labour yet be vain,<br>
 And search through Janasthán again,-<br>
 A realm where giant foes abound.<br>
 And trees and creepers hide the ground.<br>
 For there are caverns deep and dread,<br>
 By deer and wild birds tenanted,<br>
 And hills with many a dark abyss,<br>
 Grotto and rock and precipice.<br>
 There bright Gandharvas love to dwell,<br>
 And Kinnars in each bosky dell.<br>
 With me thy eager search to aid<br>
 Be every hill and cave surveyed.<br>
 Great chiefs like thee, the best of men,<br>
 Endowed with sense and piercing ken,<br>
 Though tried by trouble never fail.<br>
 Like rooted hills that mock the gale,'<br>
     Then Ráma, pierced by anger's sting,<br>
 Laid a keen arrow on his string,<br>
 And by the faithful Lakshman's side<br>
 Roamed through the forest far and wide.<br>
 Jatáyus there with blood-drops dyed,<br>
 Lying upon the ground he spied,<br>
 Huge as a mountain's shattered crest,<br>
 Mid all the birds of air the best.<br>
 In wrath the mighty bird he eyed,<br>
 And thus the chief to Lakshman cried:<br>
     'Ah me, these signs the truth betray;<br>
 My darling was the vulture's prey.<br>
 Some demon in the bird's disguise<br>
 Roams through the wood that round us lies,<br>
 On large eyed Sítá he has fed.<br>
 And rest him now with wings outspread<br>
 But my keen * whose flight is true,<br>
 Shall *<br>
 
 </p><p>
 An arrow on the string he laid,<br>
 And rushing near the bird surveyed,<br>
 While earth to ocean's distant side<br>
 Trembled beneath his furious stride.<br>
 With blood and froth on neck and beak<br>
 The dying bird essayed to speak,<br>
 And with a piteous voice, distressed,<br>
 Thus Das'aratha's son addressed:<br>
     'She whom like some sweet herb of grace<br>
 Thou seekest in this lonely place,<br>
 Fair lady, is fierce Rávan's prey,<br>
 Who took, beside, my life away.<br>
 Lakshman and thou had parted hence<br>
 And left the dame without defence,<br>
 I saw her swiftly borne away<br>
 By Rávan's might which none could stay.<br>
 I hurried to the lady's aid,<br>
 I crushed his car and royal shade,<br>
 And putting forth my warlike might<br>
 Hurled Rávan to the earth in fight.<br>
 Here, Ráma, lies his broken bow,<br>
 Here lie the arrows of the foe.<br>
 There on the ground before thee are<br>
 The fragments of his battle car.<br>
 There bleeds the driver whom my wings<br>
 Beat down with ceaseless buffetings<br>
 When toil my aged strength subdued,<br>
 His sword my weary pinions hewed.<br>
 Then lifting up the dame he bare<br>
 His captive through the fields of air.<br>
 Thy vengeful blows from me restrain,<br>
 Already by the giant slain.'<br>
     When Ráma heard the vulture tell<br>
 The tale that proved his love so well,<br>
 His bow upon the ground he placed,<br>
 And tenderly the bird embraced:<br>
 Then to the earth he fell o'erpowered,<br>
 And burning tears both brothers showered,<br>
 For double pain and anguish pressed<br>
 Upon the patient hero's breast.<br>
 The solitary bird be eyed<br>
 Who in the lone wood gasped and sighed,<br>
 And as again his anguish woke<br>
 Thus Ráma to his brother spoke:<br>
     'Expelled from power the woods I tread,<br>
 My spouse is lost, the bird is dead.<br>
 A fate so sad. I ween, would tame<br>
 The vigour of the glorious flame.<br>
 If I to cool my fever tried<br>
 To cross the deep from side to side.<br>
 The sea,--so hard my fate,--would dry<br>
 His waters as my feet came nigh.<br>
 In all this world there lives not one<br>
 So cursed as I beneath the sun;<br>
 So strong a net of misery cast<br>
 Around me holds the captive fast,<br>
 Best of all birds that play the wing,<br>
 Loved, honoured by our sire the king,<br>
 The vulture, in my fate enwound,<br>
 Lies bleeding, dying on the ground.'<br>
     Then Ráma and his brother stirred<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_309"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 309</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 By pity mourned the royal bird,<br>
 And, as their hands his limbs caressed,<br>
 Affection for a sire expressed.<br>
 And Ráma to his bosom strained<br>
 The bird with mangled wings distained,<br>
     With crimson blood-drops dyed.<br>
 He fell, and shedding many a tear,<br>
     'Where is my spouse than life more dear?<br>
         Where is my love?' he cried.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry267.htm">Next: Canto LXIX.: The Death of Jatáyus.</a></center>
 </body>