<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry259.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry261.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXII.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 When all the toil and search was vain<br>
 He sought, his leafy home again.<br>
 'Twas empty still: all scattered lay<br>
 The seats of grass in disarray.<br>
 He raised his shapelv arms on high<br>
 And spoke aloud with bitter cry:<br>
 'Where is the Maíthil dame?' he said,<br>
 'O, whither has my darling fled?<br>
 Who can have borne away my dame,<br>
 Or feasted on her tender frame?<br>
 If, Sítá hidden by some tree,<br>
 Thou joyest still to mock at me,<br>
 Cease, cease thy cruel sport, and take<br>
 Compassion, or my heart will break.<br>
 Bethink thee, love, the gentle fawns<br>
 With whom thou playest on the lawns,<br>
 Impatient for thy coming wait<br>
 With streaming eyes disconsolate.<br>
 Reft of my love. I needs must go<br>
 Hence to the shades weighed down by woe.<br>
 The king our sire will see me there,<br>
 And cry, 'O perjured Ráma, where.<br>
 Where is thy faith, that thou canst speed<br>
 From exile ere the time decreed?<br>
     Ah Sítá, whither hast thou fled<br>
 And left me here disquieted,<br>
 A hapless mourner, reft of hone.<br>
 Too feeble with my woe to cope?<br>
 E'en thus indignant Glory flies<br>
 The wretch who stains his soul with lies.<br>
 If thou, my love, art lost to view,<br>
 I in my woe must perish too.'<br>
     Thus Rama by big grief distraught<br>
 Wept for the wife he vainly sought.<br>
 And Lakshman whose fraternal breast<br>
 Longed for his weal, the chief addressed<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_302"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 302</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Whose soul gave way beneath the pain<br>
 When all his eager search was vain.<br>
 Like some great elephant who stands<br>
 Sinking upon the treacherous sands:<br>
 'Not yet, O wisest chief, despair;<br>
 Renew thy toil with utmost care.<br>
 This noble hill where trees are green<br>
 Has many a cave and dark ravine.<br>
 The Maithil lady day by day<br>
 Delighted in the woods to stray.<br>
 Deep in the grove she wanders still.<br>
 Or walks by blossom-covered rill,<br>
 Or fish-loved river stealing through<br>
 Tall clusters of the dark bamboo.<br>
 Or else the dame with arch design<br>
 To prove thy mood, O Prince, and mine,<br>
 Far in some sheltering thicket lies<br>
 To frighten ere she meet our eyes.<br>
 Then come, renew thy labour, trace<br>
 The lady to her lurking-place,<br>
 And search the wood from side to aide<br>
 To know where Sitá loves to bide.<br>
 Collect thy thoughts, O royal chief,<br>
 Nor yield to unavailing grief.'<br>
     Thus Lakshman, by attention stirred,<br>
 To fresh attempts his brother spurred,<br>
 And Ráma, as he ceased, began<br>
 With Lakshman's aid each spot to scan.<br>
 In eager search their way they took<br>
 Through wood, o'er hill, by pool and brook,<br>
 They roamed each mount, nor spared to seek<br>
 On ridge and crag and towering peak.<br>
 They sought the dame in every spot;<br>
 But all in vain; they found her not.<br>
 Above, below, on every side<br>
 They ranged the hill, and Ráma cried,<br>
 'O Lakshman, O my brother still<br>
 No trace of Sítá on'the hill!'<br>
 Then Lakshman as he roamed the wood<br>
 Beside his glorious brother stood,<br>
 And while fierce grief his bosom burned<br>
 This answer to the chief retained:<br>
 'Thou, Ráma, after toil and pain<br>
 Wilt meet the Maithil dame again,<br>
 As Vishnu, Buli's might subdued,<br>
 His empire of the earth renewed.' <a name="fr_509"></a><a href="#fn_509"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
     Then Ráma cried in mournful tone,<br>
 His spirit by his woe o'erthrown;<br>
 'The wood is searched from side to side,<br>
 No distant spot remains untried,<br>
 No lilied pool, no streamlet where<br>
 The lotus buds are fresh and fair.<br>
 Our eyes have searched the hill with all<br>
 His caves and every waterfall,--<br>
 But ah, not yet I find my wife,<br>
 More precious than the breath of life.'<br>
     As thus he mourned his vanished dame<br>
 A mighty trembling seized his frame,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And by o'erpowering grief assailed,<br>
 His troubled senses reeled and failed.<br>
 Too great to bear his misery grew,<br>
 And many a long hot sigh he drew,<br>
 Then as he wept and sobbed and sighed,<br>
 "O Sita, O my love!' he cried.<br>
 Then Lakshman, joining palm to palm,<br>
 Tried every art his woe to calm.<br>
 But Ráma in his anguish heard<br>
 Or heeded not one soothing word.<br>
 Still for his spouse he mourned, and shrill<br>
 Rang out his lamentation still,<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_509"></a><a href="ry260.htm#fr_509">302:1</a>  See Book I. Canto XXXI.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry261.htm">Next: Canto LXIII.: Ráma's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>