<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry261.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry263.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIV.: RAMA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 Reft of his love, the royal chief,<br>
 Weighed down beneath his whelming grief,<br>
 Desponding made his brother share<br>
 His grievous burden of despair.<br>
 Over his sinking bosom rolled<br>
 The flood of sorrow uncontrolled.<br>
     And as he wept and sighed,<br>
 In mournful accents faint and slow<br>
 With words congenial to his woe,<br>
     To Lakshman thus he cried:<br>
 'Brother, I ween, beneath the sun,<br>
 Of all mankind there lives not one<br>
 So full of sin, whose hand has done<br>
     Such cursed deeds as mine.<br>
 For my sad heart with misery bleeds,<br>
 As, guerdon of those evil deeds,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Still greater woe to woe succeeds<br>
     In never-ending line.<br>
 A life of sin I freely chose,<br>
 And from my past transgression flows<br>
 A ceaseless flood of bitter woes<br>
     My folly to repay.<br>
 The fruit of sin has ripened fast.<br>
 Through many a sorrow have I passed,<br>
 And now the crowning grief at last<br>
     Falls on my head to-day.<br>
 From all my faithful friends I fled,<br>
 My sire is numbered with the dead,<br>
 My royal rank is forfeited,<br>
     My mother far away.<br>
 These woes on which I sadly think<br>
 Fill, till it raves above the brink,<br>
 The stream of grief in which I sink,--<br>
     The flood which naught can stay.<br>
 Ne'er, brother, ne'er have I complained;<br>
 Though long by toil and trouble pained,<br>
 Without a murmur I sustained<br>
     The woes of woodland life.<br>
 But fiercer than the flames that rise<br>
 When crackling wood the food supplies,--<br>
 Flashing a glow through evening skies,--<br>
     This sorrow for my wife.<br>
 Some cruel fiend has seized the prey<br>
 And torn my trembling love away,<br>
 While, as he bore her through the skies,<br>
 She shrieked aloud with frantic cries,<br>
 It tones of fear which, wild and shrill,<br>
 Retained their native sweetness still.<br>
 Ah me, that breast so soft and sweet,<br>
 For sandal's precious perfume meet,<br>
 Now all detained with dust and gore,<br>
 Shall meet my fond caress no more.<br>
 That face, whose lips with tones so clear<br>
 Made pleasant music, sweet to hear,--<br>
 With soft locks plaited o'er the brow,--<br>
 Some giant's hand is on it now.<br>
 It smiles not, us the dear light fails<br>
 When Ráhu's jaw the moon assails.<br>
 Ah, my true love! that shapely neck<br>
 She loved with fairest chains to deck,<br>
 The cruel demons rend, and drain<br>
 The lifeblood from each mangled vein.<br>
 Ah, when the savage monsters came<br>
 And dragged away the helpless dame,<br>
 'The lady of the long soft eye<br>
 Called like a lamb with piteous cry.<br>
 Beneath this rock, O Lakshman, see,<br>
 My peerless consort sat with me,<br>
 And gently talked to thee the while,<br>
 Her sweet lips opening with a smile.<br>
 Here is that fairest stream which she<br>
 Loved ever, bright Godávarí.<br>
 Ne'er can the dame have passed this way:<br>
 So far alone she would not stray,<br>
 Nor has my darling, lotus-eyed,<br>
 Sought lilies by the river's side,<br>
 For without me she ne'er would go<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_304"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 304</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To streamlets where the wild flowers grow,<br>
 Tell me not, brother, she has strayed<br>
 To the dark forest's distant shade<br>
 Where blooming boughs are gay and sweet,<br>
 And bright birds love the cool retreat.<br>
 Alone my love would never dare,--<br>
 My timid love,--to wander there.<br>
     O Lord of Day whose eye sees all<br>
 We act and plan, on thee I call:<br>
 For naught is hidden from thy sight,--<br>
 Great witness thou of wrong and right.<br>
 Where is she, lost or torn away?<br>
 Dispel my torturing doubt and say.<br>
 And O thou Wind who blowest free,<br>
 The worlds have naught concealed from thee.<br>
 List to my prayer, reveal one trace<br>
 Of her, the glory of her race.<br>
 Say, is she stolen hence, or dead,<br>
 Or do her feet the forest tread?'<br>
     Thus with disordered senses, faint<br>
 With woe he poured his sad complaint,<br>
 And then, a better way to teach,<br>
 Wise Lakshman spoke in seemly speech:<br>
 'Up, brother dear, thy grief subdue,<br>
 With heart and soul thy search renew.<br>
 When woes oppress and dangers threat<br>
 Brave effort ne'er was fruitless yet.'<br>
 He spoke, but Ráma gave no heed<br>
 To valiant Lakshman's prudent rede.<br>
 With double force the flood of pain<br>
 Rushed o'er his yielding soul again.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry263.htm">Next: Canto LXV.: Rama's Wrath.</a></center>
 </body>