<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry264.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry266.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVII.: RÁMA APPEASED.</h3>
 <p>
 As Ráma, pierced by sorrow's sting,<br>
 Lamented like a helpless thing,<br>
 And by his mighty woe distraught<br>
 Was last in maze of troubled thought,<br>
 Sumitrá's son with loving care<br>
 Consoled him in his wild despair,<br>
 And while his feet he gently pressed<br>
 With words like these the chief addressed;<br>
 'For sternest vow and noblest deed<br>
 Was Das'aratha blessed with seed.<br>
 Thee for his son the king obtained,<br>
 Like Amrit by the Gods regained.<br>
 Thy gentle graces won his heart,<br>
 And all too weak to live apart<br>
 The monarch died, as Bharat told,<br>
 And lives on high mid Gods enrolled.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 If thou, O Ráma, wilt not bear<br>
 This grief which fills thee with despair,<br>
 How shall a weaker man e'er hope,<br>
 Infirm and mean, with woe to cope?<br>
 Take heart, I pray thee, noblest chief:<br>
 What man who breathes is free from grief?<br>
 Misfortunes come and burn like flame,<br>
 Then fly as quickly as they came.<br>
 Yayáti son of Nahush reigned<br>
 With Indra on the throne he gained.<br>
 But falling for a light offence<br>
 He mourned a while the consequence.<br>
 Vasishtha, reverend saint and sage,<br>
 Priest of our sire from youth to age,<br>
 Begot a hundred sons, but they<br>
 Were smitten in a single day.  <a name="fr_512"></a><a href="#fn_512"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And she, the queen whom all revere,<br>
 The mother whom we hold so dear,<br>
 The earth herself not seldom feels<br>
 Fierce fever when she shakes and reels.<br>
 And those twin lights,the world's great eyes,<br>
 On which the universe relies,--<br>
 Does not eclipse at times assail<br>
 Their brilliance till their fires grow pale?<br>
 The mighty Powers, the Immortal Blest<br>
 Bend to a law which none contest.<br>
 No God, no bodied life is free<br>
 From conquering Fate's supreme decree,<br>
 E'en S'akra's self must reap the meed<br>
 Of virtue and of sinful deed.<br>
 And O great lord of men, wilt thou<br>
 Helpless beneath thy misery bow?<br>
 No, if thy dame be lost or dead,<br>
 O hero, still be comforted,<br>
 Nor yield for ever to thy woe<br>
 O'ermastered like the mean and low.<br>
 Thy peers, with keen far-reaching eyes,<br>
 Spend not their hours in ceaseless sighs;<br>
 In dire distress, in whelming ill<br>
 Their manly looks are hopeful still.<br>
 To this, great chief, thy reason bend,<br>
 And earnestly the truth perpend.<br>
 By reason's aid the wisest learn<br>
 The good and evil to discern.<br>
 With sin and goodness scarcely known<br>
 Faint light by chequered lives is shown;<br>
 Without some clear undoubted deed<br>
 We mark not how the fruits succeed.<br>
 In time of old, O thou most brave,<br>
 To me thy lips such counsel gave.<br>
 Vrihaspati  <a name="fr_513"></a><a href="#fn_513"><font size="1">2</font></a> can scarcely find<br>
 New wisdom to instruct thy mind.<br>
 For thine is wit and genious high<br>
 Meet for the children of the sky.<br>
 I rouse that heart benumbed by pain<br>
 And call to vigorous life again.<br>
 Be manly godlike vigour shown;<br>
 Put forth that noblest strength, thine own.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_308"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 308</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Strive, best of old Ikshváku's strain,<br>
 Strive till the conquered foe be slain.<br>
 Where is the profit or the joy<br>
 If thy fierce rage the worlds destroy?<br>
 Search till thou find the guilty foe,<br>
 Then let thy hand no mercy show.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_512"></a><a href="ry265.htm#fr_512">307:1</a>  See Book I, Canto LIX.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_513"></a><a href="ry265.htm#fr_513">307:2</a>  The Preceptor of the Gods</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry266.htm">Next: Canto LXVIII.: Jatáyus.</a></center>
 </body>