<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry276.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry278.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO II.: SUGRÍVA'S ALARM.</h3>
 <p>
 Sugríva moved by wondering awe<br>
 The high-souled sons of Raghu saw,<br>
 In all their glorious arms arrayed;<br>
 And grief upon his spirit weighed.<br>
 To every quarter of the sky<br>
 He turned in fear his anxious eye,<br>
 And roving still from spot to spot<br>
 With troubled steps he rested not.<br>
 He durst not, as he viewed the pair,<br>
 Resolve to stand and meet them there:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And drooping cheer and quailing breast<br>
 The terror of the chief confessed.<br>
 While the great fear his bosom shook,<br>
 Brief counsel with his lords he took;<br>
 Each gain and danger closely scanned,<br>
 What hope in flight, what power to stand,<br>
 While doubt and fear his bosom rent,<br>
 On Raghu's sons his eyes he bent,<br>
 And with a spirit ill at ease<br>
 Addressed his lords in words like these:<br>
     'Those chiefs with wandering steps invade<br>
 The shelter of our pathless shade,<br>
 And hither come in fair disguise<br>
 Of hermit garb as Báli's spies.'<br>
     Each lord beheld with troubled heart<br>
 Those masters of the bowman's art,<br>
 And left the mountain side to seek<br>
 Sure refuge on a loftier peak.<br>
 The Vánar chief in rapid flight<br>
 Found shelter on a towering height,<br>
 And all the band with one accord<br>
 Were closely gathered round their lord.<br>
 Their course the same, with desperate leap<br>
 Each made his way from steep to steep,<br>
 And speeding on in wild career<br>
 Filled every height with sudden fear.<br>
 Each heart was struck with mortal dread,<br>
 As on their course the Vánars sped,<br>
 While trees that crowned the steep were bent<br>
 And crushed beneath them as they went.<br>
 As in their eager flight they pressed<br>
 For safety to each mountain crest,<br>
 The wild confusion struck with fear<br>
 Tiger and cat and wandering deer.<br>
 The lords who watched Sugríva's will<br>
 Were gathered on the royal hill,<br>
 And all with reverent hands upraised<br>
 Upon their king and leader gazed.<br>
 Sugríva feared some evil planned,<br>
 Some train prepared by Báli's hand.<br>
 But skilled in words that charm and teach,<br>
 Thus Hanumán  <a name="fr_539"></a><a href="#fn_539"><font size="1">1b</font></a> began his speech:<br>
     Dismiss, dismiss thine idle fear,<br>
 Nor dread the power of Báli here.<br>
 For this is Malaya's glorious hill  <a name="fr_540"></a><a href="#fn_540"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Where Bálí's might can work no ill.<br>
 I look around but nowhere see<br>
 The hated foe who made thee flee,<br>
 Fell Báli, fierce in form and face:<br>
 Then fear not, lord of Vánar race.<br>
 Alas, in thee I clearly find<br>
 The weakness of the Vánar kind,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_325"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 325</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 That loves from thought to thought to range,<br>
 Fix no belief and welcome change.<br>
 Mark well each hint and sign and scan,<br>
 Discreet aud wise, thine every plan.<br>
 How may a king, with sense denied,<br>
 The subjects of his sceptre guide?'<br>
       Hanúmán,  <a name="fr_541"></a><a href="#fn_541"><font size="1">1</font></a> wise in hour of need,<br>
 Urged on the chief his prudent rede.<br>
 His listening ear Sugríva bent,<br>
 And spake in words more excellent:<br>
       'Where is the dauntless heart that free<br>
 From terror's chilling touch can see<br>
 Two stranger warriors, strong as those,<br>
 Equipped with swords and shafts and bows,<br>
 With mighty arms and large full eyes,<br>
 Like glorious children of the skies<br>
 Báli my foe, I ween, has sent<br>
 These chiefs to aid his dark intent.<br>
 Hence doubt and fear disturb me still,<br>
 For thousands serve a monarch's will,<br>
 In borrowed garb they come, and those<br>
 Who walk disguised are counted foes.<br>
 With secret thoughts they watch their time,<br>
 And wound fond hearts that fear no crime<br>
 My foe in state affairs is wise,<br>
 And prudent kings have searching eyes.<br>
 By other hands they strike the foe:<br>
 By meaner tools the truth they know.<br>
 Now to those stranger warriors turn,<br>
 And, less than king, their purpose learn.<br>
 Mark well the trick and look of each;<br>
 Observe his form and note his speech.<br>
 With care their mood and temper sound,<br>
 And, if their minds be friendly found,<br>
 With courteous looks and words begin<br>
 Their confidence and love to win.<br>
 Then as my friend and envoy speak,<br>
 And question where the strangers seek.<br>
 Ask why equipped with shaft and bow<br>
 Through this wild maze of wood they go.<br>
 If does, O chief, as first appear<br>
 Pure of all guile, in heart sincere,<br>
 Detect in speech and look the sin<br>
 And treachery that lurk within.'<br>
       He spoke: the Wind-God's son obeyed.<br>
 With ready zeal he sought the shade,<br>
 And reached with hasty steps the wood<br>
 Where Ragbu's son and Lakshman stood. <a name="fr_542"></a><a href="#fn_542"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The envoy in his faithful breast<br>
 Pondered Sugrivá's high behest.<br>
 From Rishyamúka's peak he hied<br>
 And placed him by the princes' side.<br>
 The Wind-God's son with cautious art<br>
 Had laid his Vánar form apart,<br>
 And wore, to cheat the strangers eyes,<br>
 A wandering mendicant's disguise.  <a name="fr_543"></a><a href="#fn_543"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Before the heroes' feet he bent<br>
 And did obeisance reverent,<br>
 And spoke, the gloirious pair to praise,<br>
 His words of truth in courteous phrase,<br>
 High honour duly paid, the best<br>
 Of all the Vánar kind addressed,<br>
 With free accord and gentle grace,<br>
 Those glories of their warrior race:<br>
     'O hermits, blest in vows, who shine<br>
 Like royal saints or Gods divine,<br>
 O best of young ascetics, say<br>
 How to this spot you found your way,<br>
 Scaring the troops of wandering deer<br>
 And silvan things that harbour here<br>
 Searching amid the trees that grow<br>
 Where Pampá's gentle waters flow.<br>
 And lending from your brows a gleam<br>
 Of glory to the lovely stream.<br>
 Who are you, say, so brave and fair.<br>
 Clad in the bark which hermits wear?<br>
 I see you have the frequent sigh,<br>
 I see the deer before you fly.<br>
 While you, for strength and valour dread,<br>
 The earth, like lordly lions, tread,<br>
 Each bearing in his hand a bow,<br>
 Like Indra's own, to slay the foe,<br>
 With the grand paces of bull,<br>
 So bright and young and beautiful<br>
 The mighty arms you raise appear<br>
 Like trunks which elephants uprear,<br>
 And as you move this mountain-king  <a name="fr_544"></a><a href="#fn_544"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Is glorious with the light you bring.<br>
 How have you reached, like Gods in face,<br>
 Best lords of earth, this lonely place,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_326"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 326</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With tresses coiled in hermit guise, <a name="fr_545"></a><a href="#fn_545"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And splendours of those lotus eyes?<br>
 As God's who leave their heavenly sphere,<br>
 Alike your beauteous forms appear.<br>
 Tne Lords of Day and Night <a name="fr_546"></a><a href="#fn_546"><font size="1">2</font></a> might thus<br>
 Stray from the skies to visit us.<br>
 Heroic youth, so broad of chest,<br>
 Fair with the beauty of the Blest,<br>
 With lion shoulders, tall and strong,<br>
 Like bulls who lead the lowing throng.<br>
 Your arms, unmatched for grace and length,<br>
 With massive clubs may vie in strength.<br>
 Why do no gauds those limbs adorn<br>
 Where priceless gems were meetly worn?<br>
 Each noble youth is fit, I deem,<br>
 To guard this earth, as lord supreme,<br>
 With all her woods and seas, to reign<br>
 From Meru's peak to Vindhya's chain.<br>
 Your smooth bows decked with dyes and gold<br>
 Are glorious in their masters' hold,<br>
 And with the arms of Indra  <a name="fr_547"></a><a href="#fn_547"><font size="1">3</font></a> vie<br>
 Which diamond splendours beautify.<br>
 Your quivers glow with golden sheen,<br>
 Well stored with arrows fleet and keen,<br>
 Each gleaming like a flery snake<br>
 That joys the foeman's life to take.<br>
 As serpents cast their sloughs away<br>
 And all their new born sheen display,<br>
 So flash your mighty swords inlaid<br>
 With burning gold on hilt and blade.<br>
 Why are you silent, heroes? Why<br>
 My questions hear nor deign reply?<br>
 Sugríva, lord of virtuous mind.<br>
 The foremost of the Vánar kind.<br>
 An exile from his royal state,<br>
 Roams through the land disconsolate.<br>
 I Hanumán, of Vánar race,<br>
 Sent by the king have sought this place,<br>
 For he, the pious, just, and true.<br>
 In friendly league would join with you.<br>
 Know, godlike youths, that I am one<br>
 Of his chief lords, the Wind-God's son.<br>
 With course unchecked I roam will,<br>
 And now from Rishyamúka's hill.<br>
 To please his heart, his hope to speed,<br>
 I came disguised in beggar's weed.'<br>
     Thus Hanumán, well trained in lore<br>
 Of language spoke, and said no more.<br>
 The son of Raghu joyed to hear<br>
 The envoy's speech, and bright of cheer<br>
 He turned to Lakshman by his side,<br>
 And thus in words of transport cried:<br>
     'The counselor we now behold<br>
 Of King Sugríva righteous souled.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 His face I long have yearned to see,<br>
 And now his envoy comes to me<br>
 With sweetest words in courteous phrase<br>
 Answer this mighty lord who slays<br>
 His foemen, by Sugríva sent.<br>
 This Vánar chief most eloquent.<br>
 For one whose words so sweetly flow<br>
 The whole Rig-veda  <a name="fr_548"></a><a href="#fn_548"><font size="1">1b</font></a> needs must know,<br>
 And in his well-trained memory store<br>
 The Yajush and the Sáman's lore.<br>
 He must have bent his faithful ear<br>
 All grammar's varied rules to hear.<br>
 For his long speech how well he spoke!<br>
 In all its length no rule he broke.<br>
 In eye, on brow, in all his face<br>
 The keenest look no guile could trace.<br>
 No change of hue, no pose of limb<br>
 Gave sign that aught was false in him.<br>
 Concise, unfaltering, sweet and clear,<br>
 Without a word to pain the ear.<br>
 From chest to throat, nor high nor low,<br>
 His accents came in measured flow.<br>
 How well he spoke with perfect art<br>
 That wondrous speech that charmed the heart,<br>
 With finest skill and order graced<br>
 In words that knew nor pause nor haste!<br>
 That speech, with consonants that spring<br>
 From the three seats of uttering, <a name="fr_549"></a><a href="#fn_549"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Would charm the spirit of a foe<br>
 Whose sword is raised for mortal blow.<br>
 How may a ruler's plan succeed<br>
 Who lacks such envoy good at need?<br>
 How fail, if one whose mind is stored<br>
 With gifts so rare assist his lord?<br>
 What plans can fail, with wisest speech<br>
 Of envoy's lips to further each?'<br>
     Thus Ráma spoke: and Lakshman, taught<br>
 In all the art that utters thought,<br>
 To King Súgríva's learned spy<br>
 Thus made his eloquent reply:<br>
 'Full well we know the gifts that grace<br>
 Sugríva, lord of Vánar race,<br>
 And hither turn our wandering feet<br>
 That we that high-souled king may meet<br>
 So now our pleasant task shall be<br>
 To do the words he speaks by thee.'<br>
     His prudent speech the Vánar heard,<br>
 And all his heart with joy was stirred.<br>
 And hope that league with them would bring<br>
 Redress and triumph to his king.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_327"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 327</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_537"></a><a href="ry276.htm#fr_537">324:1</a>  Sugríva, the ex-king of the Vánars,
 foresters, or monkeys, an exile from his
 home, wandering about the mountain
 Rishyamúka with his four faithful ex-ministers.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_538"></a><a href="ry276.htm#fr_538">324:2</a>  The hermitage of the Saint Matauga
 which his curse prevented Báli, the
 present king of the Vánars, from entering.
 The story is told at length in Canto XI.
 of this Book.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_539"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_539">324:1b</a>  Hanumán, Sugríva's chief general,
 was the son of the God of Wind. See
 Book I, Canto XVI.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_540"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_540">324:2b</a>  A range of hills in Malabar; the
 Western Ghats in the Deccan.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_541"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_541">325:1</a>  Válmíki makes the second vowel in
 this name long or short to suit the exigencies
 of the verse. Other Indian poets
 have followed his example, and the same
 licence will be used in this translation.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_542"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_542">325:2</a>  I omit a recapitulatory and interpolated
 verse in a different metre, which is as
 follows:--Reverencing with the words,
 So be it, the speech of the greatly terrified
 and unequalled monkey king, the magnanimous
 Hanúmán then went where (stood)
 the very mighty Ráma with Lakshman.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_543"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_543">325:1b</a>  The semi divine Hanuma'n posseses.
 like the Gods and demons, the power of
 wearing all shapes at will, He is one of
 the <i>Kámarúpís</i>.
 
 </p><p>
       Like Milton's good and bad angels
 </p><dir><br>
       "as they please<br>
       They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size<br>
       Assume as likes them best, coudense or rare."<br>
 </dir>
 
 <p><a name="fn_544"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_544">325:2b</a>  Himálaya is of course <i>par excellence</i>
 the Monarch of mountains, but the complimentary
 title is frequently given to
 other hills as here to Malaya.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_545"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_545">326:1</a>  Twisted up in a matted coil as was
 the custom of ascetics.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_546"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_546">326:2</a>  The sun and the moon.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_547"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_547">326:3</a>  The rainbow.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_548"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_548">326:1b</a>  The Vedas are four in number, the
 Rich or Rig-veda, the Yajush or Yajur-veda;
 the Sáman or Sáma-veda*, and the
 Atharvan or Atharva-veda. See p. 3.
 Note.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_549"></a><a href="ry277.htm#fr_549">326:2b</a>  The chest, the throat, and the head.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry278.htm">Next: Canto IV: Lakshman's Reply.</a></center>
 </body>