<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry277.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry279.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO IV: LAKSHMAN'S REPLY.</h3>
 <p>
 Cheered by the words that Ráma spoke,<br>
 Joy in the Vánar's breast awoke,<br>
 And, as his friendly mood he knew,<br>
 His thoughts to King Sugriva flew:<br>
 ' Again,' he mused,'my high-sou'ed lord<br>
 Shall rule, to kingly state restored;<br>
 Since one so mighty comes to save,<br>
 And freely gives the help we crave."<br>
 Then joyous Hanumán, the best<br>
 Of all the Vánar kind, addressed<br>
 These words to Ráma, trained of yore<br>
 In all the arts of speakers' lore:  <a name="fr_550"></a><a href="#fn_550"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 'Why do your feet this forest tread<br>
 By silvan life inhabited,<br>
 This awful maze of tree and thorn<br>
 Which Pampá's flowering groves adorn?<br>
     He spoke: obedient to the eye<br>
 Of Ráma Lakshman made reply,<br>
 The name and fortune to unfold<br>
 Of Raghu's son the lofty-souled:<br>
 'True to the law, of fame unstained,<br>
 The glorious Das'aratha reigned.<br>
 And, steadfast in his duty, long<br>
 Kept the four castes  <a name="fr_551"></a><a href="#fn_551"><font size="1">2</font></a>from scathe and wrong.<br>
 Through his wide realm his will was done,<br>
 And, loved by all, he hated none.<br>
 Just to each creature great and small,<br>
 Like the Good Sire he cared for all.<br>
 The Agnishtom, <a name="fr_552"></a><a href="#fn_552"><font size="1">3</font></a> as priests advised,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And various rites he solemnized.<br>
 Where ample largess ever paid<br>
 The Brahmans for their holy aid.<br>
 Here Ráma stands, his heir by birth,<br>
 Whose name is glorious in the earth:<br>
 Sure refuge he of all oppressed,<br>
 Most faithful to his sire's behest.<br>
 He, Das'aratha's eldest born<br>
 Whom gifts above the rest adorn,<br>
 Lord of each high imperial sign,  <a name="fr_553"></a><a href="#fn_553"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 The glory of his kingly line,<br>
 Reft of his right, expelled from home,<br>
 Came forth with me the woods to roam,<br>
 And Sitá too, his faithful dame,<br>
 Forth with her virtuous husband came,<br>
 Like the sweet light when day is done<br>
 Still cleaving to her lord the sun.<br>
 And me his sweet perfections drew<br>
 To follow as his servant true.<br>
 Named Lakshman, brother of my lord<br>
 Of grateful heart with knowledge stored<br>
 Most meet is he all bliss to share,<br>
 Who makes the good of all his care.<br>
 While, power and lordship caat away,<br>
 In the wild wood he chose to stay,<br>
 A giant came,--his name unknown,--<br>
 And stole the princess left alone.<br>
 Then Dití's son  <a name="fr_554"></a><a href="#fn_554"><font size="1">2b</font></a> who, cursed of yore.<br>
 The semblance of a Rakshas wore,<br>
 To King Sugríva bade us turn<br>
 The robber's name and home to learn.<br>
 For he, the Vánar chief, would know<br>
 The dwelling of our secret foe.<br>
 Such words of hope spake Dití's son,<br>
 And sought the heaven his deeds had won.<br>
 Thou hast my tale. From first to last<br>
 Thine ears have heard whate'er has past.<br>
 Rama the mighty lord and I<br>
 For refuge to Sugríva fly.<br>
 The prince whose arm bright glory gained.<br>
 O'er the whole earth as monarch reigned,<br>
 And richest gifts to others gave,<br>
 Is come Sugríva's help to crave;<br>
 Son of a king the surest friend<br>
 Of virtue, him who loved to lend<br>
 His succour to the suffering weak,<br>
 Is come Sugríva's aid to seek.<br>
 Yes, Raghu's son whose matchless hand<br>
 Protected all this sea-girt land,<br>
 The virtuous prince, my holy guide,<br>
 For refuge seeks Sugríva's side.<br>
 His favour sent on great and small<br>
 Should ever save and prosper all.<br>
 He now to win Sugríva's grace<br>
 Has sought his woodland dwelling-place.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_328"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 328</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Son of a king of glorious fame;--<br>
 Who knows not Das'aratha's name?--<br>
 From whom all princes of the earth<br>
 Received each honour due to worth;--<br>
 Heir of that best of earthly kings,<br>
 Ráma the prince whose glory rings<br>
 Through realms below and earth and skies,<br>
 For refuge to Sugríva flies.<br>
 Nor should the Vánar king refuse<br>
 The boon for which the suppliant sues,<br>
 But with his forest legions speed<br>
 To save him in his utmost need.<br>
     Sumitrá's son, his eyes bedewed<br>
 With piteous tears, thus sighed and sued.<br>
 Then, trained in all the arts that guide<br>
 The speaker, Hanumán replied:<br>
     'Yea, lords like you of wisest thought,<br>
 Whom happy fate has hither brought,<br>
 Who vanquish ire and rule each sense,<br>
 Must of our lord have audience.<br>
 Reft of his kingdom, sad, forlorn,<br>
 Once Báli's hate now Báli's scorn,<br>
 Defeated, severed from his spouse,<br>
 Wandering under forest boughs,<br>
 Child of the Sun, our lord and king<br>
 Sugríva will his succours bring,<br>
 And all our Vánar hosts combined<br>
 Will trace the dame you long to find.'<br>
     With gentle tone and winning grace<br>
 Thus spake the chief of Vánar race,<br>
 And then to Raghu's son he cried:<br>
 'Come, haste we to Sugrivá's side.'<br>
     He spoke, and for his words so sweet<br>
 Good Lakshman' paid all honour meet;<br>
 Then turned and cried to Raghu's son:<br>
 'Now deem thy task already done,<br>
 Because this chief of Vánar kind,<br>
 Son of the God who rules the wind,<br>
 Declares Sugríva's self would be<br>
 Assisted in his need by thee.<br>
 Bright gleams of joy his cheek o'erspread<br>
 As each glad word of hope he said;<br>
 And ne'er will one so valiant deign<br>
 To cheer our hearts with hope in vain.'<br>
     He spoke, and Hanúmán the wise<br>
 Cast off his mendicant disguise,<br>
 And took again his Vánar form,<br>
 Son of the God of wind and storm.<br>
 High on his ample back in haste<br>
 Baghu's heroic sons he placed.<br>
 And turned with rapid steps to find<br>
 The sovereign of the Vánar kind.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_550"></a><a href="ry278.htm#fr_550">327:1</a>  "In our own metrical romances, or
 wherever a poem is meant not for readers
 but for chanters and oral reciters, these
 <i>formulae</i>, to meet the same recurring case,
 exist by scores. Thus every woman in
 these metrical romances who happens to
 be young, is described as "so bright of ble,"
 or complexion; always a man goes "the
 mountenance of a mule" before he overtakes
 or is overtaken. And so on through.
 a vast bead-roll of cases. In the same
 spirit Homer has his eternal δ᾽αῤ
 ὑποδρα ιδων, or τον δ᾽απαμειβομενος
 προσεφη, &amp;c.
 
 </p><p>
 To a reader of sensibility, such recurrences
 wear an air of child-like simplicity,
 beautifully recalling the features of
 Homer's primitive age. But they would have
 appeared faults to all commonplace critics
 in literary ages."
 
 </p><p>
 DE QUINCEY. <i>Homer and the Homeridæ</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_551"></a><a href="ry278.htm#fr_551">327:2</a>  Brahmans the sacerdotal caste. Kshatriyas
 the royal and military, Vaisyas the
 mercantile, and Sudras the servile.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_552"></a><a href="ry278.htm#fr_552">327:3</a>  A protracted sacrifice extending over
 several days. See Book I. p, 21 Note.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_553"></a><a href="ry278.htm#fr_553">327:1b</a>  Possessed of all the auspicious personal
 marks that indicate capacity of universal
 sovereignty. See Book I. p. 2, and, Note 3.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_554"></a><a href="ry278.htm#fr_554">327:2b</a>  Kabandha. See Book III. Canto
 LXXlII.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry279.htm">Next: Canto V.: The League.</a></center>
 </body>