<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry272.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry274.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXV.: SAVARI</h3>
 <p>
 Thus counselled by their friendly guide<br>
 On through the wood the princes hied<br>
 Pursuing still the eastern road<br>
 To Pampa which Kabandha showed,<br>
 Where trees that on the mountains grew<br>
 With fruit like honey charmed the view<br>
 They rested weary for the night<br>
 Upon a mountain's wooded height,<br>
 Then onward with the dawn they hied<br>
 And stood, on Pampa's western side.<br>
 Where S'avan's fair home they viewed<br>
 Deep in that shady solitude.<br>
 The princes reached the holy ground<br>
 Where noble trees stood thick around,<br>
 And joying in the lovely view<br>
 Near to the aged votress drew.<br>
 To meet the sons of Raghu came,<br>
 With hands upraised, the pious dame,<br>
 And bending low with reverence meet<br>
 Welcomed them both and pressed theif feet,<br>
 Then water, as beseems, she gave,<br>
 Their lips to cool, their feet to lave.<br>
 To that pure saint who never broke<br>
 One law of duty Ráma--spoke:<br>
     'I trust no cares invade thy peace,<br>
 While holy works and zeal increase;<br>
 That thou content with scanty food<br>
 All touch of ire hast long subdued;<br>
 That all thy vows are well maintained;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_317"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 317</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 While peace of mind is surely gained:<br>
 That reverence of the saints who taught<br>
 The faithful heart due fruit has brought.'<br>
     The aged votaress pure of taint,<br>
 Revered by every perfect saint,<br>
 Rose to her feet by Ráma's side<br>
 And thus in gentle tones replied:<br>
 'My penance' meed this day I see<br>
 Complete, my lord, in meeting thee.<br>
 This day the fruit of birth I gain,<br>
 Nor have I served the saints in vain,<br>
 I reap rich fruits of toil and vow,<br>
 And heaven itself awaits me now,<br>
 When I, O chief of men, have done<br>
 Honour to thee the godlike one.<br>
 I feel, great lord, thy gentle eye<br>
 My earthly spirit purify,<br>
 And I, brave tamer of thy foes,<br>
 Shall through thy grace in bliss repose.<br>
 Thy feet by Chitrakáta strayed<br>
 When those great saints whom I obeyed,<br>
 In dazzling chariots bright of hue,<br>
 Hence to their heavenly mansions flew.<br>
 As the high saints were borne away<br>
 I heard their holy  voices say:<br>
     'In this pure grove, O devotee,<br>
 Prince Ráma soon will visit thee.<br>
 When he and Lakshman seek this shade,<br>
 Be to thy guests all honour paid.<br>
 Him shalt thou see, and pass away<br>
 To those blest worlds which ne'er decay.'<br>
 To me, O mighty chief, the best<br>
 Of lofty saints these words addressed.<br>
 Laid up within my dwelling lie<br>
 Fruits of each sort which woods supply,--<br>
 Food culled for thee in endless store<br>
 From every tree on Pampá's shore.'<br>
     Thus to her virtuous guest she sued<br>
 And he, with heavenly lore endued,<br>
 Words such as these in turn addressed<br>
 To her with equal knowledge blest:<br>
 'Danu himself the power has told<br>
 Of thy great masters lofty-souled.<br>
 Now if thou will, mine eyes would fain<br>
 Assurance of their glories gain.'<br>
     She heard the prince his wish declare:<br>
 Then rose she, and the royal pair<br>
 Of brothers through the wood she led<br>
 That round her holy dwelling spread.<br>
 'Behold Matanga's wood' she cried,<br>
 'A grove made famous far and wide,<br>
 Dark as thick clouds and tilled with herds<br>
 Of wandering deer, and joyous birds.<br>
 In this pure spot each reverend sire<br>
 With offerings fed the holy fire.<br>
 See here the western altar stands<br>
 Where daily with their trembling hands<br>
 The aged saints, so long obeyed<br>
 By me, their gifts of blossoms laid.<br>
 The holy power, O Raghu's son,<br>
 By their ascetic virtue won,<br>
 Still keeps their well-loved altar bright.<br>
 Filling the air with beams of light.<br>
 And those seven neighbouring lakes behold<br>
 Which, when the saints infirm and old,<br>
 Worn out by fasts, no longer sought,<br>
 Moved hither drawn by power of thought.<br>
 Look, Ráma, where the devotees<br>
 Hung their bark mantles on the trees.<br>
 Fresh from the bath: those garments wet<br>
 Through many a day are dripping yet.<br>
 See, through those aged hermits' power<br>
 The tender spray, this bright-hued flower<br>
 With which the saints their worship paid,<br>
 Fresh to this hour nor change nor fade.<br>
 Here thou hast seen each lawn and dell,<br>
 And heard the tale I had to tell:<br>
 Permit thy servant, lord, I pray,<br>
 To cast this mortal shell away,<br>
 For I would dwell, this life resigned,<br>
 With those great saints of lofty mind,<br>
 Whom I within this holy shade<br>
 With reverential care obeyed.'<br>
     When Ráma and his brother heard<br>
 The pious prayer the dame preferred,<br>
 Filled full of transport and amazed<br>
 They marvelled as her words they praised.<br>
 Then Ráma to the votaress said<br>
 Whose holy vows were perfected<br>
     'Go, lady, where thou fain wouldst be,<br>
 O thou who well hast honoured me.'<br>
     Her locks in hermit fashion tied,<br>
 Clad in hark coat and black deer-hide,<br>
 When Ráma gave consent, the dame<br>
 Resigned her body to the flame.<br>
 Then like the fire that burns and glows.<br>
 To heaven the sainted lady rose,<br>
 In all her heavenly garments dressed,<br>
 Immortal wreaths on neck and breast,<br>
 Bright with celestial gems she shone<br>
 Most beautiful to look upon,<br>
 And like the flame of lightning sent<br>
 A glory through the firmament.<br>
 That holy sphere the dame attained,<br>
 By depth of contemplation gained,<br>
 Where roam high saints with spirits pure<br>
 In bliss that shall for aye endure.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry274.htm">Next: Canto LXXVI.: Pampá.</a></center>
 </body>