<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry269.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry271.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXII.: KABANDHA'S TALE.</h3>
 <p>
 'Lord of the mighty arm, of yore<br>
 A shape transcending thought I wore,<br>
 And through the triple world's extent<br>
 My fame for might and valour went.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_313"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 313</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Scarce might the sun and moon on high,<br>
 Scarce Sakra, with ray beauty vie.<br>
 Then for a time this form I took,<br>
 And the great world with trembling shook<br>
 The saints in forest shades who dwelt<br>
 The terror of my presence felt.<br>
 But once I stirred to furious rage<br>
 Great Sthúlas'nas, glorious sage.<br>
 Culling in woods his hermit food<br>
 My hideous shape with fear he viewed.<br>
 Then forth his words of anger burst<br>
 That bade me live a thing accursed:<br>
 'Thou, whose delight is others' pain,<br>
 This grisly form shalt still retain.'<br>
 Then when I prayed him to relent<br>
 And fix some term of punishment,--<br>
 Prayed that the curse at length might cease,<br>
 He bade me thus expect release:<br>
 'Let Ráma cleave thine arms away<br>
 And on the pyre thy body lay,<br>
 And then shalt thou, set free from doom,<br>
 Thine own fair shape once more assume.'<br>
 O Lakshman, hear my words: in me<br>
 The world-illustrious Danu see.<br>
 By Indra's curse, subdued in fight,<br>
 I wear this form which scares the sight.<br>
 By sternest penance long maintained<br>
 The mighty Father's grace I gained.<br>
 When length of days the God bestowed,<br>
 With foolish pride my bosom glowed.<br>
 My life, of lengthened years assured,<br>
 I deemed from Sakra's might secured.<br>
 Led by my senseless pride astray<br>
 I challenged Indra to the fray.<br>
 A flaming bolt with many a knot<br>
 With his terrific arm he shot.<br>
 And straight my head and thighs compressed<br>
 Were buried in my bulky chest.<br>
 Deaf to each prayer and piteous call<br>
 He sent me not to Yama's hall.<br>
 'These prayers and cries,' he said 'are vain.<br>
 The Father's word must true remain<br>
 But how my lengthened life be spent<br>
 By one the bolt has * and rent?<br>
 How can I live' I cried, 'unfed<br>
 With shattered face and thighs and head?'<br>
 As thus I spoke his grace to crave<br>
 Arms each a league in length he gave,<br>
 And opened in my chest beneath<br>
 This mouth supplied with fearful teeth.<br>
 So my huge arms I used to cast<br>
 Round woodland creatures as they passed,<br>
 And fed within the forest here<br>
 On lion, tiger, pard,* and deer.<br>
 Then Indra spake to soothe my grief:<br>
 'When Rama and his brother chief<br>
 From thy huge bulk those arms shall cleave,<br>
 Then shall the skies thy sould recieve.'<br>
 Disguised in this terrific shape<br>
 
 </p><p>
 I let no woodland thing escape,<br>
 And still my longing sould was pleased<br>
 Whene'er my arms a victim seized,<br>
 For in these arms I fondly thought<br>
 Would Ráma's self at last be caught.<br>
 Thus hoping, toiling many a day<br>
 I yearned to cast my life away,<br>
 And here, my lord, thou standest now:<br>
 Blessings be thine for none but thou<br>
 Could cleave my arms with trenchant stroke:<br>
 True are the words the hermit spoke.<br>
 Now let me, best of warriors, lend<br>
 My counsel, and thy plans befriend,<br>
 And aid thee with advice in turn<br>
 If thou with fire my corse wilt burn.'<br>
     As thus the mighty Danu prayed<br>
 With offer of his friendly aid,<br>
 While Lakshman gazed with anxious eye,<br>
 The virtuous Ráma made reply:<br>
 'Lakshman and I through forest shade<br>
 From Janasthán a while had strayed.<br>
 When none was near her, Rávan came<br>
 And bore away my glorious dame,<br>
 The giant's form and size unknown,<br>
 I learn as yet his name alone.<br>
 Not yet the power and might we know<br>
 Or dwelling of the monstrous foe.<br>
 With none our helpless feet to guide<br>
 We wander here by sorrow tried.<br>
 Let pity move thee to requite<br>
 Our service in the funeral rite.<br>
 Our hands shall bring the boughs that, dry<br>
 Where elephants have rent them, lie,<br>
 Then dig a pit, and light the fire<br>
 To burn thee as the laws require.<br>
 Do thou as meed of this declare<br>
 Who stole my spouse, his dwelling where,<br>
 0, if thou can. I pray thee say,<br>
 And let this grace our deeds repay.'<br>
     Danu had lent attentive ear<br>
 The words which Ráma spoke to hear,<br>
 And thus, a speaker skilled and tried.<br>
 To that great orator replied:<br>
 ' No heavenly lore my soul endows,<br>
 Naught know I of thy Maithil spouse.<br>
 Yet will I, when my shape I wear.<br>
 Him who will tell thee all declare.<br>
 Then, Ráma, will my lips disclose<br>
 His name who well that giant knows<br>
 But, till the flames my corse devour<br>
 This hidden knowledge mocks my power.<br>
 For through that curse's withering taint<br>
 My knowledge now is small and faint<br>
 Unknown the giant's very name<br>
 Who bore away the Maithil dame<br>
 Cursed for my evil deeds I wore<br>
 A shape which all the worlds abhor.<br>
 Now ere with wearied steeds the sun<br>
 Through western skies his course have run,<br>
 Deep in a pit my body lay<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_314"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 314</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And burn it in the wonted way.<br>
 When in the grave my corse is placed,<br>
 With fire and funeral honours graced,<br>
 Then I, great chief, his name will tell<br>
 Who knows the giant robber well.<br>
 With him, who guides his life aright,<br>
 In league of trusting love unite,<br>
 And he, O valiant prince, will be<br>
 A faithful friend and aid to thee.<br>
 For, Ráma, to his searching eyes<br>
 The triple world uncovered lies.<br>
 For some dark cause of old, I ween,<br>
 Through all the spheres his ways have been.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry271.htm">Next: Canto LXXIII.: Kabandha's Counsel.</a></center>
 </body>