<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry278.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry280.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO V.: THE LEAGUE.</h3>
 <p>
 From Rishyamáka's rugged side<br>
 To Malaya's hills the Vánar hied<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And to his royal chieftain there<br>
 Announced the coming of the pair:<br>
 'See here with Lakshman' Ráma stands<br>
 Illustrious in a hundred lands.<br>
 Whose valiant heart will never quail<br>
 Although a thousand foes assail;<br>
 King Das'aratha's son, the grace<br>
 And glory of Ikshváku's race.<br>
 Obedient to his father's will<br>
 He cleaves to sacred duty still.<br>
 With rites of royal pomp and pride<br>
 His sire the Fire-God gratified;<br>
 Ten hundred thousand kine he freed,<br>
 And priests enriched with ample meed;<br>
 And the broad land protected, famed<br>
 For truthful lips and passions tamed.<br>
 Through woman's guile his son has made<br>
 His dwelling in the forest shade,<br>
 Where, as he lived with every sense<br>
 Subdued in hermit abstinence,<br>
 Fierce Rávan' stole his wife, and he<br>
 Is come a suppliant, lord, to thee.<br>
 Now let all honour due be paid<br>
 To these great chiefs who seek thine aid.'<br>
     Thus spake the Vánar prince, and, stirred<br>
 With friendly thoughts, Sugríva heard.<br>
 The light of joy his face o'erspread,<br>
 And thus to Raghu's son he said:<br>
 'O Prince, in rules of duty trained,<br>
 Caring for all with love unfeigned,<br>
 Hanúmán's tongue has truly shown<br>
 The virtues that are thine alone.<br>
 My chiefest glory, gain, and bliss,<br>
 O stranger Prince, I reckon this,<br>
 That Raghu's son will condescend<br>
 To seek the Vánar for his friend.<br>
 If thou my true ally wouldst be<br>
 Accept the pledge I offer thee,<br>
 This hand in sign of friendship take,<br>
 And bind the bond we ne'er will break.'<br>
     He spoke, and joy thrilled Ráma's breast;<br>
 Sugríva's hand he seized and pressed<br>
 And, transport beaming from his eye,<br>
 Held to his heart his new ally.<br>
 In wanderer's weed disguised no more,<br>
 His proper form Hanúmán wore.<br>
 Then, wood with wood engendering, <a name="fr_555"></a><a href="#fn_555"><font size="1">1</font></a> came<br>
 Neath his deft hands the kindled flame.<br>
 Between the chiefs that fire he placed<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_329"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 329</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With wreaths of flowers and worship graced.<br>
 And round its blazing glory went<br>
 The friends with slow steps reverent.<br>
     Thus each to other pledged and bound<br>
 In solemn league new transport found.<br>
 And bent upon his dear ally<br>
 The gaze he ne'er could satisfy.<br>
 'Friend of my soul art thou: we share<br>
 Each other's joy, each other's care;'<br>
 To us the bliss that thrilled his breast<br>
 Sugriva Raghu's son addressed.<br>
 From a high Sál a branch he tore<br>
 Which many a leaf and blossom bore,<br>
 And the fine twigs beneath them laid<br>
 A seat for him and Ráma made.<br>
 Then Hanumán with joyous mind,<br>
 Son of the God who rules the wind,<br>
 To Lakshman gave, his seat to be,<br>
 The gay branch of a Sandal tree.<br>
 Then King Sugriva with his eyes<br>
 Still trembling with the sweet surprise<br>
 Of the great joy he could not hide,<br>
 To Raghu's noblest scion cried:<br>
 'O Ráma, racked with woe and fear,<br>
 Spurned by my foes, I wander here.<br>
 Reft of my spouse, forlorn I dwell<br>
 Here in my forest citadel.<br>
 Or wild with terror and distress<br>
 Roam through the distant wilderness.<br>
 Vext by my brother Báli long<br>
 My soul has borne the scathe and wrong.<br>
 Do thou, whose virtues all revere,<br>
 Release me from my woe and fear.<br>
 From dire distress tby friend to free<br>
 Is a high task and worthy thee.'<br>
     He spoke, and Raghu's son who knew<br>
 All sacred duties men should do.<br>
 The friend of justice, void of guile,<br>
 Thus answered with a gentle smile:<br>
 'Great Vánar, friends who seek my aid<br>
 Still find their trust with fruit repaid.<br>
 Báli, thy foe, who stole away<br>
 Thy wife this vengeful hand shall slay.<br>
 These shafts which sunlike flash and burn,<br>
 Winged with the feathers of the *ern,<br>
 Each swift of flight and sure and dread,<br>
 With even knot and pointed head,<br>
 Fierce as the crashing fire-bolt sent<br>
 By him who rules the firmament, <a name="fr_556"></a><a href="#fn_556"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Shall reach thy wicked foe and like<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Infuriate serpents hiss and strike.<br>
 Thou, Vánar King, this day shalt see<br>
 The foe who long has injured thee<br>
 Lie, like a shattered mountain, low,<br>
 Slain by the tempest of my bow.'<br>
     Thus Ráma spake: Sugriva heard,<br>
 And mighty joy his bosom stirred:<br>
 As thus his champion he addressed:<br>
 'Now by thy favour, first and best<br>
 Of heroes, shall thy friend obtain<br>
 His realm and darling wife again<br>
     Recovered from the foe.<br>
 Check thou mine elder brother's might;<br>
 That ne'er again his deadly spite<br>
 May rob me of mine ancient right,<br>
     Or vex my soul with woe.'<br>
 The league was struck, a league to bring<br>
 To Sítá fiends, and Vánar king  <a name="fr_557"></a><a href="ry280.htm#fn_557"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
     Apportioned bliss and bale.<br>
 Through her left eye quick throbbings shot, <a name="fr_558"></a><a href="ry280.htm#fn_558"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Glad signs the lady doubted not,<br>
     That told their hopeful tale.<br>
 The bright left eye of Báli felt<br>
 An inauspicious throb that dealt<br>
     A deadly blow that day.<br>
 The fiery left eyes of the crew<br>
 Of demons felt the throb, and knew<br>
     The herald of dismay.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_555"></a><a href="ry279.htm#fr_555">328:1</a>  Fire for sacred purposes is produced
 by the attrition of two pieces of wood.
 In marriage and other solemn covenants
 fire is regarded as the holy witness in
 whose presence the agreement is made.
 Spenser in a description of a marriage,
 has borrowed from them the Roman rite what
 he (<i>illegible</i>) sacrificial fire: <a name="page_329"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 329</font></a>
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
 
 <p>
 "His owne two hands the holy knots did knit<br>
 That none but death forever can divide.<br>
 His owne two hands, for such a turn most fit,<br>
 The *ing fire did kindle and provide.'<br>
     Faery Queen, Book 1 XII. 37<br>
 
 </p><p>
 </p></dir>
 
 <p><a name="fn_556"></a><a href="ry279.htm#fr_556">329:1</a>  Indra</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry280.htm">Next: Canto VI.: The Tokens.</a></center>
 </body>