<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry287.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry289.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIV.: THE CHALLENGE.</h3>
 <p>
 They stood where trees of densest green<br>
 Wove round their forms a veiling screen.<br>
 O'er all the garden's pleasant shade<br>
 The eyes of King Sugríva strayed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_341"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 341</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And, as on grass and tree he gazed,<br>
 The fires of wrath within him blazed.<br>
 Then like a mighty cloud on high,<br>
 When roars the tempest through the sky,<br>
 Girt by his friends he thundered out<br>
 His dread sky-rending battle-shout<br>
 Like some proud lion in his gait,<br>
 Or as the sun begins his state,<br>
 Sugríva let his quick glance rest<br>
 On Ráma whom he thus addressed:<br>
 'There is the seat of Báli's sway.<br>
 Where flags on wall and turret play,<br>
 Which mighty bands of Vánars hold,<br>
 Rich in all arms and store of gold.<br>
 Thy promise to thy mind recall<br>
 That Báli by thy hand shall fall.<br>
 As kindly fruits adorn the bough.<br>
 So give my hopes their harvest now.'<br>
     In suppliant tone the Vánar prayed,<br>
 And Raghu's son his answer made<br>
 'By Lakshman''s hand this flowery twine<br>
 Was wound about thee for a sign.<br>
 The wreath of giant creeper throws<br>
 About thy form its brillant glows,<br>
 As though about the sun were set<br>
 The bright stars for a coronet.<br>
 One shaft of mine this day, dear friend,<br>
 Thy sorrow and thy fear shall end.<br>
 And, from the bowstring freed, shall be<br>
 Giver of freedom, King, to thee.<br>
 Then come, Sugríva, quickly show,<br>
 Where'er he lie, thy bitter foe;<br>
 And let my glance the wretch descry<br>
 Whose deeds, a brother's name belie.<br>
 Yea, soon in dust and blood o'erthrown<br>
 Shall Báli fall and gasp and groan.<br>
 Once let this eye the foeman see,<br>
 Then, if he live to turn and flee,<br>
 Despise my puny strength and shame<br>
 With foul opprobrium Ráma's name.<br>
 Hast thou not seen his hand, O King,<br>
 Through seven tall trees one arrow wing?<br>
 Stili in that strength securely trust,<br>
 And deem thy foeman in the dust,<br>
 In all my days, though surely tried<br>
 By grief and woe, I ne'er have lied;<br>
 And still by duty's law restrained<br>
 Will ne'er with falsehood's charge be stained.<br>
 Cast doubt away: the oath I sware<br>
 Its kindly fruit shall quickly bear,<br>
 As smiles the land with golden grain<br>
 By mercy of the Lord of rain.<br>
 Oh, warrior to the gate I defy<br>
 Thy foe with shout and battle-cry.<br>
 Till Báli with his chain of gold<br>
 Come speeding from his royal hold.<br>
 Blood hearts, with warlike fire aglow,<br>
 Brook not the challenge of a foe:<br>
 Each on his power and might relies,<br>
 And most before his fathers eyes.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 King Báli loves the fray too well<br>
 To linger in his citadel,<br>
 And, when he hears thy battle-shout,<br>
 All wild for war will hasten out.'<br>
     He spoke. Sugríva raised a cry<br>
 That shook and rent the echoing sky,<br>
 A shout so fierce and loud and dread<br>
 That stately bulls in terror fled,<br>
 Like dames who fly from threatened stain<br>
 In some ignoble monarch's reign.<br>
 The deer in wild confusion ran<br>
 Like horses turned in battle's van.<br>
 Down fell the birds, like Gods who fall<br>
 When merits fail, <a name="fr_579"></a><a href="ry289.htm#fn_579"><font size="1">1</font></a>, at that dread call.<br>
 So fiercely, boldened for the fray,<br>
 The offspring of the Lord of Day<br>
 Sent forth his furious shout as loud<br>
 As thunder from a labouring cloud,<br>
 Or, where the gale blows fresh and free,<br>
 The roaring of the troubled sea.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_578"></a><a href="ry287.htm#fr_578">340:1</a>  Called respectively Gárhapatra, Áhavaniya,
 and Dakshina, household, sacrificial,
 and southern.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry289.htm">Next: Canto XV.: Tará.</a></center>
 </body>