<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry285.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry287.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XII.: THE PALM TREES.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Ráma, that his friend might know<br>
 His strength unrivalled, grasped his bow,<br>
 That mighty bow the foe's dismay,--<br>
 And on the string an arrow lay.<br>
 Next on the tree his eye he bent,<br>
 And forth the hurtling weapon went.<br>
 Loosed from the matchless hero's hold,<br>
 That arrow, decked with burning gold,<br>
 Cleft the seven palms in line, and through<br>
 The hill that rose behind them flew:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Six subterranean realms it passed,<br>
 And reached the lowest depth at last,<br>
 Whence speeding back through earth and air<br>
 It sought the quiver, and rested there.  <a name="fr_574"></a><a href="#fn_574"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Upon the cloven trees amazed.<br>
 The sovereign of the Vánars gazed.<br>
 With all his chains and gold outspread<br>
 Prostrate on earth he laid his head.<br>
 Then, rising, palm to palm he laid<br>
 In reverent act, obeisance made,<br>
 And joyously to Ráma, best<br>
 Of war-trained chiefs, these words addressed:<br>
     'What champion, Raghu's son, may hope<br>
 With thee in deadly fight to cope,<br>
 Whose arrow, leaping from the bow.<br>
 Cleaves tree and hill and earth below?<br>
 Scarce might the Gods, arrayed for strife<br>
 By Indra's self, escape, with life<br>
 Assailed by thy victorious hand:<br>
 And how may Báli hope to stand?<br>
 All grief and care are past away,<br>
 And joyous thoughts my bosom sway,<br>
 Who have in thee a friend, renowned.<br>
 As Varun  <a name="fr_575"></a><a href="#fn_575"><font size="1">2</font></a> or as Indra, found.<br>
 Then on! subdue,--'tis friendship's claim,--<br>
 My foe who bears a brother's name.<br>
 Strike Báli down beneath thy feet:<br>
 With suppliant hands I thus entreat,'<br>
 Sugríva ceased, and Ráma pressed<br>
 The grateful Vánar to his breast;<br>
 And thoughts of kindred feeling woke<br>
 In Lakshman's bosom, as he spoke:<br>
 'On to Kishkindhá, on with speed!<br>
 Thou, Vánar King, our way shalt lead,<br>
 Then challenge Báli forth to fight.<br>
 Thy foe who scorns a brother's right.'<br>
     They sought Kishkindhá's gate and stood<br>
 Concealed by trees in densest wood,<br>
 Sugríva, to the fight addressed,<br>
 More closely drew his cinctured vest,<br>
 And raised a wild sky-piercing shout<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_339"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 339</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To call the foeman Báli out.<br>
 Forth came impetuous Báli, stirred<br>
 To fury by the shout he heard.<br>
 So the great sun, ere night has ceased,<br>
 Springs up impatient to the east.<br>
 Then fierce and wild the conflict raged<br>
 As hand to hand the foes engaged,<br>
 As though in battle mid the stars<br>
 Fought Mercury and fiery Mars.  <a name="fr_576"></a><a href="#fn_576"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 To highest pitch of frenzy wrought<br>
 With fists like thunderbolts they fought,<br>
 While near them Ráma took his stand,<br>
 And viewed the battle, bow in hand.<br>
 Alike they stood in form and might,<br>
 Like heavenly As'vins  <a name="fr_577"></a><a href="#fn_577"><font size="1">2</font></a> paired in fight,<br>
 Nor might the son of Raghu know<br>
 Where fought the friend and where the foe;<br>
 So, while his bow was ready bent.<br>
 No life-destroying shaft he sent.<br>
 Crushed down by Báli's mightier stroke<br>
 Sugríva's force now sank and broke,<br>
 Who, hoping naught from Ráma's aid,<br>
 To Rishyamúka fled dismayed,<br>
 Weary, and faint, and wounded sore,<br>
 His body bruised and dyed with gore,<br>
 From Báli's blows, in rage and dread,<br>
 Afar to sheltering woods he fled.<br>
     Nor Báli farther dared pursue,<br>
 The curbing curse too well he knew.<br>
 'Fled from thy death!' the victor cried,<br>
 And home the mighty warrior hied.<br>
 Hanúmán, Lakshman, Raghu's son<br>
 Beheld the conquered Vánar run.<br>
 And followed to the sheltering shade<br>
 Where yet Sugríva stood dismayed.<br>
 Near and more near the chieftains came,<br>
 Then, for intolerable shame,<br>
 Not daring yet to lift his eyes,<br>
 Sugríva spoke with burning sighs:<br>
 'Thy matchless strength I first beheld,<br>
 And dared my foe, by thee impelled.<br>
 Why hast thou tried me with deceit<br>
 And urged me to a sure defeat?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Thou shouldst have said, 'I will not slay<br>
 Thy foeman in the coming fray.'<br>
 For had I then thy purpose known<br>
 I had not waged the fight alone.'<br>
     The Vánar sovereign, lofty-souled,<br>
 In plaintive voice his sorrows told.<br>
 Then Ráma spake: 'Sugríva, list,<br>
 All anger from thy heart dismissed,<br>
 And I will tell the cause that stayed<br>
 Mine arrow, and withheld the aid.<br>
 In dress, adornment, port, and height,<br>
 In splendour, battle-shout, and might,<br>
 No shade of difference could I see<br>
 Between thy foe, O King, and thee.<br>
 So like was each, I stood at gaze,<br>
 My senses lost in wildering maze,<br>
 Nor loosened from my straining bow<br>
 A deadly arrow at the foe,<br>
 Lest in my doubt the shaft should send<br>
 To sudden death our surest friend.<br>
 O, if this hand in heedless guilt<br>
 And rash resolve thy blood had spilt,<br>
 Through every land, O Vánar King,<br>
 My wild and foolish act would ring,<br>
 Sore weight of sin on him must lie<br>
 By whom a friend is made to die;<br>
 And Lakshman, I, and Sítá, best<br>
 Of dames, on thy protection rest.<br>
 On, warrior! for the fight prepare;<br>
 Nor fear again thy foe to dare.<br>
 Within one hour thine eye shall view<br>
 My arrow strike thy foeman through;<br>
 Shall see the stricken Báli lie<br>
 Low on the earth, and gasp and die.<br>
 But come, a badge about thee bind,<br>
 O monarch of the Vánar kind.<br>
 That in the battle shock mine eyes<br>
 The friend and foe may recognize.<br>
 Come, Lakshman, let that creeper deck<br>
 With brightest bloom Sugríva's neck,<br>
 And be a happy token, twined<br>
 Around the chief of lofty mind.'<br>
     Upon the mountain slope there grew<br>
 A threading creeper fair to view,<br>
 And Lakshman plucked the bloom and round<br>
 Sugríva's neck a garland wound,<br>
 Graced with the flowery wreath he wore,<br>
 The Vánar chief the semblance bore<br>
 Of a dark cloud at close of day<br>
 Engarlanded with cranes at play,<br>
 In glorious light the Vánar glowed<br>
 As by his comrade's side he strode.<br>
 And, still on Ráma's word intent,<br>
 His steps to great Kishkindhá bent.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_340"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 340</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_574"></a><a href="ry286.htm#fr_574">338:1</a>  The Bengal recension makes it return
 In the form of a swan.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_575"></a><a href="ry286.htm#fr_575">338:2</a>  Varuna is one of the oldest of the
 Vedic Gods, corresponding in name and
 partly in character to the οὐρανός of
 the Greeks and is often regarded as the
 supreme deity. He upholds heaven and
 earth, possesses extraordinary power and
 wisdom, sends his messengers through
 both worlds, numbers the very winkings
 of men's eyes, punishes transgressors whom
 he seizes with his deadly noose, and pardons
 the sins of those who are penitent. In
 later mythology he has become the God
 of the sea.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_576"></a><a href="ry286.htm#fr_576">339:1</a>  Budha, not to be confounded with the
 great reformer Buddha, is the son of Soma
 or the Moon, and regent of the planet
 Mercury. Angára is the regent of Mars
 who is called the red or the fiery planet.
 The encounter between Michael and Satan
 is similarly said to have been as if
 </p><dir><br>
     "Two planets rushing from aspect malign<br>
     Of fiercest opposition in midsky<br>
     Should combat, and their jarring spheres<br>
     compound."<br>
 </dir>
 <i>Paradise Lost.</i> Book VI.
 <p><a name="fn_577"></a><a href="ry286.htm#fr_577">339:2</a>  The As'vins or Heavenly Twins, the
 Dioskuri or Castor and Pollux of the
 Hindus, have frequently been mentioned.
 See p. 36, Note</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry287.htm">Next: Canto XIII.: The Return To Kishkindhá.</a></center>
 </body>