<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry286.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry288.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIII.: THE RETURN TO KISHKINDHÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus with Sugríva, from the side<br>
 Of Rishyamuka, Ráma hied,<br>
 And stood before Kishkindhá's gate<br>
 Where Báli kept his regal state.<br>
 The hero in his warrior hold<br>
 Raised his great bow adorned with gold,<br>
 And drew his pointed arrow bright<br>
 As sunbeams, finisher of fight.<br>
 Strong-necked Sugríva led the way<br>
 With Lakshman mighty in the fray.<br>
 Nala and Níla came behind<br>
 With Hanumán of lofty mind.<br>
 And valiant Tára, last in place,<br>
 A leader of the Vánar race.<br>
 They gazed on many a tree that showed<br>
 The glory of its pendent load,<br>
 And brook and limpid rill that made<br>
 Sweet murmurs as they seaward strayed.<br>
 They looked on caverns dark and deep,<br>
 On bower and glen and mountain steep,<br>
 And saw the opening lotus stud<br>
 With roseate cup the crystal flood,<br>
 While crane and swan and coot and drake<br>
 Made pleasant music on the lake,<br>
 And from the reedy bank was heard<br>
 The note of many a happy bird.<br>
 In open lawns, in tangled ways,<br>
 They saw the tall deer stand at gaze,<br>
 Or marked them free and fearless roam,<br>
 Fed with sweet grass, their woodland home.<br>
 At times two flashing tusks between<br>
 The wavings of the wood were seen,<br>
 And some mad elephant, alone,<br>
 Like a huge moving hill, was shown.<br>
 And scarcely less in size appeared<br>
 Great monkeys all with dust besmeared.<br>
 And various birds that roam the skies,<br>
 And silvan creatures, met their eyes,<br>
 As through the wood the chieftains sped,<br>
 Anil followed where Sugríva led.<br>
     Then Ráma, as their way they made,<br>
 Saw near at hand a lovely shade,<br>
 And, as he gazed upon the trees,<br>
 Spake to Sugríva words like these;<br>
 'Those stately trees in beauty rise,<br>
 Fair as a cloud in autumn skies,<br>
 I fain, my friend, would learn from thee<br>
 What pleasant grove is that I see.'<br>
     Thus Ráma spake, the mighty souled;<br>
 And thus his tale Sugríva told:<br>
     'That, Ráma, is a wide retreat<br>
 That brings repose to weary feet.<br>
 Bright streams and fruit and roots are there,<br>
 And shady gardens passing fair.<br>
 There, neath the roof of hanging boughs,<br>
 The sacred Seven maintained their vows.<br>
 Their heads in dust were lowly laid,<br>
 In streams their nightly beds were made.<br>
 Each seventh night they broke their fast,<br>
 But air was still their sole repast,<br>
 And when seven hundred years were spent<br>
 To homes in heaven the hermits went.<br>
 Their glory keeps the garden yet,<br>
 With walls of stately trees beset.<br>
 Scarce would the Gods and demons dare,<br>
 By Indra led, to enter there.<br>
 No beast that roams the wood is found,<br>
 No bird of air, within the bound;<br>
 Or, thither if they idly stray,<br>
 They find no more their homeward way.<br>
 You hear at times mid dulcet tones<br>
 The chime of anklets, rings, and zones.<br>
 You hear the song and music sound,<br>
 And heavenly fragrance breathes around,<br>
 There duly burn the triple fires <a name="fr_578"></a><a href="ry288.htm#fn_578"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Where mounts the smoke in curling spires,<br>
 And, in a dun wreath, hangs above<br>
 The tall trees, like a brooding dove.<br>
 Round brunch and crest the vapours close<br>
 Till every tree enveloped shows<br>
 A hill of lazulite when clouds<br>
 Hang round it with their misty shrouds.<br>
 With Lakshman, lord of Raghu's line,<br>
 In reverent guise thine head incline,<br>
 And with fixt heart and suppliant hand<br>
 Give honour to the sainted band.<br>
 They who with faithful hearts revere<br>
 The holy Seven who harboured here,<br>
 Shall never, son of Raghu, know<br>
 In all their lives an hour of woe.'<br>
     Then Ráma and his brother bent.<br>
 And did obeisance reverent<br>
 With suppliant hand and lowly head,<br>
 Then with Sugríva onward sped.<br>
 Beyond the sainted Seven's abode<br>
 Far on their way the chieftains strode,<br>
 And great Kishkindhá's portal gained,<br>
 The royal town where Báli reigned.<br>
 Then by the gate they took their stand<br>
 All ready armed a noble band,<br>
     And burning every one<br>
 To slay in battle, hand to hand,<br>
     Their foeman, Indra's son,<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry288.htm">Next: Canto XIV.: The Challenge.</a></center>
 </body>