<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry288.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry290.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XV.: TARÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 That shout, which shook the land with fear,<br>
 In thunder smote on Báli's ear,<br>
 Where in the chamber barred and closed<br>
 The sovereign with his dame reposed.<br>
 Each amorous thought was rudely stilled,<br>
 And pride and rage his bosom filled.<br>
 His angry eyes flashed darkly red,<br>
 And all his native brightness fled,<br>
 As when, by swift eclipse assailed,<br>
 The glory of the sun has failed.<br>
 While in his fury uncontrolled<br>
 He ground his teeth, his eyeballs rolled,<br>
 He seemed a lake wherein no gem<br>
 Of blossom decks the lotus stem.<br>
 He heard, and with indignant pride<br>
 Forth from the bower the Vánar hied.<br>
 And the earth trembled at the beat<br>
 And fury of hit hastening feet.<br>
 But Tára to her consort flew,<br>
 Her loving arms around him threw.<br>
 And trembling and bewildered, gave<br>
 Wise counsel that might heal and save:<br>
 'O dear my lord, this rage control<br>
 That like a torrent floods thy soul,<br>
 And cant these idle thoughts away<br>
 Like faded wreath of yesterday,<br>
 O tarry till the morning light,<br>
 Then, if thou wilt, go forth and fight.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_342"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 342</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Think not I doubt thy valour, no;<br>
 Or deem thee weaker than thy foe,<br>
 Yet for a while would have thee stay<br>
 Nor see thee tempt the fight to-day.<br>
 Now list, my loving lord, and learn<br>
 The reason why I bid thee turn.<br>
 Thy foeman came in wrath and pride,<br>
 And thee to deadly fight defied,<br>
 Thou wentest out: he fought, and fled<br>
 Sore wounded and discomfited.<br>
 But yet, untaught by late defeat,<br>
 He comes his conquering foe to meet.<br>
 And calls thee forth with cry and shout:<br>
 Hence spring, my lord, this fear and doubt.<br>
 A heart so bold that will not yield,<br>
 But yearns to tempt the desperate field,<br>
 Such loud defiance, fiercely pressed,<br>
 On no uncertain hope can rest.<br>
 So lately by thine arm o'erthrown,<br>
 He comes not back, I ween, alone.<br>
 Some mightier comrade guards his side,<br>
 And spurs him to this burst of pride.<br>
 For nature made the Vánar wise:<br>
 On arms of might his hope relies;<br>
 And never will Sugríva seek<br>
 A friend whose power to save is weak.<br>
 Now listen while my lips unfold<br>
 The wondrous tale my Angad told.<br>
 Our child the distant forest sought,<br>
 Aud, learnt from spies, the tidings brought.<br>
 Two sons of Das'arathu, sprung<br>
 From old Ikshváku, brave and young,<br>
 Renowned in arms, in war untamed--<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman are they named--<br>
 Have with thy foe Sugríva made<br>
 A league of love and friendly aid.<br>
 Now Ráma, famed for exploit high,<br>
 Is bound thy brother's firm ally,<br>
 Like fires of doom  <a name="fr_580"></a><a href="#fn_580"><font size="1">1</font></a> that ruin all<br>
 He makes each foe before him fall.<br>
 He is the suppliant's sure defence,<br>
 The tree that shelters innocence.<br>
 The poor and wretched seek his feet:<br>
 In him the noblest glories meet.<br>
 With skill and knowledge vast and deep<br>
 His sire's commands he loved to keep;<br>
 With princely gifts and graces stored<br>
 As metals deck the Mountains' Lord. <a name="fr_581"></a><a href="#fn_581"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Thou canst not, O my hero, stand<br>
 Before the might of Ráma's hand;<br>
 For none may match his powers or dare<br>
 With him in deeds of war compare.<br>
 Hear, I entreat, the words I say,<br>
 Nor lightly turn my rede away.<br>
 O let fraternal discord cease,<br>
 And link you in the bonds of peace.<br>
 Let consecrating rites ordain<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Sugríva partner of thy reign.<br>
 Let war and thoughts of conflict end,<br>
 And be thou his and Ráma's friend,<br>
 Each soft approach of love begin.<br>
 And to thy soul thy brother win;<br>
 for whether here or there he be,<br>
 Thy brother still, dear lord, is he.<br>
 Though far and wide these eyes I strain<br>
 A friend like him I seek in vain.<br>
 Let gentle words his heart incline,<br>
 And gifts and honours make him thine,<br>
 Till, foes no more, in love allied,<br>
 You stand as brothers side by side.<br>
 Thou in high rank wast wont to hold<br>
 Sugríva, formed in massive mould;<br>
 Then come, thy brother's love regain,<br>
 For other aids are weak and vain.<br>
 If thou would please my soul, and still<br>
 Preserve me from all fear and ill,<br>
 I pray thee by thy love be wise<br>
 And do the thing which I advise.<br>
 Assuage thy fruitless wrath, and shun<br>
 The mightier arms of Raghu's son;<br>
 For Indra's peer in might is he,<br>
 A foe too strong, my lord, for thee.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_579"></a><a href="ry288.htm#fr_579">341:1</a>  The store of merit accumulated by a
 holy or austere life secures only a temporary
 seat in the mansion of bliss. When
 the lapse of time this store is exhausted,
 return to earth is unavoidable.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_580"></a><a href="ry289.htm#fr_580">342:1</a>  The conflagration which destroys the
 world at the end of a Yuga or age</p>
 <p><a name="fn_581"></a><a href="ry289.htm#fr_581">342:2</a>  Himalaya.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry290.htm">Next: Canto XVI.: The Fall of Báli.</a></center>
 </body>