<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry280.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry282.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VII.: RÁMA CONSOLED.</h3>
 <p>
 With longing love and woe oppressed<br>
 The Vánar chief he thus addressed:<br>
 And lie, while sobs his utterance broke,<br>
 Raised up his reverent hands and spoke:<br>
     'O Raghu's son, I cannot tell<br>
 Where now that cruel fiend may dwell,<br>
 Declare his power and might, or trace<br>
 The author of his cursed race.<br>
 Still trust the promise that I make<br>
 And let thy breast no longer ache.<br>
 So will I toil, nor toil in vain,<br>
 That thou thy consort mayst regain.<br>
 So will I work with might and skill<br>
 That joy anew thy heart shall fill:<br>
 The valour of my soul display,<br>
 And Rávan and his legions slay.<br>
 Awake, awake! unmanned no more<br>
 Recall the strength was thine of yore.<br>
 Beseems not men like thee to wear<br>
 A weak heart yielding to despair.<br>
 Like troubles, too, mine eyes have seen,<br>
 Lamenting for a long-lost queen;<br>
 But, by despair unconquered yet,<br>
 My strength of mind I ne'er forget.<br>
 Far more shouldst thou of lofty soul<br>
 Thy passion and thy tears control,<br>
 When I, of Vánar's humbler strain,<br>
 Weep not for her in ceaseless pain.<br>
 Be firm, be patient, nor forget<br>
 The bounds the brave of heart have set<br>
 In loss, in woe, in strife, in fear,<br>
 When the dark hour of death is near.<br>
 Up? with thine own brave heart advise:<br>
 Not thus despond the firm and wise.<br>
 But he who gives his childish heart<br>
 To choose the coward's weakling part,<br>
 Sinks, like a foundered vessel, deep<br>
 In waves of woe that o'er him sweep.<br>
 See, suppliant hand to hand I lay,<br>
 And, moved by faithful love, I pray.<br>
 Give way no more to grief and gloom,<br>
 But all thy native strength resume.<br>
 No joy on earth, I ween, have they<br>
 Who yield their souls to sorrow's sway.<br>
 Their glory fades in slow decline:<br>
 'Tis not for thee to grieve and pine.<br>
 I do but hint with friendly speech<br>
 The wiser part I dare not teach.<br>
 This better path, dear friend, pursue,<br>
 And let not grief thy soul subdue.'<br>
     Sugríva thus with gentle art<br>
 And sweet words soothed the mourner's heart,<br>
 Who brushed off with his mantle's hem<br>
 Tears from the eyes bedewed with them.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sugríva's words were not in vain,<br>
 And Ráma was himself again,<br>
 Around the king his arms he threw<br>
 And thus began his speech anew:<br>
     'Whate'er a friend most wise and true,<br>
 Who counsels for the best, should do,<br>
 Whate'er his gentle part should be,<br>
 Has been performed, dear friend, by thee.<br>
 Taught by thy counsel, O my lord,<br>
 I feel my native strength restored.<br>
 A friend like thee is hard to gain.<br>
 Most rare in time of grief and pain.<br>
 Now strain thine utmost power to trace<br>
 The Maithil lady's dwelling place,<br>
 And aid me in my search to find<br>
 Fierce Rávan of the impious mind.<br>
 Trust thou, in turn thy loyal friend,<br>
 And say what aid this arm can lend<br>
 To speed thy hopes, as fostering rain<br>
 Quickens in earth the scattered grain.<br>
 Deem not those words, that seemed to spring<br>
 From pride, are false, O Vánar King.<br>
 None from these lips has ever heard,<br>
 None e'er shall hear, one lying word.<br>
 Again I promise and declare,<br>
 Yea, by my truth, dear friend, I swear.'<br>
     Then glad was King Sugríva's breast,<br>
 And all his lords their joy confessed,<br>
 Stirred by sure hope of Ráma's aid,<br>
 And promise which the prince had made.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry282.htm">Next: Canto VIII.: Ráma's Promise.</a></center>
 </body>