<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry279.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry281.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VI.: THE TOKENS.</h3>
 <p>
 With joy that sprang from hope restored<br>
 To Ráma spake the Vánar lord:<br>
 'I know, by wise Hanúmán taught,<br>
 Why thou the lonely wood hast sought,<br>
 Where with thy brother Lakshman thou<br>
 Hast sojourned, bound by hermit vow;<br>
 Have heard how Sitá, Janak's child,<br>
 Was stolen in the pathless wild,<br>
 How by a roving Rákshas she<br>
 Weeping was reft from him and thee;<br>
 How, bent on death, the giant slew<br>
 The vulture king, her guardian true,<br>
 And gave thy widowed breast to know<br>
 A solitary moaner's woe.<br>
 But soon, dear Prince, thy heart shall be<br>
 From every trace of sorrow free;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_330"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 330</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 For I thy darling will restore,<br>
 Lost like the prize of holy lore. <a name="fr_559"></a><a href="#fn_559"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Yea, though in heaven the lady dwell,<br>
 Or prisoned in the depths of hell,<br>
 My friendly care her way shall track<br>
 And bring thy ransomed darling back.<br>
 Let this my promise soothe thy care,<br>
 Nor doubt the words I truly swear.<br>
 Saints, fiends, and dwellers of the skies<br>
 Shall find thy wife a bitter prize,<br>
 Like the rash child who rues too late<br>
 Thy treacherous lure of poisoned cate.<br>
 No longer, Prince, thy loss deplore:<br>
 Thy darling wife will I restore.<br>
 'Twas she I saw: my heart infers<br>
 That shrinking form was doubtless hers.<br>
 Which gaint Rávan', fierce and dread,<br>
 Bore swiftly through the clouds o'erhead<br>
 Still writhing in his strict embrace<br>
 Like helpless queen oft serpent race, <a name="fr_560"></a><a href="#fn_560"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 And from her lips that sad voice came<br>
 Shrieking thine own and Lakshman's name.<br>
 High on a hill she saw me stand<br>
 With comrades twain on either hand.<br>
 Her outer robe to earth she threw,<br>
 And with it sent her anklets too.<br>
 We saw the glittering tokens fall,<br>
 We found them there and kept them all.<br>
 These will I bring: perchance thine eyes<br>
 The treasured spoils will recognize.'<br>
     He ceased: then Raghu's son replied<br>
 To the glad tale, and eager cried:<br>
 'Bring them with all thy speed: delay<br>
 No more, dear friend, but haste away.'<br>
     Thus Ráma spoke. Sugríva hied<br>
 Within the mountain's caverned side.<br>
 Impelled by love that stirred each thought<br>
 The precious tokens quickly brought,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And said to Raghu's son, Behold<br>
 This garment and these rings of gold,<br>
 In Ráma's hand with friendly haste<br>
 The jewels and the robe he placed.<br>
 Then, like the moon by mist assailed,<br>
 The tear-dimmed eyes of Ráma failed;<br>
 That burst of woe unmanned his frame,<br>
 Woe sprung from passion for his dame.<br>
 And with his manly strength o'erthrown,<br>
 He fell and cried, Ah me! mine own!<br>
 Again, again close to his breast<br>
 The ornaments and robe he pressed.<br>
 While the quick pants that shook his frame<br>
 As from a furious serpent came.<br>
 On his dear brother standing nigh<br>
 He turned at length his piteous eye;<br>
 And, while his tears increasing ran,<br>
 In bitter wail he thus began:<br>
 'Look, brother, and behold once more<br>
 The ornaments and robe she wore,<br>
 Dropped while the giant bore away<br>
 In cruel arras his struggling prey,<br>
 Dropped in some quiet spot, I ween,<br>
 Where the young grass was soft and green;<br>
 For still untouched by spot or stain<br>
 Their former beauty all retain.'<br>
     He spoke with many a tear and sigh,<br>
 And thus his brother made reply:<br>
 'The bracelets thou hast fondly shown,<br>
 And earrings, are to me unknown,<br>
 But by long service taught I greet<br>
 The anklets of her honoured feet.' <a name="fr_561"></a><a href="#fn_561"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
     Then to Sugríva Ráma, best<br>
 Of Raghu's sons, these words addressed:<br>
     'Say to what quarter of the sky<br>
 The cruel fiend was seen to fly.<br>
 Bearing afar my captured wife,<br>
 My darling dearer tban my life.<br>
 Speak, Vánar King, that I may know<br>
 Where dwells the cause of all my woe;<br>
 The fiend for whose transgression all<br>
 The giants by this hand shall fall.<br>
 He who the Maithil lady stole<br>
 And kindled fury in my soul,<br>
 Has sought his fate in senseless pride<br>
 And opened Death's dark portal wide.<br>
 Then toll me, Vánar lord, I pray,<br>
     The dwelling of my foe.<br>
 And he, beneath this hand, to-day<br>
     To Yama's halls shall go.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_331"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 331</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_557"></a><a href="ry279.htm#fr_557">329:1b</a>  Báli the king <i>de facto</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_558"></a><a href="ry279.htm#fr_558">329:2b</a>  With the Indian, as with the ancient
 Greeks, the throbbing of the right eye in
 a man is an auspicious sign, the throbbing
 of the left eye is the opposite. In a woman
 the * of signs are reversed.
 
 </p><p>
 On the alliance between Ráma and the
 monkeys see ADDITIONAL NOTES.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_559"></a><a href="ry280.htm#fr_559">330:1</a>  The Vedas stolen by the demons Madhu
 and Kait'abha.
 
 </p><p>
 "The text has (<i>Sanskrit text</i>) which signifies literally "the lost vedic tradition."
 It seems that allusion is here made to the
 Vedas submerged in the depth of the sea,
 but promptly recovered by Vishn'u in one
 of his incarnation, as the brahmanic legend
 relates, with which the ordhodoxy of the
 Bráhmans intended perhaps to allude to
 the prompt restoration and uninterrupted
 continuity of the ancient vedic tradition."
 
 </p><p>
 GORRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_560"></a><a href="ry280.htm#fr_560">330:2</a>  Like the wife of a Nága or Serpent-
 God carried off by an eagle. The enmity
 between the King of birds and the serpent
 is of very frequent occurrence. It seems
 to be a modification of the strife between
 the Vedic Indra and the Ahi, the serpent
 or drought-fiend; between Apollón, and
 the Python, Adam and the Serpent.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_561"></a><a href="ry280.htm#fr_561">330:1b</a>  He means that he has never ventured
 to raise his eyes to her arms and face,
 though he has ever been her devoted
 servant.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry281.htm">Next: Canto VII.: Ráma Consoled.</a></center>
 </body>