<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry292.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry294.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIX.: TÁRÁ'S GRIEF.</h3>
 <p>
 No answer gave the Vánar king<br>
 To Ráma's prudent counselling.<br>
 Battered and bruised by tree and stone,<br>
 By Ráma's arrow overthrown,<br>
 Fainting upon the ground he lay,<br>
 Gasping his troubled life away.<br>
     But Tárá in the Vánar's hall<br>
 Heard tidings of her husband's fall;<br>
 Heard that a shaft from Ráma's bow<br>
 Had laid the royal Báli low.<br>
 Her darling Angad by her side,<br>
 Distracted from her home she hied.<br>
 Then nigh the place of battle drew<br>
 The Vánars, Angad's retinue.<br>
 They saw the bow-armed Ráma: dread<br>
 Fell on them, and they turned and fled.<br>
 Like helpless deer, their leaders slain,<br>
 So wildly fled the startled train.<br>
 But Tárá saw, and nearer pressed.<br>
 And thus the flying band addressed:<br>
 'O Vánars, ye who ever stand<br>
 About our king, a trusty band,<br>
 Where is the lion master? why<br>
 Forsake ye thus your lord and fly?<br>
 Say, lies he dead upon the plain,<br>
 A brother by a brother slain,<br>
 Or pierced by shafts from Ráma's bow<br>
 That rain from far upon the foe?'<br>
     Thus Tárá questioned, and was still:<br>
 Then, wearers of each shape at will,<br>
 The Vánars thus with one accord<br>
 Answered the Lady of their lord:<br>
 'Turn, Tárá turn, and half undone<br>
 Save Angad thy beloved son.<br>
 Tnere Ráma stands in death's disguise,<br>
 And conquered Báli faints and dies.<br>
 He by whose strong arm, thick and fast,<br>
 Uprooted trees and rocks were cast,<br>
 Lies smitten by a shaft that came<br>
 Resistless as the lightning flame.<br>
 When he, whose splendour once could vie<br>
 With Indra's, regent of the sky,<br>
 Fell by that deadly arrow, all<br>
 The Vánars fled who marked his fall.<br>
 Let all our chiefs their succours bring,<br>
 And Angad be anointed king:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_349"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 349</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 For all who come of Vánar race<br>
 Will serve him set in Báli's place.<br>
 Or else our conquering foes to-day<br>
 Within our wall will force their way,<br>
 Polluting with their hostile feet<br>
 The chambers of thy loved retreat.<br>
 Great fear is on us. all and one.<br>
 Those who have wives and who have none,<br>
 They lust for power, are fierce and bold,<br>
 Or hate us for the strife of old.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She heard their speech as, sore afraid,<br>
 Arrested in their flight, they stayed,<br>
 And gave her answer as became<br>
 Tne spirit of so true a dame:<br>
 'Nay, what have I to do with pelf,<br>
 With son, with kingdom, or with self,<br>
 When he, my noble lord, who leads<br>
 The Vánars 'like a loin, bleeds?<br>
 His high-souled victor will I meet,<br>
 And throw me prostrate at his feet.'<br>
 She hastened forth, her bosom rent<br>
 With anguish, weeping as she went,<br>
 And striking, mastered by her woes,<br>
 Her head and breast with frantic blows.<br>
 She hurried to the field and found<br>
 Her husband postrate on the ground,<br>
 Who quelled the hostile Vánars' might,<br>
 Whose bank was never turned in flight:<br>
 Whose arm a massy rock could throw<br>
 As Indra hurls his bolts below:<br>
 Fierce as the rushing tempest, loud<br>
 As thunder from a labouring cloud:<br>
 Whene'er he roared his voice of fear<br>
 Struck terror on the boldest ear:<br>
 Now slain, as, hungry for the prey,<br>
 A tiger might a lion slay:<br>
 Or when, his serpent foe to seek,<br>
 Suparna <a name="fr_601"></a><a href="#fn_601"><font size="1">1</font></a> with his furious beak<br>
 Tears up a sacred hillock, long<br>
 The reverence of a village throng,<br>
 Its altar with their offerings spread,<br>
 And the gay flag that waved o erhead.<br>
 She looked and saw the victor stand<br>
 Renting upon his bow his hand:<br>
 And fierce Sugriva she descried,<br>
 And Lakshman by his brother's side,<br>
 She passed them by, nor stayed to view,<br>
 Swift to her husband's side she flew;<br>
 Then as she looked, her strength gave way.<br>
 And in the dust she fell and lay.<br>
 Then, as if startled ere the close<br>
 Of slumber, from the earth she rose.<br>
 Upon her dying husband, round<br>
 Whose soul the coils of Death were wound,<br>
 Her eyes in agony she bent<br>
 And called him with a shrill lament.<br>
 Sugriva, when he heard her cries,<br>
 Aud saw the queen with weeping eyes,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And youthful Angad standing there,<br>
 His load of grief could hardly bear.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_601"></a><a href="ry293.htm#fr_601">349:1</a>  A name of Garuda the king of birds,
 the great enemy of the Serpents.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry294.htm">Next: Canto XX.: Tárá's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>