<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry291.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry293.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVIII.: RÁMA'S REPLY.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased: and Ráma's heart was stirred<br>
 At every keen reproach he heard.<br>
 There Báli lay, a dim dark sun,<br>
 His course of light and glory run;<br>
 Or like the bed of Ocean dried<br>
 Of his broad floods from side to side,<br>
 Or helpless, as the dying fire,<br>
 Hushed his last words of righteous ire.<br>
 Then Ráma, with his spirit moved,<br>
 The Vánar king in turn reproved:<br>
 'Why dost thou Báli, thus revile,<br>
 And castest not a glance the while<br>
 On claims of duty, love, and gain,<br>
 And customs o'er the world that reign?<br>
 Why dost thou blame me, rash and blind,<br>
 Fickle as all thy Vánar kind.<br>
 Slighting each rule of ancient days<br>
 Which all the good and prudent praise?<br>
 This land, each hill and woody chase,<br>
 Belongs to old Ikshváku's race:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 With bird and beast and man, the whole<br>
 Is ours to cherish and control.<br>
 Now Bharat, prompt at duty's call,<br>
 Wise, just, and true, is lord of all.<br>
 Each claim of law, love, gain he knows,<br>
 And wrath and favour duly shows.<br>
 A king from truth who never bends,<br>
 And grace with vigour wisely blends;<br>
 With valour worthy of his race,<br>
 He knows the claims of time and place,<br>
 Now we and other kings of might,<br>
 By his ensample taught aright,<br>
 The lands of every region tread<br>
 That justice may increase and spread.<br>
 While royal Bharat, wise and just,<br>
 Rules the broad earth, his glorious trust,<br>
 Who shall attempt, while he is lord,<br>
 A deed by Justice held abhorred?<br>
 We now, as Bharat has decreed,<br>
 Let justice guide our every deed,<br>
 And toil each sinner to repress<br>
 Who scorns the way of righteousness.<br>
 Thou from that path hast turned aside,<br>
 And virtue's holy law defied.<br>
 Left the fair path which kings should tread,<br>
 And followed pleasure's voice instead.<br>
 The man who cleaves to duty's law<br>
 Regards these three with filial awe--<br>
 The sire, the elder brother, third<br>
 Him from whose lips his lore he heard.<br>
 Thus too, for duty's sake, the wise<br>
 Regard with fond paternal eyes<br>
 The well-loved younger brother, one<br>
 Their lore has ripened, and a son.<br>
 Fine are the laws which guide the good,<br>
 Abstruse, and hardly understood;<br>
 Only the soul, enthroned within<br>
 The breast of each, knows right from sin<br>
 But thou art wild and weak of soul,<br>
 And spurnest, like thy race, control;<br>
 The true and right thou canst not find.<br>
 Tht blind consulting with the blind.<br>
 Incline thine ear and I will teach<br>
 The cause that prompts my present speech<br>
 This tempest of thy soul assuage<br>
 Nor blame me in thine idle rage.<br>
 On this great sin thy thoughts bestow,<br>
 The sin for which I lay thee low.<br>
 Thou, Báli, in thy brother's life<br>
 Hast robbed him of his wedded wife,<br>
 And keepest, scorning ancient right,<br>
 His Rumá for thine own delight.<br>
 Thy son's own wife should scarcely be<br>
 More sacred in thine eyes than she.<br>
 All duty thou hast scorned, and hence<br>
 Comes punishment for dire offence.<br>
 For those who blindly do amiss<br>
 There is, I ween, no way but this:<br>
 To check the rash who dare to stray<br>
 From custom which the good obey,<br>
 I may not, sprung of Kshatriya line,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_347"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 347</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Forgive this heinous sin of thine:<br>
 The laws for those who sin like thee<br>
 The penalty of death decree.<br>
 Now Bharat rules with sovereign sway,<br>
 And we his royal word obey.<br>
 Tnere was no hope of pardon, none,<br>
 For the vile deed that thou hast done,<br>
 That wisest monarch dooms to die<br>
 The wretch whose crimes the law defy;<br>
 And we, chastising those who err,<br>
 His righteous doom administer.<br>
 Mv soul accounts Sugríva dear<br>
 E'en as my brother Lakshman here.<br>
 He brings me blessing, and I swore<br>
 his wife and kingdom to restore:<br>
 A bond in solemn honour bound<br>
 When Vánar chieftains stood around.<br>
 And can a king like me forsake<br>
 His friend, and plighted promise break?<br>
 Reflect, O Vánar, on the cause,<br>
 The sanction of eternal laws,<br>
 And, justly smitten down, confess<br>
 Thou diest for thy wickediness,<br>
 By honour was I bound to lend<br>
 Assistance to a faithful friend;<br>
 And thou hast met a righteous fate<br>
 Thy former sins to expiate.<br>
 And thus wilt thou some merit win<br>
 And make atonement for thy sin.<br>
 For hear me, Vánar King, rehearse<br>
 What Manu <a name="fr_598"></a><a href="#fn_598"><font size="1">1</font></a> spake in ancient verse,--<br>
 This holy law, which all accept<br>
 Who honour duty, have I kept:<br>
 'Pure grow the sinners kings chastise,<br>
 And, like.the virtuous, gain the skies;<br>
 By pain or full atonement freed,<br>
 They reap the fruit of righteous deed,<br>
 While kings who punish not incur<br>
 The penalties of those who err.'<br>
 Mándhátá <a name="fr_599"></a><a href="#fn_599"><font size="1">2</font></a> once, a noble king,<br>
 Light of the line from which I spring,<br>
 Punished with death a devotee<br>
 When he had stooped to sin like thee;<br>
 And many a king in ancient time<br>
 Has punished frantic sinners' crime,<br>
 And, when their impious blood was spilt,<br>
 Has washed away the stain of guilt.<br>
 Cease, Báli, cease; no more complain:<br>
 Reproaches and laments are vain.<br>
 For thou art justly punished: we<br>
 Obey our king and are not free.<br>
 Once more, O Báli, lend thine ear<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Another weightiest plea to hear.<br>
 For this, when heard and pondered well.<br>
 Will all complaint and rage dispel.<br>
 My soul will ne'er this deed repent,<br>
 Nor was my shaft in anger sent.<br>
 We take the silvan tribes beset<br>
 With snare and trap and gin and net,<br>
 And many a heedless deer we smite<br>
 From thickest shade, concealed from sight.<br>
 Wild for the slaughter of the game,<br>
 At stately stags our shafts we aim.<br>
 We strike them bounding scared away,<br>
 We strike them as they stand at bay,<br>
 When careless in the shade they lie,<br>
 Or scan the plain with watchful eye.<br>
 They turn away their heads; we aim,<br>
 And none the eager hunter blame.<br>
 Each royal saint, well trained in law<br>
 Of duty, loves his bow to draw<br>
 And strike the quarry, e'en as thou<br>
 Hast fallen by mine arrow now,<br>
 Fiphting with him or unaware,--<br>
 A Vánar thou.--I little care. <a name="fr_600"></a><a href="#fn_600"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 But yet, O best of Vánars, know<br>
 That kings who rule the earth bestow<br>
 Fruit of pure life and virtuous deed.<br>
 And lofty duty's hard-won meed.<br>
 Harm not thy lord the king: abstain<br>
 From ant and word that cause him pain;<br>
 For kings are children of the skies<br>
 Who walk this earth in men's disguise.<br>
 But thou, in duty's claims untaught,<br>
 thy breast with blinding passion fraught,<br>
 Assailest me who still have clung<br>
 To duty, with thy bitter tongue.'<br>
     He ceased; and Ball sore distressed<br>
 The sovereign claims of law confessed,<br>
 And freed, o'erwhelmed with woe and shame,<br>
 The lord of Raghu's race from blame.<br>
 Then, reverent palm to palm applied,<br>
 To Ráma thus the Vánar cried:<br>
 'True, best of men, is every word<br>
 That from thy lips these ears have heard,<br>
 It ill beseems a wretch like me<br>
 To bandy empty words with thee.<br>
 Forgive the angry taunts that broke<br>
 From my wild bosom as I spoke.<br>
 And lay not to my charge, O King,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_348"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 348</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 My mad reproaches' idle sting.<br>
 Thou, in the truth by trial trained,<br>
 Best knowledge of the right hast gained:<br>
 And layest, just and pure within,<br>
 The meetest penalty on sin.<br>
 Through every bond of law I burst,<br>
 The boldest sinner and the worst.<br>
 O let thy right-instructing speech<br>
 Console my heart and wisely teach.'<br>
     Like some sad elephant who stands<br>
 Fast sinking in the treacherous sands,<br>
 Thus Báli raised despairing eyes;<br>
 Then spake again with sobs and sighs:<br>
     'Not for myself, O King, I grieve,<br>
 For Tárá or the friends I leave,<br>
 As for sweet Angad, my dear son,<br>
 My noble, only little one.<br>
 For, nursed in luxury and bliss,<br>
 His father he will mourn and miss,<br>
 And like a stream whose fount is dry<br>
 Will waste away and sink and die,--<br>
 My own dear child, my only boy,<br>
 His mother Tárá's hope and joy.<br>
 Spare him, O son of Raghu, spare<br>
 The child entrusted to thy care.<br>
 My Angad and Sugríva treat<br>
 E'en as thy heart considers meet,<br>
 For thou, O chief of men, art strong<br>
 To guard the right and punish wrong.<br>
 O, if thou wilt thine ear incline<br>
 To hear these dying words of mine,<br>
 He and Sugríva will to thee<br>
 As Bharat and as Lakshman be.<br>
 Let not my Tárá, left forlorn,<br>
 Weep for Sugríva's wrathful scorn;<br>
 Nor let him, for her lord's offence,<br>
 Condemn her faithful innocence.<br>
 And well and wisely may he reign<br>
 If thy dear grace his power sustain:<br>
 If, following thee his friend and guide,<br>
 He turn not from thy hest aside:<br>
 Thus may he reign with glory, nay<br>
 Thus to the skies will win his way.<br>
 Though stayed by Tárá's fond recall,<br>
 By thy dear hand I longed to fall.<br>
 Against my brother rushed and fought,<br>
 And gained the death I long have sought.'<br>
     Then Ráma thus the prince consoled<br>
 From whose clear eyes the mists were rolled:<br>
 'Grieve not for those thou leavest thus,<br>
 Nor tremble for thyself or us,<br>
 For we will deal with thine and thee<br>
 As duty and the laws decree.<br>
 He who exacts and he who pays,<br>
 Is justly slain or justly slays,<br>
 Shall in the life to come have bliss;<br>
 For each has done his task in this.<br>
 Thou, wandering from the right, art made<br>
 Pure by the forfeit thou hast paid.<br>
 Thy weight of sins is cast aside,<br>
 And duty's claim is satisfied.<br>
 Then grieve no more, O Prince, but clear<br>
 Thy bosom from all doubt and fear,<br>
 For fate, inexorably stern,<br>
 Thou hast no power to move or turn.<br>
 Thy princely Angad still will share<br>
 My tender love. Sugríva's care;<br>
 And to thy offspring shall be shown<br>
 Affection that shall match thine own.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_595"></a><a href="ry291.htm#fr_595">346:1</a>  Hayagríva, Horse-necked, is a form
 of Vishnu</p>
 <p><a name="fn_596"></a><a href="ry291.htm#fr_596">346:2</a>  "As'vatara is the name of a chief of
 the Nágas or serpents which inhabit the
 regions under the earth; it is also the
 name of a Gandharva. As'vatarí ought
 to be the wife of one of the two, but I am
 not sure that this conjecture is right. The
 commentator does not say who this As'vatarí
 is, or what tradition or myth, is alluded
 to. Vimalabodha reads As'vatarí
 in the nominative case, and explains, As'vatarí
 is the sun, and as the sun with his
 rays brings back the moon which has been
 sunk in the ocean and the infernal regions,
 so will I bring back Sítá." GORRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_597"></a><a href="ry291.htm#fr_597">346:3</a>  That is, 'Consider what answer you
 can give to your accusers when they
 charge you with injustice in killing me.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_598"></a><a href="ry292.htm#fr_598">347:1</a>  Manu, Book VIII. 318. "But men who
 have committed offences and have received
 from kings the punishment due to them,
 go pure to heaven and become as clear as
 those who have done well."</p>
 <p><a name="fn_599"></a><a href="ry292.htm#fr_599">347:2</a>  Mándhátá was one of the earlier descendants
 of Ikshváku. His name is mentioned
 in Ráma's genealogy, p. 81.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_600"></a><a href="ry292.htm#fr_600">347:1b</a>  I cannot understand how Válmíki
 could put such an excuse as this into
 Ráma's mouth. Ráma with all solemn
 ceremony, has made a league of alliance
 with Báli's younger brother whom he
 regards as a dear friend and almost as an
 equal, and now he winds up his reasons
 for killing Báli by coolly saying: 'Besides
 you are only a monkey, you know, after
 all, and as such I have every right to kill
 you how, when, and where I like.'</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry293.htm">Next: Canto XIX.: Tárá's Grief.</a></center>
 </body>