<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry295.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry297.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXII.: BÁLI DEAD.</h3>
 <p>
 There breathing still with slow faint sighs<br>
 Lay Báli on the ground: his eyes,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_351"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 351</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Damp with the tears of death, he raised,<br>
 On conquering Sugríva gazed,<br>
 And then in clearest speech expressed<br>
 The tender feelings of his breast;<br>
 'Not to my charge, Sugríva, lay<br>
 Thine injuries avenged to-day;<br>
 But rather blame resistless Fate<br>
 That urged me on infuriate.<br>
 Fate ne'er agreed our lives to bless<br>
 With simultaneous happiness:<br>
 To dwell like brothers side by side<br>
 In tender love was still denied.<br>
 The Vánars' realm is thine to-day:<br>
 Begin, O King, thy rightful sway;  <a name="fr_605"></a><a href="#fn_605"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 for I must go at Yama's call<br>
 To sojourn in his gloomy hall;<br>
 Must part and leave this very hour<br>
 My life, my realm, my kingly power,<br>
 And go instead of these to gain<br>
 Bright glory free from spot and stain.<br>
 Now at thy hands one boon I seek<br>
 With the last words my lips shall speak,<br>
 And, though it be no easy thing,<br>
 perform the task I give thee, King.<br>
 This son of mine, no foolish boy,<br>
 Worthy of bliss and nursed in joy,--<br>
 See, prostrate on the ground he lies,<br>
 The hot tears welling from his eyes--<br>
 The child I love so well, more sweet<br>
 Than life itself, for woe unmeet,--<br>
 To him be kindly favour shown:<br>
 O guard and keep him as thine own.<br>
 Retain him ever by thy side,<br>
 His father, helper, friend, and guide.<br>
 From fear and woe his young life save,<br>
 And give him all his father gave.<br>
 Then Tárá's son in time shall be<br>
 Brave, resolute, and famed like thee,<br>
 And march before thee to the fight<br>
 Where stricken fiends shall own his might.<br>
 While yet a tender stripling, fame<br>
 Shall bruit abroad his warrior name,<br>
 And brigbtlv shall his glory shine<br>
 For exploits worthy of his line.<br>
 Child of Sushen, <a name="fr_606"></a><a href="#fn_606"><font size="1">2</font></a> my Tárá well<br>
 Obscurest lore can read and tell;<br>
 And, trained in wondrous art, divines<br>
 Each mystery of boding signs.<br>
 Her solemn warning ne'er despise,<br>
 Do boldly what her lips advise;<br>
 For things to come her eye can see,<br>
 And with her words events agree.<br>
 And for the son of Raghu's sake<br>
 The toil and danger undertake:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 For breach of faith were grievous wrong,<br>
 Nor wouldst thou be unpunished long.<br>
 Now, brother, take this chain of gold,<br>
 Gift of celestial hands of old,<br>
 Or when I die its charm will flee,<br>
 And all its might be lost with me.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The loving speech Sugríva heard.<br>
 And all his heart with woe was stirred.<br>
 Remorse and gentle pity stole<br>
 Each thought of triumph from his soul:<br>
 Thus fades the light when Ráhu <a name="fr_607"></a><a href="#fn_607"><font size="1">1b</font></a> mars<br>
 The glory of the Lord of Stars. <a name="fr_608"></a><a href="#fn_608"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 All angry thoughts were staved and stilled<br>
 And kindly love his bosom filled.<br>
 His brother's word the chief obeyed<br>
 And took the chain as Báli prayed.<br>
 On little Angad standing nigh<br>
 The dying hero fixed his eye,<br>
 And, ready from this world to part,<br>
 Spoke the fond utterance of his heart:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Let time and place thy thoughts employ:<br>
 In woe be strong, he meek in joy.<br>
 Accept both pain and pleasure, still<br>
 Obedient to Sugríva's will.<br>
 Thou hast, my darling, from the first<br>
 With tender care been softly nursed;<br>
 But harder days, if thou wouldst win<br>
 Sugríva's love, must now begin.<br>
 To those who hate him ne'er incline,<br>
 Nor count his foe a friend of thine.<br>
 In all thy thoughts his welfare seek,<br>
 Obedient, lowly, faithful, meek.<br>
 Let no rash suit his bosom pain,<br>
 Nor yet from due requsts abstain.  <a name="fr_609"></a><a href="#fn_609"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 Each is a grievous fault, between<br>
 The two is round the happy mean.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Báli ceased: his eyeballs rolled<br>
 In stress of anguish uncontrolled<br>
 His massive teeth were bared to view,<br>
 And from the frame the spirit flew.<br>
 Their lord and leader dead, the crowd<br>
 Of noblest Vánars shrieked aloud:<br>
 'Since thou, O King, hast sought the skies<br>
 All desolate Kishkindhá lies.<br>
 Her woods, where Vánars loved to rove,<br>
 Are empty now, and hill and grove.<br>
 From every eye the light is fled,<br>
 Since thou, our mighty lord, art dead.<br>
 Thine was the unwearied arm that bore<br>
 The brunt of deadly fight of yore<br>
 With Golabh the Gandharva, when,<br>
 Lasting through five long years and ten,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_352"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 352</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The dreadful conflict knew no stay<br>
 In gloom of night, in glare of day;<br>
 And when the fifteenth year had past<br>
 Thy dire opponent fell at last.<br>
 If such a foeman fell beneath<br>
 Our hero's arm and awful teeth<br>
 Who freed us from our terror, how<br>
 Is conquering Báli fallen now?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then when they saw their leader slain<br>
 Great anguish seized the Vánar train,<br>
 Weeping their mighty chief, as when<br>
 In pastures near a lion's den<br>
 The cows by sudden fear are stirred,<br>
 Slain the bold bull who led the herd.<br>
 And hapless Tárá sank below<br>
 The whelming waters of her woe,<br>
 Looked upon Báli's face and fell<br>
 Beside him whom she loved go well,<br>
 Like a young creeper clinging round<br>
 A tall tree prostrate on the ground.<br>
 
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_604"></a><a href="ry295.htm#fr_604">350:1b</a>  Sugríva and Angad.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_605"></a><a href="ry296.htm#fr_605">351:1</a>  Angad himself, being too young to
 govern, would be Yuvarája or heir-
 apparent.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_606"></a><a href="ry296.htm#fr_606">351:2</a>  Sushena was the son of Varuna the
 God of the sea,</p>
 <p><a name="fn_607"></a><a href="ry296.htm#fr_607">351:1b</a>  A demon with the tail of a dragon,
 that causes eclipses by endeavouring to
 swallow the sun and moon.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_608"></a><a href="ry296.htm#fr_608">351:2b</a>  The Lord of Stars is the Moon.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_609"></a><a href="ry296.htm#fr_609">351:3b</a>  Or the passage may be interpreted:
 'Be neither to obsequious or affectionate,
 nor wanting in due respect of love.'</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry297.htm">Next: Canto XXIII.: Tárá's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>