<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry297.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry299.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIV.: SUGRÍVA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 But when Sugríva saw her weep<br>
 O'erwhelmed in sorrow's rushing deep.<br>
 Swift through his bosom pierced the sting<br>
 Of anguish for the fallen king.<br>
 At the sad sight his eyes beheld<br>
 A flood of bitter tears outwelled,<br>
 And, with his bosom racked and rent,<br>
 To Ráma with his train he went.<br>
 He came with faltering steps and slow<br>
 Where Ráma held his mighty bow<br>
 And arrow like a venomed snake,<br>
 And to the son of Raghu spake:<br>
 'Well hast thou kept, O King, thy vow:<br>
 The promised fruit is gathered now.<br>
 But life is marred, my soul to-day<br>
 Turns sickening from all joy away.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 For, while this queen laments and sighs<br>
 Amid a mourning people's cries,<br>
 And Angad weeps his father slain,<br>
 How can my heart delight to reign?<br>
 For outrage, fury, senseless pride,<br>
 My brother, doomed of yore, has died.<br>
 Yet, Raghu's son, in bitter woe<br>
 I mourn his fated overthrow.<br>
 Ah, better far in pain and ill<br>
 To dwell on Rishyamúka still<br>
 Than gain the heaven of Gods and all<br>
 Its pleasures by my brother's fall.<br>
 Did not he cry,--great-hearted foe,--<br>
 'Go, for I will not slay thee, Go'?<br>
 With his brave soul those words agree:<br>
 My speech, my deeds, are worthy me.<br>
 How can a brother counterweigh<br>
 His grievous loss with joys of sway,<br>
 And see with dull unpitying eye<br>
 So brave and good a brother die?<br>
 His lofty soul was nobly blind:<br>
 My death alas, he ne'er designed;<br>
 But I, urged blindly on by hate,<br>
 Sought with his life my rage to sate.<br>
 He smote me with a splintered tree:<br>
 I groaned aloud and turned to flee,<br>
 From stern reproaches he forbore,<br>
 And gently bade me sin no more.<br>
 Serene and dutiful and good<br>
 He kept the laws of brotherhood:<br>
 I, fierce and greedy, vengeful, base,<br>
 Showed all the vices of our race.<br>
 Ah me, dear friend, my brother's fate<br>
 Lays on my soul a crushing weight:<br>
 A sin no heart should e'er conceive,<br>
 But at the thought each soul should grieve:<br>
 Sin such as Indra's when his blow<br>
 Laid heavenly Vis'varúpa  <a name="fr_611"></a><a href="#fn_611"><font size="1">1b</font></a> low.<br>
 Yet earth, the waters of the seas,<br>
 The race of women and the trees<br>
 Were fain upon themselves to take<br>
 The weight of sin for Indra's sake.<br>
 But who a Vánar's soul will free,<br>
 Or ease the load that crushes me?<br>
 Wretch that I am, I may not claim<br>
 The reverence due to royal name.<br>
 How shall I reign supreme, or dare<br>
 Affect the power I should not share?<br>
 Ah me, I sorrow for my sin,<br>
 The ruin of my race and kin,<br>
 Polluted by a hideous crime<br>
 World-hated till the end of time.<br>
 Alas, the floods of sorrow roll<br>
 With whelming force upon my soul:<br>
 So gathers the descending rain<br>
 In the deep hollow of the plain.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_354"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 354</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_610"></a><a href="ry297.htm#fr_610">353:1</a>  Sacrifices and all religious rites begin
 and end with ablution, and the wife of
 the officiating Brahman takes an important
 part in the performance of the
 holy ceremonies.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_611"></a><a href="ry298.htm#fr_611">353:1b</a>  Vis'varúpa, a son of Twashtri or Vis'vakarma
 the heavenlv architect, was a
 three-headed monster slain by Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry299.htm">Next: Canto XXV.: Ráma's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>