<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry296.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry298.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIII.: TÁRÁ'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 She kissed her lifeless husband's face,<br>
 She clasped him in a close embrace,<br>
 Laid her soft lips upon his head;<br>
 Then words like these the mourner said:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'No words of mine wouldst thou regard,<br>
 And now thy bed is cold and hard.<br>
 Upon the rude rough ground o'erthrown,<br>
 Beneath thee naught but sand and stone.<br>
 To thee the earth is dearer far<br>
 Than I and my caresses are,<br>
 If thou upon her breast wilt lie,<br>
 And to my words make no reply.<br>
 Ah my beloved, good and brave,<br>
 Bold to attack and strong to save,<br>
 Fate is Sugriva's thrall, and we<br>
 In him our lord and master see.<br>
 Lo, by thy bed, a mournful band,<br>
 Thy Vánar chiefs lamenting stand.<br>
 O hear thy nobles' groans and cries,<br>
 O mark thy Angad's Weeping eyes,<br>
 O list to my entreaties, break<br>
 The chains of slumber and awake.<br>
 Ah me, my lord, this lowly bed<br>
 Where rest thy limbs and fallen head,<br>
 Is the cold couch where smitten lay<br>
 Thy foemen in the bloody fray.<br>
 O noble heart from blemish free,<br>
 Lover of war, beloved by me,<br>
 Why hast thou fled away and left<br>
 Thy Tárá of all hope bereft!<br>
 Unwise the father who allows<br>
 His child to be a warrior's spouse,<br>
 For, hero, see thy consort's fate,<br>
 A widow now moat desolate,<br>
 For ever broken is my pride,<br>
 My hope of lasting bliss has died,<br>
 And sinking in the lowest deep<br>
 Of sorrow's sea I pine and weep.<br>
 Ah, surely not of earthly mould,<br>
 This stony heart is stern and cold,<br>
 Or, in a hundred pieces rent,<br>
 It had not lingered to lament.<br>
 Dead, dead! my husband, friend, and lord<br>
 In whom my loving hopes were stored,<br>
 First in the field, his foemen's dread,<br>
 My own victorious Báli, dead!<br>
 A woman when her lord has died,<br>
 Though children flourish by her side,<br>
 Though stores of gold her coffers fill,<br>
 Is called a lonely widow still.<br>
 Alas, thy bleeding gashes make<br>
 Around thy limbs a purple lake:<br>
 Thus slumbering was thy wont to lie<br>
 On cushions bright with crimson dye.<br>
 Dark streams of welling blood besmear<br>
 Thy limbs where dust and mire adhere,<br>
 Nor have I strength, weighed down by woe,<br>
 Mine arms about thy form to throw.<br>
 The issue of this day has brought<br>
 Sugriva all his wishes sought,<br>
 For Ráma shot one shaft and he<br>
 Is freed from fear and jeopardy.<br>
 Alas, alas, I may not rest<br>
 My head upon thy wounded breast,<br>
 Obstructed by the massive dart<br>
 Deep buried in thy bleeding heart.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Níla from his bosom drew<br>
 The fatal shaft that pierced him through,<br>
 Like some tremendous serpent deep<br>
 In caverns of a hill asleep.<br>
 As from the hero's wound it came,<br>
 Shot from the shaft a gleam of flame,<br>
 Like the last flashes of the sun<br>
 Descending when his course is run.<br>
 From the wide rent in crimson flood<br>
 Rushed the full stream of Báli's blood,<br>
 Like torrents down a mountain's side<br>
 With golden ore and copper dyed.<br>
 Then Tárá brushed with tender care<br>
 The dust of battle from his hair,<br>
 While her sad eyes poured down their rain<br>
 Upon her lord untimely slain.<br>
 Once more she looked upon the dead;<br>
 Then to her bright-eyed child she said:<br>
 'Turn hither, turn thy weeping eyes<br>
 Where low in death thy father lies.<br>
 By sinful deed and bitter hate<br>
 Our lord has met his mournful fate.<br>
 Bright as the sun at early morn<br>
 To Yama's halls is Báli borne.<br>
 Then go, my child, salute the king,<br>
 From whom our bliss and honour spring.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Obedient to his mother's hest<br>
 His father's feet he gently pressed<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_353"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 353</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With twining arms and lingering hands:<br>
 'Father', he cried, there Angad stands.'<br>
       Then Tárá: 'Art thou stern and mute,<br>
 Regardless of thy child's salute?<br>
 Hast thou no blessing for thy son,<br>
 No word for little Angad, none?<br>
 O, hero, at thy lifeless feet<br>
 Here with my boy I take my seat,<br>
 As some sad mother of the herd,<br>
 By the fierce lion undeterred,<br>
 Lies moaning by the grassy dell<br>
 Wherein her lord and leader fell.<br>
 How, having wrought that awful rite,<br>
 The sacrifice of deadly fight.<br>
 Wherein the shaft by Ráma sped<br>
 Supplied the place of water shed,<br>
 How hast thou bathed thee at the end<br>
 Without thy wife her aid to lend?  <a name="fr_610"></a><a href="ry298.htm#fn_610"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Why do mine eyes no more behold<br>
 Thy bright beloved chain of gold,<br>
 Which, pleased with thee, the Immortals' King<br>
 About thy neck vouchsafed to fling?<br>
 Still lingering on thy lifeless face<br>
 I see the pride of royal race:<br>
 Thus when the sun has set his glow<br>
 Still rests upon the Lord of Snow.<br>
 Alas my hero! undeterred<br>
 Thou wouldst not listen to my word.<br>
 With tears and prayers I sued in vain:<br>
 Thou wouldst not listen, and art slain.<br>
 Gone is my bliss, my glory: I<br>
 And Angad now with thee will die.'<br>
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry298.htm">Next: Canto XXIV.: Sugríva's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>