<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry298.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry300.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXV.: RÁMA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Raghu's son, whose feeling breast<br>
 Shared the great woe that moved the rest,<br>
 Strove with wise charm their grief to ease<br>
 And gently spoke in words like these:<br>
       'You ne'er can raise the dead to bliss<br>
 By agony of grief like this<br>
 Cease your lament, nor leave undone<br>
 The funeral task you may not shun.<br>
 As nature orders o'er the dead<br>
 Your tributary tears are shed,<br>
 But Fate, directing each event,<br>
 Is still the lord preeminent.<br>
 Yes, all obey the changeless laws<br>
 Of Fate the universal cause,<br>
 By Fate, the lives of all proceed,<br>
 That governs every word and deed,<br>
 None acts, none sees his hest obeyed.<br>
 But each and all by Fate are swayed.<br>
 The world its ordered course maintains,<br>
 And o'er that course Fate ever reigns.<br>
 Fate ne'er exceeds the rule of Fate:<br>
 Is ne'er too swift, is ne'er too late,<br>
 And making nature its ally<br>
 Forgets no life, nor passes by.<br>
 No kith and kin, no power and force<br>
 Can check or stay its settled course,<br>
 No friend or client, grace or charm,<br>
 That victor of the world disarm.<br>
 So all who see with prudent eyes<br>
 The hand of Fate must recognize,<br>
 For virtue rules, or love, or gain,<br>
 As Fate's unchanged decrees ordain.<br>
 Báli has died and won the meed<br>
 That waits in heaven on noble deed,<br>
 Throned in the seats the brave may reach<br>
 By liberal hand and gentle speech,<br>
 True to a warrior's duty, bold<br>
 In fight, the hero lofty-souled<br>
 Deigned not to guard his life: he died,<br>
 And now in heaven is glorified.<br>
 Then cease these tears and wild despair:<br>
 Turn to the task that claims your care,<br>
 For Báli's is the glorious fate<br>
 Which warriors count most fortunate.'<br>
       When Ráma's speech had found a close.<br>
 Brave Lakshman, terror of his foes,<br>
 With wise and soothing words addressed<br>
 Sugríva still with woe oppressed:<br>
 'Arise Sugríva,' thus he said,<br>
 'Perform the service of the dead.<br>
 Prepare with Tárá and her son<br>
 That Báli's rites be duly done.<br>
 A store of funeral wood provide<br>
 Which wind and sun and time have dried<br>
 And richest sandal fit to grace<br>
 The pyre of one of royal race.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 With words of comfort soft and kind<br>
 Console poor Angad's troubled mind,<br>
 Nor let thy heart be thus cast down,<br>
 For thine is now the Vánars' town.<br>
 Let Angad's care a wreath supply,<br>
 And raiment rich with varied dye,<br>
 And oil and perfumes for the fire,<br>
 And all the solemn rites require.<br>
 Go, hasten to the town, O King,<br>
 And Tárá's little quickly bring.<br>
 A virtue is despatch: and speed<br>
 Is best of all in hour of need.<br>
 Go, let a chosen band prepare<br>
 The litter of the dead to bear.<br>
 For stout and tall and strong of limb<br>
 Must be the cheifs who carry him.'<br>
       He spoke,--his friends' delight and pride,--<br>
 Then stood again by Ráma's side.<br>
 When Tára  <a name="fr_612"></a><a href="#fn_612"><font size="1">1</font></a> heard the words he said<br>
 Within the town he quickly sped,<br>
 And brought, on stalwart shoulders laid,<br>
 The litter for the rites arrayed,<br>
 Framed like a car for Gods, complete<br>
 With painted sides and royal seat,<br>
 With latticed windows deftly made,<br>
 And golden birds and trees inlaid:<br>
 Well joined and wrought in every part,<br>
 A marvel of ingenious art.<br>
 Where pleasure mounds in carven wood<br>
 And many a graven figure stood.<br>
 The best of jewels o'er it hung,<br>
 And wreaths of flowers around it clung,<br>
 And over all was raised on high<br>
 A canopy of saffron dye,<br>
 While like the sun of morning shone<br>
 The billiant blooms that lay thereon.<br>
 That glorious litter Ráma eyed.<br>
 And spake to Lakshman by his side:<br>
 'Let Báli on the bier be placed<br>
 And with all funeral service graced.'<br>
 Sugríva then with many a tear<br>
 Drew Báli's body to the bier<br>
 Whereon, with weeping Angad's aid,<br>
 The relics of the chief were laid<br>
 Neath many a vesture's varied fold,<br>
 And wreaths and ornaments and gold.<br>
 Then King Sugríva bade them speed<br>
 The obsequies by law decreed:<br>
 'Let Vánars lead the way and throw<br>
 Rich gems around them as they go,<br>
 And be the chosen bearers near<br>
 Behind them, laden with the bier.<br>
 No costly rite may you deny,<br>
 Used when the proudest monarchs die:<br>
 As for a king of widest sway.<br>
 Perform his obsequies to-day,'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_355"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 355</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Sugríva gave his high behest;<br>
 Then Princely Tára and the rest,<br>
 With little Angad weeping, led<br>
 The long procession of the dead.<br>
 Behind the funeral litter came,<br>
 With Tára first, each widowed dame<br>
 In tears and shrieks her loss deplored,<br>
 Add cried aloud, My lord! My lord!<br>
 While wood and hill and valley sent<br>
 In echoes back the shrill lament.<br>
 Then on a low and sandy isle<br>
 Was reared the hero's funeral pile<br>
 By crowds of toiling Vánars, where<br>
 The mountain stream ran fresh and fair.<br>
 The Vánar chiefs, a noble band,<br>
 Had laid the litter on the sand,<br>
 And stood a little space apart,<br>
 Each mourning in his inmost heart.<br>
 But Tára, when her weeping eye<br>
 Saw Báli, on the litter lie,<br>
 Laid his dear head upon her lap,<br>
 And wailed aloud her dire mishap;<br>
 'O mighty Vánar, lord and king,<br>
 To whose fond breast brave, and bold,<br>
 Rise, look upon me as of old.<br>
 Rise up, my sovereign, dost thou see<br>
 A crowd of subjects weep for thee?<br>
 Still o'er thy face, though breath has fled.<br>
 The joyous light of life is spread:<br>
 Thus around the sun, although he set,<br>
 A crimson glory lingers yet.<br>
 Death clad in Ráma's form to-day<br>
 Hast dragged thee from the world away.<br>
 One shaft from his tremendous bow<br>
 Dooms us to widowhood and woe.<br>
 Hast thou, O Vánar King, no eyes<br>
 Thy weeping wives to recognize,<br>
 Who for the length of way unmeet<br>
 Have followed thee with weary feet?<br>
 Yet every moon-faced beauty here<br>
 By thee, O King was counted dear.<br>
 Lord of the Vánar race, hast thou<br>
 No eyes to see Sugríva now?<br>
 About thee stands in mournful mood<br>
 A sore-afflicted multitude,<br>
 And Tára and thy lords of state<br>
 Around their monarch weep and wait,<br>
 Arise my lord, with gentle speech,<br>
 As was thy wont, dismissing each,<br>
 Then in the forest will we play<br>
 And love shall make our spirits gay.'<br>
     The Vánar dames raised Tára, drowned<br>
 In floods of sorrow, from the ground;<br>
 And Angad with Sugríva's aid,<br>
 O'erwhelmed with anguish and dismayed,<br>
 Weeping for his departed sire,<br>
 Placed Bali's body on the pyre:<br>
 Then lit the flame, and round the dead<br>
 Paced slowly with a mourner's tread.<br>
 Thus with full rites the funeral train.<br>
 Performed the service for the slain,<br>
 Then sought the flowing stream and made<br>
 Libations to the parted shade.<br>
 There, setting Angad first in place,<br>
 The chieftains of the Vanar race,<br>
 With Tára and Sugríva, shed<br>
 The water that delights the dead.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_612"></a><a href="ry299.htm#fr_612">354:1</a>  The Vánar chief, not to be confounded
 with Tárá.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry300.htm">Next: Canto XXVI.: The Coronation.</a></center>
 </body>