<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry289.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry291.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVI.: THE FALL OF BÁLI.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Tárá with the starry eyes  <a name="fr_582"></a><a href="#fn_582"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Her counsel gave with burning sighs.<br>
 But Báli, by her prayers unmoved,<br>
 Spurned her advice, and thus reproved:<br>
 'How may this insult, scathe, aud scorn<br>
 By me, dear love, be tamely born?<br>
 My brother, yea my foe, comes nigh<br>
 Aud dares me forth with shout and cry.<br>
 Learn, trembler! that the valiant, they<br>
 Who yield no step in battle fray,<br>
 Will die a thousand deaths but ne'er<br>
 An unavenged dishonour bear.<br>
 Nor, O my love, be thou dismayed<br>
 Though Ráma lend Sugríva aid,<br>
 For one so pure and duteous, one<br>
 Who loves the right, all sin will shun,<br>
 Release me from thy soft embrace,<br>
 And with thy dames thy steps retrace:<br>
 Enough already, O mine own,<br>
 Of love and sweet devotion shown.<br>
 Drive all thy fear and doubt away;<br>
 I seek Sugríva in the fray<br>
 His boisterous rage and pride to still,<br>
 And tame the foe I would not kill.<br>
 My fury, armed with brandished trees,<br>
 Shall strike Sugríva to his knees:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_343"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 343</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Nor shall the humbled foe withstand<br>
 The blows of my avenging hand,<br>
 When, nerved by rage and pride, I beat<br>
 The traitor down beneath my feet.<br>
 Thou, love, hast lent thine own sweet aid,<br>
 And all thy tender care displayed;<br>
 Now by my life, by these who yearn<br>
 To serve thee well, I pray thee turn.<br>
 But for a while, dear dame, I go<br>
 To come triumphant o'er the foe.'<br>
     Thus Báh spake in gentlest tone:<br>
 Soft arms about his neck were thrown;<br>
 Then round her lord the lady went<br>
 With sad steps slow and reverent.<br>
 She stood in solemn guise to bless<br>
 With prayers for safety and success,<br>
 Then with her train her chamber sought<br>
 By grief and racking fear distraught.<br>
     With serpent's pantings fierce and fast<br>
 King Báli from the city passed.<br>
 His glance, as each quick breath he drew,<br>
 Around to find the foe he threw,<br>
 And saw where fierce Sugríva showed<br>
 His form with golden hues that glowed,<br>
 And, as a fire resplendent, stayed<br>
 To meet his foe in arms arrayed.<br>
 When Báli, long-armed chieftain, found<br>
 Sugríva stationed on the ground,<br>
 Impelled by warlike rage he braced<br>
 His warrior garb about his waist,<br>
 And with his mighty arm raised high<br>
 Rushed at Sugríva with a cry.<br>
 But when Sugríva, fierce and bold,<br>
 Saw Báli with his chain of gold.<br>
 His arm he heaved, his hand he closed,<br>
 And face to face his foe opposed.<br>
 To him whose eyes with fury shone,<br>
 In charge imtpetuous rushing on,<br>
 Skilled in each warlike art and plan,<br>
 Báli with hasty words began:<br>
 'My ponderous hood, to fight addressed.<br>
 With fingers clenched and arm compressed.<br>
 Shall on thy death doomed brow descend<br>
 And, crashing down, thy life shall end.'<br>
 He spoke; and wild with rage and pride,<br>
 The fierce Sagríva thus replied:<br>
 'Thus let my arm begin the strife<br>
 And from thy body crush the life.'<br>
     Then Báli, wounded aud enraged,<br>
 With furious blows the battle waged.<br>
 Sugríva seemed, with blood-streams dyed,<br>
 A hill with fountains in his side.<br>
 But with his native force unspent<br>
 A Sál tree from the earth he rent,<br>
 And like the bolt of Indra smote<br>
 On Báli's head and chest and throat.<br>
 Bruised by the blows he could not shield,<br>
 Half vanquished Báli sank and reeled,<br>
 As sinks a vessel with her freight<br>
 Borne down by overwhelming weight.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Swift as Suparna's  <a name="fr_583"></a><a href="ry291.htm#fn_583"><font size="1">1</font></a> swiftest flight<br>
 In awful strength they rushed to fight:<br>
 So might the sun and moon on high<br>
 Encountering battle in the sky.<br>
 Fierce and more fierce, as fought the foes,<br>
 The furious rage of combat rose.<br>
 They warred with feet and arms and knees,<br>
 With nails and stones and boughs and trees,<br>
 And blows descending fast as rain<br>
 Dyed each dark form with crimson stain,<br>
 While like two thunder-clouds they met<br>
 With battle-cry and shout and threat.<br>
 Then Ráma saw Sugríva quail,<br>
 Marked his worn strength grow weak and fail.<br>
 Saw how he turned his wistful eye<br>
 To every quarter of the sky.<br>
 His friend's defeat he could not brook.<br>
 Bent on his shaft an eager look,<br>
 Then burned to slay the conquering foe,<br>
 And laid his arrow on the bow.<br>
 As to an orb the bow he drew<br>
 Forth from the string the arrow flew<br>
 Like Fate's tremendous discus hurled<br>
 By Yama  <a name="fr_584"></a><a href="ry291.htm#fn_584"><font size="1">2</font></a> forth to end the world.<br>
 So loud the din that every bird<br>
 The bow-string's clans with terror heard,<br>
 And wildly fled the affrighted deer<br>
 As though the day of doom were near,<br>
 So, deadly as the serpent's fang,<br>
 Forth from the string the arrow sprang.<br>
 Like the red lightning's flash and flame<br>
 It flew unerring to its aim,<br>
 And, hissing murder through the air,<br>
 Pierced Báli's breast, and quivered there.<br>
 Struck by the shaft that flew so well<br>
 The mighty Vánar reeled and fell,<br>
 As earthward Indra's flag they pull<br>
 When As'víní's fair moon is full  <a name="fr_585"></a><a href="ry291.htm#fn_585"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_582"></a><a href="ry290.htm#fr_582">342:1b</a>  Tárá means 'star'. The poet plays
 upon the name by comparing her beauty
 to that of the Lord of stars, the Moon.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry291.htm">Next: Canto XVII.: Báli's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>