<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry302.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry304.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIX.: HANUMÁN'S COUNSEL.</h3>
 <p>
 No flash of lightning lit the sky.<br>
 No cloudlet marred the blue on high.<br>
 The Saras  <a name="fr_631"></a><a href="#fn_631"><font size="1">3b</font></a> missed the welcome rain,<br>
 The moon's full beams were bright again.<br>
 Sugríva, lapped in bliss, forgot<br>
 The claims of faith, or heeded not;<br>
 And by alluring joys misled<br>
 The path of falsehood learned to tread<br>
 In careless ease he passed each hour,<br>
 And dallied in his lady's bower<br>
 Each longing of his heart was stilled,<br>
 And every lofty hope fulfilled.<br>
 With royal Rumá by his side,<br>
 Or Tará yet a dearer bride,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_360"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 360</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spent each joyous day and night<br>
 In revelry and wild delight,<br>
 Like Indra whom the nymphs entice<br>
 To taste the joys of Paradise.<br>
 The power to courtiers' hands resigned,<br>
 To all their acts his eyes were blind.<br>
 All doubt, all fear he cast aside<br>
 And lived with pleasure for his guide.<br>
 But sage Hanumán, firm and true,<br>
 Whose heart the lore of Scripture knew,<br>
 Well trained to meet occasion, trained<br>
 In all by duty's law ordained,<br>
 Strove with his prudent speech to find<br>
 *Set* access to the monarch's mind.<br>
 He, skilled in every gentle art<br>
 Of eloquence that wins the heart,<br>
 Sugríva from his trance to wake,<br>
 His salutary counsel spake:<br>
   'The realm is won, thy name advanced,<br>
 The glory of thy house enhanced,<br>
 And now thy foremost care should he<br>
 To aid the friends who succoured thee.<br>
 He who is firm and faithful found<br>
 To friendly ties in honour bound,<br>
 Will see his name and fame increase<br>
 Wide sway is his who truly boasts<br>
 That friends and treasure, self and hosts,<br>
 Are blest in one harmonious whole,<br>
 Are subject to his firm control.<br>
 Do thou, whose footsteps never stray<br>
 From the clear bounds of duty's way.<br>
 Assist, as honour bids thee, now<br>
 Thy friends, observant of thy vow.<br>
 For if all cares we lay not by.<br>
 And to our friend's assistance fly.<br>
 We, after, toil in idle haste,<br>
 And all the late endeavour waste.<br>
 Up! nor the promised help delay<br>
 Until the hour have slipped away.<br>
 Up! and with Raghu's son renew<br>
 The search for Sitá lost to view.<br>
 The hour is come: he hears the call,<br>
 But not on thee reproaches fall<br>
 From him who labours to repress<br>
 His eager spirit's restlessness.<br>
 Long joined to thee in friendly ties<br>
 He made thy fame and fortune rise,<br>
 In gentle gifts by none excelled.<br>
 In splendid might unparalleled.<br>
 Up, to his succour, King! repay<br>
 The favour of that prosperous day,<br>
 And to thy bravest captains send<br>
 Prompt mandates to assist thy friend,<br>
 Tbe cry for help thou wilt not spurn<br>
 Although no grace demands return:<br>
 And wilt thou not thine aid afford<br>
 To him who realm and life restored?<br>
 Exert thy power, and thou hast won<br>
 The love of Dasaratha's son:<br>
 And will then for his summons wait,<br>
 And till he call thee, hesitate?<br>
 Think not the hero needs thy power<br>
 To save him in the desperate hour:<br>
 He with his arrows could subdue<br>
 The Gods and all the demon crew,<br>
 And only waits that he may see<br>
 Redeemed the promise made by thee.<br>
 For thee he risked his life and fought,<br>
 For thee that great deliverance wrought.<br>
 Then let us trace through earth and skies<br>
 His lady wheresoe'er she lies.<br>
 Through realms above, beneath, we flee,<br>
 And plant our footsteps on the sea.<br>
 Tnen why, O Lord of Vanary, still<br>
 Delay us waiting for thy will?<br>
 Give thy commands, O King, and say<br>
 What task has each and where the way.<br>
 Before thee myriad Vanars stand<br>
 To sweep through heaven, o'er seas and land.'<br>
   Sugriva heard the timely rede<br>
 That roused him in the day of need,<br>
 And thus to Nila prompt and brave<br>
 His hest the imperial Vanar gave:<br>
     'Go, Nila, to the distant hosts<br>
 That keep in arms their several posts,<br>
 And all the armies that protect<br>
 The quarters,  <a name="fr_632"></a><a href="ry304.htm#fn_632"><font size="1">1</font></a> with their chiefs, collect.<br>
 To all the luminaries placed<br>
 In intermediate regions haste,<br>
 And bid each captain rise and lead<br>
 His squadrons to their king with speed<br>
 Do thou meanwhile with strictest care<br>
 All that the time requires prepare.<br>
 The loitering Vanar who delays<br>
 To gather here ere thrice five days,<br>
 Shall surely die for his offence,<br>
 Condemned for sinful negligence.'<br>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_629"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_629">359:1b</a>  The river on which Ayodhyá was built.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_630"></a><a href="ry302.htm#fr_630">359:2b</a>  I omit a <i>sloka</i> or f***s on altitude and lugratirade repeated word for word from the la Canto</p>
 <p><a name="fn_631"></a><a href="ry303.htm#fr_631">359:3b</a>  The Indian crane a magnificent bird
 easily domesticated.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry304.htm">Next: Canto XXX.: Ráma's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>