<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry304.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry306.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXI.: THE ENVOY.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Ráma spoke, and Lakshman then<br>
 Made answer to the prince of men:<br>
 'Yea, if the Vánar, undeterred<br>
 By fear of vengeance, break his word,<br>
 Loss of his royal power ere long<br>
 Shall pay the traitor for the wrong,<br>
 Nor deem I him so void of sense<br>
 To brave the bitter consequence.<br>
 But if enslaved to joy he lie,<br>
 And scorn thy grace with blinded eye,<br>
 Then let him join his brother slain:<br>
 Unmeet were such a wretch to reign.<br>
 Quick rises, kindling in my breast,<br>
 The wrath that will not be repressed,<br>
 And bids me in my fury slay<br>
 The breaker of his faith to-day.<br>
 Let Báli's son thy consort trace<br>
 With bravest chiefs of Vánar race.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spoke the hero, and aglow<br>
 With rage of battle seized his bow.<br>
 But Ráma thus in gentler mood<br>
 With fitting words his speech renewed:<br>
 'No hero with a soul like thine<br>
 To paths of sin will e'er incline.<br>
 He who his angry heart can tame<br>
 Is worthiest of a hero's name.<br>
 Not thine, my brother, be the part<br>
 So alien from the tender heart,<br>
 Nor let thy feet by wrath misled<br>
 Forsake the path they loved to tread.<br>
 From harsh and angry words abstain:<br>
 With gentle speech a hearing gain,<br>
 And tax Sugríva with the crime<br>
 Of failing faith and wasted time.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Lakshman, bravest of the brave,<br>
 Obeyed the best that Ráma gave,<br>
 To whom devoting every thought<br>
 The Vánar's royal town he sought.<br>
 As Mandar's mountain heaves on high<br>
 His curved peak soaring to the sky,<br>
 So Lakshman showed, his dread bow bent<br>
 Like Indra's  <a name="fr_635"></a><a href="#fn_635"><font size="1">1</font></a> in the firmament.<br>
 His brother's wrath, his brother's woe<br>
 Inflamed his soul to fiercest glow.<br>
 The tallest trees to earth were cast<br>
 As furious on his way he passed,<br>
 And where he stepped, so fiercely fleet,<br>
 The stones were shivered by his feet.<br>
 He reached Kishkindhá's city deep<br>
 Embosomed where the hills were steep,<br>
 Where street and open square were lined<br>
 With legions of the Vánar kind.<br>
 Then, as his lips with fury swelled,<br>
 The lord of Raghu's line beheld<br>
 A stream of Vánar chiefs outpoured<br>
 To do obeisance to their lord.<br>
 But when the mighty prince in view<br>
 Of the thick coming Vánars drew,<br>
 They turned them in amaze to seize<br>
 Crags of the rock and giant trees.<br>
 He saw, and fiercer waxed his ire,<br>
 As oil lends fury to the fire.<br>
 Scarce bad the Vánar chieftains seen<br>
 That wrathful eye, that troubled mien<br>
 Fierce as the God's who rules the dead,<br>
 When, turned in wild affright, they fled,<br>
 Speeding in breathless terror all<br>
 Sought King Sugríva's council hall,<br>
 And there made known their tale of fear,<br>
 That Lakshman wild with rage, was near.<br>
 The king, untroubled by alarms,<br>
 Held Tára in his amorous arms,<br>
 And in the distant bower with her<br>
 Heard not each clamorous messenger.<br>
 Then, summoned at the lords' behest<br>
 Forth from the city portals pressed.<br>
 Each like some elephant or cloud,<br>
 The Vánars in a trembling cloud:<br>
 Fierce warriors all with massive jaws<br>
 And terrors of their tiger claws.<br>
 Some matched ten elephants, and some<br>
 A hundred's strength could overcome.<br>
 Some chieftains, mightier than the rest,<br>
 Ten times a hundred's force possessed.<br>
 With eyes of fury Lakshman viewed<br>
 The Vánars' tree-armed multitude.<br>
 Thus garrisoned from side to side<br>
 The city walls assault defied.<br>
 Beyond the moat that girt the wall<br>
 Advanced the Vánar chiefs; and all<br>
 Upon the plain in *numbers *made,(?)<br>
 Impetuous warriors, stood arrayed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_363"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 363</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Red at the sight flashed Lakshman's eyes,<br>
 His bosom heaved tumultuous sighs,<br>
 And forth the fire of fury broke<br>
 Like flame that flashes through the smoke.<br>
 Like some fierce snake the hero stood:<br>
 His bow recalled the expanded hood,<br>
 And in his shaft-head bright and keen<br>
 The flickering of its tongue was seen:<br>
 And in his own all-conquering might<br>
 The venom of its deadly bite.<br>
 Prince Angad marked his angry look,<br>
 And every hope his heart forsook.<br>
 Then, his large eyes with fury red,<br>
 To Angad Lakshman turned and said:<br>
     'Go tell the king that Lakshman waits<br>
 For audience at the city gates,<br>
 Whose heart, O tamer of thy foes,<br>
 Is heavy with his brother's woes.<br>
 Bid him to Ráma's word attend,<br>
 And ask if he will aid his friend.<br>
 Go, let the king my message learn:<br>
 Then hither with all speed return.'<br>
     Prince Angad heard and wild with grief<br>
 Cried as he looked upon the chief:<br>
 ''Tis Lakshman's self: impelled by ire<br>
 He seeks the city of my sire.'<br>
 At the fierce words and furious look<br>
 Of Raghu'a son he quailed and shook,<br>
 Back through the city gates he sped,<br>
 And, laden with the tale of dread,<br>
 Sought King Sugríva, filled his ears<br>
 And Rumá's with his doubts and fears.<br>
 To Rumá and the king he bent,<br>
 And clasped their feet most reverent,<br>
 Clasped the dear feet of Tárá, too,<br>
 And told the startling tale anew.<br>
     But King Sugríva's ear was dulled,<br>
 By love and wine and languor lulled,<br>
 Nor did the words that Angad spake<br>
 The slumberer from his trance awake.<br>
 But soon as Raghu's son came nigh<br>
 The startled Vánars raised a cry,<br>
 And strove to win his grace, while dread<br>
 Each anxious heart disquieted.<br>
 They saw, and, as they gathered round,<br>
 Rose from the mighty throng a sound<br>
 Like torrents when they downward dash,<br>
 Or thunder with the lightning's flash.<br>
 The shouting of the Vánars broke<br>
 Sugriva's slumber, and he woke:<br>
 Still with the wine his eyes were red,<br>
 His neck with flowers was garlanded.<br>
 Roused at the voice of Angad came<br>
 Two Vánar lords of rank and fame;<br>
 One Yaksha, one Prabhava hight,-<br>
 Wise counsellors of gain and right.<br>
 They came and raised their voices high,<br>
 And told that Raghu's son was nigh:<br>
 'Two brothers steadfast in their truth,<br>
 Each glorious in the bloom of youth,<br>
 Worthy of rule, have left the skies,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And clothed their forms in men's disguise.<br>
 One at thy gates, in warlike hands<br>
 Holding his mighty weapon, stands.<br>
 His message is the charioteer<br>
 That brings the eager envoy near,<br>
 Urged onward by his bold intent,<br>
 And by the hest of Ráma sent. <a name="fr_636"></a><a href="ry306.htm#fn_636"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The gathered Vánars saw and fled,<br>
 And raised aloud their cry of dread.<br>
 Son of Queen Tárá, Angad ran<br>
 To parley with the godlike man.<br>
 Still fiery-eyed with rage and hate<br>
 Stands Lakshman at the city gate,<br>
 And trembling Vanars scarce can fly<br>
 Scathed by the lightning of his eye.<br>
 Go with thy son, thy kith and kin,<br>
 The favour of the prince to win,<br>
 And bow thy reverent head that so<br>
 His fiery wrath may cease to glow.<br>
 What righteous Ráma bids thee, do,<br>
 And to thy plighted word be true.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_635"></a><a href="ry305.htm#fr_635">362:1</a>  The rainbow.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry306.htm">Next: Canto XXXII.: Hanuman's Counsel.</a></center>
 </body>