<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry311.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry313.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVIII.: SUGRÍVA'S DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus all the princely Vánars, true<br>
 To their appointed tasks, withdrew.<br>
 Suigríva deemed already done<br>
 The work he planned for Raghu's son.<br>
 Then Lakshman gently spoke and cheered<br>
 Sugríva for his valour feared:<br>
 ' Now, chieftain, if thy will be so.<br>
 Forth from Kishkindhá let us go.'<br>
 Sugríva's heart swelled high with pride<br>
 As to the prince he thus replied:<br>
 'Come, speed we forth without delay:<br>
 'Tis mine thy mandate to obey.'<br>
 Sugríva bade the dames adieu,<br>
 And Tárá and the rest withdrew.<br>
 Then at their chieftain's summons came<br>
 The Vánars first in rank and fame,<br>
 A trusty brave and reverent band,<br>
 Meet e'en before a queen to stand.<br>
 They at his call made haste to bring<br>
 The litter of the glorious king.<br>
 ' Mount, O my friend.' Sugríva cried,<br>
 And straight Sumitrá's son complied.<br>
 Then took by Lakshman's side his place<br>
 The sovereign of the woodland race,<br>
 Upraised by Vánars, fleet and strong.<br>
 Who bore the glittering load along.<br>
 On high above his royal head<br>
 A paly canopy was spread,<br>
 And chouries white in many a hand<br>
 The forehead of the monarch fanned,<br>
 And shell and drum and song and shout<br>
 Pealed round him as the king passed out.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_370"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 370</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 About the monarch went a throng<br>
 Of Vánar warriors brave and strong,<br>
 As onward to the mountain shade<br>
 Where Ráma dwelt his way he made.<br>
 Soon as the lovely spot he viewed<br>
 Where Ráma lived in solitude,<br>
 The Vánar monarch, far-renowed,<br>
 With Lakshman, lightly stepped to ground,<br>
 And to the son of Raghu went<br>
 Joining his raised hands reverent.<br>
 As their great leader raised his hands,<br>
 So suppliant stood the Vánar bands.<br>
 Well pleased the son of Raghu saw<br>
 Those legions, hushed in reverent awe,<br>
 Stand silent like the tranquil floods<br>
 That raise their hands of lotus buds.<br>
 But Ráma, when the king, to greet<br>
 His friend, had bowed him at his feet,<br>
 Raised him who ruled the Vanar race,<br>
 And held him in a close embrace:<br>
 Then, when his arms he had unknit,<br>
 Besought him by his side to sit,<br>
 And thus with gentle words the best<br>
 Of men the Vánar king addressed:<br>
     'The prince who well his days divides,<br>
 And knows aright the times and tides<br>
 To follow duty, joy, or gain,<br>
 He, only he, deserves to reign.<br>
 But he who wealth and virtue leaves,<br>
 And every hour to pleasure cleaves,<br>
 False from his bliss like him who wakes<br>
 From slumber on a branch that breaks.<br>
 True king is he who smites his foes,<br>
 And favour to his servants shows,<br>
 And of that fruit makes timely use<br>
 Which virtue, wealth, and joy produce.<br>
 The hour is come that bids thee rise<br>
 To aid me in my enterprise.<br>
 Then call thy nobles to debate,<br>
 And with their help deliberate.'<br>
     'Lost was my power,' the king replied,<br>
 'All strength had fled, all hope had died<br>
 The Vánars owned another lord,<br>
 But by thy grace was all restored.<br>
 All this, O conqueror of the foe,<br>
 To thee and Lakshman's aid I owe<br>
 And his should be the villain's shame<br>
 Who durst deny the sacred claim.<br>
 These Vánar chiefs of noblest birth<br>
 Have at my bidding roamed the earth,<br>
 And brought from distant regions all<br>
 Our legions at their monarch's call:<br>
 Fierce bears with monkey troops combined,<br>
 And apes of every varied kind,<br>
 Terrific in their forms, who dwell<br>
 In grove and wood and bosky dell:<br>
 The bright Gaudharvas' brood, the seed<br>
 Of Gods, <a name="fr_651"></a><a href="#fn_651"><font size="1">1</font></a>  they change their shapes at need.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Each with his legions in array,<br>
 Hither, O Prince, they make their way,<br>
 They come: and tens of millions swell<br>
 To numbers that no tongue may tell. <a name="fr_652"></a><a href="ry313.htm#fn_652"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 For thee their armies will unite<br>
 With chiefs, Mahendra's peers in might.<br>
 From Meru and from Vindhya's chain<br>
 They come like clouds that bring the rain.<br>
 These round thee to the war will go,<br>
 To smite to earth thy demon foe;<br>
 Will slay the Rákshas and restore<br>
 Thy consort when the fight is o'er."<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_651"></a><a href="ry312.htm#fr_651">370:1</a>  See Book I. Canto XVI.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry313.htm">Next: Canto XXXIX.: The Vánar Host.</a></center>
 </body>