<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry318.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry320.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLV.: THE DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 Away, away the Vánars<br>
 Like locusts o'er the land outspread.<br>
 To northern realms where rising high<br>
 The King of Mountains cleaves the sky,<br>
 Fierce S'atabal with vast array<br>
 Of Vánariors led the way.<br>
 Far southward, as his lord decreed,<br>
 Wise Hanumán Wind-God's seed,<br>
 With Angad his swift way pursued,<br>
 And Tára's warlike multitude,<br>
 Strong Vinata with all his band<br>
 Betook him to the eastern land,<br>
 And brave Sushen in eager quest<br>
 Sped swiftly to the gloomy west.<br>
 Each Vánarftain sought with speed<br>
 The quarter by his king decreed,<br>
 While from his legions rose on high<br>
 The shout and boast and battle cry:<br>
 'We will restore the dame and beat<br>
 The robber down beneath our feet.<br>
 My arm alone shall win the day<br>
 From Rávanin single fray,<br>
 Shall rob the robber of his life,<br>
 And rescue Ráma's captive wife<br>
 All trembling in her fear and woe.<br>
 Here, comrades, rest: no farther go:<br>
 For I will vanquish hell, and she<br>
 Shall by this arm again be free.<br>
 The rooted mountains will I rend,<br>
 The mightiest trees will break and bend.<br>
 Earth to her deep foundations cleave,<br>
 And make the calm sea throb and heave.<br>
 A hundred leagues from steep to steep<br>
 In desperate bound my feet shall leap.<br>
 My steps shall tread unchecked and free.<br>
 Through woods, o'er land and hill and sea,<br>
 Range as they list from flood to fell,<br>
 And wander through the depths of hell.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry320.htm">Next: Canto XLVI.: Sugríva's.</a></center>
 </body>