<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry313.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry315.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XL.: THE ARMY OF THE EAST.</h3>
 <p>
 With practiced eye the king reviewed<br>
 The Vánars' counties multitude,<br>
 And, joying that his hest was done,<br>
 Thus spake to Raghu's mighty son:<br>
 'See, all the Vánar hosts who fear<br>
 My sovereign might are gathered here.<br>
 Chiefs strong as Indra's self, who speed<br>
 Wher'er they list, these armies lead.<br>
 Fierce and terrific to the view<br>
 As Daityas or the Dánav <a name="fr_661"></a><a href="#fn_661"><font size="1">2b</font></a> crew,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_372"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 372</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Famed in all lands for souls afire<br>
 With lofty thoughts, they never tire,<br>
 O'er hill and vale they wander free,<br>
 And islets of the distant sea.<br>
 And these gathered myriads, all<br>
 Will serve thee, Ráma, at thy call.<br>
 Whate'er thy heart advises, say:<br>
 Thy mandates will the host obey.'<br>
     Then answered Ráma, as he pressed<br>
 The Vánar monarch to his breast:<br>
 'O search for my lost Sítá, strive<br>
 To find her if she still survive:<br>
 And in thy wondrous wisdom trace<br>
 Fierce Rávan to his dwelling-place.<br>
 And when by toil and search we know<br>
 Where Sítá lies and where the foe,<br>
 With thee, dear friend, will I devise<br>
 Fit means to end the enterprise.<br>
 Not mine, not Lakshman's is the power<br>
 To guide us in the doubtful hour.<br>
 Thou, sovereign of the *Vanars, thou<br>
 Must be our hope and leader now.'<br>
     He ceased: at King Sugríva's call<br>
 Near came a Vánar strong and tall.<br>
 Huge as a towering mountain, loud<br>
 As some tremendous thunder cloud,<br>
 A prince who warlike legions led:<br>
 To him his sovereign turned and said:<br>
 'Go, take ten thousand  <a name="fr_662"></a><a href="#fn_662"><font size="1">1</font></a> of our race<br>
 Well trained in lore of time and place,<br>
 And search the eastern region; through<br>
 Groves, woods, and hills thy way pursue,<br>
 There seek for Sítá, trace the spot<br>
 Where Rávan hides, and weary not.<br>
 Search for the captive in the caves<br>
 Of mountains, and by woods and waves.<br>
 To Surjú, <a name="fr_663"></a><a href="#fn_663"><font size="1">2</font></a> Kauá*ikí, <a name="fr_664"></a><a href="#fn_664"><font size="1">3</font></a> repair,<br>
 Bhagírath's daughter <a name="fr_665"></a><a href="#fn_665"><font size="1">4</font></a> fresh and fair.<br>
 Search mighty *Yámun's <a name="fr_666"></a><a href="#fn_666"><font size="1">5</font></a> peak, explore<br>
 Swift Yamu*ná's <a name="fr_667"></a><a href="#fn_667"><font size="1">6</font></a> delightful shore,<br>
 Sarasvati <a name="fr_668"></a><a href="#fn_668"><font size="1">7</font></a> and Sindhu's <a name="fr_669"></a><a href="#fn_669"><font size="1">8</font></a> tide,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And rapid S'ona's <a name="fr_670"></a><a href="#fn_670"><font size="1">1b</font></a> pebbly side.<br>
 Then roam afar by Mahí's <a name="fr_671"></a><a href="#fn_671"><font size="1">2b</font></a> bed<br>
 Where Kálamahí's groves are spread.<br>
 Go where the silken tissue shines,<br>
 Go to the land of silver mines. <a name="fr_672"></a><a href="#fn_672"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 Visit each isle and mountain steep<br>
 And city circled by the deep,<br>
 And distant villages that high<br>
 About the peaks of Mandar lie.<br>
 Speed over Yavadwipa's land, <a name="fr_673"></a><a href="#fn_673"><font size="1">4b</font></a><br>
 And see Mount S'is'ir <a name="fr_674"></a><a href="#fn_674"><font size="1">5b</font></a> proudly stand<br>
 Uplifting to the skies his head<br>
 By Gods and Dánavs visited.<br>
 Search each ravine and mountain pass,<br>
 Each tangled thicket deep in grass.<br>
 Search every cave with utmost care<br>
 If haply Ráma's queen be there.<br>
 Then pass beyond the sounding sea<br>
 Where heavenly beings wander free,<br>
 And S'ona's <a name="fr_675"></a><a href="#fn_675"><font size="1">6b</font></a> waters swift and strong<br>
 With ruddy billows foam along.<br>
 Search where his shelving banks descend,<br>
 Search where the hanging woods extend<br>
 Try if the pathless thickets screen<br>
 The robber and the captive queen.<br>
 Search where the torrent floods that rend<br>
 The mountain to the plains descend:<br>
 Search dark abysses where they rave,<br>
 Search mountain slope and wood and cave<br>
 Then on with rapid feet and gain<br>
 The inlands of the fearful main<br>
 Where, tortured by the tempest's lash,<br>
 Against rude rocks the billows d*ash:<br>
 An ocean like a sable cloud,<br>
 Whose margent monstrous serpents crowd;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_373"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 373</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 An ocean rising with a roar<br>
 To beat upon an iron shore.<br>
 On, onward still! your feet shall tread<br>
 Shores of the sea whose waves are red,<br>
 Where spreading wide your eyes shall see<br>
 The guilt-tormenting cotton tree  <a name="fr_676"></a><a href="#fn_676"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And the wild spot where Garud  <a name="fr_677"></a><a href="#fn_677"><font size="1">2</font></a> dwells<br>
 Which gems adorn and ocean shells,<br>
 High as Kallása, nobly decked,<br>
 Wrought by the heavenly architect.  <a name="fr_678"></a><a href="#fn_678"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 Hnge giants named Mandehas  <a name="fr_679"></a><a href="#fn_679"><font size="1">4</font></a> there<br>
 In each foul shape they love to wear,<br>
 Numbing the soul with terror's chill,<br>
 Hang from the summit of the hill.<br>
 When darts the sun his earliest beam<br>
 They plunge them in the ocean stream,<br>
 New vigour from his rays obtain,<br>
 And hang upon the rocks again<br>
 Speed onward still: your steps shall be<br>
 At length beside the Milky Sea<br>
 Whose everv ripple as it curls<br>
 Gleams glorious with its wealth of pearls.<br>
 Amid that sea like pale clouds spread<br>
 The white Mount Rishabh  <a name="fr_680"></a><a href="#fn_680"><font size="1">5</font></a> rears his head.<br>
 About the mountain's glorious waist<br>
 Woods redolent of bloom are braced.<br>
 A lake where lotuses unfold<br>
 Their silver buds with threads of gold,<br>
 Sudar*s'an ever bright and fair<br>
 Where white swans sport, lies gleaming there,<br>
 The wandering Kinnar's  <a name="fr_681"></a><a href="#fn_681"><font size="1">6</font></a> dear resort,<br>
 Where heavenly nymphs and Yakshas  <a name="fr_682"></a><a href="#fn_682"><font size="1">7</font></a> sport.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 On! leave the Milky Sea behind:<br>
 Another flood your search shall find,<br>
 A waste of waters, wild and drear.<br>
 That chills each living heart with fear.<br>
 There see the horse's awful head,<br>
 Wrath-born, that flames in Ocean's bed. <a name="fr_683"></a><a href="#fn_683"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 There rises up a fearful cry<br>
 From the sea things that move thereby,<br>
 When, helpless, powerless for flight,<br>
 They gaze upon the horrid sight.<br>
 Past to the northern shore, and then<br>
 Beyond the flood three leagues and ten<br>
 Your wondering glances will behold<br>
 Mount Játarúpa  <a name="fr_684"></a><a href="#fn_684"><font size="1">2b</font></a> bright with gold.<br>
 There like the young moon pale of hue<br>
 The monstrous serpent  <a name="fr_685"></a><a href="#fn_685"><font size="1">3b</font></a> will ye view,<br>
 The earth's supporter, whose bright eyes<br>
 Resemble lotus leaves in size.<br>
 He rests upon the mountain's brow,<br>
 And all the Gods before him bow.<br>
 Ananta with a thousand heads<br>
 His length in robes of azure spreads.<br>
 A triple-headed palm of gold--<br>
 Meet standard for the lofty-souled--<br>
 Springs towering from the mountain's crest<br>
 Beneath whose shade he loves to rest,<br>
 So that in eastern realms each God<br>
 May use it as a measuring-rod.<br>
 Beyond, with burning gold aglow,<br>
 The eastern steep his peaks will show,<br>
 Which in unrivalled glory rise<br>
 A hundred leagues to pierce the skies,<br>
 And all the neighbouring air is bright<br>
 With golden trees that clothe the height.<br>
 A lofty peak uprises there<br>
 Ten leagues in height and one league square<br>
 *Saumanas*, wrought of glistering gold,<br>
 Ne'er to be loosened from its hold.<br>
 There his first step Lord Vishnu placed<br>
 When through the universe he paced,<br>
 And with his second lightly pressed<br>
 The loftiest peak of Meru's crest.<br>
 When north of Jambudwíp  <a name="fr_686"></a><a href="#fn_686"><font size="1">4b</font></a> the sun<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_374"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 374</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 A portion of his course has run.<br>
 And hangs above this mountain height,<br>
 Then creatures see the genial light.<br>
 Vaikhánases, <a name="fr_687"></a><a href="#fn_687"><font size="1">1</font></a> saints far renowned,<br>
 And Bálaklulvas, <a name="fr_688"></a><a href="#fn_688"><font size="1">2</font></a> love the ground<br>
 Where in their glory half divine.<br>
 Touched by the morning glow, they shine<br>
 The light that flashes from that steep<br>
 Illumines all Sudars'andwip, <a name="fr_689"></a><a href="#fn_689"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 And on each creature, as it glows,<br>
 The sight and strength of life bestows.<br>
 Search well that mountain's woody side<br>
 If Rávan there his captive hide.<br>
 The rising sun, the golden hill<br>
 The air with growing splendours fill,<br>
 Till flashes from the east the red<br>
 Of morning with the light they shed.<br>
 This, where the sun begins his state,<br>
 Is earth and heaven's most eastern gate.<br>
 Through all the mountain forest seek<br>
 By waterfall and cave and peak.<br>
 Search every nook and bosky dell,<br>
 If Rávan there with Sítá dwell.<br>
 There, Vánars, there your steps must stay:<br>
 No farther eastward can ye stray.<br>
 Beyond no sun, no moon given light,<br>
 But all is sunk in endless night.<br>
 Thus far, O Vánar lords, may you<br>
 O'er sea and land your search pursue.<br>
 But wild and dark and known to none<br>
 Is the drear space beyond the sun.<br>
 That mountain whence the sun ascends<br>
 Your long and weary journey ends. <a name="fr_690"></a><a href="#fn_690"><font size="1">4</font></a><br>
 Now go, and in a month return,<br>
 And let success my praises earn,<br>
 He who beyond tho month shall stay<br>
 Will with his life the forfeit pay.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_660"></a><a href="ry313.htm#fr_660">面面面面面面面面面面面面面面面面1b:1b</a>  Gandhamádana, Angad, Tára, Indrajánu,
 Rambha, Durmukha, Hanumán,
 Nala, Da mukha, S'arabha, Kumuda,
 Vahni.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_661"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_661">面面面面面面面面面面面面面面面面2b:2b</a>  Daityas and Dánavas are fiends and
 enemies of the Gods, life the Titans of
 Greek mythology.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_662"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_662">372:1</a>  I reduce the unwieldy numbers of the
 original to more modest figures.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_663"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_663">372:2</a>  Sarayú now Sarjú is the river on which
 Ayodhyá was built.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_664"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_664">372:3</a>  Kaus'iki is a river which flows through
 Behar, commonly called Kosi.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_665"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_665">372:4</a>  Bhagirath's daughter is Ganga or the
 Ganges. The legend is told at length in Book
 I. Canto XLIV <i>The Descent of Gangá</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_666"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_666">372:5</a>  A mountain not identified.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_667"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_667">372:6</a>  The Jumna. The river is personified as
 the twin sister of Yama, and hence regarded
 as the daughter of the Sun.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_668"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_668">372:7</a>  The Sarasvatí (corruptly called Sursooty,
 is supposed to join the Ganges and
 Jumna at Prayág or Allahabad. It rises
 in the mountains bounding the north-east
 part of the province of Delhi, and running
 in a south-westerly direction becomes lost
 in the sands of the great desert.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_669"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_669">372:8</a>  The Sindhu is the Indus, the Sanskrit <i>s</i>
 becoming <i>h</i> in Persian and being in this
 instance dropped by the Greeks.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_670"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_670">372:1b</a>  The Sone which rises in the district of
 Nagpore and falls into the Ganges above
 Patna.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_671"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_671">372:2b</a>  Mahi* is a river rising in Malwa and
 falling into the gulf of Cambay after a
 westerly course of 280 miles.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_672"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_672">372:3b</a>  There is nothing to show what parts
 of the country the poet intended to denote
 as silk-producing and silver-producing.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_673"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_673">372:4b</a>  Yavadwipa means the island of Yava,
 wherever that may be.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_674"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_674">372:5b</a>  S'is'ir is said to be a mountain ridge
 projecting from the base of Meru on the
 south. WILSON'S <i>Vishnu Purána</i>, ed.
 Hall, Vol. II. p. 117.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_675"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_675">372:6b</a>  This appears to be some mythical
 stream and not the well-known Sone. The
 name means red-coloured.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_676"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_676">373:1</a>  A fabulous thorny rod of the cotton
 tree used for torturing the wicked in hell.
 The tree gives its name, Sálmali, to
 one of the seven Dwípas, or great divisions
 of the known continent: and also to a
 hell where the wicked are tormented with
 the pickles of the tree.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_677"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_677">373:2</a>  The king of the feathered creation.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_678"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_678">373:3</a>  Vis´vakarmá, the Muleiher of the Indian heaven.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_679"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_679">373:4</a>  "The terrific fiends named Mandehas
 attempt to devour the sun: for Brahmá
 denounced this curse upon them, that
 without the power to perish they should
 die every day (and revive by night) and
 therefore a fierce contest occurs (daily)
 between them and the sun."
 
 </p><p>
 WILSON'S Vishnu Purána. Vol.II. p. 250.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_680"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_680">373:5</a>  Said in the Vishnu Purána to be a ridge
 projecting from the base of Meru to the north.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_681"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_681">373:6</a>  Kinnars are centaurs reversed, beings
 with equine head and human bodies.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_682"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_682">373:7</a>  Yakshas are demi-gods attendant on
 "Ruyera"* the God of wealth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_683"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_683">373:1b</a>  Aurva was one of the descendants of
 Bhrigu From his wrath proceeded a flame
 that threatened to destroy the world, had
 not Aurva cast it into the ocean where it
 remained concealed, and having the face
 of a horse. The legend is told in the
 <i>Mahábharat</i>. I. 6*3*02.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_684"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_684">373:2b</a>  The word Játarupa means gold.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_685"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_685">373:3b</a>  The celebrated mythological serpent
 king Sesha, called also Ananta or the
 infinite, represented as bearing the earth
 on one of his thousand heads.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_686"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_686">373:4b</a>  Jambudwípa is in the centre of the
 seven great <i>dwípas</i> or continents into
 which the world is divided, and in the
 centre of Jambudwípa is the golden <a name="page_374"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 374</font></a>
 mountain Meru 84,000 yojans high, and
 crowned by the great city of Brahmá,
 Sse WILSON'S <i>Vishnu Purána</i>, Vol II,
 p. 110.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_687"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_687">374:1</a>  Vaikhánases are a race of hermit
 saints said to have sprung from the nails
 of Prajápati.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_688"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_688">374:2</a>  "The wife of Eratu, Samnnti, brought
 forth the sixty thousand Válakhilyas,
 pigmy sages, no bigger than a joint of the
 thumb, chaste, pious, resplendent as the
 rays of the Sun" WlLSOK'S <i>Vishnu
 Purána</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_689"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_689">374:3</a>  The continent in which Sudarsan or
 Meru stands, <i>i. e.</i> Jambudwip.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_690"></a><a href="ry314.htm#fr_690">374:4</a>  The names of some historical peoples
 which occur in this Canto and in the
 Cantos describing the south and north
 will he found in the ADDITIONAL NOTES.
 They are bare lists, not susceptible of a
 metrical version.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry315.htm">Next: Canto XLI.: The Army of The South.</a></center>
 </body>