<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry314.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry316.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLI.: THE ARMY OF THE SOUTH.</h3>
 <p>
 He gathered next a chosen band<br>
 For service in the southern land.<br>
 He summoned Níla son of Fire,<br>
 And, offspring of the eternal Sire,<br>
 Jámbaván bold and strong and tall.<br>
 And Hanumán, the best of all,<br>
 And many a valiant lord beside, <a name="fr_691"></a><a href="#fn_691"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 With Angad for their chief and guide.<br>
 'Go forth,' he cried, 'with all this host<br>
 Exploring to the southern coast:<br>
 The thousand peaks that Vindhya shows<br>
 Where every tree and creeper grows:<br>
 Where Narmadá's  <a name="fr_692"></a><a href="#fn_692"><font size="1">2b</font></a> sweet waters run,<br>
 And serpents bask them in the sun:<br>
 Where Krishnavení, <a name="fr_693"></a><a href="#fn_693"><font size="1">3b</font></a> currents flee,<br>
 And sparkles fair Godávaií. <a name="fr_694"></a><a href="#fn_694"><font size="1">4b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Through Mekhal, <a name="fr_695"></a><a href="#fn_695"><font size="1">5b</font></a> pass and Utkal's, <a name="fr_696"></a><a href="#fn_696"><font size="1">6b</font></a> land:<br>
 Go where Das'árna's, <a name="fr_697"></a><a href="#fn_697"><font size="1">7b</font></a> cities stand.<br>
 Avantí, <a name="fr_698"></a><a href="#fn_698"><font size="1">8b</font></a> seek, of high renown,<br>
 And Abravanti's, <a name="fr_699"></a><a href="#fn_699"><font size="1">9b</font></a> glorious town.<br>
 Search every hill and brook and cave<br>
 Where Dandak's woods their branches wave<br>
 Avomukh's, <a name="fr_700"></a><a href="#fn_700"><font size="1">10b</font></a> woody hill explore<br>
 Whose sides are bright with richest ore,.<br>
 lifting his glorious head on high<br>
 From bloomy groves that round him lie.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_375"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 375</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Search well his forests where the breeze<br>
 Blows fragrant from the sandal trees.<br>
 Then will you see Káverí's <a name="fr_701"></a><a href="#fn_701"><font size="1">1</font></a> stream<br>
 Whose pleasant waters glance and gleam,<br>
 And to the lovely banks entice<br>
 The sportive maids of Paradise.<br>
 High on the top of Malaya's <a name="fr_702"></a><a href="#fn_702"><font size="1">2</font></a> hill,<br>
 In holy musing, calm and still,<br>
 Sits, radiant as the Lord of Light,<br>
 Agastya, <a name="fr_703"></a><a href="#fn_703"><font size="1">3</font></a> noblest anchorite.<br>
 Soon as that lofty-thoughted lord<br>
 His high permission shall accord,<br>
 Pass Támraparní's <a name="fr_704"></a><a href="#fn_704"><font size="1">4</font></a> flood whose isles<br>
 Are loved by basking crocodiles.<br>
 The sandal woods that fringe her side<br>
 Those islets and her waters hide;<br>
 While, like an amorous matron, she<br>
 Speeds to her own dear lord the sea.<br>
 Thence hasting on your way behold<br>
 The Pándyas' <a name="fr_705"></a><a href="#fn_705"><font size="1">5</font></a> gates of pearl and gold.<br>
 Then, with your task maturely planned,<br>
 On ocean's shore your feet will stand.<br>
 Where, by Agastya's high decree,<br>
 Mahendra, <a name="fr_706"></a><a href="#fn_706"><font size="1">6</font></a> planted in the sea,<br>
 With tinted peaks against the tide<br>
 Rises in solitary pride,<br>
 And glorious in his golden glow<br>
 Spurns back the waves that beat below.<br>
 Fair mountain, bright with creepers' bloom<br>
 And every tint that trees assume,<br>
 Where Yaksha, God, and heavenly maid<br>
 Meet wandering in the lovely shade,<br>
 At changing moon and solemn tide<br>
 By Indra's presence glorified.<br>
 One hundred leagues in fair extent<br>
 An island <a name="fr_707"></a><a href="#fn_707"><font size="1">7</font></a> fronts the continent:<br>
 No man may tread its glitering shore<br>
 With utmost heed that isle explore,<br>
 For the fair country owns the sway<br>
 Of Rávan whom we burn to day.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 A mighty monster stands to keep<br>
 The passage of the southern deep,<br>
 Lifting her awful arms on high<br>
 She grasps e'en shadows as they fly.<br>
 Speed through that isle, and onward still<br>
 Where in mid sea the Flowery Hill <a name="fr_708"></a><a href="#fn_708"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Haises on high his bloomy head<br>
 By saints and angels visited.<br>
 There, with a hundred gleaming peaks<br>
 Bright as the sun, the sky he seeks,<br>
 One glorious peak the Lord of Day<br>
 Gilds ever with his loving ray;<br>
 Thereon ne'er yet the glances fell<br>
 Of thankless wretch or infidel.<br>
 Bow to that hill in reverence due,<br>
 And then once more your search pursue.<br>
 Beyond that glorious mountain hie,<br>
 And Súryaván, <a name="fr_709"></a><a href="#fn_709"><font size="1">2b</font></a> proud hill is nigh.<br>
 Your rapid course yet farther bend<br>
 Where Vaidyut's <a name="fr_710"></a><a href="#fn_710"><font size="1">3b</font></a> airy peaks ascend.<br>
 There trees of noblest sort, profuse<br>
 Of wealth, their kindly gifts produce.<br>
 Their precious fruits, O Vánars, taste,<br>
 The honey sip, and onward haste.<br>
 Next will ye see Mount Kunjar rise,<br>
 Who cheers with beauty hearts and eyes.<br>
 There is Agastya's <a name="fr_711"></a><a href="#fn_711"><font size="1">4b</font></a> mansion, decked<br>
 Bv heaven's all moulding architect.<br>
 Near Bhogavatí <a name="fr_712"></a><a href="#fn_712"><font size="1">5b</font></a> stands, the place<br>
 Where dwell the hosts of serpent race:<br>
 A broad-wayed city, walled and barred,<br>
 Which watchful legions keep and guard,<br>
 The fiercest of the serpent youth,<br>
 Each awful for his venomed tooth:<br>
 And throned in his imperial hall<br>
 Is Vásuki <a name="fr_713"></a><a href="#fn_713"><font size="1">6b</font></a> who rules them all.<br>
 Explore the serpent city well,<br>
 Search town and tower and citadel,<br>
 And scan each field and wood that lies<br>
 Around it, with your watchful eyes.<br>
 Beyond that spot your way pursue:<br>
 A noble mountain shall ye view,<br>
 Named Rishabh, like a mighty bull,<br>
 With gems made bright and beautiful.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_376"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 376</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 All trees of sandal flourish there<br>
 Of heavenly fragrance, rich and rare.<br>
 But, though they tempt your longing eyes,<br>
 Avoid to touch them, and be wise.<br>
 For Rohitas, a guardian band<br>
 Of fierce Gandharvas, round them stand,<br>
 Who five bright sovereign lords <a name="fr_714"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fn_714"><font size="1">1</font></a> obey,<br>
 In glory like the God of Day.<br>
 Here by good deeds a home is won.<br>
 With shapes like fire, the moon, the sun.<br>
 Here they who merit heaven by worth<br>
 Dwell on the confines of the earth.<br>
 There stay; beyond it, dark and drear,<br>
 Lies the departed spirits' sphere,<br>
 And, girt with darkness, far from bliss,<br>
 Is Yama's sad metropolis. <a name="fr_715"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fn_715"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 So far, my lords, o'er land and sea<br>
 Vour destined course is plain and free.<br>
 Beyond your steps you may not set,<br>
 Where living thing ne'er journeyed yet.<br>
 With utmost care these realms survey,<br>
 And all you meet upon the way.<br>
 And, when the lady's course is traced,<br>
 Back to your king, O Vánars, haste.<br>
 And he who tells me he has seen.<br>
 After long search, the Maithil queen,<br>
 Shall gain a noble guerdon: he<br>
 In power and bliss shall equal me.<br>
 Dear as my very life, above<br>
 His fellows in his master's love;<br>
 I call him, yea though stained with crime.<br>
 My kinsman from that happy time.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_691"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_691">374:1b</a>  Suhotra, S'arári, S'aragulma, Gain,
 Gavák-ha, Gavaya, Sushena, Gandhamádana,
 Ulkámukha, and Ananga.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_692"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_692">374:2b</a>  The modern Nerbudda.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_693"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_693">374:3b</a>  Krishnavení is mentioned in the <i>Vishnu
 Purnna</i> as 'the deep Krishnaven' '*
 but there appears to be no clue to its
 identification.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_694"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_694">374:4b</a>  The modern Godavery.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_695"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_695">374:5b</a>  The Mekbaias or Mekalas according
 to the Patánas live in the Vindhya hills,
 but here they appear among the peoples
 of the south.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_696"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_696">374:6b</a>  Utkal is still the native nameof Oriss*.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_697"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_697">374:7b</a>  The land of the people of the 'ten
 forts.' Professor Hall in a note on WlL.-
 SONS <i>Vishnu Purana</i>, Vol. II. p.160 says:
 "The oral traditions of the vicinity to this
 day assign the nameof Dasarna to a region
 lying to the east of the District of
 Cbundeyree."</p>
 <p><a name="fn_698"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_698">374:8b</a>  Avantí is one of the ancient names of
 the celebrated Ujjayin or Oujein in Central
 India.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_699"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_699">374:9b</a>  Not identified</p>
 <p><a name="fn_700"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_700">374:10b</a>  Ayemukh means iron faced. The
 mountun is not identified.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_701"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_701">375:1</a>  The Káverí or modern Cauvery is
 well known and has always borne the
 same appellation, being the Chaberis of
 Ptolemy.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_702"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_702">375:2</a>  One of the seven principal mountain
 chains: the southern portion of the Western
 Gháts.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_703"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_703">375:3</a>  Agastya is the great sage who has
 already frequently appeared as Ráma's
 friend and benefactor.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_704"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_704">375:4</a>  Támraparni is a river rising in Malaya.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_705"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_705">375:5</a>  The Pándyas are a people of the Decean.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_706"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_706">375:6</a>  Mahendra is the chain of hills that
 extends from Orissa and the northern
 Sircars to Gondwána, part of which near
 Ganjam is still called Mahendra Malay
 or hills of Mahendra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_707"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_707">375:7</a>  Lanká, Sinhaladvípa, Sarandib, or
 Ceylon,</p>
 <p><a name="fn_708"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_708">375:1b</a>  The Flowery Hill of course is mythical.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_709"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_709">375:2b</a>  The whole of the geography south of
 Lanká is of course mythical. Súryaván
 means Sunny.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_710"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_710">375:3b</a>  Vaidyut means connected with lightning.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_711"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_711">375:4b</a>  Agastya is here placed far to the south
 of Lanká. Earlier in this Canto he was
 said to dwell on Malaya.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_712"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_712">375:5b</a>  Bhogavatí has been frequently mentioned:
 it is the capital of the serpent
 Gods or demons, and usually represented
 as being in the regions under the earth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_713"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_713">375:6b</a>  Vásuki is according to some accounts
 the king of the Nágas or serpent Gods.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry316.htm">Next: Canto XLII.: The Army of The West.</a></center>
 </body>