<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry317.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry319.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIV.: THE RING.</h3>
 <p>
 But special counselling he gave<br>
 To Hanumánwise and brave:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_379"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 379</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 To him on whom his soul relied,<br>
 With friendly words the monarch cried:<br>
 'O best of Vánarsght can stay<br>
 By land or sea thy rapid way,<br>
 Who through the air thy flight canst bend,<br>
 And to the Immortals' home ascend.<br>
 All realms, I ween, are known to thee<br>
 With every mountain, lake, and sea.<br>
 In strength and speed which naught can tire<br>
 Thou, worthy rival of thy sire<br>
 The mighty monarch of the wind,<br>
 Where'er thou wilt a way canst find.<br>
 Exert thy power, O swift and strong,<br>
 Bring back the lady lost so long,<br>
 For time and place, O thou most wise,<br>
 Lie open to thy searching eyes.'<br>
     When Ráma heard that special best<br>
 To Hanumáne the rest,<br>
 He from the monarch's favour drew<br>
 Hope of success and trust anew<br>
 That he on whom his lord relied,<br>
 In toil and peril trained and tried,<br>
 Would to a happy issue bring<br>
 The task commanded by the king.<br>
 He gave the ring that bore his name,<br>
 A token for the captive dame,<br>
 That the sad lady in her woe<br>
 The missive of her lord might know.<br>
 'This ring,' he said, 'my wife will see,<br>
 Nor fear an envoy sent by me.<br>
 Thy valour and thy skill combined,<br>
 Thy resolute and vigorous mind,<br>
 And King Sugríva's behest,<br>
 With joyful hopes inspire my breast.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_743"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_743">378:1b</a>  "The Uttara Kurus, it should be
 remarked, may have been a real people,
 as they are mentioned in the Altareya
 BráhmanaI. 14 ... "Wherefore the
 several nations who dwell in this northern
 quarter, beyond the Himavat, the Uttara
 Kurus and the Uttara Madras are consecrated
 to glorious dominion, and people
 term them the glorious. In another passage
 of the same work, however, the Uttara
 Kurus are treated as belonging to the
 domain of mythology." MUIR's <i>Sanskrit
 Texts</i>. Vol. I p. 494. See ADDITIONAL
 NOTES.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_744"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_744">378:2b</a>  The Moon-mountain.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_745"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_745">378:3b</a>  The Rudras are the same as the storm
 winds, more usually called Maruts, and
 are often associated with Indra. In the
 later mythology the Rudras are regarded
 as inferior manifestations of S'iva, and
 most of their names are also names of Siva.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry319.htm">Next: Canto XLV.: The Departure.</a></center>
 </body>