<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry316.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry318.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIII.: THE ARMY OF THE NORTH.</h3>
 <p>
 Forth went the legions of the west:<br>
 And wise Sugríva addressed<br>
 S'atabal, summoned from the crowd.<br>
 To whom the sovereign cried aloud:<br>
 'Go forth, O Vánarf, go forth,<br>
 Explore the regions of the north.<br>
 Thy host a hundred thousand be,<br>
 And Yama's sons  <a name="fr_735"></a><a href="#fn_735"><font size="1">4b</font></a> attend on thee.<br>
 With dauntless courage, strength, and skill<br>
 Search every river, wood, and hill.<br>
 Through every land in order go<br>
 Right onward to the Hills of Snow.<br>
 Search mid the peaks that shine afar,<br>
 In woods of Lodh and Deodár. <a name="fr_736"></a><a href="#fn_736"><font size="1">5b</font></a><br>
 Search if with Janak's daughter, screened<br>
 By sheltering rocks, there lie the fiend<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_378"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 378</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The holy grounds of Soma tread<br>
 By Gods and minstrels visited.<br>
 Reach Kála's mount, and flats that lie<br>
 Among the peaks that tower on high.<br>
 Then leave that hill that gleams with ore,<br>
 And fair Sudars'an's heights explore.<br>
 Then on to Devasakhát <a name="fr_737"></a><a href="#fn_737"><font size="1">1</font></a> hie.<br>
 Loved by the children of the sky.<br>
 A dreary land you then will see<br>
 Without a hill or brook or tree,<br>
 A hundred leagues, bare, wild, and dread<br>
 In lifeless desolation, spread.<br>
 Pursue your onward way, and haste<br>
 Through the dire horrors of the waste<br>
 Until triumphant with delight<br>
 You reach Kailása'stering height.<br>
 There stands a palace decked with gold,<br>
 For King Kuvera  <a name="fr_738"></a><a href="#fn_738"><font size="1">2</font></a> wrought of old,<br>
 A home the heavenly artist planned<br>
 And fashioned with his cunning hand.<br>
 There lotuses adorn the flood<br>
 With full-blown flower and opening bud<br>
 Where swans and mallards float, and gay<br>
 Apsarases  <a name="fr_739"></a><a href="#fn_739"><font size="1">3</font></a> come down to play.<br>
 There King Vaisravan's  <a name="fr_740"></a><a href="#fn_740"><font size="1">4</font></a> self, the lord<br>
 By all the universe adored,<br>
 Who golden gifts to mortals sends,<br>
 Lives with the Guhyakas  <a name="fr_741"></a><a href="#fn_741"><font size="1">5</font></a> his friends.<br>
 Search every cavern in the steep,<br>
 And green glens where the moonbeams sleep.<br>
 If haply in that distant ground<br>
 The robber and the dame be found.<br>
 Then on to Krauncha's hill,  <a name="fr_742"></a><a href="#fn_742"><font size="1">6</font></a> and through<br>
 His fearful pass your way pursue:<br>
 Though dark and terrible the vale<br>
 Your wonted courage must not fail.<br>
 There through abyss and cavern seek,<br>
 On lofty ridge, and mountain peak.<br>
 On, on! pursue your journey still<br>
 By valley, lake, and towering hill.<br>
 Reach the North Kurus' land, where rest<br>
 The holy spirits of the blest;<br>
 Where golden buds of lilies gleam<br>
 Resplendent on the silver stream,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And leaves of azure turkis throw<br>
 Soft splendour on the waves below.<br>
 Bright as the sun at early morn<br>
 Fair pools that happy clime adorn,<br>
 Where shine the loveliest flowers on stems<br>
 Of crystal and all valued gems.<br>
 Blue lotuses through all the land<br>
 The glories of their blooms expand,<br>
 And the resplendent earth is strown<br>
 With peerless pearl and precious stone.<br>
 There stately trees can scarce uphold<br>
 The burthen of their fruits of gold,<br>
 And ever flaunt their gay attire<br>
 Of flower and leaf like flames of fire.<br>
 All there sweet lives untroubled spend<br>
 In bliss and joy that know not end,<br>
 While pearl-decked maidens laugh, or sing<br>
 To music of the silvery string.  <a name="fr_743"></a><a href="ry318.htm#fn_743"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Still on your forward journey keep,<br>
 And rest you by the northern deep,<br>
 Where springing from the billows high<br>
 Mount Somagiri  <a name="fr_744"></a><a href="ry318.htm#fn_744"><font size="1">2b</font></a> seeks the sky,<br>
 And lightens with perpetual glow<br>
 The sunless realm that lies below.<br>
 There, present through all life's extent,<br>
 Dwells Brahmá Lord preeminent,<br>
 And round the great God, manifest<br>
 In Rudra  <a name="fr_745"></a><a href="ry318.htm#fn_745"><font size="1">3b</font></a> forms high sages rest.<br>
 Then turn, O Vánarsrch no more,<br>
 Nor tempt the sunless, boundless shore.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_732"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_732">377:1b</a>  One of the oldest and mightiest of the
 Vedic deities; in later mythology regard
 ed as the God of the sea.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_733"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_733">377:2b</a>  The knotted noose with which he
 seizes and punishes transgressors.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_734"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_734">377:3b</a>  Sávarni Manu, Manuspring of the
 Sun by Chháyá.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_735"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_735">377:4b</a>  The poet has not said who the sons of
 Yama are.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_736"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_736">377:5b</a>  The Lodhra or Lodh (Symplocoa
 Racemosa) and the DevadárueodaDeodar
 are well known trees.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_737"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_737">378:1</a>  The hills mentioned are not identifiable.
 Soma means the Moon. Kála, black;
 Sudaras'an, fair to see; and Devasakhá
 friend of the Gods</p>
 <p><a name="fn_738"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_738">378:2</a>  The God of Wealth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_739"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_739">378:3</a>  The nymphs of Paradise.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_740"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_740">378:4</a>  Kuvera the son of Vis'ravas.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_741"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_741">378:5</a>  A class of demigods who, like the
 Yakshas, are the attendants of Kuvera,
 and the guardians of his treasures.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_742"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fr_742">378:6</a>  Situated in the eastern part of the
 Himálaya chain, on the north of Assam.
 The mountain was torn asunder and the
 pass formed by the War-God Kártikeya
 and Paras'uráma.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry318.htm">Next: Canto XLIV.: The Ring.</a></center>
 </body>