<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry315.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry317.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLII.: THE ARMY OF THE WEST.</h3>
 <p>
 Then to Sushen Sugríva bent,<br>
 And thus addressed him reverent:<br>
 'Two hundred thousand of our best<br>
 With thee, my lord, shall seek the west.<br>
 Explore Suráshtra's <a name="fr_716"></a><a href="#fn_716"><font size="1">3</font></a> distant plain,<br>
 Explore Váhlíka's <a name="fr_717"></a><a href="#fn_717"><font size="1">4</font></a> wild domain,<br>
 And all the pleasant brooks that flee<br>
 Through mountains to the western sea.<br>
 Search clustering groves on mountain<br>
 heights,<br>
 And woods the whom of anchorites.<br>
 Search where the breezy hills are high,<br>
 Search where the desert regions lie.<br>
 Search all the western land beset<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 With woody mountains like a net.<br>
 The country's farthest limit reach,<br>
 And stand upon the ocean beach.<br>
 There wander through the groves of palm<br>
 Where the soft air is full of balm.<br>
 Through grassy dell and dark ravine<br>
 Seek Rávan and the Maithil queen.<br>
 Go visit Somagiri's <a name="fr_718"></a><a href="#fn_718"><font size="1">1b</font></a> steep<br>
 Where Sindhu <a name="fr_719"></a><a href="#fn_719"><font size="1">2b</font></a> mingles with the deep.<br>
 There lions, borne on swift wings, roam<br>
 The levels of their mountain home,<br>
 And elephants and monsters bear,<br>
 Caught from the ocean, to their lair.<br>
 You Vánars, changing forms at will.<br>
 With rapid search must scour the hill,<br>
 And his sky-kissing peak of gold<br>
 Where loveliest trees their blooms unfold.<br>
 There golden-peaked, ablaze with light,<br>
 Uprises Páriyátra's <a name="fr_720"></a><a href="#fn_720"><font size="1">3b</font></a> height<br>
 Where wild Gandharvas, fierce and fell,<br>
 In bands of countless myriads dwell.<br>
 Pluck ye no fruit within the wood;<br>
 Beware the impious neighbourhood,<br>
 Where, very mighty, strong, and hard<br>
 To overcome, the fruit they guard.<br>
 Yet search for Janak's daughter still,<br>
 For Vánars there need fear no ill.<br>
 Near, bright as turkis, Vajra <a name="fr_721"></a><a href="#fn_721"><font size="1">4b</font></a> named,<br>
 There stands a hill of diamond framed.<br>
 Soaring a hundred leagues in pride,<br>
 With trees and creepers glorified.<br>
 Search there each cave and dark abyss<br>
 By waterfall and precipice.<br>
 Far in that sea the wild waves beat<br>
 On Chakraván's <a name="fr_722"></a><a href="#fn_722"><font size="1">5b</font></a> firm-rooted feet.<br>
 Where the great discus, <a name="fr_723"></a><a href="#fn_723"><font size="1">6b</font></a> thousand rayed,<br>
 By Vísvakarmá's <a name="fr_724"></a><a href="#fn_724"><font size="1">7b</font></a> art was made.<br>
 When Panchajan <a name="fr_725"></a><a href="#fn_725"><font size="1">8b</font></a> the fiend was slain.<br>
 And Hayagríva, <a name="fr_726"></a><a href="#fn_726"><font size="1">9b</font></a> fierce in vain,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_377"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 377</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thence taking shell and discus went<br>
 Lord Vishnu, God preeminent.<br>
 On sixty thousand hills of gold<br>
 With wondering eyes shall ye behold,<br>
 Where in his glory every one<br>
 Is brilliant as the morning sun.<br>
 Full in the midst King Meru, <a name="fr_727"></a><a href="#fn_727"><font size="1">1</font></a> best<br>
 Of mountains, lifts his lofty crest,<br>
 On whom of yore, as all have heard,<br>
 The sun well-pleased this boon conferred:<br>
 'On thee, O King, on thee and thine<br>
 Light, day and night, shall ever shine.<br>
 Gandharvas, Gods who love thee well<br>
 And on thy sacred summits dwell,<br>
 Undimmed in lustre, bright and fair,The golden sheen shall ever share.'<br>
 The Vis'vas, <a name="fr_728"></a><a href="#fn_728"><font size="1">2</font></a> Vasus <a name="fr_729"></a><a href="#fn_729"><font size="1">3</font></a> they who ride<br>
 The tempest, <a name="fr_730"></a><a href="#fn_730"><font size="1">4</font></a> every God beside,<br>
 Draw nigh to Meru's lofty crest<br>
 When evening darkens in the west,<br>
 And to the parting Lord of Day<br>
 The homage of their worship pay,<br>
 Ere yet a while, unseen of all,<br>
 Behind Mount Asta's  <a name="fr_731"></a><a href="#fn_731"><font size="1">5</font></a> peaks he fall.<br>
 Wrought by the heavenly artist's care<br>
 A glorious palace glitters there,<br>
 And round about it sweet birds sing<br>
 Where the gay trees are blossoming:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The home of Varun  <a name="fr_732"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fn_732"><font size="1">1b</font></a> high souled-lord,<br>
 Wrist-girded with his deadly cord. <a name="fr_733"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fn_733"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 With ten tall stems, a palm between<br>
 Meru and Asta's hill is seen:<br>
 Pure silver from the base it springs,<br>
 And far and wide its lustre flings.<br>
 Seek Rávanthe dame by brook,<br>
 In pathless glen, in leafy nook<br>
 On Meru's crest a hermit lives<br>
 Bright with the light that penance gives:<br>
 Sávarni  <a name="fr_734"></a><a href="ry317.htm#fn_734"><font size="1">3b</font></a> is he named, renowned<br>
 As Brahmá's peer, with glory crowned.<br>
 There bowing down in reverence speak<br>
 And ask him of the dame you seek.<br>
 Thus far the splendid Lord of Day<br>
 Pursues through heaven his ceaseless way,<br>
 Shedding on every spot his light;<br>
 Then sinks behind Mount Asta's height,<br>
 Thus far advance: the sunless sea<br>
 Beyond is all unknown to me.<br>
 Sushen of mighty arm, long tried<br>
 In peril, shall your legions guide,<br>
 Receive his words with high respect,<br>
 And ne'er his lightest wish neglect.<br>
 He is my consort's sire, and hence<br>
 Deserves the utmost reverence.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_714"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_714">376:1</a>  S'ailúsha, Gramini, Siksha, Suka, Babhru.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_715"></a><a href="ry315.htm#fr_715">376:2</a>  The distant south beyond the confines
 of the earth is the home of departed spirits
 and the city of Yama the God of Death.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_716"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_716">376:3</a>  Suráshtra, the 'good country,' is the
 modern Surat.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_717"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_717">376:4</a>  A country north-west of Afghanistan,
 Baíkh</p>
 <p><a name="fn_718"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_718">376:1b</a>  The Moon-mountain here is mythical.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_719"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_719">376:2b</a>  Sindhu is the Indus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_720"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_720">376:3b</a>  Páriyátra, or as more usually written
 Páripátra, is the central or western portion
 of the Vindhya chain which skirts
 the province of Malwa.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_721"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_721">376:4b</a>  Vajra means both diamond and thunderbolt,
 the two substances being supposed
 to be identical.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_722"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_722">376:5b</a>  Chakraván means the discus-bearer.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_723"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_723">376:6b</a>  The discus is the favourite weapon of
 Vishnu</p>
 <p><a name="fn_724"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_724">376:7b</a>  The Indian Hephaistos or Vulcan.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_725"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_725">376:8b</a>  Panchajan was a demon who lived in
 the sea in the form of a conch shell.
 WILSON'S Vishnu Pura'na,* V. 21.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_726"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_726">376:9b</a>  Hayagríva,Horse-necked, is the name
 of a Daitya who at the dissolution of the
 universe caused by Brahmá's sleep, seized
 and carried off the Vedas. Vishnu slew
 him and recovered the sacred treasures.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_727"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_727">377:1</a>  Meru stands in the centre of Jambudwípa
 and consequently of the earth.
 "The sun travels round the world, keeping
 Meru always on his right. To the spectator
 who fronts him, therefore, as he
 rises Meru must be always on the north;
 and as the sun's rays do not penetrate beyond
 the centre of the mountain, the regions
 beyond, or to the north of it must
 be in darkness, whilst those on the south
 of it must be in light: north and south
 being relative, not absolute, terms, depending
 on the position of the spectator
 with regard to the Sun and Meru." WILSON'S
 <i>Vishnu Pura'na</i>, Vol. II. p. 243. Note.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_728"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_728">377:2</a>  The Vis'vadevas are a class of deities
 to whom sacrifices should be daily offered,
 as part of the ordinary worship of the
 householder. According to the <i>Váyun Purána</i>
 this is a privilege conferred on
 them by Brahmá and the Pitris as a reward
 for religious austerities practised by
 them upon Himálaya.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_729"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_729">377:3</a>  The eight Vasus were originally personifications
 like other Vedic deities, of
 natural phenomena, such as Fire, Wind,
 &amp;c. Their appellations are variously given
 by different authorities.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_730"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_730">377:4</a>  The Maruts or Storm-Gods, frequently
 addressed and worshipped as the attendants
 and allies of Indra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_731"></a><a href="ry316.htm#fr_731">377:5</a>  The mountain behind which the sun sets.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry317.htm">Next: Canto XLIII.: The Army of The North.</a></center>
 </body>