<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry326.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry328.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIII.: ANGAD'S COUNSEL.</h3>
 <p>
 They looked upon the boundless main<br>
 The awful seat of Varun's reign.<br>
 And heard his waters roar and rave<br>
 Terrific with each crested wave.<br>
 Then, in the depths of sorrow drowned,<br>
 They sat upon the bosky ground,<br>
 And sadly, as they pondered, grieved<br>
 For days gone by and naught achieved.<br>
 Pain pierced them through with sharper sting<br>
 When, gazing on the trees of spring,<br>
 They saw each waving bough that showed<br>
 The treasures of its glorious load,<br>
 And helpless, fainting with the weight<br>
 Of woe they sank disconsolate.<br>
 Then, lion-shouldered, stout and strong,<br>
 The noblest of the Vánar throng,<br>
 Angad the prince imperial rose,<br>
 And, deeply stricken by the woes<br>
 That his impetuous spirit broke,<br>
 Thus gently to the chieftains spoke:<br>
 'Mark ye not, Vánars, that the day<br>
 Our monarch fixed has passed away?<br>
 The month is lost in toil and pain,<br>
 And now, my friends, what hopes remain?<br>
 On you, in lore of counsel tried,<br>
 Our king Sugríva most relied.<br>
 Your hearts, with strong affection fraught,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_384"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 384</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 His weal in every labour sought,<br>
 And the true valour of your band<br>
 Was blazoned wide in every land.<br>
 Forth on the toilsome search you sped,<br>
 By me--for so he willed it--led.<br>
 To us, of every hope bereft,<br>
 Death is the only refuge left.<br>
 For none a happy life may see<br>
 Who fails to do our king's decree.<br>
 Come, let us all from food abstain,<br>
 And perish thus, since hope is vain.<br>
 Stern is our king and swift to ire,<br>
 Imperious, proud, and fierce like fire,<br>
 And ne'er will pardon us the crime<br>
 Of fruitless search and wasted time.<br>
 Far better thus to end our lives,<br>
 And leave our wealth, our homes and wives,<br>
 Leave our dear little ones and all,<br>
 Than by his vengeful hand to fall.<br>
 Think not Sugríva's wrath will spare<br>
 Me Báli's son, imperial heir:<br>
 For Raghu's royal son, not he,<br>
 To this high place anointed me,<br>
 Sugríva, long my bitter foe,<br>
 With eager hand will strike the blow,<br>
 And, mindful of the old offence,<br>
 Will slay me now for negligence,<br>
 Nor will my pitying friends have power<br>
 To save me in the deadly hour.<br>
 No--here, O chieftains, will I lie<br>
 By ocean's marge, and fast and die.'<br>
     They heard the royal prince declare<br>
 The purpose of his fixt despair;<br>
 And all, by common terror moved,<br>
 His speech in these sad words approved:<br>
 'Sugríva's heart is hard and stern,<br>
 And Ráma's thoughts for Sítá yearn.<br>
 Our forfeit lives will surely pay<br>
 For idle search and long delay,<br>
 And our fierce king will bid us die<br>
 The favour of his friend to buy.'<br>
     Then Tára softly spake to cheer<br>
 The Vánars' hearts oppressed by fear:<br>
 'Despair no more, your doubts dispel:<br>
 Come in this ample cavern dwell.<br>
 There may we live in blissful ease<br>
 Mid springs and fruit and bloomy trees,<br>
 Secure from every foe's assault,<br>
 For magic framed the wondrous vault.<br>
 Protected there we need not fear<br>
 Though Ráma and our king come near;<br>
 Nor dread e'en him who batters down<br>
 The portals of the foeman's town.'  <a name="fr_758"></a><a href="#fn_758"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_758"></a><a href="ry327.htm#fr_758">384:1</a>  Purandara, the destroyer of cities; the
 cities being the clouds which the God of
 the firmament bursts open with his thunderbolts,
 to release the waters imprisoned
 in these fortesses of the demons of drought.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry328.htm">Next: Canto LIV.: Hanumán's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>