<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry324.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry326.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LI.: SVAYAMPRABHÁ</h3>
 <p>
 'Assailed by thirst and hunger, dame,<br>
 Within a gloomy vault we came.<br>
 We saw the cavern opening wide,<br>
 And straight within its depths we hied.<br>
 But utterly amazed are we<br>
 At all the marvels that we see.<br>
 Whose are the golden trees that gleam<br>
 With splendour like the morning's beam?<br>
 These cates of noblest sort? these roots?<br>
 This wondrous store of rarest fruits?<br>
 Whose are these calm and cool retreats,<br>
 These silver homes and golden seats,<br>
 And lattices of precious stones?<br>
 Who is the happy lord that owns<br>
 The golden trees, of rarest scent,<br>
 Neath loads of fruit and blossom bent?<br>
 Who, strong in holy zeal, had power<br>
 To deck the streams with richest dower,<br>
 And bade the lilies bright with gold<br>
 The glory of their blooms unfold,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Where fish in living gold below<br>
 The sheen of changing colours show?<br>
 Thine is the holy power, I ween,<br>
 That beautified the wondrous scene;<br>
 But if another's, lady, deign<br>
 To tell us, and the whole explain.'<br>
 To him the lady of the cave<br>
 In words like, these her answer gave:<br>
 'Skilled Maya framed in days of old<br>
 This magic wood of growing gold.<br>
 The chief artificer in place<br>
 Was he of all the Dánav.<br>
 He, for his wise enchantments famed,<br>
 This glorious dwelling planned and framed<br>
 He for a thousand years endured<br>
 The sternest penance, and secured<br>
 From Brahmá of all boons the best,<br>
 The knowledge Us'anas  <a name="fr_754"></a><a href="#fn_754"><font size="1">1b</font></a> possessed.<br>
 Lord, by that boon, of all his will,<br>
 He fashioned all with perfect skill;<br>
 And, with his blissful state content,<br>
 In this vast grove a season spent.<br>
 By Indra's jealous bolt he fell<br>
 For loving Hemá's <a name="fr_755"></a><a href="#fn_755"><font size="1">2b</font></a> charms too well.<br>
 And Brahmá on that nymph bestowed<br>
 The treasures of this fair abode,<br>
 Wherein her tranquil days to spend<br>
 In happiness that ne'er may end.<br>
 Sprung of a lineage old and high,<br>
 Merusávarni's  <a name="fr_756"></a><a href="#fn_756"><font size="1">3b</font></a> daughter, I<br>
 Guard ever for that heavenly dame<br>
 This home, Svayamprabhát <a name="fr_757"></a><a href="#fn_757"><font size="1">4b</font></a> my name,-<br>
 For I have loved the lady long,<br>
 So skilled in arts of dance and song.<br>
 But say what cause your steps has led<br>
 The mazes of this grove to tread.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_383"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 383</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 How, strangers did ye chance to spy<br>
 The wood concealed from wanderer's eye?<br>
 Tell clearly why ye come: but first<br>
 Eat of this fruit and quench your thirst.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_753"></a><a href="ry324.htm#fr_753">382:1</a>  The skin of the black antelope was
 the ascetic's proper garb.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_754"></a><a href="ry325.htm#fr_754">382:1b</a>  Us'anas is the name of a sage mentioned
 in the Vedas. In the epic poems
 he is identified with S'ukra, the regent of
 the planet Venus, and described as the
 preceptor of the Asuras or Daityas, and
 possessor of vast knowledge.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_755"></a><a href="ry325.htm#fr_755">382:2b</a>  Hemáne of the nymphs of Paradise.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_756"></a><a href="ry325.htm#fr_756">382:3b</a>  Merusávarni general name for the
 last four of the fourteen Manus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_757"></a><a href="ry325.htm#fr_757">382:4b</a>  Svayamprabhá "self-luminous"
 is according to DE GUBERNATIS the moon:
 "In the <i>Svayamprabhátoo</i>, we meet with
 the moon as a good fairy who, from the
 golden palace which she reserves for her
 friend Hemá golden one:) is during a
 month the guide, in the vast cavern of
 Hanumant and his companions, who have
 lost their way in the search of the dawn
 Sitáis is not quite accurate: HanumHanumán
 and his companions wander for a
 month in the cavern without a guide, and
 then Svayamprabhás them out.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry326.htm">Next: Canto LII.: The Exit.</a></center>
 </body>