<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry327.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry329.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIV.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 But Hanumán, while Tára, best<br>
 Of splendid chiefs his thought expressed,<br>
 Perceived that Báli's princely son<br>
 A kingdom for himself had won.  <a name="fr_759"></a><a href="#fn_759"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 His keen eye marked in him combined<br>
 The warrior's arm, the ruler's mind,<br>
 And every noble gift should grace<br>
 The happy sovereign of his race:<br>
 Marked how he grew with ripening age<br>
 More glorious and bold and sage,--<br>
 Like the young moon that night by night<br>
 Shines on with ever waxing light,--<br>
 Brave as his royal father, wise<br>
 As he who counsels in the skies:  <a name="fr_760"></a><a href="#fn_760"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Marked how, forwearied with the quest,<br>
 He heeded not his liege's hest,<br>
 But Tára's every word obeyed<br>
 Like Indra still by Sukra  <a name="fr_761"></a><a href="#fn_761"><font size="1">3b</font></a> swayed.<br>
 Then with his prudent speech he tried<br>
 To better thoughts the prince to guide,<br>
 And by division's skilful art<br>
 The Vánars and the youth to part:<br>
 'Illustrious Angad, thou in fight<br>
 Hast far surpassed thy father's might,<br>
 Most worthy, like thy sire of old,<br>
 The empire of our race to hold.<br>
 The Vánars' fickle people range<br>
 From wish to wish and welcome change.<br>
 Their wives and babes they will not leave<br>
 And to their new-made sovereign cleave.<br>
 No art, no gifts will draw away<br>
 The Vánars from Sugríva's sway,<br>
 Through hope of wealth, through fear of pain<br>
 Still faithful will they all remain.<br>
 Thou fondly hopest in this cave<br>
 The vengeance of the foe to brave.<br>
 But Lakshman's arm a shower will send<br>
 Of deadly shafts those walls to rend.<br>
 Like Indra's bolts his shafts have power<br>
 To cleave the mountain like a flower.<br>
 O Angad, mark my counsel well:<br>
 If in this cave thou choose to dwell,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_385"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 385</font></a><br>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_759"></a><a href="ry328.htm#fr_759">384:1b</a>  Perceived that Angad had secured,
 through the love of the Vánars, the reversion
 of Sugríva's kingdom; or, as
 another commentator explains it, perceived
 that Angad had obtained a new kingdom
 in the enchanted cave which the
 Vánars, through love of him, would consent
 to occupy.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_760"></a><a href="ry328.htm#fr_760">384:2b</a>  Váchaspati, Lord of Speech, the Preceptor
 of the Gods.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_761"></a><a href="ry328.htm#fr_761">384:3b</a>  Sukra is the regent of the planet Venus,
 and the preceptor of the Daítyas.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry329.htm">Next: Canto LVI: </a></center>
 </body>