<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry325.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry327.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LII.: THE EXIT.</h3>
 <p>
 'Ráma,' he cried, 'a prince whose sway<br>
 All peoples of the earth obey,<br>
 To Dandak's tangled forest came<br>
 With his brave brother and his dame.<br>
 From that dark shade of forest boughs<br>
 The giant Rávan stole his spouse.<br>
 Our king Sugríva's orders send<br>
 These Vánars forth to aid his friend,<br>
 That so the lady be restored<br>
 Uninjured to her sorrowing lord.<br>
 With Angad and the rest, this band<br>
 Has wandered through the southern land,<br>
 With careful search in every place<br>
 The lady and the fiend to trace<br>
 We roamed the southern region o'er,<br>
 And stood upon the ocean's shore.<br>
 By hunger pressed our strength gave way;<br>
 Beneath the spreading trees we lay,<br>
 And cried, worn out with toil and woe,<br>
 'No farther, comrades, can we go.'<br>
 Then as our sad eyes looked around<br>
 We spied an opening in the ground,<br>
 Where all was gloomy dark behind<br>
 The creeping plants that o'er it twined.<br>
 Forth trooping from the dark-recess<br>
 Came swans and mallards numberless,<br>
 With drops upon their shining wings<br>
 As newly bathed where water springs.<br>
 'On, comrades, to the cave,' I cried<br>
 And all within the portal hied.<br>
 Each clasping fast another's hand<br>
 Far onward pressed the Vánar band;<br>
 And still, as thirst and hunger drove,<br>
 We traced the mazes of the grove.<br>
 Here thou with hospitable care<br>
 Hast fed us with the noblest fare,<br>
 Preserving us, about to die,<br>
 With this thy plentiful supply.<br>
 But how, O pious lady, say,<br>
 May we thy gracious boon repay?'<br>
     He ceased: the ascetic dame replied:<br>
 'Well, Vánars, am I satisfied.<br>
 A life of holy works I lead,<br>
 And from your hands no service need.'<br>
 Then spake again the Vánar chief:<br>
 'We came to thee and found relief.<br>
 Now listen to a new distress,<br>
 And aid us, holy votaress.<br>
 Our wanderings in this vasty cave<br>
 Exhaust the time Sugríva gave.<br>
 Once more then, lady, grant release,<br>
 And let thy suppliants go in peace<br>
 Again upon their errand sped,<br>
 For King Sugríva's ire we dread.<br>
 And the great task our sovereign set,<br>
 Alas, is unaccomplished yet.'<br>
     Thus Hanumán their leader prayed,<br>
 And thus the dame her answer made:<br>
 Scarce may the living find their way<br>
 Returning hence to light of day;<br>
 But I will free you through the might<br>
 Of penance, fast, and holy rite.<br>
 Close for a while your eyes, or ne'er<br>
 May you return to upper air.'<br>
 She ceased: the Vánars all obeyed;<br>
 Their fingers on their eyes they laid,<br>
 And, ere a moment's time had fled,<br>
 Were through the mazy cavern led.<br>
 Again the gracious lady spoke,<br>
 And joy in every bosom woke:<br>
 'Lo, here again is Vindhya's hill,<br>
 Whose valleys trees and creepers fill;<br>
 And, by the margin of the sea,<br>
 Prasravan where you fain would be.'<br>
 With blessings then she bade adieu,<br>
 And swift within the cave withdrew.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry327.htm">Next: Canto LIII.: Angad's Counsel.</a></center>
 </body>