<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry323.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry325.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO L.: THE ENCHANTED CAVE.</h3>
 <p>
 Angad and Tára by his side,<br>
 Again rose Hanumántried<br>
 Each mountain cavern, dark and deep,<br>
 And stony pass and wooded steep,<br>
 The lion's and the tiger's home,<br>
 By rushing torrents white with foam.<br>
 Then with new ardour, south and west,<br>
 O'er Vindhya's height the search they pressed.<br>
 The day prescribed was near and they<br>
 Still wandered on their weary way.<br>
 They reached the southern land beset<br>
 With woody mountains like a net.<br>
 At length a mighty cave they spied<br>
 That opened in a mountain's side.<br>
 Where many a verdant creeper grew<br>
 And o'er the mouth its tendrils threw.<br>
 Thence issued crane, and swan, and drake,<br>
 And trooping birds that love the lake.<br>
 The Vánarsed within to cool<br>
 Their fevered lips in spring or pool.<br>
 Vast was the cavern dark and dread,<br>
 Where not a ray of light was shed;<br>
 Yet not the more their eyesight failed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_382"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 382</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Their courage sank or valour quailed.<br>
 On through the gloom the Vánarssed<br>
 With hunger, thirst, and toil distressed,<br>
 Poor helpless wanderers, sad, forlorn,<br>
 With wasted faces wan and worn.<br>
 At length, when life seemed lost for aye,<br>
 They saw a splendour as of day,<br>
 A wondrous forest, fair and bright,<br>
 Where golden trees shot flamy light.<br>
 And lotus-covered pools were there<br>
 With pleasant waters fresh and fair,<br>
 And streams their rippling currents rolled<br>
 By seats of silver and of gold.<br>
 Fair houses reared their stately height<br>
 Of burnished gold and lazulite,<br>
 And glorious was the lustre thrown<br>
 Through lattices of precious stone.<br>
 And there were flowers and fruit on stems<br>
 Of coral decked with rarest gems,<br>
 And emerald leaves on silver trees,<br>
 And honeycomb and golden bees.<br>
 Then as the Vánarser drew,<br>
 A holy woman met their view.<br>
 Around her form was duly tied<br>
 A garment of the blackdeer's hide. <a name="fr_753"></a><a href="ry325.htm#fn_753"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Pure votaress she shone with light<br>
 Of fervent zeal and holy rite.<br>
 Then Hanumánre the rest<br>
 With reverent words the dame addressed:<br>
 'Who art thou? say: and who is lord<br>
 Of this vast cave with treasures stored?'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry325.htm">Next: Canto LI.: Svayamprabhá</a></center>
 </body>