<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry331.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry333.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVII.: ANGAD'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Though grief and woe his utterance broke<br>
 They trusted not the words he spoke;<br>
 But, looking still for secret guile,<br>
 Reflected in their hearts a while:<br>
 'If on our mangled limbs he feed,<br>
 We gain the death ourselves decreed.'<br>
     Then rose the Vánar chiefs, and lent<br>
 Their arms to aid the bird's descent;<br>
 And Angad spake: There lived of yore<br>
 A noble Vánar king who bore<br>
 The name of Riksharajas, great<br>
 And brave and strong and fortunate.<br>
 His sons were like their father: fame<br>
 Knows Báli and Sugríva's name.<br>
 Praised in all lands, a glorious king<br>
 Was Báli, and from him I spring.<br>
 Brave Ráma, Das'aratha's heir,<br>
 A glorious prince beyond compare,<br>
 His sire and duty's law obeyed,<br>
 And sought the depths of Dandaks' shade<br>
 Sítá his well-beloved dame,<br>
 And Lakshman, with the wanderer came.<br>
 A giant watched his hour, and stole<br>
 The sweet delight of Ráma's soul.<br>
 Jatáyus, Das'aratha's friend,<br>
 Swift succour to the dame would lend.<br>
 Fierce Rávan from his car he felled,<br>
 And for a time the prize withheld.<br>
 But bleeding, weak with years, and tired,<br>
 Beneath the demon's blows expired,<br>
 Due rites at Ráma's hands obtained,<br>
 And bliss that ne'er shall minish, gained.<br>
 Then Ráma with Sugríva made<br>
 A covenant for mutual aid,<br>
 And Báli, to the field defied,<br>
 By conquering Ráma's arrow died.<br>
 Sugríva then, by Ráma's grace,<br>
 Was monarch of the Vánar race.<br>
 By his command a mighty host<br>
 Seeks Ráma's queen from coast to coast.<br>
 Sent forth by him, in every spot<br>
 We looked for her, but find her not.<br>
 Vain is the toil, as though by night<br>
 We sought to find the Day-God's light.<br>
 In lands unknown at length we found<br>
 A spacious cavern under ground,<br>
 Whose vaults that stretch beneath the hill<br>
 Were formed by Maya's magic skill.<br>
 Through the dark maze our steps were bent,<br>
 And wandering there a month we spent,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_387"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 387</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And lost, in fruitless error, thus<br>
 The days our king allotted us.<br>
 Thus we though faithful have transgressed,<br>
 And failed to keep our lord's behest.<br>
 No chance of safety can we see,<br>
 No lingering hope of life have we.<br>
 Sugriva's wrath and Ráma's hate<br>
 Press on our souls with grievous weight;<br>
 And we, because 'tis vain to fly,<br>
 Resolve at length to fast and die.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry333.htm">Next: Canto LVIII: Tidings of Sitá.</a></center>
 </body>