<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry334.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry336.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LX.: SAMPÁTI'S STORY</h3>
 <p>
 Then from the flood Sampáti paid<br>
 Due offerings to his brother's shade.<br>
 He bathed him when the rites were done.<br>
 And spake again to Báli's son:<br>
 'Now listen, Prince, while I relate<br>
 How first I learned the lady's fate.<br>
 Burnt by the sun's resistless might<br>
 I fell and lay on Vindhya's height.<br>
 Seven nights in deadly swoon I passed,<br>
 But struggling life returned at last.<br>
 Around I bent my wondering view,<br>
 But every spot was strange and new.<br>
 I scanned the sea with eager ken,<br>
 And rock and brook and lake and glen,<br>
 I saw gay trees their branches wave,<br>
 And creepers mantling o'er the cave.<br>
 I heard the wild birds' joyous song,<br>
 And waters as they foamed along,<br>
 And knew the lovely hill must be<br>
 Mount Vindhya by the southern sea.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_389"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 389</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Revered by heavenly beings, stood<br>
 Near where I lay, a sacred wood,<br>
 Where great Nis'akar dwelt of yore<br>
 And pains of awful penance bore.<br>
 Eight thousand seasons winged their flight<br>
 Over the toiling anchorite--<br>
 Upon that hill my days were spent,--<br>
 And then to heaven the hermit went.<br>
 At last, with long and hard assay,<br>
 Down from that height I made my way,<br>
 And wandered through the mountain pass<br>
 Rough with the spikes of Darbha grass.<br>
 I with my misery worn, and faint<br>
 Was eager to behold the saint:<br>
 For often with Jatáyus I<br>
 Had sought his home in days gone by.<br>
 As nearer to the grove I drew<br>
 The breeze with cooling fragrance blew,<br>
 And not a tree that was not fair,<br>
 With richest flower and fruit was there.<br>
 With anxious heart a while I stayed<br>
 Beneath the trees' delightful shade,<br>
 Aud soon the holy hermit, bright<br>
 With fervent penance, came in sight.<br>
 Behind him bears and lions, tame<br>
 As those who know their feeder, came,<br>
 And tigers, deer, and snakes pursued<br>
 His steps, a wondrous multitude,<br>
 And turned obeisant when the sage<br>
 Had reached his shady hermitage.<br>
 Then came Nis'ákar to my side<br>
 And looked with wondering eyes, and cried:<br>
 'I knew thee not, so dire a change<br>
 Has made thy form and feature strange.<br>
 Where are thy glossy feathers? where<br>
 The rapid wings that cleft the air?<br>
 Two vulture brothers once I knew:<br>
 Each form at will could they endue.<br>
 They of the vulture race were kings,<br>
 And flew with Mátaris'va's  <a name="fr_776"></a><a href="ry336.htm#fn_776"><font size="1">1</font></a> wings.<br>
 In human shape they loved to greet<br>
 Their hermit friend, and clasp his feet,<br>
 The younger was Jatáyus, thou<br>
 The elder whom I gaze on now.<br>
 Say, has disease or foeman's hate<br>
 Reduced thee from thy high estate?<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_775"></a><a href="ry334.htm#fr_775">388:1b</a>  Mahendra is chain of mountains
 generally identified with part of the Gháts
 of the Peninsula.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry336.htm">Next: Canto LXI.: Sampáti's Story.</a></center>
 </body>