<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry338.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry340.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXIV.: THE SEA.</h3>
 <p>
 Shouts of triumphant joy outrang<br>
 As to their feet the Vánars sprang:<br>
 And, on the mighty task intent,<br>
 Swift to the sea their steps they bent.<br>
 They stood and gazed upon the deep,<br>
 Whose billows with a roar and leap<br>
 On the sea banks ware wildly hurled,--<br>
 The mirror of the mighty world.<br>
 There on the strand the Vánars stayed<br>
 And with sad eyes the deep surveyed,<br>
 Here, as in play, his billows rose,<br>
 And there he slumbered in repose.<br>
 Here leapt the boisterous waters, high<br>
 As mountains, menacing the sky,<br>
 And wild infernal forms between<br>
 The ridges of the waves were seen.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_391"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 391</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 They saw the billows rave and swell,<br>
 And their sad spirits sank and fell;<br>
 For ocean in their deep despair<br>
 Seemed boundless as the fields of air.<br>
 Then noble Angad spake to cheer<br>
 The Vánars and dispel their fear:<br>
 'Faint not: despair should never find<br>
 Admittance to a noble mind.<br>
 Despair, a serpent's mortal bite,<br>
 Benumbs the hero's power and might.'<br>
     Then passed the weary night, and all<br>
 Assembled at their prince's call,<br>
 And every lord of high estate<br>
 Was gathered round him for debate.<br>
 Bright was the chieftains' glorious band<br>
 Round Angad on the ocean strand,<br>
 As when the mighty Storm-Gods meet<br>
 Round Indra on his golden seat.<br>
 Then princely Angad looked on each,<br>
 And thus began his prudent speech:<br>
 'What chief of all our host will leap<br>
 A hundred leagues across the deep?<br>
 Who, O illustrious Vánars, who<br>
 Will make Sugriva's promise true,<br>
 And from our weight of fear set free<br>
 The leaders of our band and me!<br>
 To whom, O warriors, shall we owe<br>
 A sweet release from pain and woe,<br>
 And proud success, and happy lives<br>
 With our dear children and our wives,<br>
 Again permitted by his grace<br>
 To look with joy on Ráma's face,<br>
 And noble Lakshman, and our lord<br>
 The king, to our sweet homes restored?'<br>
     Thus to the gathered lords he spoke;<br>
 But no reply the silence broke.<br>
 Then with a sterner voice he cried:<br>
 'O chiefs, the nation's boast and pride,<br>
 Whom valour strength and power adorn,<br>
 Of most illustrious lineage born,<br>
 Where'er you wilt you force a way,<br>
 And none your rapid course can stay.<br>
 Now come, your several powers declare.<br>
 And who this desperate leap will dare?<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_780"></a><a href="ry338.htm#fr_780">390:1b</a>  In the Bengal recension the fourth
 Book ends here, the remaining Cantos
 being placed in the fifth.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry340.htm">Next: Canto LXV.: The Council.</a></center>
 </body>