<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry339.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry341.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXV.: THE COUNCIL.</h3>
 <p>
 But none of all the host was found<br>
 To clear the sea with desperate bound,<br>
 Though each, as Angad bade, declared<br>
 His proper power and what he dared.  <a name="fr_781"></a><a href="#fn_781"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Then spake good Jámbavan the sage,<br>
 Chief of them all for reverend age;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>
 'I, Vánar chieftains, long ago<br>
 Limbs light to leap could likewise show,<br>
 But now on frame and spirit weighs<br>
 The burthen of my length of days.<br>
 Still task like this I may not slight,<br>
 When Ráma and our king unite.<br>
 So listen while I tell, O friends,<br>
 What lingering strength mine age attends.<br>
 If my poor leap may aught avail,<br>
 Of ninety leagues, I will not fail.<br>
 Far other strength in youth's fresh prime<br>
 I boasted, in the olden time,<br>
 When, at Prahláda's  <a name="fr_782"></a><a href="#fn_782"><font size="1">1b</font></a> solemn rite,<br>
 I circled in my rapid flight<br>
 Lord Vishnu, everlasting God,<br>
 When through the universe he trod.<br>
 But now my limbs are weak and old,<br>
 My youth is fled, its fire is cold,<br>
 And these exhausted nerves to strain<br>
 In such a task were idle pain,'<br>
     Then Angad due obeisance paid,<br>
 And to the chief his answer made:<br>
 'Then I, ye noble Vánars, I<br>
 Mvself the mighty leap will try:<br>
 Although perchance the power I lack<br>
 To leap from Lanká's island back'<br>
     Thus the impetuous chieftain cried,<br>
 And Jámbavan the sage replied:<br>
 'Whate'er thy power and might may be,<br>
 This task, O Prince, is not for thee.<br>
 Kings go not forth themselves, but send<br>
 The servants who their best attend.<br>
 Thou art the darling and the boast,<br>
 The honoured lord of all the host.<br>
 In thee the root, O Angad, lies<br>
 Of our appointed enterprise;<br>
 And thee, on whom our hopes depend,<br>
 Our care must cherish and defend.'<br>
     Then Báli's noble son replied:<br>
 'Needs must I go whate'er betide,<br>
 *** For, if no chief this exploit dare,<br>
 What waits us all save blank despair,--<br>
 Upon the ground again to lie<br>
 In hopeless misery, fast, and die?<br>
 For not a hope of life I see<br>
 If we neglect our king's decree*'<br>
 Then spoke the aged chief again:<br>
 '***Now your attempt shall not be in vain,<br>
 For to the task will I incite<br>
 A chieftain of sufficient might.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_392"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 392</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_781"></a><a href="ry340.htm#fr_781">391:1</a>  Each chief comes forward and says how far he can leap. Gaja says he can leap ten yojans. Gavaksha can leap twenty. Gavaya thirty.* and so on up to ninety.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_782"></a><a href="ry340.htm#fr_782">391:1b</a>  Prahlá*da, the son of H***iranyakasipu, was a pious Datya remarkable for his devotion to Vishnu, and was on this account persecuted by his father.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry341.htm">Next: Canto LXVI.: Hanumán.</a></center>
 </body>