<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry347.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry349.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VI.  <a name="fr_810"></a><a href="#fn_810"><font size="1">1</font></a>: THE COURT.</h3>
 <p>
 The palace gates were guarded well<br>
 By many a Rákshas sentinel,<br>
 And far within, concealed from view,<br>
 Were dames and female retinue<br>
 For charm of form and face renowned;<br>
 Whose tinkling armlets made a sound,<br>
 Clashed by the wearers in their glee,<br>
 Like music of a distant sea.<br>
 The hall beyond the palace gate,<br>
 Rich with each badge of royal state,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Where lines of noble courtiers stood,<br>
 Showed like a lion-guarded wood.<br>
 There the wild music rose and fell<br>
 Of drum and tabor and of shell,<br>
 Through chambers at each holy tide<br>
 By solemn worship sanctified.<br>
 Through grove and garden, undismayed,<br>
 From house to house the Vánar strayed,<br>
 And still his wondering glances bent<br>
 On terrace, dome, and battlement:<br>
 Then with a light and rapid tread<br>
 Prahasta's  <a name="fr_811"></a><a href="ry349.htm#fn_811"><font size="1">1b</font></a> home he visited,<br>
 And Kumbhakarna's  <a name="fr_812"></a><a href="ry349.htm#fn_812"><font size="1">2b</font></a> courtyard where<br>
 A cloudy pile rose high in air;<br>
 And, wandering o'er the hill, explored<br>
 The garden of each Rákshas lord.<br>
 Each court and grove he wandered through,<br>
 Then nigh to Rávan's palace drew.<br>
 She-demons watched it foul of face,<br>
 Eace* armed with sword and spear and mace,<br>
 And warrior fiends of every hue,<br>
 A strange and fearful retinue.<br>
 There elephants in many a row,<br>
 The terror of the stricken foe.<br>
 Huge Airávat,  <a name="fr_813"></a><a href="ry349.htm#fn_813"><font size="1">3b</font></a> deftly trained<br>
 In battle-fields, stood ready chained.<br>
 Fair litters on the ground were set<br>
 Adorned with gems and golden net.<br>
 Gay bloomy creepers clothed the walls;<br>
 Green bowers were there and picture halls,<br>
 And chambers made for soft delight.<br>
 Broad banners waved on every height.<br>
 And from the roof like Mandar's hill<br>
 The peacock's cry came loud and shrill.  <a name="fr_814"></a><a href="ry349.htm#fn_814"><font size="1">4b</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_810"></a><a href="ry348.htm#fr_810">399:1</a>  I omit Canto V. which corresponds to
 chapter XI. in Gorresio's edition. That
 scholar justly observes: "The eleventh
 chapter, Description of Evening, is certainly
 the work of the Rhapsodists and
 an interpolation of later date. The chapter
 might be omitted without any injury
 to the action of the poem, and besides the
 metre, style, conceits and images differ
 from the general tenour of the poem;
 and that continual repetition of the same
 sounds at the end of each hemistich which
 is not exactly rime, but assonance, reveals
 the artificial labour of a more recent age.'
 The following sample will probably be
 enough. I am unable to show the difference
 of style in a translation:
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
 Fair shone the moon, as if to lend<br>
 His cheering light to guide a friend,<br>
 And, circled by the starry host,<br>
 Looked down upon the wild sea-coast.<br>
 The Vánar cheiftain raised his eyes,<br>
 And saw him sailing through the skies<br>
 Like a bright swan who joys to take<br>
 His pastime on a silver lake;<br>
 Fair moon that calms the mourner's pain.<br>
 Heaves up the waters of the main,<br>
 And o'er the *hie beneath him throws<br>
 A tender light of soft repose,<br>
 The charm that clings to Mandar's hill,<br>
 Gleams in the sea when winds are still,<br>
 And decks the lilly's opening flower,<br>
 Showed in that moon her sweetest power.<br>
 </dir>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry349.htm">Next: Canto VII.: Ravan's Palace.</a></center>
 </body>