<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry343.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry345.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO I.: HANUMÁN'S LEAP.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Rávan's foe resolved to trace<br>
 The captive to her hiding-place<br>
 Through airy pathways overhead<br>
 Which heavenly minstrels visited.<br>
 With straining nerve aud eager brows,<br>
 Like some strong husband of the cows,<br>
 In ready might he stood prepared<br>
 For the bold task his soul has dared.<br>
 O'er gem-like grass that flashed and glowed<br>
 The Vánar like a lion strode.<br>
 Roused by the thunder of his tread,<br>
 The beasts to shady coverts fled.<br>
 Tall trees he crushed or hurled aside,<br>
 And every bird was terrified.<br>
 Around him loveliest lilies grew,<br>
 Pale pink, and red, and white, and blue,<br>
 And tints of many a metal lent<br>
 The light of varied ornament.<br>
 Gandharvas, changing forms at will.<br>
 And Yakshas roamed the lovely hill,<br>
 Aud countless Serpent-Gods were seen<br>
 Where flowers and grass were fresh and green.<br>
 As some resplendent serpent takes<br>
 His pastime in the best of lakes,<br>
 So on the mountain's woody height<br>
 The Vánar wandered with delight.<br>
 Then, standing on tne flowery sod,<br>
 He paid his vows to saint and God.<br>
 Swayambhu  <a name="fr_790"></a><a href="#fn_790"><font size="1">2</font></a> and the Sun he prayed,<br>
 And the swift Wind to lend him aid,<br>
 And Indra, sovereign of the skies,<br>
 To bless his hardy enterprise.<br>
 Then once again the chief addressed<br>
 The Vánars from tke mountain crest:<br>
 'Swift as a shaft from Ráma's bow<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 To Rávan's city will I go,<br>
 And if she be not there will fly<br>
 And seek the lady in the sky;<br>
 Or, if in heaven she be not found,<br>
 Will hither bring the giant bound.'<br>
     He ceased; and mustering his might<br>
 Sprang downward from the mountain height,<br>
 While, shattered by each mighty limb,<br>
 The trees unrooted followed him.<br>
 The shadow on the ocean cast<br>
 By his vast form, as on he passed,<br>
 Flew like a ship before the gale<br>
 When the strong breeze has tilled the sail,<br>
 And where his course the Vánar held<br>
 The sea beneath him raged and swelled.<br>
 Then Gods and all the heavenly train<br>
 Poured flowerets down in gentle rain;<br>
 Their voices glad Gandharvas raised,<br>
 And saints in heaven the Vánar praised.<br>
 Fain would the Sea his succour lend<br>
 And Raghu's noble son befriend.<br>
 He, moved by zeal for Ráma's sake,<br>
 The hill Maináka  <a name="fr_791"></a><a href="#fn_791"><font size="1">1b</font></a> thus bespake:<br>
 'O strong Maináka, heavens decree<br>
 In days of old appointed thee<br>
 To be the Asurs bar, and keep<br>
 The rebels in the lowest deep.<br>
 Thou guardest those whom heaven has cursed<br>
 Lest from their prison-house they burst,<br>
 And standest by the gates of hell<br>
 Their limitary* sentinel.<br>
 To thee is given the power to spread<br>
 Or spring above thy watery bed.<br>
 Now, best of noble mountains, rise<br>
 And do the thing that I advise,<br>
 E'en now above thy buried crest<br>
 Flies mighty Hanumán, the best<br>
 Of Van*sis, moved for Ráma's sake<br>
 A wonderous deed to undertake.<br>
 Lift up thy head that he may stay<br>
 And rest him on his weary way.'<br>
     He heard, and from his watery abroud,<br>
 As bursts the sun from ***** cloud,<br>
 Rose swifty. Crowned with plant and tree,<br>
 And stood above the foamy* sea.  <a name="fr_792"></a><a href="#fn_792"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 There with his lofty peaks apraised<br>
 Bright as a hundred suns he blazed,<br>
 And crest and crag of burnished gold<br>
 Flashed on the flood that round him rolled,*<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_395"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 395</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The Vánar thought the mountain rose<br>
 A hostile bar to interpose,<br>
 And, like a wind-swept cloud, o'erthrew<br>
 The glittering mountain as he flew.<br>
 Then from the falling hill rang out<br>
 A warning voice and joyful shout.<br>
 Again he raised him high in air<br>
 To meet the flying Vánar there,<br>
 And standing on his topmost peak<br>
 In human form began to speak: <a name="fr_793"></a><a href="#fn_793"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 'Best of the Vánars' noblest line,<br>
 A mighty task, O chief, is thine.<br>
 Here for a while, I pray thee, light<br>
 And rest upon the breezy height.<br>
 A prince of Raghu's line was he<br>
 Who gave his glory to the Sea, <a name="fr_794"></a><a href="#fn_794"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Who now to Rama's envoy shows<br>
 High honour for the debt he owes.<br>
 He bade me lift my buried head<br>
 Uprising from my watery bed,<br>
 And woo the Vanar chief to rest<br>
 A moment on my glittering crest,<br>
 Refresh thy weary limbs, and eat<br>
 My mountain fruits for they are sweet.<br>
 I too, O chieftain, know thee well;-<br>
 Three worlds thy famous virtues tell;<br>
 And none, I ween, with thee may vie<br>
 Who spring impetuous through the sky.<br>
 To every guest, though mean and low.<br>
 The wise respect and honour show;<br>
 And how shall I neglect thee, how<br>
 Slight the great guest so near me now?<br>
 Son of the Wind,'tis thine to share<br>
 The might of him who shakes the air;<br>
 And,--for he loves his offspring,--he<br>
 Is honoured when I honour thee.<br>
 Of yore, when Krita's age  <a name="fr_795"></a><a href="#fn_795"><font size="1">3</font></a> was new,<br>
 The little hills and mountains flew<br>
 Where'er they listed, borne on wings<br>
 More rapid the feathered king's. <a name="fr_796"></a><a href="#fn_796"><font size="1">4</font></a><br>
 But mighty terror came on all<br>
 The Gods and saints who feared their fall.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And Indra in his anger rent<br>
 Their pinions with the bolts he sent.<br>
 When in his ruthless fury he<br>
 Levelled his flashing bolt at me,<br>
 The great-souled Wind inclined to save,<br>
 And laid me neath the ocean's wave.<br>
 Thus by the favour of the sire<br>
 I kept my cherished wings entire;<br>
 And for this deed of kindness done<br>
 I honour thee his noble son.<br>
 O come, thy weary limbs relieve,<br>
 And honour due from me receive.'<br>
 'I may not rest,' the Vanar cried;<br>
 'I must not stay or turn aside.<br>
 Yet pleased am I, thou noblest hill,<br>
 And as the deed accept thy will.'<br>
     Thus as he spoke he lightly pressed<br>
 With his broad hand the mountain's crest.<br>
 Then bounded upward to the height<br>
 Of heaven, rejoicing in his might,<br>
 And through the fields of boundless blue,<br>
 The pathway of his father, flew.<br>
 Gods, saints, and heavenly bards beheld<br>
 That flight that none had paralleled,<br>
 Then to the Nagas' mother  <a name="fr_797"></a><a href="#fn_797"><font size="1">1b</font></a> came<br>
 And thus addressed the sun-bright dame:<br>
 'See, Hauum'an with venturous leap<br>
 Would spring across the mighty deep,-<br>
 A Viinar prince, the Wind-God's seed:<br>
 Come, Suras'a, his course impede.<br>
 In Rakshas form thy shape disguise,<br>
 Terrific, like a hill in size:<br>
 Let thy red eyes with fury glow,<br>
 And high as heaven thy body grow.<br>
 With fearful tusks the chief defy.<br>
 That we his power and strength may try.<br>
 He will with guile thy hold elude,<br>
 Or own thy might, by thee subdued.'<br>
     Pleased with the grateful honours paid,<br>
 The godlike dame their words obeyed,<br>
 Clad in a shape of terror she<br>
 Sprang from the middle of the sea,<br>
 And, with fierce accents that appalled<br>
 All creatures, to the Vanar called:<br>
 'Come, prince of Vanars, doomed to be<br>
 My food this day by heaven's decree.<br>
 Such boon from ages long ago<br>
 To Brahma's favouring will I owe.'<br>
     She ceased, and Hanuman replied,<br>
 By shape and threat unterrified:<br>
 'Brave Rama with his Maithil spouse<br>
 Lodged in the shade of Dandak's boughs.<br>
 Thence Ravan king of giants stole<br>
 Sita the joy of Rama's soul.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_396"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 396</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 By Ráma's high behest to her<br>
 I go a willing messenger;<br>
 And never shouldst them hinder one<br>
 Who toils for Das'aratha's son.<br>
 First captive Sítá will I see,<br>
 And him who sent and waits for me,<br>
 Then come and to thy will submit,<br>
 Yea, by my truth I promise it.'<br>
 'Nay, hope not thus thy life to save;<br>
 Not such the boon that Brahma gave.<br>
 Enter my mouth,' was her reply,<br>
 'Then forward on thy journey hie!'  <a name="fr_798"></a><a href="#fn_798"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Stretch, wider stretch thy jaws,' exclaimed<br>
 The Vánar chief, to ire inflamed;<br>
 And, as the Rákshas near him drew,<br>
 Ten leagues in height his stature grew.<br>
 Then straight, her threatening jaws between,<br>
 A gulf of twenty leagues was seen.<br>
 To fifty leagues he waxed, and still<br>
 Her mouth grew wider at her will.<br>
 Then smaller than a thumb became,<br>
 Shrunk by his power, the Vánar's frame.  <a name="fr_799"></a><a href="#fn_799"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 He leaped within, and turning round<br>
 Sprang through the portal at a bound.<br>
 Then hung in air a moment, while<br>
 He thus addressed her with a smile:<br>
 'O Daksha's child,  <a name="fr_800"></a><a href="#fn_800"><font size="1">3</font></a> farewell at last!<br>
 For I within thy mouth have passed.<br>
 Thou hast the gift of Brahmá's grace:<br>
 I go, the Maithil queen to trace.'<br>
 Then, to her former shape restored,<br>
 She thus addressed the Vánar lord:<br>
 'Then forward to the task, and may<br>
 Success and joy attend thy way!<br>
 Go, and the rescued lady bring<br>
 In triumph to her lord and king.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Then hosts of spirits as they gazed<br>
 The daring of the Vánar praised.<br>
 Through the broad fields of ether, fast<br>
 Garud's royal self, he passed,<br>
 The region of the cloud and rain,<br>
 Loved by the gay Gandharva train,<br>
 Where mid the birds that came and went<br>
 Shone Indra's glorious bow unbent,<br>
 And like a host of wandering stars<br>
 Flashed the high Gods' celestial cars.<br>
 Fierce Sinhiká  <a name="fr_801"></a><a href="#fn_801"><font size="1">1b</font></a> who joyed in ill<br>
 And changed her form to work her will,<br>
 Descried him on his airy way<br>
 And marked the Vánar for her prey.<br>
 'This day at length,' the demon cried,<br>
 'My hunger shall be satisfied,'<br>
 And at his passing shadow caught<br>
 Delighted with the cheering thought.<br>
 The Vánar felt the power that stayed<br>
 And held him as she grasped his shade,<br>
 Like some tall ship upon the main<br>
 That struggles with the wind in vain.<br>
 Below, above, his eye he bent<br>
 And scanned the sea and firmament.<br>
 High from the briny deep upreared<br>
 The monster's hideous form appeared,<br>
 'Sugríva's tale,' he cried,'is true:<br>
 This is the demon dire to view<br>
 Of whom the Vánar monarch told,<br>
 Whose grasp a passing shade can hold.'<br>
 Then, as a cloud in rain-time grows.<br>
 His form, dilating, swelled and rose.<br>
 Wide as the space from heaven to hell<br>
 Her jaws she opened with a yell,<br>
 And rushed upon her fancied prey<br>
 With cloud-like roar to seize and slay.<br>
 The Vánar swift as thought compressed<br>
 His borrowed bulk of limb and chest,<br>
 And stood with one quick bound inside<br>
 The monstrous mouth she opened wide.<br>
 Hid like the moon when Ráhu  <a name="fr_802"></a><a href="#fn_802"><font size="1">2b</font></a> draws<br>
 The orb within his ravening jaws.<br>
 Within that ample cavern pent<br>
 The demon's form he tore and rent,<br>
 And, from the mangled carcass freed,<br>
 Came forth again with thought-like speed.  <a name="fr_803"></a><a href="#fn_803"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_397"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 397</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus with his skill the fiend he slew,<br>
 Then to his wonted stature grew.<br>
 The spirits saw the demon die.<br>
 And hailed the Vánar from the sky:<br>
 'Well hast thou fought a wondrous fight<br>
 Nor spared the fiend's terrific might,<br>
 On, on! perform the blameless deed,<br>
 And in thine every wish succeed.<br>
 Ne're can they fail in whom combine<br>
 Such valour; thought, and skill as thine.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Pleased with their praises as they sang,<br>
 Again through fields of air he sprang,<br>
 And now, his travail wellnigh done,<br>
 The distint shore was almost won,<br>
 Before him on the margent stood<br>
 In long dark line a waving wood,<br>
 And the fair island, bright and green<br>
 With flowers and trees, was clearly seen,<br>
 And every babbling brook that gave<br>
 Her lord the sea a tribute wave.<br>
 He lighted down on Lamba's peak<br>
 Which tinted metals stain and streak,<br>
 And looked where Lanká's splendid town<br>
 Shone on the mountain like a crown.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_789"></a><a href="ry343.htm#fr_789">394:1</a>  This Book is called Sundar or the
 Beatiful. To a European taste it is the
 most intolerably tedious of the whole
 poem, abounding in repetition, overloaded
 description, and long aud useless speeches
 which impede the action of the poem.
 Manifest interpolations of whole Cantos
 also occur. I have omitted none of the
 action of the Book, but have occasionally
 omitted long passages of common-place
 description, lamentation, and long stories
 which have been again and again repeated.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_790"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_790">394:2</a>  Brahmá the Self-Existent.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_791"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_791">394:1b</a>  Maináka was the son of Rimálaya*
 and Mená or Menaka.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_792"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_792">394:2b</a>  Thus Milton makes the hills of heaven
 self-moving at command:
 
 </p><p>
 'At his comma*d the uprooted hiils retired
 Each to his place, they heard his voice and went Obsequious'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_793"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_793">395:1</a>  The spirit of the mountain is
 separable from the mountain. Himalaya has
 also been represented as standing in human
 on one of his own peaks.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_794"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_794">395:2</a>  Sagar or the Sea is said to have
 derived its name from Sagar. The story is
 fully told in Book I, Cantos XLII, XLIII,
 and XLlV.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_795"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_795">395:3</a>  Kritu is the first of the four ages of
 the world, the golden age, also called
 Satya.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_796"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_796">395:4</a>  <i>Parvata</i> means a mountain and in the
 Vedas a cloud. Hence in later mythology
 the mountain have taken the place of
 the clouds as the objects of the attacks of
 Indra the Sun-God. The feathered king
 is Garuda.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_797"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_797">395:1b</a>  "The children of Surasa were a
 thousand mighty many-headed serpents,
 traversing the sky."
 WlLSON'S <i>Vishnu Purana</i>,
 Vol.II. p.73.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_798"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_798">396:1</a>  She means, says the Commentator,
 pursue thy journey if thou can.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_799"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_799">396:2</a>  If Milton's spirits are allowed the
 power of infinite self-extension and
 compression the same must be conceded to
 Válmíki's supernatural beings. Given the
 power as in Milton the result in Válmíki
 is perfectly consistent.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_800"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_800">396:3</a>  "Daksha is the son of Brahmá and
 one of the Prajápatis or divine progenitors.
 He had sixty daughters, twenty-seven of
 whom married to Kas'yapa produced,
 according to one of the Indian cosmogonies,
 all mundane beings. Does the
 epithet, Descendant of Daksha, given to
 Surasá, mean that she is one of those
 daughters? I think not. This epithet is
 perhaps an appellation common to all
 created beings as having sprung from
 Daksha." GORRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_801"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_801">396:1b</a>  Sinhiká is the mother of Ráhu the
 dragon's head or ascending node, the chief
 agent in eclipses.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_802"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_802">396:2b</a>  Ráhu is the demon who causes eclipses
 by attempting to swallow the sun and
 moon.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_803"></a><a href="ry344.htm#fr_803">396:3b</a>  According to De Gubernatis, the
 author of the very learned, ingenious, and
 interesting though too fanciful <i>Zoological
 Mythology.</i> Hanuman here represents the
 sun entering into and escaping from a
 cloud. The biblical Jonah, according to
 him, typifies the same phenomenon. Sádi, <a name="page_395"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 395</font></a>
 speaking of sunset, says <i>Yùnas andar-i-dihán-i
 máhi shud</i>: Jonas was within the
 fish's mouth. See ADDITIONAL NOTES.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry345.htm">Next: Canto II.: Lanká.</a></center>
 </body>