<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry344.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry346.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO II.: LANKÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 The glorious sight a while he viewed,<br>
 Then to the town his way pursued.<br>
 Around the Vanar as he went<br>
 Breathed from the wood delicious scent,<br>
 And the soft grass beneath his feet<br>
 With gem-like flowers was bright and sweet.<br>
 Still as the Vanar nearer drew<br>
 More clearly rose the town to view<br>
 The palm her fan-like leaves displayed,<br>
 Priyálas  <a name="fr_804"></a><a href="#fn_804"><font size="1">1</font></a> lent their pleasant shade,<br>
 And mid the lower greenery far<br>
 Conspicuous rose the Kovidár  <a name="fr_805"></a><a href="#fn_805"><font size="1">2</font></a>.<br>
 A thousand trees mid flowers that glowed<br>
 Hung down their fruit's delicious load  <a name="fr_806"></a><a href="#fn_806"><font size="1">3</font></a>,<br>
 And in their crests that rocked and swayed<br>
 Sweet birds delightful music made.<br>
 And there were pleasant pools whereon<br>
 The glories of the lotus shone;<br>
 And gleams of sparkling fountains, stirred<br>
 By many a joyous water-bird.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Around, in lovely gardens grew<br>
 Blooms sweet of scent and bright of hue,<br>
 And Lanká, seat of Rávan's sway,<br>
 Before the wondering Vánar lay:<br>
 With stately domes and turrets tall,<br>
 Encircled by a golden wall,<br>
 And moats whose waters were aglow<br>
 With lily blossoms bright below:<br>
 For Sitá's sake defended well<br>
 With bolt and bar and sentinel,<br>
 And Rakshases who roamed in bands<br>
 With ready bows in eager hands.<br>
 He saw the stately mansions rise<br>
 Like pale-hued clouds in autumn skies;<br>
 Where noble streets were broad and bright,<br>
 And banners waved on every height.<br>
 Her gates were glorious to behold<br>
 Rich with the shine of burnished gold:<br>
 A lovely city planned and decked<br>
 By heaven's creative arhitect  <a name="fr_807"></a><a href="#fn_807"><font size="1">1b</font></a>,<br>
 Fairest of earthly cities meet<br>
 To be the Gods' celestial seat.<br>
 The Vánar by the northern gate<br>
 Thus in his heart began debate<br>
 'Our mightiest host would strive in vain<br>
 To take this city on the main:<br>
 A city that may well defy<br>
 The chosen warriors of the sky;<br>
 A city never to be won<br>
 E'en by the arm of Raghu's son.<br>
 Here is no hope by guile to win<br>
 The hostile hearts of those within.<br>
 'Twere vain to war, or bribe, or sow<br>
 Dissension mid the Vánar foe.<br>
 But now my search must I pursue<br>
 Until the Maithil queen I view:<br>
 And, when I find the captive dame,<br>
 Make victory mine only aim.<br>
 But, if I wear my present shape,<br>
 How shall I enter and escape<br>
 The Rákshas troops, their guards and spies,<br>
 And sleepless watch of cruel eyes?<br>
 The fiends of giant race who hold<br>
 This mighty town are strong and bold;<br>
 And I must labour to elude<br>
 The fiercely watchful multitude.<br>
 I in a shape to mock their sight<br>
 Must steal within the town by night,<br>
 Blind with my art the demons' eyes,<br>
 And thus achieve my enterprise.<br>
 How may I see, myself unseen<br>
 Of the fierce king, the captive queen.<br>
 And meet her in some lonely place,<br>
 With none beside her, face to face?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 When the bright sun had left the skies<br>
 The Vánar dwarfed his mighty size,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_398"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 398</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And, in the straitest bounds restrained,<br>
 The bigness of a cat retained.  <a name="fr_808"></a><a href="ry346.htm#fn_808"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Then, when the moon's soft light was spread,<br>
 Within the city's walls he sped.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_804"></a><a href="ry345.htm#fr_804">397:1</a>  The Buchanania Latifolia.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_805"></a><a href="ry345.htm#fr_805">397:2</a>  The Bauhinia Variegata.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_806"></a><a href="ry345.htm#fr_806">397:3</a>  Through the power that Rávan's stern
 mortifications had won for him his trees
 bore flowers and fruit simultaneously.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_807"></a><a href="ry345.htm#fr_807">397:1b</a>  Vis'vakarmá is the architect of the
 Gods.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry346.htm">Next: Canto III.: The Guardian Goddess.</a></center>
 </body>