<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry353.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry355.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XII.: THE SEARCH RENEWED.</h3>
 <p>
 Again the Vánar chief began<br>
 Each chamber, bower, and hall to scan.<br>
 In vain: he found not her he sought,<br>
 And pondered thus in bitter thought:<br>
 'Ah me the Maithil queen is slain:<br>
 She, ever true and free from stain,<br>
 The fiend's entreaty has denied.<br>
 And by his cruel hand has died.<br>
 Or has she sunk, by terror killed,<br>
 When first she saw the palace filled<br>
 With female monsters evil miened<br>
 Who wait upon the robber fiend?<br>
 No battle fought, no might displayed,<br>
 In vain this anxious search is made;<br>
 Nor shall my steps, made slow by shame,<br>
 Because I failed to find the dame,<br>
 Back to our lord the king be bent,<br>
 For he is swift to punishment.<br>
 In every bower my feet have been,<br>
 The dames of Rávan I seen;<br>
 But Ráma's spouse I seek in vain,<br>
 And all my toil is fruitless pain.<br>
 How shall I meet the Vánar<br>
 I left upon the ocean strand?<br>
 How, when they bid me speak, proclaim<br>
 These tidings of defeat and shame?<br>
 How shall I look on Angad's eye?<br>
 What words will Jámbaván<br>
 Yet dauntless hearts will never fail<br>
 To win success though foes assail,<br>
 And I this sorrow will subdue<br>
 And search the palace through and through,<br>
 Exploring with my cautious tread<br>
 Each spot as yet unvisited.'<br>
     Again he turned him to explore<br>
 Each chamber, hall, and corridor,<br>
 And arbour bright with scented bloom.<br>
 And lodge and cell and picture-room.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_403"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 403</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 With eager eye and noiseless feet<br>
 He passed through many a cool retreat<br>
 Where women lay in slumber drowned;<br>
 But Sítá nowhere found.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry355.htm">Next: Canto XIII.: Despair And Hope.</a></center>
 </body>