<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry357.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry359.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVI.: HANUMÁN'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 Then, all his thoughts on Sítá bent,<br>
 The Vánar chieftain made lament:<br>
 'The queen to Ráma's soul endeared,<br>
 By Lakshman's pious heart revered,<br>
 Lies here,--for none may strive with Fate,<br>
 A captive, sad and desolate.<br>
 The brothers' might full well she knows,<br>
 And bravely bears the storm of woes,<br>
 As swelling Gangá in the rains<br>
 The rush of every flood sustains.<br>
 Her lord, for her, fierce Báli slew,<br>
 Virádha's monstrous might o'erthrew,<br>
 For her the fourteen thousand slain<br>
 In Janasthán bedewed the plain.<br>
 And if for her Ikshváku's son<br>
 Destroyed the world 'twere nobly done.<br>
 This, this is she, so far renowned,<br>
 Who sprang from out the furrowed ground,  <a name="fr_827"></a><a href="#fn_827"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Child of the high-souled king whose sway<br>
 The men of Mithilá obey;<br>
 The glorious lady wooed and won<br>
 By Das'aratha's noblest son;<br>
 And now these sad eyes look on her<br>
 Mid hostile fiends a prisoner.<br>
 From home and every bliss she fled<br>
 By wifely love and duty led,<br>
 And heedless of a wanderer's woes,<br>
 A life in lonely forests chose.<br>
 This, this is she so fair of mould.<br>
 Whose limbs are bright as burnished gold.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_405"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 405</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Whose voice was ever soft and mild.<br>
 Who sweetly spoke and sweetly smiled.<br>
 O, what is Ráma's misery! how<br>
 He longs to see his darling now!<br>
 Pining for one of her fond looks<br>
 As one athirst for water brooks.<br>
 Absorbed in woe the lady sees<br>
 No Rákshas guard, no blooming trees.<br>
 Her eyes are with her thoughts, and they<br>
 Are fixed on Ráma far away.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_827"></a><a href="ry358.htm#fr_827">404:1b</a>  Sítá 'not of woman born,' was found
 by King Janak as be was turning up the
 ground in preparation for a sacrifice, See
 Book II. Canto CXVIII.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry359.htm">Next: Canto XVII.: Sítá's Guard.</a></center>
 </body>