<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry356.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry358.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XV.: SÍTÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 Fair as Kailása white with snow<br>
 He saw a palace flash and glow,<br>
 A crystal pavement gem-inlaid,<br>
 And coral steps and colonnade,<br>
 And glittering towers that kissed the skies,<br>
 Whose dazzling splendour charmed his eyes.<br>
 There pallid, with neglected dress,<br>
 Watched close by fiend and giantess,<br>
 Her sweet face thin with constant flow<br>
 Of tears, with fasting and with woe;<br>
 Pale as the young moon's crescent when<br>
 The first faint light returns to men:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Dim as the flame when clouds of smoke<br>
 The latent glory hide and choke;<br>
 Like Rohiní the queen of stars<br>
 Oppressed by the red planet Mars;<br>
 From her dear friends and husband torn,<br>
 Amid the cruel fiends, forlorn,<br>
 Who fierce-eyed watch around her kept,<br>
 A tender woman sat and wept,<br>
 Her sobs, her sighs, her mournful mien,<br>
 Her glorious eyes, proclaimed the queen.<br>
 'This, this is she,' the Vánar cried,<br>
 'Fair as the moon and lotus-eyed,<br>
 I saw the giant Rávan bear<br>
 A captive through the fields of air.<br>
 Such was the beauty of the dame;<br>
 Her form, her lips, her eyes the same.<br>
 This peerless queen whom I behold<br>
 Is Ráma's wife with limbs of gold.<br>
 Best of the sons of men is he,<br>
 And worthy of her lord is she.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_826"></a><a href="ry356.htm#fr_826">404:1</a>  The poet forgets that Hanumán has
 reduced himself to the size of a cat.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry358.htm">Next: Canto XVI.: Hanumán's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>