<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry358.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry360.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVII.: SÍTÁ'S GUARD.</h3>
 <p>
 His pitying eyes with tears bedewed,<br>
 The weeping queen again he viewed,<br>
 And saw around the prisoner stand<br>
 Her demon guard, a fearful band. <a name="fr_828"></a><a href="#fn_828"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Some earless, some with ears that hung<br>
 Low as their feet and loosely swung:<br>
 Some fierce with single ears and eyes,<br>
 Some dwarfish, some of monstrous size:<br>
 Some with their dark necks long and thin<br>
 With hair upon the knotty skin:<br>
 Some with wild locks, some bald and bare,<br>
 Some covered o'er with bristly hair:<br>
 Some tall and straight, some bowed and bent<br>
 With every foul disfigurement:<br>
 All black and fierce with eyes of fire.<br>
 Ruthless and stern and swift to ire:<br>
 Some with the jackal's jaw and nose.<br>
 Some faced like boars and buffaloes:<br>
 Some with the heads of goats and kine,<br>
 Of elephants, and dogs, and swine:<br>
 With lions' lips and horses' brows,<br>
 They walked with feet of mules and cows:<br>
 Swords, maces, clubs, and spears they bore<br>
 In hideous hands that reeked with gore,<br>
 And, never sated, turned afresh<br>
 To bowls of wine and piles of flesh.<br>
 Such were the awful guards who stood<br>
 Round Sítá in that lovely wood,<br>
 While in her lonely sorrow she<br>
 Wept sadly neath a spreading tree.<br>
 He watched the spouse of Ráma there<br>
 Regardless of her tangled hair,<br>
 Her jewels stripped from neck and limb,<br>
 Decked only with her love of him.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_828"></a><a href="ry359.htm#fr_828">405:1</a>  Somewhat similarly has Ariosto described
 the band of monster at the gate
 of the city of Alcina:
 
 </p><p>
 </p><dir><br>
 "Non fu veduta mai piú strana torma,<br>
 Piú monstruosi volti e peggio fatti;<br>
 Alcun' dal collo in giú d'uomini han forma,<br>
 Col viso altri di simie, altri di gatti;<br>
 Stampano alcun con pié caprigni l'orma,<br>
 Alcuni son centauri agili ed atti."<br>
 </dir>
 <i>Orlando Furioso</i>, Canto VI.
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry360.htm">Next: Canto XVIII.: Rávan.</a></center>
 </body>