<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry355.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry357.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIV.: THE AS'OKA GROVE.</h3>
 <p>
 He cleared the barrier at a bound;<br>
 He stood within the pleasant ground,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_404"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 404</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And with delighted eyes surveyed<br>
 The climbing plants and varied shade,<br>
 He saw unnumbered trees unfold<br>
 The treasures of their pendent gold,<br>
 As, searching for the Maithil queen,<br>
 He strayed through alleys soft and green;<br>
 And when a spray he bent or broke<br>
 Some little bird that slept awoke.<br>
 Whene'er the breeze of morning blew,<br>
 Where'er a startled peacock flew,<br>
 The gaily coloured branches shed<br>
 Their flowery rain upon his head<br>
 That clung around the Vánar till<br>
 He seemed a blossom-covered hill,  <a name="fr_826"></a><a href="ry357.htm#fn_826"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 The earth, on whose fair bosom lay<br>
 The flowers that fell from every spray,<br>
 Was glorious as a lovely maid<br>
 In all her brightest robes arrayed,<br>
 He saw the breath of morning shake<br>
 The lilies on the rippling lake<br>
 Whose waves a pleasant lapping made<br>
 On crystal steps with gems inlaid.<br>
 Then roaming through the enchanted ground,<br>
 A pleasant hill the Vánar found,<br>
 And grottoes in the living stone<br>
 With grass and flowery trees o'ergrown.<br>
 Through rocks and boughs a brawling rill<br>
 Leapt from the bosom of the hill,<br>
 Like a proud beauty when she flies<br>
 From her love's arms with angry eyes.<br>
 He clomb a tree that near him grew<br>
 And leafy shade around him threw.<br>
 'Hence,' thought the Vánar, 'shall I see<br>
 The Maithil dame, if here she be,<br>
 These lovely trees, this cool retreat<br>
 Will surely tempt her wandering feet.<br>
 Here the sad queen will roam apart.<br>
 And dream of Ráma in her heart,'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_822"></a><a href="ry355.htm#fr_822">403:1</a>  The Vasus are a class of eight deities,
 originally personifications of natural phenomena.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_823"></a><a href="ry355.htm#fr_823">403:2</a>  The Maruts are the winds or Storm-Gods.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_824"></a><a href="ry355.htm#fr_824">403:3</a>  The Ádityas originally seven
 deities of the heavenly sphere of whom
 Varuna is the chief. The name Áditya
 was afterwards given to any God, specially
 to Súrya the Sun.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_825"></a><a href="ry355.htm#fr_825">403:4</a>  The As'vins are the Heavenly Twins,
 the Castor and Pollux of the Hindus.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry357.htm">Next: Canto XV.: Sítá.</a></center>
 </body>