<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry368.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry370.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVII.: TRIJATÁ'S DREAM.</h3>
 <p>
 Their threats unfeared, their counsel spurned,<br>
 The demons' breasts with fury burned.<br>
 Some sought the giant king to bear<br>
 The tale of Sita's fixt despair.<br>
 With threats and taunts renewed the rest<br>
 Around the weeping lady pressed.<br>
 But Trijatá, of softer mould,<br>
 A Rákshas matron wife and old,<br>
 With pity for the captive moved,<br>
 In words like these the fiends reproved:<br>
 "Me, me,' she cried,'eat me, but spare<br>
 The spouse of Das'aratha's heir<br>
 Last night I dreamt a dream; and still<br>
 The fear and awe my bosom chill;<br>
 For in that dream I saw foreshown,<br>
 Our race by Ráma's hand o'erthrown.<br>
 I saw a chariot high in the air,<br>
 Of ivory exceeding fair.<br>
 A hundred steeds that chariot drew<br>
 As swiftly through the clouds it flew,<br>
 And, clothed in white, with wreaths that shone,<br>
 The sons of Raghu rode thereon,<br>
 I looked and saw this lady here,<br>
 Clad in the purest white, appear<br>
 High on the snow white hill whose feet<br>
 The angry waves of ocean beat.<br>
 And she and Ráma met at last<br>
 Like light and sun when night is past,<br>
 Again I saw them side by side.<br>
 On Rávan's car they seemed to ride,<br>
 And with the princely Lakshman flee<br>
 To northern realms beyond the sea.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_411"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 411</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Rávan, shaved and shorn, besmeared<br>
 With oil from head to foot, appeared.<br>
 He quaffed, he raved: his robes were red:<br>
 Fierce was his eye, and bare his head.<br>
 I saw him from his chariot thrust;<br>
 I saw him rolling in the dust.<br>
 A woman came and dragged away<br>
 The stricken giant where he lay,<br>
 And on a car which asses drew<br>
 The monarch of our race she threw,<br>
 He rose erect, he danced and laughed,<br>
 With thirsty lips the oil he quaffed,<br>
 Then with wild eyes and streaming mouth<br>
 Sped on the chariot to the south.  <a name="fr_849"></a><a href="ry370.htm#fn_849"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Then, dropping oil from every limb,<br>
 His sons the princes followed him,<br>
 And Kumbhakarna,  <a name="fr_850"></a><a href="ry370.htm#fn_850"><font size="1">2</font></a> shaved and shorn,<br>
 Was southward on a camel borne.<br>
 Then royal Lanká reeled and fell<br>
 With gate and tower and citadel,<br>
 This ancient city, far-renowned:<br>
 All life within her walls was drowned;<br>
 And the wild waves of ocean rolled<br>
 O'er Lanká and her streets of gold.<br>
 Warned by these signs I bid you fly;<br>
 Or by the hand of Ráma die,<br>
 Whose vengeance will not spare the life<br>
 Of one who vexed his faithful wife.<br>
 Your bitter taunts and threats forgo:<br>
 Comfort the lady in her woe,<br>
 And humbly pray her to forgive;<br>
 For so you may be spared and live,'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry370.htm">Next: Canto XXX.: Hanumán's Deliberation.</a></center>
 </body>