<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry361.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry363.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XX.: RÁVAN'S WOOING.</h3>
 <p>
 With amorous look and soft address<br>
 The fiend began his suit to press:<br>
 'Why wouldst thou, lady lotus-eyed,<br>
 From my fond glance those beauties hide?<br>
 Mine eager suit no more repel:<br>
 But love me, for I love thee well.<br>
 Dismiss, sweet dame, dismiss thy fear;<br>
 No giant and no man is near.<br>
 Ours is the right by force to seize<br>
 What dames soe'er our fancy please.  <a name="fr_833"></a><a href="#fn_833"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 But I with rude hands will not touch<br>
 A lady whom I love so much.<br>
 Fear not, dear queen: no fear is nigh:<br>
 Come, on thy lover's love rely.<br>
 Some little sign of favor show,<br>
 Nor lie enamoured of thy woe.<br>
 Those limbs upon that cold earth laid.<br>
 Those tresses twined in single braid,  <a name="fr_834"></a><a href="#fn_834"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 The fast and woe that wear thy frame,<br>
 Beseem not thee, O beauteous dame.<br>
 For thee the fairest wreaths were meant,<br>
 The sandal and the aloe's scent,<br>
 Rich ornaments and pearls of price,<br>
 And vesture meet for Paradise.<br>
 With dainty cates shouldst thou be fed,<br>
 And rest upon a sumptuous bed.<br>
 And festive joys to thee belong,<br>
 The music, and the dance and song.<br>
 Rise, pearl of women, rise and deck<br>
 With gems and chains thine arms and neck.<br>
 Shall not the dame I love be seen<br>
 In venture worthy of a queen?<br>
 Methinks when thy sweet form was made<br>
 His hand the wise Creator stayed;<br>
 For never more did he design<br>
 A beauty meet to rival thine.<br>
 Come, let, us love while we yet may,<br>
 For youth will fly and charms decay.<br>
 Come cast thy *** fear aside<br>
 And to my lo*e, my chosen bride.<br>
 The gem*s and jewels that my hands<br>
 Has reft from every plundered land,--<br>
 To thee I give th*** this day<br>
 And at thy feet my kingdom lay.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_407"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 407</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The broad rich earth will I o'errun,<br>
 And leave no town unconquered, none;<br>
 Then of the whole an offering make<br>
 To Janak, <a name="fr_835"></a><a href="ry363.htm#fn_835"><font size="1">1</font></a> dear, for thy sweet sake.<br>
 In all the world no power I see<br>
 Of God or man can strive with me.<br>
 Of old the Gods and Asurs set<br>
 In terrible array I met:<br>
 Their scattered hosts to earth I beat,<br>
 And trod their flags beneath my feet.<br>
 Come, taste of bliss and drink thy fill,<br>
 And rule the slave who serves thy will.<br>
 Think not of wretched Ráma: he<br>
 Is less than nothing now to thee.<br>
 Stript of his glory, poor, dethroned,<br>
 A wanderer by his friends disowned,<br>
 On the cold earth he lays his head,<br>
 Or is with toil and misery dead.<br>
 And if perchance he lingers yet.<br>
 His eyes on thee shall ne'er be set.<br>
 Could he, that mighty monarch, who<br>
 Was named Hiranyakas'ipu.<br>
 Could he who wore the garb of gold<br>
 Win Glory back from Indra's hold?  <a name="fr_836"></a><a href="ry363.htm#fn_836"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 O lady of the lovely smile,<br>
 Whose eyes the sternest heart beguile,<br>
 In all thy radiant beauty dressed<br>
 My heart and soul thou ravishest.<br>
 What though thy robe is soiled and worn,<br>
 And no bright gems thy limbs adorn,<br>
 Thou unadorned art dearer far<br>
 Than all my loveliest consorts are.<br>
 My royal home is bright and fair;<br>
 A thousand beauties meet me there.<br>
 But come, my glorious love, and be<br>
 The queen of all those dames and me.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_833"></a><a href="ry362.htm#fr_833">406:1b</a>  Rávan in his magic car carrying off
 the most beautiful women reminds us of
 the magician in <i>Orlando Furioso</i>, possesor
 of the flying horse.
 </p><dir><br>
 "Volando talor s'aza ne le stelle,     *<br>
 E por quasis talor 'a terra rade';     *<br>
 Bie porta con tui tutte le belle      *<br>
 Donna che trova perquelle contrade."   *<br>
 </dir>
 
 <p><a name="fn_834"></a><a href="ry362.htm#fr_834">406:2b</a>   Indian women twisted their long hair
 in a single braid as a sign of mourning for
 their absent husbands.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry363.htm">Next: Canto XXI.: Sita's Scorn.</a></center>
 </body>