<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry366.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry368.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXV.: SÍTÁ'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 On the bare earth the lady sank,<br>
 And trembling from their presence shrank<br>
 Like a strayed fawn, when night is dark,<br>
 And hungry wolves around her bark.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_410"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 410</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then to a shady tree she crept,<br>
 And thought upon her lord and wept.<br>
 By fear and bitter woe oppressed<br>
 She bathed the beauties of her breast<br>
 With her hot tears' incessant flow,<br>
 And found no respite from her woe.<br>
 As shakes a plantain in the breeze<br>
 She shook, and fell on trembling knees;<br>
 While at each demon's furious look<br>
 Her cheek its native hue forsook.<br>
 She lay and wept and made her moan<br>
 In sorrow's saddest undertone,<br>
 And, wild with grief, with fear appalled,<br>
 On Ráma and his brother called:<br>
 'O dear Kaus'alyá, <a name="fr_847"></a><a href="ry368.htm#fn_847"><font size="1">1</font></a> hear me cry!<br>
 Sweet Queen Sumitrá  <a name="fr_848"></a><a href="ry368.htm#fn_848"><font size="1">2</font></a>, list my sigh!<br>
 True is the saw the wise declare:<br>
 Death comes not to relieve despair.<br>
 'Tis vain for dame or man to pray;<br>
 Death will not hear before his day;<br>
 Since I, from Ráma's sight debarred,<br>
 And tortured by my cruel guard,<br>
 Still live in hopeless woe to grieve<br>
 And loathe the life I may not leave.<br>
 Here, like a poor deserted thing,<br>
 My limbs upon the ground I fling,<br>
 And, like a bark beneath the blast,<br>
 Shall sink oppressed with woes at last.<br>
 Ah, blest are they, supremely blest,<br>
 Whose eyes upon my lord may rest;<br>
 Who mark his lion, port, and hear<br>
 His gentle speech that charms the ear.<br>
 Alas, what antenatal crime,<br>
 What trespass of forgotten time<br>
 Waighs on my soul, and bids me bow<br>
 Beneath this load of misery now?'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry368.htm">Next: Canto XXVI.: Sitá's Lament</a></center>
 </body>