<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry365.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry367.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIV.: SÍTÁ'S REPLY.</h3>
 <p>
 Still with reproaches rough and rude<br>
 Those fiends the gentle queen pursued:<br>
 What! can so fair a life displease,<br>
 To dwell with him in joyous ease?<br>
 Dwell in his bowers a happy queen<br>
 In silk and gold and jewels' sheen?<br>
 Still must thy woman fancy cling<br>
 To Ráma and reject our king?<br>
 Die in thy folly, or forget<br>
 That wretched wandering anchoret.<br>
 Come, Sita, in luxurious bowers<br>
 Spend with our lord thy happy hours;<br>
 The mighty lord who makes his own<br>
 The treasures of the worlds o'erthrown.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then, as a tear bedewed her eye,<br>
 The hapless lady made reply:<br>
 'I loathe, with heart and soul detest<br>
 The shameful life your words suggest.<br>
 Eat, if you will, this mortal frame:<br>
 My soul rejects the sin and shame.<br>
 A homeless wanderer though he be,<br>
 In him my lord, my life I see,<br>
 And, till my earthly days be done,<br>
 Will cling to great Ikshváku's son.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then with fierce eyes on Sítá set<br>
 They cried again with taunt and threat:<br>
 Each licking with her fiery tongue<br>
 The lip that to her bosom hung,<br>
 And menacing the lady's life<br>
 With axe, or spear or murderous knife:<br>
 'Hear, Sítá, and our words obey.<br>
 Or perish by our hands to-day,<br>
 Thy love for Raghu's son forsake,<br>
 And Rávan for thy husband take,<br>
 Or we will rend thy limbs apart<br>
 And banquet on thy quivering heart.<br>
 Now from her body strike the head,<br>
 And tell the king the dame is dead.<br>
 Then by our lord's commandment she<br>
 A banquet for our band shall be.<br>
 Come, let the wine be quickly brought<br>
 That frees each heart from saddening thought.<br>
 Then to the western gate repair,<br>
 And we will dance and revel there.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry367.htm">Next: Canto XXV.: Sítá's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>