<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry364.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry366.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIII.: THE DEMONS' THREATS</h3>
 <p>
 Then round the helpless Sítá drew<br>
 With fiery eyes the hideous crew,<br>
 And thus assailed her, all and each,<br>
 With insult, taunt, and threatening speech:<br>
 'What! can it be thou prizest not<br>
 This happy chance, this glorious lot,<br>
 To be the chosen wife of one<br>
 So strong and great, Pulastya's son?<br>
 Pulastya--thus have sages told--<br>
 Is mid the Lords of Life  <a name="fr_843"></a><a href="#fn_843"><font size="1">2b</font></a> enrolled.<br>
 Lord Brahmá's mind-born son was he,<br>
 Fourth of that glorious company.<br>
 Vis'ravas from Pulastya sprang,--<br>
 Through all the worlds his glory rang.<br>
 And of Vis'ravas, large-eyed dame!<br>
 Our king the mighty Rávan came.<br>
 His happy consort thou mayst be:<br>
 Scorn not the words we say to thee'<br>
     One awful demon, fiery-eyed,<br>
 Stood by the Maithil queen and cried:<br>
 'Come and be his, if thou art wise.<br>
 Who smote the sovereign of the skies,<br>
 And made the thirty Gods and three, <a name="fr_844"></a><a href="#fn_844"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 O'ercome in furious battle, flee.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_409"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 409</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thy lover turns away with scorn<br>
 From wives whom grace and youth adorn.<br>
 Thou art his chosen consort, thou<br>
 Shall be his pride and darling now."<br>
     Another, Vikatá by name,<br>
 In words like these addressed the dame:<br>
 The king whose blows, in fury dealt,<br>
 The Nágas  <a name="fr_845"></a><a href="#fn_845"><font size="1">1</font></a> and Gandharvas  <a name="fr_846"></a><a href="#fn_846"><font size="1">2</font></a> felt,<br>
 In battle's fiercest brunt subdued,<br>
 Has stood by thee and humbly wooed.<br>
 And wilt thou in thy folly miss<br>
 The glory of a love like this?<br>
 Scared by his eye the sun grows chill,<br>
 The wanderer wind is hushed and still.<br>
 The rains at his command descend,<br>
 And trees with new-blown blossoms bend.<br>
 His word the hosts of demons fear.<br>
 And wilt thou, dame, refuse to hear?<br>
 Be counselled; with his will comply,<br>
 Or, lady, thou shalt surely die.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_842"></a><a href="ry364.htm#fr_842">408:1b</a>  These four lines have occurred before.
 Book III. Canto LVI.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_843"></a><a href="ry365.htm#fr_843">408:2b</a>  Prajápatis are the ten lords of created
 beings first created by Brahmá; somewhat
 like the Demiurgi of the Gnostics.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_844"></a><a href="ry365.htm#fr_844">408:3b</a>  "This is the number of the Vedic
 divinities mentioned in the Rig-veda. In <a name="page_409"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 409</font></a>
 Ashtaka I. Súkta XXXIV. the Rishi
 Hiranyastúpa invoking the As'vins says:
 À Násatyá tribhirekádasair iha devebniryátam:
 "O Násatyas (As'vins) come hither
 with the thrice eleven Gods," And in
 Súkta XLV. the Rishi Praskanva addressing
 his hymn to Agni (ignis, fire),
 thus invokes him: "Lord of the red
 steeds, propitiated by our prayers lead
 hither the thirty-three Gods." This number
 must certainly have been the actual
 number in the early days of the Vedic
 religion: although it appears probable
 enough that the thirty-three Vedic divinities
 could not then be found co-ordinated
 in so systematic a way as they were arranged
 more recently by the authors of
 the Upanishads. In the later ages of
 Bramanism the number went on increasing
 without measure by successive mythical
 and religious creations which peopled
 the Indian Olympus with abstract beings
 of every kind. But through lasting veneration
 of the word of tha Veda the custom
 regained of giving the name of "the
 thirty-three Gods" to the immense phalanx
 of the multiplied deities." GORRESIO.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_845"></a><a href="ry365.htm#fr_845">409:1</a>  Serpent-Gods who dwell in the regions
 under the earth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_846"></a><a href="ry365.htm#fr_846">409:2</a>  In the mythology of the epics the
 Gandharvas are the heavenly singers or
 musicians who form the orchestra at the
 banquets of the Gods, and they belong to
 the heaven of India in whose battles they
 share.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry366.htm">Next: Canto XXIV.: Sítá's Reply.</a></center>
 </body>