<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry359.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry361.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVIII.: RÁVAN.</h3>
 <p>
 While from his shelter in the boughs<br>
 The Vánar looked on Ráma's spouse<br>
 He heard the gathered giants raise<br>
 The solemn hymn of prayer and praise.--<br>
 Priests skilled in rite and ritual, who<br>
 The Vedas and their branches  <a name="fr_829"></a><a href="#fn_829"><font size="1">1b</font></a> knew.<br>
 Then, as loud strains of music broke<br>
 His sleep, the giant monarch woke.<br>
 Swift to his heart the thought returned<br>
 Of the fair queen for whom he burned;<br>
 Nor could the amorous fiend control<br>
 The passion that absorbed his soul.<br>
 In all his brightest garb arrayed<br>
 He hastened to that lovely shade.<br>
 Where glowed each choicest flower and fruit.<br>
 And the sweet birds were never mute.<br>
 And tall deer bent their heads to drink<br>
 On the fair streamlet's grassy brink.<br>
 Near that As'oka grove he drew,--<br>
 A hundred dames his retinue.<br>
 Like Indra with the thousand eyes<br>
 Girt with the beauties of the skies.<br>
 Some walked beside their lord to hold<br>
 The chouries, fans, and lamps of gold.<br>
 And others purest water bore<br>
 In golden urns, and paced before.<br>
 Some carried, piled on golden plates.<br>
 Delicious food of dainty cates;<br>
 Some wine in massive bowls whereon<br>
 The fairest gems resplendent shone.<br>
 Some by the monarch's side displayed,<br>
 Wrought like a swan, a silken shade:<br>
 Another beauty walked behind,<br>
 The sceptre to her care assigned.<br>
 Around the monarch gleamed the crowd<br>
 As lightnings flash about a cloud.<br>
 And each made music as she went<br>
 With zone and tinkling ornament.<br>
 Attended thus in royal state<br>
 The monarch reached the garden gate,<br>
 While gold and silver torches, fed<br>
 With scented oil a soft light shed.  <a name="fr_830"></a><a href="#fn_830"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_406"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 406</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He, while the flame of fierce desire<br>
 Burnt in his eyes like kindled fire,<br>
 Seemed Love incarnate in his pride,<br>
 His bow and arrows laid aside.  <a name="fr_831"></a><a href="ry361.htm#fn_831"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 His robe, from spot and blemish free<br>
 Like Amrit foamy from the sea,  <a name="fr_832"></a><a href="ry361.htm#fn_832"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Hung down in many a loosened fold<br>
 Inwrought with flowers and bright with gold.<br>
 The Vánar from his station viewed,<br>
 Amazed, the wondrous multitude,<br>
 Where, in the centre of that ring<br>
 Of noblest women, stood the king,<br>
 As stands the full moon fair to view,<br>
 Girt by his starry retinue.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_829"></a><a href="ry360.htm#fr_829">405:1b</a>  The six <i>Angas</i> or subordinate branches
 of the Vedas are 1. <i>Sikshá</i>, the science
 of proper articulation and pronunciation:
 2. <i>Chhandas</i>,metre: 3. <i>Vyakarana</i>, linguistic
 analysis or grammar: 4. <i>Nirukta</i>,
 explanation of difficult Vedic words:
 5. <i>Jyotisha</i>, Astronomy, or rather the Vedic
 Calendar: 6. <i>Kalpa</i>, ceremonial.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_830"></a><a href="ry360.htm#fr_830">405:2b</a>  There appears to be some confusion,
 of time here. It was already morning
 when Hanumán entered the grove, and
 the torches would be needless.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry361.htm">Next: Canto XIX.: Síta's Fear.</a></center>
 </body>