<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry370.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry372.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXI.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then in sweet accents low and mild<br>
 The Vánar spoke to Janak's child:<br>
 'A noble king, by sin unstained,<br>
 The mighty Das'aratha reigned.<br>
 Lord of the warrior's car and steed,<br>
 The pride of old Ikshváku's seed.<br>
 A faithful friend, a blameless king.<br>
 Protector of each living thing.<br>
 A glorious monarch, strong to save,<br>
 Blest with the bliss he freely gave,<br>
 His son, the best of all who know<br>
 The science of the bended bow,<br>
 Was moon-bright Ráma, brave and strong<br>
 Who loved the right and loathed the wrong<br>
 Who ne'er from kingly duty swerved,<br>
 Loved by the lands his might preserved.<br>
 His feet the path of law pursued;<br>
 His arm rebellious foes subdued.<br>
 His sire's command the prince obeyed<br>
 And, banished, sought the forest shade,<br>
 Where with his wife and brother he<br>
 Wandered a saintly devotee.<br>
 There as he roamed the wilds he slew<br>
 The bravest of the Rákshas crew.<br>
 The giant king the prince beguiled,<br>
 And stole his consort, Janak's child.<br>
 Then Ráma roamed the country round,<br>
 And a firm friend, Sugríva, found,<br>
 Lord of the Vánar race, expelled<br>
 From his own realm which Báli held,<br>
 He conquered Báli and restored<br>
 The kingdom to the rightful lord.<br>
 Then by Sugríva's high decree<br>
 The Vánarlegions searched for thee,<br>
 Sampáti's counsel bade me leap<br>
 A hundred leagues across the deep.<br>
 And now my happy eyes have seen<br>
 At last the long-sought Maithil queen.<br>
 Such was the form, the eye, the grace<br>
 Of her whom Ráma bade me trace.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: her flowing locks she drew<br>
 To shield her from a stranger's view;<br>
 Then, trembling in her wild surprise,<br>
 Raised to the tree her anxious eyes.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry372.htm">Next: Canto XXXII.: Sítá's Doubt.</a></center>
 </body>