<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry376.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry378.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVII.: SÍTÁ'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 'Thou bringest me,' she cried again,<br>
 'A mingled draught of bliss and pain<br>
 Bliss, that he wears me in his heart,<br>
 Pain, that he wakes and weeps apart,<br>
 O, see how Fate is king of all,<br>
 Now lifts us high, now bids us fall,<br>
 And leads a captive bound with cord<br>
 The meanest slave, the proudest lord,<br>
 Thus even now Fate's stern decree<br>
 Has struck with grief my lord and me.<br>
 Say, how shall Ráma reach the shore<br>
 Of sorrow's waves that rise and roar,<br>
 A shipwrecked sailor, wellnigh drowned<br>
 In the wild sea that foams around?<br>
 When will he smite the demon down,<br>
 Lay low in dust the giants' town,<br>
 And, glorious from his foes' defeat,<br>
 His wife, his long-lost Sítá, meet?<br>
 Go, bid him speed to smite his foes<br>
 Before the year shall reach its close.<br>
 Ten months are fled but two remain,<br>
 Then Rávan's captive must be slain.<br>
 Oft has Vibhíshan,  <a name="fr_869"></a><a href="#fn_869"><font size="1">1b</font></a> just and wise,<br>
 Besought him to restore his prize.<br>
 But deaf is Rávan's senseless ear:<br>
 His brother's rede he will not hear.<br>
 Vibhíshan's daughter  <a name="fr_870"></a><a href="#fn_870"><font size="1">2b</font></a> loves me well:<br>
 From her I learnt the tale I tell,<br>
 Avindhva  <a name="fr_871"></a><a href="#fn_871"><font size="1">3b</font></a> prudent, just, and old,<br>
 The giant's fall has oft foretold;<br>
 But Fate impels him to despise<br>
 His word on whom he most relies.<br>
 In Ráma's love I rest secure,<br>
 For my fond heart is true and pure,<br>
 And him, my noblest lord, I deem<br>
 In valour, power, and might supreme.'<br>
     As from her eyes the waters ran,<br>
 The Vánar chief again began:<br>
 'Yea, Ráma, when he hears my tale,.<br>
 Will with our hosts these walls assail,<br>
 Or I myself, O Queen, this day<br>
 Will bear thee from the fiend away,<br>
 Will lift thee up, and take thee hence<br>
 To him thy refuge and defence;<br>
 Will take thee in my arms, and flee;<br>
 To Ráma far beyond the sea;<br>
 Will place thee on Prasravan hill<br>
 Where Raghu's son is waiting still.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_416"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 416</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     'How canst thou bear me hence?' she cried,<br>
 'The way is long, the sea is wide.<br>
 To bear my very weight would be<br>
 A task too hard for one like thee.' <a name="fr_872"></a><a href="ry378.htm#fn_872"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
     Swift rose before her startled eyes<br>
 The Vánar in his native size,<br>
 Like Mandar's hill or Meru's height,<br>
 Encircled with a blaze of light.<br>
 'O come,' he cried, 'thy fears dispel,<br>
 Nor doubt that I will bear thee well.<br>
 Come, in my strength and care confide,<br>
 And sit in joy by Ráma's side.'<br>
     Again she spake: 'I know thee now,<br>
 Brave, resolute, and strong art thou;<br>
 In glory like the Lord of Fire<br>
 With storm-swift feet which naught may tire<br>
 But yet with thee I may not fly:<br>
 For, borne so swiftly through the sky,<br>
 Mine eyes would soon grow faint and dim,<br>
 My dizzy brain would reel and swim,<br>
 My yielding arms relax their hold,<br>
 And I in terror uncontrolled<br>
 Should fall into the raging sea<br>
 Where hungry sharks would feed on me.<br>
 Nor can I touch, of free accord,<br>
 The limbs of any save my lord.<br>
 If, by the giant forced away,<br>
 In his enfolding arms I lay,<br>
 Not mine, O Vánar, was the blame;<br>
 What could I do, a helpless dame?<br>
 Go, to my lord my message bear,<br>
 And bid him end my long despair.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_869"></a><a href="ry377.htm#fr_869">415:1b</a>  Vibhíshan is the wicked Rávan's good
 brother.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_870"></a><a href="ry377.htm#fr_870">415:2b</a>  Her name is Kalá, or in the Bengal
 recension Nandá.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_871"></a><a href="ry377.htm#fr_871">415:3b</a>  One of Rávan's chief councillors.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry378.htm">Next: Canto XXXVIII.: Sitá's Gem.</a></center>
 </body>