<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry373.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry375.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIV.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus spoke the dame in mournful mood,<br>
 And Hanumán his speech renewed:<br>
 'O lady, by thy lord's decree<br>
 I come a messenger to thee.<br>
 Thy lord is safe with steadfast friends,<br>
 And greeting to his queen he sends,<br>
 And Lakshman, ever faithful bows<br>
 His reverent head to Ráma's spouse.'<br>
     Through all her frame the rapture ran,<br>
 As thus again the dame began:<br>
 'Now verily the truth I know<br>
 Of the wise saw of long ago:<br>
 'Once only in a hundred years<br>
 True joy to living man appears.'<br>
     He marked her rapture-beaming hue,<br>
 And nearer to the lady drew,<br>
 But at each onward step he took<br>
 Suspicious fear her spirit shook.<br>
 'Alas, Alas,' she cried in fear.<br>
 'False is the tale I joyed to hear.<br>
 'Tis Rávan, 'tis the fiend, who tries<br>
 To mock me with a new disguise.<br>
 If thou, to wring my woman's heart,<br>
 Hast changed thy shape by magic art,<br>
 And wouldst a helpless dame beguile,<br>
 The wicked deed is doubly vile.<br>
 But no: that fiend thou canst not be:<br>
 Such joy I had from seeing thee.<br>
 But if my fancy does not err,<br>
 And thou art Ráma's messenger,<br>
 The glories of my lord repeat:<br>
 For to these ears such words are sweet.<br>
     The Vánar knew the lady's thought, <a name="fr_862"></a><a href="#fn_862"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 And gave the answer fondly sought:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_414"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 414</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Bright as the sun that lights the sky<br>
 Dear as the Moon to every eye.<br>
 He scatters blessings o'er the land<br>
 Like bounties from Vais'ravan's  <a name="fr_863"></a><a href="ry375.htm#fn_863"><font size="1">1</font></a> hand.<br>
 Like Vishnu strong and unsubdued,<br>
 Unmatched in might and fortitude.<br>
 Wise, truthful as the Lord of Speech,<br>
 With gentle words he welcomes each.<br>
 Of noblest mould and form is he,<br>
 Like love's incarnate deity.<br>
 He quells the fury of the foe,<br>
 And strikes when justice prompts the blow.<br>
 Safe in the shadow of his arm<br>
 The world is kept from scathe and harm.<br>
 Now soon shall Rávan rue his theft,<br>
 And fall, of realm and life bereft.<br>
 For Ráma's wrathful hand shall wing<br>
 His shafts against the giant king.<br>
 The day, O Maithil Queen, is near<br>
 When he and Lakshman will he here,<br>
 And by their side Sugríva lead<br>
 His countless hosts of Vánar breed.<br>
 Sugríva's servant, I, by name<br>
 Hanúmán, by his order came.<br>
 With desperate leap I crossed the sea<br>
 To Lanká's isle in search of thee,<br>
 No traitor, gentle dame, am I:<br>
 Upon my word and faith rely.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_862"></a><a href="ry374.htm#fr_862">413:1b</a>  That a friend of Rama would praise
 him as he should be praised, and that if
 the stranger were Rávan in disguise he
 would avoid the subject.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry375.htm">Next: Canto XXXV.: Hanuman's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>