<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry377.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry379.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVIII.: SITÁ'S GEM.</h3>
 <p>
 Again the Vánar chief replied,<br>
 With her wise answer satisfied:<br>
 'Well hast thou said: thou canst not brave<br>
 The rushing wind, the roaring wave.<br>
 Thy woman's heart would sink with fear<br>
 Before the ocean shore were near.<br>
 And for thy dread lest limb of thine<br>
 Should for a while be touched by mine,<br>
 The modest fear is worthy one<br>
 Whose cherished lord is Raghu's son.<br>
 Yet when I sought to bear thee hence<br>
 I spoke the words of innocence,<br>
 Impelled to set the captive free<br>
 By friendship for thy lord and thee.<br>
 But if with me thou wilt not try<br>
 The passage of the windy sky,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Give me a gem that I may show,<br>
 Some token which thy lord may know.'<br>
     Again the Maithil lady spoke,<br>
 While tears and sobs her utterance broke:<br>
 'The surest of all signs is this,<br>
 To tell the tale of vanished bliss.<br>
 Thus in my name to Ráma speak:<br>
 'Remember Chitrakúta's peak.<br>
 And the green margin of the rill  <a name="fr_873"></a><a href="#fn_873"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 That flows beside that pleasant hill,<br>
 Where thou and I together strayed<br>
 Delighting in the tangled shade.<br>
 There on the grass I sat with thee<br>
 And laid my head upon thy knee.<br>
 There came a greedy crow and pecked<br>
 The meat I waitd to protect<br>
 And, heedless of the clods I threw,<br>
 About my head in circles flew,<br>
 Until by darling hunger pressed<br>
 He boldly pecked me on the breast.<br>
 I ran to thee in rage and grief<br>
 And prayed for vengeance on the thief.<br>
 Then Ráma  <a name="fr_874"></a><a href="#fn_874"><font size="1">2b</font></a> from his slumber rose<br>
 And smiled with pity at my woes.<br>
 Upon my bleeding breast he saw<br>
 The scratches made by beak and claw.<br>
 He laid an arrow on his bow.<br>
 And launched it at the shameless crow.<br>
 That shaft, with magic power endued,<br>
 The bird, where'er he flew, pursued,<br>
 Till back to Raghu's son he fled<br>
 And bent at Ráma's feet his head. <a name="fr_875"></a><a href="#fn_875"><font size="1">3b</font></a><br>
 Couldst thou for me with anger stirred<br>
 Launch that dire shaft upon a bird,<br>
 And yet canst pardon him who stole<br>
 The darling of thy heart and soul?<br>
 Rise up, O bravest of the brave.<br>
 And come in all thy might to save.<br>
 Come with the thunders of thy bow,<br>
 And smite to earth the Rakshas foe.'<br>
     She ceased; and from her glorious hair<br>
 She took a gem that sparkled there<br>
 A token which her husband's eyes<br>
 With eager love would recognize.<br>
 His head the Vánar envoy bent<br>
 In low obeisance reverent.<br>
 And on his finger bound the gem<br>
 She loosened from her diadem.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_417"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 417</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_872"></a><a href="ry377.htm#fr_872">416:1</a>  Hanumán when he entered the city
 had in order to escape observation condensed
 himself to the size of a cat.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_873"></a><a href="ry378.htm#fr_873">416:1b</a>  The brook Mandákiní, not far from
 Chitrakúta where Ráma sojourned for
 a time.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_874"></a><a href="ry378.htm#fr_874">416:2b</a>  The poet here changes from the second
 person to the third.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_875"></a><a href="ry378.htm#fr_875">416:3b</a>  The whole long story is repeated with
 some slight variations and additions from
 Book II. Canto XCVI. I give here only
 the outline.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry379.htm">Next: Canto XLI.: The Ruin of The Grove.</a></center>
 </body>