<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry378.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry380.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLI. <a name="fr_876"></a><a href="#fn_876"><font size="1">1</font></a>: THE RUIN OF THE GROVE.</h3>
 <p>
 Dismissed with every honour due<br>
 The Vánar from the spot withdrew.<br>
 Then joyous thought the Wind-God's son:<br>
 'The mighty task is wellnigh done.<br>
 The three expedients I must leave;<br>
 The fourth alone can I achieve.  <a name="fr_877"></a><a href="#fn_877"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 These dwellers in the giants' isle<br>
 No arts of mine can reconcile.<br>
 I cannot bribe: I cannot sow<br>
 Dissension mid the Rákshas foe.<br>
 Arts, gifts, address, these fiends despise;<br>
 But force shall yet their king chastise.<br>
 Perchance he may relent when all<br>
 The bravest of his chieftains fall.<br>
 This lovely grove will I destroy,<br>
 The cruel Rávan's pride and joy.<br>
 The garden where he takes his ease<br>
 Mid climbing plants and flowery trees<br>
 That lift their proud tops to the skies,<br>
 Dear to the tyrant as his eyes.<br>
 Then will he rouse in wrath, and lead<br>
 His legions with the car and steed<br>
 And elephants in long array,<br>
 And seek me thirsty for the fray.<br>
 The Rákshas legions will I meet,<br>
 And all his bravest host defeat;<br>
 Then, glorious from the bloody plain,<br>
 Turn to my lord the king again.'<br>
     Then every lovely tree that bore<br>
 Fair blossoms, from the soil he tore,<br>
 Till each green bough that lent its shade<br>
 To singing birds on earth was laid.<br>
 The wilderness he left a waste,<br>
 The fountains shattered and defaced:<br>
 O'erthrew and levelled with the ground<br>
 Each shady seat and pleasure-mound.<br>
 Each arbour clad with climbing bloom,<br>
 Each grotto, cell, and picture room,<br>
 Each lawn by beast and bird enjoyed,<br>
 Each walk and terrace was destroyed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And all the place that was so fair<br>
 Was left a ruin wild and bare,<br>
 As if the fury of the blast<br>
 Or raging fire had o'er it passed.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_876"></a><a href="ry379.htm#fr_876">417:1</a>  I omit two Cantos of dialogue. Sítá
 tells Hanumán again to convey her message
 to Ráma and bid him hasten to rescue
 her. Hanumán replies as before that
 there is no one on earth equal to Ráma,
 who will soon come and destroy Rávan.
 There is not a new idea in the two Cantos:
 all is reiteration.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_877"></a><a href="ry379.htm#fr_877">417:2</a>  The expedients to vanquish an enemy
 or to make him come to terms are said to
 be four: conciliation, gifts, disunion, and
 force or punishment. Hanumán considers
 it useless to employ the first three and
 resolves to punish Rávan by destroying
 his pleasure-grounds.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry380.htm">Next: Canto XLII.: The Giants Roused.</a></center>
 </body>