<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry369.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry371.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXX. <a name="fr_851"></a><a href="#fn_851"><font size="1">3</font></a>: HANUMÁN'S DELIBERATION.</h3>
 <p>
 The Vánar watched concealed: each word<br>
 Of Sítá and the fiends he heard,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 And in a maze of anxious thought<br>
 His quick-conceiving bosom wrought.<br>
 'At length my watchful eyes have seen,<br>
 Pursued so long, the Maithil queen,<br>
 Sought by our Vánar hosts in vain<br>
 From east to west, from main to main,<br>
 A cautious spy have I explored<br>
 The palace of the Rákhshas lord,<br>
 And thoroughly learned, concealed from sight,<br>
 The giant monarch's power and might.<br>
 And now my task must be to cheer<br>
 The royal dame who sorrows here.<br>
 For if I go, and sooth her not,<br>
 A captive in this distant spot,<br>
 She, when she finds no comfort nigh,<br>
 Will sink beneath her woes and die.<br>
 How shall my tale, if unconsoled<br>
 I leave her. be to Ráma told?<br>
 How shall I answer Raghu's son,<br>
 'No message from my darling, none!'<br>
 The husband's wrath, to fury fanned,<br>
 Will scorch me lifeless where I stand,<br>
 Or if I urge my lord the king<br>
 To Lanká's isle his hosts to bring,<br>
 In vain will be his zeal, in vain<br>
 The toil, the danger, and the pain.<br>
 Yea, this occasion must I seize<br>
 That from her guard the lady frees,  <a name="fr_852"></a><a href="#fn_852"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 To win her ear with soft address<br>
 And whisper hope in dire distress.<br>
 Shall I, a puny Vánar, choose<br>
 The Sanskrit men delight to use?<br>
 If. as a man of Bráhman kind,<br>
 I speak the tongue by rules refined.<br>
 The lady, yielding to her fears,<br>
 Will think 'tis Rávan's voice she hears.<br>
 I must assume my only plan--<br>
 The language of a common  <a name="fr_853"></a><a href="#fn_853"><font size="1">2b</font></a> man.<br>
 Yet, if the lidy sees me nigh,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 second passage, may perhaps be understood<br>
 not a language in which words different<br>
 from Sanskrit were used, but the employment<br>
 of formal and elaborate diction,<br>
 MUIR'S <i>Sanskrit Texts</i>, Part II. p. 166.}<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_412"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 412</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 In terror she will start and cry;<br>
 And all the demon band, alarmed,<br>
 Will come with various weapons armed.<br>
 With their wild shouts the grove will fill.<br>
 And strive to take me, or to kill.<br>
 And, at my death or capture, dies<br>
 The hope of Ráma's enterprise.<br>
 For none can leap, save only me,<br>
 A hundred leagues across the sea.<br>
 It is a sin in me, I own,<br>
 To talk with Janak's child alone.<br>
 Yet greater is the sin if I<br>
 Be silent, and the lady die.<br>
 First I will utter Ráma's name.<br>
 And laud the hero's gifts and fame.<br>
 Perchance the name she holds so dear<br>
 Will soothe the faithful lady's fear.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_849"></a><a href="ry369.htm#fr_849">411:1</a>  In the south is the region of Yama the
 God of Death, the place of departed spirits.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_850"></a><a href="ry369.htm#fr_850">411:2</a>  Kumbhakarna was one of Rávan's
 brothers.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_851"></a><a href="ry370.htm#fr_851">411:3</a>  I omit the 28th and 29th Cantos as an
 unmistakeable interpolation. Instead of
 advancing the story it goes back to Canto
 XVII. containing a lamentation of Sítá
 after Rávan has left her, and describes the
 the auspicious signs sent to cheer her, the
 throbbing of her left eye, arm, and side.
 The Canto is found in the Bengal recension.
 Gorresio translates it. and observes:
 "I think that Chapter XXVIII.--The
 Auspicious Signs--is an addition, a later
 interpolation by the Rhapsodists. It has
 no bond of connexion either with what
 precedes or follows it, and may be struck
 out not only without injury to, but positively
 to the advantage of the poem. The
 metre in which this chapter is written
 differs from that which is generally adopted
 in the course of the poem.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_852"></a><a href="ry370.htm#fr_852">411:1b</a>  The guards are still in the grove, but
 they are asleep; and Sítá has crept to a
 tree at some distance from them.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_853"></a><a href="ry370.htm#fr_853">411:2b</a>  "As the reason assigned in these passages
 for not addressing Sítá in Sanskrit
 such as a Bráhman would use is not that
 she would not understand it, but that it
 would alarm her and be unsuitable to the
 speaker, we must take them as indicating
 that Sanskrit, if not spoken by women of
 the upper classes at the time when the
 Rámáyana was written (whenever that
 may have been), was at least understood
 by them, and was commonly spoken by
 men of the priestly class, and other educated
 persons, By the Sanskrit proper to <a name="page_412"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 412</font></a>
 an [ordinary</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry371.htm">Next: Canto XXXI.: Hanumán's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>