<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry386.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry388.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIX.: RÁVAN.</h3>
 <p>
 On the fierce king Hanúmán turned<br>
 His angry eyes that glowed and burned.<br>
 He saw him decked with wealth untold<br>
 Of diamond and pearl and gold,<br>
 And priceless was each wondrous gem<br>
 That sparkled in his diadem.<br>
 About his neck rich chains were twined,<br>
 The best that fancy e'er designed,<br>
 And a fair robe with pearls bestrung<br>
 Down from his mighty shoulders hung.<br>
 Ten heads he reared,  <a name="fr_887"></a><a href="#fn_887"><font size="1">2</font></a> as Mandar's hill<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Lifts woody peaks which tigers fill.<br>
 Bright were his eyes, and bright, beneath,<br>
 The flashes of his awful teeth.<br>
 His brawny arms of wondrous size<br>
 Were decked with rings and scented dyes<br>
 His hands like snakes with five long heads<br>
 Descending from their mountain beds.<br>
 He sat upon a crystal throne<br>
 Inlaid with wealth of precious stone,<br>
 Whereon, of noblest work, was set<br>
 A gold-embroidered coverlet,<br>
 Behind the monarch stood the best<br>
 Of beauteous women gaily dressed.<br>
 And each her giant master fanned,<br>
 Or waved a chourie in her hand.<br>
 Four noble courtiers  <a name="fr_888"></a><a href="ry388.htm#fn_888"><font size="1">1b</font></a> wise and good<br>
 In counsel, near the monarch stood,<br>
 As the four oceans ever stand<br>
 About the sea-encompassed land.<br>
 Still, though his heart with rage was fired,<br>
 The Vánar marvelled and admired:<br>
 'O what a rare and wondrous sight!<br>
 What beauty, majesty, and might!<br>
 All regal pomp combines to grace<br>
 This ruler of the Rákshas race.<br>
 He, if he scorned not right aud law,<br>
 Might guide the world with tempered awe:<br>
 Yea, Indra and the Gods on high<br>
 Might on his saving power rely.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_886"></a><a href="ry386.htm#fr_886">421:1</a>  The <i>sloka</i> which follows is probably
 an interpolation, as it is inconsistent w?th
 the questioning in Canto L.:
 He looked on Ravan in his pride,
 And boldly to the monarch cried:
 'I came an envoy to this place
 From him who rules the Vánar race.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_887"></a><a href="ry387.htm#fr_887">421:2</a>  The ten heads of Rávan have provoked
 much ridicule from European critics.
 It should be remembered that
 Spenser tells us of "two brethren giants"
 "The one of which had two heads, the
 other three;" and Milton speaks of the
 "four-fold visaged Four," the four Cherubic
 shapes each of which had four faces.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry388.htm">Next: Canto L.: Prahasta's Questions.</a></center>
 </body>