<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry387.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry389.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO L.: PRAHASTA'S QUESTIONS.</h3>
 <p>
 Then fierce the giant's fury blazed<br>
 As on Hanúmán's form he gazed,<br>
 And shaken by each wild surmise<br>
 He spake aloud with flashing eyes:<br>
 'Can this be Nandi  <a name="fr_889"></a><a href="#fn_889"><font size="1">2b</font></a> standing here,<br>
 The mighty one whom all revere?<br>
 Who once on high Kailása's hill<br>
 Pronounced the curse that haunts me still?<br>
 Or is the woodland creature one<br>
 Of Asur race, or Bali's  <a name="fr_890"></a><a href="#fn_890"><font size="1">3b</font></a> son?<br>
 The wretch with searching question try:<br>
 Learn who he is, and whence; and why<br>
 He marred the glory of the grove,<br>
 And with my captains fiercely strove.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_422"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 422</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Prahasta heard his lord's behest,<br>
 And thus the Vánar chief addressed:<br>
 'O monkey stranger, be consoled:<br>
 Fear not, and let thy heart be bold.<br>
 If thou by Indra's mandate sent<br>
 Thy steps to Lanká's isle hast bent,<br>
 With fearless words the cause explain,<br>
 And freedom thou shalt soon regain.<br>
 Or if thou comest as a spy<br>
 Despatched by Vishnu in the sky,<br>
 Or sent by Yama, or the Lord<br>
 Of Riches, hast our town explored;<br>
 Proved by the prowess thou hast shown<br>
 No monkey save in form alone;<br>
 Speak boldly all the truth, and be<br>
 Released from bonds, unharmed and free.<br>
 But falsehood spoken to our king<br>
 Swift punishment of death will bring.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: the Vánar made reply;<br>
 'Not Indra's messenger am I,<br>
 Nor came I hither to fulfil<br>
 Kuvera's hest or Vishnu's will.<br>
 I stand before the giants here<br>
 A Vánar e'en as I appear.<br>
 I longed to see the king--'twas hard<br>
 To win my way through gate and guard.<br>
 And so to gain my wish I laid<br>
 In ruin that delightful shade<br>
 No fiend, no God of heavenly kind<br>
 With bond or chain these herbs may bind.<br>
 The Eternal Sire himself of old<br>
 Vouchsafed the boon that makes me bold,<br>
 From Brahmá's magic shaft released  <a name="fr_891"></a><a href="ry389.htm#fn_891"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 I knew the captor's power had ceased,<br>
 The fancied bonds I freely brooked,<br>
 And thus upon the king have looked.<br>
 My way to Lanká have I won,<br>
 A messenger from Raghu's son.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_888"></a><a href="ry387.htm#fr_888">421:1b</a>  Durdhar, or as the Bengal recension
 reads Mahodara, Prahasta, Mahápárs'va,
 and Nikumbha.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_889"></a><a href="ry388.htm#fr_889">421:2b</a>  The chief attendant of S'iva.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_890"></a><a href="ry388.htm#fr_890">421:3b</a>  Bali, not to be confounded with Báli
 the Vánar, was a celebrated Daitya or
 demon who had usurped the empire of
 the three worlds, and who was deprived
 of two thirds of his dominions by Vishnu
 in the Dwarf incarnation.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry389.htm">Next: Canto LI.: Hanumán's Reply.</a></center>
 </body>