<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry384.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry386.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVII.: THE DEATH OF AKSHA.</h3>
 <p>
 But Rávan, as his fury burned,<br>
 His eyes on youthful Aksha  <a name="fr_884"></a><a href="#fn_884"><font size="1">1</font></a> turned,<br>
 Who rose impetuous at his glance<br>
 And shouted for his bow and lance.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 He rode upon a glorious car<br>
 That shot the light of gems afar.<br>
 His pennon waved mid glittering gold<br>
 And bright the wheels with jewels rolled.<br>
 By long and fierce devotion won<br>
 That car was splendid as the sun.<br>
 With rows of various weapons stored;<br>
 And thought-swift horses whirled their lord<br>
 Racing along the earth, or rose<br>
 High through the clouds whene'er he chose.<br>
 Then fierce and fearful war between<br>
 The Vánar and the fiend was seen.<br>
 The Gods and Asurs stood amazed,<br>
 And on the wondrous combat gazed.<br>
 A cry from earth rose long and shrill,<br>
 The wind was hushed, the sun grew chill.<br>
 The thunder bellowed from the sky,<br>
 And troubled ocean roared reply.<br>
 Thrice Aksha strained his dreadful bow,<br>
 Thrice smote his arrow on the foe,<br>
 And with full streams of crimson bled<br>
 Three gashes in the Vánar's head.<br>
 Then rose Hanumán in the air<br>
 To shun the shafts no life could bear.<br>
 But Aksha in his car pursued,<br>
 And from on high the fight renewed<br>
 With storm of arrows, thick as hail<br>
 When angry clouds some hill assail.<br>
 Impatient of that arrowy shower<br>
 The Vánar chief put forth his power,<br>
 Again above his chariot rose<br>
 And smote him with repeated blows.<br>
 Terrific came each deadly stroke:<br>
 Breast neck and arm and back he broke;<br>
 And Aksha fell to earth, and lay<br>
 With all his life-blood drained away.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_884"></a><a href="ry385.htm#fr_884">420:1</a>  Rávan's son.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry386.htm">Next: Canto XLVIIL: Hanumán Captured.</a></center>
 </body>