<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry382.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry384.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLV.: THE SEVEN DEFEATED.</h3>
 <p>
 Forth went the seven in brave attire,<br>
 In glory brilliant as the fire.<br>
 Impetuous chiefs with massive bows,<br>
 The quellers of a host of foes:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Trained from their youth in martial lore,<br>
 And masters of the arms they bore:<br>
 Each emulous and fiercely bold,<br>
 And banners wrought with glittering gold<br>
 Waved o'er their chariots, drawn at speed<br>
 By coursers of the noblest breed.<br>
 On through the ruins of the grove<br>
 At Hannmán they fiercely drove,<br>
 And from the ponderous bows they strained<br>
 A shower of deadly arrows rained.<br>
 Then scarce was seen the Vánar's form<br>
 Enveloped in the arrowy storm.<br>
 So stands half veiled the Mountains' King<br>
 When rainy clouds about him cling.<br>
 By nimble turn, by rapid bound<br>
 He shunned the shafts that rained around,<br>
 Eluding, as in air he rose.<br>
 The rushing chariots of his foes,<br>
 The mighty Vánar undismayed<br>
 Amid his archer foemen played,<br>
 As plays the frolic wind on high<br>
 Mid bow-armed  <a name="fr_883"></a><a href="ry384.htm#fn_883"><font size="1">1b</font></a> clouds that fill the sky,<br>
 He raised a mighty roar and yell<br>
 That fear on all the army fell,<br>
 And then, his warrior soul aglow<br>
 With fury, rushed upon the foe,<br>
 Some with his open hand he beat<br>
 To death and trampled with his feet;<br>
 Some with fierce nails he rent and slew,<br>
 And others with his fists o'erthrew;<br>
 Some with his legs, as on he rushed,<br>
 Some with his bulky chest he crushed:<br>
 While some struck senseless by his roar<br>
 Dropped on the ground and breathed no more.<br>
 The remnant, seized with sudden dread,<br>
 Turned from the grove and wildly fled.<br>
 The trampled earth was thickly strown<br>
 With steed and car and flag o'erthrown,<br>
 And the red blood in rivers flowed<br>
 From slaughtered fiends o'er path and road.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_882"></a><a href="ry382.htm#fr_882">419:1</a>  We were told a few lines before that
 the chariot of Jambumah was drawn by
 asses. Here horses are spoken of. The
 Commentator notices the discrepancy and
 says that by horses asses are meant.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry384.htm">Next: Canto XLVI.: The Captains.</a></center>
 </body>