<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry381.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry383.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIV.: JAMBUMÁLI'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Jambumáli, pride and boast<br>
 For valour of the Rákshas host,<br>
 Prahasta's son supremely brave.<br>
 Obeyed the hest that Rávan gave:<br>
 Fierce warrior with terrific teeth,<br>
 With saguine robes and brilliant wreath.<br>
 A bow like Indra's own  <a name="fr_881"></a><a href="#fn_881"><font size="1">2b</font></a>, and store<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_419"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 419</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Of glittering shafts the chieftain bore.<br>
 And ever as the string he **tried<br>
 The weapon with a roar replied,<br>
 Loud as the crashing thunder sent<br>
 By him who rules the firmament.<br>
 Soon as the foeman came in view<br>
 Borne on a car which asses drew.<br>
 The Vánar chieftain mighty-voiced<br>
 Shouted in triumph and rejoiced.<br>
 Prahasta's son his bow-string drew,<br>
 And swift the winged arrows flew.<br>
 One in the face the Vánar smote,<br>
 Another quivered in his throat.<br>
 Ten from the deadly weapon sent<br>
 His brawny aims and shoulders rent.<br>
 Then as he felt each galling shot<br>
 The Vánar's rage waxed fiercely hot.<br>
 He looked, and saw a mass of stone<br>
 That lay before his feet o'erthrown.<br>
 The mighty block he raised and threw,<br>
 And crashing through the air it flew.<br>
 But Jambumah shunned the blow,<br>
 And rained fresh arrows from his bow.<br>
 The Vánar's limbs were red with gore:<br>
 A Sál tree from the earth he tore,<br>
 And, ere he hurled it undismayed,<br>
 Above his head the missile swayed.<br>
 But shafts from Jambumah's bow<br>
 Cut through it ere his hand could throw.<br>
 And thigh and arm and chest and side<br>
 With streams of rushing blood were dyed.<br>
 Still unsubdued though wounded oft<br>
 The shattered trunk he raised aloft,<br>
 And down with well-directed aim<br>
 On Jambumah's chest it came.<br>
 There crushed upon the trampled grass<br>
 He lay an undistinguished mass,<br>
 The foeman's eye no more could see<br>
 His head or chest or arm or knee.<br>
 And bow and car and steeds <a name="fr_882"></a><a href="ry383.htm#fn_882"><font size="1">1</font></a> and store<br>
 Of glittering; shafts were seen no more.<br>
     When Jambumah's death he heard,<br>
 King Rávan's heart with rage was stirred<br>
 And forth his general's sons he sent,<br>
 For power and might preeminent.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_880"></a><a href="ry381.htm#fr_880">418:1b</a>  Chaityaprásáda is explained by the
 Commentator as the place where the Gods
 of the Rákshases were kept. Goiresio
 translates it by 'un grande edificio.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_881"></a><a href="ry382.htm#fr_881">418:2b</a>  The bow of Indra is the rainbow.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry383.htm">Next: Canto XLV.: The Seven Defeated.</a></center>
 </body>