<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry379.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry381.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLII.: THE GIANTS ROUSED.</h3>
 <p>
 The cries of startled birds, the sound<br>
 Of tall trees crashing to the ground,<br>
 Struck with amaze each giant's ear.<br>
 And filled the isle with sudden fear.<br>
 Then, wakened by the crash and cries,<br>
 The fierce shefiends unclosed their eyes,<br>
 And saw the Vánar where he stood<br>
 Amid the devastated wood.<br>
 The more to scare them with the view<br>
 To size immense the Vánar grew;<br>
 And straight the Rákshas warders cried<br>
 Janak's daughter terrified<br>
 Whose envoy, whence, and who is he,<br>
 Why has he come to talk with thee?<br>
 Speak, lady of the lovely eyes,<br>
 And let not fear thy joy disguise.'<br>
     Then thus replied the Maithil dame<br>
 Of noble soul and perfect frame.<br>
 'Can I discern, with scanty skill,<br>
 These fiends who change their forms at will?<br>
 'Tis yours to say: your kin you meet;<br>
 A serpent knows a serpent's feet.<br>
     I weet not who he is: the sight<br>
 Has filled my spirit with affright.'<br>
 Some pressed round Sítá in a ring;<br>
 Some bore the story to their king:<br>
 'A mighty creature of our race,<br>
 In monkey form, has reached the place.<br>
 He came within the grove,' they cried,<br>
 'He stood and talked by Sítá's side,<br>
 He comes from Indra's court to her,<br>
 Or is Kuvera's messenger;<br>
 Or Ráma sent the spy to seek<br>
 His consort, and her wrongs to wreak.<br>
 His crushing arm, his trampling feet<br>
 Have marred and spoiled that dear retreat,<br>
 And all the pleasant place which thou<br>
 So lovest is a ruin now.<br>
 The tree where Sítá sat alone<br>
 Is spared where all are overthrown.<br>
 Perchance he saved the dame from harm:<br>
 Perchance the toil had numbed his arm.'<br>
     Then flashed the giant's eye with fire<br>
 Like that which lights the funeral pyre.<br>
 He bade his bravest Kinkars  <a name="fr_878"></a><a href="#fn_878"><font size="1">1b</font></a> speed<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_418"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 418</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And to his feet the spoiler lead.<br>
 Forth from the palace, at his hest,<br>
 Twice forty thousand warriors pressed.<br>
 Burning for battle, strong and fierce,<br>
 With clubs to crush and swords to pierce,<br>
 They saw Hanúmán near a porch,<br>
 And, thick as moths around a torch,<br>
 Rushed on the foe with wild attacks<br>
 Of mace and club and battle-axe.<br>
 As round him pressed the Rákshas crowd,<br>
 The wondrous monkey roared aloud,<br>
 That birds fell headlong from the sky:<br>
 Then spake he with a mighty cry:<br>
 'Long life to Das'aratha's heir,<br>
 And Lakshman, ever-glorious pair<br>
 Long life to him who rules our race,<br>
 Preserved by noblest Ráma's grace<br>
 I am the slave of Kosal's king, <a name="fr_879"></a><a href="#fn_879"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Whose wondrous deeds the minstrels sing.<br>
 Hanúmán I, the Wind-God's seed:<br>
 Beneath this arm the foemen bleed.<br>
 I fear not, unapproached in might,<br>
 A thousand Rávans ranged for fight,<br>
 Although in furious hands they rear<br>
 The hill and tree for sword and spear,<br>
 I will, before the giants' eyes,<br>
 Their city and their king chastise;<br>
 And, having communed with the dame,<br>
 Depart in triumph as I came.'<br>
   At that terrific roar and yell<br>
 The heart of every giant fell.<br>
 But still their king's command they feared<br>
 And pressed around with arms upreared.<br>
 Beside the porch a club was laid:<br>
 The Vánar caught it up, and swayed<br>
 The weapon round his head, and slew<br>
 The foremost of the Rákshas crew.<br>
 Thus Indra vanquished, thousand-eyed,<br>
 The Daityas who the Gods defied.<br>
 Then on the porch Hanúmán sprang,<br>
 And loud his shout of triumph rang.<br>
 The giants looked upon the dead,<br>
 And turning to their monarch fled.<br>
 And Rávan with his spirit wrought<br>
 To frenzy by the tale they brought,<br>
 Urged to the fight Prahasta's son,<br>
 Of all his chiefs the mightiest one.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_878"></a><a href="ry380.htm#fr_878">417:1b</a>  Kinkar means the special servant of
 a sovereign, who receives his orders immediately <a name="page_418"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 418</font></a>
 from his master. The Bengal
 recension gives these Rákshases an epithet
 which the Commentator explains 'as
 generated in the mind of Brahmá.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_879"></a><a href="ry380.htm#fr_879">418:1</a>  Ráma <i>de jure</i> King of Kosal of which
 Ayodhyá was the capital.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry381.htm">Next: Canto XLIII.: The Ruin of The Temple.</a></center>
 </body>