<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry388.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry390.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LI.: HANUMÁN'S REPLY.</h3>
 <p>
 My king Sugriva greets thee fair,<br>
 And bids me thus his rede declare.<br>
 Son of the God of Wind, by name<br>
 Hanumán, to this isle I came.<br>
 To set the Maithil lady free<br>
 I crossed the barrier of the sea.<br>
 I roamed in search of her and found<br>
 Her weeping on that lovely ground.<br>
 Then in the lore of duty trained,<br>
 Who hast by stern devotion gained<br>
 This wondrous wealth and power and fame<br>
 Shouldst fear to wrong another's dame.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Hear thou my counsel, and be wise:<br>
 No fiend, no dweller in the skies<br>
 Can bear the shafts by Lakshman shot,<br>
 Or Ráma when his wrath is hot.<br>
 O Giant King, repent the crime<br>
 And soothe him while there yet is time.<br>
 Now be the Maithil queen restored<br>
 Uninjured to her sorrowing lord.<br>
 Soon wilt thou rue thy dire mistake:<br>
 She is no woman but a snake,<br>
 Whose very deadly bite will be<br>
 The ruin of thy house and thee.<br>
 Thy pride has led thy thoughts astray,<br>
 That fancy not a hand may slay<br>
 The monarch of the giants, screened<br>
 From mortal blow of God and fiend.<br>
 Sugríva still thy death may be:<br>
 No Yaksha, fiend, or God is he<br>
 And Ráma from a woman springs,<br>
 The mortal seed of mortal kings.<br>
 O think how Báli fell subdued;<br>
 Think on thy slaughtered multitude.<br>
 Respect those brave and strong allies;<br>
 Consult thy safety, and be wise.<br>
 I, even I, no helper need<br>
 To overthrow, with car and steed,<br>
 Thy city Lanká half divine:<br>
 The power but not the will is mine.<br>
 For Raghu's son, before his friend<br>
 Tne Vánar monarch, strove to end<br>
 With his own conquering arm the life<br>
 Of him who stole his darling wife.<br>
 Turn, and be wise, O Rávan turn;<br>
 Or thou wilt see thy Lanká burn,<br>
 And with thy wives, friends, kith and kin<br>
 Be ruined for thy senseless sin.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_891"></a><a href="ry388.htm#fr_891">422:1</a>  When Hanumán was bound with cords
 Indrajit released his captive from the spell
 laid upon him by the magic weapon.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry390.htm">Next: Canto LII.: Vibhíshan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>