<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry397.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry399.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVI.: RÁMA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 There ceased the Vánar: Ráma pressed<br>
 The treasured jewel to his breast,<br>
 And from his eyes the waters broke<br>
 As to the Vánar king he spoke:<br>
 'As o'er her babe the mother weeps,<br>
 This flood of tears the jewel steeps.<br>
 This gem that shone on Sítá's head<br>
 Was Janak'a gift when we were wed,<br>
 And the pure brow that wore it lent<br>
 New splendour to the ornament.<br>
 This gem, bright offspring of the wave,<br>
 The King of Heaven to Janak gave,<br>
 Whose noble sacrificial rite<br>
 Had filled the God with new delight.<br>
 Now, as I gaze upon the prize,<br>
 Methinks I see my father's eyes.<br>
 Methinks I see before me stand<br>
 The ruler of Videha's land. <a name="fr_903"></a><a href="#fn_903"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Methinks mine arms are folded now<br>
 Round her who wore it on her brow.<br>
 Speak, Hanumán, O say, dear friend,<br>
 What message did my darling send?<br>
 O speak, and let thy words impart<br>
 Their gentle dew to cool my heart.<br>
 Ah, 'tis the crown of woe to see<br>
 This gem and ask 'Where, where is she?'<br>
 If for one month her heart be strong,<br>
 Her days of life will yet be long.<br>
 But I, with naught to lend relief,<br>
 This very day must die of grief.<br>
 Come, Hanumán, and quickly guide<br>
 The mourner to his darling's side.<br>
 O lead me--thou hast learnt the way--<br>
 I cannot and I will not stay.<br>
 How can my gentle love endure,<br>
 So timid, delicate, and pure,<br>
 The dreadful demons fierce and vile<br>
 Who watch her in the guarded isle?<br>
 No more the light of beauty shines<br>
 From Sítá as she weeps and pines.<br>
 But pain and sorrow, cloud on cloud.<br>
 Her moonlight glory dim and shroud.<br>
 O speak, dear Hanumán, and tell<br>
 Each word that from her sweet lips fell,<br>
 Her words, her words alone can give<br>
 The healing balm to make me live.' <a name="fr_904"></a><a href="#fn_904"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 <br>
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_903"></a><a href="ry398.htm#fr_903">427:1</a>  Janak was king of Videha or Mithilá
 in Behar.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_904"></a><a href="ry398.htm#fr_904">427:2</a>  The original contains two more Cantos
 which end the Book, Canto LXVII begins
 thus: 'Hanumán thus addressed by the
 great-souled son of Raghu related to the
 son of Raghu all that Sítá had said.' And
 the two Cantos contain nothing but
 Hanumán's account of his interview with
 Sítá, and the report of his own speeches
 as well as of hers.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry399.htm">Next: Book VI</a></center>
 </body>