<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry394.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry396.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LVII.: HANÚMÁN'S RETURN.</h3>
 <p>
 Still, like a winged mountain, he<br>
 Sprang forward through the airy sea, <a name="fr_897"></a><a href="#fn_897"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And rushing through the ether drew<br>
 The clouds to follow as he flew,<br>
 Through the great host around him spread,<br>
 Grey, golden, dark, and white, and red.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Now in a sable cloud immersed,<br>
 Now from its gloomy pall he burst,<br>
 Like the bright Lord of Stars concealed<br>
 A moment, and again revealed.<br>
 Sunábha  <a name="fr_898"></a><a href="#fn_898"><font size="1">1b</font></a> passed, he neared the coast<br>
 Where waited still the Vánar host.<br>
 They heard a rushing in the skies,<br>
 And lifted up their wondering eyes.<br>
 His wild triumphant shout they knew<br>
 That louder still and louder grew,<br>
 And Jámbaván with eager voice<br>
 Called on the Vánars to rejoice:<br>
 'Look he returns, the Wind-God's son,<br>
 And full success his toils have won;<br>
 Triumphant is the shout that comes<br>
 Like music of a thousand drums.'<br>
   Up sprang the Vánars from the ground<br>
 And listened to the wondrous sound<br>
 Of hurtling arm and thigh as through<br>
 The region of the air he flew,<br>
 Loud as the wind, when tempests rave,<br>
 Roars in the prison of the cave.<br>
 From crag to crag, from height to height;<br>
 They bounded in their mad delight,<br>
 And when he touched the mountain's crest,<br>
 With reverent welcome round him pressed.<br>
 They brought him of their woodland fruits,<br>
 They brought him of the choicest roots,<br>
 And laughed and shouted in their glee<br>
 The noblest of their chiefs to see.<br>
 Nor Hanúmán delayed to greet<br>
 Sage Jámbaván with reverence meet;<br>
 To Angad and the chiefs he bent<br>
 For age and rank preëminent,<br>
 And briefly spoke: 'These eyes have seen,<br>
 These lips addressed, the Maithil queen.'<br>
 They sat beneath the waving trees,<br>
 And Angad spoke in words like these:<br>
 'O noblest of the Vánar kind<br>
 For valour power and might combined,<br>
 To thee triumphant o'er the foe<br>
 Our hopes, our lives and all we owe.<br>
 O faithful heart in perils tried,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_426"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 426</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Which toil nor fear could turn aside,<br>
 Thy deed the lady will restore,<br>
 And Ráma's heart will ache no more,'  <a name="fr_899"></a><a href="ry396.htm#fn_899"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_897"></a><a href="ry395.htm#fr_897">425:1</a>  I omit two stanzas which continue
 the metaphor of the sea or lake of air.
 The moon is its lotus, the sun its wild-
 duck, the clouds are its water-weeds, Mars
 is its shark and so on. Gorresio remarks:
 'This comparison of a great lake to the
 sky and of celestial to aquatic objects is
 one of those ideas which the view and
 qualities of natural scenery awake in lively
 fancies. Imagine one of those grand
 and splendid lakes of India covered with
 lotus blossoms, furrowed by wild-ducks
 of the most vivid colours, mantled over
 here and there with flowers and water
 weeds &amp;c. and it will be understood how
 the fancy of the poet could readily compare
 to the sky radiant with celestial azure
 the blue expanse of the water, to the soft
 light of the moon the ****** hue of the
 lotus, to the splendour of the sun the brilliant
 colours of the wild-fowl, to the stars
 the flowers, to the cloud the weeds that
 float upon the water &amp;c.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_898"></a><a href="ry395.htm#fr_898">425:1b</a>  Sunábha is the mountain that rose
 from the sea when Hanúmán passed over
 to Lanká.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry396.htm">Next: Canto LXI.: The Feast of Honey.</a></center>
 </body>