<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry391.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry393.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIV.: THE BURNING OF LANKÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 'What further deed remains to do<br>
 To vex the Rákshas king anew?<br>
 The beauty of his grove is marred,<br>
 Killed are the bravest of his guard.<br>
 The captains of his host are slain;<br>
 But forts and palaces remain.<br>
 Swift is the work and light the toil<br>
 Each fortress of the foe to spoil.'<br>
     Reflecting thus, his tale ablaze<br>
 As through the cloud red lightning plays,<br>
 He scaled the palaces and spread<br>
 The conflagration where he sped.<br>
 From house to house he hurried on,<br>
 And the wild flames behind him shone.<br>
 Each mansion of the foe he scaled,<br>
 And furious fire its roof assailed<br>
 Till all the common ruin shared:<br>
 Vibhíshan's house alone was spared.<br>
 From blazing pile to pile he sprang,<br>
 And loud his shout of triumph rang,<br>
 As roars the doomsday cloud when all<br>
 The worlds in dissolution fall.<br>
 The friendly wind conspired to fan<br>
 The hungry flames that leapt and ran,<br>
 And spreading in their fury caught<br>
 The gilded walls with pearls inwrought,<br>
 Till each proud palace reeled and fell<br>
 As falls a heavenly citadel.<br>
     Loud was the roar the demons raised<br>
 Mid walls that split and beams that blazed,<br>
 As each with vain endeavour strove<br>
 To stay the flames in house or grove.<br>
 The women, with dishevelled hair,<br>
 Flocked to the roofs in wild despair,<br>
 Shrieked out for succour, wept aloud,<br>
 And fell, like lightning from a cloud.<br>
 He saw the flames ascend and curl<br>
 Round turkis, diamond, and pearl,<br>
 While silver floods and molten gold<br>
 From ruined wall and latice rolled.<br>
 As fire grows fiercer as he feeds<br>
 On wood and grass and crackling reeds,<br>
 So Hanumán the ruin eyed<br>
 With fury still unsatisfied.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry393.htm">Next: Canto LV.: Fear For Sítá.</a></center>
 </body>