<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry390.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry392.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIII.: THE PUNISHMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 King Rávan, by his pleading moved,<br>
 The counsel of the chief approved:<br>
     'Thy words are wise and true; to kill<br>
 An envoy would beseem us ill<br>
 Yet must we for his crime invent<br>
 Some fitting mode of punishment.<br>
 The tail, I fancy, is the part<br>
 Most cherished by a monkey's heart. <a name="fr_893"></a><a href="#fn_893"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Make ready: set his tail aflame,<br>
 And let him leave us as he came,<br>
 And thus disfigured and disgraced<br>
 Back to his king and people haste.'<br>
     The giants heard their monarch's speech;<br>
 And, filled with burning fury, each<br>
 Brought strips of cotton cloth, and round<br>
 The monkey's tail the bandage wound.<br>
 As round big tail the bands they drew<br>
 His mighty form dilating grew<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Vast as the flame that bursts on high<br>
 Where trees are old and grass is dry.<br>
 Each hand and strip they soaked in oil,<br>
 And set on fire the twisted coil.<br>
 Delighted as they viewed the blaze,<br>
 The cruel demons stood at gaze:<br>
 And mid loud drums and shells rang out<br>
 The triumph of their joyful shout.<br>
 They pressed about him thick and fast<br>
 As through the crowded streets he passed,<br>
 Observing with attentive care<br>
 Each rich and wondrous structure there,<br>
 Still heedless of the eager cry<br>
 That rent the air, The spy! the spy!<br>
     Some to the captive lady ran.<br>
 And thus in joyous words began:<br>
 'That copper-visaged monkey, he<br>
 Who in the garden talked with thee,<br>
 Through Lanká's town is led a show,<br>
 And round his tail the red flames glow.'<br>
 The mournful news the lady heard<br>
 That with fresh grief her bosom stirred.<br>
 Swift to the kindled fire she went<br>
 And prayed before it reverent:<br>
 'If I my husband have obeyed,<br>
 And kept the ascetic vows I made,<br>
 Free, ever free, from stain and blot,<br>
 O spare the Vánar; harm him not.'<br>
     Then leapt on high the flickering flame<br>
 And shone in answer to the dame.<br>
 The pitying fire its rage forbore:<br>
 The Vánar felt the heat no more.<br>
 Then, to minutest size reduced, <a name="fr_894"></a><a href="#fn_894"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 The bonds that bound his limbs he loosed,<br>
 And, freed from every band and chain,<br>
 Rose to his native size again.<br>
 He seized a club of ponderous weight<br>
 That lay before him by the gate,<br>
 Rushed at the fiends that hemmed him round,<br>
 And laid them lifeless on the ground,<br>
 Through Lanká's town again he strode,<br>
 And viewed each street and square and road,--<br>
 Still wreathed about with harmless blaze,<br>
 A sun engarlanded with rays.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_424"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 424</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_893"></a><a href="ry391.htm#fr_893">423:1</a>  I have not attempted to tone down
 anything in this Canto. I give a faithful
 translation.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_894"></a><a href="ry391.htm#fr_894">423:1b</a>  "Behold a wonder! they but now who seemed
 In bigness to surpass earth's giant sons,
 Now less than smallest dwarfs in narrow room
 Throng numberless."
 
 </p><p>
 <i>Paradise Lost</i>, I, 716.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry392.htm">Next: Canto LIV.: The Burning of Lanká.</a></center>
 </body>