<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry396.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry398.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXV.  <a name="fr_902"></a><a href="#fn_902"><font size="1">1b</font></a>: THE TIDINGS.</h3>
 <p>
 On to Prasravan's hill they sped<br>
 Where blooming trees their branches spread.<br>
 To Raghu's sons their heads they bent<br>
 And did obeisance reverent.<br>
 Then to their king, by Angad led,<br>
 Each Vánar chieftain bowed his head;<br>
 And Hanumán the brave and bold<br>
 His tidings to the monarch told;<br>
 But first in Ráma's hand he placed<br>
 The gem that Sítá's brow had graced:<br>
 'I crossed the sea: I searched a while<br>
 For Sítá in the giants' isle.<br>
 I found her vext with taunt and threat<br>
 By demon guards about her set.<br>
 Her tresses twined in single braid,<br>
 On the bare earth her limbs were laid.<br>
 Sad were her eyes: her cheeks were pale<br>
 As shuddering flowers in winter's gale.<br>
 I stood beside the weeping dame,<br>
 And gently whispered Ráma's name:<br>
 With cheering words her grief consoled,<br>
 And then the whole adventure told.<br>
 She weeps afar beyond the sea,<br>
 And her true heart is still with thee.<br>
 She gave a sign that thou wouldst know,<br>
 She bids thee think upon the crow,<br>
 And bright mark pressed upon her brow<br>
 When none was nigh but she and thou.<br>
 She bids thee take this precious stone,<br>
 The sea-born gem thou long hast known.<br>
 'And I', she said, 'will dull the sting<br>
 Of woe by gazing on the ring.<br>
 One little month shall I sustain<br>
 This life oppressed with woe and pain:<br>
 And when the month is ended, I<br>
 The giants' prey must surely die.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_427"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 427</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_902"></a><a href="ry397.htm#fr_902">426:1b</a>  Three Cantos consisting of little but
 repetitions are omitted. Dadhimukh escapes
 from the infuriated monkeys and
 hastens to Sugríva to report their misconduct.
 Sugríva infers that Hanumán and
 his band have been successful in their
 search, and that the exuberance of spirits
 and the mischief complained of, are but
 the natural expression of their joy. Dadhimukh
 obtains little sympathy from
 Sugríva, and is told to return and send
 the monkeys on with all possible speed.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry398.htm">Next: Canto LXVI.: Ráma's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>