<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry389.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry391.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LII.: VIBHÍSHAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then Rávan spake with flashing eye:<br>
 'Hence with the Vánar: let him die.<br>
 Vibíshan heard the stern behest,<br>
 And pondered in his troubled breast;<br>
 Then, trained in arts that soothe and please<br>
 Addressed the king in words like these:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Revoke, my lord, thy fierce decree,<br>
 And hear the words I speak to thee.<br>
 Kings wise and noble ne'er condemn<br>
 To death the envoys sent to them:<br>
 Such deed the world's contempt would draw<br>
 On him who breaks the ancient law.  <a name="fr_892"></a><a href="#fn_892"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Observe the mean where justice lies,<br>
 And spare his life but still chastise.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_423"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 423</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
     Then forth the tyrant's fury broke,<br>
 And thus in angry words he spoke:<br>
 'O hero, when the wicked bleed<br>
 No sin or shame attends the deed.<br>
 The Vánar's blood must needs be spilt,<br>
 The penalty of heinous guilt.'<br>
     Again Vibhíshan made reply:<br>
 'Nay, hear me, for he must not die.<br>
 Hear the great law the wise declare:<br>
 'Thy foeman's envoy thou shalt spare.'<br>
 'Tis true he comes an open foe:<br>
 'Tis true his hands have wrought us woe<br>
 But law allows thee, if thou wilt,<br>
 A punishment to suit the guilt.<br>
 The mark of shame, the scourge, the brand,<br>
 The shaven head, the wounded hand.<br>
 Yea, were the Vánar envoy slain,<br>
 Where, King of giants, were the gain?<br>
 On them alone, on them who sent<br>
 The message, be the punishment.<br>
 For spake he well or spake he ill,<br>
 He spake obedient to their will.<br>
 And, if he perish, who can bear<br>
 Thy challenge to the royal pair?<br>
 Who, cross the ocean and incite<br>
 Thy death-doomed enemies to fight?'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_892"></a><a href="ry390.htm#fr_892">422:1b</a>  "One who murders an ambassador
 i (<i>rája *bhata</i>) goes to Tuptakumbha, the
 hell of heated caldrons." WILSON's <i>Vishya
 Purana</i>, Vol. II pg 217. <a name="page_423"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 423</font></a>
 "It will be remembered that the envoys
 of King David had the half of their
 beards shaved off by Hanun, King of
 Ammon. (2 Sam. X.)" WHEELER, <i>Hist,
 of India</i>, Vol. II. 342.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry391.htm">Next: Canto LIII.: The Punishment.</a></center>
 </body>