<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry405.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry407.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VII.: RÁVAN ENCOURAGED.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased: they scorned, with blinded eyes,<br>
 The foeman and his bold allies,<br>
 Raised reverent bands with one accord,<br>
 And thus made answer to their lord:<br>
 'Why yield thee, King, to causeless fear?<br>
 A mighty host with sword and spear<br>
 And mace and axe and pike and lance<br>
 Waits but thy signal to advance.<br>
 Art thou not he who slew of old<br>
 The Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold;<br>
 Scaled Mount Kailása and o'erthrew<br>
 Kuvera  <a name="fr_920"></a><a href="#fn_920"><font size="1">1</font></a> and his Yaksha crew,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_432"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 432</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Compelling S'iva's haughty friend<br>
 Beneath a mightier arm to bend?<br>
 Didst thou not bring from realms afar<br>
 The marvel of the magic car,<br>
 When they who served Kuvera fell<br>
 Crushed in their mountain citadel?<br>
 Attracted by thy matchless fame<br>
 To thee, a suppliant, Maya came,<br>
 The lord of every Dánav band,<br>
 And won thee with his daughter's hand.<br>
 Thy arm in hell itself was felt,<br>
 Where Vásuki <a name="fr_921"></a><a href="#fn_921"><font size="1">1</font></a> and S'ankha dwelt,<br>
 And they and Takshak, overthrown,<br>
 Were forced thy conquering might to own.<br>
 The Gods in vain their blessing gave<br>
 To heroes bravest of the brave,<br>
 Who strove a year and, sorely pressed,<br>
 Their victor's peerless might confessed.<br>
 In vain their magic arts they tried,<br>
 In vain thy matchless arm defied.<br>
 King Varun's sons with fourfold force,<br>
 Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse,<br>
 But for a while thy power withstood,<br>
 And, conquered, mourned their hardihood.<br>
 Thou hast encountered, face to face,<br>
 King Yama <a name="fr_922"></a><a href="#fn_922"><font size="1">2</font></a> with his murdering mace.<br>
 Fierce as the wild tempestuous aea,<br>
 What terror had his wrath for thee,<br>
 Though death in every threatening form,<br>
 And woe and torment, urged the storm?<br>
 Thine arm a glorious victory won<br>
 O'er the dread king who pities none;<br>
 And the three worlds, from terror freed,<br>
 In joyful wonder praised thy deed.<br>
 The tribe of Warriors, strong and dread<br>
 As Indra's self, o'er earth had spread;<br>
 As giant trees that towering stand<br>
 ln mountain glens, they filled the land.<br>
 Can Raghu's son encounter foes<br>
 Fierce, numerous, and strong as those?<br>
 Yet, trained in war and practised well,<br>
 O'ermatched by thee, they fought and fell,<br>
 Stay in thy royal home, nor care<br>
 The battle and the toil to share;<br>
 But let the easy fight be won<br>
 By Indrajit <a name="fr_923"></a><a href="#fn_923"><font size="1">3</font></a> thy matchless son.<br>
 All, all shall die, if thou permit,<br>
 Slain by the hand of Indrajit.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_920"></a><a href="ry406.htm#fr_920">431:1</a>  The God of Riches, brother and enemy
 of Rávan and first possessor of Pushpak
 the flying car.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_921"></a><a href="ry406.htm#fr_921">432:1</a>  King of the Serpents. S'ankha and
 Takshak are two of the eight Serpent
 Chiefs.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_922"></a><a href="ry406.htm#fr_922">432:2</a>  The God of Death, the Pluto of the
 Hindus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_923"></a><a href="ry406.htm#fr_923">432:3</a>  Literally Indra's conqueror, so called
 from his victory over that God.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry407.htm">Next: Canto VIII.: Prahasta's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>