<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry403.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry405.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO V.: RÁMA'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 There on the coast in long array<br>
 The Vánars' marshalled legions lay,<br>
 Where Níla's care had ordered well<br>
 The watch of guard and sentinel,<br>
 And Mainda moved from post to post<br>
 With Dwivid to protect the host.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma stood by Lakshman's side.<br>
 And mastered by his sorrow cried:<br>
 'My brother dear, the heart's distress,<br>
 As days wear on, grows less and less.<br>
 But my deep-seated grief, alas,<br>
 Grows fiercer as the seasons pass.<br>
 Though for my queen my spirit longs,<br>
 And broods indignant o'er my wrongs,<br>
 Still wilder is my grief to know<br>
 That her young life is passed in woe.<br>
 Breathe, gentle gale, O breathe where she<br>
 Lies prisoned, and then breathe on me,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_431"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 431</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And, though my love I may not meet,<br>
 Thy kiss shall be divinely sweet.<br>
 Ah, by the giant's shape appalled,<br>
 On her dear lord for help she called,<br>
 Still in mine ears the sad cry rings<br>
 And tears my heart with poison stings.<br>
 Through the long daylight and the gloom<br>
 Of night wild thoughts of her consume<br>
 My spirit, and my love supplies<br>
 The torturing flame which never dies.<br>
 Leave me, my brother; I will sleep<br>
 Couched on the bosom of the deep.<br>
 For the cold wave may bring me peace<br>
 And bid the fire of passion cease.<br>
 One only thought my stay must be,<br>
 That earth, one earth, holds her and me,<br>
 To hear, to know my darling lives<br>
 Some life-supporting comfort gives,<br>
 As streams from distant fountains run<br>
 O'er meadows parching in the sun.<br>
 Ah when, my foeman at my feet,<br>
 Shall I my queen, my glory, meet,<br>
 The blossom of her dear face raise<br>
 And on her eyes enraptured gaze,<br>
 Press her soft lips to mine again,<br>
 And drink a balm to banish pain!<br>
 Alas, alas! where lies she now,<br>
 My darling of the lovely brow?<br>
 On the cold earth, no help at hand,<br>
 Forlorn amid the Rákshas band,<br>
 King Janak's child still calls on me,<br>
 Her lord and love, to set her free.<br>
 But soon in glory will she rise<br>
 A crescent moon in autumn skies,<br>
 And those dark rovers of the night.<br>
 Like scattered clouds shall turn in flight.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_919"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_919">430:1b</a>  The Asurs or demons dwell imprisoned
 in the depths beneath the sea.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry405.htm">Next: Canto VI.: Rávan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>