<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry402.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry404.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO IV.: THE MARCH.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased; and spurred by warlike pride<br>
 The impetuous son of Raghu cried:<br>
 'Soon shall mine arm with wrathful joy<br>
 That city of the foe destroy.<br>
 Now, chieftain, now collect the host,<br>
 And onward to the southern coast!<br>
 The sun in his meridian tower<br>
 Gives glory to the Vánar power.<br>
 The demon lord who stole my queen<br>
 By timely flight his life may screen.<br>
 She, when she knows her lord is near,<br>
 Will cling to hope and banish fear,<br>
 Saved like a dying wretch who sips<br>
 The drink of Gods with fevered lips.<br>
 Arise, thy troops to battle lead:<br>
 All happy omens counsel speed.<br>
 The Lord of Stars in favouring skies<br>
 Bodes glory to our enterprise.<br>
 This arm shall slay the fiend; and she.<br>
 My consort, shall again be free.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_429"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 429</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Mine upward-throbbing eye foreshows<br>
 The longed-for triumph o'er my foes.<br>
 Far in the van be Níla's post,<br>
 To scan the pathway for the host,<br>
 And let thy bravest and thy best,<br>
 A hundred thousand, wait his hest.<br>
 Go forth, O warrior Níla, lead<br>
 The legions on through wood and mead<br>
 Where pleasant waters cool the ground,<br>
 And honey, flowers, and fruit abound,<br>
 Go, and with timely care prevent<br>
 The Rákshas foeman's dark intent.<br>
 With watchful troops each valley guard<br>
 Ere brooks and fruits and roots be marred<br>
 And search each glen and leafy shade<br>
 For hostile troops in ambuscade.<br>
 But let the weaklings stay behind:<br>
 For heroes is our task designed.<br>
 Let thousands of the Vánar breed<br>
 The vanguard of the armies lead:<br>
 Fierce and terrific must it be<br>
 As billows of the stormy sea.<br>
 There be the hill-huge Gaja's place,<br>
 And Gavaya's, strongest of his race,<br>
 And, like the bull that leads the herd,<br>
 Gaváksha's, by no fears deterred<br>
 Let Rishabh, matchless in the might<br>
 Of warlike arms, protect our right,<br>
 And Gandhamádan next in rank<br>
 Defend and guide the other flank.<br>
 I, like the God who rules the sky<br>
 Borne on Airávat <a name="fr_910"></a><a href="#fn_910"><font size="1">1</font></a> mounted high<br>
 On stout Hanúmán's back will ride,<br>
 The central host to cheer and guide.<br>
 Fierce as the God who rules below,<br>
 On Angad's back let Lakshman show<br>
 Like him who wealth to mortals shares, <a name="fr_911"></a><a href="#fn_911"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 The lord whom Sárvabhauma <a name="fr_912"></a><a href="#fn_912"><font size="1">3</font></a> bears.<br>
 The bold Sushen's impetuous might,<br>
 And Vegadars'í's piercing sight,<br>
 And Jámbaván whom bears revere,<br>
 Illustrious three, shall guard the rear.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased, the royal Vánar heard,<br>
 And swift, obedient to his word,<br>
 Sprang forth in numbers none might tell<br>
 From mountain, care, and bosky dell,<br>
 From rocky ledge and breezy height,<br>
 Fierce Vánars burning for the fight.<br>
 And Ráma's course was southward bent<br>
 Amid the mighty armament.<br>
 On, joyous, pressed in close array<br>
 The hosts who owned Sugríva's sway,<br>
 With nimble feet, with rapid bound<br>
 Exploring, ere they passed, the ground,<br>
 While from ten myriad throats rang out<br>
 The challenge and the battle shout.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 On roots and honeycomb they fed,<br>
 And clusters from the boughs o'erhead,<br>
 Or from the ground the tall trees tore<br>
 Rich with the flowery load they bore.<br>
 Some carried comrades, wild with mirth,<br>
 Then cast their riders to the earth,<br>
 Who swiftly to their feet arose<br>
 And overthrew their laughing foes.<br>
 While still rang out the general cry,<br>
 'King Rávan and his fiends shall die,'<br>
 Still on, exulting in the pride<br>
 Of conscious strength, the Vánars hied,<br>
 And gazed where noble Sahya, best<br>
 of mountains, raised each towering crest.<br>
 They looked on lake and streamlet, where<br>
 The lotus bloom was bright and fair,<br>
 Nor marched--for Ráma's hest they feared<br>
 Where town or haunt of men appeared.<br>
 Still onward, fearful as the waves<br>
 Of Ocean when he roars and raves,<br>
 Led by their eager chieftains, went<br>
 The Vánars' countless armament.<br>
 Each captain, like a noble steed<br>
 Urged by the lash to double speed.<br>
 Pressed onward, filled with zeal and pride,<br>
 By Ráma's and his brother's side,<br>
 Who high above the Vánar throng<br>
 On mighty backs were borne along,<br>
 Like the great Lords of Day and Night<br>
 Seized by eclipsing planets might.<br>
 Then Lakshman radiant as the morn,<br>
 On Angad's shoulders high upborne.<br>
 With sweet consoling words that woke<br>
 New ardour, to his brother spoke:<br>
 'Soon shalt thou turn, thy queen regained<br>
 And impious Rávan's life-blood drained,<br>
 In happiness and high renown<br>
 To dear Ayodhyá's happy town.<br>
 I see around exceeding fair<br>
 All omens of the earth and air.<br>
 Auspicious breezes sweet and low<br>
 To greet the Vánar army blow,<br>
 And softly to my listening ear<br>
 Come the glad cries of bird and deer.<br>
 Bright is the sky around us, bright<br>
 Without a cloud the Lord of Light,<br>
 And S'ukra <a name="fr_913"></a><a href="#fn_913"><font size="1">1b</font></a> with propitious love<br>
 Looks on thee from his throne above.<br>
 The pole-star and the Sainted Seven <a name="fr_914"></a><a href="#fn_914"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Shine brightly in the northern heaven,<br>
 And great Tris'anku, <a name="fr_915"></a><a href="#fn_915"><font size="1">3b</font></a> glorious king,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_430"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 430</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ikshváku's son from whom we spring,<br>
 Beams in unclouded glory near<br>
 His holy priest <a name="fr_916"></a><a href="#fn_916"><font size="1">1</font></a> whom all revere.<br>
 Undimmed the two Vis'ákhás <a name="fr_917"></a><a href="#fn_917"><font size="1">2</font></a> shine,<br>
 The strength and glory of our line,<br>
 And Nairrit's <a name="fr_918"></a><a href="#fn_918"><font size="1">3</font></a> influence that aids<br>
 Our Rákshas foemen faints and fades.<br>
 The running brooks are fresh and fair,<br>
 The boughs their ripening clusters bear,<br>
 And scented breezes gently sway<br>
 The leaflet of the tender spray.<br>
 See, with a glory half divine<br>
 The Vánars' ordered legions shine,<br>
 Bright as the Gods' exultant train<br>
 Who saw the demon Tárak slain.<br>
 O let thine eyes these signs behold,<br>
 And bid thy heart be glad and bold.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The Vánar squadrons densely spread<br>
 O'er all the country onward sped,<br>
 While rising from the rapid beat<br>
 Of bears' and monkeys' hastening feet<br>
 Dust hid the earth with thickest veil,<br>
 And made the struggling sunbeams pale.<br>
 Now where Mahendra's peaks arise<br>
 Came Ráma of the lotus eyes<br>
 And the long arm's resistless might,<br>
 And clomb the mountain's wood-crowned height.<br>
 Thence Das'aratha's son beheld<br>
 Where billowy Ocean rose and swelled.<br>
 Past Malaya's peaks and Sahya's chain<br>
 The Vánar legions reached the main,<br>
 And stood in many a marshalled band<br>
 On loud-resounding Ocean's strand.<br>
 To the fair wood that fringed the tide<br>
 Came Das'aratha's son, and cried:<br>
 'At length, my lord Sugríva, we<br>
 Have reached King Várun's realm the sea,<br>
 And one great thought, still-vexing, how<br>
 To cross the flood, awaits us now.<br>
 The broad deep ocean, that denies<br>
 A passage, stretched before us lies.<br>
 Then let us halt and plan the while<br>
 How best to storm the giant's isle.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: Sugríva on the coast<br>
 By trees o'ershadowed stayed the host,<br>
 That seemed in glittering lines to be<br>
 The bright waves of a second sea.<br>
 Then from the shore the captains gazed<br>
 On billows which the breezes raised<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 To fury, as they dashed in foam<br>
 O'er Várun's realm, the Asurs' home: <a name="fr_919"></a><a href="ry404.htm#fn_919"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 The sea that laughed with foam, and danced<br>
 With waves whereon the sunbeams glanced:<br>
 Where, when the light began to fade,<br>
 Huge crocodiles and monsters played;<br>
 And, when the moon went up the sky,<br>
 The troubled billows rose on high<br>
 From the wild watery world whereon<br>
 A thousand moons reflected shone:<br>
 Where awful serpents swam and showed<br>
 Their fiery crests which flashed and glowed,<br>
 Illumining the depths of hell,<br>
 The prison where the demons dwell.<br>
 The eye, bewildered, sought in vain<br>
 The bounding line of sky and main:<br>
 Alike in shade, alike in glow<br>
 Were sky above and sea below.<br>
 There wave-like clouds by clouds were chased,<br>
 Here cloud-like billows roared and raced:<br>
 Then shone the stars, and many a gem<br>
 That lit the waters answered them.<br>
 They saw the great-souled Ocean stirred<br>
 To frenzy by the winds, and heard,<br>
 Loud as ten thousand drums, the roar<br>
 Of wild waves dashing on the shore.<br>
 They saw him mounting to defy<br>
 With deafening voice the troubled sky.<br>
 And the deep bed beneath him swell<br>
 In fury as the billows fell.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_909"></a><a href="ry402.htm#fr_909">428:1</a>  The God of the sea.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_910"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_910">429:1</a>  Indra's elephant.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_911"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_911">429:2</a>  Kuvera, God of wealth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_912"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_912">429:3</a>  Kuvera's elephant.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_913"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_913">429:1b</a>  The planet Venus, or its regent who
 is regarded as the son of Bhrigu and preceptor
 of the Daitvas.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_914"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_914">429:2b</a>  The seven <i>rishis</i> or saints who form
 the constellation of the Great Bear.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_915"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_915">429:3b</a>  Tris'anku was raised to the skies to
 form a constellation in the southern hemisphere.
 The story in told in Book I. Canto LX.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_916"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_916">430:1</a>  The sage Vis'vámitra, who performed
 for Tris'anku the great sacrifice which
 raised him to the heavens.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_917"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_917">430:2</a>  One of the lunar asterisms containing
 four or originally two stars under the
 regency of a dual divinity Indrágni, Indra
 and Agni.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_918"></a><a href="ry403.htm#fr_918">430:3</a>  The lunar asterism Múla, belonging
 to the Rákshases.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry404.htm">Next: Canto V.: Ráma's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>