<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry404.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry406.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VI.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 But when the giant king surveyed<br>
 His glorious town in ruin laid,<br>
 And each dire sign of victory won<br>
 By Hanumán the Wind-God's son,<br>
 He vailed his angry eyes oppressed<br>
 By shame, and thus his lords addressed:<br>
 'The Vánar spy has passed the gate<br>
 Of Lanká long inviolate,<br>
 Eluded watch and ward, and seen<br>
 With his bold eyes the captive queen.<br>
 My royal roof with flames is red,<br>
 The bravest of my lords are dead,<br>
 And the fierce Vánar in his hate<br>
 Has left our city desolate.<br>
 Now ponder well the work that lies<br>
 Before us, ponder and advise.<br>
 With deep-observing judgment scan<br>
 The peril, and mature a plan.<br>
 From counsel, sages say, the root,<br>
 Springs victory, most glorious fruit.<br>
 First ranks the king, when woe impends<br>
 Who seeks the counsel of his friends,<br>
 Of kinsmen ever faithful found,<br>
 Or those whose hopes with his are bound,<br>
 Then with their aid his strength applies,<br>
 And triumphs in his enterprise.<br>
 Next ranks the prince who plans alone,<br>
 No counsel seeks to aid his own,<br>
 Weighs loss and gain and wrong and right,<br>
 And seeks success with earnest might.<br>
 Unwisest he who spurns delays,<br>
 Who counts no cost, no peril weighs,<br>
 Speeds to his aim, defying fate,<br>
 And risks his all, precipitate.<br>
 Thus too in counsel sages find<br>
 A best, a worst, a middle kind.<br>
 When gathered counsellors explore<br>
 The way by light of holy lore,<br>
 And all from first to last agree,<br>
 Is the best counsel of the three.<br>
 Next, if debate first waxes high,<br>
 And each his chosen plan would try<br>
 Till all agree at last, we deem<br>
 This counsel second in esteem.<br>
 Worst of the three is this, when each<br>
 Assails with taunt his fellow's speech;<br>
 When all debate, and no consent<br>
 Concludes the angry argument.<br>
 Consult then, lords; my task shall be<br>
 To crown with act your wise decree.<br>
 With thousands of his wild allies<br>
 The vengeful Ráma hither hies;<br>
 With unresisted might and speed<br>
 Across the flood his troops will lead,<br>
 Or for the Vánar host will drain<br>
 The channels of the conquered main.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry406.htm">Next: Canto VII.: Rávan Encouraged.</a></center>
 </body>