<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry406.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry408.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO VIII.: PRAHASTA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Dark as a cloud of autumn, dread<br>
 Prahasta joined his palms and said:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Gandharvas, Gods, the hosts who dwell<br>
 In heaven, in air, in earth, in hell,<br>
 Have yielded to thy might, and how<br>
 Shall two weak men oppose thee now?<br>
 Hanúmán came, a foe disguised,<br>
 And mocked us heedless and surprised,<br>
 Or never had he lived to flee<br>
 And boast that he has fought with me.<br>
 Command, O King, and this right hand<br>
 Shall sweep the Vánars from the land,<br>
 And hill and dale, to Ocean's shore,<br>
 Shall know the death-doomed race no more.<br>
 But let my care the means devise<br>
 To guard thy city from surprise.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Durmukh cried, of Rákshas race:<br>
 'Too long we brook the dire disgrace.<br>
 He gave our city to the flames,<br>
 He trod the chambers of thy dames.<br>
 Ne'er shall so weak and vile a thing<br>
 Unpunished brave the giants' king.<br>
 Now shall this single arm attack<br>
 And drive the daring Vánars back,<br>
 Till to the winds of heaven they flee,<br>
 Or seek the depths of earth and sea.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then, brandishing the mace he bore,<br>
 Whose horrid spikes were stained with gore,<br>
 While fury made his eyeballs red,<br>
 Impetuous Vajradanshtra said:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Why waste a thought on one so vile<br>
 As Hanúmán the Vánar, while<br>
 Sugriva, Lakshman, yet remain,<br>
 And Ráma mightier still, unslain?<br>
 This mace to-day shall crush the three,<br>
 And all the host will turn and flee.<br>
 Listen, and I will speak: incline,<br>
 O King, to hear these words of mine,<br>
 For the deep plan that I propose<br>
 Will swiftly rid thee of thy foes.<br>
 Let thousands of thy host assume<br>
 The forms of men in youthful bloom,<br>
 In war's magnificent array<br>
 Draw near to Raghu's son, and say:<br>
 'Thy younger brother Bharat sends<br>
 This army, and thy cause befriends.'<br>
 Then let our legions hasten near<br>
 With bow and mace and sword and spear,<br>
 And on the Vánar army rain<br>
 Our steel and stone till all be slain.<br>
 If Raghu's sons will fain believe,<br>
 Entangled in the net we weave,<br>
 The penalty they both must pay,<br>
 And lose their forfeit lives to-day.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_433"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 433</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then with his warrior soul on fire,<br>
 Nikumbha spoke in burning ire:<br>
     'I, only I, will take the field,<br>
 And Ragha's son his life shall yield.<br>
 Within these walls, O Chiefs, abide,<br>
 Nor part ye from our monarch's side.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry408.htm">Next: Canto IX.: Vibhíshan's Counsel.</a></center>
 </body>