<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry408.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry410.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO X.: VIBHÍSHAN'S COUNSEL.</h3>
 <p>
 Soon as the light of morning broke,<br>
 Vibhíshan from his slumber woke,<br>
 And, duty guiding every thought,<br>
 The palace of his brother sought.<br>
 Vast as a towering hill that shows<br>
 His peaks afar, that palace rose.<br>
 Here stood within the monarch's gate<br>
 Sage nobles skilful in debate.<br>
 There strayed in glittering raiment through<br>
 The courts his royal retinue,<br>
 Where in wild measure rose and fell<br>
 The music of the drum and shell,<br>
 And talk grew loud, and many a dame<br>
 Of fairest feature went and came<br>
 Through doors a marvel to behold,<br>
 With pearl inlaid on burning gold:<br>
 Therein Gandharvas or the fleet<br>
 Lords of the storm might joy to meet.<br>
 He passed within the wondrous pile,<br>
 Chief glory of the giants' isle:<br>
 Thus, ere his fiery course be done,<br>
 An autumn cloud admits the sun.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_434"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 434</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He heard auspicious voices raise<br>
 With loud accord the note of praise,<br>
 And sages, deep in Scripture, sing<br>
 Each glorious triumph of the king.<br>
 He saw the priests in order stand,<br>
 Curd, oil, in every sacred hand;<br>
 And by them flowers were laid and grain,<br>
 Due offerings to the holy train.<br>
 Vibhíshan to the monarch bowed,<br>
 Raised on a throne above the crowd:<br>
 Then, skilled in arts of soft address,<br>
 He raised his voice the king to bless,<br>
 And sate him on a seat where he<br>
 Full in his brother's sight should be.<br>
 The chieftain there, while none could hear,<br>
 Spoke his true speech for Rávan's ear,<br>
 And to his words of wisdom lent<br>
 The force of weightiest argument:<br>
   'O brother, hear! since Ráma's queen<br>
 A captive in thy house has been,<br>
 Disastrous omens day by day<br>
 Have struck our souls with wild dismay.<br>
 No longer still and strong and clear<br>
 The flames of sacrifice appear,<br>
 But, restless with the frequent spark,<br>
 Neath clouds of smoke grow faint and dark.<br>
 Our ministering priests turn pale<br>
 To see their wonted offerings fail,<br>
 And ants and serpents creep and crawl<br>
 Within the consecrated hall. <a name="fr_926"></a><a href="#fn_926"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Dried are the udders of our cows,<br>
 Our elephants have juiceless brows, <a name="fr_927"></a><a href="#fn_927"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Nor can the sweetest pasture stay<br>
 The charger's long unquiet neigh.<br>
 Big tears from mules and camels flow<br>
 Whose staring coats their trouble show,<br>
 Nor can the leech's art restore<br>
 Their health and vigour as before.<br>
 Rapacious birds are fierce and bold:<br>
 Not single hunters as of old,<br>
 In banded troops they chase the prey,<br>
 Or gathering on our temples stay.<br>
 Through twilight hours with shriek and howl<br>
 Around the city jackals prowl,<br>
 And wolves and foul hyaenas wait<br>
 Athirst for blood at every gate.<br>
 One sole atonement still may cure<br>
 These evils, and our weal assure.<br>
 Restore the Maithil dame, and win<br>
 An easy pardon for thy sin.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The Rákshas monarch heard, and moved<br>
 To sudden wrath his speech reproved:<br>
     'No danger, brother, can I see:<br>
 The Maithil dame I will not free.<br>
 Though all the Gods for Ráma fight,<br>
 He yields to my superior might.'<br>
 Thus the tremendous king who broke<br>
 The ranks of heavenly warriors spoke,<br>
 And, sternly purposed to resist,<br>
 His brother from the hall dismissed.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_926"></a><a href="ry409.htm#fr_926">434:1</a>  The <i>Agnisálá</i> or room where the
 sacrificial fire was kept.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_927"></a><a href="ry409.htm#fr_927">434:2</a>  The exudation of a fragrant fluid from
 the male elephant's temples, especially at
 certain seasons, is frequently spoken of
 in Sanskrit poetry. It is said to deceive
 and attract the bees, and is regarded as a
 sign of health and masculine vigour.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry410.htm">Next: Canto XI.: The Summons.</a></center>
 </body>