<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry412.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry414.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIV.: VIBHÍSHAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased: Vibhíshan ill at ease<br>
 Addressed the king in words like these:<br>
     O Rávan, O my lord, beware<br>
 Of Sitá dangerous as fair,<br>
 Nor on thy heedless bosom hang<br>
 This serpent with a deadly fang.<br>
 O King, the Maithil dame restore<br>
 To Raghu's matchlees son before<br>
 Those warriors of the woodlands, vast<br>
 As mountain peaks, approaching fast,<br>
 Armed with fierce teeth and claws, enclose<br>
 Thy city with unsparing foes.<br>
 O, be the Maithil dame restored<br>
 Ere loosened from the clanging cord<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_437"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 437</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The vengeful shafts of Ráma fly,<br>
 And low in death thy princes lie.<br>
 In all thy legions hast thou one<br>
 A match in war for Raghu's son?<br>
 Can Kumbhakarna's self withstand,<br>
 Or Indrajit, that mighty hand?<br>
 In vain with Ráma wilt thou strive:<br>
 Thou wilt not save thy soul alive<br>
 Though guarded by the Lord of Day<br>
 And Storm-Gods' terrible array,<br>
 In vain to Indra wilt thou fly,<br>
 Or seek protection in the sky,<br>
 In Yama's gloomy mansion dwell,<br>
 Or hide thee in the depths of hell.'<br>
     He ceased; and when his lips were closed<br>
 Prahasta thus his rede opposed:<br>
     'O timid heart, to counsel thus!<br>
 What terrors have the Gods for us?<br>
 Can snake, Gandharva, fiend appal<br>
 The giants' sons who scorn them all?<br>
 And shall we now our birth disgrace,<br>
 And dread a king of human race?'<br>
 Thus fierce Prahasta counselled ill;<br>
 But sage Vibhíshan's constant will<br>
 The safety of the realm ensued;<br>
 Who thus in turn his speech renewed:<br>
     'Yes, when a soul defiled with sin<br>
 Shall mount to heaven and enter in,<br>
 Then, chieftain, will experience teach<br>
 The truth of thy disdainful speech.<br>
 Can I, or thou, or these or all<br>
 Our bravest compass Ráma's fall,<br>
 The chief in whom all virtues shine,<br>
 The pride of old Ikshváku'a line,<br>
 With whom the Gods may scarce compare<br>
 In skill to act, in heart to dare?<br>
 Yea, idly mayst thou vaunt thee, till<br>
 Sharp arrows winged with matchless skill<br>
 From Ráma's bowstring, fleet and fierce<br>
 As lightning's flame, thy body pierce.<br>
 Nikumbha shall not save thee then,<br>
 Nor Rávan, from the lord of men.<br>
 O Monarch, hear my last appeal,<br>
 My counsel for thy kingdom's weal,<br>
 This sentence I again declare:<br>
 O giant King, beware, beware!<br>
 Save from the ruin that impends<br>
 Thy town, thy people, and thy friends;<br>
 O hear the warning urged once more:<br>
 To Raghu's son the dame restore.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_932"></a><a href="ry412.htm#fr_932">436:1</a>  One of the Nymphs of Indra's heaven.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_933"></a><a href="ry412.htm#fr_933">436:2</a>  The Lotus River, a branch of the
 heavenly Gangá.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry414.htm">Next: Canto XV.: Indrajit's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>