<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry418.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry420.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XX.: THE SPIES.</h3>
 <p>
 Sárdúla, Rávan's spy, surveyed<br>
 The legions on the strand arrayed.<br>
 And bore, his bosom racked with fear,<br>
 These tidings to the monarch's ear:<br>
     'They come, they come. A rushing tide,<br>
 Ten leagues they spread from side to side,<br>
 And on to storm thy citv press,<br>
 Fierce rovers of the wilderness.<br>
 Rich in each princely power and grace,<br>
 The pride of Das'aratha's race,<br>
 Ráma and Lakshman lead their bands,<br>
 And halt them on the ocean sands.<br>
 O Monarch, rise, this peril meet;<br>
 Risk not the danger of defeat.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_442"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 442</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 First let each wiser art be tried;<br>
 Bribe them, or win them, or divide.'<br>
 Such was the counsel of the spy:<br>
 And Rávan called to S'uka: 'Fly,<br>
 Sugríva lord of Vánars seek,<br>
 And thus my kingly message speak:<br>
 'Great power and might and fame are thine.<br>
 Brave scion of a royal line,<br>
 King Riksharajuas' son, in thee<br>
 A brother and a friend I see.<br>
 How wrouged by me canst thou complain?<br>
 What profit here pretend to gain?<br>
 If from the wood the wife I stole<br>
 Of Ráma of the prudent soul,<br>
 What cause hast thou to mourn the theft?<br>
 Thou art not injured or bereft.<br>
 Return, O King, thy steps retrace<br>
 And seek thy mountain dwelling-place.<br>
 No, never may thy hosts within<br>
 My Lanká's walls a footing win.<br>
 A mighty town whose strength defies<br>
 The gathered armies of the skies.'<br>
     He ceased: obedient S'uka heard;<br>
 With wings and plumage of a bird<br>
 He rose in eager speed and through<br>
 The air upon his errand flew.<br>
 Borne o'er the sea with rapid wing<br>
 He stood above the Vánar king,<br>
 And spoke aloud, sublime in air.<br>
 Thu message he was charged so bear.<br>
 The Vánar heard the words he spoke,<br>
 And quick redoubling stroke on stroke<br>
 On head and pinions hemmed him round<br>
 And bore him struggling to the grouud.<br>
 The Rákshas wounded and distressed<br>
 These words to Raghu's son addressed:<br>
     'Quick, quick! This Vánar host * restrain,<br>
 For heralds never must be slain.<br>
 To him alone, a wretch untrue,<br>
 The punishment of death is due<br>
 Who leaves his master's speech unsaid<br>
 And speaks another word * instead'<br>
 Moved by the suppliant speech and praver<br>
 Up sprang the prince and cried, forbear.<br>
 Saved from his wild assailant's blows<br>
 Again the Rákshas herald rose<br>
 And borne on light wings to the sky<br>
 Addressed Sugríva from on high:<br>
 'O Vánar Monarch, chief endued<br>
 With power and wonderous fortitude.<br>
 What answer is my king the fear<br>
 And scourge of weeping worlds, to hear?'<br>
 'Go tell thy lord,' Sugríva cried.<br>
 'Thou, Ráma's foe, art thus defied.<br>
 His arm the guilty Bali slew;<br>
 Thus, tyrant, shalt thee perish too,<br>
 Thy sons, thy friends, proud King and all<br>
 Thy kith and kin with thee shall fall;<br>
 And emptied of the giant's brood,<br>
 Burnt * Lanká be a solitude.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Fly to the Sun-God's pathway, go<br>
 And hide thee deep in hell below:<br>
 In vain from Ráma shalt thou flee<br>
 Though heavenly warriors fight for thee.<br>
 Thine arm subdued, securely bold,<br>
 The Vulture-king infirm and old:<br>
 But will thy puny strength avail<br>
 When Raghu's wrathful sons assail?<br>
 A captive in thy palace lies<br>
 The lady of the lotus eyes:<br>
 Thou knowest not how fierce and strong<br>
 Is he whom thou hast dared to wrong.<br>
 The best of Raghu's lineage, he<br>
 Whose conquering hand shall punish thee.'<br>
     He ceased: and Augad raised a cry;<br>
 'This is no herald but a spy.<br>
 Above thee from his airy post<br>
 His rapid eye surveyed our host,<br>
 Where with advantage he might scan<br>
 Our gathered strength from rear to van,<br>
 Bind him. Vánars, bind the spy,<br>
 Nor let him back to Lanká fly.'<br>
     They hurled the Rákshas to the ground,<br>
 Thiey grasped his neck, his pinions bound,<br>
 And firmly held bear while * in vain<br>
 His voice was lifted to complain.<br>
 But Ráma's heart inclined to spare,<br>
 He listened to his plaint and prayer,<br>
 And cried aloud: 'O Vánars, cease;<br>
 The captive from his bonds release.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_942"></a><a href="ry418.htm#fr_942">441:1b</a>  The story is told in Book I. Cantos
 XL., XLI., XLII.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry420.htm">Next: Canto XXI.: Ocean Threatened.</a></center>
 </body>