<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry409.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry411.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XI.: THE SUMMONS.</h3>
 <p>
 Still Rávan's haughty heart rebelled.<br>
 The counsel of the wise repelled,<br>
 And, as his breast with passion burned,<br>
 His thoughts again to Sitá turned.<br>
 Thus, to each sign of danger blind,<br>
 To love and war he still inclined.<br>
 Then mounted he his car that glowed<br>
 With gems and golden net, and rode<br>
 Where, gathered at the monarch's call,<br>
 The nobles filled the council hall.<br>
 A host of warriors bright and gay<br>
 With coloured robes and rich array,<br>
 With shield and mace and spear and sword,<br>
 Followed the chariot of their lord<br>
 Mid the loud voice of shells and beat<br>
 Of drums he raced along the street,<br>
 And, ere he came, was heard afar<br>
 The rolling thunder of his car.<br>
 He reached the doors: the nobles bent<br>
 Their heads before him reverent:<br>
 And, welcomed with their loud acclaim,<br>
 Within the glorious hall he came.<br>
 He sat upon a royal seat<br>
 With golden steps beneath his feet,<br>
 And bade the heralds summon all<br>
 His captains to the council hall.<br>
 The heralds heard the words he spake,<br>
 And sped from house to house to wake<br>
 The giants where they slept or spent<br>
 The careless hours in merriment.<br>
 These heard the summons and obeyed:<br>
 From chamber, grove, and colonnade,<br>
 On elephants or cars they rode,<br>
 Or through the streets impatient strode.<br>
 As birds on rustling pinions fly<br>
 Through regions of the darkened sky,<br>
 Thus cars and mettled coursers through<br>
 The crowded streets of Lanká flew.<br>
 The council hall was reached, and then,<br>
 As lions seek their mountain den.<br>
 Through massy doors that opened wide,<br>
 With martial stalk the captains hied.<br>
 Welcomed with honour as was meet<br>
 They stooped to press their monarch's feet,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_435"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 435</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And each a place in order found<br>
 On stool, on cushion, or the ground.<br>
 Nor did the sage Vibhishan long<br>
 Delay to join the noble throng.<br>
 High on a car that shone like flame<br>
 With gold and flashing gems he came,<br>
 Drew near and spoke his name aloud,<br>
 And reverent to his brother bowed.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry411.htm">Next: Canto XII.: Ravan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>