<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry417.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry419.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIX.: VIBHÍSHAN'S COUNSEL.</h3>
 <p>
 When Raghu's son had owned his claim<br>
 Down from the air Vibhíshan came,<br>
 And with his four attendants bent<br>
 At Ráma's feet most reverent.<br>
     'O Ráma,' thus he cried, 'in me<br>
 Vibhíshan, Rávan's brother see.<br>
 By him disgraced thine aid I seek,<br>
 Sure refuge of the poor and weak.<br>
 From Lanká, friends, and wealth I fly.<br>
 And reft of all on thee rely.<br>
 On thee, the wretch's firmest friend,<br>
 My kingdom, joys, and life depend.'<br>
     With glance of favour Ráma eyed<br>
 The Rákshas chief and thus replied:<br>
     'First from thy lips I fain would hear<br>
 Each brighter hope, each darker fear.<br>
 Speak, stranger, that I well may know<br>
 The strength and weakness of the foe.'<br>
     He ceased: the Rákshas chief obeyed,<br>
 And thus in turn his answer made:<br>
     'O Prince, the Self-existent gave<br>
 This boon to Rávan; he may brave<br>
 All foes in fight; no fiend or snake,<br>
 Gandharva, God, his life may take.<br>
 His brother Kumbhakarna vies<br>
 In might with him who rules the skies.<br>
 The captain of his armies--fame<br>
 Perhaps has taught the warrior's name--<br>
 Is terrible Prahanta, who<br>
 King Manibhadra's  <a name="fr_940"></a><a href="#fn_940"><font size="1">1</font></a> self o'erthrew.<br>
 Where is the warrior found to face<br>
 Young Indrajit, when armed with brace<br>
 And guard  <a name="fr_941"></a><a href="#fn_941"><font size="1">2</font></a> and bow he stands in mail<br>
 And laughs at spear and arrowy hail?<br>
 Within his city Lanká dwell<br>
 Ten million giants fierce and fell,<br>
 Who wear each varied shape at will<br>
 And eat the flesh of those they kill.<br>
 These hosts against the Gods he led.<br>
 And heavenly might discomfited.'<br>
     Then Ráma cried: 'I little heed<br>
 Gigantic strength or doughty deed.<br>
 In spite of all their might has done<br>
 The king, the captain, aud the son<br>
 Shall fall beneath my fury dead,<br>
 And thou shalt reign in Rávan's stead.<br>
 He, though in depths of earth he dwell,<br>
 Or seek protection down in hell,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Or kneel before the Sire supreme,<br>
 His forfeit life shall ne'er redeem.<br>
 Yea, by my brothers' lives I swear,<br>
 I will not to my home repair<br>
 Till Rávan and his kith and kin<br>
 Have paid in death the price of sin.'<br>
     Vibhíshan bowed his head and cried:<br>
 'Thy conquering army will I guide<br>
 To storm the city of the foe,<br>
 And aid the tyrant's overthrow.'<br>
 Thus spake Vibhíshan: Ráma pressed<br>
 The Rákshas chieftain to his breast,<br>
 And cried to Lakshman:'Haste and bring<br>
 Sea-water for the new-made king.'<br>
 He spoke, and o'er Vibhíshan's head<br>
 The consecrating drops were shed<br>
 Mid shouts that hailed with one accord<br>
 The giants' king and Lanká's lord,<br>
     'Is there no way,' Hanúmán cried,<br>
 'No passage o'er the boisterous tide?<br>
 How may we lead the Vánar host<br>
 In triumph to the farther coast?<br>
 'Thus,' said Vibhíshan, 'I advise:<br>
 Let Raghu's son in suppliant guise<br>
 Entreat the mighty Sea to lend<br>
 His succour and this cause befriend.<br>
 His channels, as the wise have told,<br>
 By Sagar's sons were dug of old,  <a name="fr_942"></a><a href="ry419.htm#fn_942"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 Nor will high-thoughted Ocean scorn<br>
 A prince of Sagar's lineage born.'<br>
     He ceased; the prudent counsel won<br>
 The glad assent of Raghu's son.<br>
 Then on the ocean shore a bed<br>
 Of tender sacred grass was spread,<br>
 Where Ráma at the close of day<br>
 Like fire upon an altar lay.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_940"></a><a href="ry418.htm#fr_940">441:1</a>  A King of the Yakshas, or Kuvera
 himself, the God of Gold.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_941"></a><a href="ry418.htm#fr_941">441:2</a>  The brace protects the left arm from
 injury from the bow-string, and the guard
 protects the fingers of the right hand.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry419.htm">Next: Canto XX.: The Spies.</a></center>
 </body>