<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry414.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry416.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XVI.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 Then, while his breast with fury swelled,<br>
 Thus Rávan spoke, as fate impelled:<br>
     'Better with foes thy dwelling make,<br>
 Or house thee with the venomed snake,<br>
 Than live with false familiar friends<br>
 Who further still thy foeman's ends.<br>
 I know their treacherous mood, I know<br>
 Their secret triumph at thy woe.<br>
 They in their inward hearts despise<br>
 The brave, the noble, and the wise,<br>
 Grieve at their bliss with rancorous hate,<br>
 And for their sorrows watch and wait:<br>
 Scan every fault with curious eye,<br>
 And each slight error magnify.<br>
 Ask elephants who roam the wild<br>
 How were their captive friends beguiled.<br>
 'For fire,' they cry, 'we little care,<br>
 For javelin and shaft and snare:<br>
 Our foes are traitors, taught to bind<br>
 The trusting creatures of their kind.'<br>
 Still, still, shall blessings flow from cows, <a name="fr_936"></a><a href="#fn_936"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 And Brahmans love their rigorous vows;<br>
 Still woman change her restless will,<br>
 And friends perfidious work us ill,<br>
 What though with conquering feet I tread<br>
 On every prostrate foeman's head;<br>
 What though the worlds in abject fear<br>
 Their mighty lord in me revere<br>
 This thought my peace of mind destroys<br>
 And robs me of expected joys.<br>
 The lotus of the lake receives<br>
 The glittering rain that gems its leaves,<br>
 But each bright drop remains apart:<br>
 So is it still with heart and heart,<br>
 Deceitful as an autumn cloud<br>
 Which, though its thunderous voice be loud,<br>
 On the dry earth no torrent sends,<br>
 Such is the race of faithless friends,<br>
 No riches of the bloomy spray<br>
 Will tempt the wandering bee to stay<br>
 That loves from flower to flower to range;<br>
 And friends like thee are swift to change,<br>
 Thou blot upon thy glorious line,<br>
 If any giant's tongue but thine<br>
 Had dared to give this base advice,<br>
 He should not live to shame me twice,'<br>
     Then just Vibhíshan in the heat<br>
 Of anger started from his seat,<br>
 And with four captains of the band<br>
 Sprang forward with his mace in hand;<br>
 Then, fury flashing from his eye,<br>
 Looked on the king and made reply:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
     'Thy rights, O Rávan, I allow:<br>
 My brother and mine elder thou.<br>
 Such, though from duty's path they stray,<br>
 We love like fathers and obey,<br>
 But still too bitter to be borne<br>
 Is thy harsh speech of cruel scorn.<br>
 The rash like thee, who spurn control,<br>
 Nor check one longing of the soul,<br>
 Urged by malignant fate repel<br>
 The faithful friend who counsels well,<br>
 A thousand courtiers wilt thou meet,<br>
 With flattering lips of smooth deceit;<br>
 But rare are they whose tongue or ear<br>
 Will speak the bitter truth, or hear.<br>
 Unclose thy blinded eyes and see<br>
 That snares of death encompass thee,<br>
 I dread, my brother, to behold<br>
 The shafts of Ráma, bright with gold,<br>
 Flash fury through the air, and red<br>
 With fires of vengeance strike thee dead,<br>
 Lord, brother, King, again reflect,<br>
 Nor this mine earnest prayer reject,<br>
 O, save thyself, thy royal town,<br>
 Thy people and thine old renown."<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_936"></a><a href="ry415.htm#fr_936">438:1</a>  As producers of the <i>ghi</i>, clarified butter
 or sacrificial oil, used in fire-offerings.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry416.htm">Next: Canto XVII.: Vibhíshan's Flight.</a></center>
 </body>