<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry411.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry413.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XIII.: RÁVAN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 But Mahápárs'va saw the sting<br>
 Of keen reproach had galled the king;<br>
 And humbly, eager to appease<br>
 His anger, spoke in words like these:<br>
     'And breathes there one so cold and weak<br>
 The forest and the gloom to seek<br>
 Where savage beasts abound, and spare<br>
 To taste the luscious honey there?<br>
 Art thou not lord? and who is he<br>
 Shall venture to give laws to thee?<br>
 Love thy Videhan still, and tread<br>
 Upon thy prostrate foeman's head.<br>
 O'er Sitá's will let thine prevail,<br>
 And strength achieve if flattery fail.<br>
 What though the lady yet be coy<br>
 And turn her from the proffered joy?<br>
 Soon shall her conquered heart relent<br>
 And yield to love and blandishment.<br>
 With us let Kumbhakarna fight,<br>
 And Indrajit of matchless might<br>
 We need not other champions, they<br>
 Shall lead us forth to rout and slay.<br>
 Not ours to bribe or soothe or part<br>
 The foeman's force with gentle art,<br>
 Doomed, conquered by our might, to feel<br>
 The vengeance of the warrior's steel.'<br>
     The Rákshas monarch heard, and moved<br>
 By flattering hopes the speech approved:<br>
     'Hear me,' he cried, 'great chieftain, tell<br>
 What in the olden time befell,--<br>
 A secret tale which, long supressed,<br>
 Lies prisoned only in my breast.<br>
 One day--a day I never forget--<br>
 Fair Punjikasthalá  <a name="fr_932"></a><a href="ry413.htm#fn_932"><font size="1">1</font></a> I met,<br>
 When, radiant as a flame of fire,<br>
 She sought the palace of the Sire.<br>
 In passion's eager grasp I tore<br>
 From her sweet limbs the robes she wore,<br>
 And heedless of her prayers and cries<br>
 Strained to my breast the vanquised prize.<br>
 Like Nalini  <a name="fr_933"></a><a href="ry413.htm#fn_933"><font size="1">2</font></a> with soil distained.<br>
 The mansion of the Sire she gained,<br>
 And weeping made the outrage known<br>
 To Brahmá on his heavenly throne.<br>
 He in his wrath pronounced a curse,--<br>
 That lord who made the universe:<br>
 'If, Rávan, thou a second time<br>
 Be guilty of so foul a crime,<br>
 Thy head in shivers shall be rent:<br>
 Be warned, and dread the punishment.<br>
 Awed by the threat of vengeance still<br>
 I force not Sitá's stubborn will.<br>
 Terrific as the sea in might:<br>
 My steps are like the Storm-Gods' flight;<br>
 But Ráma knows not this, or he<br>
 Had never sought to war with me.<br>
 Where is the man would idly brave<br>
 The lion in his mountain cave,<br>
 And wake him when with slumbering eyes<br>
 Grim, terrible as Death, he lies?<br>
 No, blinded Ráma knows me not:<br>
 Ne'er has he seen mine arrows shot;<br>
 Ne'er marked them speeding to their aim<br>
 Like snakes with cloven tongues of flame.<br>
 On him those arrows will I turn,<br>
 Whose fiery points shall rend and burn.<br>
 Quenched by my power when I assail<br>
 The glory of his might shall fail,<br>
 As stars before the sun grow dim<br>
 And yield their feeble light to him.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry413.htm">Next: Canto XIV.: Vibhíshan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>