<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry413.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry415.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XV.: INDRAJIT'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 He ceased: and Indrajit the pride<br>
 Of Rákshas warriors thus replied:<br>
     'Is this a speech our king should hear,<br>
 This counsel of ignoble fear?<br>
 A scion of our glorious race<br>
 Should ne'er conceive a thought so base,<br>
 But one mid all our kin we find.<br>
 Vibhíshan, whose degenerate mind<br>
 No spark of gallant pride retains.<br>
 Whose coward soul his lineage stains.<br>
 Against one giant what can two<br>
 Unhappy sons of Raghu do?<br>
 Away with idle fears, away!<br>
 Matched with our meanest, what are they?<br>
 Beneath my conquering prowess fell<br>
 The Lord of earth and heaven and hell,  <a name="fr_934"></a><a href="#fn_934"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Through every startled region dread<br>
 Of my resistless fury spread;<br>
 And Gods in each remotest sphere<br>
 Confessed the universal fear.<br>
 Rending the air with roar and groan,<br>
 Airávt  <a name="fr_935"></a><a href="#fn_935"><font size="1">2</font></a> to the earth was thrown.<br>
 From his huge head the tusks I drew,<br>
 And smote the Gods with fear anew.<br>
 Shall I who tame celestials' pride,<br>
 By whom the fiends are terrified,<br>
 Now prove a weakling little worth,<br>
 And fail to slay those sons of earth?'<br>
     He ceased: Vibhíshan trained and tried<br>
 In war and counsel thus replied<br>
     'Thy speech is marked with scorn of truth,<br>
 With rashness and the pride of youth.<br>
 Yea, to thy ruin like a child<br>
 Thou pratest, and thy words are wild.<br>
 Most dear, O Indrajit, to thee<br>
 Should Rávan's weal and safety be,<br>
 For thou art called his son, but thou<br>
 Art proved his direst foeman now,<br>
 When warned by me thou hast not tried<br>
 To turn the coming woe aside.<br>
 Both thee and him 'twere meet to slay,<br>
 Who brought thee to this hall to-day,<br>
 And dared so rash a youth admit<br>
 To council where the wisest sit.<br>
 Presumptuous, wild, devoid of sense,<br>
 Filled full of pride and insolence,<br>
 Thv reckless tongue thou wilt not rule<br>
 That speaks the counsel of a fool.<br>
 Who in the fight may brook or shun<br>
 The arrows shot by Raghu's son<br>
 With flame and fiery vengeance sped,<br>
 Dire as his staff who rules the dead?<br>
 O Rávan, let thy people live,<br>
 And to the son of Raghu give<br>
 Fair robes and gems and precious ore,<br>
 And Sitá to his arms restore.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_438"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 438</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_934"></a><a href="ry414.htm#fr_934">437:1</a>  <i>Trilohanatha,</i> Lord of the Three
 Worlds, is a title of Indra.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_935"></a><a href="ry414.htm#fr_935">437:2</a>  The celestial elephant that carries
 Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry415.htm">Next: Canto XVI.: Rávan's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>