<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry428.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry430.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXX.: SÁRDÚLA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 They told their lord that Ráma still<br>
 Lay waiting by Suvela's hill.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The tyrant, flushed with angry glow,<br>
 Heard of the coming of the foe,<br>
 And thus with close inquiry pressed<br>
 S'árdúla spokesman for the rest:<br>
 'Why art thou sad, night-rover? speak:<br>
 Has grief or terror changed thy cheek?<br>
 Have the wild Vánars' hostile bands<br>
 Assailed thee with their mighty hands?<br>
     S'árdúla heard, but scarce might speak;<br>
 His trembling tones were faint and weak;<br>
 'O Giant King, in vain we try<br>
 The purpose of the foe to spy.<br>
 Their strength and number none may tell,<br>
 And Ráma guards his legions well.<br>
 He leaves no hope to prying eyes,<br>
 And parley with the chiefs denies:<br>
 Each road and path a Vánar guard,<br>
 Of mountain size, has closed and barred.<br>
 Soon as my feet an entrance found<br>
 By giants was I seized and bound,<br>
 And wounded sore I fell beneath<br>
 Their fists and knees and hands and teeth.<br>
 Then trembling, bleeding, wellnigh dead<br>
 To Ráma's presence was I led.<br>
 He in his mercy stooped to save,<br>
 And freedom to the captive gave.<br>
 With rocks and shattered mountains he<br>
 Has bridged his way athwart the sea,<br>
 And he and all his legions wait<br>
 Embattled close to Lanká's gate.<br>
 Soon will the host thy wall assail,<br>
 And, swarming on, the rampart scale,<br>
 Now, O my King, his consort yield,<br>
 Or arm thee with the sword and shield.<br>
 This choice is left thee: choose between<br>
 Thy safety and the Maithil queen. <a name="fr_953"></a><a href="ry430.htm#fn_953"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry430.htm">Next: Canto XXXI.: The Magic Head.</a></center>
 </body>