<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry425.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry427.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVII.: THE VÁNAR CHIEFS.</h3>
 <p>
 'Yet more remain, brave chiefs who stake<br>
 Their noble lives for Ráma's sake.<br>
 See, glorious, golden-coated, one<br>
 Who glisters like the morning sun,<br>
 Whom thousands of his race surround,<br>
 'Tis Hara for his strength renowned,<br>
 Next comes a mighty chieftain, he<br>
 Whose legions, armed with rock and tree,<br>
 Press on, in numbers passing tale,<br>
 The ramparts of our town to scale.<br>
 O Rávan, see the king advance<br>
 Terrific with his fiery glance,<br>
 Girt by the bravest of his train,<br>
 Majestic as the God of Rain,<br>
 Parjanya, when his host of clouds<br>
 About the king, embattled, crowds:<br>
 On Rikshaván's high mountain nursed,<br>
 In Narmadá  <a name="fr_950"></a><a href="#fn_950"><font size="1">1b</font></a>  he slakes his thirst,<br>
 Dhúmra, proud ursine chief, who leads<br>
 Wild warriors whom the forest breeds.<br>
 His brother, next in strength and age,<br>
 In Jámbaván the famous sage.<br>
 Of yore his might and skill he lent<br>
 To him who rules the firmament,<br>
 And Indra's liberal boons repaid<br>
 The chieftain for the timely aid.<br>
 There like a gloomy cloud that flies<br>
 Borne by the tempest through the skies,<br>
 Pramáthí stands: he roamed of yore<br>
 The forest wilds on Gangá's shore,<br>
 Where elephants were struck with dread<br>
 And trembling at his coming fled.<br>
 There on his foes he loved to sate<br>
 The old hereditary hate.  <a name="fr_951"></a><a href="#fn_951"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_449"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 449</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Look, Gaja and Gaváksha show<br>
 Their lust of battle with the foe.<br>
 See Nala burning for the fray,<br>
 And Níla chafing at delay,<br>
 Behind the eager captains press<br>
 Wild hosts in numbers numberless,<br>
 And each for Ráma's sake would fall<br>
 Or force his way through Lanká's wall.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_950"></a><a href="ry426.htm#fr_950">448:1b</a>  The Anglicized Nerbudda.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_951"></a><a href="ry426.htm#fr_951">448:2b</a>  According to a Pauranik legend Kes'arí
 Hanúmán's putative father had killed
 an Asur or demon who appeared in the <a name="page_449"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 449</font></a>
 form of an elephant, and hence arose the
 hostility between Vánars and elephants.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry427.htm">Next: Canto XXVIII.: The Chieftains.</a></center>
 </body>