<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry427.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry429.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXIX.: S'ÁRDÚLA CAPTURED.</h3>
 <p>
 The giant viewed with earnest ken<br>
 The Vánars and the lords of men;<br>
 Then thus, with grief and anger moved,<br>
 In bitter tone the spies reproved:<br>
 'Can faithful servants hope to please<br>
 Their master with such fates as these?<br>
 Or hope ye with wild words to wring<br>
 The bosom of your lord and king?<br>
 Such words were better said by those<br>
 Who come arrayed our mortal foes.<br>
 In vain your ears have heard the sage,<br>
 And listened to the lore of age,<br>
 Untaught, though lectured many a day,<br>
 The first great lesson, to obey,<br>
 'Tis marvel Rávan reigns and rules<br>
 Whose counsellors are blind and fools.<br>
 Has death no terrors that ye dare<br>
 To tempt your monarch to despair,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_450"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 450</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 From whose Imperial mandate flow<br>
 Disgrace and honour, weal and woe?<br>
 Yea, forest trees, when flames are fanned<br>
 About their scorching trunks, may stand;<br>
 But naught can set the sinner free<br>
 When kings the punishment decree.<br>
 I would not in mine anger spare<br>
 The traitorous foe-praising pair,<br>
 But years of faithful service plead<br>
 For pardon, and they shall not bleed.<br>
 Henceforth to me be dead: depart,<br>
 Far from my presence and my heart.'<br>
     Thus spoke the angry king: the two<br>
 Cried, Long live Rávan, and withdrew,<br>
 The giant monarch turned and cried<br>
 To strong Mahodar at his side:<br>
 'Go thou, and spies more faithful bring.<br>
 More duteous to their lord the king.'<br>
     Swift at his word Mahodar shed,<br>
 And came returning at the head<br>
 Of long tried messengers, who bent<br>
 Before their monarch reverent.<br>
 'Go quickly hence,' said Rávan 'scan<br>
 With keenest eyes the foeman's plan.<br>
 Learn who, as nearest friends, advise<br>
 And mould each secret enterprise.<br>
 Learn when he wakes and goes to rest,<br>
 Sound every purpose of his breast.<br>
 Learn what the prince intends to-day:<br>
 Watch keenly all, and come away.'<br>
     With joy they heard the words he said:<br>
 Then with S'árdúla at their head<br>
 About the giant king they went<br>
 With circling paces reverent.<br>
 By fair Suvela's grassy side<br>
 The chiefs of Raghu's race they spied,<br>
 Where, shaded by the waving wood,<br>
 Vibhíshan and Sugríva stood.<br>
 A while they rested there and viewed<br>
 The Vánars' countless multitude.<br>
 Vibhíshan with observant eyes<br>
 Knew at a glance the giant spies,<br>
 And bade the warriors of his train<br>
 Bind the rash foes with cord and chain:<br>
 'S'árdúla's is the sin,' he cried.<br>
 He neath the Vánars' hands had died,<br>
 But Ráma from their fury freed<br>
 The captive in his utmost need,<br>
 And, merciful at sight of woe,<br>
 Loosed all the spies and bade them go.<br>
 Then home to Lanká's monarch fled<br>
 The giant chiefs discomfited.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_952"></a><a href="ry427.htm#fr_952">449:1</a>  Here follows the enumeration of
 Sugríva's forces which I do not attempt
 to follow. It soon reaches a hundred
 thousand billions.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry429.htm">Next: Canto XXX.: Sárdúla's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>