<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry424.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry426.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXVI.: THE VÁNAR CHIEFS.</h3>
 <p>
 'Not if the Gods in heaven who dwell,<br>
 Gandharvas, and the fiends of hell<br>
 In banded opposition rise<br>
 Against me, will I yield my prize.<br>
 Still trembling from the ungentle toucb<br>
 Of Vánar hands ye fear too much,<br>
 And bid me, heedless of the shame,<br>
 Give to her lord the Maithil dame.'<br>
     Thus spoke the king in stern reproof;<br>
 Then mounted to his palace roof<br>
 Aloft o'er many a story raised,<br>
 And on the lands beneath him gazed.<br>
 There by his faithful spies he stood<br>
 And looked on sea and hill and wood.<br>
 There stretched before him far away<br>
 The Vánars' numberless array:<br>
 Scarce could the meadows' tender green<br>
 Beneath their trampling feet be seen.<br>
 He looked a while with furious eye,<br>
 Then questioned thus the nearer spy:<br>
 'Bend, Sáran, bend thy gaze, and show<br>
 The leaders of the Vánar foe<br>
 Tell me their heroes' names, and teach<br>
 The valour, power and might of each.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Obedient Sáran eyed the van,<br>
 The leaders marked, and thus began:<br>
 That chief conspicuous at the head<br>
 Of warriors in the forest bred,<br>
 Who hither bends his ruthless eye<br>
 And shouts his fearful battle cry:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_448"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 448</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Whose voice with pealing thunder shakes<br>
 All Lanká, with the groves and lakes<br>
 And hills that tremble at the sound,<br>
 Is Nila, for his might renowned:<br>
 First of the Vánar lords controlled<br>
 By King Sugríva lofty-souled.<br>
 He who his mighty arm extends,<br>
 And his fierce eye on Lanká bends,<br>
 In stature like a stately tower,<br>
 In colour like a lotus flower,<br>
 Who with his wild earth-shaking cries<br>
 Thee, Rávan, to the field defies,<br>
 Is Angad, by Sugríva's care<br>
 Anointed his imperial heir:<br>
 In wondrous strength, in martial fire<br>
 Peer of King Bali's self, his sire;<br>
 For Ráma's sake in arms arrayed<br>
 Like Varun called to S'akra's aid.<br>
 Behind him, girt by warlike bands,<br>
 Nala the mighty Vánar stands,<br>
 The son of Vis'vakarmá, he<br>
 Who built the bridge athwart the sea.<br>
 Look farther yet, O King, and mark<br>
 That chieftain clothed in Sandal bark.<br>
 'Tis S'weta, famed among his peers,<br>
 A sage whom all his race reveres.<br>
 See, in Sugríva's ear he speaks,<br>
 Then, hasting back, his post reseeks,<br>
 And turns his practised eye to view<br>
 The squadrons he has formed anew.<br>
 Next Kumud stands who roamed of yore<br>
 On Gomati's  <a name="fr_949"></a><a href="#fn_949"><font size="1">1</font></a> delightful shore,<br>
 Feared where the waving woods invest<br>
 His seat on Mount Sanrochan's crest.<br>
 Next him a chieftain strong and dread,<br>
 Comes Chanda at his legions' head;<br>
 Exulting in his warrior might<br>
 He hastens, burning for the fight.<br>
 And boasts that his unaided powers<br>
 Shall cast to earth thy walls and towers.<br>
 Mark, mark that chief of lion gait,<br>
 Who views thee with a glance of hate<br>
 As though his very eyes would burn<br>
 The city walls to which they turn:<br>
 'Tis Rambha, Vánar king; he dwells<br>
 In Krishnagiri's tangled dells,<br>
 Where Vindhya's pleasant slopes are spread<br>
 And fair Sudars'an lifts his head.<br>
 There, listening with erected ears,<br>
 S'arabha, mighty chief, appears.<br>
 His soul is burning for the strife,<br>
 Nor dreads the jeopardy of life.<br>
 He trembles as he moves, for ire,<br>
 And bends around his glance of fire.<br>
 Next, like a cloud that veils the sides,<br>
 A chieftain of terrific size,<br>
 Conspicuous mid the Vánars, comes<br>
 With battle shout like rolling drums,<br>
 'Tis Panas, trained in war and tried,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Who dwells on Páriyátra's side.<br>
 He, far away, the chief who throws<br>
 A glory o'er the marshalled rows<br>
 That ranged behind their captain stand<br>
 Exulting on the ocean strand,<br>
 Is Vinata the fierce in fight.<br>
 Preëminent like Dardur's height.<br>
 That chieftain bending down to drink<br>
 On lovely Vená's verdant brink,<br>
 Is Krathan; now he lifts his eyes<br>
 And thee to mortal fray defies.<br>
 Next Gavaya comes, whose haughty mind<br>
 Scorns all the warriors of his kind.<br>
 He comes to trample - such his boast -<br>
 On Lanká with his single host.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_949"></a><a href="ry425.htm#fr_949">448:1</a>  The Goomtee.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry426.htm">Next: Canto XXVII.: The Vánar Chiefs.</a></center>
 </body>