<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry419.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry421.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXI.: OCEAN THREATENED.</h3>
 <p>
 His hands in reverence Ráma raised<br>
 And southwared o'er the ocean gazed:<br>
 Then on the sacred grass that made<br>
 His lowly couch* his limbs* he laid,<br>
 His head on that strong arm reclined<br>
 Which Sitá, best of womankind,<br>
 Had loved in happier days to hold<br>
 With soft arms decked* with pearls and gold.<br>
 Then rising from his bed of grass,<br>
 'This day,' he cried, 'the host shall pass<br>
 Triumphant to the southern shore,<br>
 Or Ocean's self shall be no more *.'<br>
 Thus vowing in his constant breast<br>
 Again he turned him to his rest,<br>
 And there, his eyes in slumber closed,<br>
 Silent beside the sea reposed.<br>
 Thrice rose the Day-God thrice he set,<br>
 The lord of Ocean came not yet,<br>
 Thrice came the night, but Raghu's son<br>
 No answer by his service won.<br>
 To Lakshman thus the hero cried,<br>
 His eyes aflame with wrath and pride:<br>
     'In vain the softer gifts that grace<br>
 The good are offered to the base.  *<br>
 Long-suffering, patience, gentle speech<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_443"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 443</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Their thankless hearts can never reach.<br>
 The world to him its honour pays<br>
 Whose ready tongue himself can praise.<br>
 Who scorns the true, and hates the right,<br>
 Whose hand is ever raised to smite.<br>
 Each milder art is tried in vain:<br>
 It wins no glory, but disdain.<br>
 And victory owns no softer charm<br>
 Than might which nerves a warrior's arm.<br>
 My humble suit is still denied<br>
 By Ocean's overweening pride.<br>
 This day the monsters of the deep<br>
 In throes of death shall wildly leap.<br>
 My shafts shall rend the serpents curled<br>
 In caverns of the watery world,<br>
 Disclose each sunless depth and bare<br>
 The tangled pearl and coral there.<br>
 Away with mercy! at a time<br>
 Like this compassion is a crime.<br>
 Welcom, the battle and the foe! <br>
 My bow! my arrows and my bow!<br>
 This day the Vánars' feet shall tread<br>
 The conquered Sea's exhausted bed,<br>
 And he who never feared before<br>
 Shall tremble to his farthest shore."<br>
     Red flashed his eyes with angry glow;<br>
 He stood and grasped his mighty bow,<br>
 Terrific as the fire of doom<br>
 Whose quenchless flames the world consume.<br>
     His clanging cord the archer drew.<br>
 And swift the fiery arrows flew<br>
 Fierce as the flashing levin sent<br>
 By him who rules the firmament.<br>
 Down through the startled waters sped<br>
 Each missile with its flaming head.<br>
 The foamy billows rose and sank,<br>
 And dashed upon the trembling bank<br>
 Sea monsters of tremendous form<br>
 With crash and roar of thunder storm.<br>
 Still the wild waters rose and fell<br>
 Crowned with white foam and pearl and shell.<br>
     Each serpent, startled from his rest,<br>
 Raised his fierce eyes and glowing crest.<br>
 And prisoned Dánavs  <a name="fr_943"></a><a href="#fn_943"><font size="1">1</font></a> where they dwelt<br>
 In depths below the terror felt.<br>
 Again upon his string he laid<br>
 A flaming shaft, but Lakshman stayed<br>
 His arm, with gentle reasoning tried<br>
 To soothe his angry mood, and cried:<br>
 'Brother, reflect: the wise control<br>
 The rising passions of the soul.<br>
 Let Ocean grant, without thy threat,<br>
 The boon on which thy heart is set.<br>
 That gracious lord will ne'er refuse<br>
 When Ráma son of Raghu sues.'<br>
 He ceased: and voices from the air<br>
 Fell clear and loud, Spare, Ráma, spare.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_943"></a><a href="ry420.htm#fr_943">443:1</a>  Fiends and enemies of the Gods.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry421.htm">Next: Canto XXII.: </a></center>
 </body>