<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry420.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry422.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXII.: </h3>
 <p>
 With angry menace Rama, best<br>
 Of Raghu's sons, the Sea addressed:<br>
 'With fiery flood of arrowy rain<br>
 Thy channels will I dry and drain.<br>
 And I and all the Vánnr host<br>
 Will reach on foot the farther coast.<br>
 Thou shalt not from destruction save<br>
 The creatures of the teeming wave,<br>
 And lapse of time shall ne'er efface<br>
 The memory of the dire disgrace'<br>
     Thus spoke the warrior, and prepared<br>
 The mortal shaft which never spared,<br>
 Known mystic weapon, by the name<br>
 Of Brahma, red with quenchless flarme<br>
 Great terror, as he strained the bow,<br>
 Struck heaven above and earth below<br>
 Through echoing skies the thunder pealed<br>
 And startled mountains rocked and reeled<br>
 The earth was black with sudden night<br>
 And heaven was blotted from the sight.<br>
 Then ever and anon the glare<br>
 Of meteors shot through murky air,<br>
 And with a wild terrific sound<br>
 Red lightnings struck the trembling ground.<br>
 In furious gusts the fierce wind blew:<br>
 Tall trees it shattered and overthrew,<br>
 And, smiting with a giant's stroke,<br>
 Huge masses from the mountain broke.<br>
 A cry of terror long and shrill<br>
 Came from each valley, plain, and hill.<br>
 Each ruined dale, each riven peak<br>
 Re-echoed with a wail or shriek.<br>
     While Ragbu's son undaunted gazed<br>
 The waters of the deep were raised,<br>
 And, still uplifted more and more,<br>
 Leapt in wild flood upon the shore.<br>
 Still Ráma looked upon the tide<br>
 And kept his post unterrified.<br>
 Then from the seething flood upreared<br>
 Majestic Ocean's form appeared,<br>
 As rising from his eastern height<br>
 Springs through the sky the Lord of Light.<br>
 Attendant on their monarch came<br>
 Sea serpents with their eyes aflame.<br>
 Like lazulite mid burning gold<br>
 His form was wondrous to behold.<br>
 Bright with each fairest precious stone<br>
 A chain about his neck was thrown.<br>
 Calm shone his lotus eyes beneath<br>
 The blossoms of his heavenly wreath,<br>
 And many a pearl and sea-born gem<br>
 Flashed in the monarch's diadem.<br>
 There Gangá, tributary queen.<br>
 And Sindhu  <a name="fr_944"></a><a href="#fn_944"><font size="1">1b</font></a> by his lord, were seen,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_444"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 444</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And every stream and brook renowned<br>
 In ancient story girt him round.<br>
 Then, as the waters rose and swelled,<br>
 The king with suppliant hands upheld,<br>
 His glorious head to Ráma bent<br>
 And thus addressed him reverent:<br>
 'Air, ether, fire, earth, water, true<br>
 To nature's will, their course pursue;<br>
 And I, as ancient laws ordain,<br>
 Unfordable must still remain.<br>
 Yet, Raghu's son, my counsel hear:<br>
 I ne'er for love or hope or fear<br>
 Will pile my waters in a heap<br>
 And leave a pathway through the deep.<br>
 Still shall my care for thee provide<br>
 An easy passage o'er the tide,<br>
 And like a city's paven street<br>
 Shall be the road beneath thy feet.'<br>
 He ceased: and Ráma spoke again:<br>
 'This spell is ne'er invoked in vain.<br>
 Where shall the magic shaft, to spend<br>
 The fury of its might, descend?'<br>
 'Shoot,' Ocean cried, 'thine arrow forth<br>
 With all its fury to the north.<br>
 Where sacred Drumakulya lies,<br>
 Whose glory with thy glory vies,<br>
 There dwells a wild Abhíra  <a name="fr_945"></a><a href="#fn_945"><font size="1">1</font></a> race,<br>
 As vile in act as foul of face,<br>
 Fierce Dasyus  <a name="fr_946"></a><a href="#fn_946"><font size="1">2</font></a> who delight in ill,<br>
 And drink my tributary rill.<br>
 My soul no longer may endure<br>
 Their neighbourhood and touch impure.<br>
 At these, O son of Raghu, aim<br>
 Thine arrow with the quenchless flame.'<br>
   Swift from the bow, as Ráma drew<br>
 His cord, the fiery arrow flew.<br>
 Earth groaned to feel the wound, and sent<br>
 A rush of water through the rent;<br>
 And famed for ever is the well<br>
 Of Vrana  <a name="fr_947"></a><a href="#fn_947"><font size="1">3</font></a> where the arrow fell.<br>
 Then every brook and lake beside<br>
 Throughout the region Ráma dried.<br>
 But yet he gave a boon to bless<br>
 And fertilize the wilderness:<br>
 No fell disease should taint the air,<br>
 And sheep and kine should prosper there:<br>
 Earth should produce each pleasant root,<br>
 The stately trees should bend with fruit;<br>
 Oil, milk, and honey should abound,<br>
 And fragrant herbs should clothe the<br>
   ground.<br>
 Then spake the king of brooks and seas<br>
 To Raghu's son in words like these:<br>
 'Now let a wondrous task be done<br>
 By Nala, Vis'vakarmá's son.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Who, born of one of Vánar race,<br>
 Inherits by his father's grace<br>
 A share of his celestial art.<br>
 Call Nala to perform his part,<br>
 And he, divinely taught and skilled,<br>
 A bridge athwart the sea shall build.'<br>
   He spoke and vanished Nala, best<br>
 Of Vánar chiefs, the king addressed:<br>
 'O'er the deep sea where monsters play<br>
 A bridge, O Ráma, will I lay;<br>
 For, sharer of my father's skill,<br>
 Mine is the power and mine the will.<br>
 'Tis vain to try each gentler art<br>
 To bribe and soothe the thankless heart;<br>
 In vain on such is mercy spent;<br>
 It yields to naught but punishment.<br>
 Through fear alone will Ocean now<br>
 A passage o'er his waves allow.<br>
 My mother, ere she bore her son,<br>
 This boon from Vis'vakarmá won:<br>
 'O Mandari, thy child shall be<br>
 In skill and glory next to me.'<br>
 But why unbidden should I fill<br>
 Thine ear with praises of my skill?<br>
 Command the Vánar hosts to lay<br>
 Foundations for the bridge to-day.'<br>
     He spoke: and swift at Ráma's best<br>
 Up sprang the Vánars from their rest,<br>
 The mandate of the king obeyed<br>
 And sought the forest's mighty shade.<br>
 Unrooted trees to earth they threw,<br>
 And to the sea the timber drew.<br>
 The stately palm was bowed and bent,<br>
 As'okas from the ground were rent,<br>
 And towering Sáls and light bamboos,<br>
 And trees with flowers of varied hues,<br>
 With loveliest creepers wreathed and crowned,<br>
 Shook, reeled, and fell upon the ground.<br>
 With mighty engines piles of stone<br>
 And seated hills were overthrown:<br>
 Unprisoned waters sprang on high,<br>
 In rain descending from the sky:<br>
 And ocean with a roar and swell<br>
 Heaved wildly when the mountains fell.<br>
 Then the great bridge of wondrous strength<br>
 Was built, a hundred leagues in length.<br>
 Rocks huge as autumn clouds bound fast<br>
 With cordage from the shore were cast,<br>
 And fragments of each riven hill,<br>
 And trees whose flowers adorned them still.<br>
 Wild was the tumult, loud the din<br>
 As ponderous rocks went thundering in.<br>
 Ere set of sun, so toiled each crew,<br>
 Ten leagues and four the structure grew;<br>
 The labours of the second day<br>
 Gave twenty more of ready way,<br>
 And on the fifth, when sank the sun,<br>
 The whole stupendous work was done.<br>
 O'er the broad way the Vánars sped,<br>
 Nor swayed it with their countless tread.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_445"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 445</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Exultant on the ocean strand<br>
 Vibhíshan stood, and, mace in hand,<br>
 Longed eager for the onward way,<br>
 And chafed impatient at delay.<br>
 Then thus to Ráma trained and tried<br>
 In battle King Sugríva cried:<br>
 'Come, Hauumán's broad back ascend;<br>
 Let Angad help to Lakshman lend.<br>
 These high above the sea shall bear<br>
 Their burthen through the ways of air.'<br>
     So, with Sugríva, borne o'erhead<br>
 Ikshváku's sons the legions led.<br>
 Behind, the Vánar hosts pursued<br>
 Their march in endless multitude.<br>
 Some skimmed the surface of the wave,<br>
 To some the air a passage gave.<br>
 Amid their ceaseless roar the sound<br>
 Of Ocean's fearful voice was drowned,<br>
 As o'er the bridge by Nala planned<br>
 They hastened on to Lanká's strand,<br>
 Where, by the pleasant brooks, mid trees<br>
 Loaded with fruit, they took their ease.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_944"></a><a href="ry421.htm#fr_944">443:1b</a>  The Indus.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_945"></a><a href="ry421.htm#fr_945">444:1</a>  Cowherds, sprung from a Bráhman
 and a woman of the medical tribe, the
 modern Ahírs.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_946"></a><a href="ry421.htm#fr_946">444:2</a>  Barbarians or outcasts.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_947"></a><a href="ry421.htm#fr_947">444:3</a>  <i>Vrana</i> means wound or rent.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry422.htm">Next: Canto XXIII.: The Omens.</a></center>
 </body>