<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry423.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry425.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXV. <a name="fr_948"></a><a href="#fn_948"><font size="1">1</font></a>: RÁVAN'S SPIES.</h3>
 <p>
 When Ráma and the host he led<br>
 Across the sea had safely sped.<br>
 Thus Rávan, moved by wrath and pride.<br>
 To S'uka and to Sáran cried:<br>
 'O counsellors, the Vánar host<br>
 Has passed the sea from coast to coast,<br>
 And Das'aratha's son has wrought<br>
 A wondrous deed surpassing thought.<br>
 And now in truth I needs must know<br>
 The strength and number of the foe.<br>
 Go ye, to Ráma's host repair<br>
 And count me all the legions there.<br>
 Learn well what power each captain leads<br>
 His name and fame for warlike deeds.<br>
 Learn by what artist's wondrous aid<br>
 That bridge athwart the sea was made;<br>
 Learn how the Vánar hoat came o'er<br>
 And halted on the island shore.<br>
 Mark Ráma son of Raghu well;<br>
 His valour, strength, and weapons tell.<br>
 Watch his advisers one by one,<br>
 And Lakshman, Raghu's younger son.<br>
 Learn with observant eyes, and bring<br>
 Unerring tidings to your king.'<br>
     He ceased: then swift in Vánar guise<br>
 Forth on their errand sped the spies.<br>
 They reached the Vánars, and, dismayed,<br>
 Their never-ending lines surveyd:<br>
 Nor would they try, in mere despair,<br>
 To count the countless legions there,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_447"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 447</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 That crowded valley, plain and hill,<br>
 That pressed about each cave and rill.<br>
 Though sea-like o'er the land were spread<br>
 The endless hosts which Ráma led,<br>
 The bridge by thousands yet was lined,<br>
 And eager myriads pressed behind.<br>
 But sage Vibhíshan's watchful eyes<br>
 Had marked the giants in disguise.<br>
 He gave command the pair to seize,<br>
 And told the tale in words like these:<br>
     'O  Ráma these, well known erewhile,<br>
 Are giant sons of Lanká's isle.<br>
 Two counsellors of Rávan sent<br>
 To watch the invading armament.'<br>
   Vibhíshan ceased: at Ráma's look<br>
 The Rákshas envoys quailed and shook;<br>
 Then suppliant hand to hand they pressed<br>
 And thus Ikshváku's son addressed:<br>
 'O Ráma, bear the truth we speak:<br>
 Our monarch Rávan bade us seek<br>
 The Vánar legions and survey<br>
 Their numbers, strength, and vast array'.<br>
     Then Ráma, friend and hope and guide<br>
 Of suffering creatures, thus replied:<br>
     'Now giants, if your eyes have scanned<br>
 Our armies, numbering every band,<br>
 Marked lord and chief, and gazed their fill,<br>
 Return to Rávan when ye will.<br>
 It aught remain, if aught anew<br>
 Ye fain would scan with closer view,<br>
 Vibhíshan, ready at your call,<br>
 Will lead you forth and show you all.<br>
 Think not of bonds and capture; fear<br>
 No loss of life, no peril here:<br>
 For, captive, helpless and unarmed,<br>
 An envoy never should be harmed.<br>
 Again to Lanká's town repair,<br>
 Speed to the giant monarch there,<br>
 And be these words to Rávan told,<br>
 Fierce brother of the Lord of Gold:<br>
 'Now, tyrant, tremble for thy sin:<br>
 Call up thy friends, thy kith and kin,<br>
 And let the power and might be seen<br>
 Which made thee bold to steal my queen.<br>
 To-morrow shall thy mournful eye<br>
 Behold thy bravest warriors die,<br>
 And Lanká's city, tower and wall,<br>
 Struck by my fiery shafts, will fall.<br>
 Then shall my vengeful blow descend<br>
 Its rage on thee and thine to spend,<br>
 Fierce as the fiery bolt that flew<br>
 From heaven against the Dánav crew,<br>
 Mid these rebellious demons sent<br>
 By him who rules the firmament.'<br>
     Thus spake Ikshváku's son, and ceased:<br>
 The giants from their bonds released<br>
 Lauded the King with glad accord,<br>
 And hasted homeward to their lord.<br>
 Before the tyrant side by side<br>
 S'uka and Sáran stood and cried:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Vibhíshan seized us, King, and fain<br>
 His helpless captives would have slain.<br>
 But glorious Ráma saw us; he,<br>
 Great-hearted hero, made us free.<br>
 There in one spot our eyes beheld<br>
 Four chiefs on earth unparalleled,<br>
 Who with the guardian Gods may vie<br>
 Who rule the regions of the sky.<br>
 There Ráma stood, the boast and pride<br>
 Of Raghu's race, by Lakshman's side.<br>
 There stood the sage Vibhíshan, there<br>
 Sugríva strong beyond compare.<br>
 These four alone can batter down<br>
 Gate, rampart, wall, and Lanka's town.<br>
 Nay, Ráma matchless in his form,<br>
 A single foe, thy town would storm:<br>
 So wondrous are his weapons, he<br>
 Needs not the succour of the three.<br>
 Why speak we of the countless train<br>
 That fills the valley, hill and plain,<br>
 The millions of the Vánar breed<br>
 Whom Ráma and Sugríva lead?<br>
 O King, be wise, contend no more,<br>
 And Sitá to her lord restore.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_948"></a><a href="ry424.htm#fr_948">446:1</a>  Here in the Bengal recension
 (Gorresio's edition), begins Book VI.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry425.htm">Next: Canto XXVI.: The Vánar Chiefs.</a></center>
 </body>