<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry434.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry436.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVI.: RÁVAN'S REPLY.</h3>
 <p>
 But Rávan's breast with fury swelled,<br>
 And thus he spake by Death impelled,<br>
 While, under brows in anger bent,<br>
 Fierce glances from his eyes were sent:<br>
 'The bitter words which thou, misled<br>
 By friendly thought, hast fondly said,<br>
 Which praise the foe and counsel fear,<br>
 Unheeded fall upon mine ear.<br>
 How canst thou deem a mighty foe<br>
 This Ráma who, in stress of woe,<br>
 Seeks, banished as his sire decreed,<br>
 Assistance from the Vánar breed?<br>
 Am I so feeble in thine eyes,<br>
 Though feared by dwellers of the skies,--<br>
 Whose might in many a battle shown<br>
 The glorious race of giants own?<br>
 Shall I for fear of him restore<br>
 The lady whom I hither bore,<br>
 Exceeding fair like Beauty's Queen  <a name="fr_954"></a><a href="#fn_954"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Without her well-loved lotus seen?<br>
 Around the chief let Lakshman stand,<br>
 Sugríva, and each Vánar band,<br>
 Soon, Malyaván, thine eyes will see<br>
 This boasted Ráma slain by me.<br>
 I in the brunt of war defy<br>
 The mightiest warriors of the sky;<br>
 And if I stoop to combat men,<br>
 Shall I be weak and tremble then?<br>
 This mangled trunk the foe may rend,<br>
 But Rávan ne'er can yield or bend,<br>
 And be it vice or virtue, I<br>
 This nature never will belie.<br>
 What marvel if he bridged the sea?<br>
 Why should this deed disquiet thee?<br>
 This, only this, I surely know,<br>
 Back with his life he shall not go.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus in loud tones the king exclaimed,<br>
 And mute stood Malyaván ashamed,<br>
 His reverend head he humbly bent,<br>
 And slowly to his mansion went.<br>
 But Rávan stayed, and deep in care<br>
 Held counsel with his nobles there,<br>
 All entrance to secure and close,<br>
 And guard the city from their foes.<br>
 He bade the chief Prahasta wait<br>
 Commander at the eastern gate.<br>
 To fierce Mahodar, strong and brave,<br>
 To keep the southern gate, he gave,<br>
 Where Mahápárs'va's might should aid<br>
 The chieftain with his hosts arrayed.<br>
 To guard the west--no chief more fit--<br>
 He placed the warrior Indrajit,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 His son, the giant's joy and boast,<br>
 Surrounded by a Rákshas host:<br>
 And mighty Sáran hastened forth<br>
 With Suka to protect the north.  <a name="fr_955"></a><a href="ry436.htm#fn_955"><font size="1">1b</font></a><br>
 'I will myself,' the monarch cried,<br>
 'Be present on the northern side.'<br>
 These orders for the walls' defence<br>
 The tyrant gave, then parted thence,<br>
 And, by the hope of victory fired,<br>
 To chambers far within, retired.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_954"></a><a href="ry435.htm#fr_954">455:1</a>  Lakshmi is the Goddess both of
 beauty and fortune, and is represented
 with a lotus in her hand.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry436.htm">Next: Canto XXXVII.: Preparations.</a></center>
 </body>