<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry430.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry432.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXII.: SITÁ'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 Again her eyes with tears o'erflowed.<br>
 She gazed upon the head he showed.<br>
 Gazed on the bow so famed of yore,<br>
 The glorious bow which Ráma bore.<br>
 She gazed upon his cheek and brows,<br>
 The eyes of her beloved spouse;<br>
 His lips, the lustre of his hair,<br>
 The priceless gem that glittered there.<br>
 The features of her Lord she knew,<br>
 And, pierced with anguish at the view,<br>
 She lifted up her voice and cried:<br>
   "Kaikey, are thou satisfied?'<br>
 Now all thy longings are fulfilled;<br>
 The joy of Rughu's race is killed,<br>
 And ruined is the ancient line,<br>
 Destroyer, by that hand of thine.<br>
 Ah, what offense, O cruel dame,<br>
 What fault in Ráma couldst thou blame,<br>
 To drive him clad in hermit dress<br>
 With Sitá to the wilderness?'<br>
   Great trembling seized her frame, and she<br>
 Fell like a stricken plantain tree.<br>
 As **** the     *********    lays at length<br>
 Slowly regaining sense and strength,<br>
 On the dear head she ********   her eye<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_452"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 452</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And cried with very bitter cry:<br>
 'Ah, when thy cold dead cheek I view,<br>
 My hero, I am murdered too.<br>
 Then first a faithful woman's eyes<br>
 See sorrow, when her husband dies.<br>
 When thou, my lord, wast nigh to save,<br>
 Some stealthy hand thy death wound gave.<br>
 Thou art not dead: rise, hero, rise;<br>
 Long life was thine, as spake the wise<br>
 Whose words, I ween, are ever true,<br>
 For faith lies open to their view.<br>
 Ah lord, and shall thy head recline<br>
 On earth's cold breast, forsaking mine,<br>
 Counting her chill lap dearer far<br>
 Than I and my caresses are?<br>
 Ah, is it thus these eyes behold<br>
 Thy famous bow adorned with gold,<br>
 Whereon of yore I loved to bind<br>
 Sweet garlands that my bands had twined?<br>
 And hast thou sought in heaven a place<br>
 Amid the founders of thy race,<br>
 Where in the home deserved so well<br>
 Thy sires and Das'aratha dwell?<br>
 Or dost thou shine a brighter star<br>
 In skies where blest immortals are,<br>
 Forsaking in thy lofty scorn<br>
 The race wherein thy sires were born?<br>
 Turn to my gaze. O turn thine eye:<br>
 Why are thy cold lips silent, why?<br>
 When first we met as youth and maid.<br>
 When in thy hand my hand was laid,<br>
 Thy promise was thy steps should be<br>
 Through life in duty's path with me.<br>
 Remember, faithful still, thy vow,<br>
 And take me with thee even now.<br>
 Is that broad bosom where I hung,<br>
 That neck to which I fondly clung,<br>
 Where flowery garlands breathed their scent<br>
 By hungry dogs and vultures rent?<br>
 Shall no funereal honours grace<br>
 The parted lord of Raghu's race,<br>
 Whose bounty liberal fees bestowed.<br>
 For whom the fires of worship glowed?<br>
 Kaus'alyá wild with grief will see<br>
 One sole survivor of the three<br>
 Who in their hermit garments went<br>
 To the dark woods in banishment.<br>
 Then at her cry shall Lakshman tell<br>
 How, slain by night, the Vánars fell;<br>
 How to thy side the giants crept,<br>
 And slew the hero as he slept.<br>
 Thy fate and mine the queen will know,<br>
 And broken-hearted die of woe.<br>
 For my unworthy sake, for mine,<br>
 Ráma, the glory of his line,<br>
 Who bridged his way across the main,<br>
 Is basely in a puddle slain;<br>
 And I, the graceless wife he wed,<br>
 Have brought this ruin on his head.<br>
 Me, too, on him, O Rávan, slay:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The wife beside her husband lay.<br>
 By his dear body let me rest,<br>
 Cheek close to cheek and breast to breast,<br>
 My happy eyes I then will close.<br>
 And follow whither Ráma goes.'<br>
     Thus cried the miserable dame;<br>
 When to the king a warder came,<br>
 Before the giant monarch bowed<br>
 And said that, followed by a crowd<br>
 Of counsellors and lords of state,<br>
 Prahasta stood before the gate,<br>
 And, sent by some engrossing care,<br>
 Craved audience of his master there.<br>
 The anxious tyrant left his seat<br>
 And hastened forth the chief to meet:<br>
 Then summoning his nobles all,<br>
 Took counsel in his regal hall.<br>
     When Lanká's lord had left the queen,<br>
 The head and bow no more were seen.<br>
 The giant king his nobles eyed,<br>
 And, terrible as Yama, cried:<br>
 'O faithful lords, the time is come:<br>
 Gather our hosts with beat of drum.<br>
 Nigh to the town our foeman draws:<br>
 Be prudent, nor reveal the cause.'<br>
     The nobles listened and obeyed:<br>
 Swift were the gathered troops arrayed,<br>
 And countless rovers of the night<br>
 Stood burning for the hour of tight.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry432.htm">Next: Canto XXXIII.: Saramá.</a></center>
 </body>