<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry432.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry434.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIV.: SARAMÁ'S TIDINGS.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus Saramá her story told:<br>
 And Sitá's spirit was consoled.<br>
 As when the first fresh rain is shed<br>
 The parching earth is comforted.<br>
 Then, filled with zeal for Sitá's sake,<br>
 Again in gentle tones she spake,<br>
 And, skilled in arts that soothe and please,<br>
 Addressed the queen in words like these;<br>
 'Thy husband, lady, will I seek,<br>
 Say the fond words thy lips would apeak,<br>
 And then, unseen of any eye,<br>
 Back to thy side will swiftly fly.<br>
 My airy flights are speedier far<br>
 Than Garuda's and the tempest are.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Sitá spake: her former woe<br>
 Still left her accents faint and low:<br>
 'I know thy steps, which naught can stay,<br>
 Can urge through heaven and hell their way.<br>
 Then if thy love and changeless will<br>
 Would serve the helpless captive still,<br>
 Go forth and learn each plot and guile<br>
 Planned by the lord of Lanká's isle.<br>
 With magic art like maddening wine<br>
 He cheats these weeping eyes of mine.<br>
 Torments me with his suit, nor spares<br>
 Reproof or flattery, threats or prayers.<br>
 These guards surround me night and day;<br>
 My heart is sad, my senses stray;<br>
 And helpless in my woe I fear<br>
 The tyrant Rávan even here.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Saramá replied:'I go<br>
 To learn the purpose of thy foe,<br>
 Soon by thy side again to stand<br>
 And tell thee what the king has planned.'<br>
 She sped, she heard with eager ears<br>
 The tyrant speak his hopes and fears.<br>
 Where, gathered at their master's call,<br>
 The nobles filled the council hall;<br>
 Then swiftly, to her promise true,<br>
 Back to the As'oka grove she flew.<br>
 The lady on the grassy ground,<br>
 Longing for her return, she found;<br>
 Who with a gentle smile, to greet<br>
 The envoy, led her to a seat<br>
 Through her worn frame a shiver ran<br>
 As Saramá her tale began:<br>
 'There stood the royal mother: she<br>
 Besought her son to set thee free,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_454"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 454</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And to her counsel, tears and prayers,<br>
 The elder nobles added theirs:<br>
 'O be the Maithíl queen restored<br>
 With honour to her angry lord.<br>
 Let Janasthán's* unhappy fight<br>
 Be witness of the hero's might.<br>
 Hanuúmán o'er the waters came<br>
 And looked upon the guarded dame.<br>
 Let Lanká's chiefs who fought and fell<br>
 The prowess of the leader tell.'<br>
 In vain they sued, in vain she wept,<br>
 His purpose still unchanged he kept.<br>
 As clings the miser to his gold,<br>
 He would not loose thee from his hold.<br>
 No, never till in death he lies,<br>
 Will Lanká's lord release his prize.<br>
 Soon slain by Ráma's arrows all<br>
 The giants with their king will fall,<br>
 And Ráma to his home will lead<br>
 His black-eyed queen from bondage freed.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 An awful sound that moment rose<br>
 From Lanká's fast-approaching foes,<br>
 Where drum and shell in mingled peal<br>
 Made earth in terror rock and reel.<br>
 The hosts within the walls arrayed<br>
 Stood trembling, in their hearts dismayed;<br>
 Thought of the tempest soon to burst,<br>
 Aud Lanká's lord, their ruin, cursed.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry434.htm">Next: Canto XXXV.: Malyaván's Speech.</a></center>
 </body>