<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry435.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry437.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVII.: PREPARATIONS.</h3>
 <p>
 Lords of the legions of the wood,<br>
 The chieftains with Vibhíshan stood,<br>
 And, strangers in the foeman's land,<br>
 Their hopes and fears in council scanned:<br>
 'See, see where Lanká's towers ascend,<br>
 Which Rávan's power and might defend,<br>
 Which Gods, Gandharvas, fiends would fail<br>
 To conquer, if they durst assail.<br>
 How shall our legions pass within,<br>
 The city of the foe to win,<br>
 With massive walls and portals barred<br>
 Which Rávan keeps with surest guard?'<br>
 With anxious looks the walls they eyed:<br>
 And sage Vibhíshan thus replied:<br>
 'These lords of mine  <a name="fr_956"></a><a href="#fn_956"><font size="1">2b</font></a> can answer: they<br>
 Within the walls have found their way,<br>
 The foeman's plan and order learned,<br>
 And hither to my side returned.<br>
 Now, Ráma, let my tongue declare<br>
 How Rávan's hosts are stationed there.<br>
 Prahasta heads, in warlike state,<br>
 His legions at the eastern gate.<br>
 To guard the southern portal stands<br>
 Mahodar, girt by Rákshas bands,<br>
 Where mighty Mahápárs'va, sent<br>
 By Rávan's hest, his aid has lent.<br>
 Guard of the gate that fronts the west<br>
 Is valiant Indrajit, the best<br>
 Of warriors, Rávan's joy and pride;<br>
 And by the youthful chieftain's side<br>
 Are giants, armed for fierce attacks<br>
 With sword and mace and battle-axe.<br>
 North, where approach is dreaded most,<br>
 The king, encompassed with a host<br>
 Of giants trained in war, whose hands<br>
 Wield maces, swords and lances, stands.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_456"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 456</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 All these are chiefs whom Rávan chose<br>
 As mightiest to resist his foes;<br>
 And each a countless army  <a name="fr_957"></a><a href="ry437.htm#fn_957"><font size="1">1</font></a> leads<br>
 With elephants and cars and steeds.'<br>
     Then Ráma, while his spirit burned<br>
 For battle, words like these returned:<br>
 'The eastern gate be Níla's care.<br>
 Opponent of Prahasta there.<br>
 The southern gate, with troops arrayed<br>
 Let Angad, Báli's son, invade.<br>
 The gate that fronts the falling sun<br>
 Shall be by brave Hanúmán won;<br>
 Soon through its portals shall he lead<br>
 His myriads of Vánar breed.<br>
 The gate that fronts the north shall be<br>
 Assailed by Lakshman and by me.<br>
 For I myself have sworn to kill<br>
 The tyrant who delights in ill.<br>
 Armed with the boon which Brahmá gave,<br>
 The Gods of heaven he loves to brave.<br>
 And through the trembling worlds he flies,<br>
 Oppressor of the just and wise.<br>
 Thou, Jámbaván, and thou, O King<br>
 Of Vánars, all your bravest bring,<br>
 And with your hosts in dense array<br>
 Straight to the centre force your way.<br>
 But let no Vánar in the storm<br>
 Disguise him in a human form.<br>
 Ye chiefs who change your shapes at will,<br>
 Retain your Vánar semblance still.<br>
 Thus, when we battle with the foe,<br>
 Both men and Vánars will ye know,<br>
 In human form will seven appear;<br>
 Myself, my brother Lakshman here;<br>
 Vibhíshan, and the four he led<br>
 From Lanká's city when he fled.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus Raghu's son the chiefs addressed:<br>
 Then, gazing on Suvela's crest,<br>
 Transported by the lovely sight,<br>
 He longed to climb the mountain height.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_955"></a><a href="ry435.htm#fr_955">455:1b</a>  The poet appears to have forgotten
 that Suka and Sáran were dismissed with
 ignominy in Canto XXIX., and have not
 been reinstated.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_956"></a><a href="ry436.htm#fr_956">455:2b</a>  The four who fled with him. Their
 names are Anala*, Panasa, Sampáti, and
 Pramati.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry437.htm">Next: Canto XXXVIII.: The Ascent of Suvela.</a></center>
 </body>