<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry438.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry440.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XL.: RÁVAN ATTACKED.</h3>
 <p>
 Still stood the son of Raghu where<br>
 Suvela's peak rose high in air,<br>
 And with Sugríva turned his eye<br>
 To scan each quarter of the sky.<br>
 There on Trikúta, nobly planned<br>
 And built by Vis'vakarmá's hand,<br>
 He saw the lovely Lanká, dressed<br>
 In all her varied beauty, rest.<br>
 High on a tower above the gate<br>
 The tyrant stood in kingly state,<br>
 The royal canopy displayed<br>
 Above him lent its grateful shade,<br>
 And servants, from the giant band,<br>
 His cheek with jewelled chowries fanned.<br>
 Red sandal o'er his breast was spread,<br>
 His ornaments and robe were red:<br>
 Thus shows a cloud of darksome hue<br>
 With golden sunbeams flashing through.<br>
 While Ráma and the chiefs intent<br>
 Upon the king their glances bent,<br>
 Up sprang Sugríva from the ground<br>
 And reached the turret at a bound.<br>
 Unterrified the Vánar stood,<br>
 And wroth, with wondrous hardihood,<br>
 The king in bitter words addressed,<br>
 And thus his scorn and hate expressed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'King of the giant race, in me<br>
 The friend and slave of Ráma see.<br>
 Lord of the world, he gives me power<br>
 To smite thee in thy fenced tower.'<br>
 While through the air his challenge rang,<br>
 At Rávan's face the Vánar sprang.<br>
 Snatched from his head the kingly crown<br>
 And dashed it in his fury down.<br>
 Straight at his foe the giant flew,<br>
 His mighty arms about him threw.<br>
 With strength resistless swung him round<br>
 And dashed him panting to the ground,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Unharmed amid the storm of blows<br>
 Swift to his feet Sugríva rose.<br>
 Again in furious fight they met:<br>
 With streams of blood their limbs were wet,<br>
 Each grasping his opponent's waist.<br>
 Thus with their branches interlaced,<br>
 Which, crimson with the flowers of spring,<br>
 From side to side the breezes swing,<br>
 In furious wrestle you may see<br>
 The Kins'uk and the Seemal tree.  <a name="fr_958"></a><a href="ry440.htm#fn_958"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 They fought with fists and hands, alike<br>
 Prepared to parry and to strike.<br>
 Long time the doubtful combat, waged<br>
 With matchless strength and fury, raged.<br>
 Each fiercely struck, each guarded well,<br>
 Till, closing, from the tower they fell,<br>
 And, grasping each the other's throat,<br>
 Lay for an instant in the moat,<br>
 Then rose, and each in fiercer mood<br>
 The sanguinary strife renewed.<br>
 Well matched in size and strength and skill<br>
 They fought the dubious battle still.<br>
 While sweat and blood their limbs bedewed<br>
 They met, retreated, and pursued:<br>
 Each stratagem and art they tried,<br>
 Stood front to front and swerved aside.<br>
 His hand a while the giant stayed<br>
 And called his magic to his aid.<br>
 But brave Sugríva, swift to know<br>
 The guileful purpose of the foe,<br>
 Gained with light leap the upper air.<br>
 And breath and strength and spirit then;<br>
 Then, joyous as for victory won,<br>
 Returned to Raghu's royal son.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry440.htm">Next: Canto XLI.: Ráma's Envoy.</a></center>
 </body>