<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry437.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry439.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXIX.: LANKÁ.</h3>
 <p>
 They slept secure: the sun arose<br>
 And called the chieftains from repose.<br>
 Before the wondering Vánars, gay<br>
 With grove and garden, Lanká lay,<br>
 Where golden buds the Champak showed,<br>
 And bright with bloom As'oka glowed,<br>
 And palm and Sál and many a tree<br>
 With leaf and flower were fair to see.<br>
 They looked on wood and lawn and glade,<br>
 On emerald grass and dusky shade,<br>
 Where creepers filled the air with scent.<br>
 And luscious fruit the branches bent,<br>
 Where bees inebriate loved to throng,<br>
 And each sweet bird was loud in song.<br>
 The wondering Vánars passed the bound<br>
 That circled that enchanting ground,<br>
 And as they came a sweet breeze through<br>
 The odorous alleys softly blew.<br>
 Some Vánars, at their king's behest,<br>
 Onward to bannered Lanká pressed,<br>
 While, startled by the strangers' tread,<br>
 The birds and deer before them fled.<br>
 Earth trembled at each step they took,<br>
 And Lanká at their shouting shook.<br>
 Bright rose before their wondering eyes<br>
 Trikata's * peak that kissed the skies,<br>
 And, clothed with flowers of every hue,<br>
 And its golden alin * thr *.<br>
 More fair to see the * mountain's head<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_457"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 457</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 A hundred leagues in length was spread.<br>
 There Rávan's town, securely placed,<br>
 The summit of Trikúta graced.<br>
 O'er leagues of land she stretched in pride,<br>
 A hundred long and twenty wide.<br>
 They saw a lofty wall enfold<br>
 The city, built of blocks of gold,<br>
 They saw the beams of morning fall<br>
 On dome and fane within the wall,<br>
 Bright with the shine that mansion gives<br>
 Where Vishnu in his glory lives.<br>
 White-created like the Lord of Snows<br>
 Before them Rávan's palace rose.<br>
 High on a thousand pillars raised<br>
 With gold and precious stone it blazed,<br>
 Guarded by giant warders, crown<br>
 And ornament of Lanká's town.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry439.htm">Next: Canto XL.: Rávan Attacked.</a></center>
 </body>