<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry436.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry438.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXVIII.: THE ASCENT OF SUVELA.</h3>
 <p>
 'Come let us scale,' the hero cried,<br>
 'This hill with various metals dyed.<br>
 This night upon the breezy crest<br>
 Sugríva, Lakshman, I, will rest,<br>
 With sage Vibhíshan, faithful friend,<br>
 His counsel and his lore to lend.<br>
 From these tall* peaks each eager eye<br>
 The foeman's city shall espy,<br>
 Who from the wood my darling stole<br>
 And brought long anguish on my soul.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus spake the lord of men, and bent<br>
 His footsteps to the steep ascent,<br>
 And Lakshman, true in weal and woe,<br>
 Next followed with his shafts and bow.<br>
 Vibhíshan followed, next in place,<br>
 The sovereign of the Vánar race,<br>
 And hundreds of the forest kind<br>
 Thronged with impetuous feet, behind.<br>
 The chiefs in woods and mountains bred<br>
 Fast followed to Suvela's head,<br>
 And gazed on Lanká bright and fair<br>
 As some gay city in the air.<br>
 On glittering gates, on ramparts raised<br>
 By giant hands, the chieftains gazed.<br>
 They saw the mighty hosts that, skilled<br>
 In arts of war, the city filled,<br>
 And ramparts with new ramparts lined,<br>
 The swarthy hosts that stood behind.<br>
 With spirits burning for the fight<br>
 They saw the giants from the height,<br>
 And from a hundred throats rang out<br>
 Defiance and the battle shout.<br>
 Then sank the sun with dying flame,<br>
 And soft the shades of twilight came,<br>
 And the full moon's delicious light<br>
 Was shed upon the tranquil night.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_957"></a><a href="ry436.htm#fr_957">456:1</a>  The numbers here are comparatively
 modern: ten thousand elephants, ten
 thousand chariots, twenty thousand horses
 and ten million giants.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry438.htm">Next: Canto XXXIX.: Lanká.</a></center>
 </body>