<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry433.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry435.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XXXV.: MALYAVÁN'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 The fearful notes of drum and shell<br>
 Upon the ear of Rávan fell.<br>
 One moment quailed his haughty look,<br>
 One moment in his fear he shook,<br>
 But soon recalling wonted pride,<br>
 His counsellors he sternly eyed,<br>
 And with a voice that thundered through<br>
 The council had* began anew:<br>
     'Lords, I have heard--your tongues have told--<br>
 How Raghu's son is fierce and bold.<br>
 To Lanká's shore has bridged his way<br>
 And hither leads his wild array.<br>
 I know your might, in battle tried,<br>
 Fighting and conquering by my side.<br>
 Why now, when such a foe is near,<br>
 Looks eye to eye in silent fear?<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased, his mother's sire well known<br>
 For wisdom in the council shown,<br>
 Malyaván *, sage and faithful guide.<br>
 Thus to the monarch's speech replied:<br>
     'Long reigns the king in safe repose.<br>
 Unmoved by fear of vanquished foes,<br>
 Whose feet* by saving knowledge led<br>
 In justice's* path delight to tread:<br>
 Who knows to sheath the sword or wield,<br>
 To sue for peace*, to strike or yield:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Prefers, when foes are stronger, peace,<br>
 And bids a doubtful conflict cease.<br>
 Now, King, the choice before thee lies,<br>
 Make peace with Ráma, and be wise.<br>
 This day the captive queen restore<br>
 Who brings the foe to Lanká's shore.<br>
 The Sire by whom the worlds are swayed<br>
 Of yore the Gods and demons made.<br>
 With these Injustice sided; those<br>
 Fair Justice for her champions chose.<br>
 Still Justice dwells with Gods above;<br>
 Injustice, fiends and giants love.<br>
 Thou, through the worlds that fear thee, long<br>
 Hast scorned the right and loved the wrong,<br>
 And Justice, with thy foes allied,<br>
 Gives might resistless to their side.<br>
 Thou, guided by thy wicked will,<br>
 Hast found delight in deeds of ill,<br>
 And sages in their holy rest*<br>
 Have trembled, by thy power oppressed.<br>
 But they, who check each vain desire,<br>
 Are clothed with might which burns like fire.<br>
 In them the power and glory live<br>
 Which zeal and saintly fervour give.<br>
 Their constant task, their sole delight<br>
 Is worship and each holy rite,<br>
 To chant aloud the Veda hymn,<br>
 Nor let the sacred fire grow dim.<br>
 Now through the air like thunder ring<br>
 The echoes of the chants they sing.<br>
 The vapours of their incense rise<br>
 And, veil with cloudy pall the skies,<br>
 And Rákshas might grows weak and faint<br>
 Killed by the power of sage and saint.<br>
 By Brahmá's boon thy life was screened<br>
 From God, Gandharva, Yaksha *,  fiend;<br>
 But Vánars, men and bears* arrayed<br>
 Against thee now, thy shores invade.<br>
 Red meteors, heralds of despair<br>
 Flash* frequent through the humid* air,<br>
 Foretelling to my troubled mind<br>
 The ruin of the Rákshas kind<br>
 With awful thundering overhead<br>
 Clouds black as night are densely spread,<br>
 And oozing* from the gloomy pall<br>
 Great drops of blood on Lanká fall<br>
 Dogs roam through house and shrine to steal<br>
 The sacred oil * and curd  and meal.<br>
 Cats pair with tigers*, hounds with swine,<br>
 And asses' foals are born of kine.<br>
 In these and countless signs I trace<br>
 The ruin of the giant race,<br>
 'Tis Vishnu's self who comes to storm<br>
 Thy city, clothed in Ráma's form;<br>
 For, well I ween, no mortal hand<br>
 The ocean with a bridge has spanned.<br>
 O giant King, the dame release,<br>
 And sue to Raghu's son for peace'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_455"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 455</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry435.htm">Next: Canto XXXVI.: Rávan's Reply.</a></center>
 </body>