<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry440.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry442.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLII.: THE SALLY.</h3>
 <p>
 Still was the cry,'The Vánar foes<br>
 Around the leaguered city close.'<br>
 King Rávan from the terrace gazed<br>
 And saw, with eyes where fury blazed,<br>
 The Vánar host in serried ranks<br>
 Press to the moat and line the banks,<br>
 And, first in splendour and in place,<br>
 The lion lord of Raghu's race.<br>
 And Ráma looked on Lanká where<br>
 Gay flags were streaming to the air,<br>
 And, while keen sorrow pierced him through,<br>
 His loving thoughts to Sitá flew:<br>
 'There, there in deep affliction lies<br>
 My darling with the fawn-like eyes.<br>
 There on the cold bare ground she keeps<br>
 Sad vigil and for Ráma weeps.'<br>
 Mad with the thought, 'Charge, charge,' he cried.<br>
 'Let earth with Rákshas blood be dyed.'<br>
   <br>
 Responsive to his call rang out<br>
 A loud, a universal shout,<br>
 As myriads filled the moat with stone,<br>
 Trees, rocks, and mountains overthrown,<br>
 And charging at their leader's call<br>
 Pressed forward furious to the wall.<br>
 Some in their headlong ardour scaled<br>
 The rampart's height, the guard assailed,<br>
 And many a ponderous fragment rent<br>
 From portal, tower, and battlement.<br>
 Huge gates adorned with burnished gold<br>
 Were loosed and lifted from their hold;<br>
 And post and pillar, with a sound<br>
 Like thunder, fell upon the ground.<br>
 At every portal, east and west<br>
 And north and south, the chieftains pressed<br>
 Each in his post appointed led<br>
 His myriads in the forest bred.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Charge, let the gates be opened wide:<br>
 'Charge, charge, my giants,' Rávan cried.<br>
 They heard his voice, and loud and long<br>
 Rang the wild clamour of the throng,<br>
 And shell and drum their notes upsent,<br>
 And every martial instrument.<br>
 Forth, at the bidding of their lord<br>
 From every gate the giants poured,<br>
 As, when the waters rise and swell.<br>
 Huge waves preceding waves impel.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Again from every Vánar throat<br>
 A scream of fierce defiance smote<br>
 The welkin: earth and sea and sky<br>
 Reëchoed with the awful cry.<br>
 The roar of elephants, the neigh<br>
 Of horses eager for the fray.<br>
 The frequent clash of warriors' steel,<br>
 The rattling of the chariot wheel.<br>
 Fierce was the deadly fight: opposed<br>
 In terrible array they closed,<br>
 As when the Gods of heaven enraged<br>
 With rebel fiends wild battle waged.<br>
 Axe, spear, and mace were wielded well:<br>
 At every blow a Vánar fell.<br>
 But shivered rock and brandished tree<br>
 Brought many a giant on his knee,<br>
 To perish in his turn beneath<br>
 The deadly wounds of nails and teeth.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry442.htm">Next: Canto XLIII.: The Single Combats.</a></center>
 </body>