<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry441.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry443.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLIII.: THE SINGLE COMBATS.</h3>
 <p>
 Brave chiefs of each opposing side<br>
 Their strength in single combat tried.<br>
 Fierce Indrajit the fight began<br>
 With Angad in the battle's van.<br>
 Sampátí, strongest of his race,<br>
 Stood with Prajangha face to face.<br>
 Hanúmán, Jambumálí met<br>
 In mortal opposition set.<br>
 Vibhíshan, brother of the lord<br>
 Of Lanká, raised his threatening sword<br>
 And singled out, with eyes aglow<br>
 With wrath, S'atrughna for his foe.<br>
 The mighty Gaja Tapan sought,<br>
 And Níla with Nikumbha fought.<br>
 Sugríva, Vánar king, defied<br>
 Fierce Praghas long in battle tried,<br>
 And Lakshman fearless in the fight<br>
 Encountered Virúpáksha's might.<br>
 To meet the royal Ráma came<br>
 Wild Agniketu fierce as flame;<br>
 Mitraghana, he who loved to strike<br>
 His foeman and his friend alike:<br>
 With Ras'miketu, known and feared<br>
 Where'er his ponderous flag was reared;<br>
 And Yajnakopa whose delight<br>
 Was ruin of the sacred rite.<br>
 These met and fought, with thousands more,<br>
 And trampled earth was red with gore<br>
 Swift as the bolt which Indra sends<br>
 When fire from heaven the mountain rends<br>
 Smote Indrajit with furious blows<br>
 On Angad queller of his foes.<br>
 But Angad from his foeman tore<br>
 The murderous mace the warrior bore,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_460"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 460</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And low in dust his coursers rolled,<br>
 His driver, and his car of gold.<br>
 Struck by the shafts Prajangha sped,<br>
 The Vánar chief Sampáti bled,<br>
 But, heedless of his gashes he<br>
 Crushed down the giant with a tree.<br>
 Then car-borne Jambumáli smote<br>
 Hanumán on the chest and throat;<br>
 But at the car the Vánar rushed,<br>
 And chariot, steeds, and rider crushed.<br>
 Sugríva whirled a huge tree round,<br>
 And struck fierce Praghas to the ground.<br>
 One arrow shot from Lakshman's bow<br>
 Laid mighty Virúpáksha low.<br>
 His giant foes round Ráma pressed<br>
 And shot their shafts at head and breast;<br>
 But, when the iron shower was spent,<br>
 Four arrows from his bow he sent,<br>
 And every missile, deftly sped;<br>
 Cleft from the trunk a giant head.  <a name="fr_961"></a><a href="ry443.htm#fn_961"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry443.htm">Next: Canto XLIV.: The Night.</a></center>
 </body>