<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry444.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry446.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLVI.: INDRAJIT'S TRIUMPH.</h3>
 <p>
 The Vánar chiefs whose piercing eyes<br>
 Scanned eagerly the earth and skies,<br>
 Saw the brave brothers wounded sore<br>
 Transfixed with darts and stained with gore.<br>
 The monarch of the Vánar race,<br>
 With wise Vibhíshan, reached the place;<br>
 Angad and Níla came behind,<br>
 And others of the forest kind,<br>
 And standing with Hanúmán there<br>
 Lamented for the fallen pair.<br>
 Their melancholy eyes they raised;<br>
 In fruitless search a while they gazed,<br>
 But magic arts Vibhíshan knew;<br>
 Not hidden from his keener view,<br>
 Though veiled by magic from the rest,<br>
 The son of Rávan stood confessed,<br>
 Fierce Indrajit with savage pride<br>
 The fallen sons of Raghu eyed,<br>
 And every giant heart was proud<br>
 As thus the warrior cried aloud:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Slain by mine arrows Ráma lies,<br>
 And closed in death are Lakshman's eyes.<br>
 Dead are the mighty princes who<br>
 Dúshan and Khara smote and slew.<br>
 The Gods and fiends may toil in vain<br>
 To free them from the binding chain.<br>
 The haughty chief, my father's dread,<br>
 Who drove him sleepless from his bed,<br>
 While Lanká, troubled like a brook<br>
 In rain time, heard his name and shook:<br>
 He whose fierce hate our lives pursued<br>
 Lies helpless by my shafts subdued.<br>
 Now fruitless is each wondrous deed<br>
 Wrought by the race the forests breed,<br>
 And fruitless every toil at last<br>
 Like cloudlets when the rains are past.'<br>
 Then rose the shout of giants loud<br>
 As thunder from a bursting cloud,<br>
 When, deeming Ráma, dead, they raised<br>
 Their voices and the conqueror praised.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Still motionless, as lie the slain,<br>
 The brothers pressed the bloody plain,<br>
 No sigh they drew, no breath they heaved,<br>
 And lay as though of life bereaved.<br>
 Proud of the deed his art had done,<br>
 To Lanká's town went Rávan's son,<br>
 Where, as he passed, all fear was stilled,<br>
 And every heart with triumph filled.<br>
 Sugríva trembled as he viewed<br>
 Each fallen prince with blood bedewed,<br>
 And in his eyes which overflowed<br>
 With tears the flame of anger glowed.<br>
 'Calm,' cried Vibhíshan, 'calm thy fears,<br>
 And stay the torrent of thy tears.<br>
 Still must the chance of battle change,<br>
 And victory still delight to range.<br>
 Our cause again will she befriend<br>
 And bring us triumph in the end.<br>
 This is not death: each prince will break<br>
 The spell that holds him, and awake;<br>
 Nor long shall numbing magic bind<br>
 The mighty arm, the lofty mind.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: his finger bathed in dew<br>
 Across Sugríva's eyes he drew;<br>
 From dulling mist his vision freed.<br>
 And spoke these words to suit the need:<br>
 'No time is this for fear: away<br>
 With fainting heart and weak delay.<br>
 Now, e'en the tear which sorrow wrings<br>
 From loving eyes destruction brings.<br>
 Up, on to battle at the head<br>
 Of those brave troops which Ráma led.<br>
 Or guardian by his side remain<br>
 Till sense and strength the prince regain.<br>
 Soon shall the trance-bound pair revive,<br>
 And from our hearts all sorrow drive.<br>
 Though prostrate on the earth he lie,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_462"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 462</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Deem not that Ráma's death is nigh;<br>
 Deem not that Lakshmí will forget<br>
 Or leave her darling champion yet.<br>
 Rest here and be thy heart consoled;<br>
 Ponder my words, be firm and bold.<br>
 I, foremost in the battlefield,<br>
 Will rally all who faint or yield.<br>
 Their staring eyes betray their fear;<br>
 They whisper each in other's ear.<br>
 They, when they hear my cheering cry<br>
 And see the friend of Ráma nigh,<br>
 Will cast their gloom and fears away<br>
 Like faded wreaths of yesterday.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus calmed he King Sugríva's dread;<br>
 Then gave new heart to those who fled.<br>
 Fierce Indrajit, his soul on fire<br>
 With pride of conquest, sought his sire,<br>
 Raised reverent hands, and told him all,<br>
 The battle and the princes' fall.<br>
 Rejoicing at his foes' defeat<br>
 Upsprang the monarch from his seat,<br>
 Girt by his giant courtiers: round<br>
 His warrior son his arms he wound,<br>
 Close kisses on his head applied,<br>
 And heard again how Ráma died.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry446.htm">Next: Canto XLVII.: Sitá.</a></center>
 </body>