<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry443.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry445.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XLV.: INDRAJIT'S VICTORY.</h3>
 <p>
 Brave Ráma, burning still to know<br>
 The station of his artful foe,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_461"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 461</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Gave to ten chieftains, mid the best<br>
 Of all the host, his high behest.<br>
 Swift rose in air the Vánar band:<br>
 Each region of the sky they scanned:<br>
 But Rávan's son by magic skill<br>
 Checked them with arrows swifter still,<br>
 When streams of blood from chest and side<br>
 The dauntless Vánars' limbs had dyed.<br>
 The giant in his misty shroud<br>
 Showed like the sun obscured by cloud.<br>
 Like serpents hissing through the air,<br>
 His arrows smote the princely pair;<br>
 And from their limbs at every rent<br>
 A stream of rushing blood was sent.<br>
 Like Kins'uk trees they stood, that show<br>
 In spring their blossoms' crimson glow.<br>
 Then Indrajit with fury eyed<br>
 Ikshváku's royal sons, and cried:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Not mighty Indra can assail<br>
 Or see me when I choose to veil<br>
 My form in battle: and can ye,<br>
 Children of earth, contend with me?<br>
 The arrowy noose this hand has shot<br>
 Has bound you with a hopeless knot;<br>
 And, slaughtered by my shafts and bow,<br>
 To Yama's hall this hour ye go.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He spoke, and shouted. Then anew<br>
 The arrows from his bowstring flew,<br>
 And pierced, well aimed with perfect art,<br>
 Each limb and joint and vital part.<br>
 Transfixed with shafts in every limb.<br>
 Their strength relaxed, their eyes grew dim.<br>
 As two tall standards side by side,<br>
 With each sustaining rope untied.<br>
 Fall levelled by the howling blast,<br>
 So earth's majestic lords at last<br>
 Beneath the arrowy tempest reeled,<br>
 And prostrate pressed the battle field.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_962"></a><a href="ry443.htm#fr_962">460:1b</a>  Yajnas'atru, Maháphráva, Mahodar,
 Vajradanshtra, S'uka, and Sáran.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_963"></a><a href="ry443.htm#fr_963">460:2b</a>  Angad.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_964"></a><a href="ry443.htm#fr_964">460:3b</a>  A mysterious weapon consisting of
 serpents transformed to arrows which
 deprived the wounded object of all sense
 and power of motion.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry445.htm">Next: Canto XLVI.: Indrajit's Triumph.</a></center>
 </body>