<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry453.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry455.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LIX.: RÁVANS SALLY.</h3>
 <p>
 They told him that the chief was killed,<br>
 And Rávan's breast with rage was filled.<br>
 Then, fiercely moved by wrath and pride,<br>
 Thus to his lords the tyrant cried:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'No longer, nobles, may we show<br>
 This lofty scorn for such a foe<br>
 By whom our bravest, with his train<br>
 Of steeds and elephants, is slain.<br>
 Myself this day will take the field,<br>
 And Raghu's sons their lives shall yield.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 High on the royal car, that glowed<br>
 With glory from his face, he rode;<br>
 And tambour shell and drum pealed out,<br>
 And joyful was each giant's shout.<br>
 A mighty host, with eyeballs red<br>
 Like flames of kindled fire, he led.<br>
 He passed the city gate, and viewed,<br>
 Arrayed, the Vánar multitude,<br>
 Those wielding massy rocks, and these<br>
 Armed with the stems of uptorn trees,<br>
 And Ráma with his eyes aglow<br>
 With warlike ardour viewed the foe,<br>
 And thus the brave Vibhíshan, best<br>
 Of weapon-wielding chiefs, addressed:<br>
 'What captnin leads this bright array<br>
 Where lances gleam and banners play,<br>
 And thousands armed with spear and sword<br>
 Await the bidding of their lord?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Seest, thou,' Vibhíshan answered, 'one<br>
 Whose face is as the morning sun,<br>
 Preëminent for hugest frame?<br>
 Akampan  <a name="fr_973"></a><a href="#fn_973"><font size="1">1</font></a> is the giant's name<br>
 Behold that chieftain, chariot-borne,<br>
 Whom Brahmá's chosen gifts adorn.<br>
 He wields a bow like Indra's own;<br>
 A lion on his flag is shown,<br>
 His eyes with baleful fire are lit:<br>
 'Tis Rávan's son,'tis Indrajit<br>
 There, brandishing in mighty hands<br>
 His huge bow, Atikáya stands.<br>
 And that proud warrior o'er whose head<br>
 A moon-bright canopy is spread:<br>
 Whose might, in many a battle tried,<br>
 Has tamed imperial Indra's pride;<br>
 Who wears a crown of burnished gold,<br>
 Is Lanká's lord the lofty-souled.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: and Ráma knew his foe,<br>
 And laid an arrow on his bow:<br>
 'Woe to the wretch,' he ciied, 'whom fate<br>
 Abandons to my deadly hate.'<br>
 He spoke, and, firm by Lakshman's side,<br>
 The giant to the fray defied.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 The lord of Lanká bade his train<br>
 Of warriors by the gates remain,<br>
 To guard the city from surprise<br>
 By Ráma's forest born allies.<br>
 Then as some monster of the sea<br>
 Cleaves swift-advancimg billows, he<br>
 Charged with impetuous onset through<br>
 The foe, and cleft the host in two.<br>
 Sugríva ran, the king to meet:<br>
 A hill uprooted from its seat<br>
 He hurled,with trees that graced the height<br>
 Against the rover of the night:<br>
 But cleft with shafts that checked its way<br>
 Harmless upon the earth it lay.<br>
 Then fiercer Rávan's fury grew,<br>
 An arrow from his side he drew,<br>
 Swift as a thunderbolt, aglow<br>
 With fire, and launched it at the foe.<br>
 Through flesh and bone a way it found,<br>
 And stretched Sugríva on the ground.<br>
 Sushen and Nala saw him fall,<br>
 Gaváksha, Gavaya heard their call,<br>
 And, poising hills, in act * to fling<br>
 They charged amain the giant king.<br>
 They charged, they hurled the hills in vain.<br>
 He checked them with his arrowy rain,<br>
 And every brave assailant felt<br>
 The piercing wounds his missiles dealt,<br>
 Then smitten by the shafts that came<br>
 Keen, fleet, and thick, with certain aim,<br>
 They fled to Ráma, sure defence<br>
 Against the oppressor's violence,<br>
 Then, reverent palm to palm applied,<br>
 Thus Lakshman to his brother cried:<br>
 'To me, my lord, the task entrust<br>
 To lay this giant in the dust.'<br>
 'Go, then,' said Ráma, 'bravely fight;<br>
 Beat down this rover of the night.<br>
 But he, unmatched in bold emprise.<br>
 Fears not the Lord of earth and skies,<br>
 Keep on thy guard: with keenest eye<br>
 Thy moments of attack espy.<br>
 Let hand and eye in due accord<br>
 Protect thee with the bow and sword.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Lakshman round his brother threw<br>
 His mighty arms in honour due,<br>
 Bent lowly down his reverent head,<br>
 And onward to the battle sped.<br>
 Hanúmán from afar beheld<br>
 How Rávan's shafts the Vánars quelled:<br>
 To meet the giant's car he ran,<br>
 Raised his right arm and thus began:<br>
 'If Brahmá's boon thy life has screened<br>
 From Yaksha, God, Gandharva, fiend.<br>
 With these contending fear no ill,<br>
 But tremble at a Vánar still.'<br>
 With fury flashing from his eye<br>
 The lord of Lanká made reply.<br>
 'Strike, Vánar, strike, the fray begin,<br>
 Aml hope eternal fame to win<br>
 This arm shall pr * thee in the * ??<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_469"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 469</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And end thy glory and thy life.'<br>
 'Remember,' cried the Wind-God's son,<br>
 'Remember all that I have done,<br>
 My prowess, King, thou knowest well,<br>
 Shown in the fight when Aksha  <a name="fr_974"></a><a href="#fn_974"><font size="1">1</font></a> fell.'<br>
     With heavy hand the giant smote<br>
 Hanúmán on the chest and throat,<br>
 Who reeled and staggered to and fro,<br>
 Stunned for a moment by the blow.<br>
 Till, mustering strength, his hand he reared<br>
 And struck the foe whom Indra feared.<br>
 His huge limbs bent beneath the shock,<br>
 As mountains, in an earthquake, rock,<br>
 And from the Gods and sages pealed<br>
 Shouts of loud triumph as he reeled.<br>
 But strength returning nerved his frame:<br>
 His eyeballs flashed with fiercer flame.<br>
 No living creature might resist<br>
 That blow of his tremendous fist<br>
 Which fell upon Hanúmán's flank:<br>
 And to the ground the Vánar sank,<br>
 No sign of life his body showed:<br>
 And Rávan in his chariot rode<br>
 At Níla; and his arrowy rain<br>
 Eell on the captain and his train.<br>
 Fierce Níla stayed his Vánar band,<br>
 And, heaving with his single hand<br>
 A mountain peak with vigorous swing<br>
 Hurled the huge missile at the king.<br>
     Hanúmán life and strength regained,<br>
 Burned for the fight and thus complained:<br>
 'Why, coward giant, didst thou flee<br>
 And leave the doubtful fight with me?'<br>
 Seven mighty arrows keen and fleet<br>
 The giant launched, the hill to meet;<br>
 And, all its force and fury stayed,<br>
 The harmless mass on earth was laid.<br>
 Enraged the Vánar chief beheld<br>
 The mountain peak by force repelled,<br>
 And rained upon the foe a shower<br>
 Of trees uptorn with branch and flower.<br>
 Still his keen shafts which pierced and rent<br>
 Each flying tree the giant sent:<br>
 Still was the Vánar doomed to feel<br>
 The tempest of the winged steel.<br>
 Then, smarting from that arrowy storm,<br>
 The Vánar chief condensed his form,  <a name="fr_975"></a><a href="#fn_975"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 And lightly leaping from the ground<br>
 On Rávan's standard footing found;<br>
 Then springing unimpeded down<br>
 Stood on his bow and golden crown.<br>
 The Vánar's nimble leaps amazed<br>
 Ikshváku's son who stood and gazed.<br>
 The giant, raging in his heart,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Laid on his bow a fiery dart;<br>
 The Vánar on his flagstaff eyed,<br>
 And thus in tones of fury cried:<br>
 'Well skilled in magic lore art thou:<br>
 But will thine art avail thee now?<br>
 See if thy magic will defend<br>
 Thy life against the dart I send.'<br>
     Thus Rávan spake, the giant king,<br>
 And loosed the arrow from the string.<br>
 It pierced, with direst fury sped,<br>
 The Vánar with its flaming head.<br>
 His father's might, his power innate<br>
 Preserved him from the threatened fate.<br>
 Upon his knees he fell, distained<br>
 With streams of blood, but life remained,<br>
     Still Rávan for the battle burned:<br>
 At Lakshman next his car he turned,<br>
 And charged amain with furious show,<br>
 Straining in mighty hands his bow.<br>
 'Come,' Lakshman cried, 'assay the fight:<br>
 Leave foes unworthy of thy might.'<br>
 Thus Lakshman spoke: and Lanká's lord<br>
 Heard the dread thunder of the cord,<br>
 And mad with burning rage and pride<br>
 In hasty words like these replied:<br>
 'Joy, joy is mine, O Raghu's son:<br>
 Thy fate to-day thou canst not shun.<br>
 Slain by mine arrows thou shalt tread<br>
 The gloomy pathway of the dead.'<br>
     Thus as, he spoke his bow he drew,<br>
 And seven keen shafts at Lakshman flew,<br>
 But Raghu's son with surest aim<br>
 Cleft every arrow as it came.<br>
 Thus with fleet shafts each warrior shot<br>
 Against his foe, and rested not.<br>
 Then one choice weapon from his store,<br>
 By Brahmá's self bestowed of yore,<br>
 Fierce as the flames that end the world,<br>
 The giant king at Lakshman hurled.<br>
 The hero fell, and racked with pain,<br>
 Scarce could his hand his bow retain.<br>
 But sense and strength resumed their seat<br>
 And, lightly springing to his feet,<br>
 He struck with one Tremendons stroke<br>
 And Rávan's bow in splinters broke.<br>
 From Lakshmans's cord three arrows flew<br>
 And pierced the giant monarch through.<br>
 Sore wounded Rávan closed, and round<br>
 Ikshváku's son his strong arms wound.<br>
 With strength unrivalled, Brahmá's gift,<br>
 He strove from earth his foe to lift.<br>
 'Shall I,' he cried, 'who overthrow<br>
 Mount Meru and the Lord of Snow,<br>
 And heaven and all who dwell therein,<br>
 Be foiled by one of Ráma's kin?'<br>
 But though he heaved, and toiled, and strained,<br>
 Unmoved Ikshváku's son remained.<br>
 His frame by those huge arms compressed<br>
 The giant's God given *****<br>
 But conscious that himself * was part<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_470"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 470</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Of Vishnu, he was firm in heart.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The Wind-God's son the fight beheld,<br>
 And rushed at Rávan, rage-impelled.<br>
 Down crashed his mighty hand the foe<br>
 Full in the chest received the blow.<br>
 His eyes grew dim, his knees gave way,<br>
 And senseless on the earth he lay.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The Wind-God's son to Ráma bore<br>
 Deep-wounded Lakshman stained with gore.<br>
 He whom no foe might lift or bend<br>
 Was light as air to such a friend.<br>
 The dart that Lakshman's side had cleft,<br>
 Untouched, the hero's body left,<br>
 And flushing through the air afar<br>
 Resumed its place in Rávan's car;<br>
 And, waxing well though wounded sore,<br>
 He felt the deadly pain no more.<br>
 And Rávan, though with deep wounds pained,<br>
 Slowly his sense and strength regained,<br>
 And furious still and undismayed<br>
 On bow and shaft his hand he laid.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Hanúmán to Ráma cried:<br>
 'Ascend my back, great chief, and ride<br>
 Like Vishnu borne on Garud's wing,<br>
 To battle with the giant king.'<br>
 So, burning for the dire attack,<br>
 Rode Ráma on the Vánar's back,<br>
 And with fierce accents loud and slow<br>
 Thus gave defiance to the foe,<br>
 While his strained bowstring made a sound<br>
 Like thunder when it shakes the ground:<br>
 'Stay, Monarch of the giants, stay,<br>
 The penalty of sin to pay.<br>
 Stay! whither wilt thou fly, and how<br>
 Escape the death that waits thee now?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 No word the giant king returned:<br>
 His eyes with flames of fury burned.<br>
 His arm was stretched, his bow was bent,<br>
 And swift his fiery shafts were sent.<br>
 Red torrents from the Vánar flowed:<br>
 Then Ráma near to Rávan strode,<br>
 And with keen darts that never failed,<br>
 The chariot of the king assailed.<br>
 With surest aim his arrows flew:<br>
 The driver and the steeds he slew.<br>
 And shattered with the pointed steel<br>
 Car, flag, and pole and yoke and wheel.<br>
 As Indra hurls his bolt to smite<br>
 Mount Meru's heaven-ascending height,<br>
 So Ráma with a flaming dart<br>
 Struck Lanká's monarch near the heart,<br>
 Who reeled and fell beneath the blow<br>
 And from loose fingers dropped his bow.<br>
 Bright as the sun, with crescent head,<br>
 From Ráma's bow an arrow sped,<br>
 And from his forehead, proud no more,<br>
 Cleft the bright coronet he wore.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma stood by Rávan's side<br>
 And to the conquered giant cried:<br>
 'Well hast thou fought: thine arm has slain<br>
 Strong heroes of the Vánar train.<br>
 I will not strike or slay thee now,<br>
 For weary, faint with fight art thou.<br>
 To Lanká's town thy footsteps bend,<br>
 And there the night securely spend.<br>
 To-morrow come with car and bow,<br>
 And then my prowess shall thou know.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: the king in humbled pride<br>
 Rose from the earth and naught replied.<br>
 With wounded limbs and shattered crown<br>
 He sought again his royal town.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_973"></a><a href="ry454.htm#fr_973">468:1</a>  'It is to be understood,' says the
 commentator, 'that this is not * the Akampan
 who has already been slain.*</p>
 <p><a name="fn_974"></a><a href="ry454.htm#fr_974">469:1</a>  Ravan's son, whom Hanúmán killed
 when he first visited Lanká.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_975"></a><a href="ry454.htm#fr_975">469:2</a>  Níla was the son of Agni the God of
 Fire and possessed, like Milton's demons,
 the power of dilating and condensing his
 form at pleasure.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry455.htm">Next: Canto LX.: Kumbhakarna Roused.</a></center>
 </body>