<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry449.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry451.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LI.: DHÚMRÁKSHA'S SALLY.</h3>
 <p>
 King Rávan, where he sat within,<br>
 Heard from his hall the deafening din,<br>
 And with a spirit ill at ease<br>
 Addressed his lords in words like these:<br>
     'That warlike shout, those joyous cries,<br>
 Loud as the thunder of the skies,<br>
 Upsent from every Vánar throat,<br>
 Some new-born confidence denote.<br>
 Hark, how the sea and trembling shore<br>
 Re-echo with the Vánars' roar.<br>
 Though arrowy chains, securely twined<br>
 Both Ráma and his brother bind,<br>
 Still must the fierce triumphant shout<br>
 Disturb my soul with rising doubt.<br>
 Swift envoys to the army send,<br>
 And learn what change these cries portend,'<br>
     Obedient, at their master's call.<br>
 Fleet giants clomb the circling wall.<br>
 They saw the Vánars formed and led:<br>
 They saw Sugríva at their head,<br>
 The brothers from their bonds released:<br>
 And hope grew faint and fear increased.<br>
 Their faces pale with doubt and dread,<br>
 Back to the giant king they sped,<br>
 And to his startled ear revealed<br>
 The tidings of the battle field.<br>
     The flush of rage a while gave place<br>
 To chilling fear that changed his face:<br>
     'What? cried the tyrant, 'are my foes<br>
 Freed from the binding snakes that close<br>
 With venomed clasp round head and limb,<br>
 Bright as the sun and fierce like him:<br>
 The spell a God bestowed of yore,<br>
 The spell that never failed before?<br>
 If arts like these be useless, how<br>
 Shall giant strength avail us now<br>
 Go forth, Dhúmráksha, good at need,<br>
 The bravest of my warriors lead:<br>
 Force through the foe thy conquering way,<br>
 And Ráma and the Vánars slay'<br>
     Before his king with reverence due<br>
 Dhúmráksha bowed him, and withdrew.<br>
 Around him at his summons came<br>
 Fierce legions led by chiefs of fame.<br>
 Well armed with sword and spear and mace,<br>
 They hurried to the gathering place,<br>
 And rushed to battle, borne at speed<br>
 By elephant and car and steed.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry451.htm">Next: Canto LII.: Dhúmráksha's Death.</a></center>
 </body>