<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry456.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry458.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXI.: THE VÁNARS' ALARM.</h3>
 <p>
 The son of Raghu near the wall<br>
 Saw, proudly towering over all,<br>
 The mighty giant stride along<br>
 Attended by the warrior throng;<br>
 Heard Kumbhakarna's heavy feet<br>
 Awake the echoes of the street;<br>
 And, with the lust of battle fired,<br>
 Turned to  and inquired:<br>
 'Vibhíshan, tell that chieftain's name<br>
 Who rears so high his mountain frame;<br>
 With glittering helm and lion eyes,<br>
 Preeminent in might and size<br>
 Above the rest of giant birth,<br>
 He towers the standard of the earth;<br>
 And all the Vánars when they see<br>
 The mighty warrior turn and flee.'<br>
     'In him,' Vibhíshan answered, 'know<br>
 Vis'ravas' son, the Immortals' foe,<br>
 Fierce Kumbhakaiiia, mightier far<br>
 Than Gods and fiends and giants are.<br>
 He conquered Yama in the fight,<br>
 And Indra trembling owned his might.<br>
 His arm the Gods and fiends subdued,<br>
 Gandharvas and the serpent brood.<br>
 The rest of his gigantic race<br>
 Are wonderous strong by God-given grace;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 But nature at his birth to him<br>
 Gave matchless power and strength of limb.<br>
 Scarce was he born, fierce monster, when<br>
 He killed and ate a thousand men.<br>
 The trembling race of men, appalled,<br>
 On Indra for protection called;<br>
 And he, to save the suffering world,<br>
 His bolt at Kumbhakarna hurled.<br>
 So awful was the monster's yell<br>
 That fear on all the nations fell,<br>
 He, rushing on with furious roar,<br>
 A tusk from huge Airávat tore,<br>
 And dealt the God so dire a blow<br>
 That Indra reeling left his foe,<br>
 And with the Gods and mortals fled<br>
 To Brahmá's throne dispirited.<br>
 'O Brahmá,' thus the suppliants cried,<br>
 'Some refuge for this woe provide.<br>
 If thus his maw the giant sate<br>
 Soon will the world be desolate.'<br>
 The Self-existent calmed their woe,<br>
 And spake in anger to their foe:<br>
 'As thou wast born, Paulastya's son,<br>
 That worlds might weep by thee undone,<br>
 Thou like the dead henceforth shalt be:<br>
 Such is the curse I lay on thee.'<br>
 Senseless he lay, nor spoke nor stirred;<br>
 Such was the power of Brahmá's word.<br>
 But Rávan, troubled for his sake,<br>
 Thus to the Self-existent spake:<br>
 'Who lops the tree his care has reared<br>
 When golden fruit has first appeared?<br>
 Not thus, O Brahmá, deal with one<br>
 Descended from thine own dear son. <a name="fr_988"></a><a href="#fn_988"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 Still thou, O Lord, thy word must keep<br>
 He may not die, but let him sleep.<br>
 Yet fix a time for him to break<br>
 The chains of slumber and awake.'<br>
 He ceased: and Brahmá made reply;<br>
 'Six months in slumber shall he lie<br>
 And then arising for a day<br>
 Shall cast the numbing bonds away.'<br>
 Now Rávan in his doubt and dread<br>
 Has roused the monster from his bed,<br>
 Who comes in this the hour of need<br>
 On slaughtered Vánars flesh to feed.<br>
 Each Vánar, when his awe-struck eyes<br>
 Behold the monstrous chieftain, flies.<br>
 With hopeful words their minds deceive,<br>
 And let our trembling hosts believe<br>
 They see no giant, but, displayed,<br>
 A lifeless engine deftly made.'<br>
     Then Ráma called to Nila: 'Haste,<br>
 Let troops near every gate be placed,<br>
 And, armed with fragments of the rock<br>
 And trees, each lane and alley block.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_475"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 475</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus Rama spoke: the chief obeyed,<br>
 And swift the Vánars stood arrayed,<br>
 As when the black clouds their battle form,<br>
 The summit of a hill to storm<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_988"></a><a href="ry457.htm#fr_988">474:1</a>  Pulastya was the son of Brahmá and
 father of Vis'ravas or Paulustya the father
 of Rávan and Kumbhakaina.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry458.htm">Next: Canto LXII: Rávan's Request</a></center>
 </body>