<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry454.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry456.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LX.: KUMBHAKARNA ROUSED.</h3>
 <p>
 With humbled heart and broken pride<br>
 Through Lanká's gate the giant hied,<br>
 Crushed, like an elephant beneath<br>
 A lion's spring and murderous teeth,<br>
 Or like a serpent 'neath the wing<br>
 And talons of the Feathered King.<br>
 Such was the giant's wild alarm<br>
 At arrows shot by Ráma's arm;<br>
 Shafts with red lightning round them curled,<br>
 Like Brahmá's bolts that end the world.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Supported on his golden throne,<br>
 With failing eye and humbled tone,<br>
 'Giants,' he cried,' the toil is vain,<br>
 Fruitless the penance and the pain,<br>
 If I whom Indra owned his peer,<br>
 Secure from Gods, a mortal fear.<br>
 My soul remembers, now too late,<br>
 Lord Brahmá's words who spoke my fate:<br>
 'Tremble, proud Giant,' thus they ran,<br>
 'And dread thy death from slighted man.<br>
 Secure from Gods and demons live,<br>
 And serpents, by the boon I give.<br>
 Against their power thy life is charmed,<br>
 But against man is still unarmed.'<br>
 This Ráma is the man foretold<br>
 By Anarama's*  <a name="fr_976"></a><a href="#fn_976"><font size="1">1</font></a> lips of old:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Fear, Rávan, basest of the base:<br>
 For of mine own imperial race<br>
 A prince in after time shall spring<br>
 And thee and thine to ruin bring.<br>
 And Vedavati, <a name="fr_977"></a><a href="#fn_977"><font size="1">2</font></a> ere she died<br>
 Slain by my ruthless insult, cried:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_471"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 471</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 'A scion of my royal line<br>
 Shall slay, vile wretch, both thee and thine.'<br>
 She in a later birth became<br>
 King Janak's child, now Ráma's dame.<br>
 Nandís'vara  <a name="fr_978"></a><a href="#fn_978"><font size="1">1</font></a> foretold this fate,<br>
 And Umá  <a name="fr_979"></a><a href="#fn_979"><font size="1">2</font></a> when I moved her hate,<br>
 And Rambhá,  <a name="fr_980"></a><a href="#fn_980"><font size="1">3</font></a> and the lovely child<br>
 Of Varun  <a name="fr_981"></a><a href="#fn_981"><font size="1">4</font></a> by my touch defiled.<br>
 I know the fated hour is nigh:<br>
 Hence, captains, to your stations fly.<br>
 Let warders on the rampart stand:<br>
 Place at each gate a watchful band;<br>
 And, terror of immortal eyes,<br>
 Let mightiest Kumbhakarnna rise.<br>
 He, slumbering, free from care and pain,<br>
 By Brahmá's curse, for months has lain.<br>
 But when Prahasta's death he hears,<br>
 Mine own defeat and doubts and fears,<br>
 The chief will rise to smite the foe<br>
 And his unrivalled valour show.<br>
 Then Raghu's royal sons and all<br>
 The Vánars neath his might will fall.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The giant lords his hest obeyed,<br>
 They left him, trembling and afraid,<br>
 And from the royal palace strode<br>
 To Kumbhakarna's vast abode.<br>
 They carried garlands sweet and fresh,<br>
 And reeking loads of blood and flesh.<br>
 They reached the dwelling where he lay,<br>
 A cave that reached a league each way,<br>
 Sweet with fair blooms of lovely scent<br>
 And bright with golden ornament.<br>
 His breathings came to fierce and fast,<br>
 Scarce could the giants brook the blast.<br>
 They found him on a golden bed<br>
 With his huge limbs at length outspread.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 They piled their heaps of venison near,<br>
 Fat buffaloes and boars and deer.<br>
 With wreaths of flowers they fanned his face,<br>
 And incense sweetened all the place.<br>
 Each raised his mighty voice as loud<br>
 As thunders of an angry cloud,<br>
 And conches their stirring summons gave<br>
 That echoed through the giant's cave.<br>
 Then on his breast they rained their blows.<br>
 And high the wild commotion rose<br>
 When cymbal vied with drum and horn.<br>
 And war cries on the gale upborne<br>
 Through all the air loud discord spread,<br>
 And, struck with fear, the birds fell dead.<br>
 But still he slept and took his rest.<br>
 Then dashed they on his shaggy chest<br>
 Clubs, maces, fragments of the rock:<br>
 He moved not once, nor felt the shock.<br>
 The giants made one effort more<br>
 With shell and drum and shout and roar.<br>
 Club, mallet, mace, in fury plied,<br>
 Rained blows upon his breast and side.<br>
 And elephants were urged to aid,<br>
 And camels groaned and horses neighed.<br>
 They drenched him with a hundred pails,<br>
 They tore his ears with teeth and nails.<br>
 They bound together many a mace<br>
 And beat him on the head and face;<br>
 And elephants with ponderous tread<br>
 Stamped on his limbs and chest and head.<br>
 The unusual weight his slumber broke:<br>
 He started, shook his sides, and woke;<br>
 And, heedless of the wounds and blows,<br>
 Yawning with thirst and hunger rose,<br>
 His jaws like hell gaped fierce and wide,<br>
 Dire as the flame neath ocean's tide.<br>
 Red as the sun on Meru's crest<br>
 The giant's face his wrath expressed,<br>
 And every burning breath he drew<br>
 Was like the blast that rushes through<br>
 The mountain cedars. Up he raised<br>
 His awful head with eyes that blazed<br>
 Like comets, dire as Death in form<br>
 Who threats the worlds with fire and stcrm.<br>
 The giants pointed to their stores<br>
 Of buffaloes and deer and boars,<br>
 And straight he gorged him with a flood<br>
 Of wine, with marrow, flesh, and blood.<br>
 He ceased: the giants ventured near<br>
 And bent their lowly heads in fear.<br>
 Then Kumbhakarna glared with eyes<br>
 Still heavy in their first surprise,<br>
 Still drowsy from his troubled rest,<br>
 And thus the giant band addressed.<br>
 'How have ye dared my sleep to break?<br>
 No trifling cause should bid me wake.<br>
 Say, is all well? or tell the need<br>
 That drives you with unruly speed<br>
 To wake me. Mark the words I say,<br>
 The king shall tremble in dismay,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_472"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 472</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Of Vishn'u, he was firm in heart.<br>
     The Wind-God's son the fight beheld,<br>
 And rushed at Rávan, rage-impelled.<br>
 Down crashed his mighty hand the foe<br>
 Full in the chest received the blow.<br>
 His eyes grew dim, his knees gave way.<br>
 And senseless on the earth he lay.<br>
     The Wind-God's son to Ráma bore<br>
 Deep-wounded Lakshman stained with gore.<br>
 He whom no foe might lift or bend<br>
 Was light as air to such a friend.<br>
 The dart that Lakshman's side had cleft,<br>
 Untouched, the hero's body left,<br>
 And flashing through the air afar<br>
 Resumed its place in Rávan's car;<br>
 And, waxing well though wounded sore,<br>
 He felt the deadly pain no more.<br>
 And Rávan, though with deep wounds pained,<br>
 Slowly his sense and strength regained,<br>
 And furious still and undismayed<br>
 On bow and shaft his hand he laid.<br>
     Then Hanumán to Ráma cried:<br>
 'Ascend my back, great chief, and ride<br>
 Like Vishnu borne on Garud's wing,<br>
 To battle with the giant king.'<br>
 So, burning for the dire attack,<br>
 Rode Ráma on the Vánar's back,<br>
 And with fierce accents loud and slow<br>
 Thus gave defiance to the foe,<br>
 While his strained bowstring made a sound<br>
 Like thunder when it shakes the ground:<br>
 'Stay, Monarch of the giants, stay,<br>
 The penalty of sin to pay.<br>
 Stay; whither wilt thou fly, and how<br>
 Escape the death that waits thee now?'<br>
     No word the giant king returned:<br>
 His eyes with flames of fury burned.<br>
 His arm was stretched, his bow was bent,<br>
 And swift his fiery shafts were sent.<br>
 Red torrents from the Vánar flowed:<br>
 Then Ráma near to Rávan' strode,<br>
 And, with keen darts that never failed,<br>
 The chariot of the king assailed.<br>
 With surest aim his arrows flew:<br>
 The driver and the steeds he slew,<br>
 And shattered with the pointed steel<br>
 Car, flag and pole and yoke and wheel.<br>
 As Indra hurls his bolt to smite<br>
 Mount Meru's heaven-ascending height,<br>
 So Ráma with a flaming dart<br>
 Struck Lanká's monarch near the heart,<br>
 Who reeled and fell beneath the blow<br>
 And from loose fingers dropped his bow.<br>
 Bright as the sun, with crescent head,<br>
 From Ráma's bow an arrow sped,<br>
 And from his forehead, proud no more,<br>
 Cleft the bright coronet he wore.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma stood by Rávan''s side<br>
 And to the conquered giant cried:<br>
 'Well hast thou fought: thine arm has slain<br>
 Strong heroes of the Vánar train.<br>
 I will not strike or slay thee now,<br>
 For weary, faint with fight art thou.<br>
 To Lanká's town thy footsteps bend,<br>
 And there the night securely spend.<br>
 To-morrow come with car and bow,<br>
 And then my prowess shall thou know.'<br>
     He ceased: the king in humbled pride<br>
 Rose from the earth and naught replied.<br>
 With wounded limbs and shattered crown<br>
 He sought again his royal town.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_976"></a><a href="ry455.htm#fr_976">470:1</a>  An ancient king of Ayodhyá said by
 some to have been Prithu's father.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_977"></a><a href="ry455.htm#fr_977">470:2</a>  The daughter of King Kus'adhwaja.
 She became an ascetic, and being insulted
 by Rávan in the woods where she was <a name="page_471"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 471</font></a>
 performing penance, destroyed herself by
 entering fire, but was born again as Sitá
 to be in turn the destruction of him who
 had insulted her.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_978"></a><a href="ry455.htm#fr_978">471:1</a>  Nandís'vara was S'iva's chief attendant.
 Rávan had despised and laughed at him
 for appearing in the form of a monkey
 and the irritated Nandís'vara cursed him
 and foretold his destruction by monkeys.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_979"></a><a href="ry455.htm#fr_979">471:2</a>  Rávan once upheaved and shook
 Mount Kailása the favourite dwelling
 place of S'iva the consort of Umá, and
 was cursed in consequence by the offended
 Goddess.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_980"></a><a href="ry455.htm#fr_980">471:3</a>  Rambhá, who has several times been
 mentioned in the course of the poem, was
 one of the nymphs of heaven, and had
 been insulted by Rávan.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_981"></a><a href="ry455.htm#fr_981">471:4</a>  Punjikasthalá was the daughter of
 Varun. Rávan himself has mentioned in
 this book his insult to her, and the curse
 pronounced in consequeuce by Brahmá.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry456.htm">Next: Canto LX.: Kumbhakarn'a Roused.</a></center>
 </body>