<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry450.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry452.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LII.: DHÚMRÁKSHA'S DEATH.</h3>
 <p>
 The Vánars saw the giant foe<br>
 Pour from the gate in gallant show,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_466"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 466</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Rejoiced with warriors' fierce delight<br>
 And shouted, longing for the fight.<br>
 Near came the hosts and nearer yet:<br>
 Dire was the tumult as they met,<br>
 As, serried line to line opposed,<br>
 The Vánars and the giants closed.<br>
 Fierce on the foe the Vánars rushed,<br>
 And, wielding trees, the foremost crushed;<br>
 But, feathered from the heron's wing,<br>
 With eager flight from sounding string.<br>
 Against them shot with surest aim<br>
 A ceaseless storm of arrows came:<br>
 And, pierced in head and chest and side,<br>
 Full many a Vánar fell and died.<br>
 They perished slain in fierce attacks<br>
 With sword and pike and battle-axe;<br>
 But myriads following undismayed<br>
 Their valour in the fight displayed.<br>
 Unnumbered Vánars rent and torn<br>
 With shaft and spear to earth were borne.<br>
 But crashed by branchy trees and blocks<br>
 Of jagged stone and shivered rocks<br>
 Which the wild Vánars wielded well<br>
 The bravest of the giants fell.<br>
 Their trampled banners strewed the fields,<br>
 And broken swords and spears and shields;<br>
 And, crushed by blows which none might stay,<br>
 Cars, elephants, and riders lay.<br>
 Dhúmráksha turned his furious eye<br>
 And saw his routed legions fly.<br>
 Still dauntless, with terrific blows,<br>
 He struck and slew his foremost foes.<br>
 At every blow, at every thrust,<br>
 He laid a Vánar in the dust.<br>
 So fell they neath the sword and lance<br>
 In battle's wild Gandharva  <a name="fr_971"></a><a href="#fn_971"><font size="1">1</font></a> dance,<br>
 Where clang of bow and clash of sword<br>
 Did duty for the silvery chord,<br>
 And hoofs that rang and steeds that neighed<br>
 Loud concert for the dancer made.<br>
 So fiercely from Dhúmráksha's bow<br>
 His arrows rained in ceaseless flow,<br>
 The Vánar legions turned and fled<br>
 To all the winds discomfited.<br>
 Hanúmán saw the Vánars fly:<br>
 He heaved a mighty rock on high.<br>
 His keen eyes flashed with wrathful fire,<br>
 And, rapid as the Wind his sire,<br>
 Strong as the rushing tempests are,<br>
 He hurled it at the advancing car.<br>
 Swift through the air the missile sang:<br>
 The giant from the chariot sprang,<br>
 Ere crushed by that terrific blow<br>
 Lay pole and wheel and flag and bow.<br>
 Hanúmán's eyes with fury blazed:<br>
 A mountain's rocky peak he raised,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Poised it on high in act to throw,<br>
 And rushed upon his giant foe.<br>
 Dhúmráksha saw: he raised his mace<br>
 And smote Hanúmán on the face,<br>
 Who maddened by the wound's keen pang<br>
 Again upon his foeman sprang;<br>
 And on the giant's head the rock<br>
 Descended with resistless shock.<br>
 Crushed was each limb: a shapeless mass<br>
 He lay upon the blood-stained grass.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_971"></a><a href="ry451.htm#fr_971">466:1</a>  The Gandharvas are warriors and
 Minstrels of Indra's heaven.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry452.htm">Next: Canto LIII.: Vajradanshtra's Sally.</a></center>
 </body>