<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry468.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry470.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXIII.: INDRAJIT'S VICTORY.</h3>
 <p>
 But Indrajit the fierce and bold<br>
 With words like these his sire consoled:<br>
 'Dismiss, O King, thy grief and dread,<br>
 And be not thus disquieted.<br>
 Against this numbing sorrow strive,<br>
 For Indrajit is yet alive;<br>
 And none in battle may withstand<br>
 The fury of his strong right hand.<br>
 This day, O sire, thine eyes shall see<br>
 The sons of Raghu slain by me.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: he bade the king farewell:<br>
 Clear, mid the roar of drum and shell,<br>
 The clash of sword and harness rang<br>
 As to his car the warrior sprang.<br>
 Close followed by his Rákshas train<br>
 Through Lanká's gate he reached the plain.<br>
 Then down he leapt, and bade a band<br>
 Of giants by the chariot stand:<br>
 Then with due rites, as rules require,<br>
 Did worship to the Lord of Fire.<br>
 The sacred oil, as texts ordain,<br>
 With wreaths of scented flowers and grain,<br>
 Within the flame in order due<br>
 That mightiest of the giants threw.<br>
 There on the ground were spear and blade<br>
 And arrowy leaves and fuel laid;<br>
 An iron ladle deep and wide,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 And robes with sanguine colours dyed.<br>
 Beside him stood a sable goat:<br>
 The giant seized it by the throat,<br>
 And straight from the consuming flame<br>
 Auspicious signs of victory came.<br>
 For swiftly, curling to the right,<br>
 The fire leapt up with willing light<br>
 Undimmed by smoky cloud, and, red<br>
 Like gold, upon the offering fed.<br>
 They brought him, while the flame yet glowed,<br>
 The dart by Brahmá's grace bestowed,<br>
 And all the arms he wielded well<br>
 Were charmed with text and holy spell.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then fiercer for the fight he burned,<br>
 And at the foe his chariot turned,<br>
 While all his followers lifting high<br>
 Their maces charged with furious cry.<br>
 Dire, yet more dire the battle grew,<br>
 As rocks and trees and arrows flew.<br>
 The giant shot his shafts like rain,<br>
 And Vánars fell in myriads slain,<br>
 Sugríva, Angad, Níla felt<br>
 The wounds his hurtling arrows dealt,<br>
 His shafts the blood of Gaya drank;<br>
 Hanúmán reeled and Mainda sank.<br>
 Bright as the glances of the sun<br>
 Came the swift darts they could not shun.<br>
 Caught in the arrowy nets he wove.<br>
 In vain the sons of Raghu strove;<br>
 And Ráma, by the darts oppressed,<br>
 His brother chieftain thus addressed:<br>
 'See, first this giant warrior sends<br>
 Destruction, mid our Vánar friends,<br>
 And now his arrows thick and fast<br>
 Their binding net around us cast.<br>
 To Brahmá's grace the chieftain owes<br>
 The matchless power and might he shows;<br>
 And mortal strength in vain contends<br>
 With him whom Brahmá's self befriends.<br>
 Then let us still with dauntless hearts<br>
 Endure this storm of pelting darts.<br>
 Soon must we sink bereaved of sense;<br>
 And then the victor, hurrying hence,<br>
 Will seek his father in his hall<br>
 And tell him of his foemen's fall.'<br>
 He ceased: o'erpowered by shaft and spell<br>
 The sons of Raghu reeled and fell.<br>
 The Rákshas on their bodies gazed;<br>
 And, mid the shouts his followers raised,<br>
 Sped back to Lanká to relate<br>
 In Rávan's hall the princes' fate.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry470.htm">Next: Canto LXXIV.: The Medicinal Herbs.</a></center>
 </body>