<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry460.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry462.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXV.: KHUMBHAKARNA'S SPEECH.</h3>
 <p>
 But haughty Kumbhakarna spurned<br>
 His counsel, and to Rávan turned:<br>
 'Thy life from peril will I free<br>
 And slay the foe who threatens thee.<br>
 A hero never vaunts in vain,<br>
 Like bellowing clouds devoid of rain,<br>
 Nor, Monarch, be thine ear inclined<br>
 To counsellors of slavish kind,<br>
 Who with mean arts their king mislead<br>
 And mar each gallant plan and deed.<br>
 O, let not words like his beguile<br>
 The glorious king of Lanka's isle.'<br>
     Thus scornful Kumbhakarna cried,<br>
 And Rávan with a laugh replied:<br>
 'Mahodar fears and fain would shun<br>
 The battle with Ikshvaku's son.<br>
 Of all my giant warriors, who<br>
 Is strong as thou, and brave and true?<br>
 Ride, conqueror, to the battle ride,<br>
 And tame the foeman's senseless pride.<br>
 Go forth like Yama to the field,<br>
 And let thine arm thy trident wield.<br>
 Scared by the lightning of thine eye<br>
 The Vanar hosts will turn and fly;<br>
 And Rama, when he sees thee near,<br>
 With trembling heart will own his fear.'<br>
     The champion heard, and, well content,<br>
 Forth from the hall his footsteps bent.<br>
 He grasped his spear, the foeman's dread,<br>
 Black iron all, both shaft and head.<br>
 Which, dyed in many a battle, bore<br>
 Great spots of slaughtered victims' gore.<br>
 The king upon his neck had thrown<br>
 The jewelled chain which graced his own.<br>
 And garlands of delicious scent<br>
 About his limbs for ornament.<br>
 Around his arms gay bracelets clung,<br>
 And pendants in his ears were hung.<br>
 Adorned with gold, about his waist<br>
 His coat of mail was firmly braced,<br>
 And like Náráyan  <a name="fr_992"></a><a href="#fn_992"><font size="1">1b</font></a> or the God<br>
 Who rules the sky he proudly trod.<br>
 Behind him went a mighty throng<br>
 Of giant warriors tall and strong,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_477"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 477</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 On elephants of noblest breeds.<br>
 With cars, with camels, and with steeds:<br>
 And, armed with spear and axe and sword<br>
 Were fain to battle for their lord.  <a name="fr_993"></a><a href="ry462.htm#fn_993"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_992"></a><a href="ry461.htm#fr_992">476:1b</a>  A name of Vishn'u.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry462.htm">Next: Canto LXVI.: Kombhakarna's Sally.</a></center>
 </body>