<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry465.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry467.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXX.: THE DEATH OF TRIS'IRAS.</h3>
 <p>
 Then raged the Rákshas chiefs, and all<br>
 Burned to avenge Narántak's fall.<br>
 Devántak raised his club on high<br>
 And rushed at Angad with a cry.<br>
 Behind came Tris'iras, and near<br>
 Mahodar charged with levelled spear.<br>
 There Angad stood to fight with three:<br>
 High o'er his head he waved a tree,<br>
 And at Devántak, swift and true<br>
 As Indra's flaming bolt, it flew.<br>
 But, cut by giant shafts in twain,<br>
 With minished force it flew in vain.<br>
 A shower of trees and blocks of stone<br>
 From Angad's hand was fiercely thrown;<br>
 But well his club Devántak plied<br>
 And turned each rock and tree aside.<br>
 Nor yet, by three such foes assailed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_482"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 482</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The heart of Angad sank or quailed.<br>
 He slew the mighty beast that bore<br>
 Mahodar: from his head he tore<br>
 A bleeding tusk, and blow on blow<br>
 Fell fiercely on his Rákshas foe.<br>
 The giant reeled, but strength regained,<br>
 And furious strokes on Angad rained,<br>
 Who, wounded by the storm of blows,<br>
 Sank on his knees, but swiftly rose.<br>
 Then Tris'iras, as up he sprang,<br>
 Drew his great bow with awful clang,<br>
 And fixed three arrows from his sheaf<br>
 Full in the forehead of the chief.<br>
 Hanúmán saw, nor long delayed<br>
 To speed with Níla to his aid,<br>
 Who at the three-faced giant sent<br>
 A peak from Lanká's mountain rent.<br>
 But Tris'iras with certain aim<br>
 Shot rapid arrows as it came:<br>
 And shivered by their force it broke<br>
 And fell to earth with flash and smoke.<br>
 Then as the Wind-God's son came nigh,<br>
 Devántak reared his mace on high.<br>
 Hanúmán smote him on the head<br>
 And stretched the monstrous giant dead.<br>
 Fierce Tris'iras with fury strained<br>
 His bow, and showers of arrows rained<br>
 That smote on Níla's side and chest:<br>
 He sank a moment, sore distressed;<br>
 But quickly gathered strength to seize<br>
 A mountain with its crown of trees.<br>
 Crushed by the hill, distained with gore,<br>
 Mahodar fell to rise no more.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Tris'iras raised high his spear<br>
 Which chilled the trembling foe with fear<br>
 And, like a flashing meteor through<br>
 The air at Hanúmán it flew.<br>
 The Vánar shunned the threatened stroke,<br>
 And with strong hands the weapon broke.<br>
 The giant drew his glittering blade:<br>
 Dire was the wound the weapon made<br>
 Deep in the Vánar's ample chest,<br>
 Who, for a moment sore oppressed,<br>
 Raised his broad hand, regaining might,<br>
 And struck the rover of the night.<br>
 Fierce was the blow: with one wild yell<br>
 Low on the earth the monster fell,<br>
 Hanúmán seized his fallen sword<br>
 Which served no more its senseless lord,<br>
 And from the monger triple-necked<br>
 Smote his huge heads with crowns bedecked.<br>
 Then Mahápárs'va burned with ire;<br>
 Fierce flashed his eyes with vengeful fire.<br>
 A moment on the dead he gazed,<br>
 Then his black mace aloft was raised,<br>
 And down the mass of iron came<br>
 That struck and shook the Vánar's frame.<br>
 Hanúmán's chest was wellnigh crushed,<br>
 And from his mouth red torrents gushed:<br>
 Yet served one instant to restore<br>
 
 </p><p>
 His spirit: from the foe he tore<br>
 His awful mace, and smote, and laid<br>
 The giant in the dust dismayed.<br>
 Crushed were his jaws and teeth and eyes:<br>
 Breathless and still he lay as lies<br>
 A summit from a mountain rent<br>
 By him who rules the firmament.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry467.htm">Next: Canto LXXI.: Atikáya's Death.</a></center>
 </body>