<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry463.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry465.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXVIII.: RÁVAN'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 They ran to Rávan in his hall<br>
 And told him of his brother's fall:<br>
 'Fierce as the God who rules the dead,<br>
 Upon the routed foe he fed;<br>
 And, victor for a while, at length<br>
 Fell slain by Ráma's matchless strength,<br>
 Now like a mighty hill in size<br>
 His mangled trunk extended lies,<br>
 And where he fell, a bleeding mass,<br>
 Blocks Lanká's gate tbat none may pass.'<br>
 The monarch heard: his strength gave way;<br>
 And fainting on the ground he lay.<br>
 Grieved at the giants' mournful tale,<br>
 Long, shrill was Atikáya's wail;<br>
 Aud Tris'iras in sorrow bowed<br>
 His triple head, and wept aloud,<br>
 Mahodar, Mahápárs'va shed<br>
 Hot tears and mourned their brother dead.<br>
 At length, his wandering sense restored,<br>
 In loud lament cried Lanká's lord:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Ah chief, for might and valour famed,<br>
 Whose arm the haughty foeman tamed,<br>
 Forsaking me, thy friends and all,<br>
 Why hast thou fled to Yama's hall?<br>
 Why hast thou fled to taste no more<br>
 The slaughtered foeman's flesh and gore?<br>
 Ah me, my life is done to-day:<br>
 My better arm is lopped away.<br>
 Whereon in danger I relied,<br>
 And, fearless, Gods and fiends defied.<br>
 How could a shaft from Ráma's bow<br>
 The matchless giant overthrow,<br>
 Whose iron frame so strong of yore<br>
 The crushing bolt of Indra bore?<br>
 This day the Gods and sages meet<br>
 And triumph at their foe's defeat.<br>
 This day the Vánar chiefs will boast<br>
 And, with new ardour fired, their host<br>
 In fiercer onset will assail<br>
 Our city, and the ramparts scale.<br>
 What care I for a monarch's name,<br>
 For empire, or the Maithil dame?<br>
 What joy can power and riches give,<br>
 Or life that I should care to live,<br>
 Unless this arm in mortal fray<br>
 The slayer of my brother slay?<br>
 For me, of Kumbhakarna reft,<br>
 Death is the only solace left;<br>
 And I will seek, o'erwhelmed with woes,<br>
 The realm to which my brother goes.<br>
 Ah me ill-minded, not to take<br>
 His counsel when Vibhíshan spake<br>
 When he this evil day foretold<br>
 My foolish heart was overbold:<br>
 I drove my sage adviser hence,<br>
 And reap the fruits of mine offence.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_481"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 481</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry465.htm">Next: Canto LXIX.: Narántak's Death.</a></center>
 </body>