<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry470.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry472.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXV.: THE NIGHT ATTACK.</h3>
 <p>
 Sugríva spake in words like these:<br>
 'Now, Vánar lords, the occasion seize.<br>
 For now, of sons and brothers reft,<br>
 To Rávan little hope is left:<br>
 And if our host his gates assail<br>
 His weak defence will surely fail.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 At dead of night the Vánar bands<br>
 Rushed on with torches in their hands.<br>
 Scared by the coming of the host<br>
 Each giant warder left his post.<br>
 Where'er the Vánar legions came<br>
 Their way was marked with hostile flame<br>
 That spread in fury to devour<br>
 Palace and temple, gate and tower.<br>
 Down came the walls and porches, down<br>
 Came stately piles that graced the town.<br>
 In many a house the fire was red,<br>
 On sandal wood and aloe fed.<br>
 And scorching flames in billows rolled<br>
 O'er diamonds and pearls and gold.<br>
 On cloth of wool, on silk brocade,<br>
 On linen robes their fury preyed.<br>
 Wheels, poles and yokes were burned, and all<br>
 The coursers' harness in the stall;<br>
 And elephants' and chariots' gear,<br>
 The sword, the buckler, and the spear.<br>
 Scared by the crash of falling beams,<br>
 Mid lamentations, groans and screams<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Forth rushed the giants through the flames<br>
 And with them dragged bewildered dames,<br>
 Each, with o'erwhelming terror wild,<br>
 Still clamping to her breast a child.<br>
 The swift fire from a cloud of smoke<br>
 Through many a gilded lattice broke,<br>
 And, melting pearl and coral, rose<br>
 O'er balconies and porticoes.<br>
 The startled crane and peacock screamed<br>
 As with strange light the courtyard gleamed,<br>
 And fierce unusual glare was thrown.<br>
 Cm shrinking wood and heated stone.<br>
 From burning stall and stable freed<br>
 Rushed frantic elephant and steed.<br>
 And goaded by the driving blaze<br>
 Fled wildly tbrough the crowded ways.<br>
 As earth with fervent heat will glow<br>
 When comes her final overthrow;<br>
 From gate to gate, from court to spire<br>
 Proud Lanká was one blaze of fire,<br>
 And every headland, rock and bay<br>
 Shone bright a hundred leagues away.<br>
 Forth, blinded by the heat and flame<br>
 Ran countless giants huge of frame;<br>
 And, mustering for fierce attack,<br>
 The Vánars charged to drive them back,<br>
 While shout and scream and roar and cry<br>
 Reëchoed through the earth and sky.<br>
 There Rama stood with stength renewed,<br>
 And ever, as the foe he viewed,<br>
 Shaking the distant regions rang<br>
 His mighty bow's tremendous clang.<br>
 Then through the gates Nikummbha hied,<br>
 And Kumbha by his brother's side,<br>
 Sent forth--the bravest and the best--<br>
 To battle by the king's behest.<br>
 There fought the chiefs in open field,<br>
 And Angad fell and Dwivid reeled.<br>
 Sugríva saw: by rage impelled<br>
 He crushed the bow which Kumbha held.<br>
 About his foe Sugríva wound<br>
 His arms, and, heaving from the ground<br>
 The giant hurled him o'er the bank;<br>
 And deep beneath the sea he sank.<br>
 Like mandar hill with furious swell<br>
 Up leapt the waters where he fell.<br>
 Again he rose: he sprang to land<br>
 And raised on high his threatening hand:<br>
 Full on Sugríva's chest it came<br>
 And shook the Vánar's massy frame,<br>
 But on the wounded bone he broke<br>
 His wrist--so furious was the stroke.<br>
 With force that naught could stay or check,<br>
 Sugríva smote him neath the neck.<br>
 The fierce blow crashed through flesh and bone<br>
 And Kumbha lay in death o'erthrown.<br>
 Nikumbha saw his brother die,<br>
 And red with fury flashed his eye.<br>
 He dashed with mighty sway and swing<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_487"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 487</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 His axe against the Vánar king;<br>
 But shattered on that living rock<br>
 It split in fragments at the shock.<br>
 Sugríva, rising to the blow,<br>
 Raised his huge hand and smote his foe.<br>
 And in the dust the giant lay<br>
 Gasping in blood his soul away.  <a name="fr_1010"></a><a href="ry472.htm#fn_1010"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry472.htm">Next: Canto XCIII.: Rávan's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>