<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry469.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry471.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO LXXIV.: THE MEDICINAL HERBS.</h3>
 <p>
 The shades of falling night concealed<br>
 The carnage of the battle field,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_485"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 485</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Which, hearing each a blazing brand,<br>
 Hanúmán and Vibhíshan scanned,<br>
 Moving with slow and anxious tread<br>
 Among the dying and the dead.<br>
 Sad was the scene of slaughter shown<br>
 Where'er the torches' light was thrown.<br>
 Here mountain forma of Vánars lay<br>
 Whose heads and limbs were lopped away<br>
 Arms legs and fingers strewed the ground,<br>
 And severed heads lay thick around.<br>
 The earth was moist with sanguine streams,<br>
 And sighs were heard and groans and screams.<br>
 There lay Sugríva still and cold,<br>
 There Angad, once so brave and bold.<br>
 There Jámbaván his might reposed,<br>
 There Vegadars'í's eyes were closed;<br>
 There in the dust was Nala's pride,<br>
 And Dwivid lay by Mainda's side.<br>
 Where'er they looked the ensanguined plain<br>
 Was strewn with myriads of the slain; <a name="fr_1007"></a><a href="#fn_1007"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 They sought with keenly searching eyes<br>
 King Jámbaván supremely wise.<br>
 His strength had failed by slow decay,<br>
 And pierced with countless shafts he lay.<br>
 They saw, and hastened to his side,<br>
 And thus the sage Vibhíshan cried:<br>
 'Thee, monarch of the bears, we seek:<br>
 Speak if thou yet art living, speak.'<br>
     Slow came the aged chief's reply;<br>
 Scarce could he say with many a sigh:<br>
 'Torn with keen shafts which pierce each limb,<br>
 My strength is gone, my sight is dim;<br>
 Yet though I scarce can raise mine eyes.<br>
 Thy voice. O chief. I recognize.<br>
 O, while these ears can hear thee, say,<br>
 Has Hanumán survived this day?'<br>
     'Why ask,' Vibhíshan cried,' for one<br>
 Of lower rank, the Wind-God's son?<br>
 Hast thou forgotten, first in place,<br>
 The princely chief of Raghu's race?<br>
 Can King Sugríva claim no care,<br>
 And Angad, his imperial heir?'<br>
     'Yea, dearer than my noblest friends<br>
 Is he on whom our hope depends.<br>
 For if the Wind-God's son survive,<br>
 All we though dead are yet alive.<br>
 But if his precious life be fled<br>
 Though living still we are but dead:<br>
 He is our hope and sure relief.'<br>
 Thus slowly spoke the aged chief:<br>
 Then to his side Hanúmán came,<br>
 And with low reverence named his name.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Cheered by the face he longed to view<br>
 The wounded chieftain lived anew.<br>
 'Go forth,' he cried, 'O strong and brave,<br>
 And in their woe the Vánars save.<br>
 'No might but thine, supremely great,<br>
 May help us in our lost estate,<br>
 The trembling bears and Vánars cheer,<br>
 Calm their sad hearts, dispel their fear.<br>
 Save Raghu's noble sons, and heal<br>
 The deep wounds of the winged steel.<br>
 High o'er the waters of the sea<br>
 To far Himálaya's summits flee.<br>
 Kailása there wilt thou behold,<br>
 Aud Rishabh, with his peaks of gold.<br>
 Between them see a mountain rise<br>
 Whose splendour will enchant thine eyes;<br>
 His sides are clothed above, below,<br>
 With all the rarest herbs that grow.<br>
 Upon that mountain's lofty crest<br>
 Four plants, of sovereign powers possessed,<br>
 Spring from the soil, and flashing there<br>
 Shed radiance through the neighbouring air.<br>
 One draws the shaft: one brings again<br>
 The breath of life to warm the slain;<br>
 One heals each wound; one gives anew<br>
 To faded cheeks their wonted hue.<br>
 Fly, chieftain, to that mountain's brow<br>
 And bring those herbs to save us now.'<br>
     Hanúmán heard, and springing through<br>
 The air like Vishnu's discus  <a name="fr_1008"></a><a href="#fn_1008"><font size="1">1b</font></a> flew.<br>
 The sea was passed: beneath him, gay<br>
 With bright-winged birds, the mountains lay,<br>
 And brook and lake and lonely glen,<br>
 And fertile lands with toiling men.<br>
 On, on he sped: before him rose<br>
 The mansion of perennial snows.<br>
 There soared the glorious peaks as fair<br>
 As white clouds in the summer air.<br>
 Here, bursting from the leafy shade,<br>
 In thunder leapt the wild cascade.<br>
 He looked on many a pure retreat<br>
 Dear to the Gods' and sages' feet:<br>
 The spot where Brahmá dwells apart,<br>
 The place whence Rudra launched his dart;  <a name="fr_1009"></a><a href="#fn_1009"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 Vishnu's high seat and Indra's home,<br>
 And slopes where Yama's servants roam.<br>
 There was Kuvera's bright abode;<br>
 There Brahma's mystic weapon glowed.<br>
 There was the noble hill whereon<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_486"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 486</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Those herbs with wondrous lustre shone.<br>
 And, ravished by the glorious sight,<br>
 Hanúmán rested on the height.<br>
 He, moving down the glittering peak,<br>
 The healing herbs began to seek:<br>
 But, when he thought to seize the prize,<br>
 They hid them from his eager eyes.<br>
 Then to the hill in wrath he spake:<br>
 'Mine arm this day shall vengeance take,<br>
 If thou wilt feel no pity, none,<br>
 In this great need of Raghu's son.'<br>
 He ceased: his mighty arms he bent<br>
 And from the trembling mountain rent<br>
 His huge head with the life it bore,<br>
 Snakes, elephants, and golden ore.<br>
 O'er hill and plain and watery waste<br>
 His rapid way again he traced.<br>
 And mid the wondering Vánars laid<br>
 His burthen through the air conveyed.<br>
 The wondrous herbs' delightful scent<br>
 To all the host new vigour lent.<br>
 Free from all darts and wounds and pain<br>
 The sons of Raghu lived again,<br>
 And dead and dying Vánars healed<br>
 Rose vigorous from the battle field.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1007"></a><a href="ry470.htm#fr_1007">485:1</a>  In such cases as this I am not careful
 to reproduce the numbers of the poet,
 which in the text which I follow are
 670,000,000; the Bengal recension being
 content with thirty million less.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1008"></a><a href="ry470.htm#fr_1008">485:1b</a>  The discus or quoit, a sharp-edged
 circular missile is the favourite weapon
 of Vishnu.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1009"></a><a href="ry470.htm#fr_1009">485:2b</a>  To destroy Tripura the triple city in
 the sky, air and earth, built by Maya for
 a celebrated Asur or demon, or as another
 commentator explains, to destroy Randarpa or Love.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry471.htm">Next: Canto LXXV.: The Night Attack.</a></center>
 </body>