<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry474.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry476.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CI.: LAKSHMAN'S FALL.</h3>
 <p>
 When Rávan saw his darts repelled,<br>
 With double rage his bosom swelled.<br>
 He summoned, wroth but undismayed,<br>
 A mightier charm to lend its aid.<br>
 And, fierce as fire before the blast,<br>
 A storm of missiles thick and fast,<br>
 Spear, pike and javelin, mace and brand,<br>
 Came hurtling from the giant's hand.<br>
 But, mightier still, the arms employed<br>
 By Raghu's son their force destroyed,<br>
 And every dart fell dulled and spent<br>
 By powers the bards of heaven had lent.<br>
 With his huge mace Vibhíshan slew<br>
 The steeds that Ravan'a chariot drew.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_490"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 490</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Rávan hurled in deadly ire<br>
 A ponderous spear that flashed like fire:<br>
 But Ráma's arrows checked its way,<br>
 And harmless on the earth it lay,<br>
 The giant seized a mightier spear,<br>
 Which Death himself would shun with fear.<br>
 Vibhíshan with the stroke had died,<br>
 But Lakshman'a hand his bowstring plied,<br>
 And flying arrows thick as hail<br>
 Smote fiercely on the giant's mail.<br>
 Then Rávan turned his aim aside,<br>
 On Lakshman looked and fiercely cried:<br>
 'Thou, thou again my wrath hast braved,<br>
 And from his death Vibhíshan saved.<br>
 Now in his stead this spear receive<br>
 Whose deadly point thy heart shall cleave.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: he hurled the mortal dart<br>
 By Maya forged with magic art.<br>
 The spear, with all his fury flung.<br>
 Swift, flickering like a serpent's tongue,<br>
 Adorned with many a tinkling bell,<br>
 Smote Lakshman, and the hero fell.<br>
 When Ráma saw, he heaved a sigh,<br>
 A tear one moment dimmed his eye.<br>
 But tender grief was soon repressed<br>
 And thoughts of vengeance filled his breast.<br>
 The air around him flashed and gleamed<br>
 As from his bow the arrows streamed;<br>
 And Lanká's lord, the foeman's dread,<br>
 O'erwhelmed with terror turned and fled.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1016"></a><a href="ry474.htm#fr_1016">489:1</a>  It is not very easy to see the advantage
 of having arrows headed in the way
 mentioned. Fanciful names for war-engines
 and weapons derived from their resemblance
 to various animals are not confined
 to India. The "War-wolf" was
 used by Edward I. at the siege of Brechin,
 the "Cat-house" and the "Sow" were
 used by Edwaid III. at the siege of Dunbar.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry476.htm">Next: Canto CII.: Lakshman Healed.</a></center>
 </body>