<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry472.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry474.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO XCVI.: RÁVAN'S SALLY.</h3>
 <p>
 The groans and cries of dames who wailed<br>
 The ears of Lanká's lord assailed,<br>
 For from each house and home was sent<br>
 The voice of weeping and lament.<br>
 In troubled thought his head he bowed,<br>
 Then fiercely loosing on the crowd<br>
 Of nobles near his throne he broke<br>
 The silence, and in fury spoke:<br>
 'This day my deadly shafts shall fly,<br>
 And Raghu's sons shall surely die.<br>
 This day shall countless Vánars bleed<br>
 And dogs and kites and vultures feed.<br>
 Go, bid them swift my car prepare,<br>
 Bring the great bow I long to bear:<br>
 And let my host with sword and shield<br>
 And spear be ready for the field.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 From street to street the captains passed<br>
 And Rákshas warriors gathered fast.<br>
 With spear and sword to pierce and strike,<br>
 And axe and club and mace and pike.  <a name="fr_1013"></a><a href="#fn_1013"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Rávan's warrior chariot  <a name="fr_1014"></a><a href="#fn_1014"><font size="1">1b</font></a> wrought<br>
 With gold and rich inlay was brought.<br>
 Mid tinkling bells and weapons' clang<br>
 The monarch on the chariot sprang,<br>
 Which, decked with gems of every hue,<br>
 Eight steeds of noble lineage drew.<br>
 Mid roars of drum and shell rang out<br>
 From countless throats a joyful shout.<br>
 As, girt with hosts in warlike pride.<br>
 Through Lanká's streets the tyrant hied.<br>
 Still, louder than the roar of drums,<br>
 Went up the cry 'He comes, he comes,<br>
 Our ever conquering lord who trod<br>
 Beneath his feet both fiend and God.'<br>
 On to the gate the warriors swept<br>
 Where Raghu's sons their station kept.<br>
 When Rávan's car the portal passed<br>
 The sun in heaven was overcast.<br>
 Earth rocked and reeled from side to side<br>
 And birds with boding voices cried.<br>
 Against the standard of the king<br>
 A vulture flapped his horrid wing.<br>
 Big gouts of blood before him dropped,<br>
 His trembling steeds in terror stopped.<br>
 The hue of death was on his cheek,<br>
 And scarce his flattering tongue could speak,<br>
 When, terrible with flash and flame,<br>
 Through murky air a meteor came.<br>
 Still by the hand of Death impelled<br>
 His onward way the giant held.<br>
 The Vánars in the field afar<br>
 Heard the loud thunder of his car.<br>
 And turned with warriors' fierce delight<br>
 To meet the giant in the fight.<br>
 He came: his clanging bow he drew<br>
 And myriads of the Vánars slew.<br>
 Some through the side and heart he cleft,<br>
 Some headless on the plain were left.<br>
 Some struggling groaned with mangled thighs,<br>
 Or broken arms or blinded eyes.  <a name="fr_1015"></a><a href="#fn_1015"><font size="1">2b</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_489"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 489</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1012"></a><a href="ry472.htm#fr_1012">488:1</a>  I omit two Cantos in the first of which
 Ráma with an enchanted Gandharva
 weapon deals destruction among the
 Rákshases sent out by Rávan, and in the
 second the Rákshas dames' lament the
 slain and mourn over the madness of
 Rávan.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1013"></a><a href="ry473.htm#fr_1013">488:2</a>  I omit several weapons for which I
 cannot find distinctive names, and among
 them the <i>Sataghní</i> or <i>Centicide</i>, supposed
 by some to be a kind of fire-arms or rocket,
 but described by a commentator on the
 Mahábhárata as a stone or cylindrical
 piece of wood studded with iron spikes.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1014"></a><a href="ry473.htm#fr_1014">488:1b</a>  The chariots of Rávan's present army
 are said to have been one hundred and
 fifty million in number with three hundred
 million elephants, and twelve hundred
 million horses and asses. The footmen
 are merely said to have been 'unnumbered.'</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1015"></a><a href="ry473.htm#fr_1015">488:2b</a>  I omit Cantos XCVII., XCVIII,and
 XCIX, which describe in the usual way
 three single combats between Sugríva and
 Angad on the Vánar side and Virúpaksha,
 Mahodar, and Mahápárs'va on the side of
 the giants. The weapons of the Vánars
 are trees and rocks: the giants fight with
 swords, axes, and bows and arrows. The
 details are generally the same as those of
 preceding duels. The giants fall, one in
 each Canto.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry474.htm">Next: Canto C.: Ravan In The Field.</a></center>
 </body>