<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry478.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry480.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CVIII.: THE BATTLE.</h3>
 <p>
 He spoke, and vanished: Ráma raised<br>
 His eyes with reverence meet, and praised<br>
 The glorious Day-God full in view:<br>
 Then armed him for the fight anew.<br>
 Urged onward by his charioteer<br>
 The giant's foaming steeds came near,<br>
 And furious was the battle's din<br>
 Where each resolved to die or win.<br>
 The Rákshas host and Vánar bands<br>
 Stood with their weapons in their hands,<br>
 And watched in terror and dismay<br>
 The fortune of the awful fray.<br>
 The giant chief with rage inflamed<br>
 His darts at Ráma's pennon aimed;<br>
 But when they touched the chariot made<br>
 By heavenly hands their force was stayed.<br>
 Then Ráma's breast with fury swelled;<br>
 He strained the mighty bow he held.<br>
 And straight at Rávan's banner flew<br>
 An arrow as the string he drew--<br>
 A deadly arrow swift of flight,<br>
 Like some huge snake ablaze with light,<br>
 Whose fury none might e'er repel,--<br>
 And, split in twain, the standard fell.<br>
 At Ráma's steeds sharp arrows, hot<br>
 With flames of fire, the giant shot.<br>
 Unmoved the heavenly steeds sustained<br>
 The furious shower the warrior rained,<br>
 As though soft lotus tendrils smote<br>
 Each haughty crest and glossy coat,<br>
 Then volleyed swift by magic art,<br>
 Tree, mountain peak and spear and dart,<br>
 Trident and pike and club and mace<br>
 Flew hurtling straight at Ráma's face.<br>
 But Ráma with his steeds and car<br>
 Escaped the storm which fell afar<br>
 Where the strange missiles, as they rushed<br>
 To earth, a thousand Vánars crushed.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_493"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 493</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry480.htm">Next: Canto CIX.: The Battle.</a></center>
 </body>