<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry475.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry477.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CII.: LAKSHMAN HEALED.</h3>
 <p>
 But Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,<br>
 Gazed tenderly on Lakshman's face,<br>
 And, as the sight his spirit broke,<br>
 Turned to Sushen and sadly spoke:<br>
 'Where is my power and valour? how<br>
 Shall I have heart for battle now,<br>
 When dead before my weeping eyes<br>
 My brother, noblest Lakshman, lies?<br>
 My tears in blinding torrents flow,<br>
 My hand unnerved has dropped my bow<br>
 The pangs of woe have blanched my cheek.<br>
 My heart is sick, my strength is weak.<br>
 Ah me, my brother! Ah, that I<br>
 By Lakshman's side might sink and die<br>
 Life, war and conquest, all are vain<br>
 If Lakshman lies in battle slain.<br>
 Why will those eyes my glances shun?<br>
 Hast thou no word of answer, none?<br>
 Ah, as thy noble spirit flown<br>
 And gone to other worlds alone?<br>
 Could thou not let thy brother seek<br>
 Those worlds with thee? O speak, O speak!<br>
 Rise up once more, my brother, rise,<br>
 Look on me with thy loving eyes.<br>
 Were not thy steps beside me still<br>
 
 </p><p>
 In gloomy wood, on breezy hill?<br>
 Did not thy gentle care assuage<br>
 Thy brother's grief and fitful rage?<br>
 Didst thou not all his troubles share,<br>
 His guide and comfort in despair?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 As Ráma, vanquished, wept and sighed<br>
 The Vánar chieftain thus replied:<br>
 'Great Prince, unmanly thoughts dismiss,<br>
 Nor yield thy soul to grief like this,<br>
 In vain those burning tears are shed:<br>
 Our glory Lakshman is not dead.<br>
 Death on his brow no mark has set,<br>
 Where beauty's lustre lingers yet.<br>
 Clear is the skin, and tender hues<br>
 Of lotus flowers his palms suifuse.<br>
 O Ráma, cheer thy trembling heart;<br>
 Not thus do life and body part,<br>
 Now, Hanumán, to thee I speak:<br>
 Hie hence to tall Mahodaya's  <a name="fr_1017"></a><a href="ry477.htm#fn_1017"><font size="1">1</font></a> peak<br>
 Where herbs of sovereign virtue grow<br>
 Which life and health and strength bestow<br>
 Bring thou the leaves to balm his pain,<br>
 And Lakshman shall be well again.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: the Wind-God's son obeyed<br>
 Swift through the clouds his way he made.<br>
 He reached the hill, nor stayed to find<br>
 The wondrous herbs of healing kind,<br>
 From its broad base the mount he tore<br>
 With all the shrubs and trees it bore,<br>
 Sped through the clouds again and showed<br>
 To wise Sushen his woodv load.  <a name="fr_1018"></a><a href="ry477.htm#fn_1018"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 Sushen in wonder viewed the hill,<br>
 And culled the sovereign salve of ill.<br>
 Soon as the healing herb he found,<br>
 The fragrant leaves he crushed and ground.<br>
 Then over Lakshman's face he bent,<br>
 Who, healed and strengthened by the scent<br>
 Of that blest herb divinely sweet,<br>
 Rose fresh and lusty on his feet.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry477.htm">Next: Canto CIII.: Indra's Car.</a></center>
 </body>