<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry481.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry483.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXI.: VIBHÍSHAN'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 Vibhíshan saw his brother slain,<br>
 Nor could his heart its woe contain.<br>
 O'er the dead king he sadly bent<br>
 And mourned him with a loud lament:<br>
 'O hero, bold and brave.' he cried,<br>
 'Skilled in all arms, in battle tried.<br>
 Spoiled of thy crown, with limbs outspread.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_494"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 494</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Why wilt thou press thy gory bed?<br>
 Why slumber on the earth's cold breast,<br>
 When sumptuous couches woo to rest?<br>
 Ah me, my brother over bold,<br>
 Thine is the fate my heart foretold:<br>
 But love and pride forbade to hear<br>
 The friend who blamed thy wild career.<br>
 Fallen is the sun who gave us light,<br>
 Our lordly moon is veiled in night.<br>
 Our beacon fire is dead and cold<br>
 A hundred waves have o'er it rolled.<br>
 What could his light and fire avail<br>
 Against Lord Ráma's arrowy hail?<br>
 Woe for the giants' royal tree,<br>
 Whose stately height was fair to see.<br>
 His buds were deeds of kingly grace,<br>
 His bloom the sons who decked his race.<br>
 With rifled bloom and mangled bough<br>
 The royal tree lies prostrate now.'<br>
 'Nay, idly mourn not," Ráma cried,<br>
 'The warrior king has nobly died,<br>
 Interpid hero, firm through all.<br>
 So fell he as the brave should fall;<br>
 And ill beseems it chiefs like us<br>
 To weep for those who perish thus.<br>
 Be firm: thy causeless grief restrain,<br>
 And pay the dues that yet remain,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Again Vibhíshan sadly spoke:<br>
 'His was the hero arm that broke<br>
 Embattled Gods' and Indra's might,<br>
 Unconquered ere to-day in fight.<br>
 He rushed against thee, fought and fell,<br>
 As Ocean, when his waters swell,<br>
 Hurling his might against a rock,<br>
 Falls spent and shattered by the shock<br>
 Woe for our king's untimely end,<br>
 The generous lord the trusty friend:<br>
 Our sure defence when fear arose,<br>
 A dreaded scourge to stubborn foes.<br>
 O, let the king thy hand has slain<br>
 The honours of the dead obtain.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma answered. 'Hatred dies<br>
 When low in dust the foeman lies.<br>
 Now triumph bids the conflict cease,<br>
 And knits us in the bonds of peace.<br>
 Let funeral rites be duly paid.<br>
 And be it mine thy toil to aid.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry483.htm">Next: Canto CXII.: The Rákshas Dames.</a></center>
 </body>