<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry485.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry487.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXV.: SITÁ'S JOY.</h3>
 <p>
 The Vánar chieftain bowed his head.<br>
 Within the walls of Lanká sped,<br>
 Leave from the new-made king obtained,<br>
 And Sítá's lovely garden gained.<br>
 Beneath a tree the queen he found,<br>
 Where Rákshas warders watched around.<br>
 Her pallid cheek, her tangled hair,<br>
 Her raiment showed her deep despair,<br>
 Near and more near the envoy came<br>
 And gently hailed the weeping dame.<br>
 She started up in sweet surprise,<br>
 And sudden joy illumed her eyes.<br>
 For well the Vánar's voice she knew,<br>
 And hope reviving sprang and grew.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Fair Queen,' he said, 'our task is done:<br>
 The foe is slain and Lanká won.<br>
 Triumphant mid triumphant friends<br>
 Kind words of greeting Ráma sends.<br>
 'Blest for thy sake, O spouse most true,<br>
 My deadly foe I met and slew.<br>
 Mine eyes are strangers yet to sleep:<br>
 I built a bridge athwart the deep<br>
 And crossed the sea to Lanká's shore<br>
 To keep the mighty oath I swore.<br>
 Now, gentle love, thy cares dispel,<br>
 And weep no more, for all is well.<br>
 Fear not in Rávan's house to stay<br>
 For good Vibhíshan now bears sway,<br>
 For constant truth and friendship known.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Regard his palace as thine own.'<br>
 He greets thee thus thy heart to cheer,<br>
 And urged by love will soon be here.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then flushed with joy the lady's cheek.<br>
 Her eyes o'erflowed, her voice was weak;<br>
 But struggling with her sobs she broke<br>
 Her silence thus, and faintly spoke:<br>
 'So fast the flood of rapture came,<br>
 My trembling tongue no words could frame.<br>
 Ne'er have I heard in days of bliss<br>
 A tale that gave such joy as this.<br>
 More precious far than gems and gold<br>
 The message which thy lips have told.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 His reverent hands the Vánar raised<br>
 And thus the lady's answer praised:<br>
 'Sweet are the words, O Queen, which thou<br>
 True to thy lord, hast spoken now,<br>
 Better than gems and pearls of price,<br>
 Yea, or the throne of Paradise.<br>
 But, lady, ere I leave this place,<br>
 Grant me, I pray, a single grace.<br>
 Permit me, and this vengeful hand<br>
 Shall slay thy guards, this Rákshas band,<br>
 Whose cruel insult threat and scorn<br>
 Thy gentle soul too long has borne.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus, stern of mood, Hanumán cried:<br>
 The Maithil lady thus replied:<br>
 'Nay, be not wroth with servants: they,<br>
 When monarchs bid must needs obey.<br>
 And, vassals of their lords, fulfil<br>
 Each fancy of their sovereign will.<br>
 To mine own sins the blame impute,<br>
 For as we sow we reap the fruit.<br>
 The tyrant's will these dames obeyed<br>
 When their fierce threats my soul dismayed.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She ceased: with admiration moved<br>
 The Vánar chief her words approved:<br>
 'Thy speech,' he cried, 'is worthy one<br>
 Whom love has linked to Raghu's son.<br>
 Now speak, O Queen, that I may know<br>
 Thy pleasure, for to him I go.'<br>
 The Vánar ceased: then Janak's child<br>
 Made answer as she sweetly smiled:<br>
 'My first, my only wish can be,<br>
 O chief, my loving lord to see.'<br>
 Again the Vánar envoy spoke,<br>
 And with his words new rapture woke:<br>
 'Queen, ere this sun shall cease to shine<br>
 Thy Ráma's eyes shall look in thine.<br>
 Again the lord of Raghu's race<br>
 Shall turn to thee his moon-bright face.<br>
 His faithful brother shall thou see<br>
 And every friend who fought for thee,<br>
 And greet once more thy king restored<br>
 Like S'achí  <a name="fr_1037"></a><a href="#fn_1037"><font size="1">1</font></a> to her heavenly lord.'<br>
 To Raghu's son his steps he bent<br>
 And told the message that she sent.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_497"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 497</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1037"></a><a href="ry486.htm#fr_1037">496:1</a>  The consort of Indra.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry487.htm">Next: Canto CXVI.: The Meeting.</a></center>
 </body>