<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry487.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry489.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXVII.: SÍTÁ'S DISGRACE.</h3>
 <p>
 He saw her trembling by his side,<br>
 And looked upon her face and cried:<br>
 'Lady, at length my task is done,<br>
 And thou, the prize of war, art won,<br>
 This arm my glory has retrieved,<br>
 And all that man might do achieved;<br>
 The insulting foe in battle slain<br>
 And cleared mine honour from its stain.<br>
 This day has made my name renowned<br>
 And with success my labour crowned.<br>
 Lord of myself, the oath I swore<br>
 Is binding on my soul no more.<br>
 If from my home my queen was reft,<br>
 This arm has well avenged the theft,<br>
 And in the field has wiped away<br>
 The blot that on mine honour lay.<br>
 The bridge that spans the foaming flood,<br>
 The city red with giants' blood;<br>
 The hosts by King Sugríva led<br>
 Who wisely counselled, fought and bled;<br>
 Vibhíshan's love, our guide and stay--<br>
 All these are crowned with fruit to-day.<br>
 But, lady,'twas not love for thee<br>
 That led mine army o'er the sea.<br>
 'Twas not for thee our blood was shed,<br>
 Or Lanká filled with giant dead.<br>
 No fond affection for my wife<br>
 Inspired me in the hour of strife.<br>
 I battled to avenge the cause<br>
 Of honour and insulted laws.<br>
 My love is fled, for on thy fame<br>
 Lies the dark blot of sin and shame;<br>
 And thou art hateful as the light<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_498"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 498</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 That flashes on the injured sight.<br>
 The world is all before thee: flee:<br>
 Go where thou wilt, but not with me.<br>
 How should my home receive again<br>
 A mistress soiled with deathless stain?<br>
 How should I brook the foul disgrace,<br>
 Scorned by my friends and all my race?<br>
 For Rávan bore thee through the sky,<br>
 And fixed on thine his evil eye.<br>
 About thy waist his arms he threw,<br>
 Close to his breast his captive drew,<br>
 And kept thee, vassal of his power,<br>
 An inmate of his ladies' bower.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry489.htm">Next: Canto CXVIII.: Sítá's Reply.</a></center>
 </body>