<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry484.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry486.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXIV: VIBHÍSHAN CONSECRATED.</h3>
 <p>
 Joy reigned in heaven where every eye<br>
 Had seen the Lord of Lanká die.<br>
 In cars whose sheen surpassed the sun's<br>
 Triumphant rode the radiant ones:<br>
 And Rávan's death, by every tongue.<br>
 And Ráma's glorious deeds were sung.<br>
 They praised the Vánars true and brave,<br>
 The counsel wise Sugríva gave.<br>
 The deeds of Hanumán they told,<br>
 The valiant chief supremely bold,<br>
 The strong ally, the faithful friend.<br>
 And Sitá's truth which naught could bend.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To Mátali, whom Indra sent,<br>
 His head the son of Raghu bent:<br>
 And he with fiery steeds who clove<br>
 The clouds again to Swarga drove.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_496"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 496</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Round King Sugríva brave and true<br>
 His arms in rapture Ráma threw,<br>
 Looked on the host with joy and pride,<br>
 And thus to noble Lakshman cried:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Now let king-making drops be shed,<br>
 Dear brother, on Vibhíshan's head<br>
 For truth and friendship nobly shown,<br>
 And make him lord of Rávan's throne.'<br>
 This longing of his heart he told:<br>
 And Lakshman took an urn of gold<br>
 And bade the wind-fleet Vánars bring<br>
 Sea water for the giants' king.<br>
 The brimming urn was swiftly brought:<br>
 Then on a throne superbly wrought<br>
 Vibhíshan sat, the giants' lord,<br>
 And o'er his brows the drops were poured.<br>
 As Raghu's son the rite beheld<br>
 His loving heart with rapture swelled:<br>
 But tenderer thoughts within him woke,<br>
 And thus to Hanumán he spoke:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Go to my queen: this message give:<br>
 Say Lakshman and Sugríva live.<br>
 The death of Lanká's monarch tell,<br>
 And bid her joy, for all is well.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry486.htm">Next: Canto CXV.: Sitá's Joy.</a></center>
 </body>