<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry479.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry481.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CIX.: THE BATTLE.</h3>
 <p>
 With wondrous power and might and skill<br>
 The giant fought with Ráma still.<br>
 Each at his foe his chariot drove,<br>
 And still for death or victory strove.<br>
 The warriors' steeds together dashed,<br>
 And pole with pole reëchoing clashed.<br>
 Then Ráma launching dart on dart<br>
 Made Rávan's coursers swerve and start.<br>
 Nor was the lord of Lanká slow<br>
 To rain his arrows on the foe,<br>
 Who showed, by fiery points assailed,<br>
 No trace of pain, nor shook nor quailed.<br>
 Dense clouds of arrows Ráma shot<br>
 With that strong arm which rested not,<br>
 And spear and mace and club and brand<br>
 Fell in dire rain from Rávan's hand.<br>
 The storm of missiles fiercely cast<br>
 Stirred up the oceans with its blast,<br>
 And Serpent-Gods and fiends who dwell<br>
 Below were troubled by the swell.<br>
 The earth with hill and plain and brook<br>
 And grove and garden reeled and shook:<br>
 The very sun grew cold and pale,<br>
 And horror stiled the rising gale.<br>
 God and Gandharva, sage and saint<br>
 Cried out, with grief and terror faint:<br>
 O may the prince of Raghu' line<br>
 Give peace to Bráhmans and to kine,<br>
 And, rescuing the worlds, o'erthrow<br>
 The giant king our awful foe.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then to his deadly string the pride<br>
 Of Raghu's race a shaft applied.<br>
 Sharp as a serpent's venomed fang<br>
 Straight to its mark the arrow sprang,<br>
 And from the giant's body shred<br>
 With trenchant steel the monstrous head.<br>
 There might the triple world behold<br>
 That severed head adorned with gold.<br>
 But when all eyes were bent to view,<br>
 Swift in its stead another grew.<br>
 Again the shaft was pointed well:<br>
 Again the head divided fell;<br>
 But still as each to earth was cast<br>
 Another head succeeded fast.<br>
 A hundred, bright with fiery flame,<br>
 Fell low before the victor's aim,<br>
 Yet Rávan by no sign betrayed<br>
 That death was near or strength decayed.<br>
 The doubtful fight he still maintained,<br>
 And on the foe his missiles rained.<br>
 In air, on earth, on plain, on hill,<br>
 With awful might he battled still;<br>
 And through the hours of night and day<br>
 The conflict knew no pause or stay.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry481.htm">Next: Canto CX.: Rávan's Death.</a></center>
 </body>