<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry483.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry485.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXIII.: MANDODARÍ'S LAMENT.</h3>
 <p>
 While thus they wept, supreme in place,<br>
 The loveliest for form and face.<br>
 Mandodarí drew near alone,<br>
 Looked on her lord and made her moan:<br>
 'Ah Monarch, Indra feared to stand<br>
 In fight before thy conquering hand.<br>
 From thy dread spear the Immortals ran;<br>
 And art thou murdered by a man?<br>
 Ah,'twas no child of earth, I know,<br>
 That smote thee with that mortal blow.<br>
 'Twas Death himself in Ráma's shape,<br>
 That slew thee: Death whom none escape.<br>
 Or was it he who rules the skies<br>
 Who met thee, clothed in man's disguise?<br>
 Ah no, my lord, not Indra: he<br>
 In battle ne'er could look on thee.<br>
 One only God thy match I deem:<br>
 It was Vishnu's self, the Lord Supreme,<br>
 Whose days through ceaseless time extend<br>
 And ne'er began and ne'er shall end:<br>
 He with the discus, shell, and mace.<br>
 Brought ruin on the giant race.<br>
 Girt by the Gods of heaven arrayed<br>
 Like Vánar hosts his strength to aid,<br>
 He Ráma's shape and arms assumed<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_495"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 495</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 And slew the king whom Fate had doomed,<br>
 In Janasthán when Khara died<br>
 With giant legions by his side,<br>
 No mortal was the unconquered foe<br>
 In Ráma's form who struck the blow.<br>
 When Hanumán the Vanár came<br>
 And burnt thy town with hostile flame,<br>
 I counselled peace in anxious fear:<br>
 I counselled, but thou wouldst not hear.<br>
 Thy fancy for the foreign dame<br>
 Has brought thee death and endless shame.<br>
 Why should thy foolish fancy roam?<br>
 Hadst thou not wives as fair at home?<br>
 In beauty, form and grace could she,<br>
 Dear lord, surpass or rival me?<br>
 Now will the days of Sítá glide<br>
 In tranquil joy by Ráma's side:<br>
 And I--ah me, around me raves<br>
 A sea of woe with whelming waves.<br>
 With thee in days of old I trod<br>
 Each spot beloved by nymph and God;<br>
 I stood with thee in proud delight<br>
 On Mandar's side and Meru's height;<br>
 With thee, my lord, enchanted strayed<br>
 In Chaitraratha's  <a name="fr_1036"></a><a href="#fn_1036"><font size="1">1</font></a> lovely shade,<br>
 And viewed each fairest scene afar<br>
 Transported in thy radiant car.<br>
 But source of every joy wast thou,<br>
 And all my bliss is ended now.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then Ráma to Víbhíshan cried:<br>
 'Whate'er the ritual bids, provide.<br>
 Obsequial honours duly pay,<br>
 And these sad mourners grief allay.'<br>
 Vibhíshan answered, wise and true.<br>
 For duty's changeless law he knew:<br>
 'Nay one who scorned all sacred vows<br>
 And dared to touch another's spouse,<br>
 Fell tyrant of the human race,<br>
 With funeral rites I may not grace.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Him Raghu's royal son, the best<br>
 Of those who love the law, addressed:<br>
 'False was the rover of the night,<br>
 He loved the wrong and scorned the right.<br>
 Yet for the fallen warrior plead<br>
 The dauntless heart, the valorous deed.<br>
 Let him who ne'er had brooked defeat,<br>
 The chief whom Indra feared to meet,<br>
 The ever-conquering lord, obtain<br>
 The honours that should grace the slain.'<br>
 Vibhíshan bade his friends prepare<br>
 The funeral rites with thoughtful care.<br>
 Himself the royal palace sought<br>
 Whence sacred fire was quickly brought,<br>
 With sandal wood and precious scents<br>
 And pearl and coral ornaments.<br>
 Wise Bráhmans, while the tears that flowed<br>
 Down their wan cheeks their sorrow sowed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 Upon a golden litter laid<br>
 The corpse in finest ropes arrayed.<br>
 Thereon were flowers and pennons hung,<br>
 And loud the monarch's praise was sung.<br>
 Then was the golden litter raised,<br>
 While holy fire in order blazed.<br>
 And first in place Vibhíshan led<br>
 The slow procession of the dead,<br>
 Behind, their cheeks with tears bedewed,<br>
 Came sad the widowed multitude.<br>
 Where, raised as Bráhmans ordered, stood<br>
 Piled sandal logs, and scented wood,<br>
 The body of the king was set<br>
 High on a deerskin coverlet.<br>
 Then duly to the monarch's shade<br>
 The offerings for the dead they paid,<br>
 And southward on the eastern side<br>
 An altar formed and fire supplied.<br>
 Then on the shoulder of the dead<br>
 The oil and clotted milk were shed.<br>
 All rites were done as rules ordain:<br>
 The sacrificial goat was slain.<br>
 Next on the corpse were perfumes thrown<br>
 And many a flowery wreath was strown;<br>
 And with Vibhíshan's ready aid<br>
 Rich vesture o'er the king was laid.<br>
 Then while the tears their cheeks bedewed<br>
 Parched grain upon the dead they strewed;<br>
 Last, to the wood, as rules require,<br>
 Vibhíshan set the kindling fire.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Then having bathed, as texts ordain,<br>
 To Lanká went the mourning train.<br>
 Vibhíshan, when his task was done,<br>
 Stood by the side of Raghu's son.<br>
 And Ráma, freed from every foe,<br>
 Unstrung at last his deadly bow,<br>
 And laid the glittering shafts aside.<br>
 And mail by Indra's love supplied.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1036"></a><a href="ry484.htm#fr_1036">495:1</a>  The garden of Kuvera, the God of
 Riches.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry485.htm">Next: Canto CXIV: Vibhíshan Consecrated.</a></center>
 </body>