<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry482.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry484.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXII.: THE RÁKSHAS DAMES.</h3>
 <p>
 High rose the universal wail<br>
 That mourned the monarch's death, and, pale<br>
 With crushing woe, her hair unbound,<br>
 Her eyes in floods of sorrow drowned,<br>
 Forth from the inner chambers came<br>
 With trembling feet each royal dame,<br>
 Heedless of those who bade them stay<br>
 They reached the field where Rávan lay;<br>
 
 </p><p>
 There falling by their husband's side,<br>
 'Ah, King! ah dearest lord!' they cried.<br>
 Like creepers shattered by the storm<br>
 They threw them on his mangled form.<br>
 One to his bleeding bosom crept<br>
 And lifted up her voice and wept.<br>
 About his feet one mourner clung.<br>
 Around his neck another hung.<br>
 One on the giant's severed head.<br>
 Her pearly tears in torrents shed<br>
 Fast as the drops the summer shower<br>
 Pours down upon the lotus flower.<br>
 'Ah, he whose arm in anger reared<br>
 The King of Gods and Yama feared.<br>
 While panic struck their heavenly train,<br>
 Lies prostrate in the battle slain.<br>
 Thy haughty heart thou wouldst not bend,<br>
 Nor listen to each wiser friend.<br>
 Ah, had the dame, as they implored,<br>
 Been yielded to her injured lord,<br>
 We had not mourned this day thy fall,<br>
 And happy had it been for all.<br>
 Then Ráma and thy friends content<br>
 In blissful peace their days had spent.<br>
 Thine injured brother had not fled.<br>
 Nor giant chiefs and Vánars bled.<br>
 Yet for these woes we will not blame.<br>
 Thy fancy for the Maithil dame,<br>
 Fate, ruthless Fate, vhom none may bend<br>
 Has urged thee to thy hapless end.'<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry484.htm">Next: Canto CXIII.: Mandodarí's Lament.</a></center>
 </body>