<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry488.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry490.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXVIII.: SÍTÁ'S REPLY.</h3>
 <p>
 Struck down with overwhelming shame<br>
 She shrank within her trembling frame.<br>
 Each word of Ráma's like a dart<br>
 Had pierced the lady to the heart;<br>
 And from her sweet eyes unrestrained<br>
 The torrent of her sorrows, rained.<br>
 Her weeping eyes at length she dried,<br>
 And thus mid choking sobs replied:<br>
 'Canst thou, a high-born prince, dismiss<br>
 A hign-born dame with speech like this?<br>
 Such words befit the meanest hind,<br>
 Not princely birth and generous mind,<br>
 By all my virtuous life I swear<br>
 I am not what thy words declare.<br>
 If some are faithless, wilt thou find<br>
 No love and truth in womankind?<br>
 Doubt others if thou wilt, but own<br>
 The truth which all my life has shown.<br>
 If, when the giant seized his prey,<br>
 Within his hated arms I lay,<br>
 And felt the grasp I dreaded, blame<br>
 Fate and the robber, not thy dame.<br>
 What could a helpless woman do?<br>
 My heart was mine and still was true,<br>
 Why when Hanúmán sent by thee<br>
 Sought Lanká's town across the sea,<br>
 Couldst thou not give, O lord of men,<br>
 Thy sentence of rejection then?<br>
 Then in the presence of the chief<br>
 Death, ready death, had brought relief,<br>
 Nor had I nursed in woe and pain<br>
 This lingering life, alas in vain.<br>
 Then hadst thou shunned the fruitless strife<br>
 Nor jeopardied thy noble life,<br>
 But spared thy friends and bold allies<br>
 Their vain and weary enterprise.<br>
 Is all forgotten, all? my birth,<br>
 Named Janak's child, from fostering earth?<br>
 That day of triumph when a maid<br>
 My trembling hand in thine I laid?<br>
 My meek obedience to thy will,<br>
 My faithful love through joy and ill,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 That never failed at duty's call--<br>
 O King, is all forgotten, all?'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To Lakshman then she turned and spoke<br>
 While sobs and sighs her utterance broke:<br>
 'Sumitrá's son, a pile prepare,<br>
 'My refuge in my dark despair.<br>
 I will not live to bear this weight<br>
 Of shame, forlorn and desolate.<br>
 The kindled fire my woes shall end<br>
 And be my best and surest friend.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 His mournful eyes the hero raised<br>
 And wistfully on Ráma gazed,<br>
 In whose stern look no ruth was seen,<br>
 No mercy for the weeping queen.<br>
 No chieftain dared to meet those eyes,<br>
 To pray, to question or advise.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 The word was passed, the wood was piled<br>
 And fain to die stood Janak's child.<br>
 She slowly paced around her lord.<br>
 The Gods with reverent act adored,<br>
 Then raising suppliant hands the dame<br>
 Frayed humbly to the Lord of Flame;<br>
 'As this fond heart by virtue swayed<br>
 From Raghu's son has never strayed,<br>
 So, universal witness, Fire<br>
 Protect my body on the pyre,<br>
 As Raghu's son has idly laid<br>
 This charge on Sítá, hear and aid.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 She ceased: and fearless to the last<br>
 Within the flame's wild fury passed.<br>
 Then rose a piercing cry from all<br>
 Dames, children, men, who saw her fall<br>
 Adorned with gems and gay attire<br>
 Beneath the fury of the fire.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry490.htm">Next: Canto CXIX.: Glory To Vishnu.</a></center>
 </body>