<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry497.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry499.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXXVII.: RÁMA'S MESSAGE.</h3>
 <p>
 But Ráma, when he first looked down<br>
 And saw afar Ayodhyá's town,<br>
 Had called Hanumán to his side,<br>
 The chief on whom his heart relied,<br>
 And said: 'Brave Vánar, good at need,<br>
 Haste onward, to Ayodhyá speed,<br>
 And learn, I pray, if all be well<br>
 With those who in the palace dwell.<br>
 But an thou speedest on thy way<br>
 Awhile at S'ringavera stay.<br>
 Tell Guha the Nishádas' lord,<br>
 That victor, with my queen restored,<br>
 In health and strength with many a friend<br>
 Homeward again my steps I bend<br>
 Thence by the road that he will show<br>
 On to Avodhyá swiftly go.<br>
 There with my love my brother greet,<br>
 And all our wondrous tale repeat.<br>
 Say that victorious in the strife<br>
 I come with Lakshman and my wife,<br>
 Then mark with keenest eye each trace<br>
 Of joy or grief on Bharat's face.<br>
 Be all his gestures closely viewed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_504"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 504</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Each change of look and attitude.<br>
 Where breathes the man who will not cling<br>
 To all that glorifies a king?<br>
 Where beats the heart that can resign<br>
 An ancient kingdom, nor repine<br>
 To lose a land renowned for breeds<br>
 Of elephants and warrior steeds?<br>
 If, won by custom day by day,<br>
 My brother Bharat thirsts for sway,<br>
 Still let him rule the nations, still<br>
 The throne of old Ikshváku fill.<br>
 Go, mark him well: his feelings learn,<br>
 And, ere we yet be near return.'<br>
     He ceased: and, garbed in human form,<br>
 Forth sped Hanumán swift as storm.<br>
 Sublime in air he rose, and through<br>
 The region of his father flew.<br>
 He saw far far beneath his feet<br>
 Where Gangá's flood and Jumna meet.<br>
 Descending from the upper air<br>
 He entered S'ringavera, where<br>
 King Guha's heart was well content<br>
 To hear the message Ráma sent.<br>
 Then, with his mighty strengtn renewed,<br>
 The Vánar chief big way pursued,<br>
 Válúkiní was far behind,<br>
 And Gomatí with forests lined,<br>
 And golden fields and pastures gay<br>
 With flocks and herds beneath him lay.<br>
 Then Nandigráma charmed his eye<br>
 Where flowers were bright with every dye,<br>
 And trees of lovely foliage made<br>
 With meeting boughs delightful shade,<br>
 Where women watched in trim array<br>
 Their little sons' and grandsons' play.<br>
 His eager eye on Bharat fell<br>
 Who sat before his lonely cell.<br>
 In hermit weed, with tangled hair,<br>
 Pale, weak, and worn with ceaseless care.<br>
 His royal pomp and state resigned<br>
 For Ráma still he watched and pined,<br>
 Still to his dreary vows adhered,<br>
 And royal Ráma's shoes revered.<br>
 Yet still the terror of his arm<br>
 Preserved the land from fear and harm.<br>
     The Wind-God's son, in form a man,<br>
 Raised reverent hands and thus began:<br>
 'Fond greeting, Prince, I bring to thee,<br>
 And Ráma's self has sent it: he<br>
 For whom thy spirit sorrows yet<br>
 As for a hapless anchoret<br>
 In Dandak wood, in dire distress,<br>
 With matted hair and hermit dress.<br>
 This sorrow from thy bosom fling,<br>
 And hear the tale of joy I bring.<br>
 This day thy brother shalt thou meet<br>
 Exulting in his foe's defeat,<br>
 Freed from his toil and lengthened vow,<br>
 The light of victory on his brow,<br>
 With Sítá, Lakshman and his friends<br>
 Homeward at last his steps he bends.'<br>
     Then joy, too mighty for control,<br>
 Rushed in full flood o'er Bharat's soul;<br>
 His reeling sense and strength gave way,<br>
 And fainting on the earth he lay,<br>
 At length upspringing from the ground,<br>
 His arms about Hanumán wound,<br>
 With tender tears of rapture sprung,<br>
 He dewed the neck to which he clung:<br>
 'Art thou a God or man,' he cried,<br>
 'Whom love and pity hither guide?<br>
 For this a hundred thousand kine,<br>
 A hundred villages be thine.<br>
 A score of maids of spotless lives<br>
 To thee I give to be thy wives,<br>
 Of golden hue and bright of face,<br>
 Each lovely for her tender grace.'<br>
     He ceased a while by joy subdued,<br>
 And then his eager speech renewed;<br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1047"></a><a href="ry497.htm#fr_1047">503:1</a>  The <i>arghya</i>, a respectful offering to
 Gods and venerable men consisting of rice,
 dúivá grass, flowers etc, with water.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry499.htm">Next: Canto CXXVIII.: Hanumán's Story.</a></center>
 </body>