<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry498.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry500.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXXVIII.: HANUMÁN'S STORY.</h3>
 <p>
 'In doubt and fear long years have passed<br>
 And glorious tidings come at last.<br>
 True, true is now the ancient verse<br>
 Which men in time of bliss rehearse:<br>
 Once only in a hundred years<br>
 Great joy to mortal men appears.<br>
 But now his woes and triumph tell,<br>
 And loss and gain as each befell.'<br>
 He ceased: Hanumán mighty-souled<br>
 The tale of Ráma's wanderings told<br>
 From that first day on which he stood<br>
 In the drear shade of Dandak wood.<br>
 He told how fierce Virádha fell;<br>
 He told of S'arabhanga's cell<br>
 Where Ráma saw with wondering eyes<br>
 Indra descended from the skies.<br>
 He told how Súrpanukhi came,<br>
 Her soul aglow with amorous flame,<br>
 And fled repulsed, with rage and tears,<br>
 Reft of her nose and severed ears.<br>
 He told how Ráma's might subdued<br>
 The giants' furious multitude;<br>
 How Khara with the troops he led<br>
 And Tris'iras and Dúshan bled:<br>
 How Ráma, tempted from his cot,<br>
 The golden deer pursued and shot,<br>
 And Rávan came and stole away<br>
 The Maithil queen his hapless prey,<br>
 When, as he fought, the dame to save,<br>
 His noble life Jatáyus gave:<br>
 How Ráma still the the search renewed,<br>
 The robber to his hold pursued,<br>
 Bridging the sea from shore to shore,<br>
 And found his queen to part no more.  <a name="fr_1048"></a><a href="#fn_1048"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_505"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 505</font></a><br>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1048"></a><a href="ry499.htm#fr_1048">504:1</a>  I have abridged Hanuman's outline of
 Ráma's adventures, with the details of
 which we are already sufficiently acquainted.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry500.htm">Next: Canto CXXIX.: The Meeting With Bharat.</a></center>
 </body>