<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry491.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry493.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXXI.: DAS'ARATHA.</h3>
 <p>
 To him Mahes'var thus replied:<br>
 'O strong-armed hero, lotus-eyed,<br>
 Thou, best of those who love the right,<br>
 Hast nobly fought the wondrous fight.<br>
 Dispelled by thee the doom that spread<br>
 Through trembling earth and heaven is fled.<br>
 The worlds exult in light and bliss,<br>
 And praise thy name, O chief, for this.<br>
 Now peace to Bharat's heart restore,<br>
 And bid Kausalyá weep no more.<br>
 Thy face let Queen Kaikeyí see,<br>
 Let fond Sumitrá gaze on thee.<br>
 The longing of thy friends relieve,<br>
 The kingdom of thy sires receive.<br>
 Let sons of gentle Sítá born<br>
 Ikshváku's ancient line adorn.<br>
 Then from all care and foemen freed<br>
 Perform the offering of the steed.<br>
 In pious gifts thy wealth expend,<br>
 Then to the home of Gods ascend,<br>
 Thy sire, this glorious king, behold.<br>
 Among the blest in heaven enrolled.<br>
 He comes from where the Immortals dwell:<br>
 Salute him, for he loves thee well.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 His mandate Raghu's sons obeyed,<br>
 And to their sire obeisance mads,<br>
 Where high he stood above the car<br>
 In wondrous light that shone afar,<br>
 His limbs in radiant garments dressed<br>
 Whereon no spot of dust might rest.<br>
 When on the son he loved so well<br>
 The eyes of Das'aratha fell,<br>
 He strained the hero to his breast<br>
 And thus with gentle words addressed:<br>
 'No joy to me is heavenly bliss,<br>
 For there these eyes my Ráma miss.<br>
 Enrolled on high with saint and sage,<br>
 Thy woes, dear son, my thoughts engage.<br>
 Kaikeyí's guile I ne'er forget:<br>
 Her cruel words will haunt me yet,<br>
 Which sent thee forth, my son, to roam<br>
 The forest far from me and home.<br>
 Now when I look on each dear face,<br>
 And hold you both in fond embrace,<br>
 My heart is full of joy to see<br>
 The sons I love from danger free.<br>
 Now know I what the Gods designed,<br>
 And how in Ráma's form enshrined<br>
 The might of Purushottam lay,<br>
 The tyrant of the worlds to slay.<br>
 Ah, how Kausalyá will rejoice<br>
 To hear again her darling's voice,<br>
 And, all thy weary wanderings o'er,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 To gaze upon thy face once more.<br>
 Ah blest, for ever blest are they<br>
 Whose eyes shall see the glorious day<br>
 Of thy return in joy at last,<br>
 Thy term of toil and exile past.<br>
 Ayodhyá's lord, begin thy reign,<br>
 And day by day new glory gain,'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: and Ráma thus replied:<br>
 'Be not this grace, O sire, denied.<br>
 Those hasty words, that curse revoke<br>
 Which from thy lips in anger broke:<br>
 'Kaikeyí, be no longer mine:<br>
 I cast thee off, both thee and thine.'<br>
 O father, let no sorrow fall<br>
 On her or hers: thy curse recall.'<br>
 'Yea, she shall live, if so thou wilt,'<br>
 The sire replied, 'absolved from guilt.'<br>
 Round Lakshman then his arms he threw,<br>
 And moved by love began anew:<br>
 'Great store of merit shall be thine,<br>
 And brightly shall thy glory shine;<br>
 Secure on earth thy brother's grace.<br>
 And high in heaven shall be thy place.<br>
 Thy glorious king obey and fear:<br>
 To him the triple world is dear.<br>
 God, saint, and sage, by Indra led,<br>
 To Ráma bow the reverent head,<br>
 Nor from the Lord, the lofty-souled,<br>
 Their worship or their praise withhold.<br>
 Heart of the Gods, supreme is he,<br>
 The One who ne'er shall cease to be.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 On Sítá then he looked and smiled;<br>
 'List to my words' he said, 'dear child,<br>
 Let not thy gentle breast retain<br>
 One lingering trace of wrath or pain.<br>
 When by the fire thy truth be proved,<br>
 By love for thee his will was moved.<br>
 The furious flame thy faith confessed<br>
 Which shrank not from the awful test:<br>
 And thou, in every heart enshrined,<br>
 Shalt live the best of womankind.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: he bade the three adieu,<br>
 And home to heaven exulting flew.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry493.htm">Next: Canto CXXII.: Indra's Boon.</a></center>
 </body>