<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry489.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry491.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXIX.: GLORY TO VISHNU.</h3>
 <p>
 The shrill cry pierced through Ráma's ears<br>
 And his sad eyes o'erflowed with tears,<br>
 When lo, transported through the sky<br>
 A glorious band of Gods was nigh.<br>
 Ancestral shades,  <a name="fr_1039"></a><a href="#fn_1039"><font size="1">1</font></a> by men revered,<br>
 In venerable state appeared.<br>
 And he from whom all riches flow,  <a name="fr_1040"></a><a href="#fn_1040"><font size="1">2</font></a><br>
 And Yama Lord who reigns below:<br>
 King Indra, thousand-eyed, and he<br>
 Who wields the sceptre of the sea.  <a name="fr_1041"></a><a href="#fn_1041"><font size="1">3</font></a><br>
 The God who shows the blazoned, bull, <a name="fr_1042"></a><a href="#fn_1042"><font size="1">4</font></a><br>
 And Brahmá Lord most bountiful<br>
 By whose command the worlds were made<br>
 All these on radiant cars conveyed,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_499"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 499</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Brighter than sun-beams, sought the place<br>
 Where stood the prince of Raghu's race,<br>
 And from their glittering seats the best<br>
 Of blessed Gods the chief addressed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Couldst thou, the Lord of all, couldst thou,<br>
 Creator of the worlds, allow<br>
 Thy queen, thy spouse to brave the fire<br>
 And give her body to the pyre?<br>
 Dost thou not yet, supremely wise,<br>
 Thy heavenly nature recognize?<br>
 They ceased: and Ráma thus began:<br>
 'I deem myself a mortal man.<br>
 Of old Ikshváku's line, I spring<br>
 From Das'aratha Kosal's king.'<br>
 He ceased: and Brahmá's self replied:<br>
 'O cast the idle thought aside.<br>
 Thou art the Lord Náráyan, thou<br>
 The God to whom all creatures bow.<br>
 Thou art the saviour God who wore<br>
 Of old the semblance of a boar;<br>
 Thou he whose discus overthrows<br>
 All present, past and future foes;<br>
 Thou Brahmá, That whose days extend<br>
 Without beginning, growth or end;<br>
 The God, who, bears the bow of horn,<br>
 Whom four majestic arms adorn;<br>
 Thou art the God who rules the sense<br>
 And sways with gentle influence;<br>
 Thou all-pervading Vishnu Lord<br>
 Who wears the ever-conquering sword;<br>
 Thou art the Guide who leads aright,<br>
 Thou Krishna of unequalled might.<br>
 Thy hand, O Lord, the hills and plains,<br>
 And earth with all her life sustains;<br>
 Thou wilt appear in serpent form<br>
 When sinks the earth in fire and storm.<br>
 Queen Sítá of the lovely brows<br>
 Is Lakshmí thy celestial spouse.<br>
 To free the worlds from Rávan thou<br>
 Wouldst take the form thou wearest now.<br>
 Rejoice: the mighty task is done:<br>
 Rejoice, thou great and glorious one.<br>
 The tyrant, slain, thy labours end:<br>
 Triumphant now to heaven ascend.<br>
 High bliss awaits the devotee<br>
 Who clings in loving faith to thee,<br>
 Who celebrates with solemn praise<br>
 The Lord of ne'er beginning days.<br>
 On earth below, in heaven above<br>
 Great joy shall crown his faith and love.<br>
 And he who loves the tale divine<br>
 Which tells each glorious deed of thine<br>
 Through life's fair course shall never know<br>
 The fierce assault of pain and woe.' <a name="fr_1043"></a><a href="#fn_1043"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1039"></a><a href="ry490.htm#fr_1039">498:1</a>  The Pitris or Manes, the spirits of the
 dead.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1040"></a><a href="ry490.htm#fr_1040">498:2</a>  Kuvera, the God of Wealth.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1041"></a><a href="ry490.htm#fr_1041">498:3</a>  Varun, God of the sea.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1042"></a><a href="ry490.htm#fr_1042">498:4</a>  Máhadeva or S'iva whose ensign is a bull.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_1043"></a><a href="ry490.htm#fr_1043">499:1</a>  The Address to Ráma, both text and
 commentary, will be found literally translated
 in the Additional Notes. A paraphrase
 of a portion is all that I have
 attempted here.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry491.htm">Next: Canto CXX.: Sítá Restored.</a></center>
 </body>