<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry494.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry496.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXXIV.: THE DEPARTURE.</h3>
 <p>
 The giant lord the chariot viewed,<br>
 And humbly thus his speech renewed:<br>
 'Behold, O King, the car prepared:<br>
 Now be thy further will declared.'<br>
 He ceased: and Ráma spake once more:<br>
 'These hosts who thronged to Lanká's shore<br>
 Their faith and might have nobly shown,<br>
 And set thee on the giants' throne.<br>
 Let pearls and gems and gold repay<br>
 The feats of many a desperate day,<br>
 That all may go triumphant hence<br>
 Proud of their noble recompense.'<br>
 Vibhíshan, ready at his call,<br>
 With gold and gems enriched them all.<br>
 Ihen Ráma clomb the glorious car<br>
 That shone like day's resplendent star.<br>
 There in his lap he held his dame<br>
 Vailing her eyes in modest shame.<br>
 Beside him Lakshman took his stand,<br>
 Whose mighty bow still armed his hand,<br>
 'O King Vibhíshan,' Ráma cried,<br>
 'O Vánar chiefs, so long allied,<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_502"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 502</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 My comrades till the foemen fell,<br>
 List, for I speak a long farewell.<br>
 The task, in doubt and fear begun,<br>
 With your good aid is nobly done.<br>
 Leave Lanká's shore, your steps retrace,<br>
 Brave warriors of the Vánar race<br>
 Thou, King Sugríva, true, through all,<br>
 To friendship's bond and duty's call,<br>
 Seek far Kishkindha with thy train<br>
 And o'er thy realm in glory reign.<br>
 Farewell, Vibhíshan, Lanká's throne<br>
 Won by our arms is now thine own,<br>
 Thou, mighty lord, hast nought to dread<br>
 From heavenly Gods by Indra led.<br>
 My last farewell, O King, receive,<br>
 For Lanká's isle this hour I leave.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Loud rose their cry in answer: 'We,<br>
 O Raghu's son, would go with thee.<br>
 With thee delighted would we stray<br>
 Where sweet Ayodhyá's groves are gay,<br>
 Then in the joyous synod view<br>
 King-making balm thy brows bedew;<br>
 Our homage to Kaus'alyá pay,<br>
 And hasten on our homeward way.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Their prayer the son of Raghu heard,<br>
 And spoke, his heart with rapture stirred:<br>
 'Sugríva, O my faithful friend,<br>
 Vibhíshan and ye chiefs, ascend.<br>
 A joy beyond all joys the best<br>
 Will fill my overflowing breast,<br>
 If girt by you, O noble band,<br>
 I seek again my native land.'<br>
 With Vánar lords in danger tried<br>
 Sugríva sprang to Ráma's side,<br>
 And girt by chiefs of giant kind<br>
 Vibhíshan's step was close behind.<br>
 Swift through the air, as Ráma chose,<br>
 The wondrous car from earth arose.<br>
 And decked with swans and silver wings<br>
 Bore through the clouds its freight of kings.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry496.htm">Next: Canto CXXV.: The Return.</a></center>
 </body>