<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry490.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry492.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXX.: SÍTÁ RESTORED.</h3>
 <p>
 Thus spoke the Self-existent Sire:<br>
 Then swiftly from the blazing pyre<br>
 The circling flames were backward rolled,<br>
 And, raising in his gentle hold<br>
 Alive unharmed the Maithil dame,<br>
 The Lord of Fire embodied came.<br>
 Fair as the morning was her sheen,<br>
 And gold and gems adorned the queen.<br>
 Her form in crimson robes arrayed,<br>
 Her hair was bound in glossy braid.<br>
 Her wreath was fresh and sweet of scent,<br>
 Undimmed was every ornament.<br>
 Then, standing close to Ráma'a side,<br>
 The universal witness cried:<br>
 'From every blot and blemish free<br>
 Thy faithful queen returns to thee.<br>
 In word or deed, in look or mind<br>
 Her heart from thee has ne'er declined.<br>
 By force the giant bore away<br>
 From thy lone cot his helpless prey;<br>
 And in his bowers securely kept<br>
 She still has longed for thee and wept.<br>
 With soft temptation, bribe and threat,<br>
 He bade the dame her love forget:<br>
 But nobly faithful to her lord,<br>
 Her soul the giant's suit abhorred.<br>
 Receive, O King, thy queen again,<br>
 Pure, ever pure from spot and stain.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 Still stood the king in thoughtful mood<br>
 And tears of joy his eyes bedewed.<br>
 Then to the best of Gods the best<br>
 Of warrior chiefs his mind expressed:<br>
 
 </p><p>
 'Twas meet that mid the thousands here<br>
 The searching fire my queen should clear;<br>
 For long within the giant's bower<br>
 She dwelt the vassal of his power.<br>
 For else had many a slanderous tongue<br>
 Reproaches on mine honour flung,<br>
 And scorned the king who, love-impelled,<br>
 His consort from the proof withheld.<br>
 No doubt had I, but surely knew<br>
 That Janak's child was pure and true,<br>
 That, come what might, in good and ill<br>
 Her faithful heart was with me still.<br>
 I knew that Rávan could not wrong<br>
 Mv queen whom virtue made so strong.<br>
 I knew his heart would sink and fail,<br>
 Nor dare her honour to assail,<br>
 As Ocean, when he raves and roars.<br>
 Fears to o'erleap his bounding shores.<br>
 Now to the worlds her truth is shown,<br>
 And Sítá is again mine own.<br>
 Thus proved before unnumbered eyes,<br>
 On her pure fame no shadow lies.<br>
 As heroes to their glory cleave,<br>
 Mine own dear spouse I ne'er will leave.'<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_500"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 500</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 He ceased: and clasped in fond embrace<br>
 On his dear breast she hid her face.<br>
 
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry492.htm">Next: Canto CXXI.: Das'aratha.</a></center>
 </body>