<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Hinduism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ry500.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ry502.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CANTO CXXX.: THE CONSECRATION.</h3>
 <p>
 Then, reverent hand to hand applied,<br>
 Thus Bharat to his brother cried:<br>
 'Thy realm, O King, is now restored,<br>
 Uninjured to the rightful lord.<br>
 This feeble arm with toil and pain,<br>
 The weighty charge could scarce sustain.<br>
 And the great burthen wellnigh broke<br>
 The neck untrained to bear the yoke.<br>
 The royal swan outspeeds the crow:<br>
 The steed is swift, the mule is slow,<br>
 Nor can my feeble feet be led<br>
 O'er the rough ways where thine should tread.<br>
 Now grant what all thy subjects ask:<br>
 Begin, O King, thy royal task.<br>
 Now let our longing eyes behold<br>
 The glorious rite ordained of old,<br>
 And on the new-found monarch's head<br>
 Let consecrating drops be shed.'<br>
     He ceased: victorious Ráma bent<br>
 His head in token of assent.<br>
 He sat, and tonsors trimmed with care<br>
 His tangles of neglected hair<br>
 Then, duly bathed, the hero shone<br>
 With all his splendid raiment on.<br>
 And Sitá with the matrons' aid<br>
 Her limbs in shining robes arrayed,<br>
 Sumantra then, the charioteer,<br>
 Drew, ordered by S'atrughnu near,<br>
 And stayed within the hermit grove<br>
 The chariot and the steeds he drove.<br>
 Therein Sugríva's consorts, graced<br>
 With gems, and Ráma's queen were placed,<br>
 All fain Ayodhyá to behold:<br>
 And swift away the chariot rolled.<br>
 Like Indra Lord of Thousand Eyes,<br>
 Drawn by fleet lions through the skies,<br>
 Thus radiant in his glory showed<br>
 King Ráma as he homeward rode,<br>
 In power and might unparalleled.<br>
 The reins the hand of Bharat held.<br>
 Above the peerless victor's head<br>
 The snow-white shade S'atrughna spread,<br>
 And Lakshman's ever-ready hand<br>
 His forehead with a chourie fanned.<br>
 Vibhishan close to Lakshman's side<br>
 Sharing his task a chourie plied.<br>
 Sugríva on S'atrunjay came,<br>
 An elephant of hugest frame:<br>
 Nine thousand others bore, behind,<br>
 The chieftains of the Vánar kind<br>
 All gay, in forms of human mould,<br>
 With rich attire and gems and gold.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_507"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 507</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 Thus borne along in royal state<br>
 King Rama reached Ayodhya's gate<br>
 With merry noise of shells and drums<br>
 And joyful shouts, He comes, he comes,<br>
 A Brahman host with solemn tread,<br>
 And kine the long procession led,<br>
 And happy maids in ordered bands<br>
 Threw grain and gold with liberal hands.<br>
 Neath gorgeous flags that waved in rows<br>
 On towers and roofs and porticoes.<br>
 Mid merry crowds who sang and cheered<br>
 The palace of the king they neared.<br>
 Then Raghu's son to Bharat, best<br>
 Of duty's slaves, these words addressed:<br>
 'Pass onward to the monarch's hall.<br>
 The high-souled Vánars with thee call,<br>
 And let the chieftains, as is meet,<br>
 The widows of our father greet.<br>
 And to the Vánar king assign<br>
 Those chambers, best of all, which shine<br>
 With lazulite and pearl inlaid,<br>
 And pleasant grounds with flowers and shade,'<br>
 He ceased: and Bharat bent his head;<br>
 Sugriva by the hand he led<br>
 And passed within the palace where<br>
 Stood couches which S'atrughna's care,<br>
 With robes and hangings richly dyed,<br>
 And burning lamps, had seen supplied.<br>
 Then Bharat spake: 'I pray thee, friend,<br>
 Thy speedy messengers to send,<br>
 Each sacred requisite to bring<br>
 That we may consecrate our king.'<br>
 Sugriva raised four urns of gold,<br>
 The water for the rite to hold,<br>
 And bade four swiftest Vánars flee<br>
 And fill them from each distant sea.<br>
 Then east and west and south and north<br>
 The Vánar envoys hastened forth.<br>
 Each in swift flight an ocean sought<br>
 And back through air his treasure brought,<br>
 And full five hundred floods beside<br>
 Pure water for the king supplied.<br>
 Then girt by many a Bráhman sage,<br>
 Vasishtha, chief for reverend age,<br>
 High in a throne with jewels graced<br>
 King Ráma and his Sitá placed.<br>
 There by Jábáli, far revered,<br>
 Vijay and Kasyap's son appeared;<br>
 By Gautam's side Kátváyan stood,<br>
 And Vámadeva wise and good,<br>
 Whose holy hands in order shed<br>
 The pure sweet drops on Ráma's head.<br>
 Then priests and maids and warriors, all<br>
 Approaching at Vasishtha's call,<br>
 With sacred drops bedewed their king,<br>
 The centre of a joyous ring,<br>
 The guardians of the worlds, on high,<br>
 And all the children of the sky<br>
 From herbs wherewith their hands were filled<br>
 Bare juices on his brow distilled.<br>
 His brows were bound with glistering gold<br>
 Which Manu's self had worn of old,<br>
 Bright with the flash of many a gem.<br>
 His sire's ancestral diadem.<br>
 Satrughna lent his willing aid<br>
 And o'er him held the regal shade:<br>
 The monarchs whom his arm had saved<br>
 The chouries round his forehead waved.<br>
 A golden chain, that flashed and glowed<br>
 With gems the God of Wind bestowed:<br>
 Mahendra gave a glorious string<br>
 Of fairest pearls to deck the king,<br>
 The skies with acclamation rang,<br>
 The gay nymphs danced, the minstrels sang.<br>
 On that blest day the joyful plain<br>
 Was clothed anew with golden grain.<br>
 The trees the witching influence knew,<br>
 And bent with fruits of loveliest hue,<br>
 And Rama's consecration lent<br>
 New sweetness to each flowret's scent.<br>
 The monarch, joy of Raghu's line,<br>
 Gave largess to the Bráhmans, kine<br>
 And steeds unnumbered, wealth untold<br>
 Of robes and pearls and gems and gold.<br>
 A jewelled chain, whose lustre passed<br>
 The glory of the sun, he cast<br>
 About his friend Sugriva's neck;<br>
 And, Angad Báli's son to deck,<br>
 He gave a pair of armlets bright<br>
 With diamond and lazulite.<br>
 A string of pearls of matchless hue<br>
 Which gleams like tender moonlight threw<br>
 Adorned with gems of brightest sheen,<br>
 He gave to grace his darling queen.<br>
 The offering from his hand received<br>
 A moment on her bosom heaved;<br>
 Then from her neck the chain she drew,<br>
 A glance on all the Vánars threw,<br>
 And wistful eyes on Ráma bent<br>
 As still she held the ornament.<br>
 Her wish he knew, and made reply<br>
 To that mute question of her eye:<br>
 'Yea. love; the chain on him bestow<br>
 Whose wisdom truth and might we know,<br>
 The firm ally, the faithful friend<br>
 Through toil and peril to the end,<br>
     Then on Hanúmán's bosom hung<br>
 The chain which Sitá's hand had flung:<br>
 So may a cloud, when winds are still<br>
 With moon-lit silver gird a hill.<br>
     To every Vánar Ráma gave<br>
 Rich treasures from the mine and wave.<br>
 And with their honours well content<br>
 Homeward their steps the chieftains bent.<br>
 Ten thousand years Ayodhyá, blest<br>
 With Ráma's rule, had peace and rest.<br>
 No widow mourned her murdered mate,<br>
 No house was ever desolate.<br>
 The happy land no murrain knew,<br>
 The flocks and herds increased and grew.<br>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="page_508"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 508</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 The earth her kindly fruits supplied,<br>
 No harvest failed, no children died.<br>
 Unknown were want, disease, and crime:<br>
 So calm, so happy was the time.  <a name="fr_1052"></a><a href="#fn_1052"><font size="1">1</font></a><br>
 
 </p><p>
 
 </p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_1052"></a><a href="ry501.htm#fr_1052">508:1</a>  Here follows in the original an
 enumeration of the chief blessings which will
 attend the man or woman who reads or
 hears read this tale of Ráma. These blessings
 are briefly mentioned at the end of
 the first Canto of the first book, and it
 appears unnecessary to repeat them here
 in their amplified form. The Bengal
 recension (Gorresio's edition) gives them
 more concisely as follows: 'This is the
 great first poem blessed and glorious, which
 gives long life to men and victory to kings,
 the poem which Válmíki made. He who
 listens to this wondrous tale of Ráma
 unwearied in action shall be absolved from
 all his sins. By listening to the deeds of
 Ráma he who wishes for sons shall obtain,
 his heart's desire, and to him who longs for
 riches shall riches be given. The virgin
 who asks for a husband shall obtain a
 husband suited to her mind, and shall
 meet again her dear kinsfolk who are far
 away. They who hear this poem which
 Válmíki made shall obtain all their desires
 and all their prayers shall be fulfilled.'</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ry502.htm">Next: Appendices</a></center>
 </body>