<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Nostradamus Index</a> 
 <br>
 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Did Nostradamus predict the WTC disaster?</h1>
 <h3 align="CENTER">By J.B. Hare</h3>
 <hr>
 
 
 <p>
 The following is an email exchange I had recently.
 I encourage you to make up your own mind
 as to the significance of this. - J.B. Hare</p>
 
 <p>
 <i>Note:</i>
 After I posted this essay (which got a tremendous number of hits and
 continues to do so) I received a torrent of email which I was unable
 to respond to individually.</p>
 <p>
 Among these responses, several readers pointed out that the
 place name translated 'tower of Aiguesmortes'
 (in the French version Tour d'Aignes),
 is actually the name of a former seaport
 in the south of France from which ships left for the Crusades.
 Incidentally, the seashore has now retreated several
 kilometers at this point so it is no longer a seaport.
 
 </p><p>So maybe the reference to a tower is just accidental.
 I stand by my original gut feeling about this quatrain, nonetheless.</p>
 <p>
 The point of my essay is: why make up bogus Nostradamus when the real
 text is so much more interesting?</p>
 
 <center>
 <hr width="50%">
 </center>
 <p>
 <i>Note:</i> In 20/20 hindsight the 'Little ones for great ones' may
 refer to the passengers in the plane which crashed in Pennsylvania.
 Many readers have pointed this out, there is no need to write me
 about it.
 --January 8th, 2004.
 </p>
 <hr>
 <p>
 <a href="100301.htm">Read an in-depth analysis of the quatrain XII 52 by one
 of our readers who is familiar with 16th Century French language and
 culture</a>. He concludes that the quatrain refers to an 
 unrelated event (which may or may not have happened)
 and does not have anythying to
 do with the tragedy of 9/11.</p>
 
 <hr>
 <p>A reader wrote me a couple of days after the World Trade Center attack:</p>
 <center>
 <hr width="50%">
 </center>
 <blockquote type="CITE">I recieved this e-mail regarding a prophecy from
 Nostradamus.  I was skeptical of the validity of this.  Could
 you verify if this, in fact, is one of his prophecies?
 <p>Nostradamus' prediction on WW3:
 <br>&gt;
 <br>&gt; "In the year of the new century and nine months,
 <br>&gt; From the sky will come a great King of Terror...
 <br>&gt; The sky will burn at forty-five degrees.
 <br>&gt; Fire approaches the great new city..."
 <br>&gt; "In the city of york there will be a great collapse,
 <br>&gt; 2 twin brothers torn apart by chaos
 <br>&gt; while the fortress falls the great leader will succumb
 <br>&gt; third big war will begin when the big city is burning"
 <br>&gt;
 <br>&gt; - NOSTRADAMUS</p></blockquote>
 <hr>
 <p>Here's my reply:</p>
 
 The actual quatrain which this appears to be a riff on is:
 <br> 
 <blockquote><i>X 72</i><i></i>
 <p><i>L'an mil neuf cens nonante neuf sept mois</i>
 <br><i>Du ciel viendra vn grand Roy d'effrayeur</i>
 <br><i>Resusciter le grand Roy d'Angolmois,</i>
 <br><i>Auant apres Mars regner par bon heur.</i><i></i>
 </p><p><i>The year 1999, seventh month,</i>
 <br><i>From the sky will come a great King of Terror:</i>
 <br><i>To bring back to life the great King of the Mongols,</i>
 <br><i>Before and after Mars to reign by good luck.</i></p></blockquote>
 
 
 <p><br>It looks like someone pieced together several different quatrains
 (what you have has pieces of some other actual ones); Nostradamus is never
 <i>that</i> specific!
 <br>This is not a valid use of the Nostradamus material, to say the least.
 </p><p>True prophecies are never explicit; they are usually either ambiguous,
 have cloaked meanings, or incorrect portions.
 </p><p>This is one of the few Nostradamus Quatrains to actually mention a month
 and year, and the arrival of this date has long been held in dread by believers
 in the quatrains; however, nothing of the sort happened in July of 1999,
 as far as I know.  Sometimes the quatrains are duds, that's prophecy
 biz.
 </p><p>However, no need to make stuff up!
 </p><p>This is an actual quatrain which I turned up two days ago just after
 the disaster occurred, which had the correct resonance; you can tell when
 you find one because they make the hair stand up on the back of your neck (like Robert
 Graves said about true poetry). This is much more in keeping with the general tenor of a Nostradamus
 prophecy which has come true:
 <br> 
 </p><blockquote><i>XII 52 *</i><i></i>
 <p><i>Two bodies, one head, fields divided in two,</i>
 <br><i>And then to reply to four unheard ones:</i>
 <br><i>Little ones for great ones, clear evel for them,</i>
 <br><i>Lightning at the tower of Aiguesmortes, worse for "Eussouis"</i></p></blockquote>
 Here's my interpretation in 20/20 hindsight.
 <li>The two bodies, one head, fields divided in two seems to be a vision
 of the twin towers.
 </li><li>The four unheard ones could represent the four airliners.
 </li><li>Little ones for great ones: This has a couple
 of interpretations; This could refer to the passengers who
 took it on themselves to take back the airliner which crashed in Pennsylvania;
 or it could refer to the hijackers themselves, the line is suggestive
 but it doesn't add a lot to the interpretation of the quatrain. In either
 case the end was fatal (<i>clear evel</i>).
 </li><li>Aiguesmortes looks like a combination of two French words "sharp",
 and  "deaths"; this certainly appears to be very apropos.  This
 was the key phrase which made me think this was a hit.
 And even more suggestively, Eussouis (which might be pronounced 'yew-swas', with a silent s on the
 end) might be a garbled version of 'USA', of course the USA didn't exist
 when he wrote; it's not an actual French word as far as anyone knows;
 sometimes Nostradamus will introduce nonsense words that
 in retrospect make sense, e.g. 'Hisler'.
 <br> 
 <p>J.B. Hare
 
 
 <br> 
 </p><p>Copyright © 2001 J.B. Hare, All Rights Reserved</p>
 </li></body>