<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Taoism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ts03.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ts05.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">(Introduction.)</h3>
 <p>THE Exalted One says:<sup>[3]</sup> (1-3)</p>
 <p>Curses and blessings do not come through gates,<sup>[4]</sup> but man himself invites their arrival.<sup>[5]</sup> (4-11)</p>
 <p>The reward of good and evil is like the shadow accompanying a body, and so it is apparent<sup>[6]</sup> that heaven and earth are possessed of crime-recording spirits. (12-28)</p>
 <p>According to<sup>[7]</sup> the lightness or gravity of his transgressions,<sup>[8]</sup> the sinner's term of life is reduced. Not only is his term of life reduced, but poverty<sup>[9]</sup> also strikes him. Often he meets with calamity and misery.<sup>[9]</sup> His neighbors<sup>[10]</sup> hate him. Punishments and curses pursue him. Good luck shuns him. Evil stars threaten him; and when his term of life comes to an end, he perishes. (29-67)</p>
 <p>Further, there are the three councilor<sup>[11]</sup>, spirit-lords of the northern constellation,<sup>[12]</sup> residing above the heads of the people, recorders</p>
 <p>{p. 52}</p>
 <p>of men's crimes and sins,<sup>[9]</sup> cutting off terms of from twelve years to a hundred days. (68-87)</p>
 <p>Further, there are the three body-spirits<sup>[13]</sup> that live within man's person. Whenever Kêng Shên day<sup>[14]</sup> comes, they ascend to the heavenly master<sup>[15]</sup> and inform him of men's crimes and trespasses. (88-110)</p>
 <p>On the last day of the month the Hearth Spirit,<sup>[16]</sup> too, does the same. (111-118)</p>
 <p>Of all the offences which men commit, the greater ones cause a loss of twelve years, the smaller ones of a hundred days. These their offences, great as well as small, constitute some hundred affairs, and those who are anxious for life everlasting,<sup>[17]</sup> should above all avoid them.[18] (119-147)</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ts05.htm">Next: Moral Injunctions</a></center>
 </body>