<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah145.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah147.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XI</h3>
 <p>1. THE avalanza was so constructed that the words spoken by Fragapatti and Hoab could be heard by all who chose, of whom there were two thousand millions on board. And when Hoab expressed conviction, the same sentiment seized upon the whole assembly; whereupon, Fragapatti raised his hand, saying: By virtue of Thy power, O Jehovih, will I illume this hell!</p>
 <p>2. And by Fragapatti's will there was created a sudden light, so brilliant, none present, save the ethereans, could look upon him. Hoab bowed down, and hid his face, and Hoab's hosts were overcome with fear, prostrating themselves on the floors of the avalanza.</p>
 <p>3. Fragapatti said to the swift messengers: Go at once to Mouru, greeting, and say that Fragapatti demandeth, at once, one thousand million etherean volunteers, for signal centres in Aoasu's lowest hells, bringing rods of fire and water.</p>
 <p>4. The swift messengers departed hastily. Fragapatti then commanded that the avalanza be anchored for a day; and he and many of his hosts went out into hell, where the spirits were weeping and wailing, and cursing, or lying in drunkenness and lethargy. Many of them were naked and foul smelling; and hundreds of thousands of them, having had diseased corporeal bodies whilst on earth, had now carried <a name="page_203a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 203a</font></a> with them into hell the substance of their corruptions, even the rottenness of plagues and consumptions, and of other diseases it is not even lawful to mention.</p>
 <p>5. Fragapatti said: By Thy Power, O Jehovih, shall a wall of fire encompass these people about. They shall not escape. For were they to return to a nation of mortals, they would inoculate them unto death. Fire, O Jehovih, fire! Thou All Purifier!</p>
 <p>6. And he cast his hands outward and upward, in majesty, and there rose up walls of fire on the face of the mountains; and the light thereof fell into the valleys of Ugh'sa, the pit of hell. To the east and west and north and south, Fragapatti turned, saying: A wall of fire! a wall of fire! And he, himself, shone as a sun, united with the Eternal All Creator, Whose voice was power to wield the elements to His will.</p>
 <p>7. Presently, there were hemmed into one field more than five hundred million drujas, who, by the sudden transformation, were roused up to desperate wildness, with bated breath, running hither and thither, first one way and then another.</p>
 <p>8. And yet there were other millions of them, so low and stupid and crazed, that the others ran over them as if they were but a heap of rubbish, death!</p>
 <p>9. Then Fragapatti went to Hoab, saying: For pity's sake, come thou and help me, and persuade thy hosts also.</p>
 <p>10. Hoab said: O friend, and brother, do not mock me! Thou hast undone me entirely. I am nothing. My hosts are nothing. For pity's sake, temper thou thine own light. It pierceth me through!</p>
 <p>11. Fragapatti said: Shall I not send thee back quickly to Zeredho, with thy hosts? Hoab said: My wish is nothing; my will is nothing! Thine and the Great All Power's will be done. Fragapatti said: If ever thou hadst faith in thy life, I charge thee now quickly to summon it to thy soul, for Great Jehovih is with me now, and but ask and speak in faith by the Creator, and it shall be granted unto thee. Speak quickly, whilst yet the power holdeth upon me: Shall I put on a thousand-fold more light? Say thou: IN FAITH I WILL ENDURE ALL, FOR THE GLORY OF JEHOVIH! GIVE ME, OR FIRE OR TORMENTS, OR WHATSOEVER THOU WILT, O JEHOVIH!</p>
 <p>12. Hoab trembled, and then strained in every part, and at last suddenly sprang up facing the light, melting in the flame of fire; and he said: I WILL ENDURE ALL, IN FAITH OF THEE, O JEHOVIH! GIVE ME, OR FIRE OR TORMENTS, OR WHATSOEVER <a name="page_204a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 204a</font></a> THOU WILT. HENCEFORTH, I WILL DO FOR THEE, FOREVER!</p>
 <p>13. Presently, his spirit took the crystal form, and the victory dawned upon his soul. A smile, denoting knowledge of All Holiness and Majesty gleamed in his countenance! The light began to retract and to reflect from his face, brilliant and sun-like. He had conquered and won! He said: Thanks, O Jehovih!</p>
 <p>14. Fragapatti said: Quick, now, seize the goal; go forth practicing thy light for others, and it will grow, giant-like. And Hoab was strong in faith, almost mad with the delight of such wondrous change; and he rushed forth, commanding, in the name of Jehovih, raising up hundreds and thousands, even as he had been raised, crystallizing.</p>
 <p>15. All one day and one night they labored, and all the ethereans with them; and they rescued, and divided, and sub-divided the spirits of darkness into grades and sections. And many of the spirits belonging to the hosts of Hoab were thus raised to the second resurrection, with light and power.</p>
 <p>16. But of the hundreds of millions of spirits in the torments of hell none were as yet raised even to the first resurrection. But they were stirred up and routed out of lethargy; and the supplies for their drunkenness were cut off by the walls of fire, created by Fragapatti, which went up day and night, without ceasing.</p>
 <p>17. And Fragapatti stationed sentinels with power near the walls of fire, commanding them to cast in the elements of ughs and brimstone, so that the suffocating smell would prevent the drujas from escaping.</p>
 <p>18. On the second day, millions of ethereans, with rods of water and rods of fire, came from Mouru, in answer to Fragapatti's commandment. And when they had arrived before him, and had saluted in the sign of Jehovih's name, he said unto them: Behold, I have established one signal centre in hell. It will require a thousand more centres before we have broken them up and delivered them. From the rank of DAS the marshals shall select from amongst you ten thousand to remain in this centre and complete the work I have laid out.</p>
 <p>19. So the marshals selected from the ethereans of the rank of DAS ten thousand. Now the das are such as have attained to power with the rod with water, and the rod with fire, but not with the hand, like the ranks above them. They go amongst the denizens of a signal centre (in hell) with the two rods, casting water with one and <a name="page_205a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 205a</font></a> fire with the other. And the hosts of spirits in darkness run for them, like cattle for salt; and the das thus discover and assort them; for the lowest spirits go for the rods with water, and the highest for the rods of fire. Because the lowest spirits dread the light; and because the highest desire to be rescued from the lowest.</p>
 <p>20. On the second day, therefore, the das began work; and there were baptized with water many millions; but with fire only one million. The latter were then taken without and beyond the walls of fire, and colonized, and clothed, and fed, and guardians placed over them, preparatory to the nurseries, hospitals, schools, factories, and such other educationals as belong in the lowest heaven.</p>
 <p>21. On the third day the das went through the same labor again, and again many millions were baptized with water, and but two millions with fire. The latter were also taken without and beyond the walls of fire, and colonized in the same manner as those of the previous day.</p>
 <p>22. Such, then, is the labor of the das in hell, baptizing and selecting; and it continueth until all the people are taken without and beyond the walls. The last taken out are, therefore, the lowest grade, and the first taken out the highest grade. But the last are usually so low in knowledge and ambition that they move not of themselves, but are bestowed in nurseries and hospitals, to be cleansed from their foulness, and to be healed of their infirmities.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah147.htm">Next: Chapter XII</a></center>
 </body>