<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah173.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah175.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXXIX</h3>
 <p>1. WHEN Gir-ak-shi arrived at his division of the earth and heaven, the Voice of Jehovih came to him, saying: My Lord and God, hear thou the Voice of thy Father. In thy division I have no I'hins left upon the earth, and the place is like a field without seed. The I'huans have degenerated also, by marrying with the druks. And thou art come to this, My farm, where it is grown up full of weeds and thistles.</p>
 <p>2. Look about thy division, and thou shalt find no loo'is, nor ashars of any avail to righteousness. Consider, then, what shall be done, that both mortals and spirits may be made to know Me and My kingdoms.</p>
 <p>3. Gir-ak-shi found the mortals of Heleste to be barbarians, many of them naked, or at best clothed with the skins of animals to keep them warm in winter. Some of them burrowed in the ground, and some lived in houses made of bark, and leaves and grass. And their food was mostly fish and flesh. Their cities were numerous, but small, and every city spake a different language.</p>
 <p>4. Their weapons of war were clubs, and spears, and bows and arrows, but they had neither iron nor copper, and used stone for cutting.</p>
 <p>5. Gir-ak-shi said: What incentive can I give such a people, that will raise them up?</p>
 <p>6. Gir-ak-shi then surveyed his heavens, but alas, there were no kingdoms, no organizations, no societies. As mortals lived and died, so continued their spirits around about in the same places. Procuring subsistence in the same way, but spiritually; and often taking part in mortal wars and hunting, seeing and hearing through their mortal kin's eyes and ears.</p>
 <p>7. Gir-ak-shi said: What incentive can I give such angels, that will raise them up?</p>
 <p>8. If I tell the mortals to till the soil and make clothes of flax and wool, my words will be interpreted as folly, or as implying hardships. If I tell the angels there are higher heavens, more beautiful, my words will be disbelieved. If I tell them that all growth dependeth upon exercise and labor, they will decline to grow. Have I not seen rich men and rich women in other countries whom I told that, in order to rise, they must learn to labor? But they heeded me not.</p>
 <p>9. Jehovih said to Gir-ak-shi: Thou hast more than a thousand million drujas in thy department. The mountains and valleys and forests are filled with them, roving about. As thou wouldst entrap birds by rich bait, so thalt thou gather together all thou canst of these drujas. But as to thy mortals, thou shalt call famines into certain places, and thus drive them to observe the Unseen Cause of things.</p>
 <p>10. Gir-ak-shi called together his hosts, millions and millions. He said unto them: Form ye, in sacred circles, hundreds of thousands, and go to the places I will point out, and invoke the higher heavens in Jehovih's name. Cast ye a famine here; and a blight in the animals of the forest. Into the water cast ye imbrele, that the fish may die. Make mortals stop and consider.</p>
 <p><a name="page_270"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 270</font></a></p>
 <p>11. Let the ashars go, then, and find the most prophetic amongst mortals, and make them prophesy concerning the famines and the blight. Make ye their prophets objects of worship; then I can rule the inhabitants of the earth through the prophets.</p>
 <p>12. Concerning the angels, Gir-ak-shi said: Five heavenly places will I build for the drujas. One shall be called Monk, one Acha, one Troy, one Be-yome and one Hellen. Five Lords shall be my Lords to rule in my heavenly divisions: Ki-liope, Lord of Monk; I'tius, Lord of Acha; Foebe, Lordess of Troy; Liriyi, Lordess of Be-yome, and Co'ye, Lord of Hellen. These shall be heavenly places in the mountains, pure and delightful.</p>
 <p>13. And ye shall make them places of feasting and sporting for one whole year; nothing that can be done to make them attractive for drujas shall be left undone.</p>
 <p>14. Into five divisions, half a million each, shall my hosts be selected and apportioned; whose mission shall be to go around about throughout Heleste, bringing in drujas to my five heavenly places.</p>
 <p>15. As for myself, I will build a plateau in these mountains, the Aguaadica, with a Council of half a million. Let my Lords stand aside, and I will apportion to each of them their attendants; by the star-lights that fall upon them shall they be known and come forth.</p>
 <p>16. The Lords stood aside, in different places. Gir-ak-shi then cast stars until the three millions were selected. After that Gir-ak-shi proceeded according to the Voice of Jehovih; and he conducted his hosts to the places the Father commanded.</p>
 <p>17. After they were all placed, Gir-ak-shi chose his own Council, and built a plateau and a throne to Jehovih on Mount Aguaadica; and when he considered the wisdom of the manner Jehovih had directed him to thus lay a foundation for so great a work, he soliloquized, saying: O Jehovih, will these drujas ever understand the manner of Thine armies? Will these mortals ever understand the proceedings of Thy Lords and Gods?</p>
 <p>18. For one year the hosts entertained and fed and clothed the drujas sumptuously, and they won them away from the earth; won them to the kingdoms prepared for them. And then Gir-ak-shi commanded the founding of schools, factories and hospitals in heaven; and he appointed ashars and asaphs, and began the resurrection through his Lords. And by the fourth year he had colonized in his heaven nearly all the drujas, giving them sufficient recreation to restrain them from returning to the earth.</p>
 <p>19. For a long time prior to Fragapatti's coming he had it proclaimed, giving invitations to them to be present. This he communicated to Fragapatti, through messengers. So, Fragapatti, knowing the grade of the place, determined to come in gaudy colors, and with sufficient music, very loud, and for the manifestation of power.</p>
 <p>20. To match which, Gir-ak-shi had his people attire themselves in the greatest gaudy colors; for in such manner do the unlearned judge of the glory and possibilities of high heaven.</p>
 <p>21. So, it came to pass, Fragapatti's avalanza descended from above like a sea of fire, but decorated in thousands of ways with banners, flags, curtains and such other ornaments as would convey the idea of greatness to the minds of the es'yans. On the other hand, Gir-ak-shi had decorated his place and kingdom and throne, Aguaadica, in the most extravagant splendor. And he and his Lords, and his captains and generals, and his holy Council, were arrayed majestically.</p>
 <p>22. In addition to these things, Gir-ak-shi had provided a feast, which was to succeed the ceremonies; and, after the feast, there were to be divers entertainments. But of these matters, who knoweth the thought of Jehovih! How hath He not provided ingenuities to bring the dark soul to understanding!</p>
 <p>23. Gir-ak-shi said: To teach mortal teachers how to teach the barbarian, O Jehovih! To teach Cold-Awe to impart Warm-Mirth, O Jehovih! Shall they build a prison and decorate the convict in fine clothes, and bid him take his ease, beholding the virtuous working for him, O Jehovih! Will they ever learn Thy power in resurrection, O Jehovih!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah175.htm">Next: Chapter XL</a></center>
 </body>