<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah100.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah102.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIV</h3>
 <p>1. JEHOVIH spake from the light of the throne of God, saying: Hear the words of your Creator, O ye Counselors of heaven.</p>
 <p>2. They spin and weave and make clothes; they learn in the places of learning; neither do I condemn them.</p>
 <p>3. But My physicians are tired; My nurses are tired; My teachers are tired. Be wise, O My Sons and Daughters. Who hath reformed a beggar by giving to him? What physician preventeth sickness by healing?</p>
 <p>4. They bring forth in deformity on the earth, and ye must cure them in heaven. They squat on their haunches on earth, and they squat the same way in heaven, and ye must cure them.</p>
 <p>5. Go ye to the root of the matter, O My beloved. Send ye down to the kingdoms of My Lords, and say to them: Thus saith Jehovih: Follow them, O My Lords! Double the number of ashars, double the loo'is; leave no young man alone; leave no young woman alone. Keep over them day and night; give them visions and dreams of Apollo. For I am concerted in heaven and on earth to remold the forms of the earth-born.</p>
 <p>6. Jehovih said: Hear your Creator, O Gau! Make seven more plateaux for the second resurrection. Out of the idolatry of My Son, Apollo, will I beautify the inhabitants of the earth. And the cast and mold of men and of women shall become a great power.</p>
 <p>7. Jealousies will overspread the earth; jealousies will rise in the first resurrection. Make seven more plateaux in the second resurrection, and sort the es'yans in the hour of birth.</p>
 <p>8. God and the Council perceived; and so God appointed workmen, and fulfilled the commandments of Jehovih. And he established seven hundred tributary kingdoms of the second resurrection belonging to Gau.</p>
 <p>9. These sub-kingdoms were provided with sub-Gods, second in rank below the Lords, of whom there were ten thousand who had direct supervision over mortals; and the Lords had every one a sufficiency of guardian angels, ashars, and looi's, masters of generations, so that they could direct any required number to such mortals as they chose.</p>
 <p>10. The Lords mostly established their heavenly kingdoms in the temples where mortals came to worship; and by inspiration, they established spirit chambers near the altars, where the prophets sat to learn the decrees of the Lord. Hither the loo'is came to receive their appointments over mortals, for the purpose of bringing about marriages acceptable before Jehovih.</p>
 <p>11. The affairs of the sub-Gods were, however, wholly with matters in heaven, save when commanded by the Lords for special work.</p>
 <p>12. And it came to pass that mortals, and the affairs of mortals, were directed and governed by the decrees of the lower heavens, and these again by the etherean heavens, which were of Jehovih direct.</p>
 <p>13. So Jehovih changed the forms of the earth-born; but they became worshippers of Apollo; accrediting to one another Jehovih's perfection in them, according to the form and figure of the flesh. And because of the idolatry of the women for Apollo, their children were born of good flesh, and shapely; so that, in four hundred years, the hair on their heads grew long and straight, and men began to have beards. Neither considered any young man any virtue in a young woman so important as her form; nor did young women value any virtue in man so great as a well-molded form.</p>
 <p>14. And when mortals died, and their spirits entered the first resurrection, half the labor of the asaphs, the receiving angels, was accomplished.</p>
 <p>15. So God changed the es'yan period to three years, save for the heirs of cousins, and uncles, and aunts, which was left at five years.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah102.htm">Next: Chapter XV</a></center>
 </body>