<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah120.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah122.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_160"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 160</font></a></p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VI</h3>
 <p>1. JEHOVIH said: Vibrahj shall be My place; thy throne, Osire, shall be My throne. Send sheriffs out into all the divisions of heaven where thou hast destroyed the evil kingdoms. And thy sheriffs shall arrest all the false Gods whom thou hast dispossessed, and bring them hither, that I may speak with them face to face.</p>
 <p>2. Then spake Osire to the sheriffs, saying: Go ye out into all the divisions of atmospherea, and arrest and bring hither all the false Gods whom I have dethroned, saying to each of them: Osire, God of the lower heavens, commandeth my presence. Come thou, and hear the voice of thy Creator. But it shall happen that many will fear to come, because of the light, lest their evil deeds be seen; say to all such: The light will be lowered for a short space of time; come, therefore, quickly.</p>
 <p>3. To all the knots, where the false Gods are enveloped, shall ye take umbrae, a sufficiency, that ye may release them. But leave ye with the knot a sufficient guard to keep them in their places.</p>
 <p>4. The sheriffs went abroad, as commanded, being sufficiently provided with attendants and all things required for such adventures; and after many days the false Gods were arrested and brought before the throne of God, Osire, Jehovih's Son. And there were assembled, on that occasion, one hundred thousand archangels, of whom two thousand had risen to the rank of Gods and Goddesses, and thirty thousand to the rank of Lords and Lordesses.</p>
 <p>5. Osire said to the false ones: Brothers, greeting, in the name of Jehovih! Nor shall ye fear, nor be expectant of torture or punishment. Though I come in All Power, my words shall be tempered with wisdom. But I can be no respecter of persons, nor swerve one jot or tittle from Jehovih's commandments.</p>
 <p>6. The bondage of all men was in the Father; for, before ye were conscious individuals, Jehovih stretched forth His hand, and ye came forth from Void, which was your prison in which your selfs had been as nothing.</p>
 <p>7. In likeness of the Father, I came to deliver them ye had bounden; and through Him have I attained power to that end. So, in likeness of Him, also, I cannot bind you, or cast you in prison. Nay, my sheriffs have just delivered you from bondage, and I am now holding you free from the knots.</p>
 <p>8. Most of ye are learned men of the second resurrection; but ye have used your wisdom for self-glorification, being proud to call yourselves Gods; not to teach them of Jehovih and His kingdoms, but falsely teaching that your own kingdoms were the All Highest, thereby shutting out the true light from the unlearned.</p>
 <p>9. Jehovih hath blessed you all with strong minds and handsome forms, whereupon, ye have each of you falsely proclaimed ye were Apollo. Think not that this matter was not known in high heaven. I have here the reports of swift messengers, which were brought to me in the firmament above. I came not in ignorance of what ye were doing; neither came I in weakness. More than a hundred thousand millions, who have been raised up to etherea from the earth and its heavens, stand at my side. Besides these, a million times as many ethereans, from other worlds; and above all of these, the Great Orian Chiefs; and yet beyond, and over all, Great Jehovih!</p>
 <p>10. Have I not proved my power before you all? Did I go away in a corner and say: Come, I will show you my power? Nay, I came close to you all. As the Father first proveth power, so have I. After that, wisdom. That I may talk to you in wisdom, I had you arrested and brought hither. Hear me then, and remember my words.</p>
 <p>11. In former cycles, the high Gods who descended to these heavens, finding false Gods, simply liberated their slaves, but put no labor of restitution on the false Gods. This was because the false Gods of those periods were too imbecile and unlearned. But the earth and her heavens have progressed to a higher state. And with progression cometh, also, responsibility. With learning cometh responsibility; and with wisdom, also.</p>
 <p>12. Ye bound your subjects to your kingdoms; and ye perceive, now, ye cannot put them aside. Ye taught them your kingdoms were the All Highest; they must now be unlearned. Ye taught them that ye were the All Highest Gods! They must be unlearned in this, also. Ye put aside the ancient rites and ceremonies, wherein the name of Jehovih was used, teaching them to sing to you, only. They must be taught new songs, substituting the Great Spirit, to Whom none can attain, forever. Ye taught them to be unthinking, and contented as slaves; they must now be taught to think for themselves, and to labor for everlasting liberty.</p>
 <p><a name="page_161"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 161</font></a></p>
 <p>13. And now, touching the law of the resurrection, remember ye, this is the same in all the created worlds; which is, that the spirit of man groweth by giving away of whatsoever the spirit hath to give. If ye have great learning, and ye give of it, then shall more learning be added unto you; if ye have goodness of heart, and gentle words, then, by giving this away, more shall be added unto you; if ye have craft in inventions or mechanics, and ye bestow of these talents unto others, then will more be added unto you. As the corporean man accumulateth corporeal things by not giving them away, not so accumulateth the spirit of any man.</p>
 <p>14. For he who locketh up the light of the Father that is in him, cannot obtain more light; he who locketh up goodness of heart, cannot obtain strength of spirit. And without strength of spirit, no man can attain to the third resurrection. But, that men may learn to obtain strength of spirit, the second resurrection has been established in atmospherea belonging to all the habitable corporeal worlds.</p>
 <p>15. The chief delight of man shall be, therefore, to find some way to impart his spiritual talents and strength, and to the greatest possible number of people. Think not that preaching to the ignorant is sufficient; but ye shall take hold with your own hands and show them how to accomplish. Yet not labor alone; for some are so created that ye cannot inspire them without rites and ceremonies and music.</p>
 <p>16. Nor shall a man, after having taught and raised up a few, say: Behold, what a good work I have done! But as long as he findeth a man, or woman, or child, who lacketh in anything, he shall feel to say: Alas, what I have done is as nothing in the resurrection of my fellows.</p>
 <p>17. For the rule holdeth for all men alike, to desire exaltation, and everlasting liberty, and unlimited power; and unless ye are prepared to give even these unto others, then ye cannot attain them yourselves. Neither is it possible for man to turn away from responsibility; to whom the Father hath given, from him the Father requireth. Ye have had your kingdoms. Yea, and boasted of them. Your boasts have ascended to etherea. Will ye go thither and be asked: Where is thy kingdom? Shall it be said ye shirked from the care of them the Father gave into your keeping?</p>
 <p>18. Bethink ye, O brothers! When the conscience of man turneth inward, there is still darkness slumbering in his soul. The etherean lights will burn him. He whose conscience no longer burned inward, becometh himself a brilliant flame of light. Through him Jehovih speaketh.</p>
 <p>19. Osire ceased; and now a brilliant light descended around about the throne, and presently Jehovih spake through Osire, saying:</p>
 <p>20. Times and half-times have I given to My corporeal worlds and their heavens. In a time have I made a full resurrection to those who aspire to My heavens above. Nor do I go away from any place I created, saying: Go thou alone for a season. But in a time I manifest a new light, for such, also, are My creations. Think not that I have given seasons to corporeal worlds only; I gave seasons to atmospherea, also.</p>
 <p>21. Is not a summer on the earth half a time? And the winter half a time? And the two, one full time? So created I for atmospherea a time of four hundred years, and a half-time of two hundred years. And in seven times and one half-time created I one dan'ha.</p>
 <p>22. I sent my Gods to teach these things since thousands of years; whereby My angels might know the times of My resurrections. Hath not a farmer knowledge of the resurrection of spring, when I cover the earth over with new-growing things which I raise up out of the earth? How much more knowledge should my angels have of my spring-times, in atmospherea, when My archangels come to gather in My harvests of emancipated souls.</p>
 <p>23. I commanded My etherean hosts, saying: Go ye to the lower heaven and teach them there is no such thing as individual resurrection. And they came proclaiming My word, showing all people that any number of individuals were as nothing unless united, which is the salvation I provided unto all My worlds.</p>
 <p>24. For I created progress to be in compact; nor gave I to any person individual salvation or resurrection. That men might learn the advantage of compact, I caused mortals to have corporeal languages, and to live in cities. That ye in atmospherea might learn the All Perfection of being one with one another, I gave you the second resurrection; teaching you, through My Gods and Lords, to abnegate self-aspiration, for self-aspiration is at the expense of others; but commanding ye to learn to assimilate with one another.</p>
 <p>25. And I gave rites and ceremonies, <a name="page_22"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 22</font></a> amongst which was the oath of service unto Me and My kingdoms, and unto none other, wherein many bound themselves, which was, and is, the beginning of liberty. Touching which matter, I created types on earth and in the lower heavens, that even the unlearned might understand Me and My works.</p>
 <p>26. For to him that begetteth children gave I bondage, to them and to him conjointly. But this is a bondage that circumventeth not liberty in time to come, for they can ascend to heaven, and progress conjointly, better than alone. But some gave themselves up to love earthly things, such as houses, and money, and kingdoms, which things have no resurrection. Hence, such bondage holdeth the person after death to the thing he loved.</p>
 <p>27. In type of which, many have set up kingdoms in the lower heavens, binding themselves to things that have no higher resurrection, which things belong on the plateau of atmospherea where I created them. But to them who have bound themselves to their fellows, saying: I am the salvation! it is like a young man saying to a maiden: Come, I will be thy husband. And she goeth to him in confidence. Here, then, is bondage; and she holdeth him as the way of her salvation. Wherein, not he alone can annul that which hath been united, nor yet they twain; for, by their bondage, I am also a party to the contract.</p>
 <p>28. In which manner, they that assume kingdoms, professing to be Gods of salvation, and thus enticing My innocent ones unto themselves, become bound, not only to their subjects, but to the contract of deliverance unto salvation; for so, created I them.</p>
 <p>29. The Voice ceased, and Osire said: If a man wed a woman with an evil temper, his glory lieth not in going away from her, but in teaching her to overcome her temper; or, if her husband be evil, her glory lieth not in going away from him, but in reforming him. Rather is it wise to accomplish whatever work Jehovih hath put in thy way, than to desert it for sake of personal comfort.</p>
 <p>30. Nevertheless, there is a limit to all things, save Jehovih; and to the wise there is power to accomplish much that seemeth impossible at first. Hear ye, then, my judgment upon you, which is that:</p>
 <p>31. Ye shall again assume kingdoms, and every one shall have all the subjects he had before. And ye shall be provided with places and thrones by my archangels, and with councils of my archangels also. And I will give to each and every one of you an assistant God, who shall sit on your right hand for four years, the time of this dawn, teaching how to teach, and what to teach.</p>
 <p>32. My hosts will now conduct you to the places prepared for you, around which are erected walls of agni. And when ye are safely seated on your thrones, your former subjects shall be brought before you in groups, and adjudged to the labor, and to the schools, and such other places as are suited to them, according to their strength and talents.</p>
 <p>33. And I pronounce it upon you, that ye shall deliver your respective subjects sufficiently for the third resurrection. Wherein, according to your zeal and faithfulness, will my hosts labor with you, to the end that Jehovih may be glorified in your harvests for the emancipated worlds. Attend, therefore, to give the sign, IN JEHOVIH'S NAME, and receive ye ordination from my hands, by the power and wisdom of the Great Spirit.</p>
 <p>34. The sheriffs showed them how to make the sign, and how to stand before the throne; and then Osire said: By Thy Wisdom, and Love, and Power, O Jehovih, which rest in me, do I annoint these, Thy Gods, for Thy service, and for the exaltation of Thy kingdoms, forever! Amen.</p>
 <p>35. The light was now becoming so brilliant that many of the newly-made Gods quailed before it. But the marshals conducted them, and they passed before the throne of Osire, where they were crowned and arrayed as Gods of the second resurrection; after which they were again conducted before the Council, and saluted on the sign; and thence, to martial music, they were taken to the kingdoms prepared for them.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah122.htm">Next: Chapter VII</a></center>
 </body>