<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah154.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah156.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XX</h3>
 <p>1. WHEN the recreation was ended, Yaton'te called his council together, and he sat on the throne, and Fragapatti and Hoab sat on his left hand on the throne, also.</p>
 <p>2. The Voice of Jehovih came to Yaton'te, saying: Behold, O My Sons and Daughters, this heaven and this land shall not be like any other place; for hither shall rise in time after, they that shall begin the founding of My kingdom amongst mortals. For in the lands of the east, and the heavens of the east, I have given them Lords and Gods before whom they fall down and worship. But in this heaven, and this land beneath it, shall not be given any Lord, nor God, nor any person born of woman for their resurrection.</p>
 <p>3. To this end have I created this subjective heaven and her plateaux, and they shall endure till the dawn of kosmon, and the overthrow of war and mortal kingdoms. From this throne will I come in that day, through My Chiefs, and reveal the histories of My kingdoms. And I will radiate outward, around about from this heaven, until My kingdoms encircle the whole earth, and until the earth's heavens are Mine also.</p>
 <p><a name="page_228a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 228a</font></a></p>
 <p>4. And whether the I'huans be mortals or spirits, ye shall not here teach them to worship any one, save the Great Spirit.</p>
 <p>5. For a question will arise amongst mortals in the beginning of kosmon, as to whether mortals are ruled by the angels of heaven. And I will prove it before them that in this land all Gods and Lords and Saviors shall be cast out, and mortals shall become worshippers of the Great Spirit, being ruled to that end by the inspiration that shall descend from this heaven, through the spirits of the I'huan race. And they shall know that I, Jehovih, alone rule over all, and within all My works.</p>
 <p>6. Be wise, My Sons and Daughters, for as ye now find little aspiration amongst the hosts of wandering spirits, so will the same lack of aspiration be manifested in the beginning of kosmon, amongst mortals. The Voice ceased.</p>
 <p>7. Yaton'te called Et'seing, his assistant God, saying: Come thou and sit on the throne. I will go now for forty days with Fragapatti and show him all my works. And I will go also with him to Hapacha, God of Ipseogee, after which I will return hither.</p>
 <p>8. Et'seing came and sat on the throne, duly saluting, having been anointed and crowned previously. Then rose up Fragapatti to speak, perceiving that the great multitude desired to hear him. He said:</p>
 <p>9. In what they have done I am well pleased, O Jehovih. Through Thy voice I selected them, and they deserve neither praise nor censure, being Thy servants. Thou hast wisely chosen them, for in this dawn I perceive the foundation of that which will reach mortals in the third dan'ha that cometh after. And because Thou hast chosen this place, O Father, great is the responsibility of these, Thy Lords, and Thy Lord God.</p>
 <p>10. Because they have supplicated Thee, Thou hast guided them, and they cannot err. Because their work hath been slow, they have great honor in patience and persistence. May Thy Wisdom, Power and Love continue with them, for Thy glory, now and forever. Amen! Fragapatti ceased, but the light became brilliant above his head; and the Voice came out of the Light, saying:</p>
 <p>11. More shall they concern themselves in a righteous foundation of My kingdom, than in a multitude of conversions and resurrections. For the standard of their Lords and Gods, and their successors, is of more value than <a name="page_229a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 229a</font></a> tens of thousands of redeemed who are of little wisdom and strength. For the latter will be raised up afterward.</p>
 <p>12. The Voice ceased, and Fragapatti came down from the throne, followed by Yaton'te and Hoab. The es'enaurs chanted, ALL HAIL, GREAT JEHOVIH'S POWER! HIS LIGHT THE IMMORTAL VOICE! And when the Gods advanced to Ctius, they halted, standing abreast, and then filed in front of the throne, saluting in the SIGN OF OM, and were answered by Fragapatti. Lastly came the marshals of the traveling hosts; and when they had passed, the Gods followed after, thus passing out of the capital to the place of the ships of fire, followed by the inhabitants of Yaton'te.</p>
 <p>13. Thus they entered the avalanza, with music and cheering; and thus they departed, first to survey the kingdom of Yaton'te, and then go to Ispeogee.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah156.htm">Next: Chapter XXI</a></center>
 </body>