<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah187.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah189.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XI</h3>
 <p>1. By this authority then, I, Zarathustra, by the power of I'hua'Mazda, reveal the created creations.</p>
 <p><a name="page_194b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 194b</font></a></p>
 <p>2. Ormazd created a good creation. First, the land and water and firm things; out of the unseen and void created He them. Second, the lights, heavenly; and the heat and the cold everywhere. Third, all living animals, and fish and birds. Fourth, man and woman.</p>
 <p>3. Then spake Ormazd through His Son, Vivinho, saying: Speech! Voice! Words! and man and woman were the only talking animals created in all the created world.</p>
 <p>4. Ormazd then created death, Anra'mainyus; with seven heads created He him. First vanity (uk), then tattling (owow), then worthlessness (hoe'zee), then lying (ugs'ga), then incurable wickedness (hiss'ce), then evil inventions for evil (bowh-hiss), then king and leader (daevas).</p>
 <p>5. Ormazd then created association (clans) by words bringing men together, Haroyu.</p>
 <p>6. Ormazd then created habitations (oke'a). And then He created dwelling-places for the Gods, with four good corners and four evil corners, created He them, Varena.</p>
 <p>7. And Ormazd created sustenance for the living and the dead, haoma. Then He created the boon of rest, for the weary, haraquaiti. After that he created sweet-smelling and rich-growing pastures, Urva.</p>
 <p>8. And Ormazd created combination, which is strength, chakhra. Then power to receive knowledge, haden'amazd.</p>
 <p>9. Ormazd then created the holy day (rak). Then He made the four signs of the moon, Uk'git, E'git, Ki'git and M'git, for all holiness.</p>
 <p>10. And He said: Six days shalt thou labor, O man; and worship on the seventh, because they are the moon's times.</p>
 <p>11. Then Ormazd, the Creator, created the power to live without kings; like the I'hins in the east, and the name of this power He created was Ranha.</p>
 <p>12. Then spake I'hua'Mazda to Zarathustra, the All Pure, saying: To attain to Ranha; how to attain to Ranha; this, then, is the holy Mazdian law:</p>
 <p>13. Ormazd shall be King, and thou shalt acknowledge no other. He shall be thy All Highest love forever, and above all other loves.</p>
 <p>14. Thou shalt disown all other <a name="page_195b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 195b</font></a> rulers, and kings, and queens, and Lords, and Gods.</p>
 <p>15. Thou shalt not bow down in reverence save to Ormazd, thy Creator.</p>
 <p>16. Thou shalt covenant thyself to thy Creator every day, and teach thy children to do so also.</p>
 <p>17. Thou shalt keep holy the four moon days, for they are the change of watch of the Gods and angels over them.</p>
 <p>18. Thou shalt not kill what thy Creator created alive.</p>
 <p>19. Thou shalt love thy father next to thy Creator, and obey his voice, and honor thy mother, because she brought thee forth by the will of thy Creator.</p>
 <p>20. Thou shalt not suffer thy desires to lead thee after woman.</p>
 <p>21. Thou shalt not take that which is another's.</p>
 <p>22. Thou shalt not be vain, for nothing is thine.</p>
 <p>23. Thou shalt not speak untruth.</p>
 <p>24. Thou shalt not talk of thy neighbor behind his back, for Ormazd heareth thee, and the angels will go tell thy neighbor's soul what thou hast said.</p>
 <p>25. Thou shalt not be idle or lazy, or thy flesh will become weak and bear down thy soul.</p>
 <p>26. Thou shalt not envy, nor harbor hatred against any man nor woman nor child.</p>
 <p>27. Thou shalt not reprove any man nor woman for their evil, for they are the Creator's.</p>
 <p>28. Thou shalt reprove thine own child, and teach him the right way.</p>
 <p>29. Thou shalt not lie with thy wife during pregnancy.</p>
 <p>30. Thou shalt not take to wife any of thy kin, save beyond the fifth generation.</p>
 <p>31. Thou shalt not take to wife a woman of unclean habits.</p>
 <p>32. Thou shalt not commit the self-habit.</p>
 <p>33. Thou shalt not desire of thy neighbor more than thou wouldst give.</p>
 <p>34. Thou shalt fast one day of the fourth moon all thy life, neither eating fish nor flesh, nor bread nor fruit; nor anything but water shall enter thy mouth.</p>
 <p>35. One whole year of thy life thou shalt dwell with the poor, live with the poor, sleep with the poor, begging for alms for the poor.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah189.htm">Next: Chapter XII</a></center>
 </body>