<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah153.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah155.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIX</h3>
 <p>1. A thousand miles north of the northern line of the sun on the earth, in the middle betwixt the east and west front of North Guatama, and from the earth upward, and without intervening space, five hundred miles, had Yaton'te founded his kingdom, and hither it was that Fragapatti came to see him. Five hundred miles westward lay Ipseogee, extending north and south two thousand miles, where reigned the good Faithist, Hapacha, styled God of the West Wind.</p>
 <p>2. After the avalanza reached Yaton'te's capital, and the hosts duly landed in the lower heaven, Yaton'te ascended his throne, and after due ceremonies of welcome and thanksgiving, and with music rendering praise to the All High, Yaton'te proclaimed recreation for three days and three nights.</p>
 <p>3. Then spake Fragapatti to him, saying: I am glad of this, because I desire to hear the story of thy adventures, and of thy success in this kingdom, for thy record must also be my record, to be taken with us, at the end of this dawn, to heaven above. Hoab and his hosts shall also hear thy words.</p>
 <p>4. Yaton'te replied: What I have done, I have done. Nevertheless, he who hath built great kingdoms may find little to admire in a small one.</p>
 <p>5. Fragapatti said: I have seen old men who doted more on a grandchild than on a large family they had bred themselves. And is it not a wise provision of our Creator that He bestowed us with such means as enableth us at all times to live over again our past history in the young? Every hour we find a new way open to remind us of our follies in youth; and also a new channel in which to behold Jehovih's Wisdom.</p>
 <p>6. Yaton'te said: If a man convert his neighbor from evil into good, two great things are accomplished, the triumph of the man and the reformation of the neighbor. If on the other hand a man fail to convert his neighbor from evil to good, two misfortunes have transpired, which are, the disappointment of one and the loss of glory to Jehovih. It is a strong man that can recount his own failures and say he glorifieth the Father because thereof.</p>
 <p><a name="page_224a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 224a</font></a></p>
 <p>7. Fragapatti said: How shall we measure magnitudes, O Yaton'te? Hath not a mortal, that hath delivered one druk into light, as great a glory as a God that delivereth hundreds of thousands? Is not the one as great in magnitude as the other? According to our worthiness in righteous persistence, no matter what our limit is, is not this the greatest glory? Jehovih gave to man, to first learn to deliver himself in the All Highest. He who can do this is a great ruler. And in the next time Jehovih giveth him to rule over a small kingdom, perhaps a drunkard, or a wanton, or even over his own family, to righteousness. He that doeth this is a great ruler. Is not, then, man's persistence in righteousness the whole glory of his kingdom?</p>
 <p>8. Yaton'te said: The Father knoweth! To try, and to try, and to try; this is the sum of the good a man doeth. And yet what man is there in heaven or on earth but can find an apology for the good work he accomplished? Doth not the poor man say: O, if I had this, what great good I would accomplish? And the rich man maketh the same speech, and the king also. And yet Jehovih hath given a kingdom to each and every one of them. But he who can say: I have done all I could, according to my strength and wisdom, rateth amongst the highest of men and Gods.</p>
 <p>9. Hear me, then, O Fragapatti; and thou mayst best understand; suffer thyself to forget all the light of high heaven, and to be in a place of darkness, where three thousand million spirits are vagrants, scattered far and wide on the corporeal earth. Such was Aoasu in this kingdom; but the spirits congregated not together in hells, as they did in the east, for they had no association; no Gods, nor Lords. They were perpetual migrants, save such as dwelt with the druks as familiars.</p>
 <p>10. And as to the spirits of those that died in infancy, they were taken by the spirits of their fathers and mothers, or others, and cared for until they also gained sufficient knowledge to serve them as vagrants, and there was the end.</p>
 <p>11. And strange to say, all these spirits were without clothes or drapery of any kind, and devoid of shame; neither were they good or evil, nor had they desire for, or knowledge of, a higher heaven, being content to rove about, to sleep, and to eat. And they had a thousand languages; or, at least, <a name="page_225a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 225a</font></a> a thousand different kinds of signs and utterances, which they had acquired on earth, but lost and mixed up so that neither Lords nor Gods could converse with them.</p>
 <p>12. Thus I surveyed them and found them, before I built this capital, for which reason I came thus centrally amongst them. Know also, O Chief, that I traveled amongst them with music and with fire, and gaudy apparel, in hope to gain their aspiration; but, alas, they neither smiled nor frowned on my fine shows, but vacantly gazed at us, or even fell asleep whilst our otevan was paraded before them.</p>
 <p>13. Then I came hither and built this capital, and founded Jehovih's throne, whereon thou now honorest me. And then I sent to them, here and there, presents of gaudy attire, in hope to inspire the multitude through the few; but, alas, those I attired soon divested themselves of their clothes, preferring nakedness. Thus ended my second failure.</p>
 <p>14. After this, I sent a hundred thousand preachers to them, to portray the greater glory of a higher heaven. But, alas, they heeded not, or, if heeding, in a day would forget all that had been told them. And thus ended the third failure.</p>
 <p>15. Then we held a holy council, imploring Jehovih for light and power; and His voice came upon me, saying: Go to their loves, My Son; go to mortals. Begin thou with es'yans.</p>
 <p>16. Then I commanded my hosts to go and live for a season amongst mortals; and they brought the es'yans to Yaton'te, under guard of the asaphs. And the next of kin followed, desiring to remain. And I said unto them: Behold, my place is fair, and my people are clothed. Save ye be clothed also, ye cannot dwell with us, nor shall ye more look upon your next of kin, whom I have taken for myself.</p>
 <p>17. And for love there came many mothers and fathers, and brothers and sisters, belonging to the recent dead; and they suffered themselves to be clothed; and these were the first in my kingdom.</p>
 <p>18. Again I called my hosts together, and I said unto them: A thousand Lords I must have. I will divide North Guatama amongst my Lords, and they shall dwell with mortals, having a sufficiency of ashars to give one to each and every mortal, man, woman and child. And whether by natural death or by war, it mattereth not, the es'yans shall be brought to my kingdom.</p>
 <p><a name="page_226a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 226a</font></a> </p>
 <p>19. This I accomplished, providing nurseries and places of entertainment for such as were brought hither. But, alas, the tens of thousands of spirits who thus came because of their kin, and accepted clothing for sake of remaining, had little talent to talk, or even desire for anything.</p>
 <p>20. At the next holy council the Light came to me, saying: Hear the voice of thy Creator, O My Son; because thou hast been diligent in striving for the resurrection of My children, I am come to thee. Behold, I created man naked, and with shame, as the foundation of industry. But because this people followed, in the Osirian age, the abandonment of spirit communion, whilst they were yet mortal, they lost the light of My countenance.</p>
 <p>21. Neither canst thou inspire them to industry, save through clothing the body; but, first of all, thou shalt make them ashamed of nakedness; otherwise, there is no higher resurrection for them.</p>
 <p>22. Then I inquired of the Creator how I should teach them shame. He said: Of themselves, to themselves, for themselves, thou canst do but little. But thou shalt inspire them through mortals.</p>
 <p>23. Every plateau shall be a thousand miles in breadth every way, save the lowest, which shall be two thousand miles, with a rise of one degree, so that the plateaux shall extend from the earth up to thy kingdom, like a stairway, one plateau higher than another.</p>
 <p>24. And thy Lords shall provide for the lowest, and for the second lowest plateaux, subjective entertainments, subjective teachings and subjective things in general. Neither shall there be anything real on these two plateaux, save the inhabitants and their food, and the mirrors and lenses, and machinery for producing subjectives.</p>
 <p>25. And the lower plateau, being on the earth, shall be provided as a mirage, having everything spiritual in appearance, as they are corporeally on the earth. And it shall be provided with forests and lakes and rivers, and with all manner of animals and birds and fish, and of whatsoever is suitable food for mortals. And the lowest plateau shall be called Hochedowa, signifying, happy hunting ground.</p>
 <p>26. And thou shalt send word to thy Lords, saying: Thus saith thy Creator: Behold, I have created a good place, and called it Hochedowa. Teach <a name="page_227a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 227a</font></a> ye this to mortals, by inspiration and otherwise, saying also to them: Go tell one another, for, after death, the soul shall go thither in great delight. And ye shall say unto them: Save ye wear garments to hide your nakedness, ye shall not enter Hochedowa.</p>
 <p>27. Yaton'te said: When the lowest plateau was made habitable, covering a large portion of North Guatama, the Voice came again, saying: Through thy Lords, My Son, thou shalt possess all mortals, every man and woman and child, suffering not one of the drujas to come near them.</p>
 <p>28. And, behold, I will send upon the land in many places, great drouths, because of the construction of thy plateau, and these wandering spirits shall not find sustenance, save but through thee and thy Lords. And as fast as they come, thou shalt oblige them to be clothed or draped about the loins; but thou shalt show preference to all such as wear ornaments.</p>
 <p>29. Yaton'te said: This much have we accomplished, O Fragapatti: The foundation of my heavenly kingdom is broad and sure, but as yet I have few subjects to show thee.</p>
 <p>30. Fragapatti said: Behold, I will take two days of rest, and then I will inspect thy places. Proclaim, therefore, recreation for two days.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah155.htm">Next: Chapter XX</a></center>
 </body>