<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah186.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah188.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
  said: To be all bad; to be all foolish; to be all evil thinking; to do evil works, what are these?
 <p>11. I'hua'Mazda said: These are not to hear my voice; these are Anra'mainyus, O Zarathustra! Then Zarathustra inquired, saying: Is not the, ---not to hear thy voice, a person? Is the, ---to hear thy voice, a person?</p>
 <p>12. I'hua'Mazda said to Zarathustra, the All Pure: Anra'mainyus was a person; but he is dead: Vivanho is a person, and he liveth to all the holy, to all the good, to all the wise. But to all the evil, to all the bad, to all the foolish, Anra'mainyus is not dead.</p>
 <p>13. Then inquired Zarathustra, the All Pure: Whence came All Good; whence came all evil? Who is All Good; who is all evil? Then answered I'hua'Mazda to Zarathustra, saying: Thou perceivest now, all evil must have a name; All Good must have a name. Without names, no man could talk. Behold, I will write for thee, O Zarathustra, thou All Pure. The mark I make first, thou shalt call the All Good, the Creator, the Master, the Light! Here, then, have I made a circle and a cross and a leaf. (For these characters with explanations, see Tablet Saphah, verses 8 and 9. -Ed.)</p>
 <p>14. I'hua'Mazda said to Zarathustra, the All Pure: Whoever looketh upon this mark, whoever seeth it, seeth the Name of All Names, the Creator. Whoever maketh this mark, writeth the name of the All Good; whoever pronounceth this mark, pronounceth the name of Ormazd, the All Master.</p>
 <p>15. Then made I'hua'Mazda a circle, and painted four dark corners in it, and called it Anra'mainyus, the Uh-druk, the opposition to All Truth, and All Light, and All Good. And I'hua'Mazda explained to Zarathustra.</p>
 <p>16. And, behold, there stood within the circle of evil, the name of All Good, the cross, and it was light, and the corners were black. I'hua'Mazda called this mark FATE, explaining to Zarathustra, the All Pure, saying: These three marks embrace all the created creation; hence, the name of the third one is Fate, from which there is no escape, nor separation, forever.</p>
 <p>17. Zarathustra inquired of I'hua'Mazda, saying: Is evil, evil; is good, good? I'hua'Mazda said: Evil is evil to man, but evil is not evil to Ormazd. Good is good to man; but good is not good to Ormazd. Only two conditions are before Ormazd; not evil, nor good; but ripe and unripe. To Ormazd, that which man calleth evil is unripe; to Ormazd, that which man calleth good is ripe.</p>
 <p>18. I'hua'Mazda went on explaining, saying: For sake of understanding, O <a name="page_192b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 192b</font></a> Zarathustra; for sake of not confounding, thou shalt call evil, evil; and good, good. Hear me, then, my son:</p>
 <p>19. Without green fruit, none could be ripe; without evil none could be good. So Ormazd created all creation, and called it good; but lo, and behold, there was nothing to do. All things moved not; as if dead, all things were as nothing.</p>
 <p>20. Then Ormazd blew His breath outward, and every created thing went into motion. And those at the front were called All Good, and those at the rear were called all evil. Thus created the Creator the Good Creation and the Evil Creation; the I'hua'Mazda and the Anra'mainyus.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter X</h3>
 <p>1. THEN spake I'hua'Mazda to Zarathustra, the All Pure, saying: Thus thy Creator created all things; and the time of the creation was as a time, and a time, and a time, and without measure.</p>
 <p>2. I'hua'Mazda said unto Zarathustra: Thus are the created creations; thus were the created creations; thus shall ever be the created creations. The Light of all light is Ormazd; He the Soul of all souls. These are the things seen and things unseen, created by Ormazd, thy Creator: Mi, the Mother Almighty: Then is Voice, the Expression of things, the All Speech, the All Communion, created by Ormazd, thy Creator, and by Mi, the Almighty Mother, a virgin never before conceived, and this was Vivanho, the Son.</p>
 <p>3. I'hua'Mazda said to Zarathustra, the All Pure: Behold me, O thou, Zarathustra! Here I make one straight line; and now I make another straight line, and now another, all joined.</p>
 <p>4. Then Zarathustra answered, saying: Thou hast made a triangle: What is the meaning, O I'hua'Mazda? Then answered I'hua'Mazda, saying: Three in one, O Zarathustra: Father, Mother, and Son; Ormazd, the ghost of all things; Mi, the seen and unseen, and Vivanho, the expression of things.</p>
 <p>5. I'hua'Mazda said unto Zarathustra: These three comprise all things; and all things are but one; nor were there more, nor shall ever be. Nevertheless, O my son, each of these hath a million parts, a thousand million parts, ten hundred thousand million <a name="page_193b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 193b</font></a> parts. And every part is like unto the whole; thou, O Zarathustra, also. For thou hast within thyself those three attributes, and no more. And each and all created things have these three attributes in them. Thus Ormazd created all the living creation; brothers and sisters created He them, in likeness of himself, with three entities embraced in one; which are, first, the ghost, the soul, which is incomprehensible; second, the beast, the figure, the person, which is called individual; and, third, the expression, to receive and impart.</p>
 <p>6. I'hua'Mazda said unto Zarathustra, the All Pure: To receive and to impart; what else hath man; what more desireth he? Then I'hua'Mazda made a picture of a cow, and a picture of a horse, a strong male horse dashing forth. And he asked Zarathustra, saying: Which of these signifieth receiving; which of these signifieth to impart? And Zarathustra perceived.</p>
 <p>7. I'hua'Mazda said unto Zarathustra: To be negative is to be a cow; to be positive is to be a horse.</p>
 <p>8. Zarathustra inquired of I'hua'Mazda, saying: How many words are there, that can be written words! Thou hast now written many wise words, full of meaning. How many more words are there? Then answered I'hua'Mazda, saying: A thousand words and ten thousand words would not be all; but ten times ten thousand hundred thousand, and those are all the words created.</p>
 <p>9. Then Zarathustra, the All Pure, said: Write me down all the words, and explain the meaning of them to me, that I may go before the world teaching All Truth, so that men will no longer be in darkness.</p>
 <p>10. Then I'hua'Mazda wrote down tens of hundreds, and thousands of words, and explained the meaning. After that, Zarathustra sat in the bushes for thirty days and thirty nights, neither eating nor drinking nor sleeping. And then I'hua'Mazda revealed the secrets of heaven and earth to him, and commanded him to write them in a book; the which he did; and this was the first book, the Zarathustrian law, the I'hua'Mazdian law.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah188.htm">Next: Chapter XI</a></center>
 </body>