<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah291.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah293.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXVI</h3>
 <p>1. GREAT was the feast, the pomp and parade and glory, in Hored, when De'yus' victorious Gods and their companions and attendants came in answer to the summons of Anuhasaj, alias the Lord God. The trumpeters of Hored were stationed along more than a thousand miles on the heavenly roadways, and in turn the trumpeters and heralds of the visiting Gods extended in advance of the Gods themselves an equally great distance.</p>
 <p>2. All the way were the roads lined with flags and banners, and millions of spectators, the same who had formerly been in schools and colleges in heaven, but were now emancipated from the restrictions of self-improvement, and used as applauders, to sing and shout praises to De'yus (Dyaus) for his own glory.</p>
 <p>3. The table of the feast was private and in secret, and only prepared for the Gods and their close companions, one hundred all told, but the serving host numbered more than one million souls.</p>
 <p>4. Whilst at the feast, De'yus said to Osiris: Speak thou of thy exploits, and of Baal and Ashtaroth and their valorous legions.</p>
 <p>5. Then Osiris explained the nature of the earth countries, and of the battles and incidents, well exaggerating the last result. After Osiris had finished his story, De'yus said to Te-in: Speak thou of thy exploits, and of thy generals and captains, and of thy valorous legions.</p>
 <p>6. Whereupon, Te-in displayed the maps of the earth regions where he had been, and his battles, and final success, also much exaggerated. And now, after he had finished his story, De'yus said to Sudga: Speak thou of thy generals and captains and thy valorous legions.</p>
 <p>7. Then Sudga explained the earth region where he had fought and won, extolling his generals and captains, and his hosts, well exaggerated also.</p>
 <p>8. When they had all finished their hilarious accounts, and applauded one another in sufficient zeal, in that same time the feast of eating and drinking was ended also. Whereupon Anuhasaj rose up and said:</p>
 <p>9. I now declare the feast ended. Let the tables be removed. Behold, I will speak from the throne, in private, before my five Gods only, save mine own marshals. But unto all others I declare a time of recreation and sport, to be called again to duty when I have finished with my Gods, of which my marshals will inform the trumpeters, who shall sound the call.</p>
 <p>10. Speedily, now, the attendants took away the tables; and the hosts all withdrew, save the Gods and De'yus and his marshals. Whereupon De'yus ascended the throne, and then spake, saying:</p>
 <p>11. I, the Lord your God, who am De'yus of heaven and earth, declare unto you, my Gods and earth rulers, in mine own name, and with love abounding:</p>
 <p>12. To declare my doctrines and creations <a name="page_406"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 406</font></a> before you; that all the earth may be subdued alike unto me and mine forever.</p>
 <p>13. To surpass not mine own age in my doctrines, nor to explain my axioms. But to surpass the understanding of mortals sufficiently unto their knowledge of earthly things, and so appease their curiosity, as to the questions they put to ye, my Gods.</p>
 <p>14. Neither will I bind myself as Ahura did; for I will not explain who I am, save that man is in mine own likeness; nor when the beginning of things was.</p>
 <p>15. This heaven I created; and ye also bear witness that I have established the earth in me, through your valorous deeds.</p>
 <p>16. I, who am your God, look not to matters of a day, or a year; my times are as one time, for from this time forth forever this heaven and earth are mine, time without end.</p>
 <p>17. In which ye behold days and years and the generations of men on the earth pass rapidly. Who, then, shall think seriously of the inhabitants that now are yours and mine?</p>
 <p>18. Behold, the earth is fruitful; a thousand years are but as one day; and there shall spring up out of the earth thousands of millions of souls newborn. For them are my answers shaped, more than for such as now are.</p>
 <p>19. In the beginning I created this heaven and the earth (unto mine own name and glory). For they were void and without order; darkness was upon them. Whereupon I moved upon them, saying: Let there be light; and there was light. And I drew a line betwixt darkness and light (for they had worshipped the void instead of me).</p>
 <p>20. Wherefrom I declare this the morning and evening of the first day. And I have divided those that were void, and established my firmament betwixt them, even as land betwixt water and water.</p>
 <p>21. And my firmament is heaven, and I have made it to be over such as were void, like water.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah293.htm">Next: Chapter XXVII</a></center>
 </body>