<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah231.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah233.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VII</h3>
 <p>1. AHURA immediately on his return to his kingdom set about accomplishing this great labor.</p>
 <p>2. Now there were with Ahura many who had been sub-Gods and were captains and generals under him whilst he was in rebellion against Jehovih and His kingdoms; and when they heard of the proclamation they said within their souls: What, is it possible Ahura is at his old games? For they knew not his concert with the kingdoms above, and so believed not in his power.</p>
 <p>3. Jehovih moved upon Ahura, and induced him to send numerators and graders throughout his kingdom, to take the measure of those who had faith, and of those who had no faith; and of those who had neither faith nor non-faith. And these Ahura graded and numbered, so when the time came he should know where to place them. Then he numbered the unlearned and dumb; and then the enthusiastic; and he graded them and arranged them also.</p>
 <p>4. When he had this much accomplished, there came to him one Anuhasaj, a former sub-God, and he said to Ahura, privily: I love thee, Ahura, and for that reason come before thee. Thou shalt meet only failure and disaster in thy undertaking. How many times, in thy mighty kingdom of Ctusk, didst the All High fail to come to thee?</p>
 <p>5. Ahura said: Because of thy love I rejoice in thee; but because of thy lack in faith I deplore thee. How long will it be before angels and mortals understand the Father and His kingdoms? Behold, in the days of Ctusk I labored not for Jehovih, but for myself and my exaltation, and for <a name="page_334a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 334a</font></a> the exaltation of my kingdom for mine own ends. Hence the All High came not to answer my prayers. Now, in this matter, I am doing that which is not for me, nor for my kingdom for mine own sake, but for the Father's sake only. And I know He will not fail me.</p>
 <p>6. Anuhasaj said: Hath it not been from the time of the ancients till now, that certain ones say that by prayer and faith all things are possible, assuring us, moreover, that by such are all things accomplished in earth and in heaven? And yet, who hath not witnessed more failure than success? I do not desire to discourage thee, O Ahura, but I know so well the lack of faith on the part of all men, and that to get one's self weaned away from self is the weakest talent in the soul. And, for which reason, too, it is ultimately the greatest glory. But this would seem to me expedient: To have Cpenta-armij and her hosts do this resurrection for thee.</p>
 <p>7. Ahura said: Even thine every thought have I already fulfilled. And through the Chieftainess came the Father's Voice, commanding me to do this resurrection on mine own account.</p>
 <p>8. To this Anuhasaj made no reply, but in his soul he was not free from the tetracts, being jealous that Ahura had advanced him in obtaining the Father's commands. But Ahura perceived it not, and he said unto Anuhasaj: The hosts of Ailkin have been numbered, and there are four thousand millions and five hundred millions. And within the grades above es'yan there are one hundred and seventy thousand schools, two hundred and thirty thousand colleges, four hundred thousand factories, and two hundred thousand hospitals.</p>
 <p>9. Behold, on the day of resurrection I shall have the Han-od-wotcha recreation for my hosts. Let this, then, be thy labor, to have the matter proclaimed throughout Ailkin. Anuhasaj said: By Jehovih's leave and thine, I am satisfied.</p>
 <p>10. Thus ended the matter, and Ahura remembered afterward, that Anuhasaj had not answered positive acceptance, and so Ahura feared, and, to make doubly sure, called Evasan, and committed the same charge to him.</p>
 <p>11. Now when the time came, lo and behold, Anuhasaj fulfilled not his part, but Evasan did; and Evasan, moreover, came to Ahura, bringing answers from all the departments.</p>
 <p>12. In the morning of the day of the resurrection, Ahura sent for Anuhasaj and inquired concerning the <a name="page_335a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 335a</font></a> matter. Anuhasaj said: Nay, I issued not thy proclamation nor thy invitation; for I reasoned on the matter, saying to myself: If the resurrection be a failure, then would it indeed be better that the ignorant know not of it.</p>
 <p>13. Ahura said: To do well one's own part; is this not the highest? Anuhasaj said: It is the highest. Even so have I done that which seemed the highest in mine own sight.</p>
 <p>14. Ahura said: The resurrection was not for thee nor for me, but for the hosts. For thou hadst previously admitted that the resurrection of this plateau was the highest, best thing to be done. Because it seemed impracticable in thy sight, thou wert not justified in withholding thy hand. Thou shouldst have striven to accomplish that which was for the universal good, not even whispering thy distrust to any one. Then, had it failed, thine own soul had been clear. For which reason Jehovih came to me, and I was so admonished to depute Evasan in thy stead, and he hath fulfilled my commands.</p>
 <p>15. Anuhasaj made no reply, but went away in displeasure, and for the present the matter was dismissed.</p>
 <p>16. Ahura had sent invitations to the Lords of all the divisions of the earth, asking them to come, bringing their attendants with them. Of these the following came, to wit: Oe-wah, Lord of Hi-jee-tse; Ha-kappa, Lord of Paradise; Loo-gam, Lord of Vri-mij; Jes-Sie, Lordess of Spe-ta; Ami, Lordess of Kosmon; Horam, Lord of Flue; and Puetse, Lordess of Sin-Yot, each bringing one million attendants, besides hundred of thousands of visitors of lower grade.</p>
 <p>17. Cpenta-armij, with her visitors, Owks, and See-wah=Gon, and Ha-o-ha, and five million attendants, and five and thirty million visitors, from Craoshivi, came in an avalanza made for the purpose.</p>
 <p>18. The place of removal which Ahura had decided to inherit was in the second belt below meteoris, known in atmospherea at that time as Vara-pishanaha, which laid betwixt the land of Vind'yu and the star-region known as the HORSE AND COW AND CALF PASTURES, a heavenly place, uninhabited. From Ailkin to Vara-pishanaha was fourteen hours in grade twenty-five, which was the average of Ahura's hosts; but its enlargement in the upper belt would be as fifteen to nine.</p>
 <p>19. Cpenta-armij and her hosts were <a name="page_336a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 336a</font></a> the first to arrive in Ahura's dominion; for she had determined that nothing should lead to failure in Ahura's enterprise. Through her advice Ahura stationed water-bearers the entire distance of travel, lest, in the excitement, the drujas might run into knots or riot. For such is the nature of darkness, both on earth and in the lower heavens: the low delight to dwell in a city, or near a place of filth, if companionable, rather than go to a place of isolation where improvement is possible.</p>
 <p>20. Jehovih had said to Ahura: Suffer not thy drujas to know thou wilt remove them so far from the earth; confide thou only with the wise in reference to thy destiny. Cpenta-armij had said to Ahura: Provide thy drujas a holiday in parade, with rites and ceremonies. And Ahura perceived how the matter had to be, and he apportioned eighty millions of his hosts to provide parades, rites and ceremonies for the drujas of his hosts, and of these drujas, ranking below grade five, there were one thousand millions and two hundred millions, being such angels as knew not the left hand from the right, nor could remember to count five from one day to the next. And yet the next thousand million, rating below grade twelve, knew so little more, they were scarcely wiser than beasts in the field.</p>
 <p>21. Cpenta-armij, seeing these, exclaimed: O Jehovih, how long must Ahura labor with these in order to raise them to grade ninety-nine! O that they who set themselves up as Gods knew what lay before them! O that leaders of men knew! O that mortal kings and queens knew the bondage that they lay down for themselves! What a work in the lower heavens for them before they can ascend! And yet, O Jehovih, Thou art just. Some one must labor with these unfortunates. It is well that man aspireth to be king, and Lord and God.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah233.htm">Next: Chapter VIII</a></center>
 </body>