<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah211.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah213.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter V</h3>
 <p>1. GOD propounded: If a man die, and be not a Zarathustrian, what then? All the members spake, and then:</p>
 <p>2. Div decreed: Inasmuch as he accepted not the Zarathustrian law whilst mortal, he is unsuited to the highest exalted places of delight. For all official preference shall be to the Zarathustrian. This was the forty-fourth Divan law.</p>
 <p>3. Div decreed of the same spirit, who not being a Zarathustrian: His education shall not run to the Lord-head, nor to the God-head. He shall not be a column in the Father's building, nor of the arch-stones of great strength, but he shall stand as a plain brick in the wall.</p>
 <p>4. Div said: I am not created God to merely serve my time, and there an end. I am to look far ahead as to who shall be Lords and Gods over the earth and atmospherea.</p>
 <p>5. Div propounded: What, then, shall be the course of a spirit who was not a Zarathustrian? And this was made the forty-sixth Divan law: He shall be delivered to the asaphs, who shall enter him in the nurseries as an es'yan, where he shall remain six years, learning the elementary powers and expressions.</p>
 <p>6. Div decreed the forty-seventh Divan law: The same spirit shall then be apprenticed in manufacturing and general labor, where he shall serve twelve years, unless previously instructed in these things whilst mortal.</p>
 <p>7. Div decreed the forty-eighth Divan law: He shall now enter school and learn surveying and measuring without instruments, and determining the kind of emanations that rise up from the earth, their altitude and density; and he shall learn exploration and enumeration in both corpor and es; the building of piedmazrs and otevans; the constructing of arrow-ships, and all other vessels used in the heavens to carry things from place to place. And he shall serve thirty years in these things.</p>
 <p>8. Div decreed the forty-ninth Divan law: He shall now be promoted to restoring, nursing and caring for the drujas who are being rescued by the captains, generals and Lords; in which service he shall be for thirty years. But in both the forty-eighth and forty-ninth Divan laws it was afterward decreed: Whatsoever service he did in mortal life, in these respects, shall stand to his credit two-fold in spirit.</p>
 <p>9. Div decreed: If he now acknowledge and practice faith in the Great Spirit, he shall be promoted to the COLLEGE OF CREATION, and taught to create light and darkness. After this, he shall be taught to sar'gis flowers and trees and clothes, and to take elementary lessons in music and expression, <a name="page_287"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 287</font></a> in which branches he shall serve fifty years. And then, he shall be entitled to examination, and if he can withstand the third grade of light, he shall be ranked BRIDEGROOM OF OM. This was the fiftieth Divan law. The fifty-first thus provideth:</p>
 <p>10. If he doth not yet comprehend faith in the All Person, he shall be granted freedom to all the places where he hath served, and he shall be emancipated from all Lords and Gods, and from all labor and education, and honorably discharged, to pursue whatsoever he desireth in any place in heaven or earth. Nor shall the Lords nor Gods take more notice of him than due respect and honor.</p>
 <p>11. Whereupon, Div, SON OF ALL LIGHT, spake, saying: This also shall be part and parcel of the Divan law, which is to say: Of the latter class rise the false Gods and false Lords, that oft set up kingdoms of their own in atmospherea. They shall not rise above the second resurrection.</p>
 <p>12. The Voice of Jehovih came to God, saying: Without the disbeliever in spirits, mortals could not find courage to smite serpents; without false Gods and false Lords the lowest drujas would never be put to work. They who cannot be risen by persuasion, may be aroused by less scrupulous masters, who make slaves of them.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah213.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a></center>
 </body>