<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah238.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah240.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_311b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 311b</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">First Book of God</h1>
 <font size="2"><p>BEING COTEMPORANEOUS WITH THE BOOK OF CPENTA-ARMIJ, DAUGHTER OF JEHOVIH. AS THE UPPER BOOK RELATETH TO THE HIGHER HEAVENS, SO IN LIKE MANNER DEALETH THE FIRST BOOK OF GOD WITH THE LOWER HEAVENS AND WITH THE EARTH, FOR THE SAME PERIOD OF TIME. FOR WHICH REASON THIS BOOK IS PLACED BELOW THE OTHER. THIS BOOK TREATETH FULLY OF THE FOUR GREAT PERSONS CHOSEN BY GOD, NAMELY: PO, OF CHINE'YA, INSPIRED BY THE GOD YIMA; BRAHMA, OF VIND'YU, INSPIRED BY THE GOD DIV; ABRAM, OF PARSI'E, AND AFTERWARD OF EGUPT, INSPIRED BY THE GOD VISHNU; AND EA-WAH-TAH, OF NORTH GUATAMA, INSPIRED BY THE GOD OS. AND THESE INSPIRATIONS WERE FOR THE SAME PERIOD OF TIME, KNOWN IN THE KINGDOMS OF HEAVEN AS THE TIME OF THE ARC OF BON. THESE FOUR GODS WERE THE CHIEF DIVAN GODS OF THAT DAY, HA'CHUE BEING DIV IN CHIEF</p></font>.
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <p>1. THE Creator of creations: Out of Whom are all voices: Of Whom are all things in semblance. From Him and in Him these utterances. By His Gods and Lords and high-raised angels and mortals.</p>
 <p>2. Into Whose dominion gave He the earth for the glory of Jehovih, Whose God came and walked and talked with such as had been prepared for the deliverance of His chosen.</p>
 <p>3. For the four preserved divisions of the earth gave he four Sons of holy light and power for the voice of God and his Lords:</p>
 <p><a name="page_312b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 312b</font></a></p>
 <p>4. Po, of Jaffeth; Abram, of Arabin'ya; Brahma, of Vindyu, and Eawahtah, of Guatama, whose records are everlasting on the earth, which are testimony that these men were raised up by the Father for His Own glory, and for the deliverance of men.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah240.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>