<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah269.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah271.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IV</h3>
 <p>1. JEHOVIH spake to God, saying: Because thou hast founded Me-de thou shalt make Me-de-ci laws; and thou shalt send thy surveyors down to hada and to the earth also, and they shall choose a heavenly place for thy new kingdom. And thither shalt thou go and create a plateau and holy place and capital, and provide a throne for it.</p>
 <p>2. And when thou hast completed thy work thou shalt call to the throne a sub-God, who shall rule in thy place with wisdom, and power, and love, in My name.</p>
 <p>3. But since many of My chosen forget Me and so apostate themselves, thy sub-God shall also receive their spirits, and his kingdom shall be their kingdom till they are purged of their sins.</p>
 <p>4. God spake in the Council of Craoshivi, relating what Jehovih had said to him, and the Council then ratified the commandments of Jehovih. And there was selected one A-chung-le, and made sub-God of Me-de, with the title Anubi, signifying mediator, and judge of grades.</p>
 <p>5. God said: Anubi shall have a badge, and a pair of scales; with mine own hands will I invest him. And, accordingly, the place, the kingdom, the person, and the badge of office were duly established by God under the commandment of Jehovih through his kingdom of Craoshivi. And the term of office was made to correspond with God's and his Lords'.</p>
 <p>6. Thus was put upon the throne in the heavenly place, Me-de, Anubi, who had been A-chung-le, an angel of a thousand years in the colleges of Jehovih, most wise and full of love, and industrious withal.</p>
 <p>7. Again Jehovih spake to God, saying: From this time forth My colleges shall be in Craoshivi; from this time forth My schools and primaries shall be in the kingdoms of My Lords. The Diva afterward made this another section of the Divan law.</p>
 <p>8. So God and his Lords removed all his colleges and places of great learning to Craoshivi; but the schools and primary educationals were left in the dominions of the Lords, their heavenly places.</p>
 <p>9. Now, during the dawn of dan, four etherean Gods had sojourned on the earth, walking with four mortals, namely: With Po, of Jaffeth; Abram, of Arabin'ya; Brahma, of Vind'yu, and Eawahtah, of Guatama. And the four Gods preached through these four men, explaining Jehovih and His kingdoms; and the angels of Jehovih inspired many followers unto them. For four years these Gods dwelt on the earth, and then ascended into the upper regions.</p>
 <p>10. Jehovih spake to God concerning the matter, saying: For four years I bestowed My light in Person on the corporeal earth, and then I departed; for it is well that men and angels learn to be self-raising. For which reason I left four substitutes, Lords of heaven, on the earth, with My four peoples whom I delivered. And I commanded these My substitutes to abide upon the earth for forty years, in order to indulge My chosen in a surety in My creations founded in corpor.</p>
 <p>11. Provide thou unto them; for My substitutes are ethereans; and thou shalt have their places filled by atmosphereans from the highest grades.</p>
 <p>12. The Diva then made a section of the Divan law, providing for the four who stood highest in the grades in Craoshivi to take the places, to dwell with the Faithist in the names of the Great Spirit; and the names given were: To Jaffeth, Te-in; to Arabin'ya, Jehovih; to Vind'yu, Ormazd; to Guatama, Egoquim; according to the languages, and to the capabilities of mortals to pronounce words.</p>
 <p>13. The Diva then made another section of the Divan law, which was the title to be given to the four angels thus provided to bestow the Voice of Jehovih on mortals,and the title was O-yra; that is, O the High Heaven; and Y, going to; and ra, the earth.</p>
 <p>14. The twelfth section of the Divan law provided that each O-yra should have ten thousand attendants; angels from above the eightieth grade, from the colleges of Craoshivi, and their attendants were to sojourn on the earth with the Faithists as inspiring spirits and protectors.</p>
 <p>15. The thirteenth section of the Divan law made the terms of office for the O-yra eleven years each; and the same for their attendants.</p>
 <p><a name="page_374"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 374</font></a></p>
 <p>16. The fourteenth section of the Divan law explained the duties of the O-yra and their attendants, which were: that the O-yra should reside with the chief rab'bah or high priest, and be his inspirer; being with him day and night; and by virtue of his presence make the chief rab'bah know the voice of the All Highest. And the attendants first in rank were to dwell in the same way with the ordinary rab'bah, and for the same purpose. And the other attendants were to dwell with the multitude in like manner, and for the same purpose. And each O-yra was to have a heavenly place in the mortal temple, where he could meet his attendants in Council in reference to the Faithists and their affairs.</p>
 <p>17. The fifteenth section of the Divan law made the O-yra and his attendants the heavenly kingdom for the ashars of the Lords who dwelt with mortals.</p>
 <p>18. The sixteenth Divan law provided for the O-yra to increase the number of his attendants, according to the increase of the number of Faithists in each of the four divisions of the earth.</p>
 <p>19. Such, then, were the chief of the Divan laws made in heaven in the cycle of Cpenta-armij, during the first two hundred years. And all the kingdoms of atmospherea were established and officered; and all the people in these heavens became organic as soon as passing the es'yan age. Nor was there any dissatisfaction amongst any of the Gods, or Lords, or other officers, or in any of the colleges, or hospitals; and never since the foundation of the world had there been such prosperity in the resurrections of the inhabitants of heaven.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah271.htm">Next: Chapter V</a></center>
 </body>