<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah251.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah253.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIV</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>THE FIRST BIBLE OF VIND'YU.--BEING OF BRAHMA, A MAN CHOSEN BY GOD FOR THE CHILDREN OF VIND'YU. GIVING AN ACCOUNT OF BRAHMA BECOMING AN IESU; OF HIS LABORS AND HIS RESURRECTION AFTER DEATH</p></font>.
 <p>1. THESE are the races of Brahma: Gons, Shone, Gamma, This, Ram, Zerl, Mex, Shriv, Vat, Eun and Delta, each a thousand years. Of Gamma and Delta, in the upper country (Wa-wa-o-gan), were born Gu-sem and Hagu by Gamma, and by Delta, Yots, Rammus, Borgl, Otesiv and Riv. Gamma was of the fourth descent of Git-ow; and Delta the third descent of E'wangga--I'hins from the land of Jaffeth.</p>
 <p>2. The ascending caste of light in the lower country (Ho-jon-da-tivi) was by Ram, first; then Zerl, I'hin migrants <a name="page_340b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 340b</font></a> from the land of Ham; then Shriv, then Vat, then Gons and Eun, the half-breed Druks; then Shone, and then This.</p>
 <p>3. Jehovih, who by the Brahmins was called Ormazd, sent His light to the earth world once for every hundred generations. And the light fell upon His sons, prepared from before their births by the angels of Ormazd. Of the times before the submersion of Pan, each cycle was called one man, and the length of his life three thousand years.</p>
 <p>4. But of the times after, Ormazd commanded the nations of the earth to be rated as a man, and it was so. Ormazd said: That man may not be confounded, thou shalt number Osiris with the generations that believe not, save in the sun; but of the Zarathustrians, their number shall be as those who survived in the darkness of his cycle.</p>
 <p>5. Which were: Zarathustra from the races of Shone and This; and of Zarathustra, Haman; of Haman, Wonchakaka, who begat Zoar, who begat Theo, who begat Andassah, who begat Mur, who begat Romsat; these were tribes of the Zarathustrian order, who rejected idols, Lords, Gods, Saviors, kings, queens, and all other rulers on the earth or in the heavens above the earth, save Ormazd, the Creator. And in Him had faith that to do righteously, and practice good works, made the best, nearest perfect man.</p>
 <p>6. The Light by the Voice was lost in the sixth hundredth year after Zarathustra, but regained in Romsat by the I'hins, whence came the tribe Lo-jon, who begat Thonegalahogreif, who begat Subinij, and from him to Wowthutchi-subinij, which were forty-four generations, the Voice always came to the chief rab'bah.</p>
 <p>7. In Chusa-king the Voice was lost, but again restored by the I'hins, whose heirs were called Wah-sin-chung, who begat Avar, who begat Irigavagna, who begat Ben-haoma, from whom was descended thirty generations, the chief rab'bah of whom could hear the Voice.</p>
 <p>8. Ben-haoma numbered the Faithists of his day, and there were of them four thousand, men, women and children, and all other nations and tribes in Vind'yu were idolators.</p>
 <p>9. Through the descendants of Romsat the Voice was again regained by the I'hins, through a tribe called <a name="page_341b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 341b</font></a> Shriviyata, who begat Them-saga, who begat Friavamargalum, who bred with the I'hins and begat Thace, who begat with the I'hins Anu, who begat the I'hins Maha, who begat with the I'hins Brah, who had both voice and power from the Father. And he was called Brahma because of his great wisdom.</p>
 <p>10. The angels of Ormazd had prophesied, saying: Out of thy seed shall come one called BRAHMA, who shall have su'is with power. Things that were revealed to Zarathustra have been lost, but shall be recovered in Brahma.</p>
 <p>11. Romsat had prophesied, moreover: With the coming of Brahma is the end of the I'hin race in Shem (Vind'yu).</p>
 <p>12. God spake in kosmon, saying: Let no man say: With Brahma, or with Abram, or with Po, or with Eawahtah, was the beginning of the doctrine of One Spirit. For since man walked upright on the earth, behold, I have said unto him: Thou shalt have but one God, even the Creator. And in the cycles of my times I have raised up many who have comprehended my words, but others constantly put away the I AM, and raise up idols instead.</p>
 <p>13. But let all men understand who and what, is meant by the terms, Po, and Abram, and Brahma, and Eawahtah, which is, that though I walked the earth with these, teaching and speaking through them, yet none of these were idolized by men. For the nations of the earth, in the time of these four men, comprehended that they were not Gods, but men through whom, and to whom, I, even God, had spoken.</p>
 <p>14. Brahma said: Have all men stars? Behold, since my childhood up, I have had a star above my forehead.</p>
 <p>15. No man could answer Brahma. They said: Brahma is foolish, with all his wisdom.</p>
 <p>16. Brahma asked the star: Who art thou?</p>
 <p>17. God said: I am thy star; I am the light of the second heavens.</p>
 <p>18. Brahma asked: What is thy name, O star, thou mysterious light?</p>
 <p>19. God said: Call me Ormazd; I am the same light that spoke to Zarathustra in the olden time.</p>
 <p>20. Brahma asked: Who art thou, O Ormazd, thou voice of light?</p>
 <p>21. God said: With one only shalt thou commune, thy Creator; one only shalt thou worship, He who made thee alive.</p>
 <p><a name="page_342b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 342b</font></a></p>
 <p>22. Brahma said: Why hast thou taken up thy abode above my head?</p>
 <p>23. God said: Attain thou to be one with thy Creator, in wisdom, and goodness, and purity, and thou shalt answer thine own questions.</p>
 <p>24. Then Brahma applied to the rab'bah, the Zarathustrian priests, and he learned abnegation of self, and the rites and ceremonies of the ancients.</p>
 <p>25. When Brahma was grown up, God said to him: Arise on the morrow, my son, and I will lead thee into another country, where thou shalt marry, and settle down for a long season.</p>
 <p>26. Brahma said: Peaceful have been my slumbers, and joyous my wakeful hours all my life. I have made labor a pleasure, and I give all I have to the poor, doing Thy commandments with all my wisdom and strength.</p>
 <p>27. From my youth up I have killed not any living creature of Thine that goeth on the earth, or swimmeth in the waters, or flieth in the air. Neither ate I of anything that had ever breathed the breath of life; and I have been most abstemious in plain food and water only, according to the Zarathustrian law. Hear Thou me, O Ormazd; for I will break my soul unto Thee, and hold nothing back.<br>
 Ormazd said: It is well.</p>
 <p>28. Brahma said: Woe is me, if my soul turneth toward woman! Was I not wed to Thee, O Ormazd? Was I not Thy Bridegroom from my youth up?</p>
 <p>29. Why, then, protectest not Thou me unto Thyself? Ormazd said: In times past I raised up many an iesu, and they were without flesh desires all their days.</p>
 <p>30. Such men could not perpetuate the earth; they were good for their day. Zarathustra was an iesu. My Light is now for them that can perpetuate. All things are possible in my hands. Grieve not, nor smother out any talent I created unto the pure in flesh.</p>
 <p>31. Brahma said: If I love a woman, O Ormazd, may I not lose my love for Thee? Ormazd said: By faith in Me thou shalt triumph by the road I marked out for thee, since before thou wert born. Arise, then, O Brahma, and follow thy star. I will lead thee.</p>
 <p>32. Brahma said: Can there be another way than by celibacy? Can a married man serve Ormazd?</p>
 <p>33. So, Brahma traveled, and came into the country of Etchoyosin, where <a name="page_343b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 343b</font></a> lay the mountains of Talavitcha, under King Tyama, who had enforced the Zarathustrian religion with sword and spear, and with chains and death, being himself sole interpreter.</p>
 <p>34. When Brahma came to Au'watcha, he halted to inquire the way to the high priest's house, that he might be absolved for twenty days in Tyama's kingdom, according to law, paying the price as apportioned for strangers.</p>
 <p>35. In answer to his summons, there came to the gate, the damsel Yu-tiv, fairest of women, draped, also, to go before the priest for confession. Brahma inquired of her concerning the priest and the tax. Yu'tiv informed him, and, moreover, said: I am going thither, and shall delight to lead thee to the place. So Brahma went with Yu-tiv, and when they were gone a little way she said unto him: Whence camest thou, and what is thy mission? Peradventure, I may serve thee. Behold, I see a star above thy head!</p>
 <p>36. Brahma said: Seest thou a star? Now I say unto thee, there is an old legend that the pure in heart, looking upward, oft see their own paroda, and think it belongeth to another. Yu-tiv reassured Brahma that she saw the star, whereupon Brahma took heart and said:</p>
 <p>37. Yea, I have a star, and the Voice of Ormazd cometh to me at times. For some years I strove to be a priest, for I saw the wickedness of the world, and, moreover, the tyranny and tortures of the church (ha'oke), and my soul cried out for the oppressed who had faith in the Great Spirit more than in the priests. And Ormazd came to me and said: Brahma, my son, forsake thy studies, and take thy broad-axe, and go and hew logs. Behold, I will come to thee some time, and thou shalt bless the earth.</p>
 <p>38. So I gave up my studies and became a hewer of wood, living abstemiously day and night, and praying and striving with all my soul and with all my strength to purge myself of all earthly thoughts. So I grew, as thou beholdest, to be a large man of great strength. But, alas, evil overtook me; my soul desired a woman. And I cried out unto Ormazd, saying: Why hast Thou put this matter upon thy son? Lo, I strove to be wedded to thee only; I shut my eyes to all the earth, but <a name="page_344b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 344b</font></a> thou hast suffered me to fall. Rescue thou me, I pray.</p>
 <p>39. Then spake Ormazd to me, saying: Behold, I have revealed my word through such as have no earth desires; but that time is past. I will now prove unto the nations of the earth that I have power in directing the flesh, that heirs may be born unto me. Arise, therefore, and go whither I will lead thee, for thou shalt take a wife and raise up seven sons, and I will deliver my edifice (church), unto liberty.</p>
 <p>40. So I rose up and walked after the light of my star; thus far have I come, but how much further I must go I know not; but I will go to the end of the earth if Ormazd require it of me.</p>
 <p>41. Yu-tiv said: I pity thee, O man! One so holy should never with woman wed. To win such a man's love, the best of women would forget her God! To bear thee one child, instead of seven, a woman would cleave the earth in twain. It would be like peopling the world with Gods and Goddesses.</p>
 <p>42. O promise me, stranger, thou wilt turn from such unholy desires. I know not what moveth me past all modesty thus to speak to thee, but before Ormazd, Creator of heaven and earth, erst thou camest to my father's gate a voice spake in mine ear, saying: Quickly, thou, put on thy robes for confession, and hasten to the priest.</p>
 <p>43. I tell thee, O man, to save thee, the angels of Ormazd came to me. It is true that two can see more than one.</p>
 <p>44. Brahma said: Who are thou, O woman? Yu-tiv said: A weaver of mats; no more. My father liveth in yonder thatch; my mother's soul ascended to heaven, giving me birth. She was of the I'hins. From place to place my father and I have been driven; all the ills of earth are written on my soul. And the rudeness of men; the light-heartedness of women! By day and by night my soul crieth out for the miseries of the earth. O the sins of the earth! O the death of little infants! O the trials of the poor! O the suffering of the sick! O the anguish of the imprisoned! O stranger, stranger, stranger! People not this world more!</p>
 <p>45. Let us turn our souls upward; to Nirvana; to the regions of endless paradise! To the voices of angels and Gods! To wisdom that erreth not; to <a name="page_345b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 345b</font></a> music never discordant! To love that never separateth! Never!</p>
 <p>46. Brahma said: Now I beseech Thee, O Ormazd, that I may never marry! But because Thou hast raised up here so fair a woman, and withal so wise, give me leave that I may dwell near at hand!</p>
 <p>47. Then spake Ormazd, out of the midsts of the voices of their stars, saying: Hold up thy hand, O man! Hold up thy hand, O woman! And they held up their hands, and Ormazd said: I am the Father, and ye are My children. That I may have joy, dwell ye near together.</p>
 <p>48. Now after this, Brahma and she proceeded to the priest's house and made their sacrifices, and returned and came to Yu-tiv's father's house, and the father's name was Aliegan-is, called Ali. And Yu-tiv told her father all that had happened, but Brahma said little. Ali said: What the All Light doeth is well done. My house is ample. Brahma shall sojourn so long as he desireth.</p>
 <p>49. Brahma said: Of mine own accord I am not master of many words. When it pleaseth Ormazd to speak with me, I will raise my voice. Then Yu-tiv spread mats and provided food, and sat it before Brahma, and he ate; and after that they said prayers according to the laws of the king, and then retired to sleep.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah253.htm">Next: Chapter XV</a></center>
 </body>