<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah241.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah243.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IV</h3>
 <p>1. HI Seiang, the governor, sent for Ah Sin to come and investigate the nature of Po. So, when the three were together, God wrote in the sand the word TE-IN, and it was as if a flame of fire pierced the ground.</p>
 <p>2. Po said: From this time forth Te-in shall be the name of the tribes who have faith in the Creator only. Because he alone hath written it.</p>
 <p>3. Ah Sin said: How canst thou distinguish betwixt that which is written by the spirits of the dead, and that which is written by the Creator?</p>
 <p>4. Po said: Light cometh in light; darkness cometh in darkness.</p>
 <p>5. Hi Seiang asked: Sayest thou, thou canst see the angels and the Gods?</p>
 <p>6. Po said: I see the angels, but the Gods I cannot see. Angels are like ourselves; but the Gods are as a flame of fire.</p>
 <p>7. Now, whilst they were thus discoursing, a light in the form of a triangle came and rested on Po's head, and the word Te-in was inscribed on the sides of the triangle.</p>
 <p>8. The governor said: What signifieth this? And Po, being under the influence of the light of God, said:</p>
 <p>9. Call me Te-in; I am the Father (rab'bah, or bah) over all the living. I write in the sand, and speak in the mouths of my seers and prophets. He that ye call Po is My Son, begotten for the deliverance of My chosen out of the bondage of Han and his satellites (sub-kingdoms).</p>
 <p>10. Behold, My people are imprisoned and tortured; persecuted and abused. And ye twain have kingdoms taxed for the glory of Han in his unrighteous work.</p>
 <p>11. Provide ye also triangles, and espouse Me, and I will deliver your kingdoms also.</p>
 <p>12. Hi Seiang and Ah Sin both desired some pretext to throw off the yoke of the Han dynasty, and now lent willing ears to the instruction of Po and the Voice (Te-in).</p>
 <p>13. Accordingly, the learned men of <a name="page_318b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 318b</font></a> these provinces were called together, to learn of God, through Po, the mysteries of earth and heaven, and especially as to the great monarchy.</p>
 <p>14. When these Councils were assembled, God cast his light upon Po, and they all saw it. And the words Po spake were called GOD'S WORDS (Vede'or). Word by word learned they the wisdom of God, repeating them over and over, which was called LEARNING BY THE MOUTH, being in contradistinction from learning by books and tablets.</p>
 <p>15. God said: Great trials will come upon My people. The kings will seek to destroy the doctrines of the Lord thy God (Te-in).</p>
 <p>16. For which reason ye shall not write nor engrave My words until I come in judgment of the world.</p>
 <p>17. These, then, that follow, are the sacred laws given through Po, by God (Te-in):</p>
 <p>18. Seek to bring forth heirs that will be a glory to thy Creator.</p>
 <p>19. Marry not because of the impulse of the beast (the natural man), but consider thine own spirit and the spirit of thy spouse.</p>
 <p>20. Shut not up thyself in celibacy, but multiply and adorn the earth.</p>
 <p>21. Thy Creator provided milk for the infant; but with the coming of the teeth, thou shalt provide for their service also.</p>
 <p>22. Feed thou him according to the Ormazdian law. To make him a warrior, give thou him fish and flesh. To make him patient and strong, with docility, remember the camel and the ox, feeding on the herbs that grow on the earth.</p>
 <p>23. Ne-gwon asked: Was not celibacy the highest of all laws? Is it not so now?</p>
 <p>24. God said: There are times for all things. In the days of Zarathustra celibacy was the first of laws. In those days man was not ready for God's laws. Yet thou shalt not call the one law higher than the other.</p>
 <p>25. The fullness of earth knowledge requireth marriage, yet the bondage after death holdeth the spirit of man for six generations to his own heirs. By celibacy, a man's soul is not bound after death (by the love he beareth his children) to linger about the earth, and he may ascend quickly into paradise.</p>
 <p>26. The man or woman that is weak, or deformed, or blind, or deaf, or with <a name="page_319b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 319b</font></a> running sores, or with hidden sickness, shall not marry, nor bring forth heirs. Nor shall man take sorrow to his soul for this; for it is the testimony of the Father that his race is emancipated from the earth.</p>
 <p>27. Thou shalt keep sacred the Panic language; nor shall these, my holy words, be given in any language till my time is fulfilled on the earth.</p>
 <p>28. Thy sons at the age of eleven years, and daughters at the age of nine years, shall begin to learn maxims. And at that same time they shall be consecrated to the Creator and committed to His service. And of the sixth law this is made a part, to wit: Teachers in public shall be celibates; children who decide that they will become teachers, or priests, or priestesses, shall take the vows of celibacy. For such persons are married to the Great Spirit; and they shall be as Gods and Goddesses, knowing no more love to one person than another.</p>
 <p>29. Remember that they who marry, are chosen by Ormazd to raise up offspring for the glory of heaven and earth; and they shall dwell together in peace, love and harmony.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah243.htm">Next: Chapter V</a></center>
 </body>