<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah20.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah22.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter V</h3>
 <p>1. IN the first year of Hored there were received into God's kingdom in heaven, one and a half million es'yans, men, women and children, born of the earth. And there were still left within the different divisions of the earth, with the Lords, three and a quarter millions of es'yans, being for the most part fetals.</p>
 <p>2. In the first one hundred years there were born of the earth, one hundred and seventy million es'yans. Such then was the number of three generations of I'hins; which is to say, that in those days the number of the inhabitants of the earth (not including the asuans, who were not created to everlasting life) was fifty-four millions. And already had each of the Lords' heavenly places become large kingdoms.</p>
 <p>3. In those days the period of five years was allotted to the es'yans as their time of infancy in heaven, requiring nurses and helpers, but some of them required many years more.</p>
 <p>4. After five years the es'yans were taken from the nurseries, and taught by symbols and objects, the rudiments of education; and drilled in processions, and music and dancing and gymnastics; but every day they were required for a brief period to labor, some at weaving, some spinning, and some in transportation. <a name="fr_4"></a><a href="#fn_4"><font size="1">3</font></a></p>
 <p>5. The voice of Jehovih directed God, saying: The structure of My Kingdom in heaven requireth it of thee, that thou shalt make all labor an agreeable exercise for the growth of the spirits in my dominions.</p>
 <p>6. And God commanded the officers of the realm of Hored to lengthen the hours of labor, according to the age and strength of the spirits received up from the earth, and it was so.</p>
 <p>7. Jehovih again spake to God, saying: In all labor thou allottest to those who have sprung up from the earth, freely give to them to do whatever they desire; but thou shalt not suffer them to return to their earth kindred alone, unattended, lest because of their love they engraft themselves, becoming bound to mortals. But when they have lived fifty years in heaven, thou shalt not only permit them to return to mortals, but thou shalt direct them to do so, for in this period they shall have no further desire for engraftment.</p>
 <p>8. Again Jehovih said: As fast as thou canst appropriate the labor of earth born spirits to help in the resurrection of others, so shalt thou do in My name.</p>
 <p>9. And even so did God and the Lords under him; and in the time of one hundred years, there were raised up to the second rate, twenty million souls, that had come forth out of the earth. And many of them comprehended the manufactories, the nurseries and schools and hospitals in heaven to the full, and they were in many things alike equal to the requirements of their teachers.</p>
 <p>10. The voice of Jehovih came to God, saying: It is well, My Son, to take a rest. Behold, thou hast toiled a hundred years, day and night, without ceasing. Thou shalt, therefore, appoint other officers, and spread out the kingdom of Hored to cover all the land of Whaga (the continent of Pan). And thou shalt appoint in My name thy most efficient officer to sit on the throne for a short space of time, for thou shalt travel and visit the five Lords of the earth and their kingdoms.</p>
 <p>11. And thou shalt take with thee a thousand heralds, and a thousand messengers, and five thousand musicians. And thou shalt have a ship sufficient to carry thy host, and to be as thy house whithersoever thou goest. See to it, and set all things in order, and depart thou on a journey of one year.</p>
 <p>12. And God called in the surveyors, who brought maps of earth and heaven showing the best places for extending the kingdom of Hored.</p>
 <p>13. And God appointed fifty governors for the fifty places required, and he gave each of them five thousand men and women to accompany them. And when they were chosen God addressed them from the throne, saying:</p>
 <p>14. According to the commandment of the Father are ye chosen; and by His command will I come to your respective places ere long, and bestow ye with all that is required for building up colonies in Jehovih's name. As ye witnessed the founding of Hored by the archangel Etisyai, so may ye understand that I will come to you all. Go ye forth, then, taking your hosts, and lay down the foundations for your cities. As ye have learned from me, go ye forth doing as I have done; and as ye do with a small colony, and a small city, so will I give into your keeping that which is greater when ye are prepared therefor.</p>
 <p><a name="page_23"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 23</font></a></p>
 <p>15. When God ceased, the marshals led the way, and the hosts following their governors filed in front of the throne, saluting with the sign of Jehovih's name, which was answered by God's hands upraised. Meanwhile the es'enaurs sang in glory to Jehovih. Presently the hosts passed out and beyond the pillars of fire.</p>
 <p>16. When all had quieted, God said: Let the builders of ships begin now and build a ship for me and my hosts, for the time draweth near. And let the graders choose from my laborers, who have toiled a hundred years, day and night, without ceasing, such as shall be my companions and hosts on my journey; according to their grade shall they be chosen.</p>
 <p>17. And even so were they chosen and notified.</p>
 <p>18. And God said: Whilst I shall be absent there shall sit on my throne, being God in my place, he who standeth highest in the grades. According to the transcendency of him who hath done the most for the resurrection of the es'yans, so shall be your God and my God.</p>
 <p>19. And God commanded the graders to present before the throne the records, that the Council of Hored might determine the matter. And this was so done.</p>
 <p>20. And Ha'jah, an etherean, was chosen. And God commanded them to send word unto Ha'jah, with an escort to conduct him to the capital.</p>
 <p>21. In due time the escort brought Ha'jah into the palace of the kingdom of God, and God was sitting on the throne. With music they came in and filed in front of the throne, forming a crescent, with Ha'jah betwixt the horns.</p>
 <p>22. God said: By command of Jehovih have I summoned thee thither, O Ha'jah. Long before I have known thee, even on other worlds. Of all virtues in man which stand highest, which is, never to mention one's self, thou excellest all men in my kingdom. Thy labors for the general upraising of Hored excellest all others. For this reason thou art preferred, and by Jehovih chosen to be my assistant whilst I am here, and in my absence to be my very God in the Father's name.</p>
 <p>23. Ha'jah said: This being the will of Jehovih, proceed thou.</p>
 <p>24. God struck the gavel and the holy council rose to their feet. God said: In Jehovih's name I salute thee, Ha'jah, as God of Tek (see tablet Ahiod'zan, at the end of the Book of Wars against Jehovih) to hold dominion in Hored. Come forth and receive thou my throne for the Father's sake. The marshals then conducted Ha'jah to the foot of the throne, and God came down and took his hand and led him up. And as they were going forth a light, as of golden fire, came down from the firmament above, sent by the kingdoms high exalted; and God and Ha'jah were covered around about and illuminated.</p>
 <p>25. God said: By Thy Wisdom, Love and Power, O Jehovih, do I receive this Thy son on Thy Throne. Be Thou with him in Wisdom and Strength for Thy glory forever! Amen!</p>
 <p>26. God raised up a rod, waving it, and rain came down from heaven. Ha'jah said: In Thy name, O Jehovih! Whereupon God stretched forth his hand unto Jehovih, saying: Give me a crown for Thy son, God of Tek, O Jehovih!</p>
 <p>27. And there descended, as if a small star, far lengthened out, a light of gold and silver, and it settled on God's hand, and he fashioned it into a crown, and emblazoned it with the sign GOD OF TEK, and placed it on Ha'jah's head, saying: In Jehovih's name, thee I crown, to sit on the throne in Hored during my absence.</p>
 <p>28. Ha'jah said: Thy son, O Jehovih, shall fulfill Thy commandments in wisdom and love. May the Father, Creator of worlds, give this Thy son rest and comfort for the glories he hath wrought in Thy name! Amen!</p>
 <p>29. The Council said: Amen! The es'enaurs chanted an anthem of praise to Jehovih. And God led Ha'jah forth and seated him on the throne, saying: Thou art God in my name and Jehovih's also. And since I now go down to the earth to sojourn for a season, thou shalt be known as God of both earth and heaven.</p>
 <p>30. So God departed out of Hored and embarked on a ship, taking with him seven thousand men and women for his escort, beside a thousand es'enaurs and the crew of three thousand to work the ship.</p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_4"></a><a href="oah21.htm#fr_4">22:3</a> In another place we are told that "The ocean sendeth up vapour, so doth the land send up vegetable substance of which the spiritual part reaches certain plateaux, whereon are situated the lower kingdoms of heaven. Here the spirits labour after the manner of mortals, but spiritually." Hence in a spiritual way the spirits have transportation, factories and all manner of industries.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah22.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a></center>
 </body>