<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah365.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah367.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIX</h3>
 <p>1. ELOIH, Almighty, Thou, my God, Who hast delivered my people! I will sing unto Thee a song; and the children of Israel unto Thee, O Eloih!</p>
 <p>2. Thou art a great strength and salvation; unto Thee, Eloih, will I build my habitation; Thou, my father's God, O Eloih!</p>
 <p>3. Thou art my Warrior; Eloih is Thy name, forever!</p>
 <p><a name="page_520b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 520b</font></a></p>
 <p>4. Thou has encompassed Pharaoh and his hosts; they are swallowed up in the sea, his chosen captains and his warriors in the Red Sea.</p>
 <p>5. The depths covered them up; they sank to the bottom as a stone, O Eloih!</p>
 <p>6. Almighty Eloih: Glorious in power in Thy right hand that passed over innocent blood!</p>
 <p>7. Thou, my God, Eloih; Wise in majesty, in Thy right hand that dashed in pieces Thy enemy!</p>
 <p>8. Excellency, O Thou Eloih; in graciousness that came upon them that rose up in Thy way; Thou sentest Thy breath upon them; as stubble they were cut down by Thy righteous sword!</p>
 <p>9. By the breath of Thy nostrils, Thou heapedst up the waters of the sea; and the floods stood upright by Thy voice, to entrap them in the heart of the sea!</p>
 <p>10. Thine enemy said: I will pursue; I will overtake them; the spoil shall be mine; I will draw the sword; my hand shall destroy them!</p>
 <p>11. Thou didst blow with Thy wind; the sea covered them; they sank as lead in the mighty waters.</p>
 <p>12. Who is like unto Thee, Eloih, amongst the Gods? Who is like Thee, Glorious in Holiness, fearful in praise and wonders, O Eloih! Thou stretchedst out Thy right hand, and they went down into the earth.</p>
 <p>13. Merciful Almighty, Eloih, my God, and God of my fathers; Who hast led forth Israel and delivered her into the land of her fathers, O Eloih! Who hast guided them to a holy habitation and peaceful one.</p>
 <p>14. All people shall hear and be afraid; sober thought shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina. And the nobles of Edom shall be amazed! The warrior of Moab; trembling shall take hold on them, and the wild men of Kana'yan shall melt away!</p>
 <p>15. Thou, O Eloih, shalt strike them with fear; in the magnitude of the strength of Thine arm will they be amazed and helpless as stone. For this land is Thy purchase, O Eloih; in the passover of the blood of the lamb purchased Thou it; and Israel shall pass over it in fear.</p>
 <p>16. And Thou shalt bring them to the mountain of their inheritance, to Thy <a name="page_521b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 521b</font></a> place, Our God, Eloih. To dwell in Thy sanctuary, which Thou has established for Thy reign, forever and forever.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah367.htm">Next: Chapter XX</a></center>
 </body>