<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah347.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah349.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_458b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 458b</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of the Arc of Bon</h1>
 <font size="2"><p>BEING A HISTORY OF CAPILYA, MOSES AND CHINE, THE THREE GREAT LEADERS-FORTH OF THE FAITHISTS IN THE TIME OF LIKA, SON OF JEHOVIH. AS THE UPPER BOOK IS OF THE HEAVENS, SO IS THIS LOWER BOOK CHIEFLY OF EARTHLY AFFAIRS IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF GOD</p></font>.
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">HISTORY OF CAPILYA</p></font>.
 <p>1. IN the mountains of Dharma, in the high country of Yatinghadatta, in Vind'yu, God, Son of Jehovih, chose the family of Capilya for gathering together the scattered Faithists, and establishing them in safety and prosperity.</p>
 <p>2. Six generations previous to the time of Capilya God came down from his holy hill in heaven, to visit the land of Shem, now called Vind'yu.</p>
 <p>3. And God called aloud over all that land, but no man could hear his voice.</p>
 <p>4. Then God called his angels, saying: Come hither. Behold, here is a great country, with millions of people, but they cannot hear the voice of God.</p>
 <p>5. God commanded the angels to go down amongst mortals, and to dwell with them for six generations.</p>
 <p>6. To the angels God said: By inspiration and otherwise, lead ye man and woman together as husband and wife, to the profit of the voice of God. Raise <a name="page_459b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 459b</font></a> me up a man that can hear me, for I will deliver the Father's chosen.</p>
 <p>7. The angels of God, half a million of them, then came down to the earth. The angel, Hirattax, was commander over them. He divided his angel hosts into groups, and allotted to them certain places in the land of Vind'yu, where they were to dwell and to labor.</p>
 <p>8. In those days the Faithists were known by the names: Vede, and Parsi'e, and Hiyah, and Syiattahoma, beside various other names of less note.</p>
 <p>9. In some places they were slaves, in other places serfs, and in still other places hid away in wildernesses and amongst the mountains; being non-resistant and timorous, having suffered great persecution by the idolators of Dyaus and other false Gods and Lords.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah349.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>