<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah323.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah325.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter III</h3>
 <p>1. LIKA said to his chief marshall: Enroll thou my hosts, five hundred millions, and appoint unto them captains and generals, and grade them and apportion them. Beside these give me one million singers, one million trumpeters, one million attendants, one million heralds, one million messengers and one million recorders and waiters.</p>
 <p>2. Lika called his chief builder and said unto him: Build me a fire-ship, an airavagna, with capacity for a thousand millions; and provide thou the ship with officers and workmen sufficient. Consult thou with my mathematicians as to the distance to the red star, and as to the densities through which the ship shall pass, and as to the power required, and the time of the journey, and provide thou all things sufficient therefor.</p>
 <p>3. Then Lika spake to the high Council, saying: For the time of my absence my vice-Chief, Heih-Woo shall hold my place. Touching matters whereof ye desire my voice before I go, speak ye!</p>
 <p>4. Atunzi said: Behold, O Lika, the star, Yatis, headeth towards the a'ji'an Forests of Actawa, and she hath not passed the esparan age! Lika said: To clear the forest Actawa I appoint Eashivi, Goddess, with three thousand million laborers. Eashivi, how sayest thou? Eashivi said: Thanks to Jehovih and to thee, O Lika. I will at once choose my laborers and proceed to make the road.</p>
 <p>5. Wan Tu'y said: Erst thy return, O Lika, the Hapsa-ogan vortex will cross the south fields of Vetta'puissa. She hath twenty thousand million souls in grades of sixty and seventy. Lika said: To her assistance for three years I appoint Tici-king, God, with fifty millions for his hosts. How sayest thou, Tici-king? Tici-king said: By the grace of Jehovih, I rejoice in this labor. In suffucient time will I prepare my hosts and accomplish what thou hast given into my keeping.</p>
 <p>6. Wothalowsit said: In four years the hosts of E'win will return from the double stars, Eleb and Wis, with their harvest of forty thousand million angels. How shall they be apportioned? Lika said: To Bonassah, six thousand millions; to Opel, two thousand <a name="page_465a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 465a</font></a> millions; to Wedojain, five thousand millions; to Eosta, two thousand millions; to Feuben Roads, seven thousand millions; to Zekel, four thousand millions; to Huron, three thousand millions; to Poe-ga, six thousand millions; to Yulit, one thousand millions, and to Zulava, four thousand millions; and I appoint Misata, Goddess, to provide the places in these several heavens for them, and to have charge of their selection and allotment. And I give to her five hundred million angels for her laboring hosts. How sayest thou, Misata? Misata said: It is Jehovih's gift; I am rejoiced. I will prepare myself and my hosts.</p>
 <p>7. Ching Huen said: Behold the star-world, Esatas, in her se'muan age will cross the Roads of Veh-yuis in three years hence! Lika answered Ching Huen, saying: To cross these roads of light in her se'muan age would blight her power to bring forth animal life sufficient unto her wide continents. The trail must be filled with se'muan forests to preserve her gestative season. To this labor I appoint Ieolakak, God of Esatas' se'muan forests in the Roads of Veh-yuis, four thousand years. And I allot to Ieolakak six thousand million laborers. How sayest thou, Ieolakak? He answered: This is a great labor; by the wisdom and power of Jehovih, I will accomplish it.</p>
 <p>8. Veaga-indras said: In two years the fleets of Leogastrivins will return from their voyage of four thousand years, bringing two thousand million guests from the Iniggihauas regions. Who shall provide for their reception? Lika said: Yeanopstan, with ten million hosts. How sayest thou? Yeanopstan said: A most welcome labor, O Lika.</p>
 <p>9. Hiss-Joso said: The Arches of Rassittissa, the etherean world of Yungtsze's Plains, will be to cast in four years. Lika said: To Sut'tuz six million arches, and to Iviji four million arches, and to each of them one hundred million laborers. How say ye? Then spake Sut-tuz and Iviji, saying: By the help of Jehovih, the labor will be accomplished.</p>
 <p>10. Sachcha said: The star-world, Neto, will be to turn on her axis in two years hence, in which time she will pass through the south Fields of Takuspe. Lika said: This will be a great labor, and I appoint Urassus, with Salas, to accomplish it. And I give to them three years, with four thousand million laborers. How say ye? Then answered Urassus and Salas saying: With fear and trembling we rejoice at this great work. By Jehovih's <a name="page_466a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 466a</font></a> wisdom and power, we shall accomplish it.</p>
 <p>11. After this manner Lika made more than a thousand appointments to be accomplished ere he return from the earth and her heavens; but ordinary matters he left with his vice-Chief, Heih-Woo, and to the high Council, the select ten millions.</p>
 <p>12. Jehovih had said: Even as I provided a little labor unto mortals to develop the talents I created withal, so in like manner, and after the same like, but spiritually, provided I greater labor unto the high-risen inhabitants in My etherean worlds. For which reason let My children learn the secret of harmonious and united labor with one another. I gave labor to man not as a hardship, but as a means of great rejoicing.</p>
 <p>13. And the talents I gave on corpor, I gave not to die on corpor, but to continue on forever. As I gave talent for corporeal mathematics, and talent for corporeal buildings, even a talent for all things on corporeal worlds; even so provided I in My etherean worlds for the same talents, but spiritually. Wherein man on the corporeal earth, judging the adaptability of talent to corporeal things, may comprehend the nature of the labors I provided in My exalted heavens for the same talents.</p>
 <p>14. Neither let any man fear that his talents may become too exalted for the work I have provided; for until he hath created a firmament, and created suns and stars to fill it, he hath not half fulfilled his destiny.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah325.htm">Next: Chapter IV</a></center>
 </body>