<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah352.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah354.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VI</h3>
 <p>1. FOR three years Capilya traveled over the land of Vind'yu, east and west and north and south, establishing the Faithists wherever he found them; and he donated to them whatever lands laid waste and not tilled; but he touched not any land whereon other people dwelt and tilled the soil.</p>
 <p>2. And it came to pass, the servants in the provinces fled from their masters and went and dwelt in the places of Jehovih, to so great an extent that the governors and sub-kings complained against Capilya, and he was reported to Yokovrana, the king in chief, Capilya's foster-father. And the king sent a commission summoning his supposed son to the capital, to answer the charges against him.</p>
 <p>3. When Capilya was before the Royal Council, and demanded by the king why he had come, Capilya said: The servant of the great king answereth; his words are bound words. Whatsoever cometh out of Capilya's mouth, Capilya holdeth as his. There be such as maintain that man, whose tongue is moved by the spirits of the dead, is irresponsible for his words. Capilya creepeth not through so small a hole. To be master of one's flesh, and desires, and passions and words, these are great gifts indeed. Capilya professeth these. Therefore, Capilya bindeth himself in every word.</p>
 <p>4. Know then, Most Royal Council, servants to our Great King, Yokovrana, Capilya was summoned here by the king, to answer certain charges made by members of the Royal Council. These charges prefer that Capilya hath founded certain colonies which have attracted away the servants of <a name="page_473b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 473b</font></a> the sub-kings and of the rich, and thereby sowed disobedience in the remainder.</p>
 <p>5. Capilya is come to answer these charges. Hear ye, then, Capilya's answer: Capilya being heir to the throne besought the king for leave to travel, and the king said unto him: Whatsoever the soul observeth that may be good for the United Kingdoms, do thou. Said not the king this?</p>
 <p>6. Yokovrana said: Yea, my son. Thereupon Capilya said: When Capilya traveled near and far, for nine years, his heart was sick because of the misery of the poor and the glory of the rich. He beheld many forests and many plains where no man dwelt; and he said to himself: Let the poor come hither and live. Yet he called not any poor man. Was it, then, an evil for Capilya to say this to himself?</p>
 <p>7. The king said: Surely not. Then Capilya went on: After a long season of idleness, Capilya went the second time to travel, and when he came to the forests and plains, behold, the poor were gathered together, and yet more coming. So Capilya went amongst them to show them how to dwell together wisely. Was this an evil in Capilya?</p>
 <p>8. The king said: Nay; of a truth it was good. Then Capilya said: In a little while they discovered it was good for them to dwell together and to help one another; and the news spread abroad, whereupon the servants of the governors, and the rich, ran away from them. Is it not just to say of the king and governors and rich men that they are driving their servants away from themselves, because of hardships which are greater than the hardships of the Gods?</p>
 <p>9. The king said: A good proof. But why sayest thou, the Gods? These people for the most part believe not in the Gods. And many of them, I hear, are believers in the Great Spirit! Capilya said: Thou sayest truly, O king. But that is their matter, and not Capilya's. The king said: Thou art right, my son. But how sayest thou of education? Shall not the laws be maintained?</p>
 <p>10. Capilya said: Art thou the king? or merely the servant of the dead? Shall Capilya call him father who is only a servant to carry out the laws of the dead? If so, then hath Capilya sinned against the law. But hear ye, <a name="page_474b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 474b</font></a> who are of great learning; do ye obey one law of the ancients and not another? The law of the ancients was that with the death of the king all laws died, and whoso became king afterward must need make new laws of his own. The law against educating the Faithists is a law of the ancients. Let Capilya's accusers find which they will; for if they stand by the laws of the ancients, then, indeed, have we no laws, and no king nor sub-kings. If they repudiate the laws of the ancients, then Capilya hath not sinned against any law.</p>
 <p>11. Yokovrana said: Thou art acquitted, Capilya. The laws of the ancients can not bind thy king nor the king's kings. Touching these matters, then, the Royal Council shall make new laws. And since Capilya hath not contravened any law, neither shall the new laws interrupt the orders of the state as they now are.</p>
 <p>12. Because of Capilya's presence in the Royal Chamber, the power of Jehovih and His angels was great in that house.</p>
 <p>13. After this manner, that followeth, were the speeches of the sub-kings and governors: To permit great learning to the Faithists is to overthrow Dyaus and his reigning Gods and Lords; for by great learning will the Faithists ultimately become members of the Royal Council; therefore, at all hazards, great learning must be prohibited. Great learning is inimical to good servitude.</p>
 <p>14. Jehovih said to Capilya: Be thou present when these laws are passed; for by this means My holy angels will rule over the Royal Council for the good of all men.</p>
 <p>15. For one hundred days the Royal Council discussed the matter, but the angels of heaven kept them divided as to opinion and belief, so that no law was passed by them. Now after they had thus wasted much time to no purpose, Capilya asked permission to speak before the king and Council as to what was wisdom in the government of the nations; and it was granted unto him. This that followeth is, then, the substance of Capilya's speech.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah354.htm">Next: Chapter VII</a></center>
 </body>