<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah358.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah360.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XII</h3>
 <p>1. CAPILYA said (being inspired of Jehovih): Let thy life be thy preacher. The behavior of one good man, even in a sparse country, is of more avail than a thousand preachers.</p>
 <p>2. The clamor of the tongue maketh speedy converts, but it changeth not the blood. They perform the rites and ceremonies, but their behavior is not of the twelve virtues.</p>
 <p>3. One community (family) of a score of men and women, that dwell together in peace and love, doing good toward one <a name="page_493b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 493b</font></a> another, is the manifestation of more wisdom than all the books in the world.</p>
 <p>4. A man that hath learned sympathy is better learned than the philosopher that will kick a cat or a dog. Great learning is not only in books; he who hath learned to harmonize with Jehovih hath great learning.</p>
 <p>5. The doctrine of the idolator is war; but My Sons and Daughters practice peace, resisting not any man with weapons of death, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>6. My sermons are not in wordy professions, but in the souls of My people who practice My commandments.</p>
 <p>7. Ye have witnessed that Sudga's followers said: Behold, Sudga is our Lamb of Peace! And they were nations of warriors; they built monuments to glorify their greatest slayers of men.</p>
 <p>8. My people say little; profess little, as regardeth their virtues; but their practice is My Voice!</p>
 <p>9. Capilya said: Whatever should be the character of one man, so should be the family (community); so should be the state. Harmony in a man's soul is his greatest blessing; and so of the family, and of the state.</p>
 <p>10. Whoso will sacrifice self-gratification for good of the family is the greatest, best one in the family. Whoso triumphs in self-desire or in inflicting on others his opinions or doctrines, is the worst, bad man in the family.</p>
 <p>11. My Father in heaven, is thy Father also; all men and women are my brothers and sisters. To magnify one's soul so as to realize this brotherhood, is a great virtue. No matter what name He hath, there is, nevertheless, but One Creator; and all peoples are His children. Call thou Him what name thou wilt, I will not quarrel with thee. I am a child of His love; by love will I prove it unto thee. No man can prove this by war.</p>
 <p>12. At death the real life beginneth; mold thyself well whilst thy soul hath a good anchor (the body). The highest, best life in this world, findeth the highest best life in heaven. To love thy Father Who created thee; virtuous happiness is little more than this. The happiness of lust, is hate to thy Creator.</p>
 <p>13. The man learning to swim had better go in with corks, till he find the <a name="page_494b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 494b</font></a> stroke; like this, thy Creator gave thee a corporeal body. Be not in haste to enter the unseen world; make sure that thou hast learned the stroke of the resurrection erst thou puttest aside thy flesh and bones.</p>
 <p>14. Religion is the learning of music (harmony) in a community, in which the rab'bah is the key-note. Music is of two kinds: sounds and assimilation. Dumb instruments may make sound-music; but assimilation cometh to the real matter of putting one's behavior in harmony with the community.</p>
 <p>15. Good works! Who knoweth the meaning of these words? King Yokovrana judged the good works of a man by the number of bad men he had slain. When alms-houses promote laziness they are not good works. Preaching, and praying, and singing, are not works; they are the blossoms, and with enticing fragrance. Yet satan persuadeth man that these are good works. Nevertheless, all fruit is preceded by blossoms. The most learned man, the most pious man, and the greatest philosopher can not tell what is the meaning of the words, good works. But a mother, with a child one day old, can tell; a farmer, that hath sowed and reaped one harvest, and given half of it away to the less fortunate, can tell also.</p>
 <p>16. To bring forth out of the earth food or clothing, these are good works only so far as they exceed one's own requirements and are given to others. To live on the earnings of others, save in time of helplessness, is evil. To preach and not produce substance for others; such a man is a vampire. He selleth sermons and opinions to the ignorant, making believe his words are Jehovih's concerns.</p>
 <p>17. The preacher shall dwell with the poor, taking hold with his own hands; teaching and helping; he who giveth words only, and not labor, is a servant of hell. He findeth honied words, and drawleth his voice; he liveth in ease and plenty; he stretcheth out a long face seriously; he is a hypocrite and a blasphemer against his Creator.</p>
 <p>18. With love and rejoicing, and with willing hearts, stand thou upright before Jehovih; for thy preaching shall bear evidence of joyful light; and thy presence give to the weary and disconsolate assurance that thou art the Creator's son, come in earnest to glorify Him by righteous works and a helping hand.</p>
 <p><a name="page_495b"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 495b</font></a></p>
 <p>19. Besides Capilya's book of maxims, the quarter of which is not here related, he also restored the Zarathustrian commandments and the songs of Vivanho. Nor since two thousand years were the children of Jehovih so well standing before the world. And peace and plenty came upon the land of Vind'yu, even greater than in the days of Brahma.</p>
 <p>20. Thus closeth the history of Capilya, who was led in all things by Jehovih, through his angels, even to the words he uttered, though oft he knew it not. Such is it to walk with the Creator. Now whilst this was going on in Vind'yu, the Creator also labored through his angels in the land of Egupt, with Moses, of whom hear ye.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah360.htm">Next: Chapter XIII</a></center>
 </body>