<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah326.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah328.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VI</h3>
 <p>1. AS Lika in his ship sped on, coursing the Fields of Sonasat, and Hatar, and Yuax, in the etherean world, Chen-a-goetha, rich in light in these regions, on the Yong-We Road, and now traversed by hundreds of vessels coursing hither and yon, Jehovih's light descended on the High Arch, in the midst of the Rapons; and the Voice of Jehovih spake out of the light, saying:</p>
 <p>2. As I taught corporeans to build ships to traverse corporeal seas, so have I taught ethereans to build vessels to course My etherean seas.</p>
 <p>3. As I bound the corporean that he could not raise up in the air above corpor, save by a vessel, so created I My heavens for the spirits of men, that by manufactured vessels they might course My firmament.</p>
 <p>4. For the little knowledge I gave to corporeans I made as a type of knowledge which is everlasting.</p>
 <p>5. To the corporean I gave two kinds of presence, objective and subjective. By the latter he can imagine himself in a far-off place; and the thought that proceedeth out of him goeth to a friend and speaketh understandingly in the distance. For thus I created him. But he who goeth objectively must take his person with him, for so created I him.</p>
 <p>6. And I magnified these two conditions unto the spirits of all men, that they might also appear objectively and subjectively in the places known to them.</p>
 <p>7. And this is the bondage I created unto all places on the earth and in the heavens thereof, making all men understand the power of objective association.</p>
 <p>8. I created wide seas on the corporeal <a name="page_471a"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 471a</font></a> earth, that man should perceive that one man alone could not cross over; nor in a small boat, with any profit under the sun. Neither created I My heavens in the firmament that one angel could go alone on long journeys, becoming isolated and powerless. But I provided them that they could not escape association; yea, I created the firmament that they must congregate together and go.</p>
 <p>9. Nevertheless, I gave freedom unto all; to him that goeth not objectively, to go subjectively; but of little avail and not much truth or profit. And because I gave this liberty, behold, even drujas will say: Yea, I have been there. Nor know they how to raise up from the earth, or to go to any place, save on another's shoulders.</p>
 <p>10. And I created man and angels that all knowledge which is to be everlasting must be obtained objectively; yea, in the experience of his own person made I him to desire without end.</p>
 <p>11. And they fill My seas in heaven and earth with their great ships; with wants that could not be satisfied in one place created I man. For I drive him forth on strange errands and on missions of profit and love; for I will store him with a knowledge of My works.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah328.htm">Next: Chapter VII</a></center>
 </body>