<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah489.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah491.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VII</h3>
 <p>1. AT the time the roadways of the earth's heavens were completed, which was in the three hundred and ninetieth year of the cycle of Bon, this was the standing thereof, to wit:</p>
 <p>2. There had ascended, as Brides and Bridegrooms, for etherea, thirty-six thousand millions; nearly one-half of whom were from the kingdoms of Anuhasaj and his sub-Gods.</p>
 <p>3. And now inhabiting the five spheres, forty-eight thousand million spirits.</p>
 <p>4. In the first sphere, or hada, in which there were two thousand four hundred heavenly kingdoms, the grades were from one to seven.</p>
 <p>5. In the second sphere, which ranked first resurrection in those days, the grades were from seven to fifteen. In these regions there were ten thousand heavenly kingdoms.</p>
 <p>6. In the third sphere the grades were from fifteen to thirty. In these regions there were four thousand heavenly kingdoms. And including the kingdoms of Anuhasaj, five thousand more kingdoms.</p>
 <p>7. In the fourth sphere, the grades were from thirty to sixty, and there were one thousand five hundred heavenly kingdoms in these regions.</p>
 <p>8. In the fifth sphere, the grades were from sixty to ninety-nine, and here were one thousand heavenly kingdoms.</p>
 <p>9. And yet, not included in these, because of a different kind, were the kingdoms of Yaton'te, the subjective heaven, a visiting place, and with but a small fixed population, but whose visitors and students and teachers numbered three thousand million angels, graded from one to ninety-nine. But many of these belonged in other heavenly kingdoms.</p>
 <p>10. Such then were the inhabitants of the bound heavens. And they numbered, all told, forty-eight times more people than the mortal inhabitants of the earth. But in those days not many women on the earth committed abortions; neither died so many very young children; so that the fetals sent back to inhabit mortals numbered, all told, only two hundred and thirty millions. Whilst of vampire spirits, of both <a name="page_669"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 669</font></a> classes, (that is, such as inhabit gormandizers, and gluttons, and drunkards, and harlots, absorbing their spiritual sustenance, and thus making them the breeders of infidels; and such as live on the atmospherean part of mortal food, thus causing their mortal victims to emaciate and to become insane), there were, all told, not more than forty-six millions.</p>
 <p>11. Besides these, there were thirty-one million lusters, who feed on the secret vices of mortals; who were being forever pursued from place to place by ashars, and often captured and carried away to heavenly kingdoms; but would often escape and flee back to mortals. Yet, with all these fetals, and vampires and lusters included, never before had the earth remained so long in so pure a state.</p>
 <p>12. When the roadways were completed, God proclaimed seven days recreation in all the kingdoms of heaven, in order that the inhabitants should sing and dance and render praise unto Jehovih for the great works that had been accomplished.</p>
 <p>13. And on the last of the seven days, Toyvraghah assigned the roads over to God, and named them, ROADS OF PARADISE. Whereupon God crowned Toyvraghah, PRIMAL GOD OF THE ROADS OF PARADISE, of twelve hundred thousand miles.</p>
 <p>14. God said: After the manner of the government of the etherean heavens do I these things.</p>
 <p>15. And as the kingdoms and spheres of my heavens are situated, within and without, with their roadways and heavenly canals, forming one great kingdom with many parts, it shall be a type of the kingdoms in etherea, which are thousands of times larger. And it was so.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah491.htm">Next: Chapter VIII</a></center>
 </body>