<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah440.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah442.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">LORDS OF THE HOSTS IN HEAVEN</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">HEADS OF SPIRITUAL SOCIETIES IN ATMOSPHEREA, OF THOSE DAYS</p></font>.
 <p>MAIDEASHENEA, Patishahaya, Ayathrema, Maidyarrah, Hamachapathmada, Yemehataman, Aunviti, Haptanaihaiti, Ustavaiti, Cpenta'Mainyus, Kshathra, Vahistoisa, Airyamaishya, Fshushamanthra, Hadhaokhta, Cpenta-armaiti, Zaothra and Barecma, Mithra, Kamaqactra, Havanana, Aarevahsha, Roethwiskare, Vohu-Kasha, Aiwyoonhana, Nairayo-canha, Asha-vahista, Haome, Lord of Haoma rites, Frava-daiti, Lord of Fravishes, Pailvish-hahin and Ustav, Beryejaga, Avathrema, Tistrya and Yima, Son of the Sun, the All Light.</p>
 <p>Of the second rank above these were: THE GODS OF THE UNITED HOSTS OF HEAVEN.</p>
 <p>The Creator, Chief over all, Yima and Mithra, Amesha, Cpentas, Havanyi, Cavaghi and Vicya, Rapithurna. Fradotfshu and Zantuma, Fradatvira and Dagyevma, Aiwicruthrema-Aibigaza, Fradat-vicpanum-hujyaiti, Vishaptatha, Ish-Fravashi, Athwya and Kerecacpa, promoted by special decree.</p>
 <p>In addition to the above, the oagas (Gathas) of Zinebabait (afterward Lower India) the Zend, THE LORD GODS, that is, officers of kingdoms in heaven and ruler over nations on earth.</p>
 <p>1. Khahnaothra, an Ahurian of the Zarathustrian period.</p>
 <p>2. Ardvi-cara, an Ahurian of the Zarathustrian period.</p>
 <p>3. Rashnu, a Fragapattician of the Yi-ha period.</p>
 <p>4. Haha-Naepta (Goddess) of the host of Fragapatti, of the Theantiyi period. By the Ayustrians, Gathas meant Gods.</p>
 <p>5. Iaya-Haptanhaiti, special to Haptan, of the Hi-ga period.</p>
 <p>6. Ctatoa-Zacnya (Goe-howjhi), an Ahurian of the Fragapatti period.</p>
 <p>In Ushtai-bhonyia-paria-vi-hyiyi and to their descendants, the Gujerati and Huzvaresh, the Ahura, is omitted, as in the original. Thei and Aph and the Creator, are called Armadz, or Ormazd, or Ormuzd.</p>
 <p>Ahiram, betrayer of secrets, becomes in the lower heavens a confederate with the Daevas, the drujas, the Kikas, the Paris and the Ughsa of the Yi-ha period.</p>
 <p>7. Naotara, of Aphian period, an instructor, who gave many sciences to mortals. These sciences and religious ceremonies were afterward called his sons, and they are now called Fravashis. In addition to the sciences this Lord God, through oracles and otherwise, revealed two hundred and seventy kingdoms in the lower heavens, the most important of which are: Zairi-vairi, Yukhata-vairi, Crisookhshau, Kerecaokhshan, Vyarez, Vanara, Bujicravo, Berejzarsti, Tizhyarsti, Perethwarsu, Vezhyarsti, Naptva, Vazhacpa, Habacpa, Victavaru and Frans-hanm-vareta. All of these divisions, including the two hundred kingdoms, had spirits-in-chief (Lord Gods) to each and every one who took up stations in the temples of worship on earth, and employed thousands of spirit servants, whom they allotted to the different mortals who came thither to worship, to be their guides and guardians, day and night. Through the prophets and high priests in the midnight worship, and also at dawn in the morning, these spirits appeared in tangible forms, taking part in the ceremonies.</p>
 <p>8. Thrita, God of healing, the founder of a mortal race to whom he revealed the secret remedies for all diseases. He enjoined that the remedies should only be revealed from father to son on the death-bed, and when the father thus revealed, he himself lost all power to heal.</p>
 <p>9. Hiac-kaus, Lord of the Seal of Heaven. He bestowed the power of Ahura'Mazda on mortals, enabling the prayers of the living to redeem from torments the spirits of their forefathers.</p>
 <p>10. Takma-wrupa, cunning. The entity cunning. Like a fox, whose strength lieth in cunning. Like the wind. Like the air; subtle, appearing mild; appearing nothing, yet full of deceptive poison. By takma-urupa the successful man is successful. He bindeth apparent goodness in his face, but his golden foot-stool is cunning, the air with the golden tuft.</p>
 <p>11. Ashi-vanuhi, Goddess of dress. She was fourth Airon under Mithra. The duties of her inspiration to mortal women were to clothe themselves and to decorate themselves with gold and silver ornaments. She had twelve hundred Goddesses under her, and they were allotted one day in each month to speak and teach through the magicians and oracles and prophets and high priests. Some of these spirits spoke through the seers by entrancement, and some wrote on the sand-table. Prior to this period Iranian women seldom wore clothes.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah442.htm">Next: Earthly History of the Faithists of the East</a></center>
 </body>