<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah401.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah403.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_568"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 568</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Cosmogony and Prophecy</h1>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter I</h3>
 <p>1. THE same principles apply to all the stars, suns, planets and moons, differing in manifestation on account of size, motion, density and relative place.</p>
 <p>2. The earth floateth in the midst of a vortex, the outer extremity of which is somewhat beyond the moon. The vortex is globular, corresponding to the form of the earth, with slight differences, which will be pointed out hereafter. Vortices are not all closed at the ends; some are open at both ends.</p>
 <p>3. The vortex turneth the earth on its axis, with its own axial motion. Consequently the outer part of the vortex hath greater velocity than near the earth's surface, which hath an axial motion of one thousand miles an hour.</p>
 <p>4. The moon hath a vortex surrounding it also, which hath a rotation axially once a month, but being an open vortex turneth not the moon. All vortices do not lay in contact with the planet, in which case it is called a dead planet. The moon's vortex is ten times the moon's diameter, and the earth's vortex thirty times the earth's diameter, with variations which will be explained hereafter.</p>
 <p>5. The outer rim, forty-two thousand miles broad, of the earth's vortex, hath a revolution axially with the earth once a month. The swiftest part of the earth's vortex is therefore about fifteen thousand miles this side of the orbit of the moon.</p>
 <p>6. From the swiftest part of the earth's vortex, its force is toward the earth's centre. And if there were no earth here at present, the vortex would make one presently.</p>
 <p>7. Things fall not to the earth because of the magnetism therein, save as hereinafter mentioned, but they are driven toward the centre of the vortex, by the power of the vortex.</p>
 <p>8. The greater diameter of the vortex is east and west; the lesser diameter north and south, with an inclination and oscillation relatively like the earth.</p>
 <p>9. The name of the force of the vortex is called vortexya, that is, positive force, because it is arbitrary and exerteth east and west. As in the case of a wheel turning on its axis, its force will be at right angles with its axis, the extreme centre of which will be no force.</p>
 <p>10. For which reason the north and south line of the earth's vortex is called the m'vortexya, or negative force, for it is the subject of the other. As a whirlwind gathereth up straw and dust, which travel toward the centre of the whirlwind, and to the poles thereof, even so do corporeal substances incline to approach the poles of the earth's vortex. Which may be proved by poising a magnetized needle.</p>
 <p>11. In the early times, the earth was longer north and south than east and west. But the m'vortexya, being less than the vortexya, the earth assumed the globular form, which was afterward attenuated east and west, then it again turned, to adapt itself to the polarity north and south.</p>
 <p>12. In these various turnings of the earth, the same force of the vortex exerted over to the east and west. By which behavior every portion of the earth hath been to the east, to the west, to the north and to the south. Which is proven in the rocks, and boulders, and mountains of the earth.</p>
 <p>13. Wherefore it is shown there is no north and south polar power in the earth as such. Furthermore the iron mountains show they attract east and west and north and south, without any regard to a central polar force in the earth.</p>
 <p>14. Wherein mortals have been taught erroneously in regard to two powers which do not exist, as they have been heretofore set forth: These are the attraction of gravitation in the earth, and a north pole magnetism in the earth.</p>
 <p>15. The positive force of the vortex is, therefore, from the external toward the internal; and the negative force of the vortex is toward the poles, and in the ascendant toward the pole external from the sun centre.</p>
 <p><a name="page_569"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 569</font></a></p>
 <p>16. Whereof it may be said the force of the vortex is toward its own centre, but turneth at the centre and escapeth outward at the north pole. As one may draw a line from the east to the centre of the earth, thence in a right angle due north, which would be the current of the vortex until the centre were filled with a corporeal body. After which the same power applieth, and is all one power, although for convenience called positive and negative. (See cut C, Fig. 2.)</p>
 <p>17. Vortexya can be concentrated in iron and steel, and in iron ore, in which condition they are called magnetic. And these substances, if poised as needles, will assume the line of polarity of the vortex or its poles.</p>
 <p>18. Vortexya in the atmosphere will combine oxygen and hydrogen, and an explosion ensueth, which is called thunder. But if an iron wire be raised up in the air (a lightning rod), it formeth a negative centre, to which the vortexya flieth quickly, following it down into the moisture of the earth, where it is dissolved.</p>
 <p>19. If an iron wire extend from city to city, and vortexya be charged at one end, it will manifest at the other pole, and at times even escape in a flame of fire (electric flash).</p>
 <p>20. In like manner the vortex of the earth constantly chargeth the earth with its vortexya in the east and west, and it manifesteth in the northern pole of the vortex in flames of fire, which are called Borealis. But it sometimes happeneth, over high iron mountains, that the light is manifested in other directions. A su'is can see vortexya, as is proven by placing a horseshoe magnet before him in the dark, and he will describe the polar light escaping, even though he hath not been previously informed.</p>
 <p>21. When vortexya is manifested in flames of fire it is called electricity. But when it lieth dormant, as in iron, it is called magnetism.</p>
 <p>22. Where two corporeal substances are rubbed quickly together, friction and heat result; this is a manifestation of vortexya.</p>
 <p>23. In the beginning of the earth's vortex, the current concentrated certain substances (which will be described hereafter) in the centre thereof, where, by friction, the vortexya manifested in heat, so that when the congregation of materials of the earth's substance were together, they were as a molten mass of fire.</p>
 <p>24. And for a long period of time after the fire disappeared, two great lights manifested, one at the north and one at the south.</p>
 <p>25. Were the earth a central planet, like the sun, the light would have been all around, in which case it would have been called a photosphere.</p>
 <p>26. By vortexya was the earth first formed as a ball of fire. By the same power is the warmth of the surface of the earth manufactured to this day. Think not that heat cometh from the sun to the earth; heat cometh not from the sun to the earth. Of which matter mortals in part still dwell in the superstitions of the ancients, who believed all things came from the sun. For is it not said this day: Heat and light come from the sun? Nay, without examination, they also talk about the attraction of gravitation of the sun extending to other planets!</p>
 <p>27. Corpor, as such, hath no power in any direction whatever: Neither attraction of cohesion, nor attraction of gravitation; nor hath it propulsion. But it is of itself inert in all particulars. As two ships sailing near each other will collide, or as two balls suspended by long cords will approach each other somewhat, the cause lieth not in the ships or the balls, but in what is external to them.</p>
 <p>28. Cast water on a dusty floor and the drops of water will assume globular forms, being coated with dust. For convenience sake it is said that the globular form is natural to a liquid, and it is called the globular power. But it is nevertheless caused by a power external to itself. Approach one of the drops of water, which lieth coated with dust, with a piece of cloth, and instantly the globe of water breaketh and climbeth up into the cloth. This is erroneously called capillary attraction. But in fact the water had no attraction for the cloth, nor the cloth for the water. The power which accomplished this was external to both, and was the same in kind as the vortexya that brought the earth to its centre and maintained it therein.</p>
 <p>29. Withdraw the vortexian power, and the earth would instantly go into dissolution. When the cloth approacheth the drop of water, it breaketh the vortex thereof, and the water goeth into divisible parts into the cloth, in search of negative polarity.</p>
 <p>30. What is called corporeal substance, which has length, breadth and thickness, remaineth so by no power of its own, but by vortexya external thereto. Exchange the vortexya, and the corpor goeth into dissolution. This power was, by the ancients, called Uz, <a name="page_570"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 570</font></a> or the fourth dimension of corpor. (See Uz, in Saphah.)</p>
 <p>31. Wherefore it is said, the tendency of corpor is to uncorpor itself (dissolve or evaporate). From the surface of the ocean, and from the earth also, moisture riseth upward. Turn a wheel slowly, with water on its periphery, and the water flieth not off; let the wheel stand idle, and the water runneth off; or turn the wheel very swiftly, and the water flieth off. The same results would follow, as regardeth water, if the wheel stood still with a current of air whirling around the wheel. If the air passed slowly, the water would fall; if at a certain speed, the water would be retained on the periphery; but if at a higher speed, the water would be carried off.</p>
 <p>32. When the earth's axial motion and the vortexian power are equivalent, there is no evaporation of moisture outward; when the vortexya exceedeth, there is great evaporation; but when the vortexya is less, there is rain. According to the vortexian currents, so are the winds (save as hereinafter mentioned), and when these are discordant, small vortices ensue in the cloud regions, and each of these small vortices formeth a drop of rain, which is an infinitesimal planet. Nevertheless, all of them are under the propelling influence of the earth's vortex, and are thus precipitated to the earth. But neither the earth attracted the rain drops, nor do the rain drops attract themselves to the earth.</p>
 <p>33. The earth's vortex is a sub-vortex, existing within the sun's vortex: Mercury, venus, mars, jupiter, saturn, and so on, are corporeal worlds, and each and all of them within sub-vortices, and the combination of all these vortices within the sun's vortex are known by the names great serpent, or solar phalanx. For which reason the sun's vortex was called the MASTER, or TOW-SANG, by the ancient prophets.</p>
 <p>34. Were the sun planet extinct, the master vortex would instantly make another sun. As the lines of vortexya are in currents from the outer toward the interior, so do the solutions of corpor take the shape of needles, in the master, pointing toward the centre, which condition of things is called LIGHT; and when these needles approach the centre, or even the photosphere, the actinic force thereof is called HEAT.</p>
 <p>35. Neither light, nor heat, nor attraction of gravitation cometh from the sun to the earth. Heat decreaseth in force in proportion to the square of the distance from the place of generation; nevertheless, an allowance of decrease must be added thereunto of one to the hundred. Light decreaseth in proportion to the divisibility of rays, as will be mentioned hereafter. Though a man see the light of the sun, as he seeth a horse in a field, yet there is no such thing as travel of light in fact; nor is there any substance of light. But that which is called light is polarity of corporeal needles in solution, caused by the lines of vortexya. In experiments on earth, the flash requireth a certain time to polarize these infinitesimal needles, and for convenience sake such lapse of time is called the travel of light. When the flash continueth, as in the case of the sun centre, the master's infinitesimal needles remain poised from the sun centre outward, even to the earth, and may be compared to telegraph wires, with a battery at each end. But there is no travel in any sense whatever. Daylight is not, therefore, made by the sun, nor by the photosphere of the sun. Daylight is the condition of things polarized within the master vortex. Night is manufactured by the earth coming betwixt the master's focus and the outer extreme. So that both night and day continue all the time; and we realize them both alternately in consequence of the axial motion of the earth. As in the case of night, or of any darkness, when the needles of atmospherean substance are disturbed in polarity, or when the lines of needles are cut, as in eclipse, there is no direct manifestation of the earth's vortexian currents, and such is the cause of darkness. For which reason nitrogenous plants grow rapidly at night, whilst the ripening of certain fruits and grains require the light of day. For by this vortexya are seeds and grains and fruits charged with it. Whereof when man eateth, or, as in breathing air, these things go into dissolution, as hereinafter mentioned, the heat is eliminated, and lodgeth itself in man. Or if certain herbs be piled together, and they commence dissolution, their heat is evolved, and is called spontaneous combustion.</p>
 <p>36. Nevertheless, the herbs as such, have no power to produce heat; by their rapid dissolution, the vortexya in them endeavoreth to escape to some pole. The heat in herbs, and seeds, and plants, and other growing things, is because they are the objective points of the actinic force of vortexya. And this heat in herbs is equivalent to the <a name="page_571"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 571</font></a> same thing in iron, which is called magnetism. And its liberation or polar manifestation is, after all, one and the same thing as that which is discharged in a magnetic flame called electricity.</p>
 <p>37. So that the cause of all these things springeth from the vortex, the power and force of which is vortexya. By a sudden dissolution of vegetable substance, as wood or straw, we have what is called fire, or burning. There is no substance of heat, nor of fire; a dissolution occurreth in which the vortexya is liberated. Corporeal substances all contain heat (vortexya proper); even snow and ice have it in infinitesimal quantities; and oils, and herbs of all kinds; but the diamond containeth the highest percentage of charge.</p>
 <p>38. Wherein they have taught erroneously that heat cometh from the sun. As may be proved in all the earth that heat (so-called) is evolved at the expense of destroying something, which is, in general, called combustion. And there is not in all the universe anything that can give off forever without receiving a supply forever. Heat had to be stored up in the first place in anything in heaven or earth before it could be liberated.</p>
 <p>39. Though a man burn a stick of wood, he can produce no more heat therefrom than what was stored therein.</p>
 <p>40. Allowing the sun to be four and a half millions of miles in diameter, and to be of the best quality of a diamond. Give it even fifty percent of the burning capacity, and it would be entirely consumed in eighty thousand years! And yet the sun is not of any such quality as a diamond. Even not more so in quality than is the earth. But suppose it were even as a diamond, or as the highest conceived-of centre of heat; then that heat had to be previously given to it. Whence came it? To suppose that heat existeth of itself is folly; to suppose that heat can be produced forever without supply is not supported by any fact in heaven or earth.</p>
 <p>41. Friction produceth heat; but it is because the abrasion liberateth stored-up vortexya. Or as in the case of glass on leather, vortexya is manufactured. In the case of the sun no such manufactory, nor one approximating it, existeth.</p>
 <p>42. Wherein they have observed sun-spots, and said that during their presence, the temperature of the earth decreaseth, thereby reasoning that sun-spots prevented the heat of the sun falling to the earth, they have erred in two particulars: First, in defective observations and guessing at a conclusion; and second, in not having first determined the relative heat evolved from the earth at different periods in its course of travel. (Of which matter further remarks will be made hereinafter.)</p>
 <p>43. The same errors, in regard to the light of the moon, were made in the conclusions of Kepler and Humboldt, in attributing the eclipse thereof to be governed by the sun's rays being inflected by their passage through the atmosphere and thrown into the shadow cone.</p>
 <p>44. The superstitions of the ancients still cling to philosophers; they seek, first, to find the cause of things in the sun; or if failing therein, turn to the moon, or if failing here, they turn to the stars.</p>
 <p>45. Finding a coincidence in the tides with certain phases of the moon, they have erroneously attributed the cause of tides to the power of attaction in the moon manifesting on the ocean, which is taught to this day as sound philosophy! Attraction, as previously stated, existeth not in any corporeal substance as a separate thing. There is no substance of attraction. Nor is there any substance of gravitation. These powers are the manifestation of vortexya. If vortexya be charged into a piece of iron or steel, it is called a magnet, because it APPARENTLY draweth its own kind to itself. When two pieces of steel, alike in quality, are charged with vortexya to their utmost, their power will be in proportion to their dimensions. If one be twice the size of the other, its magnetic force (so-called) will be in the main two times more powerful.</p>
 <p>46. The form of a true magnet of steel, to manifest the greatest positive, and greatest negative force, should be nearly a right-angle triangle, after the manner of a line of vortexya from the equatorial surface of the earth to its centre, and thence toward the north pole. By having two such magnets, and bringing their poles together, a square is produced, which now balanceth its recipency and its emission of vortexya. (See cut C, Figs. 2 and 3.)</p>
 <p>47. As in the case of an iron mountain, it is forever receiving (feebly) equatorially; and forever emitting (feebly) polarly the vortexian current; though, for practical observations, the force may be said to be in a dormant state. And in this sense should the earth and other planets be considered. They are not in the shape of triangles or horseshoes, but as globes. Hence <a name="page_572"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 572</font></a> their positive and negative vortexian power (magnetism, erroneously called) is less than the horseshoe form.</p>
 <p>48. The power of a magnet decreaseth in proportion to the square of the distance from it. Under certain conditions one leg of the magnet repelleth things from it. As previously stated, this is nevertheless one current; which vortexya floweth through the magnet, even as water floweth through a tubel. This propelling power of the magnet also decreaseth in proportion to the square of the distance from it. If the poles of a single magnet be exposed, it will in time decrease from its maximum power until it ultimately becometh of the same capacity (as to external things) even as if the poles were closed by juxtaposition with another magnet.</p>
 <p>49. Wherein it will be observed that were the sun or moon or earth the most powerful steel magnet, it would not take a long time (as to the time of worlds) when its magnetic attraction would not exceed native iron ore. Wherein it will also be observed that were the moon a globe of magnetic iron ore, it can be shown approximately how far would extend its power of magnetic attraction external to itself.</p>
 <p>50. Nevertheless, its magnetic attraction in that extreme case would not be on water or clay, but on iron and its kindred ores. So that if the moon exerted a magnetic force on the earth it would manifest more on the magnetic needle, or other iron substance, than on the water of the ocean.</p>
 <p>51. By suspending a ball of magnetic iron along side a suspended cup of water, it will be discovered there is no magnetic attraction between them, more than between two cups of water, or between two vessels of clay.</p>
 <p>52. The highest magnetic power that can be imparted to steel in the form of a ball, to its equatorial dimension, to manifest in moving an equivalent fellow, is seven of its diameters! But in the case of iron ore (normal magnet) it is very considerably less than this. By this it is shown that were the moon a steel magnet it would not exert perceptible power more than nine thousand miles. Her shortest distance from the earth is two hundred and twenty thousand miles.</p>
 <p>53. Wherein it is shown that under the most extravagant supposition of power, her magnetic attraction is more than two hundred thousand miles short of reaching to the earth.</p>
 <p>54. Were there such a thing as magnetic attraction between the iron and water, or between water and water, a still further discrepancy would result. Admitting the general parts of the moon, as to iron and stone and clay and water, to be alike and like unto the corporeal earth, the power of the magnetic attraction of the earth, as against the moon's, to hold the tides from rising, would be in the ratio of different sizes of the two bodies, and their respective distances from the water contended for. In which case there would be more than four thousand million times advantage of power in the earth! For if we give the same magnetic equivalent to each, we must give to each a decrease in proportion to the square of the distance of their centres from the point in contention, the ocean's tides!</p>
 <p>55. The same philosophy holdeth in regard to the sun, and to jupiter and saturn and mars, and all other planets, making allowance for their different densities and velocities.</p>
 <p>56. As to the attraction (so-called) between two earth substances, as granite, or sandstone, or lead, or gold, or clay, or water, it is far less than between two steel magnets. Wherein it will be observed, that it is utterly impossible for any attractive force to exert from one planet to another; or even from a planet to its own satellite.</p>
 <p>57. And though the most extravagant supposition, based on measurement, be given to the sun's supposed attractive force, it doeth not extend to the earth by more than seventy million miles! Wherein they have taught error in place of truth!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah403.htm">Next: Chapter II</a></center>
 </body>