<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah474.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah476.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">DING.</h3>
 <p>1. QUICK springing in, and loud came the song of the heaven, Vrihaden, with her thousand million angels, high in the grades:</p>
 <p>2. Worshipful, O Almighty! Speak ye my shining rivers of heaven, Hyad-hiago and Fuen and Owagonshe, ten hundred thousand miles of water.</p>
 <p>3. Flowing past my heavenly cities, Effalt and Sugathagow, and Friabes and Yanad and Hucfomakalasakola, lying under the high mountain, Soidon, with four thousand high arches reared by the Almighty!</p>
 <p>4. My thousand millions rejoicing in Jehovih, Thou Creator of millions of heavens, stretching far. O that I could find comparisons for mortals, to tell them of the glory of my heavens!</p>
 <p>5. My places of learning and factories and ship-building, shaping vessels for coursing the firmament of the Almighty! Of the rules and philosophies of my delightful heavens.</p>
 <p>6. O that I could show them the discipline of my thousand millions; my army of Jehovih! Their high wisdom and their power over the elements created by the Almighty!</p>
 <p>7. O that mortals could see my high arches and my heavenly forests and mountains! O that mortals understood to inhabit a world within as well as without.</p>
 <p>8. To know the solutions of Jehovih's worlds, and the orderly arrangement of the unseen! Praise be unto Thee, Jehovih! Thou Provider of the heaven, Vrihaden, with her thousands of millions.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah476.htm">Next: GOWH</a></center>
 </body>