<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah462.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah464.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">SUAT.</h3>
 <p>1. YESAIN, mighty sheds of Le, ye towering strength in etherea, sing to the Almighty. And ye, C'taran and Hituns, thou, Stalacti, visiting place for the congregations born of other planets.</p>
 <p>2. Shout loud and long to the Ever Present, O ye plans of Palla and forests of Sethawan, ye golden triumphs fashioned in the Arches of Hiatusa and Nor.</p>
 <p>3. Remember Him in praise, O ye swamps of Ludz and place of toil of the Orian Chief, Hazu, with his four thousand million etherean hosts, making the Roads of Semetatosa. <a name="page_657"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 657</font></a></p>
 <p>4. Unto the Person of the Almighty, sing, thou, Orub, thou habitation of twelve million cities of Gods and Goddesses. Sing in praise and rejoicing for the red star, the young earth.</p>
 <p>5. And thou, O Seeing, thou paradise of Goddesses of ten million cities, sing to the Person of the universe, Jehovih; sing Him an anthem, Whose Voice resteth on the young earth.</p>
 <p>6. Sing ye, O Yissain and Wartz, the etherean worlds of the seven cross-roads of the seven traveling sun-worlds with their millions of stars floating in the breath of the Almighty!</p>
 <p>7. Proclaim the Creator forever, O Hoesonya and Saffer, and thou great etherean light, Mos, and ye mountains of Galeb; and thou, Yonetz, thou place of the million lakes!</p>
 <p>8. Sing in praise of Jehovih, O ye toilers with Thor, Son of the Almighty! Praise ye Him, O ye etherean angels of Ogonavesta; send forth the glad song forever and ever!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah464.htm">Next: YAT</a></center>
 </body>