<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah409.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah411.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter IX</h3>
 <p>1. THE same force, vortexya, pervadeth the entire universe, but differently, according to volume, velocity and configuration.</p>
 <p>2. As previously shown, colors are not substances or things in fact, but records of currents of vortexya, and are in proportion to their deviation from linear to adverse parallelism. These fall under the divisor, or multiple, 3 (primaries), yellow, blue and red, corresponding to the times, 11, 33, 99, and so on.</p>
 <p>3. The same rule was applied by the ancient prophets in music, making three primary sounds, e, o, ih (the words of the wind), but giving all other sounds to the beast (66), which was supposed to cover the number of sounds from the lowest bass to the highest treble, that could be procured from the animal creation. And these ranges of sounds are manifest in man, whether singing or talking, according to the kind of vortexian currents that fall upon a country and the grade he holdeth in resurrection. So that even a whole people in one country will utter sounds higher or lower than in another country, some through the teeth, some in the throat, and yet others through the nose.</p>
 <p><a name="page_588"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 588</font></a></p>
 <p>4. Sounds, as in music, are not substance, but currents of air in motion, which register their broken discharges on the drum of the ear. So that it is possible for the ear to be so cultivated that it can detect these velocities, so as to determine colors thereby. For, of a truth, in entity, sounds and colors are one and the same thing, but registered, one on the eye and one on the ear. In other words, the two organs of sense discover the same thing differently: To one it is music, to the other it is color.</p>
 <p>5. If a man be given to reverie because of music or colors, his soul traveleth in the currents thereof, and he becometh oblivious to his surroundings. The vortexian currents in that case pass through him uninterruptedly.</p>
 <p>6. If one instrument in a same room be played upon, and other instruments in the same room be in tune therewith, the currents of vortexya will cause the others to give off sounds faintly. If said instruments be connected by wood fibres, the sounds will be louder. If the person in reverie holdeth the hands of others in the room, the same current will run through the whole. Hence music is the greatest of all harmonizers. A person may be a great lover of music, but be so discordant in his disposition as not to enter the ecstatic state of reverie. Another person may not know how to sing three notes, but have so concordant a disposition that he is at once carried into ecstacy by music, or by colors, or by viewing the great harmonies of creation.</p>
 <p>7. The true prophet is such as hath attained concordance. The vortexian currents of any and everything pass through him. He seeth and feeleth with his soul. He is a perpetual register of everything near at hand. And if he cultivate his talent so as to estimate results therefrom, the future and the past are as an open book to him.</p>
 <p>8. That which is erroneously called instinct in animals, is the capacity to be moved by the positive and negative vortexya.</p>
 <p>9. Were the positive and negative currents equal in duration, the sexes born into the world would be equal in number. Males are the manifestation of positive vortexya, and females negative. The more positive the female, the less fruitful; but the opposite of this is the male's power.</p>
 <p>10. Herb-food for man cultivateth the negative condition; flesh-food for man increaseth the positive: Which is to say, flesh-food carrieth man away from prophecy; away from spirituality. A nation of meat-eaters will always culminate in disbelievers in spirituality; and they become addicted to corporeal passions. Such men can not understand; to them the world is vanity and vexation, if poor; or, if rich, a place to revel in for lust's sake.</p>
 <p>11. Let the prophet steer clear of them; nor marry with them; nor have anything in common with them. For though a man learn all the motions and powers of the corporeal worlds, his information is still but as a drop of water compared to the ocean, when measured by the seer and prophet that seeth the atmospherean and etherean worlds.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah411.htm">Next: Chapter X</a></center>
 </body>