<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah496.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah498.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <a name="loois">
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIV</h3>
 <p align="CENTER">GOD PROVIDETH FOR THE BIRTH OF KA'YU.</p>
 <p>1. GOD said: Behold, three conditions are now within the heavens of the earth; Anarchy by the false Gods and their slaves, the confederacy of the Holy Ghost, and the Faithists in Jehovih and His resurrections.</p>
 <p>2. Now, therefore, let my chief loo'is come before me, and hear the decree of God.</p>
 <p>3. The Lord said: When the chief loo'is had come before the throne, God said unto him:</p>
 <p>4. Know then, O Thoanactus, thou shalt go down to the earth, to the land of Chine'ya, and by inspiration bring forth a birth, capable of the All Voice, but not capable of su'is. And thou shalt accomplish this service so that he shall be born into the mortal world at the time a'ji ceaseth to fall upon that land.</p>
 <p>5. And thou shalt provide him with great learning and great adversity and great experience withal. For he shall establish the fundamental doctrines of the nations of Chine'ya. For his followers shall become the most numerous and peaceful inhabitants on the face of the earth.</p>
 <p>6. And as thou preparest for his birth by thy mastery over the generations of mortals, so shalt thou, through these, thy hosts, raise up such as shall become disciples. For however great a man thou mightest raise up, it is wisdom to have also born into the mortal world, at the same era, such hosts of philosophers as shall follow him, and indorse his doctrines.</p>
 <p>7. For by this means the establishment of Jehovih and His light amongst mortals shall extend the whole length and breadth of that land. How sayest thou?</p>
 <p>8. Thoanactus said: Jehovih's will and thine be done. This is a most welcome labor, O God. And I know, the voices of my hosts are with me.</p>
 <p>9. God said: In Jehovih's name, thee I crown, CHIEF OF THE HOSTS OF LOO'IS, for the land of Chine'ya, for the birth of an heir for the All Voice of the Great Spirit.</p>
 <p>10. Thoanactus was then crowned, and his hosts were provided with badges by God, for they were filed before the throne, and hosts saluted, and departed with due ceremony.</p>
 <p>11. Such, then, was God's labor for having born into the mortal world, after many generations, one that hath become known to the uttermost regions of the earth as KA'YU. Of him, more anon.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah498.htm">Next: Chapter XV</a></center>
 </a></body>