<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah492.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah494.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter X</h3>
 <p>1. TOYVRAGHAH and Hagonte and Yulis and Rufus, with their hosts, returned from their voyage to the earth, and brought records of the standing of mortals in all the tribes and nations of the earth, and of their numbers, and their grades and generations, and of the Faithists in all the different regions of the earth, and of idolaters, and of all matters pertaining to mortals, and these records were filed in the libraries of heaven, and a copy of them sent to the etherean regions in the roadway of the earth and her heavens.</p>
 <p>2. Of Faithists, there were thirty-one millions and three hundred thousand. In Chine'ya, thirteen million seven hundred thousands; in Vind'yu three million three hundred thousands; in western Arabin'ya (Kanna'yan), six million two hundred thousands, and in north Guatama, eight million one hundred thousands.</p>
 <p>3. And of all the rest of the inhabitants of the earth, there were eleven hundred millions. Of these, upward of ninety-seven per cent, were capable of everlasting life.</p>
 <p>4. Of the Faithists of Chine'ya, suffice this: Though they maintained the rites and ceremonies of the ancients, they lived not wholly as a separate people, save in a few places. But they were the head and front of learning and of teaching all the applied arts <a name="page_671"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 671</font></a> and industries. Whilst the idolaters of Joss and Te'in and Po were less learned.</p>
 <p>5. God said of Chine'ya: This is a good work. Whoso shapeth the education of a people will ultimately found them in their own doctrines. The Faithists will make these people a great people.</p>
 <p>6. Nevertheless great wars are near at hand here. The idolaters, being warriors, will suffer most, and the Faithists, who practice peace, will greatly gain upon them. And it was even so, as will be presently shown.</p>
 <p>7. Of the Faithists of Vind'yu suffice this: They lived in families and small colonies; they practiced the rites and ceremonies; nor were there any laws against them, as in the olden times. But because of the many languages in this country, all peoples were afflicted. God said: No people can advance much whilst they have many languages.</p>
 <p>8. Of the Faithists of western Arabin'ya, who, for the most part, called themselves Israelites, suffice this: The two branches still remained: those who lived under the oral law, and those who lived under the written law. The latter were called Leviticans, that is, hangers on, and of imperfect flesh and spirit.</p>
 <p>9. The Leviticans were not scrupulous as regardeth war and the preservation of their seed. And in consequence of their sins they brought great shame upon the Faithists in general. And the Leviticans' examples were evil, and they gained in numbers faster than the Oralites. The Leviticans worshiped the Great Spirit under the names, Lord and God.</p>
 <p>10. As for the Oralites, so called, because their doctrines and teachings were secret and only spoken, being taught , man to man and woman to woman, orally; they were non-resistants, and they owned nothing, giving all things to the rab'bah for the public good. Their practice was love and harmony; doing righteously in all things, and trusting to Jehovih, Whom they worshiped under the name E-O-Ih. All the prophets and seers were born of the Oralites.</p>
 <p>11. And so great was the spiritual power of the Oralites, that during all these hundreds of years the Faithists, six millions, had lived without king or governor. Being as a multitude of communities.</p>
 <p>12. Of the Faithists of Guatama, they were little learned, but were peaceful and industrious. And they comprised all the inhabitants, save the I'hins, in all the land. And they also lived without kings or governors. And every town was ruled over by a rab'bah, and a combination of towns by a chief rab'bah. And the tribes were made into states, with chief rab'bahs as representatives, and these states were united into a great government called, THE ALGONQUIN. And all the government were made and maintained for the benefit of tribes that might suffer by famines or fevers. And yet there was not amongst all these millions of people one tyrant or dictator.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah494.htm">Next: Chapter XI</a></center>
 </body>