<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah539.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah541.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter LVII</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">GOD PROPHESIETH OF THE FOUR FALSE GODS, LOOEAMONG, ENNOCHISSA, KABALACTES AND GABRIEL</p></font>.
 <p>1. GOD said: In the name of the All Highest, greeting, my brothers.</p>
 <p>2. When ye first established your Holy Confederacy, behold, ye professed to be in service of Jehovih, and that your confederation was to raise up sons and daughters for the etherean heavens.</p>
 <p>3. But, even before ye had completed your organization, ye modified the name, Jehovih, signifying the All Person, to the name, Holy Ghost, signifying no person, but a principle only.</p>
 <p>4. Thus, in the very outset, ye prepared your kingdoms without distinctive purpose, and resurrection guided toward unity:</p>
 <p>5. For, to declare, all things are not parts and principles comprising one universal All is to found a base for discord.</p>
 <p>6. (As the players, when each one turneth away from the tune, playing a strain on his own account.)</p>
 <p>7. Whereas, what ye declared of Jehovih, will also be declared of you, as ye denied His Person, substituting that which was void; and, as an incomprehensible state, so shall the same judgment come upon you all.</p>
 <p>8. As ye put away Jehovih, so will mortals put you away.</p>
 <p>9. As ye declare the Creator to be but a principle, a nonentity, without sense or unity of purpose, so shall mortals declare of you all.</p>
 <p>10. They will say: Behold, Brahma is not a person, but a principle; Budha is not a person, but a principle; Kriste is not a person, but a principle; God-Gabriel is not a person, but a principle.</p>
 <p>11. Because ye labored to pull down Jehovih's name, behold, the names which ye falsely assumed, will be pulled down, and cast out also, both on earth and in heaven.</p>
 <p>12. Because ye have sought to confine in Jehovih's firmament the spirits that rise up from the earth, your kingdoms are falling lower and lower.</p>
 <p>13. Because ye sought to confine the talents of mortals to your sacred books, your sacred books have become worthless before Jehovih.</p>
 <p>14. Mortals, as well as angels, will repudiate you and your books. Only druks and drujas will be your followers.</p>
 <p>15. And thou, Thoth, shalt be the first to be cast down, and thy heavenly kingdoms with thee.</p>
 <p>16. And thou, Ennochissa, shalt be next, and thy heavenly kingdoms with thee.</p>
 <p>17. And thou, Kabalactes, shalt be third, and thy heavenly kingdoms with thee.</p>
 <p>18. And, last of all, thou, Looeamong, shalt go down, and thy heavenly kingdoms with thee.</p>
 <p>19. Nevertheless, thou shalt conquer all the earth, and trail it round with mortal blood. And, after that, thou shalt be hated above all other false Gods, that have ever been.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah541.htm">Next: Chapter LVIII</a></center>
 </body>