<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah530.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah532.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XLVIII</h3>
 <p>1. THE Lord said: Whilst Looeamong, the false God, was yet bewailing, behold, Thoth, his chief warrior God, came upon him, saying:</p>
 <p>2. Alas, O master, thy followers have no king or queen on earth to protect them.</p>
 <p>3. Thy mortal Kriste'yan warriors, who drew the sword to establish thee, have been slaughtered in Cardalia, Cyprus, Aitina, Thessalonica, Dalmatia, Lacaonia, Napla, Selucia, Macedon, Galati and Scythia.</p>
 <p>4. In Thebes, six thousand Kriste'yan warriors were massacred by the armies of the emperor Maximum, inspired by Baal.</p>
 <p>5. In Eocla, the Gods Jupiter and Ira inspired the king Hoethus to slaughter three thousand seven hundred Kriste'yan soldiers.</p>
 <p>6. In Utica, the God Jupiter, with seven thousand angels caused three hundred of thy soldiers to be burned in a lime kiln. And they were soldiers battling for thee.</p>
 <p>7. In Damascus, two thousand seven hundred of thy warriors were cut to pieces with the sword. And the only charge against them was their fighting for thee. Yea, their sacred bull was taken from them and roasted alive. And their bloody cross, which thou gavest them as a sign of the battle-cry, was broken and burnt.</p>
 <p>8. In Crete, one thousand eight hundred of thy warriors, who had served thee well in slaughtering pagans, were walled around with fire, and roasted alive.</p>
 <p>9. On the plains of Agatha, where thy soldiers, three hundred and eighty of them, were returning with their booty, having done thee great service in destroying heathen temples, they were set upon by the Gath'yans and destroyed, and for no other cause than that they served thee.</p>
 <p>10. Looeamong cried out: Enough! Enough, O Thoth! I, too, will have a mortal emperor.</p>
 <p>11. Descend thou again to the earth, to Hatuas (Constantine), and inspire thou him to raise a mortal army of forty thousand men, and move upon Roma.</p>
 <p>12. Behold, I will prove myself before <a name="page_713"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 713</font></a> Hatuas, and he shall covenant unto me. Through him will I drive Baal out of Roma. And, as I make myself Kriste of heaven, so will I make Hatuas (Constantine) emperor of the whole earth.</p>
 <p>13.Thoth then descended to the earth, to Hatuas, who was a su'is, and could both see angels and hear them talk; and Thoth induced Hatuas to raise an army of forty thousand soldiers, and set out for conquest.</p>
 <p>14. And when they had come to the plains of Agatha, even where the Kriste'yans had been massacred many years before, behold, Looeamong and his angel hosts appeared in the heavens above Hatuas' army, so that all the soldiers thereof beheld the heavenly visitors.</p>
 <p>15. And Looeamong showed unto Hatuas, in the air of heaven, a true cross, on which was written in letters of blood: IL'KRISTE.</p>
 <p>16. Nevertheless, there was no man present who could read the inscription; and many were the conjectures thereon. In the evening, Looeamong descended to Hatuas, and said unto him: This is the interpretation of the sign and the cross I showed thee:</p>
 <p>17. IN THIS THOU SHALT CONQUER! Amd when thou arisest in the morning thou shalt cause to be made a cross, of most excellent workmanship; and thou shalt have it inscribed: THE KRISTE, OUR LORD, SON OF THE HOLY GHOST.</p>
 <p>18. And this cross shalt thou cause to be carried at the head of thy army. And thy edicts shalt thou call, bulls, and they shall be written with lamb's blood, in remembrance of the sacrifice of the Jews in Egupt, through which sacrifice the Father in heaven delivered them. For I am Lord of heaven and earth.</p>
 <p>19. Accordingly, a cross was made, and highly decorated, and inscribed as commanded, and Hatuas and his soldiers went forth with renewed courage. And so great was their zeal, that everything fell before them.</p>
 <p>20. And now, that Looeamong's angels had an anchorage on earth, they were in all respects the equals of angels of the pagan Gods. So that, whilst Hatuas was victorious on earth, Gabriel, otherwise Thoth, was victorious in heaven.</p>
 <p>21. And it came to pass in not many years, that Looeamong, through Gabriel, captured Baal and all the false Gods in all the regions far and near. And Gabriel took, along with the captured Gods, seven million and six hundred thousand warring angels, and carried them altogether to Makavishtu, in hada, and cast them into hell, where there were already more than ten millions who were in chaos and madness.</p>
 <p>22. And Gabriel had the place walled around with fire and noxious gases, so that none could escape.</p>
 <p>23. Such was the end of the earthly dominion of Baal, who had ruled over mortals for evil, for upward of three thousand years. And, in fact, it was the final termination of the earthly Gods that ruled over mortals through oracles and pagan practices.</p>
 <p>24. The earth was now clear of evil Gods, whose chief labor had been for thousands of years to capture the spirits of the recent dead, and make slaves of them for the glory of the hadan kingdoms.</p>
 <p>25. Thus had Looeamong done a good service; for the earth and lower heavens had now nothing to suffer from any Gods, save the Triunes.</p>
 <p>26. Looeamong inspired Hatuas, the mortal emperor, to call together a council of wise men from all the kingdoms of Arabin'ya, Heleste, Parsi'e and Uropa, to select from all the religious doctrines in the world, that which was the wisest and best, that it might be established by kings, emperors and governors by the sword and spear, so there should never more be but one religion.</p>
 <p>27. And, in course of time, there assembled a council of seventeen hundred and eighty-six learned men from all the regions named, and they placed themselves under the rules and presence of Hatuas. And he selected from them one hundred and forty-four speakers.</p>
 <p>28. As for the others, they were divided into groups of twelves, besides a goodly number being appointed scribes and translators. But many, having the appearance of Jews, were rejected altogether.</p>
 <p>29. Now, the council had brought with them, in all, two thousand two hundred and thirty-one books and legendary tales of Gods and Saviors and great men, together with a record of the doctrines taught by them.</p>
 <p>30. Hatuas, being under the inspiration of Looeamong, through Gabriel, alias Thoth, thus spake:</p>
 <p>31. Search ye these books, and whatsoever is good in them, that retain; but, whatsoever is evil, that cast away. What is good in one book, unite ye with that which is good in another book. And whatsoever is thus brought together shall be called, THE BOOK OF <a name="page_714"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 714</font></a> BOOKS. And it shall be the doctrine of my people, which I will recommend unto all nations, that there shall be no more war for religions' sake.</p>
 <p>32. Thoth (Gabriel) and his angel hosts formed a circle around about the mortal council, a thousand angels deep on every side, and extending upward densely for a long way, and thence, by a line of light, extending to Looeamong's throne, in Hapsendi, his heavenly kingdom.</p>
 <p>33. By day and by night, Thoth and his hosts watched over the mortal council, over-shadowing their every thought and word.</p>
 <p>34. For four years and seven months the council thus deliberated, and selected from the two thousand two hundred and thirty-one books and legendary tales.</p>
 <p>35. And, at the end of that time, there had been selected and combined much that was good and great, and worded so as to be well-remembered by mortals.</p>
 <p>36. As yet, no God had been selected by the council, and so they balloted, in order to determine that matter. And the first ballot gave prominence to the following Gods: Jove, Jupiter, Salenus, Baal, Thor, Gade, Apollo, Juno, Aries, Taurus, Minerva, Rhets, Mithra, Theo, Fragapatti, Atys, Durga, Indra, Neptune, Vulcan, Kriste, Agni, Croesus, Pelides, Huit, Hermes, Thulis, Thammus, Eguptus, Iao, Aph, Saturn, Gitchens, Minos, Maximo, Hecla and Phernes.</p>
 <p>37. Besides these, there were twenty-two other Gods and Goddesses, that received a small number of votes each.</p>
 <p>38. In seven days thereafter, another ballot was taken, and the number of Gods was reduced to twenty-seven.</p>
 <p>39. In seven days thereafter, another ballot was taken, and the number of Gods was reduced to twenty-one.</p>
 <p>40. Thus was the number reduced each ballot, but slower and slower. Six days in the week were allotted to discuss the merits and de'merits of the Gods. But many weeks elapsed towards the last, when the number was not reduced.</p>
 <p>41. For one year and five months the balloting lasted, and at that time the ballot rested nearly equally on five Gods, namely: Jove, Kriste, Mars, Crite and Siva. And here the ballot changed not for yet seven time more, which was seven weeks.</p>
 <p>42. Hatuas spake before the council, saying: Ours is a labor for all the nations of the earth, and for all time. I know the angels of heaven are with us in this matter. We have found five Gods, good and acceptable before the world. What say the council, that the angels give us a sign? For we all do know the angels' signs of these Gods.</p>
 <p>43. The council said: Well said, thou wisest of men! Such a God shall be ours, now and forever.</p>
 <p>44. And immediately, there and then, LOOEAMONG AND HIS ANGELS GAVE A SIGN IN FIRE, OF A CROSS SMEARED WITH BLOOD, AND IT RESTED ON A BULL'S HORNS, even as a cloud of fire on a cloud of fire!</p>
 <p>45. Whereupon Kriste was declared GOD AND LORD OF ALL THE NATIONS OF THE EARTH.</p>
 <p>46. And the council agreed thereto, unanimously, and, moreover, to reject all the other Gods.</p>
 <p>47. The next question was, what mortal representative should be chosen?</p>
 <p>48. The first ballot brought out the following men: Zarasthustra, Thothma, Abraham, Brahma, Atys, Thammus, Joshu, Sakaya, Habron, Bali, Crite, Chrisna, Thulis, Witoba and Speio. Besides these, there were included in the ballot, forty-six other men, who received a small number of ballots each.</p>
 <p>49. God, Son of Jehovih, said: Behold, the Council of Nice balloted for a twelve-month, as to what man heard the Voice? Sayest thou, Jehovih sendeth His matters to a council of men?</p>
 <p>50. Hatuas said: The Gods will not let us choose any man. Now, therefore, hear me: All the law-givers chosen by the Gods, have been iesu. Now, since we can not make preference as to a man, let us say: THE MAN, IESU?</p>
 <p>51. Thereupon, the name, Iesu, was adopted, and the sacred books were written accordingly.</p>
 <p>52. God, Son of Jehovih, said: The Council of Nice sinned not, for the doctrones set forth, as Iesu's, were for Jehovih.</p>
 <p>53. But, wherein their words made worshipful the names of Kriste and the Holy Ghost, behold, that matter was with Looeamong.</p>
 <p>54. God said: My testimonies were previously with Abraham and Brahma and Moses, and I spake not of Kriste nor of the Holy Ghost, I spake of God and of the I AM.</p>
 <p>55. They have said: Whosoever speaketh a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but, whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him.</p>
 <p><a name="page_715"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 715</font></a></p>
 <p>56. Therefore, suffer ye Looeamong to bear his own testimony to the kingdom whence it sprang. The Holy Ghost was his labor.</p>
 <p>57. Jehovih said: Had I weakened since the time of Moses, that I need to incarnate Myself, in order to make man understand Me?</p>
 <p>58. God said: Sufficient unto a time is the work of Jehovih; because the Triunes over threw the oracles and hundreds of false Gods and hundreds of sacred books full of error and evil, behold they fulfilled their time.</p>
 <p>59. Sufficient unto another time, even the present, is another work of Jehovih, which is to establish His Presence with the living generation.</p>
 <p>60. Jehovih said: Behold, I created; and I am sufficient unto all men.</p>
 <p>61. In the olden times, man worshipped all the spirits of the dead, and I cut him short, giving him many Gods; and, again, I cut him short, and gave him three Gods, and then, three Gods in one.</p>
 <p>62. This day, I cut him short of all, save his Creator. Behold the signs of My times, My preachers are legions.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah532.htm">Next: Chapter XLIX</a></center>
 </body>