<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah573.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah575.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XII</h3>
 <p>1. O man, remember thy Creator and praise Him. In this, thou art graded by thy God.</p>
 <p>2. Who see not Him, are weak in spirit; who see Him in all things, and hear His voice in the leaves, and in every herb, are strong in spirit.</p>
 <p>3. These are the grades of the resurrection of the souls of men.</p>
 <p>4. For what is the earth but a foaling nest, and the possessions of the earth but chains of bondage.</p>
 <p>5. My heavens rest upon the earth; the place of the es'yan is in my keeping. And the places of the grades of my heavens have I adjusted, according to the inhabitants thereof.</p>
 <p>6. I people the heavens of the earth with the spirits of the dead; according to their grade in their corporeal lives, so do I arrange them.</p>
 <p>7. To provide them unto everlasting resurrection, and make them to rejoice in their being. These are the labors of thy God.</p>
 <p>8. For the beasts of the field and the birds and fowls of the air, and for many animals that are companions to man, made I a place in heaven, where their spirits should survive for a season.</p>
 <p>9. And this animal heaven I graded, one, in the order of my heavens.</p>
 <p><a name="page_765"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 765</font></a></p>
 <p>10. For I saw that man on the earth had delight in them; and I provided unto him for his es'yan period, that he might rejoice in remembrance of finding his loves.</p>
 <p>11. And I made the animal heaven to rest on the face of the lands of the earth even the same as the place of the es'yan in grade one.</p>
 <p>12. Remember, O man, thy Creator gave to every animal a season on the earth; but He limited them to a time to become extinct. Even so, and of like duration made I a heavenly period for the spirits of animals companionable to man.</p>
 <p>13. But for man I provided heavens above, where he should rise as to place, even as he riseth, as to goodness and knowledge.</p>
 <p>14. Magnify thy perception, O man, that thou mayst comprehend the kingdoms of thy God. Behold the example thy Creator sat before thee in the fashion of the earth.</p>
 <p>15. In large bodies, He placed the lands; in large bodies, He placed the oceans. Not in little hillocks of land and little puddles of water.</p>
 <p>16.Even larger than these are the divisions (plateaux) of the heavens of thy God; the heavens of the earth are separated by atmospherean oceans.</p>
 <p>17. I fill not the air of the firmament with angels scattered about; but I give unto them regions habitable and home-like. And I grade them suitable to the resurrection of the spirits of the dead.</p>
 <p>18. Consider the work of thy Creator, and the knowledge and symbols He placeth before thee. Thou holdest up a lump of salt, and it is solid and of dimensions; but cast it into water, and it is seen not, but dissolved and lost as to thy perception.</p>
 <p>19. And thou beholdest the earth, which hath dimensions also; but the ethe, thou seest not. As water is to salt the solvent, so is ethe to corporeal things the solvent. By slow velocity holdeth the solid earth its form; yet, in ethe, external to the body of the earth, the swift velocity of corpor is magnified into dissolution. By vortices in ethe are these things accomplished.</p>
 <p>20. In the atmosphere of the earth, there is sufficient corpor to make many worlds like this habitable earth. And this corpor, which is in solution (as to a mortal's eyes), floateth in the firmament of the earth, in continents wide as the earth, and deep as the earth; and there are thousands of them.</p>
 <p>21. And yet, O man, these are but the atmospherean heavens. These are the dominions given into the keeping of thy God. These are my kingdoms and my heavens for a season.</p>
 <p>22. As thou, O man of the earth, sailest thy ships abroad over the ocean, and coming to a new land, going ashore, dost settle thy people thereon, and it becometh a new kingdom, even so doth thy God in the heavens of the earth, in the plateaux of this vortex.</p>
 <p>23. Remember the magnitude of thy Creator's works and the symbols He sat before thee: Where the clouds float high, it raineth not; where they drag on the face of the earth, it raineth daily.</p>
 <p>24. Consider the habitations of the resurrections of the dead which are in the keeping of thy God.</p>
 <p>25. Even as to the square of the distance away from the earth, so are the grades of my resurrections.</p>
 <p>26. According to the exaltation of man's soul, so shall he inhabit the places I have made.</p>
 <p>27. According to his own soul's growth and development, so shall he ascend in my kingdoms, outward away from the earth; grade unto grade adapted I them.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah575.htm">Next: Chapter XIII</a></center>
 </body>