<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah638.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah640.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXI</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">OF THE VOICE OF JEHOVIH</p></font>.
 <p>1. THIS is the sermon of the Voice, as delivered in Shalam to such as were admitted on trial, to wit:</p>
 <p>2. My Voice is with all men, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>3. Whoso is admonished against wrong-doing hath heard Me. By that shall he know My Presence.</p>
 <p>4 . The man of Uz crieth out in mockery: Who hath heard Jehovih? Do the Faithists say, they have heard the Creator's voice? How can empty space speak?</p>
 <p>5. But I am sufficient unto all My creations. The ant heareth Me, and the bee, the bird and the spider and all manner of living things which I created.</p>
 <p>6. How think ye they hear Me, learning to do My will? Go I to them with lips and tongue, or with a trumpet?</p>
 <p>7. I am Spirit; I am the Soul of things. By way of the soul is My Voice unto every living creature that I created.</p>
 <p>8. But man locketh up his soul, and will not hear Me.</p>
 <p>9. He heedeth that which cometh upon his corporeal senses. And this darkness groweth upon him, generation after generation.</p>
 <p>10. Then he crieth out: Where is Jehovih? Who hath heard Him? Perhaps the ancients; but none in this day.</p>
 <p>11. Jehovih saith: I am as one on the top of a mountain, calling to all people to come up to Me. But they hearken to darkness at the foot of the mountain, calling them down in corpor.</p>
 <p>12. Now, behold, whatsoever thou hearest, or seest or readest or any indulgence that riseth thee upward, the same is My Voice unto thee.</p>
 <p>13. But, whatsoever thou hearest, or seest or readest that casteth thee downward, is the voice of darkness.</p>
 <p>14. Whoso studieth to know the right, shall hear Me; whoso striveth to be all truth, to himself and to others, already heareth My Voice.</p>
 <p>15. Whoso indulgeth in anger, or vengeance, or in wrong-doing, casteth a veil up betwixt Me and himself; he shutteth out My Voice.</p>
 <p>16. It is a talent to hear Me; I bestowed it upon all the living; it is seated in the soul.</p>
 <p>17. By cultivation, it groweth; yea, it becometh mighty above all other talents.</p>
 <p>18. By its culture, man attaineth to all possibilities, for so I created him.</p>
 <p>19. When My Voice is weak, because of the darkness of man, he calleth Me conscience, or setteth Me aside as a faint impression.</p>
 <p>20. But, with culture, behold, My Voice cometh to man with words and with power.</p>
 <p>21. And he knoweth Me, and is mighty in good works and wisdom.</p>
 <p>22. And he becometh a proof before the world, that My Voice is with him.</p>
 <p>23. Jehovih saith: Whoso hath not heard Me, is in darkness indeed. He hath not yet turned his thoughts inward to purify himself and seek wisdom.</p>
 <p>24. Whoso hath heard Me, knoweth it, and all the world can not convince him to the contrary.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah640.htm">Next: Chapter XXII</a></center>
 </body>