<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah642.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah644.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XXV</h3>
 <p>1. THIS rule I made in all My works, saith Jehovih: When I separate the people, the good go away out from amongst the evil.</p>
 <p>2. Even as I drew the Israelites out of Egupt.</p>
 <p>3. And, whoso go out, prosper in My hand; I make them an everlasting people.</p>
 <p>4. But those that remain, go down to destruction; and they become unknown upon the earth.</p>
 <p>5. Their great men are forgotten, and their wisest men lose caste in the histories of a thousand years.</p>
 <p>6. Behold, these things I had made known unto the generations of the earth.</p>
 <p>7. Now, when I separated the Faithists and the Uzians, in the kosmon era, I sent angels, warning them. I said unto them:</p>
 <p>8. Flatter not yourselves that man is all wisdom; I say unto you, I am with the righteous; might shall not triumph through wrong-doing. Behold, a judgment shall come upon this people.</p>
 <p>9. When I begin to call them, My chosen shall come and found My kingdom; and they shall come faster and faster every year.</p>
 <p>10. And the Uzians shall fall into iniquity, more and more every year.</p>
 <p>11. And, now, behold what hath been!</p>
 <p>12. The prince of devils came upon the Uzians, saying:</p>
 <p>13. Think not that I come to send peace on earth; I come not to send peace, but a sword.</p>
 <p>14. I come to set man at variance against his father, and a daughter against her mother.</p>
 <p>15. Now, therefore, when My angels went in behalf of My kingdom, behold, the prince of devils did invade the places of the ungodly.</p>
 <p>16. And, whoso received My angels, and practiced righteousness, were fallen upon by the emissaries of the prince of devils, and unmercifully treated with curses and tortures.</p>
 <p>17. But I called the righteous hence, and they built unto Me My kingdom.</p>
 <p>18. And I said unto the Uzians: Let this be a testimony unto you of the power of the Almighty;</p>
 <p>19. Ye go about building ships of war, and harbors for defence, with torpedoes, and with all manner of wicked inventions;</p>
 <p>20. But I say unto you, this nation, this government and this people shall not be attacked in the places ye build.</p>
 <p>21. It is within.</p>
 <p>22. For I will draw away the righteous, and none but rogues shall accept your great offices.</p>
 <p>23. And this matter shall grow upon you in the way of evil, declining in virtue more and more every year.</p>
 <p>24. Look, therefore, at your grade; judge ye the words of the Almighty.</p>
 <p>25. My hands fashioned the signs of the times.</p>
 <p>26. As the hirer this day hireth one man to watch another, even so shall it come unto you in the great offices of your government.</p>
 <p>27. By force and by might, ye shall hope to overcome the prince of devils, but ye shall fail.</p>
 <p>28. And, in proportion as ye go down in corruption, even so shall the Faithists go away into My kingdoms.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah644.htm">Next: Chapter XXVI</a></center>
 </body>