<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah619.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah621.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter II</h3>
 <p>1. SO, Tae gathered together orphan babes and castaway infants and foundlings, a great number.</p>
 <p>2. And a woman named, Es, heard of Tae and his work, and she came to him, inquiring:</p>
 <p>3. How can a man attend babes? Now, because I have heard of thy work, behold, I have come to thee to labor for our Father in heaven.</p>
 <p>4. Tae said: Whoso would labor for our Father in heaven, let her do unto these little ones.</p>
 <p>5. Es said: Even for that I am before thee; I beseech thee, put me to work.</p>
 <p>6. Tae inquired: Knowest thou the care of infants? And she answered him, saying:</p>
 <p>7. In such labor, alas, I have had no experience, but I know Jehovih will guide me aright; otherwise, He had not inspired my soul unto the work. All wisdom is possible through Jehovih.</p>
 <p>8. Tae said: Such being thy faith, thou art the first chosen woman in the <a name="page_806"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 806</font></a> Father's new kingdom. Go, therefore, and fulfill thy part, and may the Father be with thee.</p>
 <p>9. So, Es went to work, accomplishing what was required unto the infants.</p>
 <p>10. And Tae went again unto Uz, and brought hence more infants; many more than were possible unto the care of one woman.</p>
 <p>11. So Tae issued a call, to wit:</p>
 <p>12. Wanted, fifty men and women, who are Faithists in Jehovih, and are willing to take part in founding the Father's kingdom on earth as it is in heaven!</p>
 <p>13. And there came in answer to Tae's call thousands and thousands of men and women.</p>
 <p>14. And Tae cried out: O Jehovih, what shall Thy servant do? Behold, I asked for fifty men and women, and here are come thousands and thousands.</p>
 <p>15. Jehovih answered Tae, saying: Try them My Son, and see if they be worthy. As many as are prepared, thou shalt accept; as many as are not prepared, thou shalt not accept. Behold, there is room for millions!</p>
 <p>16. And Tae spake unto the multitude, saying: I called for fifty men and women and, lo, here are thousands, willing to take part in founding the Father's kingdom on earth.</p>
 <p>17. Now, behold, when I saw your great number, I cried out: O Jehovih, what shall Thy servant do? I did ask for but fifty, and there are come here thousands and thousands.</p>
 <p>18. And Jehovih answered, saying: Try them, my Son; as many as are prepared, accept; as many as are not prepared, accept not. Behold, there is room for millions.</p>
 <p>19. Now, therefore, how say ye: What is the founding of the Fathers kingdom? Who here knoweth the way, and how to take part therein?</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah621.htm">Next: Chapter III</a></center>
 </body>