<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah620.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah622.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter III</h3>
 <p>1. IT came to pass that many of the multitude answered Tae; and of all that thus spake, the following were the chief words, to wit:</p>
 <p>2. Sutta said: To do what I am willing to do, is to take part in founding the Father's kingdom; therefore, hear me:</p>
 <p>3. To adjust capital and labor, that each shall contribute to the advantage and glory of both.</p>
 <p>4. That the capitalist shall receive good profit on his capital; and the laborer high and uniform wages.</p>
 <p>5. To adjust them that they can live side by side, equally, and neither above or under the other.</p>
 <p>6. That they may have extensive domains and beautiful parks; excellent factories; virtuous and industrious people.</p>
 <p>7. The part that I am capacitated to fill in this great work, is to reveal the key and the plans; to explain all things to both, the capitalists and laborers.</p>
 <p>8. After that manner, Sutta went on at great length, and he was followed by several others, who had similar plans, but each one doubted the other's capacity, as being qualified for the work.</p>
 <p>9. Aborn spake next. He said: I have heard Sutta's project. It is a farce. Capital and labor can not harmonize.</p>
 <p>10. And even if they could, it would be a worldly basis. It would not be the Father's kingdom.</p>
 <p>11. In His kingdom there shall be neither buying nor selling; neither servant nor master.</p>
 <p>12. Now, behold, I say to you all, men and women, as such, can not harmonize together. They are diverse in all their ideas and general knowledge.</p>
 <p>13. The only way to accomplish the Father's kingdom is through infants, to raise them up in the way they should go.</p>
 <p>14. But, even with these, failure will result, save their pre-natal condition is provided for.</p>
 <p>15. Therefore, the part I am capacitated to accomplish is, to become father to innumerable offspring, by most exalted and enlightened women.</p>
 <p>16. Also, I have great knowledge of physiology, mentology and psychology, and I would be willing to be examiner and dictator as to prospective parents.</p>
 <p>17. Thus spake Aborn at great length; and others spake in like manner, but each one preferred himself as the prospective father of the offspring.</p>
 <p>18. Next spake Thurtis. She said: This it is, to found the Father's kingdom on earth; hear me, that ye may understand.</p>
 <p>19. Behold, all things shall be possible through woman, especially as to raising up a new generation on the earth.</p>
 <p>20. During the period of gestation, man should not approach woman.</p>
 <p>21. Nay, in that period, woman should be treated as a very Goddess.</p>
 <p>22. Her every want and whim and <a name="page_807"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 807</font></a> notion should be gratified to the utmost.</p>
 <p>23. When she spake, or raised her finger, during the gestative period, every man and woman and child should run to do her service.</p>
 <p>24. And she should be surrounded by cultured and exalted companions and charmed with sweet music and delightful entertainments.</p>
 <p>25. Yea, as a very Goddess should all men do her reverence.</p>
 <p>26. When such a woman hath a child born, behold, there will be one child for the Father's kingdom.</p>
 <p>27. Now, behold, give me the choice as to who shall father my children, and such a part shall be my part, to help found the Father's kingdom.</p>
 <p>28. After Thurtis, then spake many of the women after the same manner, and each one doubted the other's capacity to fill the place, but recommended herself.</p>
 <p>29. Amos spake next. He said: I have heard all these beautiful systems; I am ready for any of them. Behold, I am a landscape gardner.</p>
 <p>30. The part I can do is to lay out the grounds; for plots of flowers and grass and ornamental trees.</p>
 <p>31. But ye shall provide laborers for me. I work not with mine own hands; I plan and design; my capacity is in my talent and in my education.</p>
 <p>32. After Amos, then spake the five hundred physicians, each one offering himself, to be the physician for the Father's kingdom. Then spake an equal number of lawyers in the same way.</p>
 <p>33. Next spake a thousand teachers of the piano, each one offering to teach the young for the Father's kingdom.</p>
 <p>34. And now, with slow and solemn aspect, rose up and spake five hundred priests of Brahma.</p>
 <p>35. They said: We have heard; we have seen. Behold, the Father's kingdom is none of these.</p>
 <p>36. It is the second coming of Brahma. He shall come in flames of fire, from the east and west and north and south.</p>
 <p>37. By the magic touch of his wand, the different castes of men shall be sorted; and the dead shall come forth from their graves, and Brahma shall judge them.</p>
 <p>38. The sky shall be filled with holy angels, the spirits of the saints, with wings of fire and with tails a mile in length.</p>
 <p>39. And the elect of the earth shall rise in glory, and be immersed in nirvana forever, even at the feet of Ormazd.</p>
 <p>40. This it is, to found the Father's kingdom on earth. After which, all flesh shall come into life free from sin; the corruptible shall turn incorruptible forever.</p>
 <p>41. Now, behold, our part, in founding His kingdom is to preach unto you Brahma's everlasting gospels.</p>
 <p>42. Next to speak, were five hundred Buddhist priests.  They said:</p>
 <p>43. We have heard and seen also. Our learning, no man may gainsay. As for Brahma and his second coming, for that matter, he never came once.</p>
 <p>44. None have seen him, nor found his dwelling-place. Therefore he is but a superstition, a relic of the dark ages.</p>
 <p>45. Hear us, then, as to the founding of the Father's kingdom on earth:</p>
 <p>46. It is the second coming of Buddha, when every knee shall bow down, and own him Lord of all the world.</p>
 <p>47. Behold, Buddha shall come with two swords and twelve spears, and he shall have ten thousand brides!</p>
 <p>48. When Buddha shall blow his breath upon the earth, the graves shall be opened, and the dead shall come forth, and speak.</p>
 <p>49. And Buddha shall judge them; according to case, so will he separate them.</p>
 <p>50. And ten hundred times ten thousand million angels, with fiery wings and with tails two miles in length, shall overspread the earth.</p>
 <p>51. And all flesh shall become incorruptible; the lion shall eat straw, and the lamb shall rejoice in its kin without fear.</p>
 <p>52. Next spake five hundred Kriste'yan priests. They said:</p>
 <p>53. What profanity we have heard! Behold, as for Brahma and Buddha, they are but myths. It is the second coming of Kriste, which is the founding of the Father's kingdom.</p>
 <p>54. Kriste said: Think not I came to send peace on earth; I came not to send peace, but a sword.</p>
 <p>55. It is he that shall subdue all the world, and make men bow down, and own him Lord of all.</p>
 <p>56. He shall come in a sea of fire, with millions of archangels. And when his servant, Gabriel, bloweth his horn upon the earth, the graves shall open, and the dead shall come forth, and speak to the living.</p>
 <p>57. And he shall judge them; separating them, the bad to everlasting torments, and the good, who have <a name="page_808"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 808</font></a> worshipped Him, shall rise and inherit everlasting bliss.</p>
 <p>58. Now, behold, the part we can do in founding the Father's kingdom, is to preach and explain the beautiful doctrines of our blessed Lord.</p>
 <p>59. When many others had thus spoken, Tae said unto them: I called for such as had faith in Jehovih. I am not in the labor of founding a kingdom for Brahma, nor Buddha, nor Kriste, nor for any one but the Creator, our heavenly Father.</p>
 <p>60. As for the graves opening, I have nothing to do with that; though, for the spirits of the dead appearing face to face with the living, behold, that hath been accomplished now for more than thirty years, to hundreds of thousands of good people. So with that I have nothing to do either.</p>
 <p>61. But since ye have not proved the communion of angels during all these years, how hope ye to labor for the Father's kingdom? To all such I say, go your ways; I have no use for you.</p>
 <p>62. At once, one-half of the multitude rose up, and departed; mocking, saying: The spirits of the dead! We will have none such, but angels with wings, and with fleecy tails a mile in length.</p>
 <p>63. Tae inquired once more: Who, here, hath faith in Jehovih, and, if we labor together in His name, living our all highest light, that His kingdom will be founded?</p>
 <p>64. Hundreds and hundreds said: It depends on having plenty of money and a good plantation. With money, it can be accomplished; without money, it can not be.</p>
 <p>65. Tae said: Your faith being in money, I have no use for you. I called for those with faith in Jehovih! Therefore, go your ways also. So, many more of the multitude departed, returning to Uz also, even as had the others.</p>
 <p>66. Tae asked again: Who here are capable and desirous of being leaders, let them speak?</p>
 <p>67. More than a thousand cried out: Here! That is my part. I am suited to it by nature and by experience and by great wisdom.</p>
 <p>68. Tae said unto them: Behold the spirit of the age in which we live! No man desireth a leader or dictator over him. For that reason, go your ways also; I have no use for you.</p>
 <p>69. Tae asked again: Who here have made a study of this subject, and are prepared to be lecturers and teachers and advisers, let them speak?</p>
 <p>70. And, behold, another thousand cried out: That is my strength. I can explain all subjects; of diet, clothing, social intercourse, health, marriage and worship!</p>
 <p>71. Others cried out: I am a trance speaker; I have angel guides two thousand years old!</p>
 <p>72. Others said: I am inspirational; the ancient prophets are my spirit guides! St. John, the revelator! Confucius! Hosea! King Solomon! Daniel!</p>
 <p>73. Tae interrupted them, saying: Behold, the signs of the times show us that, as to founding the Father's kingdom by words, sermons and lectures, they are worthless.</p>
 <p>74. See here; I have gathered together hundreds of helpless orphan babes. They care for none of the things that have been offered; they need washing and feeding, and their clothes are to wash and mend.</p>
 <p>75. Who, so believing in the Father, that he will give up self, in all respects, and work for these little ones, having faith that Jehovih will provide justly and sufficiently unto all, let him come.</p>
 <p>76. You all do know how the farmers go about gathering up calves and colts and the young of all sorts; and they take them to a good place and feed them; and when they are grown up, they are the choice in market.</p>
 <p>77. Now, behold, there are thousands of fatherless and destitute children in Uz, which, left to themselves, either die or grow up to be thieves, robbers and murderers.</p>
 <p>78. These are cheaper than calves and young colts. And they may be raised to be of more profit to themselves and to the state, than ten times as many cattle.</p>
 <p>79. Who, then, is ready to join in this labor without money and without price, devoting his life to training them up to practical knowledge, not only of books, but to use their hands in trades and factories, that these little ones may become useful citizens, and a joy to themselves and glory to the Father. Let such speak.</p>
 <p>80. And, now, behold, fifty men and women spake, saying: Take us, in Jehovih's name. We have neither whim or conceit to carry out.</p>
 <p>81. We are willing and anxious to go to this labor, and we know Jehovih will provide unto us. From day to day His Light will shine upon us, and we shall know what to do.</p>
 <p>82. Thy children shall be our children; thy hardships our hardships. We come not for rest, nor glory, nor for comforts; but we come to serve Jehovih in whatsoever He may give us to do for His kingdom.</p>
 <p><a name="page_809"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 809</font></a></p>
 <p>83. Tae said: In Jehovih's name, I accept you. Whatsoever is mine shall be yours also.</p>
 <p>84. Thus it came to pass, out of all the thousands and thousands who came, only fifty were accepted.</p>
 <p>85. And the others went their way, mocking, saying: A most beautiful Father's kingdom on earth!</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah622.htm">Next: Chapter IV</a></center>
 </body>