<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah624.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah626.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VII</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">FOUNDING THE GROUPS</p></font>.
 <p>1. THE Light of Jehovih being upon Tae, he said: Let the examples of Uz be not lost upon you. But where ye have learned, and what ye have acquired, these shall ye appropriate wisely in Shalam.</p>
 <p>2. For which purpose, it is wise that we appoint our groups as now required, to be added unto afterward, when more is required.</p>
 <p>3. How say ye, then, shall we appoint groups this day?</p>
 <p>4. Thereupon, different persons spake, and the sum of their wisdom was that there should be:</p>
 <p>5. A group of architects;</p>
 <p>6. A group of clothiers;</p>
 <p>7. A group of dieticians;</p>
 <p>8. A group of engineers;</p>
 <p>9. A group of manufacturers;</p>
 <p>10. A group of horticulturists;</p>
 <p>11. A group of agriculturists;</p>
 <p>12. A group of botanists;</p>
 <p>13. A group of nurses;</p>
 <p>14. A group of physicians;</p>
 <p>15. A group of artists (sculpture, painting and gardening);</p>
 <p>16. A group of musicians.</p>
 <p>17. And these were all the groups required at that time. Accordingly, Tae proclaimed them, and called for volunteers for each and every group.</p>
 <p>18. And these were filled, though, because there were but fifty-two members, some of them took membership in two or three groups, so that all were filled.</p>
 <p>19. The Light still being upon Tae, he said: Since ye have made the groups, let each group now select a chief.</p>
 <p>20. Now, many of them spake up, saying: I neither wish fame for being chief, nor do I wish the responsibility of the position.</p>
 <p>21. Tae said: Suffer me, then, to declare the Light that is upon me; which is, that ye are here to fulfill whatsoever Jehovih may put upon you, with all your wisdom and strength.</p>
 <p>22. Whether ye be made chiefs or not made chiefs, it is Jehovih's work ye are here to fulfill, without any regard as to your personal selves.</p>
 <p>23. To covet chieftainship would be selfish; to refuse chieftainship would be selfish.</p>
 <p>24. We can not found the Father's kingdom with any other members than such as say, with all their hearts, and mind and soul: Whatsoever Thou puttest upon me, O Jehovih, that will I do with all my wisdom and strength.</p>
 <p>25. To have faith in this way, is to have faith with practice; such a one is a Faithist in fact.</p>
 <p>26. Now, those who had spoken before relented, saying:   O Jehovih, what have I done? Behold, I tript myself up even in the start. Make this a rebuke to me, O Father, and heap Thou upon me whatsoever Thou wilt.</p>
 <p>27. Tae said: What any one can do, it is well done; wherein he faileth, because of incapacity, behold, it is not his fault, but his misfortune.</p>
 <p>28. So, it came to pass, chiefs were selected for every group, men and women.</p>
 <p>29. And Tae was made C'chief. And so, Tae delivered to each of the chiefs a synopsis of his duties.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah626.htm">Next: Chapter VIII</a></center>
 </body>