<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah614.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah616.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter XIV</h3>
 <p>1. THESE are Tae's revelations of Jehovih's times and seasons, appointed unto the chosen:</p>
 <p>2. The northern line of the sun shall be the end of the year, and it shall be called the last day of the old year, saith Jehovih.</p>
 <p>3. And the first day thereafter, when the sun starteth on his southern course, shall be the beginning of the year, and it shall be called the new year's day.</p>
 <p>4. These are My times of the end and the beginning of a year, which I created; and I made the earth and the sun as My written testimony thereof.</p>
 <p>5. And I blessed and sanctified the old year's day and the new year's day, and I appointed them to be holy days, that men might remember the order and the system of My works.</p>
 <p>6. And I said unto man: From one new year's day until the succeeding one shall be called one year, for it is one completed oscillation of the earth, and of her revolution in the orbit where I placed her.</p>
 <p>7. Therefore, what thou hast completed within a year shall be remembered by thee, that thou mayst judge thyself therein.</p>
 <p>8. And, on the old year's day, thou shalt render up in full forgiveness in all things against all people.</p>
 <p>9. And with the setting of the sun on that day, thou shalt be purged of all animosity and claims against every man, woman and child, in all the world.</p>
 <p>10. And thou shalt make acknowledgement of this in words and songs and prayers, and in tokens, of no intrinsic value, to whomsoever thou shalt have offended during the past year.</p>
 <p>11. Tae said: For which reason the old year's day shall be named, the Most Holy Sabbath Day. Behold, it is in accord with His heavenly kingdoms. And it shall be with thee a day of spiritual communion, and of praise to Jehovih and His creations; with music and oratory, and ceremonies, and processions of thy youth, orderly and well disciplined.</p>
 <p>12. And, on the new year's day, thou shalt rejoice and sing and dance; mingling together, old and young, even as the old year and the new year are joined together, side by side.</p>
 <p>13. The seventh day of the new year shall be thy next sabbath day, and it shall be a day of rest and of spiritual communion and praise to Jehovih and His creations, with singing and oratory.</p>
 <p>14. So also shall every seventh day be a sabbath day; for which reason <a name="page_803"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 803</font></a> seven days shall be one week, being six days for labor, and one for rest and worship.</p>
 <p>15. For this hath been proven in all the world to be good for man.</p>
 <p>16. These, then, shall be the moon's days (months):</p>
 <p>17. The first new moon's day after new year's day shall be the beginning of the first month; and the completion of the fourth quarter of the moon shall be the completion of the first month, and it shall be named, First month.</p>
 <p>18. The next four quarters of the moon shall be the second month, and it shall be named, Second month.</p>
 <p>19. And the next completed four quarters of the moon shall be named, Third month. And so on, to the completion of the year.</p>
 <p>20. Such, then, shall be the month in any and every year, for these are the moon's times as Jehovih created them.</p>
 <p>21. Neither shall it matter or not whether the months overlap a new year's day; as they are created and moved by the Almighty, even so shall man compute and register them.</p>
 <p>22. (For example, a new year's day may come upon the twentieth day of the Twelfth moon or on another moon's day, still, as they fall, so shall they be numbered in truth.)</p>
 <p>23. As the moon's time differeth to different continents, so shall the months' times of the inhabitants of different continents be locally unto them.</p>
 <p>24. But, in the intercourse between different nations on different continents, the month times shall not be enumerated.</p>
 <p>25. But, in all such cases, the year and the days thereof shall be named.</p>
 <p>26. (As, for example, the seventieth year and the ninety-sixth day.)</p>
 <p>27. And it shall come to pass that the sabbath days all around the world shall be the same day unto all people, even with the travel of the sun.</p>
 <p>28. Whereby, Jehovih's heavenly kingdoms shall be in concert with mortals, as to times and seasons in all things.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah616.htm">Next: Chapter XV</a></center>
 </body>