<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah622.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah624.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter V</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">THE HOLY COVENANT</p></font>.
 <p>1. THEN Tae and his hosts went into the midst of the Place of the Holy Covenant; and the hosts formed in a crescent, and Tae stood betwixt the horns thereof.</p>
 <p>2. And, whilst thus standing, Tae, being moved by the Light of Jehovih upon him, uttered the covenant, and his hosts, in concert, uttered the words after him.</p>
 <p>3. And these words were called, THE HOLY COVENANT, even as they are to this day, to wit:</p>
 <p>4. Thou, O Jehovih! As Thou hast declared Thyself in the Book of Jehovih!</p>
 <p>5. To Thee I covenant myself, to be Thine forever! And to Thee only, O Jehovih!</p>
 <p>6. And I abjure all Gods but Thee.</p>
 <p>7. And I abjure all Lords but Thee.</p>
 <p>8. And I abjure all Saviors but Thee.</p>
 <p>9. In this, Thy Place of the Holy Covenant, do I covenant myself unto Thee, to be only Thine, and forever!</p>
 <p>10. My corporeal body, I dedicate and covenant unto Thee, to be in Thy service during all my life.</p>
 <p>11. Because Thou madest it out of Thine own material, behold, it is Thine.</p>
 <p>12. The workmanship is Thine; the material is Thine also.</p>
 <p>13. I have no claim upon it; unto Thee, and for Thy service, do I resign it forever.</p>
 <p>14. Into my charge Thou gavest it unto me, as the habitation of my spirit.</p>
 <p>15. Because it is Thy gift, I will care for it, and keep it clean and pure, before Thee, that it may be acceptable to Thee, and to the presence of Thy holy angels.</p>
 <p>16. My spirit I also dedicate and covenant unto Thee, to be in Thy service, henceforth forever.</p>
 <p>17. My mind and soul, I dedicate and covenant unto Thee, to be in Thy service, henceforth forever.</p>
 <p>18. My whole self, whereof I am made, soul and body, dedicate and covenant I unto Thee, to be in Thy service forever.</p>
 <p>19. Out of Thine own self madest Thou me, soul and body, and they are Thine only, to be used by Thee forever.</p>
 <p>20. Appropriate Thou me, O Jehovih, my corporeal body, and my spirit, my mind, my behavior and thoughts, to be of profit to Thee, for founding Thy kingdom on earth.</p>
 <p>21. And I covenant unto Thee, Jehovih, I will search constantly into mine own every act and deed and word and thought, to make myself true in the practice of Thy highest Light upon me.</p>
 <p>22. That henceforth, forever, I will search to find the highest Light, and I will practice the same toward all men, women and children.</p>
 <p>23. Unto them will I not only do as I would be done by, but more; I will do for them, with all my wisdom and strength, all my life.</p>
 <p>24. I covenant unto Thee, Jehovih, that, since all things are Thine, I will not own nor possess, exclusively unto myself, anything under the sun, which may be entrusted to me, which any other person or persons may covet or desire, or stand in need of.</p>
 <p>25. Neither more will I talk of myself, either in laudation of what I am, nor of what I have done; but Thou shalt judge me, and hold me accountable for shortness in word and behavior, wherein, by any means, I may manifest self-esteem or covetousness for fame, or the applause of men, even for any good I may have done unto others.</p>
 <p><a name="page_811"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 811</font></a></p>
 <p>26. Neither more will I censure, nor criticise, nor blame, any man, or woman, nor any child over fourteen years of age, as an individual, in all the world, for any shortness in word or deed they manifest.</p>
 <p>27. For they are Thine, Jehovih, and not mine, to be led or driven by me.</p>
 <p>28. To all these Faithists, my brothers and sisters in Thy kingdom, will I deal and think and behave, in affiliation, as gentle and truly as were they my own blood and kin, brothers and sisters, or father and mother.</p>
 <p>29. And over these babes, which Thou hast entrusted to me, will I be as loving and true as were they mine own blood and kin, sons and daughters.</p>
 <p>30. According to Thy Light, which Thou mayst bestow upon me, will I raise them up to know Thee, and to be a glory in Thy kingdom.</p>
 <p>31. First of my teaching unto them shall be, to make them know Thee, and to remember that Thy eye is upon them, and Thy hand above them, to bless them according to their wisdom, truth, love and purity.</p>
 <p>32. And I will teach them the way of the communion of Thy angels; to develop them in su'is and sar'gis.</p>
 <p>33. Teaching them to live for the spirit within, rather than for corpor.</p>
 <p>34. Teaching them by books and instruments.</p>
 <p>35. Teaching them useful trades and occupations.</p>
 <p>36. Teaching them music and worship.</p>
 <p>37. Teaching them dancing and gymnastics.</p>
 <p>38. And, in all things, developing in them all the talents Thou hast created in them, that they may grow up to be an honor and a glory on the earth, and to rejoice because Thou hast created them alive.</p>
 <p>39. And I will emancipate them from infancy at fourteen years of age; and bestow upon them the rights of man and woman, in their thoughts, words, deeds, choice and actions.</p>
 <p>40. Throwing upon them, at that age, their responsibility unto Thee, for their thoughts, words, ideas, behavior, as fully as I claim the same unto mine own self.</p>
 <p>41. And now, O Jehovih, that this, Thy kingdom on earth, may be known and distinguished from the habitations of the Uzians, we make this our solemn oath unto Thee:</p>
 <p>42. We will not, now, nor forever, make war, nor engage in war, nor take any part in war, for any God, nor Lord, nor Savior, nor country, nor king or other ruler on earth; nor will we aid nor abet war in any way whatever.</p>
 <p>43. Neither will we now, nor forever, eat fish nor flesh of any creature Thou didst create alive.</p>
 <p>44. And we swear unto Thee, Jehovih, in regard to these our babes, which Thou hast given unto our keeping, to found Thy kingdom on earth, we will raise them up to abjure war, like unto this our oath unto Thee, and to practice not the carnivorous habit belonging to the Uzians.</p>
 <p>45. Neither will we use, nor permit to be used, in Shalam, any intoxicating drink, nor weed, nor root, nor gum, nor any other drug, for the contamination of human flesh by intoxication or for stimulation unnaturally.</p>
 <p>46. Make us strong and wise, O Jehovih, in this our covenant and oath unto Thee, for Thine are the honor and the glory of all things, time without end. Amen.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah624.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a></center>
 </body>