<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah649.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah651.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_839"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 839</font></a></p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter VI</h3>
 <font size="2"><p align="CENTER">OF JEHOVIH AND HIS KINGDOM ON EARTH</p></font>.
 <p>1. O man, apply thyself to understand the spirit of my discourse, for herein shalt thou find the key to the Father's kingdom.</p>
 <p>2. These are the rules of the second resurrection: To become an interpreter and worker without a written formula:</p>
 <p>3. That whatsoever giveth joy to thy fellow and rendereth peace and good will unto all--shall be called light:</p>
 <p>4. That whatsoever giveth sorrow to thy fellow, or discouragement to others--shall be called darkness:</p>
 <p>5. As to find fault with another, or to aggrevate unto displeasure--shall be called darkness:</p>
 <p>6. But to make another's burden light, to encourage him unto strength and happiness--shall be called light:</p>
 <p>7. To be forever complaining about this or that--shall be called darkness:</p>
 <p>8. To be forever imparting cheerfulness--shall be called light.</p>
 <p>9. Now therefore whoso becometh a member of my kingdom shall practice light; but whoso practiceth darkness, will depart away from my kingdom of his own accord.</p>
 <p>10. Neither shalt thou practice darkness upon thy fellow for any shortness he hath done.</p>
 <p>11. Nor shalt thou reprove him for error, nor blame him, nor make thyself an inquisitor over him, nor assume to be a judge over him.</p>
 <p>12. Nor ask him to apologize, nor otherwise seek to make him humble himself before thee.</p>
 <p>13. Nor shalt thou boast over him because thou art wiser or stronger or more expert.</p>
 <p>14. For all such inquisition cometh of darkness, and shall return upon him who uttereth it, in time to come.</p>
 <p>15. Rather shalt thou discover the good that is in thy neighbor, and laud him therefor, for this is the method of raising him higher.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah651.htm">Next: Chapter VII</a></center>
 </body>