<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Oahspe</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="oah605.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="oah607.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Chapter V</h3>
 <p>1. TWO kinds of voices have I, saith Jehovih: The silent voice and the audible voice.</p>
 <p>2. All men I created susceptible to one or the other of My voices, and many to both.</p>
 <p>3. One man heareth My voice in the breeze, and in thunder, and in music.</p>
 <p>4. One man heareth My voice in the flowers of the field, and in the scenery of the mountains.</p>
 <p>5. And yet another feeleth My inspiration; and he skippeth up the mountain side, and tireth not on the way.</p>
 <p>6. He that neither seeth nor feeleth My inspiration, goeth up the mountain in great labor.</p>
 <p>7. In proportion as man is clear in his corporeality and in his spirit, so discerneth he My inspiration.</p>
 <p>8. And if he have great purity as well, then he shapeth my Light into corporeal words.</p>
 <p>9. These I taught man to call My revealed words.</p>
 <p>10. Nevertheless, no corporeal man created I perfect; neither can any man reveal My words perfectly.</p>
 <p>11. But I created the way open unto all men, to try to reveal Me.</p>
 <p>12. According to man's approximation to perfect manhood, so reveal I unto him, by My Presence and My words.</p>
 <p>13. According to man's imperfection in manhood, so doth not My inspiration manifest on his senses.</p>
 <p>14. Perfect manhood created I possible, in equal corporeal and spiritual senses.</p>
 <p>15. Strong corporeal senses and weak spiritual senses detract man from My Presence, and make him infidel to My Person.</p>
 <p>16. Such a man denieth My inspiration and the inspiration of My angels. He is little more than a forest tree, which hath a trunk and many branches, but moveth not from its place.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="oah607.htm">Next: Chapter VI</a></center>
 </body>