<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">African</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="yl18.htm">Previous</a> <a href="yl20.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 31------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_31"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 31</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h2 align="center">XVII<br> IS<u>O</u>KUN AND THE BABY</h2>
 
 <p>A <small>CERTAIN</small> King Dekun had a wife named Is<u>o</u>kun who bore him no children, on which account there was great unhappiness in the palace.</p>
 
 <p> One day Is<u>o</u>kun disappeared and was absent for many weeks, and though search was made, no trace of her could be found. The truth was that Is<u>o</u>kun had set out to visit the shrines of all the gods, in the hope that one of them would promise her a child. But though she travelled far and wide, the gods of all the trees and streams and rocks refused her prayer.</p>
 
 <p> When she was at last nearing home again, she came upon a poor woman asleep by the wayside with her baby two days old.</p>
 
 <p>  Is<u>o</u>kun stole the baby and hastened to the palace, where she informed the King that she had disappeared in order to give him the joyous surprise of his little son.</p>
 
 <p> There were great rejoicings in the palace,
 
 <!------------------------page 32------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_32"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 32</font></a>
 
 sacrifices were made, and the drums beat loudly.</p>
 
 <p> Meanwhile the real mother awoke and discovered that her baby had been stolen. She ran into the town distracted, and insisted on searching in every house, but without success.</p>
 
 <p> At last she came to the palace and insisted on entering there also, which was possible at that moment because all were celebrating the arrival of the King’s heir.</p>
 
 <p> All this time the baby cried with hunger, and as Is<u>o</u>kun could not feed him, she invented other reasons for the crying and sought in vain to pacify him without arousmg suspicion.</p>
 
 <p> Drawn by the cries, the mother entered and snatched the baby to her breast, where it was at once contented.</p>
 
 <p> In a few moments the deception was made clear, the mother departed with her child, and Is<u>o</u>kun, ashamed and fearing the anger of the King, fled from the palace and never returned.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="yl20.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 </body>