<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">African</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="yl27.htm">Previous</a> <a href="yl29.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 48------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_48"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 48</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h2 align="center">XXVI<br> THE ELEPHANT’S TRUNK</h2>
 
 <p>N<small>OW</small> it is a matter of common knowledge that Elephant has a long trunk, which he uses both as a nose and as a sort of hand—a very useful trunk indeed. But he was once without it, and had a very ordinary short snout like other animals.</p>
 
 <p> Elephant was always inquisitive and went sniffing about the forest, prying into the secrets of the other animals. One day he came across a dark hole in the ground, and into this hole he poked his nose, to see what was there.</p>
 
 <p> He at once regretted his curiosity, for a large snake, who lived in the hole, seized him by the nose and tried to swallow him. At this, Elephant made a great uproar, and his wife came rushing to his assistance. She seized his tail and pulled and pulled, and Elephant himself also pulled and pulled, but the snake would not leave go.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 49------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_49"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 49</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p> And as a result, Elephant’s nose was drawn out into the long trunk which he still has.</p>
 
 <p> At first he was ashamed to appear in the forest, on account of his trunk, but now the other animals envy him.</p>
 
 <p> One day the monkey, which imitates everybody, looked down the same hole, thinking it would be good to have a long trunk so as to be able to swing from the trees by his nose. But the big snake who lived in the hole swallowed him, and since then nobody else has tried to imitate Elephant.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="yl29.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 </body>