<body>
 
 
 <center><small><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Christianity Index</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Divine Comedy Index</a> 
 <a href="in21.htm">Previous: Inferno Canto 21</a> 
 <a href="in23.htm">Next: Inferno Canto 23</a> 
 </small></center><hr><pre>
 
 
 Canto XXII
 
 
 Argument
 
 
      Virgil and Dante proceed, accompanied by the Demons, and see other
 sinners of the same description in the same gulf. The device of Ciampolo, one
 of these, to escape from the Demons, who had laid hold on him.
 
 
 It hath been heretofore my chance to see
 Horsemen with martial order shifting camp,
 To onset sallying, or in muster ranged,
 Or in retreat sometimes outstretch'd for flight:
 Light - armed squadrons and fleet foragers
 Scouring thy plains, Arezzo! have I seen,
 And clashing tournaments, and titling jousts,
 Now with the sound of trumpets, now of bells,
 Tabors,[1] or signals made from castled heights,
 And with inventions multiform, our own,
 Or introduced from foreign land; but ne'er
 To such a strange recorder I beheld,
 In evolution moving, horse nor foot,
 Nor ship, the tack'd by sign from land or star.
 
 
 [1: "Tabour, a drum, a common accompaniment of war, is mentioned as
 one of the instruments of martial music in this battle (in Richard Coeur - de
 - Lion) with characteristical propriety. It was imported into the European
 armies from the Saracens in the holy war." Warton's Hist. of English Poetry,
 vi.i. (a) 4, p. 167.]
 
 
 With the ten Demons on our way we went;
 Ah, fearful company! but in the church
 With saints, with gluttons at the tavern's mess.
 
 
 Still earnest on the pitch I gazed, to mark
 All things whate'er the chasm contain'd, and those
 Who burn'd within. As dolphins that, in sign
 To mariners, heave high their arched backs,
 That thence forewarn'd they may advise to save
 Their threaten'd vessel; so, at intervals,
 To ease the pain, his back some sinner show'd,
 Then hid more nimbly than the lightning - glance.
 
 
 E'en as the frogs, that of a watery moat
 Stand at the brink, with the jaws only out,
 Their feet and of the trunk all else conceal'd,
 Thus on each part the sinners stood; but soon
 As Barbariccia was at hand, so they
 Drew back under the wave. I saw, and yet
 
 
 My heart doth stragger, one, that waited thus,
 As it befalls that oft one frog remains,
 While the next springs away: and Graffiacan,
 Who of the fiends was nearest, grappling seized
 His clotted locks, and dragg'd him sprawling up,
 That he appear'd to me an otter. Each
 Already by their names I knew, so well
 When they were chosen I observed, and mark'd
 How one the other call'd. "O Rubicant!
 See that his hide thou with thy talons flay,"
 Shouted together all the cursed crew.
 
 
 Then I: "Inform thee, Master! if thou may,
 What wretched soul is this, on whom their hands
 His foes have laid." My leader to his side
 Approach'd, and whence he came inquired; to whom
 Was answer'd thus: "Born in Navarre's domain,[2]
 My mother placed me in a lord's retinue:
 For she had borne me to a losel vile,
 A spendthrift of his substance and himself.
 The good King Thibault[3] after that I served:
 To peculating here my thoughts were turn'd,
 Whereof I give account in this dire heat."
 
 
 [2: His name is said to be Ciampolo.]
 
 
 [3: "Thibault I, King of Navarre, died on June 8, 1233, as much to be
 commended for the desire he showed of aiding the war in the Holy Land, as
 reprehensible and faulty for his design of oppressing the rights and
 privileges of the Church. Thibault undoubtedly mertis praise, as for his other
 endowments, so especially for his cultivation of the liberal arts, his
 exercise and knowledge of music and poetry, in which he so much excelled that
 he was accustomed to compose verses and sing them to the viol, and to exhibit
 his poetical compositions publicly in his palace, that they might be
 criticised by all."]
 
 
 Straight Ciriatto, from whose mouth a tusk
 Issued on either side, as from a boar,
 Ripp'd him with one of these. 'Twixt evil claws
 The mouse had fallen: but Barbariccia cried,
 Seizing him with both arms: "Stand thou apart
 While I do fix him on my prong transpierced."
 Then added, turning to my guide his face,
 "Inquire of him, if more thou wish to learn,
 Ere he again be rent." My leader thus:
 "Then tell us of the partners in thy guilt;
 Knowest thou any sprung of Latin land
 
 
 Under the tar?" "I parted," he replied,
 "But now from one, who sojourn'd not far thence;
 So were I under shelter now with him,
 Nor hook nor talon then should scare me more."
 
 
 "Too long we suffer," Libicocco cried;
 Then, darting forth a prong, seized on his arm,
 And mangled bore away the sinewy part.
 Him Draghinazzo by his thighs beneath
 Would next have caught; whence angrily their chief,
 Turning on all sides round, with threatening brow
 Restrain'd them. When their strife a little ceased,
 Of him, who yet was gazing on his wound,
 My teacher thus without delay inquired:
 "Who was the spirit, from whom by evil hap
 Parting, as thou hast told, thou camest to shore?"
 
 
 "It was the friar Gomita,"[4] he rejoin'd,
 "He of Gallura, vessel of all guile,
 Who had his master's enemies in hand,
 And used them so that they commend him well.
 Money he took, and them at large dismiss'd;
 So he reports; and in each other charge
 Committed to his keeping play'd the part
 Of barterer to the height. With him doth herd
 The chief of Logodoro, Michel Zanche.[5]
 Sardinia is a theme whereof their tongue
 Is never weary. Out! alas! behold
 That other, how he grins. More would I say,
 But tremble lest he mean to maul me sore."
 
 
 [4: He was intrusted by Nino de' Visconti with the government of
 Gallura, one of the four jurisdictions of Sardinia. He took a bribe from his
 master's enemies and allowed them to escape. See also Canto xxxiii and
 Purgatory, Canto viii.]
 
 
 [5: President of Logodoro, of the four Sardinian jurisdictions. See
 Canto xxxiii. Note to v. 136.]
 
 
 Their captain then to Farfarello turning,
 Who roll'd his moony eyes in act to strike,
 Rebuked him thus: "Off, cursed bird! avaunt!"
 
 
 "If ye desire to see or hear," he thus
 Quaking with dread resumed, "or Tuscan spirits
 Or Lombard, I will cause them to appear.
 Meantime let these ill talons bate their fury,
 So that no vengeance they may fear from them,
 
 
 And I, remaining in this self - same place,
 Will, for myself but one, make seven appear,
 When my shrill whistle shall be heard; for so
 Our custom is to call each other up."
 
 
 Cagnazzo at that word deriding grinn'd,
 Then wagg'd the head and spake: "Hear his device,
 Mischievous as he is, to plunge him down."
 
 
 Whereto he thus, who fail'd not in rich store
 Of nice - wove toils: "Mischief, forsooth, extreme!
 Meant only to procure myself more woe."
 
 
 No longer Alichino then refrain'd,
 But thus, the rest gainsaying, him bespake:
 "If thou do cast thee down, I not on foot
 Will chase thee, but above the pitch will beat
 My plumes. Quit we the vantage ground, and let
 The bank be as a shield; that we may see,
 If singly thou prevail against us all."
 
 
 Now, reader, of new sport expect to hear.
 
 
 They each one turn'd his eyes to the other shore,
 He first, who was the hardest to persuade.
 The spirit of Navarre chose well his time,
 Planted his feet on land, and at one leap
 Escaping, disappointed their resolve.
 
 
 Them quick resentment stung, but him the most
 Who was the cause of failure: in pursuit
 He therefore sped, exclaiming, "Thou art caught."
 
 
 
 
 But little it avail'd; terror outstripp'd
 His following flight; the other plunged beneath,
 And he with upward pinion raised his breast:
 E'en thus the water - fowl, when she perceives
 The falcon near, dives instant down, while he
 Enraged and spent retires. That mockery
 In Calcabrina fury stirr'd, who flew
 After him, with desire of strife inflamed;
 And, for the barterer had 'scaped, so turn'd
 His talons on his comrade. O'er the dyke
 In grapple close they join'd; but the other proved
 A goshawk able to rend well his foe;
 And in the boiling lake both fell. The heat
 Was umpire soon between them; but in vain
 To lift themselves they strove, so fast were glued
 Their pennons. Barbariccia, as the rest,
 That chance lamenting, four in flight despatch'd
 From the other coast, with all their weapons arm'd.
 They, to their post on each side speedily
 Descending, stretch'd their hooks toward the fiends,
 Who flounder'd, inly burning from their scars:
 And we departing left them to that broil.
 
 
 
 
 </pre>
 </body>