<body>
 
 
 <center><small><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Christianity Index</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Divine Comedy Index</a> 
 <a href="pa31.htm">Previous: Paradise Canto 31</a> 
 <a href="pa33.htm">Next: Paradise Canto 33</a> 
 </small></center><hr><pre>
 
 
 Canto XXXII
 
 
 Argument
 
 
      St. Bernard shows him, on their several thrones, the other blessed souls,
 of both the Old and New Testament; explains to him that their places are
 assigned them by grace, and not according to merit; and, lastly, tells him
 that if he would obtain power to descry what remained of the heavenly vision,
 he must unite with him in supplication to Mary.
 
 
 Freely the sage, though wrapt in musings high,
 Assumed the teacher's part, and mild began:
 "The wound, that Mary closed, she[1] open'd first,
 Who sits so beautiful at Mary's feet.
 The third in order, underneath her, lo!
 Rachel with Beatrice: Sarah next;
 Judith; Rebecca; and the gleaner - maid,
 Meek ancestress[2] of him, who sang the songs
 Of sore repentance in his sorrowful mood.
 All, as I name them, down from leaf to leaf,
 Are, in gradation, throned on the rose.
 And from the seventh step, successively,
 Adown the breathing tresses of the flower,
 Still doth the file of Hebrew dames proceed.
 For these are a partition wall, whereby
 The sacred stairs are sever'd, as the faith
 In Christ divides them. On this part, where blooms
 Each leaf in full maturity, are set
 Such as in Christ, or e'er He came, believed.
 On the other, where an intersected space
 
 
 [1: Eve.]
 
 
 [2: Ruth, the ancestress of David.]
 
 
 Yet shows the semicircle void, abide
 All they, who look'd to Christ already come
 And as our Lady on her glorious stool,
 And they who on their stools beneath her sit,
 This way distinction make; e'en so on his,
 The mighty Baptist that way marks the line
 (He who endured the desert, and the pains
 Of martyrdom, and, for two years,[3] of Hell,
 Yet still continued holy), and beneath,
 Augustin;[4] Francis;[5] Benedict;[6] and the rest,
 Thus far from round to round. So Heaven's decree
 Forecasts, this garden equally to fill,
 With faith in either view, past or to come.
 Learn too, that downward from the step, which cleaves,
 Midway, the twain compartments, none there are
 Who place obtain for merit of their own,
 But have through others' merit been advanced,
 On set conditions; spirits all released,
 Ere for themselves they had the power to chuse.
 And, if thou mark and listen to them well,
 Their childish looks and voice declare as much.
 
 
 [3: The time that elapsed between the death of the Baptist and his
 redemption by the death of Christ.]
 
 
 [4: Bishop of Hippo, fourth century. See also Canto x. 117.]
 
 
 [5: "Francis." See Canto xi.]
 
 
 [6: "Benedict." See Canto xxii.]
 
 
 "Here, silent as thou art, I know thy doubt;
 And gladly will I loose the knot, wherein
 Thy subtile thoughts have bound thee. From this realm
 Excluded, chance no entrance here may find;
 No more than hunger, thirst, or sorrow can.
 A law immutable hath stablish'd all;
 Nor is there aught thou seest, that doth not fit,
 Exactly, as the finger to the ring.
 It is not, therefore, without cause, that these
 O'erspeedy comers to immortal life,
 Are different in their shares of excellence.
 Our Sovran Lord, that settleth this estate
 In love and in delight so absolute,
 That wish can dare no further, every soul,
 Created in His joyous sight to dwell,
 With grace, at pleasure, variouslyeendows.
 
 
 And for a proof the effect may well suffice.
 And 'tis moreover most expressly mark'd
 In holy Scripture, where the twins are said
 To have struggled in the womb. Therefore, as grace
 Inweaves the coronet, so every brow
 Weareth its proper hue of orient light.
 And merely in respect to his prime gift,
 Not in reward of meritorious deed,
 Hath each his several degree assign'd.
 In early times with their own innocence
 More was not wanting than the parents' faith,
 To save them: those first ages past, behoved
 That circumcision in the males should imp
 The flight of innocent wings: but since the day
 Of grace hath come, without baptismal rites
 In Christ accomplish'd, innocence herself
 Must linger yet below. Now raise thy view
 Unto the visage most resembling Christ:
 For, in her splendour only, shalt thou win
 The power to look on Him." Forthwith I saw
 Such floods of gladness on her visage shower'd,
 From holy spirits, winging that profound;
 That, whatsoever I had yet beheld,
 Had not so much suspended me with wonder,
 Or shown me such similitude of God.
 And he, who had to her descended, once,
 On earth, now hail'd in Heaven; and on poised wing,
 "Ave, Maria, Gratia Plena," sang:
 To whose sweet anthem all the blissful court,
 From all parts answering, rang: that holier joy
 Brooded the deep serene. "Father revered!
 Who deign'st, for me, to quit the pleasant place
 Wherein thou sittest, by eternal lot;
 Say, who that Angel is, that with such glee
 Beholds our Queen, and so enamour'd glows
 Of her high beauty, that all fire he seems."
 
 
 So I again resorted to the lore
 Of my wise teacher, he, whom Mary's charms
 Embellish'd, as the sun the morning star;
 Who thus in answer spake: "In him are summ'd,
 Whate'er of buxomness and free delight
 May be in spirit, or in Angel, met:
 And so beseems: for that he bare the palm
 Down unto Mary, when the Son of God
 Vouchsafed to clothe Him in terrestial weeds.
 Now let thine eyes wait heedful on my words;
 And note thou of this just and pious realm
 The chiefest nobles. Those, highest in bliss,
 The twain, on each hand next our Empress throned,
 Are as it were two roots unto this rose:
 He to the left, the parent, whose rash taste
 Proves bitter to his seed; and, on the right,
 That ancient father of the holy Church,
 Into whose keeping Christ did give the keys
 Of this sweet flower; near whom behold the seer,[7]
 That, ere, he died, saw all the grievous times
 Of the fair bride, who with the lance and nails
 Was won. And, near unto the other, rests
 The leader, under whom, on manna, fed
 The ungrateful nation, fickle and perverse.
 On the other part, facing to Peter, lo!
 Where Anna sits, so well content to look
 On her loved daughter, that with moveless eye
 She chants the loud hosanna: while, opposed
 To the first father of your mortal kind,
 Is Lucia,[8] at whose hest thy lady sped,
 When on the edge of ruin closed thine eye.
 
 
 [7: St. John.]
 
 
 [8: See Hell, Canto ii. 97, and Purgatory, Canto ix. 50.]
 
 
 "But (for the vision hasteneth to an end)
 Here break we off, as the good workman doth,
 That shapes the clock according to the cloth;
 And to the Primal Love our ken shall rise;
 That thou mayst penetrate the brightness, far
 As sight can bear thee. Yet, alas! in sooth
 Beating thy pennons, thinking to advance,
 Thou backward fall'st. Grace then must first be gain'd;
 Her grace, whose might can help thee. Thou in prayer
 Seek her: and, with affection, whilst I sue,
 Attend, and yield me all thy heart." He said;
 And thus the saintly orison began.
 
 
 </pre>
 </body>