<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Judaism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="loj200.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="loj202.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h1 align="CENTER">PREFACE</h1>
 <p>The arrangement and presentation of the material in this volume are the same as in Volume I. In both my efforts have been directed to bringing together as full as possible a collection of Jewish legends that deal with Biblical personages and events. The sources of those legends and explanations of some of them will be given in the last volume of the entire work, and the numbers throughout the work refer to the notes in the concluding volume.</p>
 <p>My original intention was to continue Volume II up to the death of Moses, but the legendary material clustering around the life and death of Moses is so abundant that practical considerations demanded the division of this material, in order not to make the second volume too bulky. The division chosen is a natural one. This volume closes with the Exodus, and contains the deeds of Moses in Egypt, while the following volume will deal with Moses in the desert.</p>
 <p>The fact that Job is placed between Jacob's sons and Moses may appear strange to some readers, since in the Bible Job is one of the last books; but "legend is above time and space," and I have, therefore, given Job the place which legend has ascribed to him.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">LOUIS GINZBERG.</p>
 <p>NEW YORK, March 28, 1910.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="loj202.htm">Next: Contents</a></center>
 </body>