<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Women</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="wcs03.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="wcs05.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <a name="page_49"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 49</font></a><h1 align="CENTER">CHAPTER II.</h1>
 <h3 align="CENTER">CELIBACY.</h3>
 <p>    While the inferior and secondary position of woman early became an integral portion of Christianity, its fullest efforts are seen in Church teachings regarding marriage. Inasmuch as it was a cardinal doctrine that the fall of Adam took place through his temptation into marriage by Eve, this relation was regarded with holy horror as a continuance of the evil which first brought sin into the world, depriving man of his immortality.<a name="fr_1"></a><a href="#fn_1"><font size="1">1</font></a> It is a notable fact that the expected millennium of a thousand years upon earth with its material joys has ever had more attraction for Christians than the eternal spiritual rapture of heaven. Many of the old Fathers taught that "the world is a state of matrimony, but paradise of virginity."<a name="fr_2"></a><a href="#fn_2"><font size="1">2</font></a> To</p>
 <p><a name="page_50"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 50</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>such extent was this doctrine carried it was declared that had it not have been for the fall, God would have found some way outside of this relation for populating the world, consequently marriage was regarded as a condition of peculiar temptation and trial; celibacy as one of especial holiness.</p>
 <p>    The androgynous theory of primal man found many supporters, the separation into two beings having been brought about by sensual desire. Jacob Bœhme and earlier mystics of that class recognized the double sexuality of God in whose image man was made. One of the most revered ancient Scriptures, "The Gospel according to the Hebrews," which was in use as late as the second century of the Christian era, taught the equality of the feminine in the Godhead; also that daughters should inherit with sons. Thirty-three fragments of this Gospel have recently been discovered. The fact remains undeniable that at the advent of Christ, a recognition of the feminine element in the divinity had not entirely died out from general belief, the earliest and lost books of the New Testament teaching this doctrine, the whole confirmed by the account of the birth and baptism of Jesus, the Holy Spirit,<a name="fr_3"></a><a href="#fn_3"><font size="1">3</font></a> the feminine creative force, playing the most important part. It was however but a short period before the church through Canons and Decrees, as well as apostolic and private teaching, denied the femininity of the Divine equally with the divinity of the feminine. There is however abundant proof that even under but partial recognition of the feminine principle as entering in the divinity, woman</p>
 <p><a name="page_51"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 51</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>was officially recognized in the early services of the church, being ordained to the ministry, officiating as deacons, administering the act of baptism, dispensing the sacrament, interpreting doctrines and founding sects which received their names.<a name="fr_4"></a><a href="#fn_4"><font size="1">4</font></a></p>
 <p>    The more mystical among priests taught that before woman was separated from man, the Elementals<a name="fr_5"></a><a href="#fn_5"><font size="1">5</font></a> were accepted by man as his children and endowed by him with immortality, but at the separation of the androgynous body into the two beings Adam and Eve, the woman through accident was also endowed with immortality which theretofore had solely inhered in the masculine portion of the double-sexed being. These mystics also taught that this endowment of woman with immortality together with her capability of bringing new beings into existence also endowed with immortal life, was the cause of intense enmity toward her on the part of the Elementals, especially shown by their bringing suffering and danger upon her at this period.</p>
 <p>    Still another class recognizing marriage as a necessity for the continuance of the species, looked upon it with more favor, attributing the fall to another cause, yet throwing odium upon the relation by maintaining that the marriage of Adam and Eve did not take place until after they had been driven from Paradise. This doctrine was taught by the Father Hieronymus<a name="fr_6"></a><a href="#fn_6"><font size="1">6</font></a>. Thus</p>
 <p><a name="page_52"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 52</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>with strange inconsistency the church supported two entirely opposing views of marriage. Yet even those who upheld its necessity still taught woman's complete subordination to man in that relation; also that this condition was one of great tribulation to man, it was even declared that God caused sleep to fall upon Adam at the creation of Eve in order to prevent his opposition.<a name="fr_7"></a><a href="#fn_7"><font size="1">7</font></a> Lecky speaking of the noxious influences of ascetics upon marriage, says it would be difficult to conceive anything more coarse and repulsive than the manner in which the church regarded it; it was invariably treated as a consequence of the fall of Adam and regarded from its lowest aspect.<a name="fr_8"></a><a href="#fn_8"><font size="1">8</font></a> But having determined that evil was necessary in order to future good, the church decided to compel a belief that its control of tins contract lessened the evil, to this end declaring marriage illegal without priestly sanction; thus creating a conviction of and belief in its sacramental nature in the minds of the people. Despite the favoring views of a class regarding marriage, celibacy was taught as the highest condition for both man and woman, and as early as the third century many of the latter entered upon a celibate life, Jerome using his influence in its favor. Augustine, while admitting the possibility of salvation to the married, yet speaking of a mother and daughter in heaven, compared the former to a star of the second magnitude, but the latter as shining with great brilliancy. The superior respect paid to the celibates even among women is</p>
 <p><a name="page_53"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 53</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>attributed to direct instruction of the apostles. The 'Apostolic Constitutions' held even by the Episcopal church as regulations established by the apostles themselves, and believed to be among the earliest christian records, give elaborate directions for the places of all who attend church, the unmarried being the most honored. The virgins and widows and elder women stood or sat first of all.</p>
 <p>    The chief respect shown by the early fathers towards marriage was that it gave virgins to the church, while the possibility of salvation to the married, at first recognized, was denied at later date even to persons otherwise living holy lives. The Emperor Jovinian banished a man who asserted the possibility of salvation to married persons provided they obeyed all the ordinances of the church and lived good lives.<a name="fr_9"></a><a href="#fn_9"><font size="1">9</font></a> As part of this doctrine, the church taught that woman was under an especial curse and man a divinely appointed agent for the enforcement of that curse. It inculcated the belief that all restrictions placed upon her were but parts of her just punishment for having caused the fall of man. Under such teaching a belief in the supreme virtue of celibacy--first declared by the apostle Paul,--was firmly established. To Augustine is the world indebted for full development of the theory of original sin, promulgated by Paul as a doctrine of the Christian Church in the declaration that Adam, first created, was not first in sin. Paul, brought up in the strictest external principles of Judaism, did not lose his educational bias or primal belief when changing from Judaism to Christianity.<a name="fr_10"></a><a href="#fn_10"><font size="1">10</font></a> Neither was his character as persecutor changed when he united</p>
 <p><a name="page_54"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 54</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>his fortunes with the new religion. He gave to the Christian world a lever long enough to reach down through eighteen centuries, all that time moving it in opposition to a belief in woman's created and religious equality with man, to her right of private judgment and to her personal freedom. His teaching that Adam, first created, was not first in sin, divided the unity of the human race in the assumption that woman was not part of the original creative idea but a secondary thought, an inferior being brought into existence as an appendage to man.</p>
 <p>    Although based upon a false conception of the creative power, this theory found ready acceptance in the minds of the men of the new church. Not illiterate, having received instruction at the feet of Gamaliel, Paul was yet intolerant and credulous, nay more, unscrupulous. He was the first Jesuit in the Christian church, "Becoming all things to all men." The Reformed church with strange unanimity has chosen Paul as its leader and the accepted exponent of its views. He may justly be termed the Protestant Pope, and although even among Catholics rivalling Peter in possession of the heavenly keys, yet the Church of Rome has accepted his authority as in many respects to be more fully obeyed than even the teachings of St. Peter.<a name="fr_11"></a><a href="#fn_11"><font size="1">11</font></a> Having been accepted by the Church as the apostolic exponent of its views upon marriage, it was but to be expected that his teachings should be received as divine. That Paul was unmarried has been assumed because of his bitterness against this relation, yet abundant proof of his having a wife exists. For the membership of the Great Sanhedrim,</p>
 <p><a name="page_55"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 55</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>marriage was a requisite. St. Clement of Alexandria positively declared that St. Paul had a wife. Until the time of Cromwell, when it was burned, a MS. letter of St. Ignatius in Greek was preserved in the old oxford Library; this letter spoke of "St. Peter and Paul and the apostles who were married." Another letter of St. Ignatius is still extant in the Vatican Library. Tussian and others who have seen it declare that it also speaks of St. Paul as a married man.<a name="fr_12"></a><a href="#fn_12"><font size="1">12</font></a> But tenderness toward woman does not appear in his teachings; man is represented as the master, "the head" of woman. In consonance with his teaching, responsibility has been denied her through the ages; although the Church has practically held her amenable for the ruin of the world, prescribing penance and hurling anathemas against her whom it has characterized as the "door of hell."</p>
 <p>    At a synod in Winchester in the eight century, St. Dunstan, famed for his hatred of women, made strenuous effort to enforce celibate life. It was asserted to be so highly immoral for a priest to marry, that even a wooden cross had audibly declared against the horrid practice.<a name="fr_13"></a><a href="#fn_13"><font size="1">13</font></a> Although in the third century marriage was permitted to all orders of the clergy," yet the very ancient "Gospel of the Egyptians," endorsed as canonical by Clement of Alexandria, taught celibacy. These old christian theologians found the nature of</p>
 <p><a name="page_56"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 56</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>woman a prolific subject of discussion, a large party classing her among brutes without soul or reason. As early as the sixth century a council at Macon (585) fifty-nine bishops taking part, devoted its time to a discussion of this question, "Does woman possess a soul?" Upon one side it was argued that woman should not be called "homo;" upon the opposite side that she should, because, <i>first</i>, the Scriptures declared that God created man, male and female; <i>second</i>, that Jesus Christ, son of a woman, is called the son of man. Christian women were therefore allowed to remain human beings in the eyes of the clergy, even though considered very weak and bad ones. But nearly a thousand years after this decision in favor of the humanity of the women of Christian Europe, it was still contended that the women of newly discovered America belonged to the brute creation, possessing neither souls nor reason.<a name="fr_15"></a><a href="#fn_15"><font size="1">15</font></a> As late as the end of the sixteenth century an anonymous work appeared, arguing that women were no part of mankind, but a species of intermediate animal between the human and the brute creation. (<i>Mulieres non est homines, etc.</i>) Mediæval Christian writings show many discussions upon this point, the influence of these old assertions still manifesting themselves.</p>
 <p>    Until time of Peter the Great, women were not recognized as human beings in that great division of Christendom known as the Greek church, the census of that empire counting only males, or so many</p>
 <p><a name="page_57"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 57</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>"souls"--no woman named. Traces of this old belief have not been found wanting in our own country within the century. As late as the Woman's Rights Convention in Philadelphia, 1854, an objector in the audience cried out: "Let women first prove they have souls; both the Church and the State deny it."</p>
 <p>Everything connected with woman was held to be unclean. It is stated that Agathro desired the Sophist Herodes to get ready for him the next morning a vessel full of pure milk, that is to say which had not been milked by the hand of a woman. But he perceived as soon as it was offered to him that it was not such as he desired, protesting that the scent of her hands who had milked it offended his nostrils. In the oldest European churches great distinction was made between the purity of man and woman. At an early date woman was forbidden to receive the Eucharist into her naked hand on account of her impurity,<a name="fr_16"></a><a href="#fn_16"><font size="1">16</font></a> or to sing in church on account of her inherent wickedness. To such an extent was this opposition carried, that the church of the middle ages did not hesitate to provide itself with eunuchs in order to supply cathedral choirs with the soprano tones inhering by nature in woman alone. One of the principal charges against the Huguenots was that they permitted women to sing in church, using their voices in praise of God contrary to the express command of St. Paul, Catherine de Medicis reproaching them for this great sin.<a name="fr_17"></a><a href="#fn_17"><font size="1">17</font></a> The</p>
 <p><a name="page_58"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 58</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>massacre at St. Bartholomew, when 30,000 men, women and children lost their lives, and the entire destruction of many families of purest character took place, with an additional great loss to France from the self-imposed banishment of hundreds more, may be traced to the teaching of St. Paul that woman should keep silence in the church. This doctrine also crossed the ocean with the Puritan Fathers, and has appeared in America under many forms.<a name="fr_18"></a><a href="#fn_18"><font size="1">18</font></a></p>
 <p>    The Christianity of the ages teaching the existence of a superior and inferior sex, possessing different rights under the law and in the church, it has been easy to bring man and woman under accountability to a different code of morals. For this double code the church is largely indebted to the subtle and acute Paul, who saw in the new religion but an enlarged Judaism that should give prominence to Abraham and his seed from whom Christ claimed descent. His conversion did not remove his old Jewish contempt for woman, as shown in his temple service, the law forbidding her entrance beyond the outer court. Nor could he divest himself of the spirit of the old morning prayer which daily led each Jew to thank, God that he was not born a heathen, a slave or a woman.</p>
 <p>    He brought into the new dispensation the influence of the old ceremonial law, which regarded woman as unclean. The Jewish exclusion of forty days from even the outer court of the sanctuary to the woman who had given birth to a son, and of twice that period, or eighty days, if a daughter had been born, was terminated</p>
 <p><a name="page_59"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 59</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>in both religions by a sin-offering in expiation of the mother's crime for having, at the peril of her own, brought another human being into life.<a name="fr_19"></a><a href="#fn_19"><font size="1">19</font></a> This Old Testament teaching degraded the life-giving principle exemplified in motherhood, and in a twofold way lessened the nation's regard for womanhood. <i>First</i>, through the sin-offering and purification demanded of the mother; <i>second</i>, by its doubling the period of exclusion from the temple in case a girl was given to the world.<a name="fr_20"></a><a href="#fn_20"><font size="1">20</font></a> The birth of girls even under Christianity has everywhere been looked upon as an infliction, and thousands have been immured in convents, there to die of despair or to linger through years,<a name="fr_21"></a><a href="#fn_21"><font size="1">21</font></a> the victim alike of father and of priest.</p>
 <p>    The influence of Judaism extended through Christendom. The custom of purification after maternity inherited by the church from Judaism brought with it into Christianity the same double restriction and chastening of the mother in case her infant proved a girl,</p>
 <p><a name="page_60"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 60</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>a gift as propitiation or expiation being required. Uncleanliness was attributed to woman in every function of her being; the purification of the Virgin Mary, who was not exempt, when after the birth of a God, being used as an incontrovertible argument in proof. A festival of the purification of the Virgin Mary, adopted from paganism, was introduced into Rome at an early date, thus perpetuating a belief in the uncleanliness of motherhood. The Church in the Roman Empire soon united with the State<a name="fr_22"></a><a href="#fn_22"><font size="1">22</font></a> in imposing new restrictions upon women. Since the Reformation the mother's duty of expiation has been confirmed by the Anglican Church, and is known in England as "churching." Directions as to the woman's dress at this time was early made the subject of a canon.<a name="fr_23"></a><a href="#fn_23"><font size="1">23</font></a> She was to be decently appareled. This term "decently," variously interpreted, was at times the occasion of serious trouble. In 1661, during the reign of James I, the Chancellor of Norwich ordered that every woman who came to be churched should be covered with a white veil. A woman who refused to conform to this order was excommunicated for contempt. She prayed a prohibition, alleging that such order was not warranted by any custom or Canon of the Church of England. The judges of the civil court, finding themselves incompetent to decide upon such a momentous question, requested the opinion of the archbishop of Canterbury. Not willing to trust his own judgment, that dignitary convened several bishops for consultation. Their decision was against</p>
 <p><a name="page_61"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 61</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>the woman, this Protestant Council upon woman's dress declaring that it was the ancient usage of the Church of England for women who were to be churched to come veiled, and a prohibition was denied.</p>
 <p>    The doctrine that woman must remain covered when in the sacred church building shows itself in the United States.<a name="fr_24"></a><a href="#fn_24"><font size="1">24</font></a> In many instances under Christianity, woman has been entirely excluded from religious houses and church buildings. When Pope Boniface<a name="fr_25"></a><a href="#fn_25"><font size="1">25</font></a> founded the abbey of Fulda he prohibited the entrance of women into any of the buildings, even including the church. This rule remained unbroken during the tenth and eleventh centuries, and even when in 1131 the Emperor Lothair went to Fulda to celebrate Pentecost, his empress was not permitted to witness the ceremonies. When Frederick Barbarossa, 1135, proposed to spend his Easter there, he was not even allowed to enter the house because of having his wife with him. In 1138 Boniface IX, at the request of the abbot, John Merlow, relaxed the rule and permitted women to attend the services of the church. Shortly afterwards the building was destroyed by lightning, which was looked upon as evidence of the divine displeasure at the desecration. The monastery of Athos under the Greek church, situated upon an</p>
 <p><a name="page_62"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 62</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>island, does not permit the entrance of a female animal upon its confines. Even in America woman has met similar experience.<a name="fr_26"></a><a href="#fn_26"><font size="1">26</font></a></p>
 <p>    At certain periods during the middle ages, conversation with women was forbidden. During the Black Death, the Flaggellants, or Brotherhood of the Cross, were under such interdict<a name="fr_27"></a><a href="#fn_27"><font size="1">27</font></a>. In this last decade of the XIX century, the Catholic church still imposes similar restrictions upon certain religious houses. Early in 1892 the queen-regent of Spain visited the monastery of Mirzaflores; its rules not all-owing a monk to speak to a woman, the queen was received in silence. Her majesty immediately telegraphed to the pope asking indulgence, which was granted, and during four hours the monks were permitted the sin of speaking to a woman. It is curious to note that the first sentence uttered by one of the monks was a compliment upon the simplicity of her majesty's attire. But the most impressive evidence of the contempt of the church towards all things feminine was shown in a remark by Tetzel the great middle-age dealer in indulgences. Offering one for sale he declared it would insure eternal salvation even if the purchaser had committed rape upon the mother of God.<a name="fr_28"></a><a href="#fn_28"><font size="1">28</font></a></p>
 <p>    A knowledge of facts like these is necessary in order to a just understanding of our present civilization, especially as to the origin of restrictive legislation concerning woman. The civilization of to-day is built</p>
 <p><a name="page_63"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 63</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>upon the religious theories of the middle ages supplemented by advancing freedom of thought. Lea, declares thus:</p>
 <p>    The Latin church is the great fact which dominates the history of modern civilization. All other agencies which molded the destinies of Europe were comparatively isolated or sporadic in the their manifestations.</p>
 <p>    The influence of church teaching is most strikingly manifested in the thought of to-day. Without predetermined intention of wrong doing, man has been so molded by the Church doctrine of ages and the coordinate laws of State as to have become blind to the justice of woman's demand for freedom such as he possesses. Nor is woman herself scarcely less bound, although now torn by the spirit of rebellion which burned in the hearts of her fore-mothers, so cruelly persecuted, so falsely judged, during past ages, when the most devout Christian woman possessed no rights in the church, the government or the family. The learning which had been hers in former periods, was then interdicted as an especial element of evil. Her property rights recognized in former periods then denied; as a being subordinate to man she was not allowed a separate estate or control over the earnings of her own hands. Her children were not her own but those of a master for whose interest or pleasure she had given them birth. Without freedom of thought or action, trained to consider herself secondary to a man, a being who came into the world not as part of the great original plan of creation but as an afterthought of her Creator, and this doctrine taught as one of the most sacred mysteries of religion which to doubt was to insure her eternal damnation, it is not strange that the great body of women are not now more outspoken in demanding equal religious and</p>
 <p><a name="page_64"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 64</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>governmental rights with man. But another phase of heredity shows itself in the eagerness with which women enter all phases of public life which does not place them in open antagonism with Church or State. Education, industries, club life and even those great modern and religious organizations which bring them before the public, throwing active work and responsibility upon them, would be entirely unexplainable were it not for the tendency of inherited thought to ultimately manifest itself.</p>
 <p>    The long continued and powerfully repressing influence of church teaching in regard to the created inferiority of women, imposed upon millions of men and women a bondage of thought and action which even the growing civilization of the nineteenth century has not yet been able to cast off. To this doctrine we can trace all the irregularities which for many centuries filled the church with shame; practices more obscene than those of Babylon or Corinth dragged Christendom to a darkness blacker than the night of heathendom in the most pagan countries--a darkness so intense that the most searching efforts of the historian but now and then cast a ray of light upon it;--a darkness so profound that in Europe from the seventh to the eleventh centuries no individual thought can be traced, no opinion was formed, no heresy arose. All Christendom was sunk in superstition. Lange<a name="fr_29"></a><a href="#fn_29"><font size="1">29</font></a> says "The disappearance of ancient civilization in the early centuries of the Christian era is an event the serious problems of which are in great part still unexplained." Had Lange not been influenced by the subtle current of heredity which unwittingly influenced nations and systems equally with individuals, he could easily have discovered the cause of this</p>
 <p><a name="page_65"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 65</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>disappearance of olden civilization, to be in the degradation of the feminine element under Christianity. While this darkness of Christian Europe was so great that history knows less of it a thousand years since than it does of Egypt 5,000 years ago, one corner of that continent was kept luminous by the brilliance of Mohammedan learning. The Arabs alone had books from the eighth to the thirteenth centuries of the Christian era. The Moors of Spain kept that portion of Europe bright, while all else was sunk in darkness. Universities existed, learning was fostered and women authors were numerous. For many hundred years Rome possessed no books but missals and a few Bibles in the hands of priests. Men were bound by church dogmas looking only for aggrandisement through her. The arts ceased to flourish, science decayed, learning was looked upon as a disgrace to a warrior,<a name="fr_30"></a><a href="#fn_30"><font size="1">30</font></a> the only occupation deemed worthy of the noble.</p>
 <p>    The priesthood who alone possessed a knowledge of letters, prostituted their learning to the basest uses; the nobility when not engaged against a common foe, spent their time battling against each other; the peasantry were by turns the sport and victim of priest and noble, while woman was the prey of all. Her person and her rights possessed no consideration except as she could be made to advance the interest or serve the pleasure of priest, noble, father, husband; some man-god to whose lightest desire all her wishes were made to bend. The most pronounced doctrine of the church at this period was that through woman sin had entered the world; that woman's whole tendency</p>
 <p><a name="page_66"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 66</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>was towards evil, and had it not been for the unfortunate oversight of her creation, man would then be dwelling in the paradisal innocence and happiness of Eden, with death entirely unknown. When the feminine was thus wholly proscribed, the night of moral and spiritual degradation reached its greatest depth, and that condition ensued which has alike been the wonder and the despair of the modern historians, whose greatest fault, as Buckle shows, has been the reading of history from a few isolated facts rather than building up its philosophy from an aggregation of events upon many different planes.</p>
 <p>    Under all restrictions woman did not fail to show her innate power even within the fold of the church. She founded devout orders,<a name="fr_31"></a><a href="#fn_31"><font size="1">31</font></a> established and endowed religious institutions, and issued her commands to the pope himself, in more than one instance seating that holy personage in the papal chair.<a name="fr_32"></a><a href="#fn_32"><font size="1">32</font></a> From St. Paulina, whose life was written by St. Jerome, to the promulgation of the dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary by the Ecumenical Council under Pius IX, and the later canonization of Joan of Arc, woman has not failed to impress even the Christian world with a sense of her intellectual and spiritual power. Yet despite the very great influence exerted by so many women in the affairs of the church--</p>
 <p><a name="page_67"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 67</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>notwithstanding the canonization of so many women, she has only been able to show her capacity at an immense expenditure of vital force against constant priestly opposition and the powerful decrees of councils. Subtle and complex as are the influences that mould thought and character, we cannot comprehend the great injustice of the church towards woman in its teaching of her mental and spiritual inferiority without a slight examination of the great religious institutions that have been under her charge. Of these none possess more remarkable history than the Abbey of Fontervault,<a name="fr_33"></a><a href="#fn_33"><font size="1">33</font></a> founded in 1099, for both monks and nuns. It belonged in the general rank of Benedictines, and was known as the Order of Fontervault. It was ruled by an abbess under title of General of the Order, who was responsible to no authority but that of the pope himself. Forming a long succession of able women in thirty-two abbesses from the most eminent families of France, woman's capacity for the management of both ecclesiastical and civil affairs was there shown for six hundred years. It was the abbess who alone decided the religious fitness of either monk or nun seeking admission to the order. It was the abbess who decreed all ecclesiastical and civil penalties; who selected the confessors for the different houses of the order throughout France and Spain; who managed and controlled the vast wealth belonging to this institution; it was the abbess who drew up the rules for the government of the order, and who</p>
 <p><a name="page_68"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 68</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>also successfully defended these privileges when attacked.<a name="fr_34"></a><a href="#fn_34"><font size="1">34</font></a> For neither the protection of the pope, the wealth of the order, or the family influence connected with it, prevented priestly attack,<a name="fr_34"></a><a href="#fn_34"><font size="1">34</font></a> and no argument in favor of woman's governing ability is stronger than the fact that its abbesses ever successfully resisted these priestly assaults upon the privileges of their order. The abbey of Fontervault, with its grounds of forty or fifty acres, was surrounded by high walls; its soil was tilled by the monks of the abbey, who received even their food as alms from the nuns, returning all fragments for distribution to the poor.<a name="fr_35"></a><a href="#fn_35"><font size="1">35</font></a> The authority of women was supreme in all monasteries of the order. The ecclesiastical power maintained by these abbesses is the more remarkable, as it was in direct contravention of the dictates of the early councils, that of Aix-la Chapelle, 816, forbidding abbesses to give the veil or take upon themselves any priestly function; the later council of Paris, A. D. 824, bitterly complained that women served at the altar, and even gave to people the body and blood of Jesus Christ.</p>
 <p>    Among the convents controlled by women, which have largely influenced religious thought, was that of the Paraclete in the 12th century under Heloise. Its teachings that belief was dependent upon knowledge, attacked the primal church tenet, that belief depends upon faith alone. The convent of Port Royal des Champs during the 17th century exerted much influence. Its abbess, the celebrated Mother Angélique Arnault, was inducted into this office in her eleventh</p>
 <p><a name="page_69"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 69</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>year upon death of her abbess-aunt, whose co-adjutrix she had been. This convent, both in person of the nuns as well as the monks connected with it, became a protest against the jesuitical doctrine of the seventeenth century, and like the Paraclete is intimately connected with reform questions in the Catholic Church. Notwithstanding such evidences of woman's organizing mind and governing qualities under the most favorable conditions, as well as of piety so unquestioned as to have produced a long calendar of female saints, the real policy of the church remained unchanged; nor could it be otherwise from its basis of woman's created inferiority and original sin. The denial to women of the right of private judgment and the control of her own actions, the constant teaching of her greater sinfulness and natural impurity, had a very depressing effect upon the majority of women whose lowly station in life was such as to deprive them of that independence of thought and action possible to women of rank and wealth. Then, as now, the church catered to the possessors of money and power; then, as now, seeking to unite their great forces with its own purpose of aggrandizement, and thus the church has ever obstructed the progress of humanity, delaying civilization and condemning the world to a moral barbarism from which there is no escape except through repudiation of its teachings. To the theory of "God the Father," shorn of the divine attribute of motherhood, is the world beholden for its most degrading beliefs, its most infamous practices. Dependent upon and identified with lost Motherhood is the "Lost Name" of ancient writers and occultists. When the femininity of the divine is once again acknowledged, the "Lost Name" will be discovered</p>
 <p><a name="page_70"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 70</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>and the holiness (wholeness) of divinity be manifested.<a name="fr_36"></a><a href="#fn_36"><font size="1">36</font></a></p>
 <p>    As the theory of woman's wickedness gathered force, her representative place in the church lessened. From century to century restrictive canons multiplied, and the clergy constantly grew more corrupt, although bearing bad reputation at an early date.<a name="fr_37"></a><a href="#fn_37"><font size="1">37</font></a> Tertullian, whose heavy diatribes are to be found in large libraries, was bitter in his opposition to, marriage.<a name="fr_38"></a><a href="#fn_38"><font size="1">38</font></a> While it took many hundreds of years for the total exclusion of woman from the christian priesthood the celibacy of the clergy during this period was the constant effort of the Church. Even during the ages that priestly marriage was permitted, celibates obtained a higher reputation for sanctity and virtue than married priests, who infinitely more than celibates were believed subject to infestation by demons.<a name="fr_39"></a><a href="#fn_39"><font size="1">39</font></a></p>
 <p>    The restriction upon clerical marriages proceeded gradually. First the superior holiness of the unmarried was taught together with their greater freedom from infestation by demons. A single marriage only was next allowed, and that with a woman who had</p>
 <p><a name="page_71"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 71</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>never before entered the relation.<a name="fr_40"></a><a href="#fn_40"><font size="1">40</font></a> The Council of A. D. 347, consisting of twenty-one bishops, forbade the ordination of those priests who had been twice married or whose wife had been a widow.<a name="fr_41"></a><a href="#fn_41"><font size="1">41</font></a> A council of A. D. 395 ruled that a bishop who had children after ordination should be excluded from the major orders. The Council of A. D. 444, deposed Chelidonius, bishop of Besancon, for having married a widow. The Council of Orleans, A. D. 511, consisting of thirty-two bishops, decided that monks who married should be expelled from the ecclesiastical order. The Church was termed the spouse of the priest. It was declared that Peter possessed a wife before his conversion, but that he forsook her and all worldly things after he became Christ's, who established chastity; priests were termed holy in proportion as they opposed marriage.<a name="fr_42"></a><a href="#fn_42"><font size="1">42</font></a> The unmarried among the laity who had never entered that relation, and the married who forsook it, were regarded as saintly. So great was the opposition to marriage that a layman who married a second time was refused benediction and penance imposed.<a name="fr_43"></a><a href="#fn_43"><font size="1">43</font></a> A wife was termed "An Unhallowed Thing."</p>
 <p><a name="page_72"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 72</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>    So far from celibacy producing chastity or purity of life, church restrictions upon marriage led to the most debasing crimes, the most revolting vices, the grossest immorality, As early as the fourth century (370) the state attempted purification through a statute enacted by the emperors Valentinian, Valerius and Gratian, prohibiting ecclesiastics and monks from entering the houses of widows, single women living alone, or girls who had lost their parents.<a name="fr_44"></a><a href="#fn_44"><font size="1">44</font></a> The nearest ties of relationship proved ineffectual in protecting woman from priestly assault, and incest became so common it was found necessary to prohibit the residence of a priest's mother or sister in his house.<a name="fr_45"></a><a href="#fn_45"><font size="1">45</font></a> This restriction was renewed at various times through the ages. The condemnation of the Council of Rome, Easter, 1051, under the pontificate of Pope Leo IX, was not directed against married priests, but against those who held incestuous relations. Yet although the Church thus externally set her seal of disapprobation upon this vice, her general teaching sustained it. Gregory, bishop of Venelli, convicted of this crime by the Council of Rome, was punished by excommunication, but in a short time was restored to his former important position. The highest legates were equally guilty with the inferior priests. Cardinal John of Cremona, the pope's legate to the Council of Westminster 1125,</p>
 <p><a name="page_73"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 73</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>sent by Pope Honorius for the express purpose of enforcing celibacy, became publicly notorious and disgraced, and was obliged to hastily leave England in consequence of his teaching and his practice being diametrically opposed.<a name="fr_46"></a><a href="#fn_46"><font size="1">46</font></a></p>
 <p>    Through this clerical contempt of marriage, the conditions of celibacy and virginity were regarded as of the highest virtue. Jerome respected marriage as chiefly valuable in that it gave virgins to the church, while Augustus in acknowledging that marriage perpetuated the species, also contended that it also perpetuated original sin.</p>
 <p>    These diverse views in regard to marriage created the most opposite teaching from the church. By one class the demand to increase and multiply was constantly brought up, and women were taught that the rearing of children was their highest duty. The strangest sermons were sometimes preached toward the enforcement of this command. Others taught an entirely different duty for both men and women, and a large celibate class was created under especial authority of the church. "Women, especially those of wealth, were constantly urged to take upon themselves the vow of virginity, their property passing into possession of the church, thus helping to build up priestly power. Another class held the touch of a woman to be a contamination, and to avoid it holy men secluded themselves in caves and forests.<a name="fr_47"></a><a href="#fn_47"><font size="1">47</font></a> Through numerous decretals</p>
 <p><a name="page_74"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 74</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>confirmation was given to the theory that woman was defiled through the physical peculiarities of her being. Even her beauty was counted as an especial snare and temptation of the devil for which in shame she ought to do continual penance.<a name="fr_48"></a><a href="#fn_48"><font size="1">48</font></a> St. Chrysostom, whose prayer is repeated at every Sunday morning service of the Episcopal church, described women as a "necessary evil, a natural temptation, a desirable calamity, a domestic peril, a deadly fascination, and a painted ill." But to escape her influence was impossible and celibacy led to the most direful results. Monks and hermits acknowledged themselves tormented in their Solitary lives by visions of beautiful women. Monasteries were visited by an illness to which celibacy imparted a name,<a name="fr_49"></a><a href="#fn_49"><font size="1">49</font></a> and impurity of body and soul spread throughout Christendom. The general tone of the church in regard to marriage; its creation of a double code of morality; its teaching of woman's greater sinfulness, together with that of her absolute subordination to man, subverted the moral character of the Christian world within whose borders the vilest systems of immorality arose which the world has ever known; its extent being a subject of historical record.<a name="fr_50"></a><a href="#fn_50"><font size="1">50</font></a></p>
 <p><a name="page_75"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 75</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>    According to the teaching of men who for many hundreds of years were molders of human thought, priests, philosophers and physicians alike, nature never designed to procreate woman, her intention being always to produce men. These authorities asserted that nature never formed the feminine except when she lost her true function and so produced the female sex by chance or accident. Aristotle<a name="fr_51"></a><a href="#fn_51"><font size="1">51</font></a> whose philosophy was accepted by the church and all teaching of a contrary character declared heretical, maintained that nature did not form woman except when by reason of imperfection of matter she could not obtain the sex which is perfect.<a name="fr_52"></a><a href="#fn_52"><font size="1">52</font></a> Cajetan enunciated the same doctrine many hundred years later.<a name="fr_53"></a><a href="#fn_53"><font size="1">53</font></a> Aristotle also denied creative power to the mother.<a name="fr_54"></a><a href="#fn_54"><font size="1">54</font></a> While throughout its history the course of the Christian Church against marriage is constantly seen, no less noticeable are the grossly immoral practices resulting from celibacy. Scarcely a crime or a vice to which it did not give birth. Celibacy was fostered in the interests of power, and in order to its more strict enforcement barons were permitted to enslave the wives and children of married priests.<a name="fr_55"></a><a href="#fn_55"><font size="1">55</font></a> Those of Rome were bestowed upon the Cathedral church of the Lateran, and bishops throughout Christendom were ordered to enforce this law 1 n their own dioceses and to seize the</p>
 <p><a name="page_76"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 76</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>wives of priests for the benefit of their churches. At no point of history do we more clearly note the influence of the Church upon the State than in the union of the temporal power with the ecclesiastical for purposes of constraining priestly celibacy.</p>
 <p>    Under reign of Philip I of France, a council was held at Troyes which condemned the marriage of priests.<a name="fr_56"></a><a href="#fn_56"><font size="1">56</font></a> In 1108, the following year, King Henry I of England<a name="fr_57"></a><a href="#fn_57"><font size="1">57</font></a> summoned a council to assemble in London for purpose of upholding priestly celibacy, urging its enforcement upon the bishops, and pledging his kingly honor in aid. A new series of canons was promulgated, strengthened by severe penalties and the co-operation of the king. Finding it impossible either through spiritual or temporal power to compel absolute celibacy<a name="fr_58"></a><a href="#fn_58"><font size="1">58</font></a> the king for the benefit of his exchequer established a license for concubinage upon the payment of a tax known as cullagium.<a name="fr_59"></a><a href="#fn_59"><font size="1">59</font></a></p>
 <p>    Notwithstanding all the powerful enginery of the church, priestly celibacy, so contrary to nature, was not rendered absolutely imperative until the thirteenth century. The Fourth Lateran Council, (Twelfth Ecumenical), 1215, under pope Innocent III, is especially famous because of its final settlement of the policy of the church in regard to priestly marriage, This was a large council, 1300 prelates taking part in the</p>
 <p><a name="page_77"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 77</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>adjudication of this question. While with St. Augustine acknowledging that marriage was requisite for the preservation of the race, it strictly confined this relation to the laity.</p>
 <p>    The subject of celibacy as we see had agitated the church from its foundation. A more renowned council even than the Twelfth Ecumenical, namely, the First Nicene or Second Ecumenical, having seriously discussed it, although after prolonged debate pronouncing against celibacy and in favor of priestly marriage. St. Paphinutius, the martyr bishop of Thebes, although himself a celibate advocated marriage which he declared to be true chastity, the council adopting his opinion. Although the tendency of the church for so many hundred years had been towards celibacy yet when adopted as a dogma, a belief in its propriety or its scriptural authority was by no means universal even among the most eminent members, but in no instance has the control of the church over the consciences and will of its adherents been more forcibly illustrated. Many illustrious and learned theologians as Gratian the Canonist, St. Thomas Aquinas and Giraldus Cambrensis, Arch-Deacon of St. Davids, while thereafter sustaining celibacy <i>as a law of the church</i> declared it had neither scriptural nor apostolic warrant; St. Thomas affirming it to be merely a law of human ecclesiastical origin.<a name="fr_60"></a><a href="#fn_60"><font size="1">60</font></a></p>
 <p>    Absolute celibacy of the priesthood proved very difficult of enforcement. At the great council of London, 1237, twenty-three years afterwards, Cardinal Otto deplored the fact that married men still received holy orders and held office in the church, and in 1268 only fifty-three years after the great council</p>
 <p><a name="page_78"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 78</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>confirming celibacy as a doctrine of the church, another great council was convened in London, when Cardinal Legate Ottoborn, the direct representative of the Pope, demanded the establishment of concubinage for priests. The institutions of Otto and Ottoborn long remained the law of the English church. Yet to their honor be it remembered that despite council and cardinal, pope and church, there were priests who still persistently refused either to part from their wives or to relinquish their priestly functions, and who when excommunicated for contumacy, laughed at the sentence and continued their priestly offices.<a name="fr_61"></a><a href="#fn_61"><font size="1">61</font></a> Others sufficiently conformed to the edicts to lock up their churches and suspend their priestly administrations, yet refusing to part with their wives. The relatives of wives also exerted their influence against the action of the church.</p>
 <p>    The struggle was bitter and long. New canons were promulgated and celibacy enforced under severe penalties, or rather marriage was prohibited under severe penalties. The holy robbery which made slaves of the wives and children of priests confiscating their property to the church, had more effect in compelling celibacy than all anathemas upon the iniquity of marriage. Priests who retained their wives preferring the chastity of this relation to the license allowed celibates, were prohibited from their offices and their wives denounced as harlots. If this did not suffice, such priests were finally excommunicated. But a way of return was left open. In case this measure coerced them into abandoning wives and children, a short penance soon restored the priestly rank with all its</p>
 <p><a name="page_79"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 79</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>attendant dignities. Nor was the re-instated priest compelled to live purely. So little was it expected that the tax upon concubinage soon became a component part of the celibate system. So gross and broadspread became the immorality of all classes that even the Head of the Church pandered to it in the erection by Pope Sixtus V. of a magnificent building devoted to illicit pleasure.<a name="fr_62"></a><a href="#fn_62"><font size="1">62</font></a></p>
 <p>    The example of Christ himself was pointed to in favor of celibacy, even upon the cross saying to his mother, "Woman, what have I to do with thee?" The saints of the Old Testament as well as the New, were quoted as having opposed marriage. Abel, Melchisedeck, Joshua, Elias, Jonah, Daniel, St John the Baptist, St. John the Evangelist, St. Paul with his disciples, and all saintly personages were declared to have been celibates.</p>
 <p>    A concubinage tax was exacted from all the clergy without exception, and rendered compulsory even upon those priests who still kept their wives, or who lived chastely outside of the marital relation. Protests were of no avail. Those whom disinclination, age or ill-health kept chaste, were told the privilege of unchastity was open to them; the bishop must have the money and after payment they were at liberty to keep concubines or not.<a name="fr_63"></a><a href="#fn_63"><font size="1">63</font></a> Under concubinage the priest was</p>
 <p><a name="page_80"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 80</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>free from all family responsibility; his mistress possessed neither present nor future claim upon him; children, who according to church teaching followed the condition of the mother, were born to him, but for their education and maintenance neither <b>ecclesiastical</b> nor civil law compelled him to provide.</p>
 <p>    For many centuries this immoral tax brought enormous sums into the treasuries of both Church and State. Although the laws against the marriage of priests were enacted on pretense of the greater inherent wickedness of woman, history proves their chief object to have been the keeping of all priestly possessions under church control. It was openly asserted that the temporal possessions of the church were imperilled by sacerdotal marriage, and it has been declared with every proof of truthfulness that edicts against the marriage of priests were promulgated to prevent the alienation of property from the church.<a name="fr_65"></a><a href="#fn_65"><font size="1">65</font></a> The saying of Paul was quoted; "He that is married careth for his wife, but he that is unmarried for the Lord." Married bishops were occasionally confirmed in their sees upon condition that their wives and children should not inherit their property, which upon their death should fall to the church.<a name="fr_66"></a><a href="#fn_66"><font size="1">66</font></a></p>
 <p>    The struggle against the absolute celibacy of the priesthood was bitter. A few priests still kept their benefices while retaining their wives and acknowledging</p>
 <p><a name="page_81"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 81</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>their children as legitimate. The sons of such contumacious priests were declared forever incapable of taking holy orders, unless by a special dispensation. The church showed almost equal determination in the establishment of concubinage as in the enforcement of priestly celibacy, each of these systems tending to its enrichment.</p>
 <p>    Opposition proved of no permanent avail. Holding control over the conscience of men, asserting the power to unlock the doors of heaven and hell, a strongly organized body working to one end, it is not a subject of astonishment that the church, its chief object the crushing of body and soul, should in the end prove conqueror, and the foulest crimes against woman receive approval of the entire christian world. Many notable consequences followed the final establishment of celibacy as a dogma of the church.</p>
 <p>    First The doctrine of woman's inherent wickedness and close fellowship with Satan took on new strength.</p>
 <p>    Second. Canon Law gained full control of civil law.</p>
 <p>    Third. An organized system of debauchery arose under mask of priestly infallibility.</p>
 <p>    Fourth. Auricular confession was confirmed as a dogma of the church.</p>
 <p>    Fifth. Prohibition of the Scriptures to the laity was enforced.</p>
 <p>    Sixth. Crime was more openly protected, the system of indulgences gained new strength, becoming the means of great revenue to the church.</p>
 <p>    Seventh. Heresy was more broadly defined and more severely punished.</p>
 <p>    Eight. The Inquisition was established.</p>
 <p>    When Innocent III completed the final destruction of sacerdotal marriage, it was not upon disobedient priests</p>
 <p><a name="page_82"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 82</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>the most severe punishment fell, but upon innocent women and children.<a name="fr_67"></a><a href="#fn_67"><font size="1">67</font></a> Effort was made to force wives to desert their husbands. Those who proved contumacious were denied christian burial in an age when such denial was looked upon as equivalent to eternal damnation; property left such wives was confiscated to the church; they were forbidden the eucharist; churching after childbirth was denied them; they were termed harlots and their children bastards, while to their sons all office in the church was forbidden. If still contumacious they were handed over to the secular power for condign punishment, or sold as slaves for the benefit of the church. They were regarded as under the direct control of Satan himself, as beings who iniquitously stood between their husbands and heaven.</p>
 <p>    At numerous times in the history of the church women have been brought to despair by its teachings, and large numbers driven to suicide. A similar period was inaugurated by the confirmation of priestly celibacy. The wives of such men, suddenly rendered homeless and with their children classed among the vilest of earth, powerless and despairing, hundreds shortened their agonies by death at their own hands. For all these crimes the church alone is responsible.</p>
 <p>    Under celibacy, auricular confession, and extended belief in witchcraft, a new era of wrong toward woman was inaugurated. From thenceforth her condition was more degraded than even during the early centuries of Christianity. Accusations of heresy, which included witchcraft as well as other sins against the church</p>
 <p><a name="page_83"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 83</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>were constantly made against that being who was believed to have brought sin into the world. Whosoever dared question the infallibility of the church by use of their own judgment, even upon the most trivial subjects, immediately fell into condemnation.</p>
 <p>    Canon Law gaining full control over civil law, the absolute sinfulness of divorce, which maintained by the church has yet been allowed by civil law, was fully established. Woman was entirely at the mercy of many the Canon Law maintaining that the confession of a guilty woman could not be received in evidence against her accomplice, although it held good against herself<a name="fr_68"></a><a href="#fn_68"><font size="1">68</font></a> and the punishment due to both was made to fall on the woman alone.<a name="fr_69"></a><a href="#fn_69"><font size="1">69</font></a> The best authorities prove that while the clergy were acquainted with the civil codes that had governed the Roman Empire, they made but little use of them.<a name="fr_70"></a><a href="#fn_70"><font size="1">70</font></a> Upon coming to the throne, Justinian<a name="fr_71"></a><a href="#fn_71"><font size="1">71</font></a> had repealed the law of the Patriarchate which gave the father sole right and title to, and interest in the children of legal marriage, but this was soon again subverted by ecclesiasticism and under Canon Law a mother was prohibited all authority over</p>
 <p><a name="page_84"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 84</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>her child, its relationship to her even being denied. While under Common Law children followed the condition of their fathers, who if free transmitted freedom to their children, yet in the interests of priestly celibacy, under church legislation, an entire reversal took place and children were held to follow the condition of their mothers. Thus serf-mothers bore serf-children to free-born fathers; slave mothers bore slave children to their masters; while unmarried mothers bore bastard children to both priestly and lay fathers, thus throwing the taint of illegitimacy upon the innocent child, and the sole burden of its maintenance upon the mother. This portion of Canon Law also became the law of the State in all Christian countries,<a name="fr_72"></a><a href="#fn_72"><font size="1">72</font></a> and is in existence at the present time, both civil codes and statue laws enforcing this great wrong of the Church.<a name="fr_73"></a><a href="#fn_73"><font size="1">73</font></a> The relations of men and women to each other, the sinfulness of marriage and the license of illicit relations for the priesthood, employed the thought of the church. The duty of woman to obey, not alone her male relatives, but all men by virtue of their sex, was sedulously inculcated. She was trained to hold her own desires and even thoughts in abeyance to those of man, as to one who was rightfully her master. Every holy principle of her nature was subverted by this degrading assumption.</p>
 <p>    When auricular confession became confirmed as a dogma of the church, it threw immense power over the family into the hands of the priesthood, a power capable of being converted to many ends, but was specially</p>
 <p><a name="page_85"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 85</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>notable in its influence upon morals.<a name="fr_74"></a><a href="#fn_74"><font size="1">74</font></a> Although auricular confession was not established as a dogma until the Council of 1215, it had been occasionally practiced at early date, carrying with it the same immorality in lesser form as that which afterwards became so great a reproach to the church.<a name="fr_75"></a><a href="#fn_75"><font size="1">75</font></a> Through its means the priesthood gained possession of all family, social and political secrets, thus acquiring information whose power for evil was unlimited. The spirit of evil never found a more subtle method of undermining and destroying human will, its most debasing influences falling upon woman, who through fear of eternal damnation made known her most secret thoughts to the confessor, an unmarried and frequently a youthful man. It soon became a source of very great corruption to both priest and woman.</p>
 <p>    Another effect of this council was the formal prohibition of the scriptures to the laity, and thenceforth the Bible was confined to the priest who explained its</p>
 <p><a name="page_86"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 86</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>teachings in the interests of his own order, adding to, or taking from, to suit his own interests; the recent new version showing many such interpolations.<a name="fr_76"></a><a href="#fn_76"><font size="1">76</font></a> Nothing was held sacred by these men, who sacrificed everything to their own advancement and that of their order.</p>
 <p>    The insolence of the priesthood was that of all periods; claiming direct inspiration from God, they taught their own infallibility and in name of Him, whom they professed to serve, the grossest crimes were perpetrated, and this profession became a protecting sanctuary to men whose villainous lives would otherwise have brought them to the gallows.<a name="fr_77"></a><a href="#fn_77"><font size="1">77</font></a></p>
 <p>    With conviction of woman's supreme wickedness, increased through the formal recognition of celibacy as a dogma of the church, with the establishment of auricular confession, and the denial of the Bible to the laity, the persecution of woman for witchcraft took on new phase. The belief that it was the ordinary method through which the devil won souls, together with the persuasion that woman through her greater wickedness fell more readily than men into such practices,</p>
 <p>{77. Cardinal Wolsey complained to the Pope that both the secular and regular priests were in the habit of committing actions for which if not in orders, they would have been promptly executed.</p>
 <p>The claim of direct inspiration from God exists equally among Protestants as among Catholics, and even among the Unitarians, who deny Christ's divinity. A notable instance of this kind, both because of the high scientific and moral character of the clergyman, took place in the pulpit of the May Memorial Church, Syracuse, N. Y., December 4th, 1887, as reported in the Morning Standard of the 5th.</p>
 <p>Luther declared that priests believed themselves to be as superior to the laity in general as males were held superior to females.}</p>
 <p><a name="page_87"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 87</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>acquired a firmer seat in theology. Heresy, of which witchcraft was one phase, became a greater sin; the inquisition arose, and the general characteristics of the Christian world rapidly grew more inimical to humanity, and especially to woman's freedom, happiness and security.</p>
 <p>    The influence of the church daily grew more unfavorable to all virtue; vice was sustained, immorality dignified. The concubines of priests called "wives," in bitter mockery of that relation in which the legal wife was termed concubine, were known as "The Hallowed Ones," "The Honored Ones." No stigma attached to such a life; these women formed quite a class in mediæval society, themselves and their children ranking the wives of ordinary laymen;<a name="fr_78"></a><a href="#fn_78"><font size="1">78</font></a> the touch of a priest had sanctified them. In the estimation of the church an immoral life led with a priest was more honorable than marriage with a layman, and all the obligations such a relation implied. Priests assumed immunity from wrong doing. So far from celibacy causing purity of life, through it the priesthood grew to look upon themselves as especially set apart for indulgence in vice. Did not history so faithfully portray this condition, it would seem impossible that it had existed among people asserting the highest morality, and is proof of the danger of irresponsible power to possessor and victim alike, and the ease with which the true meaning of right and wrong is lost under such circumstances.</p>
 <p>    The theory of the church that as the fall and sin really existed, priestly immorality became a necessity</p>
 <p><a name="page_88"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 88</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>in order to perpetuate the world even through a continuance of the original sin, was a species of fine casuistry for which the church in all ages has been remarkable. The general tenor of the church against marriage, together with its teaching of woman's greater sinfulness, were the chief causes which undermined the morality of the christian world for fifteen hundred years. With these doctrines were also taught the duty of woman to sacrifice herself in every way for man, a theory of which the present century is not unfamiliar. The loss of chastity in woman was held as light sin in comparison to the degradation that marriage would bring to a priest, and young girls ruined by some candidate or priest, considered themselves doing God service in refusing a marriage that would cause the expulsion of the priestly ]over from the ecclesiastical order. With woman's so-called "divine," but rather demoniac self-sacrifice, Heloise chose to be deemed the mistress of Abelard rather than by acknowledging their marriage destroy his prospects of advancement in the church.<a name="fr_79"></a><a href="#fn_79"><font size="1">79</font></a></p>
 <p>    The State sustained the Church in its opposition to marriage, and we find the anomaly of marriage for political reasons where the parties forever separated at the altar. St. Jerome, and at a later date St. Dunstan, sustained the policy of such marriages. The history of Britain gives instances of early queens thus separating from their newly made husbands at the close of the ceremony, dedicating their lives to celibacy and their fortunes to the church.</p>
 <p><a name="page_89"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 89</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>    Nor did this institution neglect that large class of Women to whom marriage was made impossible because of the numbers of men to whom it was forbidden. After the Lateran Council had permanently settled the action of the church in favor of priestly celibacy, great effort was made to draw women of wealth into a monastic life. Religion was the chief method of acquiring Power, and as an abbess of a religious institution it opened opportunity for power to women scarcely possible outside the church. The two highest womanly virtues inculcated by the church were a celibate life and liberality to religious houses. It was taught if anything could possibly mitigate woman's sin through Eve's transgression, it was the observance of these two conditions.</p>
 <p>    To the student this is the most remarkable period in the history of the church, not merely as a culmination of the effort of centuries in finally deciding the questions of celibacy, so long agitated with such varying results, but in the immediate change and permanent settlement it brought about in regard to other church dogmas, as well as its pronounced influence in causing the Lutheran Reformation.</p>
 <p>    It was asserted that the spiritual office of the priest sanctified sin; it became a maxim that whatever a priest might do was holy; by their taking part in lasciviousness it became consecration. To disobey a priest was to endanger salvation; it was libellous and treasonable to question the purity of a priest's motives, hence religion became a screen for all vice and a source of moral degradation to all women. To such extent was belief carried in the superior purity of a celibate life that but little more than 300 years since a man was burned at the stake in England for asserting</p>
 <p><a name="page_90"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 90</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>the lawfulness of priestly marriage.<a name="fr_80"></a><a href="#fn_80"><font size="1">80</font></a> The action of the council of 1215, so powerfully sustaining the olden claims of the superior holiness of celibacy soon created a belief in the inability of a priest to commit sin. During the middle ages his infallibility was constantly maintained, his superior sanctity in consequence of his celibacy universally asserted. It was impossible not to connect the idea of great wickedness with those incapable of entering this holy office, and as woman by virtue of sex was prohibited priestly functions, and as her marriage had been declared a necessity for the world, these conditions were used as arguments against her. The conscience and morality of tens of thousands were destroyed by these teachings, enforced as they were by all the dread authority of the church. The christian world was under entire control of a class whose aim was chiefly that of personal aggrandizement, and that hesitated at no means for securing wealth and power.</p>
 <p>    The Inquisition was firmly established; under its reign six hundred methods of torture were known, and it was conducted with such secrecy that not until dragged before it were many of its victims aware they were under suspicion. Even when imprisoned in its torture chambers, the charges against them were kept secret in hopes thereby to compel self-accusation upon other points. The inferiority of woman, her proneness to evil and readiness to listen to all suggestions of Satan, was taught with renewed vigor and power for evil.</p>
 <p>    The priest regarded himself as the direct representative of divinity; the theory of infallibility was not</p>
 <p><a name="page_91"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 91</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>confined to the pope, but all dignitaries of the church made the same claim. Asserting themselves incapable of wrong doing, maintaining an especial sanctification by reason of their celibacy, priests nevertheless made their holy office a cover for the most degrading sensuality. Methods were taken to debauch the souls as well as the bodies of women. Having first taught their special impurity, it was now maintained that immorality with a priest was not sin, but on the contrary hallowed the woman, giving her particular claim upon heaven. It was taught that sin could only be killed through sin.<a name="fr_81"></a><a href="#fn_81"><font size="1">81</font></a> The very incarnation was used as a means of weakening woman's virtue. That Christ did not enter the world through the marriage relation, stamped with christian honor a system of concubinage in the church, for whose warrant woman was pointed to the Virgin Mary. As an enforcement of her duty of absolute surrender of soul and body to the will of the priest the course of the Virgin was adduced, "who obeyed the angel Gabriel and conceived without fear of evil, for impurity could not come of a spirit."<a name="fr_82"></a><a href="#fn_82"><font size="1">82</font></a> The chastity of concubinage and the unchasteness of marriage was constantly asserted by the church, and thus the mysteries upon which its foundations were laid were used by it for the degradation of woman, who was at all times depicted as a being of no self-individuality, but one who had been created solely for man's pleasure. As late as the seventeenth century, it was taught that a priest could commit no sin. This old doctrine took new strength from the Illumes,</p>
 <p><a name="page_92"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 92</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>who claimed an inner divine light.<a name="fr_83"></a><a href="#fn_83"><font size="1">83</font></a> We find reference to priestly immorality and claim of infallibility among old writers, Boccaccio in many of his stories putting arguments of this kind in the mouth of his priestly characters.<a name="fr_84"></a><a href="#fn_84"><font size="1">84</font></a></p>
 <p>    It was asserted too that sin was of the body alone, the soul knowing nothing, partaking nothing of it. As an argument in favor of woman's throwing herself entirely in the hands of Priests for immoral purposes, it was declared that, "The devout having offered up and <b>annihilated</b> their own selves exist no longer but in God; thenceforth they can do no wrong. The better part of them is so divine that it no longer knows what the other is doing."</p>
 <p>    In confirmation of this doctrine it was said that Jesus threw off his clothing and was scourged naked before the people. The result of this teaching was the almost universal immorality of christendom. Under such religious doctrine it could but be expected that the laity would closely imitate the priesthood. Europe became a continent of moral corruption, of which proof is overwhelming. Could we but relegate christian immorality to the dark ages we might somewhat palliate it under plea of ignorance. But unfortunately for such claim ample proof is found to show that the enlightenment of modern civilization has not yet been able to overthrow the basic idea upon which this immorality rests. Amid the material and intellectual advancement of the last hundred</p>
 <p><a name="page_93"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 93</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>years we find spiritual darkness still profound in the church and the true foundation of immorality almost unrecognized.</p>
 <p>    As long as the church maintains the doctrine that woman was created inferior to man, and brought sin into the world, rendering the sacrifice of the Son of a God a necessity, just so long will the foundation of vice and crime of every character remain. Not until the exact and permanent equality of woman with man is recognized by the church, aye, even more, the greater power and capacity of woman in the creative function, together with the accountability of man to woman in everything relating to the birth of a new being, is fully accepted as a law of nature, will vice and crime disappear from the world. Until that time has fully come, prostitution in its varied forms will continue to exist, together with alms-houses, reformatories, jails, prisons, hospitals and asylums for the punishment, reformation or care of the wretched beings who have come into existence with an inheritance of disease and crime because of church theory and church teaching.</p>
 <p>    The system of celibacy produced its same effects wherever preached. So constant was the system of debauchery practiced in England during the reign of Henry VII. that the gentlemen and farmers of Carnarvonshire laid complaint against the clergy of systematically seducing their wives and daughters.<a name="fr_85"></a><a href="#fn_85"><font size="1">85</font></a> Women were everywhere looked upon as slaves and toys, to obey, to furnish pleasure and amusement, and to be cast aside at will. Under the religious teaching of christendom it could not but be expected that the laity would closely imitate the priesthood, and to victimize</p>
 <p><a name="page_94"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 94</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>women became the custom of all men.<a name="fr_86"></a><a href="#fn_86"><font size="1">86</font></a> When a priest failed to take a concubine his <b>parishioners</b> compelled him to do so in order to preserve the chastity of their own wives and daughters. Draper<a name="fr_87"></a><a href="#fn_87"><font size="1">87</font></a> tells us that in England alone 100,000 women became victims of the priests. Houses of vile character were maintained for especial use of the priesthood. The marriage of a priest was called a deception of the devil who thus led him into an adulterous relation<a name="fr_88"></a><a href="#fn_88"><font size="1">88</font></a> for sake of alienating property from the church.</p>
 <p>    This mediæval doctrine that sin can only be killed through sin, finds expression to-day not alone in religion<a name="fr_89"></a><a href="#fn_89"><font size="1">89</font></a> but in society novels;<a name="fr_90"></a><a href="#fn_90"><font size="1">90</font></a> its origin, like many other religious wrongs, being directly traceable to the teaching of St. Paul.<a name="fr_91"></a><a href="#fn_91"><font size="1">91</font></a></p>
 <p>    The incontinence of these celibate priests ultimately became so great a source of scandal to the church</p>
 <p><a name="page_95"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 95</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>that it was obliged to take action. Edicts and bulls were fulminated from the papal chair, although the facts of history prove Rome itself, its popes and its cardinals, to have been sunk in the grossest immorality. Spain, the seat of the Inquisition, and at that period the very heart of Christendom, was the first country toward which investigation was turned, Pope Paul IV. issuing a bull against those confessors who solicited women, provoking them to dissolute action. When this bull of investigation first appeared in Spain, it was accompanied by an edict commanding all those who knew of monks or priests that had thus abused the confessional to make it known within thirty days under grievous penalty. The terrible power of the church intimidated those who otherwise for very shame would surely have buried the guilt of their priests in oblivion, and so great was the number of women who thronged the palace of the Inquisition in the city of Seville alone, that twenty secretaries with as many Inquisitors were not sufficient to take the deposition of the witnesses. A second, a third and a fourth thirty days were appointed for investigation, so great were the number of women making complaint.<a name="fr_92"></a><a href="#fn_92"><font size="1">92</font></a> So large a number of priests were implicated that after a four months' examination, the Holy Tribunal of the Inquisition put a stop to the proceedings, commanding that all those immoralities and crimes against womanhood only rendered possible in the name of religion, and which has been proven by legal evidence, should be buried I n eternal oblivion. The deposition of thousands of women seduced by their confessors, was not deemed sufficient evidence for removal of the guilty priests from their holy offices.</p>
 <p><a name="page_96"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 96</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>Occasionally a single priest was suspended for a short time but in a few months restored again to his priestly position.<a name="fr_93"></a><a href="#fn_93"><font size="1">93</font></a></p>
 <p>It was not uncommon for women to be openly carried off by priests, their husbands and fathers threatened with vengeance in cases of their attempted recovery.<a name="fr_94"></a><a href="#fn_94"><font size="1">94</font></a> During the height of the Inquisitorial power it was not rare for a family to be aroused in the night by an ominous knock and the cry "The Holy Fathers, open the door!"</p>
 <p>    To this dread mandate there could be but one reply, as both temporal and spiritual power lay in their hands. A husband, father or son might thus be seized by veiled figures; or as frequently a loved wife or young daughter was dragged from her bed, her fate ever to remain a mystery. When young and beautiful these women were taken to replenish the Inquisitional harem; the "dry pan," "boiling in oil," and similar methods of torture, threatened, in order to produce compliance upon part of wretched victims. No Turkish seraglio with bow-string and sack ever exhibited as great an amount of diabolical wickedness as the prison-harems of the Inquisition. As late as the seventeenth century Pope Gregory XV. commanded strict enforcement of the bull against priestly lechery not alone in Spain, but in all other parts of the Christian world. In England after the reformation, the</p>
 <p><a name="page_97"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 97</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>same condition was found to exist.<a name="fr_95"></a><a href="#fn_95"><font size="1">95</font></a> But edicts against lasciviousness were vainly issued by a church whose foundation is a belief in the supremacy of one sex over the other, and that woman brought sin into the world through having seduced man into the marriage relation. Despite the advance of knowledge and civilization the effects of such teachings are the same now as during the middle ages, as fully proven at time of separation between the temporal and spiritual power in Italy;<a name="fr_96"></a><a href="#fn_96"><font size="1">96</font></a> and these proofs are taken from Catholic sources. In 1849 when the Roman people opened the palace of the Inquisition there was found in the library a department entitled "Summary of Solicitations," being a record of cases in which women had been solicited to acts of criminality by their confessors in the pontifical state.<a name="fr_97"></a><a href="#fn_97"><font size="1">97</font></a> The testimony of Luther as to the moral degradation of the church at time of the Reformation has never been invalidated,<a name="fr_98"></a><a href="#fn_98"><font size="1">98</font></a> and is entirely in accord with its character throughout history.</p>
 <p><a name="page_98"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 98</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>    That the same iniquities are connected with the confessional to day, we learn from the testimony of those priests who have withdrawn from the communion of the Catholic Church; Father Hyacinthe publicly declaring that ninety-nine out of one hundred priests live in sin with the women they have destroyed. Another priest following the example of Father Hyacinthe in marrying, asserted that he took this step in order to get out of the ultramontane slough and remain an honest man.<a name="fr_99"></a><a href="#fn_99"><font size="1">99</font></a> That the Catholic Church of the present day bears the same general character it did during the middle ages is proven from much testimony. Among the latest and most important witnesses, for minuteness and fullness of detail, is Rev. Charles Chiniquy in his works "The Priest, The Woman and the Confessional;" "Fifty Years of Rome," etc. Now over eighty years of age, Rev. Mr. Chiniquy was for more than fifty years a Catholic priest of influence and high reputation, known in Canada, where thousands of drunkards reformed under his teaching, as the "Apostle of Temperance." Becoming convinced of the immorality of the Romish Church, he left it in 1856, taking with him five thousand French Canadians, with whom he settled at St. Anne, Kankakee County, Illinois. Having united with a branch of the Protestant church, he was invited to Scotland to take part in the Tercentenary of the Reformation, and later to England, where he lectured on invitation of ministers of every evangelical denomination. <a name="fr_100"></a><a href="#fn_100"><font size="1">100</font></a> His "Fifty Years</p>
 <p><a name="page_99"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 99</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>of Rome" indissolubly links his name with that of Abraham Lincoln, through the information there made known regarding the Catholic plot for President Lincoln's assassination.</p>
 <p>    It is as fully a law of moral as of material nature that from the same causes the same effects follow. In his work upon the confessional<a name="fr_101"></a><a href="#fn_101"><font size="1">101</font></a> Rev. Mr. Chiniquy relates incidents coming under his own personal knowledge while he was still a Catholic priest regarding its present abuses. The character of the questions made a duty of the priest to ask during confession, are debasing in the extreme, their whole tendency towards the undermining of morality. Too broadly indelicate for translation these priestly instructions are hidden in Latin, but are no less made the duty of a priest to understand and use. In 1877, a number of prominent women of Montreal, Canada, addressed a declaration and protest to the bishop of that diocese against the abuses of the confessional of which their own experience had made them cognizant.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">    DECLARATION</p>
 <p align="CENTER">    TO HIS LORDSHIP BOURGET, BISHOP OF MONTREAL</p>
 <i></i><p>    Sir:--Since God in his infinite mercy has been pleased to show us the errors of Rome, and has given us strength to abandon them to follow Christ, we deem it our duty to say a word on the abominations of the confessional. You well know that these abominations are of such a nature that it is impossible for a woman to speak of them without a blush. How is it that among civilized Christian men one has so far forgotten the rule of common decency as to force women to reveal to unmarried men, under the pains of eternal damnation, their most secret thoughts, their most sinful desires and their most private actions?</p>
 <p><a name="page_100"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 100</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>    How unless there be a brazen mask on your priest's face dare they go out into the world having heard the tales of misery which cannot but defile the hearing, and which the women cannot relate without having laid aside modesty and all sense of shame. The harm would not be so great should the Church allow no one but the woman to accuse herself. But what shall we say of the abominable questions that are put to them and which they must answer?</p>
 <p>    Here, the laws of common decency strictly forbid us to enter into details. Suffice it to say, were husbands cognizant of one-tenth of what is going on between the confessor and their wives, they would rather see them dead than degraded to such a degree.</p>
 <p>    As for us, daughters and wives from Montreal who have known by experience the filth of the confessional, we cannot sufficiently bless God for having shown us the error of our ways in teaching us that it was not at the feet of a man as weak and as sinful as ourselves, but at the feet of Christ alone that we must seek salvation, Julia Herbert, Marie Rogers, J. Rocham, Louise Picard, Francoise Dirringer, Eugenie Martin, and forty-three others.<a name="fr_102"></a><a href="#fn_102"><font size="1">102</font></a></p>
 <p>    In reply to a letter of inquiry addressed by myself to Rev. Mr. Chiniquy, the following answer was received.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">    "St. Anne, Kankakee County, Illinois.        </p>
 <p align="RIGHT">    January 4., 1887.</p>
 <p>    "MRS. MATILDA JOSLYN GAGE,</p>
 <p align="CENTER">    MADAM;--</p>
 <p>    "In answer to your honored letter of the 29th Dec. I hasten to say: <i>First</i>. The women of Montreal signed the declaration you see in 'The Priest, the Woman and the Confessional,' in the fall of 1877. I do not remember the day. <i>Second</i>. As it is ten years since I left Montreal to come to my Missionary field of Illinois, I could not say if these women are still in Montreal or not. Great, supreme efforts were secretly made by the Bishop of Montreal to show that these</p>
 <p><a name="page_101"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 101</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>names were forged in order to answer and confound me, but the poor Bishop found that the document was too correct, authentic and public to be answered and attacked, and he remained mute and confounded, for many of these woman were well known in the city.</p>
 <p>    "<i>Third</i>. You will find the answer to your other questions, in the volume 'Fifty Years in the Church of Rome,' which I addressed you by to-day's mail.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">    "Respectfully yours in Christ,        </p>
 <p align="RIGHT">    "C. Chiniquy."</p>
 <p>    The same assertion of priestly infallibility is made to-day as it was centuries ago, the same declaration of change of nature through priestly celibacy. Upon this question Mr. Chiniquy says:</p>
 <p>    If any one wants to hear an eloquent oration let him go where the Roman Catholic priest is preaching on the divine institution of auricular confession. They make the people believe that the vow of perpetual chastity changes their nature, turns them into angels and puts them above the common faults of the fallen children of Adam. With a brazen face when they are interrogated on that subject, they say that they have special graces to remain pure and undefiled in the midst of the greatest dangers; that the Virgin Mary to whom they are consecrated is their powerful advocate to obtain from her son that superhuman virtue of Chastity; that what would be a cause of sin and perdition to common men is without peril and danger for a true son of Mary.<a name="fr_103"></a><a href="#fn_103"><font size="1">103</font></a></p>
 <p>    A work entitled "Mysteries of the Neapolitan Convents," its author Henrietta Carracciola, a woman of the purest blood of the princes of Italy, daughter of the Marshal Carracciola, Governor of the Province of Pasi in Italy, is quoted from, by Rev. Mr. Chiniquy, in confirmation of his statements as to the continued Impurity of the confessional.</p>
 <p>    Finally another priest, the most annoying of all for his obstinate assiduity, sought to secure my affections</p>
 <p><a name="page_102"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 102</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>at all cost. There was not an image profane poetry could afford him, nor a sophism he could borrow from rhetoric, no wily interpretation he could give to the word of God, which he did not employ to convert me to his wishes. Here is an example of his logic:--</p>
 <p>    "Dear daughter," said he to me one day, "knowest thou who thy God truly is?"</p>
 <p>    "He is the Creator of the Universe," I answered dryly.</p>
 <p>    "No-no-no-no! that is not enough" he replied laughing at my ignorance; "God is Love, but love in the abstract which receives its incarnation in the mutual affection of two hearts which idolize each other. You must then not only love God in the abstract existence, but must also love him in his incarnation, that is, in the exclusive love of a man who adores you. <i>Quod Deus est amor nec colitus nisi amando</i>."</p>
 <p>    "Then," I replied, "a woman who adores her own lover would adore Divinity itself?" "Assuredly," reiterated the priest over and over again, taking courage from my remark and chuckling with what seemed to him the effect of his catechism.</p>
 <p>    "In that case," said I hastily, "I should select for my lover rather a man of the world than a priest."</p>
 <p>    "God preserve you, my daughter! God preserve you from that sin. To love a man of the world, a sinner, a wretch, an unbeliever, an infidel! Why, you would go immediately to hell. The love of a priest is a sacred love, while that of a profane man is infamy. The priest purifies his affections daily in communion with the Holy Spirit . . . If you cannot love me because I am your confessor, I will find means to assist you to get rid of your scruples. We will place the name of Jesus Christ before all our affectionate demonstrations and thus our love will be a grateful offering to the Lord and will ascend fragrant with perfume to Heaven like the smoke of the incense of the Sanctuary. Say to me for example 'I love you in Jesus Christ, last night I dreamed of you in Jesus Christ; and you will, have tranquil conscience, because in doing</p>
 <p><a name="page_103"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 103</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>this God will sanctify every transport of your love." Rev. Mr. Chiniquy who in his fifty years of Romish priesthood possessed every opportunity for knowing the truth, does not hesitate to affirm that the popes are today of the same general immoral character they were in the earlier centuries of the Church. He says:</p>
 <p>    Let not my readers be deceived by the idea that the popes of Rome in our days are much better than those of the ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries. They are absolutely the same--the only difference is that to-day they take a little more care to conceal their secret orgies. Go to Italy and there the Roman Catholics themselves will show you the two beautiful daughters whom the late Pope Plus IX. had from two of his mistresses. Inquire from those who have personally known Pope Gregory XVI. the predecessor of after they will have given you the history Plus IX, of his mistresses, one of whom was the wife of his barber, they will tell you that be was one of the greatest drunkards in Italy.<a name="fr_104"></a><a href="#fn_104"><font size="1">104</font></a></p>
 <p>    The views of the Catholic Church in regard to marriage of the priesthood was recently demonstrated in the United States, 1885, by the persecution of a priest of the Uniate Greek Church sent as a missionary from Austria to Pennsylvania. The Greek Church, it must be remembered, permits a single marriage to a priest. The Uniate while in this respect following the discipline of the Greek Church, yet admits the supremacy of the Pope which the regular Greek Church does not. The Uniate Greek Church accepts, as binding, all the decisions of Rome subsequent to the division between the eastern and the western parts of Christendom. Endowed with authority from both branches, Father Wolonski came to this country accompanied by his wife, in full expectation of fellowship With his Catholic brethren. His first contrary experience occurred in Philadelphia when Archbishop Ryan</p>
 <p><a name="page_104"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 104</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>of the Cathedral refused all intercourse with him because of his marriage. Reaching Shenandoah where commissioned by his own Austrian Bishop, he discovered himself still under ban; the resident priest of the Catholic church having warned his congregation under pain of excommunication to shun both himself and his church, upon the ground that the Roman Church under no circumstances tolerated a married priest. Eventually the subject grew to such proportions that Father Wolonski was recalled, and an unmarried priest sent in his stead.<a name="fr_105"></a><a href="#fn_105"><font size="1">105</font></a></p>
 <p><a name="page_105"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 105</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>    From the experience of Father Wolonski less than a decade since, with the bitter hostility shown by the church towards Father Hyacinthe, we find that a belief in the special holiness of celibacy is as dominant in the Catholic church to-day as at any period of its history; concurrent testimony teaching us that its greatest evils remain the same as of old. It is less than twenty years since the whole Christian world was interested in a suit brought against the heirs of the deceased Cardinal Antonelli in order to secure recognition of his daughter's claim to inheritance. This girl was everywhere spoken of by the Catholic Church as "a sacrilegious child," that is, a being who had violated sacred things by coming into existence. The destruction of her mother's life, her own illegitimacy, the wrong done to her mother's family and to society were held as of no moment beside the fact that her claims, if allowed, would take property from the church. The love of the Great Cardinal for this girl's mother was fully proven, but the church having established celibacy in order that it might control the property of its priests, was not inclined to permit any portion to be diverted from that source. Honesty, justice, and the ties of natural affection, now as of yore are not part of the Church system. In consequence, this suit of the illegitimate child of the Great Cardinal Secretary, filled not alone Italy, but the whole Catholic world with disgrace.</p>
 <p>    Among the countries now striving to free themselves from Church dominion is Mexico. A letter to the New York Herald, winter of 1892, regarding the revolution there in progress, said of Diaz:</p>
 <p>    Instead of his being assisted by the Church it has been his bitterest and most relentless enemy and </p>
 <p><a name="page_106"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 106</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>opponent. The Church in Mexico is opposed to all enlightenment of the people. The clergy, if they can be honored with that name, fight all improvements. They want no railways or telegraphs and when he adopted a system of compulsory education the war began in earnest. Diaz was determined, however, and he retaliated by closing up the convents and prohibiting the establishment of monasteries. Being further opposed in his efforts at reform and defied by the priests he put hundreds of them in Pueblo in jail and prohibited the ringing of Church bells in certain localities. He forcibly impressed on them the fact that he was running Mexico, not they. He gave them to understand that his ideas of Christianity was, that priests should preach Christ crucified and not revolution and infraction of the laws.</p>
 <p>    In Mexico, priests can keep mistresses with impunity. From a church to a gambling-table is but a step, and the priests gamble with the rest. The rentals of houses of ill-fame, of gambling-houses, of bullpens all go to a church which is supposed to teach religion. Because Diaz, a catholic himself, will not tolerate such crimes under the guise of religion he is fought by the church and is the recipient of their anathemas.</p>
 <p>    Take the leading church in Monterey outside of the cathedral. You step from the church-door to a plaza owned by the church and in which stand fifty tents in which are conducted monte, roulette and other games of chance. Behind this stand the bull-pens and the profits and rentals go to the Church.</p>
 <p>    With all these lights the most plausible inference or theory is that the clerical party, as they see all these privileges being swept away, will cheerfully contribute the sinews of war with which to carry on a revolution against Diaz. They have agents in Europe and the money can come through that source without detection.</p>
 <p>    The agent of the Clerical Party in Europe is the Church itself. As a body, it has ever opposed advancement</p>
 <p><a name="page_107"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 107</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>and reform. It anathematized the printing press as an invention of the devil and has steadily opposed education of the people. its work is best done in the darkness of ignorance and superstition. For this cause it has opposed all new discoveries in science, all reforms of whatever character.<a name="fr_106"></a><a href="#fn_106"><font size="1">106</font></a> Not by the Catholic Church alone, but under the "Reformation," as we have seen, the same prohibition of the Bible to common people, has existed the same resistance to education of the masses, the same opposition to antislavery, to temperance, to woman's demand for equality of opportunity with man. The general nature of the church does not change with change of name. Looking backward through history we even find the same characteristics under the patriarchate; love of power, greed for money, and intense selfishness combined in a general disregard for the rights of others.</p>
 <p>    M. Renan's drama, "L'Abbesse de Jouarre," was written because he wished to prove the worthlessness of those vows imposed on catholic priests and nuns, as well as show the bondage under which they held the feminine conscience, while the masculine conscience throws them aside. It is not alone the nuns whose conscience is bound, but all feminine members of the catholic church are more closely held in a spiritual bondage, than the male members of that church. In 1885, a letter from Chili to the "New York Sun" graphically pictured certain Chilian women penitents who are known by a peculiar dress they are required</p>
 <p><a name="page_107"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 107</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>to wear.<a name="fr_107"></a><a href="#fn_107"><font size="1">107</font></a> Others whose sins are so great that they cannot be purged by a penitential dress, retire for a season to the "Convent of Penitents," where by mortification of the body they hope to gain absolution for the soul. Still more severe than this retreat are other convents known as "Houses of Detention," where wayward</p>
 <p><a name="page_109"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 109</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>daughters are sent, and young mothers without husbands are cared for. But the whole country of Chili fails to show a similar dress, or house of penitence, or correction for men. Shame and penance, equally with sin, have been relegated by the church to women alone.</p>
 <p>    The confessional is not frequented by men, and mass is but seldom attended by them. For this laxity a double reason exists: First, immorality in men is not looked upon as contrary to its discipline. Second, through woman having been trained to a more sensitive conscience than man, the confessional wrests secrets from her lips, which gives the church knowledge of all it wishes to learn in regard to the family. No more certain system could have been devised for the destruction of woman's self-respect than the one requiring penance from her for sins the church passes lightly over in man. Nor would penance of this character be demanded from women were the offices of the church open to her the same as to man. No greater crime against humanity has ever been known than the division of. morality into two codes, the strict for woman, the lax for man. Nor has woman been the sole sufferer from this creation of Two Moral Codes within the Christian Church. Through it man has lost fine discrimination between good and evil, and the Church itself as the originator of this distinction in sin upon the trend of sex, has become the creator and sustainer of injustice, falsehood and the crimes into which its priests have most deeply sunk. Nor is this condition of the past. As late as the fall of 1892 a number of articles appeared in Canadian papers openly accusing the catholic priesthood of that province of the</p>
 <p><a name="page_110"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 110</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>grossest immorality.<a name="fr_108"></a><a href="#fn_108"><font size="1">108</font></a> That priestly celibacy yet continues in the Romish Church is not a subject of surprise, when we realize the immense power and wealth it has been enabled to secure through its means; but it is one of astonishment, carrying with it a premonition of danger, that we now see a similar tendency in the ritualistic portion of the Episcopal Church, both in England and the United States. The evils of monasticism, although less potent than during the middle ages, are still great, and in finding entrance into Protestant denominations are a fresh warning of their dangerous tendency. The experience of the past should not appeal to us in vain. We have noticed the perils to society arising from those classes of persons who, under plea of religion, evade the duties of family and social life. No crime against the world can be greater than the deliberate divestment of responsibility by one's self, because tired of the warfare of life, that struggle which comes to every human being; the becoming "fascinated with the conceptions of an existence" outside of ordinary cares; and the entrance</p>
 <p><a name="page_111"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 111</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>into an order in which one's own personal responsibility is largely surrendered to others is not alone a crime against the state, but a sin against one)s own self and against humanity. An order which thereafter assumes the task of directing the thoughts and lives of its members into a channel of "repose and contentment" as certain protestant orders do, is one of the dangerous religious elements of the present day. No crime against one's self or against society can be greater than this. In the Ritualistic Episcopal Church are to be found monks and sisterhoods upon the celibate plan, confessors and penance, all of them primal elements in moral and spiritual degradation. If religion has a lesson to teach mankind, it is that of personal responsibility; it is that of the worth and duty of the individual; it is that each human being is alone accountable for his or her course in life; it is the lesson of the absolute equality of each human being with every other human being in relation to these cardinal points. The lesson should have been learned ere this, that ecclesiastical pretense of divinely appointed power has ever made the priesthood arrogant, coarse and tyrannical; the male laity dependent and dissimulating; woman, self-distrustful and timorous, believing in the duty of humiliation and self-sacrifice; that her life is not to be lived primarily for herself alone, but that. her very right to existence is dependent upon the benefit thereby to accrue to some other person. To-day, as of old, the underlying idea of monasticism, of "brotherhoods," "sisterhoods," and their ilk even in Protestant denominations, is the divine authority of some priestly superior, and that the power of remitting sins inheres in some system under control of some priest. The Ritualistic party</p>
 <p><a name="page_112"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 112</font></a>
 </p>
 <p>of the Episcopal Church, equally with the Roman Catholic Church, makes frequent reference to these words of Christ--St. John XX, XXIII--"Whatever sins you remit they are remitted unto them, and whatsoever sins you retain are retained," thus premising the divine power of the priesthood.</p>
 <p></p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="wcs05.htm">Next: Chapter III. Canon Law.</a></center>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <a name="fn_page_49"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 49</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_1"></a><a href="#fr_1">1.</a>  It was a favorite doctrine of the Christian fathers that concupiscence or the sensual passion was the original sin of human nature. Lecky.--<i>Hist. European Morals</i>.</p>
 <p>The tendency of the church towards the enforcement of celibacy was early seen. At the four Synods which assembled to establish the true faith in respect to the Holy nature of Christ's Humanity, the first one at Nice, 318, the second at Constantinople with forty bishops present; the third at Ephesus with two hundred bishops present; the fourth at Chaledonia with many bishops together, they forever forbade all marriage to the minister at the altar. <i>Monumenta Ecclesiastica</i>.</p>
 <p>P. 347. To no minister at the altar is it allowed to marry, but it is forbidden to every one. <i>Ibid</i>.</p><p><a name="fn_2"></a><a href="#fr_2">2.</a>  According to Christianity woman is the unclean one, the seducer who brought sin into the world and caused the fall of man. Consequently all apostles and fathers of the church have regarded marriage as an inevitable evil just as prostitution is regarded to-day. August Bebel.--<i>Woman in the Past, Present and Future</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_50"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 50</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_3"></a><a href="#fr_3">3.</a>  Spirit in the Hebrew, as shown in the first chapter, answers to all genders; in the Greek to the feminine alone. With Kabbalists the "Divine Spirit" was conceded to be the feminine Jehovah, that is, the feminine principle of the Godhead.</p><a name="fn_page_51"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 51</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_4"></a><a href="#fr_4">4.</a>  From Marcellina, in the second century, a body of the church took its name. Her life was pure, and her memory has descended to us free from calumny and reproach.</p><p><a name="fn_5"></a><a href="#fr_5">5.</a>  Lowest in the scale of being are those invisible creatures called by Kabbalists the "elementary." * * The second class is composed of the invisible antitypes of the men to be born. <i>Isis Unveiled</i>, I, 310.</p><p><a name="fn_6"></a><a href="#fr_6">6.</a>  Who maintained that Adam did not think of celebrating his nuptials till he went out of Paradise.</p><a name="fn_page_52"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 52</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_7"></a><a href="#fr_7">7.</a>  It was the effect of God's goodness to man that suffered him to sleep when Eve was formed, as Adam being endowed with a spirit of prophecy might foresee the evils which the production of Eve would cause to all mankind, so that God perhaps cast him into that sleep lest he should oppose the creation of his wife. <i>Life of Adam by Loredano</i>. Pub. at Amsterdam, 1696. See Bayle.</p><p><a name="fn_8"></a><a href="#fr_8">8.</a>  Lecky.--<i>Hist European Morals</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_53"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 53</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_9"></a><a href="#fr_9">9.</a>  That marriage was evil was taught by Jerome.</p><p><a name="fn_10"></a><a href="#fr_10">10.</a>  So fully retaining it as to require the circumcision of Timothy, the Gentile, before sending him as a missionary to the Jews.</p><a name="fn_page_54"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 54</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_11"></a><a href="#fr_11">11.</a>  The council of Tours (813) recommended bishops to read, and if possible retain by heart, the epistles of St. Paul.</p><a name="fn_page_55"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 55</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_12"></a><a href="#fr_12">12.</a>  Although Paul "led about" other "women" saluting "some with a holy kiss."</p><p><a name="fn_13"></a><a href="#fr_13">13.</a>  964. Notion of uncleanliness attaching to sexual relations fostered by the church. Herbert Spencer.--<i>Descriptive Sociology, England</i>.</p><p><a name="fn_14"></a><a href="#fr_14">14.</a>  In the third century marriage was permitted to all orders and ranks of the clergy. Those, however, who continued in a state of celibacy, obtained by this abstinence a higher reputation of sanctity and virtue than others. This was owing to an almost general persuasion that they who took wives were of all others the most subject to the influence of malignant demons.--<i>Mosheim</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_56"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 56</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_15"></a><a href="#fr_15">15.</a>  Old (Christian) theologians for a long time disputed upon the nature of females; a numerous party classed them among the brutes having neither soul nor reason. They called a council to arrest the progress of this heresy. it was contended that the women of Peru and other countries of America were without soul and reason. The first Christians made a distinction between men and women. Catholics would not permit them to sing in Church. <i>Dictionaire Féodal</i>, Paris, 1819.</p><a name="fn_page_57"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 57</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_16"></a><a href="#fr_16">16.</a>  By a decree of the Council of Auxerre (A. D. 578), women on account of their impurity were forbidden to receive the sacrament into their naked hands.</p><p><a name="fn_17"></a><a href="#fr_17">17.</a>  Catherine reproached the Protestants with this impious license as with a great crime. "Les femmes chantant aux <i>orgies</i> des huguenots, dit Georges l'apotre; apprenez donc, prédicans, que saint Paul a dit; <i>Mulieres in</i> ecclesiaétaccant; et que dans le chapitre de l'apocolypse l'evoque de Thyathire est menacé de la damnation pour avoir permis á une femme de parles a l'église. See <i>Redavances Seigneur</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_58"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 58</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_18"></a><a href="#fr_18">18.</a>  When part singing was first introduced into the United States, great objection was made to women taking the soprano or leading part, which by virtue of his superiority it was declared belonged to man. Therefore woman was relegated to the bass or tenor but nature proved too powerful, and man was eventually compelled to take bass or tenor as his part, while woman carried the soprano, says the <i>History of Music</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_59"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 59</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_19"></a><a href="#fr_19">19.</a>  <i>Leviticus 12:15</i>.</p>
 <p>Dr. Smith characterizes a sin-offering as a sacrifice made with the idea of propitiation and atonement; its central idea, that of expiation, representing a broken covenant between God and the offender; that while death was deserved, the substitute was accepted in lieu of the criminal,--Dictionary of the Bible.</p><p><a name="fn_20"></a><a href="#fr_20">20.</a>  <i>The Talmud</i> (Mishna), declared three cleansings were necessary for leprosy and three for children, thus placing the bringing of an immortal being into life upon the same plane of defilement with the most hideous plague of antiquity.</p><p><a name="fn_21"></a><a href="#fr_21">21.</a>  The mean term of life for these wretched girls under religious confinement in a nunnery was about ten years. From the fifteenth century a sickness was common, known as Disease of the Cloisters. It was described by Carmen.</p>
 <p>Jewish contempt of the feminine was not alone exhibited in prohibiting her entrance into the holy places of the temple, and in the ceremonies of her purification, but also in the especial holiness of male animals which alone were used for sacrifice. Under Jewish law the sons alone inherited, the elder receiving a double portion as the beginning of his father's strength. See Deut 21-15. If perchance the mother also possessed an inheritance that was also divided among the sons to the exclusion of daughters. The modern English law of primogeniture is traceable to Judaism.</p>
 <p>Even the commandments were made subservient to masculine ideas, the tenth classing a man's wife with his cattle and slaves, while the penalties of the seventh were usually visited upon her alone.</p><a name="fn_page_60"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 60</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_22"></a><a href="#fr_22">22.</a>  The reign of Constantine marks the epoch of the transformation of Christianity from a religious into a political system. Draper.--<i>Conflict of Religion and Science</i>.</p><p><a name="fn_23"></a><a href="#fr_23">23.</a>  "The woman that cometh to give thanks must offer accustomed offering in this kingdom; it is the law of the kingdom in such cases."</p><a name="fn_page_61"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 61</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_24"></a><a href="#fr_24">24.</a>  In the year 1867 the Right Rev. Bishop Coxe, of the Western Diocese of New York, refused the sacrament to those women patients of Dr. Foster's Sanitarium at Clifton Springs, N. Y., whose heads were uncovered, although the rite was performed in the domestic chapel of that institution and under the same roof as the patient's own rooms.</p>
 <p>During the famous See trial at Newark. N. J., 1876, the prosecutor, Rev, Dr. Craven, declared that every woman before him wore her head covered in token of her subordination.</p><p><a name="fn_25"></a><a href="#fr_25">25.</a>  The Catholic Congress of July, x892, telegraphing the pope it would strive to obtain for the Holy See the recovery of its inalienable prerogative and territorial independence, was convened at Fulda.</p><a name="fn_page_62"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 62</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_26"></a><a href="#fr_26">26.</a>  "In the old days, no woman was allowed to put her foot within the walls of the monastery at San Augustin, Mexico. A noble lady of Spain, wife of the reigning Viceroy, was bent on visiting it. Nothing could stop her, and in she came. But she found only empty cloisters, for each virtuous monk locked himself securely in his cell, and afterward every stone in the floor which her sacrilegious feet had touched was carefully replaced by a new one fresh from the mountain top. Times are sadly changed. The house has now been turned into a hotel."</p><p><a name="fn_27"></a><a href="#fr_27">27.</a>  <i>Sacerdotal Celibacy</i>.--Lea.</p><p><a name="fn_28"></a><a href="#fr_28">28.</a>  <i>Studies in Church History</i>.--Lea.</p><a name="fn_page_64"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 64</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_29"></a><a href="#fr_29">29.</a>  <i>History of Materialism</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_65"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 65</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_30"></a><a href="#fr_30">30.</a>  Seals upon legal papers owe their origin to the custom of the uneducated noble warrior stamping the imprint of his clenched or mailed hand upon wax as his signature.</p><a name="fn_page_66"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 66</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_31"></a><a href="#fr_31">31.</a>  <i>St. Theresa</i> founded the Barefoot Carmelites, and it is but a few years since thousands of its members assembled to do honor to her name.</p><p><a name="fn_32"></a><a href="#fr_32">32.</a>  The annals of the Church of Rome give us the history of that celebrated prostitute Marozia of the tenth century, who lived in public concubinage with Pope Sergius III., whom she had raised to the papal throne. Afterwards she and her sister Theodosia placed another of their lovers, under name of Anastatius III, and after him John X., in the same position. Still later this same powerful Marozia placed the tiara upon the head of her son by Pope Sergius under name of John XI., and this before he was sixteen years of age. The celebrated Countess Matilda exerted no less power over popedom, while within this century the maid of Kent has issued orders to the pope himself.</p><a name="fn_page_67"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 67</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_33"></a><a href="#fr_33">33.</a>  The first abbess, PetrouvilIe, becoming involved in a dispute with the Powerful bishop of Angers, summoned him before the council of Chateraroux and Poicters, where she pleaded the cause of her order and won her case. In 1349 the abbess Théophegénie denied the right of the seneschal of Poiton to judge the monks of Fontervault, and gained it for herself. In 1500, Mary of Brittany, in concert with the pope's deputies, drew up with an unfaltering hand the new statutes of the order. Legouvè.--<i>Moral History of Women</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_68"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 68</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_34"></a><a href="#fr_34">34.</a>  No community was richer or more influential, yet during six hundred years and under thirty-two abbesses, every one of its privileges were attacked by masculine pride or violence, and every one maintained by the vigor of the women.--<i>Sketches of Fontervault</i>.</p><p><a name="fn_35"></a><a href="#fr_35">35.</a>  What is more remarkable the monks of this convent were under control of the abbess and nuns, receiving their food as alms.--<i>Ibid</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_70"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 70</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_36"></a><a href="#fr_36">36.</a>  "The Lord's Prayer," taught his disciples by Jesus, recognizes the loss, and demands restoration of the feminine in "Hallowed (whole) be Thy Name."</p><p><a name="fn_37"></a><a href="#fr_37">37.</a>  Woman should always be clothed in mourning and rags, that the eye may perceive in her only a penitent, drowned in tears, and so doing for the sin of having ruined the whole human race. Woman is the gateway of satan, who broke the seal of the forbidden tree and who first violated the divine law.</p><p><a name="fn_38"></a><a href="#fr_38">38.</a>  Gildas, in the first half of the sixth century, declared the clergy were utterly corrupt. Lea.--<i>Studies in Church History</i>.</p><p><a name="fn_39"></a><a href="#fr_39">39.</a>  In the third century marriage was permitted to all ranks and orders of the clergy. Those, however, who continued in a slate of celibacy, obtained by this abstinence a higher reputation of sanctity and virtue than others. This was owing to the almost general persuasion that they who took wives were of all others the most subject to the influence of malignant demons.--<i>Mosheim</i>.</p>
 <p>As early as the third century, says <i>Bayle</i>, were several maidens who resolved never to marry.</p><a name="fn_page_71"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 71</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_40"></a><a href="#fr_40">40.</a>  The priests of the Greek Church are still forbidden a second marriage. In the beginning of the reign of Edward I, when men in orders were prohibited from marriage in England, a statute was framed under which lay felons were deprived of the clergy in case they had committed bigamy in addition to their other offenses; bigamy in the clerical sense meaning marriage with a widow or with two maidens in succession.</p><p><a name="fn_41"></a><a href="#fr_41">41.</a>  Pelagius II., sixty-fifth pope in censuring those priests, who after the death of their wives have become fathers by their servants, recommended that the culpable females should be immured in convents to perform perpetual penance for the fault of the priest. Cormenin.--<i>History of the Popes</i>, p. 84.</p><p><a name="fn_42"></a><a href="#fr_42">42.</a>  A priest's wife is nothing but a snare of the devil, and he who is ensnared thereby on to his end will be seized fast by the devil, and he must afterwards Pass into the hands of fiends and totally perish.-Institutes of Polity, Civil and Ecclesiastical, pp. 438-42. Canons of Ælfric and Ælfric's Pastoral Epistles. p. 458.</p><p><a name="fn_43"></a><a href="#fr_43">43.</a>  <i>Monumenta Ecclesiastica. Institutes of Polity, Civil and Ecclesiastical</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_72"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 72</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_44"></a><a href="#fr_44">44.</a>  In order to understand the morals of the clergy of this period, it is important that we should make mention of a law which was passed by the emperors Valentinian, Valerius and Gratian toward the end of the year 370. It prohibited ecclesiastics and monks from entering the houses of widows and single women living alone or who had lost their parents. Dr. Cormenin.--<i>History of the Popes</i>, p. 62.</p><p><a name="fn_45"></a><a href="#fr_45">45.</a>  <i>Lecky</i> finds evidence of the most hideous immorality in these restrictions, which forbade the presence even of a mother or sister in a priest's house.</p>
 <i></i><p>Lea says it is somewhat significant that when in France the rule of celibacy was completely enforced churchmen should find it necessary to revive the hideously suggestive restriction which denied the priest the society of his mother and sister.--<i>Sacerdotal Celibacy</i>, p. 344.</p><a name="fn_page_73"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 73</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_46"></a><a href="#fr_46">46.</a>  He declared it to be the highest degree of wickedness to rise from a woman's side to make the body of Christ. He was discovered the same night with a woman to the great indignation of the people, and obliged to flee the country to escape condign punishment.</p><p><a name="fn_47"></a><a href="#fr_47">47.</a>  It is not difficult to conceive the order of ideas that produced that passionate error of the fair sex which is such a striking characteristic of old Catholic theology. Celibacy was universally conceded as tire highest form of virtue, and in order to make it acceptable theologians exhausted all the resources of their eloquence in describing the iniquity of those whose charms had rendered it so rare. Hence the long and fiery disquisitions on the unparalleled malignity, the inconceivable subtlety, the frivolity, the unfaithfulness, the unconquerable evil propensities of woman. Lecky.--<i>Hist. European Morals</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_74"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 74</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_48"></a><a href="#fr_48">48.</a>  The Fathers of the Church for the most part, vie with each other in their depreciation of woman and denouncing her with every vile epithet, held it a degradation for a saint to touch even his aged mother with his hand in order to sustain her feeble steps. * * * For it declared woman unworthy through inherent impurity even to set foot within the sanctuaries of its temples; suffered her to exercise the function of wife and mother only under the spell of a triple exorcism, and denied her when dead burial within its more sacred precincts even though she was an abbess of undoubted sanctity. Anna Kingsford.--<i>The Perfect Way</i>, p . 286.</p><p><a name="fn_49"></a><a href="#fr_49">49.</a>  <i>Disease of the Cloisters</i>.</p><p><a name="fn_50"></a><a href="#fr_50">50.</a>  When the sailors of Columbus returned from the new world they brought with them a disease of an unknown character, which speedily found its way into every part of Europe. None were exempt; the king on his throne, the beggar in his hovel, noble and peasant, priest and layman alike succumbed to the dire influence which made Christendom one vast charnel house.</p>
 <p>Of it, <i>Montesquieu</i> said: "It is now two centuries since a disease unknown to our ancestors was first transplanted from the new world to ours, and came to attack human nature in the very source of life and pleasure. Most of the powerful families of the South of Europe were seen to perish by a distemper that was grown too common to be ignominious, and was considered in no other light than that of being fatal. <i>Works</i>, I, 265.</p><a name="fn_page_75"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 75</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_51"></a><a href="#fr_51">51.</a>  St. Ambrose and others believed not that they (women) were human creatures like other people. Luther.--<i>Familiar Discourses</i>, p. 383.</p><p><a name="fn_52"></a><a href="#fr_52">52.</a>  When a woman is born it is a deficit of nature and contrary to her intentions, as is the case when a person is born blind or lame or with any natural defect, and as we frequently see happens in fruit trees which never ripen. In like manner a woman may be called a fortuitous animal and produced by accident.</p><p><a name="fn_53"></a><a href="#fr_53">53.</a>  Cajetan, living from 1496 to 1534, became General of the Dominican Order and <b>afterwards</b> Cardinal.</p><p><a name="fn_54"></a><a href="#fr_54">54.</a>  "The Father alone is creator."</p><p><a name="fn_55"></a><a href="#fr_55">55.</a>  By decree of the Council of Lyons, 1042, barons were allowed to enslave the children of married clergy.--<i>Younge</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_76"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 76</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_56"></a><a href="#fr_56">56.</a>  In 1108 priests were again ordered to put away their wives. Such as kept them and presumptuously celebrated mass were to be excommunicated. Even the company of their wives was to be avoided, Monks and priests who for love of their wives left their orders suffering excommunication, were again admitted after forty days penance if afterwards forsaking them.</p><p><a name="fn_57"></a><a href="#fr_57">57.</a>  Dulaure.--<i>Histoire de Paris</i>, I, 387, note.</p><p><a name="fn_58"></a><a href="#fr_58">58.</a>  The abbot elect of St. Augustine, at Canterbury, in 1171, was found on investigation to have seventeen illegitimate children in a single village. An abbot of St. Pelayo, in Spain, in 1130, was proved to have kept no less than seventy mistresses.--<i>Hist. European Morals</i>, p. 350.</p><p><a name="fn_59"></a><a href="#fr_59">59.</a>  A tax called "cullagium," which was a license to clergymen to keep concubines, was during several years systematically levied by princes.--<i>Ibid.</i> 2, 349.</p><a name="fn_page_77"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 77</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_60"></a><a href="#fr_60">60.</a>  <i>Supplement to Lumires, 50th question, Art. III</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_78"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 78</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_61"></a><a href="#fr_61">61.</a>  St. Anselm, although very strict in the enforcement of the canons favoring celibacy, found recalcitrant priests in his own diocese whose course he characterized as "bestial insanity."</p><a name="fn_page_79"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 79</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_62"></a><a href="#fr_62">62.</a>  So says Bayle, author of the <i>Historical and Critical Dictionary</i>, a magnificent work in many volumes. Bayle was a man of whom it has justly been said his "profound and varied knowledge not only did much to enlighten the age in which he lived by pointing out the errors and supplying the deficiencies of contemporaneous writers of the seventeenth century, but down to the present time his work has preserved a repository of facts from which scholars continually draw."</p><p><a name="fn_63"></a><a href="#fr_63">63.</a>  Those who support celibacy would perhaps choose rather to allow crimes than marriage, because they derive considerable revenue by giving license to keep concubines. A certain prelate boasted openly at his table that he had in his diocese 1,000 priests who kept concubines, and who paid him, each of them, a crown a year for their license.--<i>Cornelius Aggrippa</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_80"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 80</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_64"></a><a href="#fr_64">64.</a>  For years in Germany the word Pufferkind signified "priest's bastard." <i>Montesquieu</i> declared celibacy to be libertinism.</p><p><a name="fn_65"></a><a href="#fr_65">65.</a>  <i>Amelot</i> (Abraham Nicholas), born in Orleans 1134. declared the celibacy of the clergy to have been established a law in order to prevent the alienation of the church estate.</p><p><a name="fn_66"></a><a href="#fr_66">66.</a>  Pope Pelaogius was unwilling to establish the Bishop of Sagola in his see because he had a wife and family, and only upon condition that wife and children should inherit nothing at his death except what he then possessed, was he finally confirmed. All else was to go into the coffers of the church.</p><a name="fn_page_82"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 82</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_67"></a><a href="#fr_67">67.</a>  Cardinal Otto decreed that wives and children of priests should have no benefit from the estate of the husband and father; such estates should be vested in the church.</p><a name="fn_page_83"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 83</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_68"></a><a href="#fr_68">68.</a>  In 1396 Charles VI. forbade that the testimony of women should be received in any of the courts of his kingdom.</p><p><a name="fn_69"></a><a href="#fr_69">69.</a>  The council of Tivoli, in the Soisonnais, 909, in which twelve bishops took part, promulgated a Canon requiring the oath of seven witnesses to convict a priest with having lived with a woman; if these failed of clearing him he could do so by his own oath.</p><p><a name="fn_70"></a><a href="#fr_70">70.</a>  Though the clergy now and then made use both of the Justinian and Theodosian Codes, the former body of law, as such, was notwithstanding from the reign of the Emperor Justinian, or about the year of our Lord 560, till the beginning of the 12th century, or the year of Christ, 1230 or thereabouts, of no force in the west in matter of government. Seldon.--<i>Dissertation on Fleta</i>, p. 112.</p><p><a name="fn_71"></a><a href="#fr_71">71.</a>  The codification of the laws under Justinian were largely due to his wife, the Empress Theodosia, who having risen from the lowest condition in the empire, that of a circus performer, to the throne of the East, proved herself capable in every way of adorning that high position.</p><a name="fn_page_84"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 84</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_72"></a><a href="#fr_72">72.</a>  By the Code Napoleon, all research into paternity is forbidden. The Christian Church was swamped by hysteria from the third to the sixteenth century. Canon Charles Kingsley.--<i>Life and Letters</i>.</p><p><a name="fn_73"></a><a href="#fr_73">73.</a>  Although under law the entire property of the wife became that of the husband upon marriage.</p><a name="fn_page_85"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 85</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_74"></a><a href="#fr_74">74.</a>  A treatise on Chastity, attributed to Pope Sixtus III., barely admits that married people can secure eternal life, though stating that the glory of heaven is not for them.</p><p><a name="fn_75"></a><a href="#fr_75">75.</a>  The Romish religion teaches that if you omit to name anything in confession, however repugnant or revolting to purity which you even doubt having committed, your subsequent confessions are thus rendered null and sacrilegious. Chiniquy.--<i>The Priest, the Woman and the Confessional</i>, p. 202. Study the pages of the past history of England, France, Italy, Spain, etc., and you will see that the gravest and most reliable historians have everywhere found instances of iniquity in the confessional box which their order refused to trace. <i>Ibid</i>, p. 175.</p>
 <p>It is a public fact which no learned Roman Catholic has ever denied that auricular confession became a dogma and obligatory practice of the church only at the Lateran Council, in the year 1215, under Pope Innocent III. Not a single trace of auricular confession as a dogma can be found before that year, <i>Ibid</i>, p. 239.</p>
 <p>Auricular confession originated with the early heretics, especially with Marcius. Bellarmin speaks of it as something to be practiced. But let us hear what the contemporary writers have to say on this question: "Certain women were in the habit of going to the heretic Marcius to confess their sins to him. But as he was smitten with-their beauty, and they loved him also, they abandoned themselves to sin with him."--<i>Ibid</i>, p. 234.</p><a name="fn_page_86"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 86</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_76"></a><a href="#fr_76">76.</a>  Disraeli, who is most excellent authority, declared the early English edition of the Bible contained 6,000 errors, which were constantly introduced and passages interpolated for sectarian purposes or to sustain new creeds; sometimes, indeed, they were added for the purpose of destroying all scriptural authority by the use of texts.</p>
 <p>The revisers of the New Testament found 150,000 errors, interpolations, additions and false translations in the King James or common version.</p><a name="fn_page_87"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 87</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_78"></a><a href="#fr_78">78.</a>  The legal wife of a priest was termed "An Unhallowed Thing," while mistresses and concubines were known as "The Hallowed Ones," "The Honored Ones." In parts of France, especially in Paris, the latter epithet was common as applied to a priest's mistress.--<i>Michelet</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_88"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 88</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_79"></a><a href="#fr_79">79.</a>  Heloise sacrificed herself on account of the impediments the church threw in the way of the married clergy's career of advancement. As his wife he would lose the ascending ladder of ecclesiastical honors, priory, abbacy, bishopric, metropolitane, cardinalate, and even that which was above and beyond all. Milman,--<i>Latin Christianity</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_90"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 90</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_80"></a><a href="#fr_80">80.</a>  In 1558 one Walter Mill was indicted, one article of his accusation being his assertion of the lawfulness of sacerdotal marriage. He was condemned to the stake and burned. Taine,--<i>English Literature</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_91"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 91</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_81"></a><a href="#fr_81">81.</a>  An old doctrine which often turns up again in the middle ages. In the seventeenth century it prevailed among the convents of France and Spain. Michelet.--<i>La Sorcerie</i>, p. 258.</p><p><a name="fn_82"></a><a href="#fr_82">82.</a>  They made the vilest use of the doctrine that Christ was born of a Virgin, using this as an example for woman to be followed.--<i>Ibid</i>, p. 259.</p><a name="fn_page_92"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 92</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_83"></a><a href="#fr_83">83.</a>  They must kill sin by being more humble and lost to all sense of pride through sin. This was the Quietist doctrine introduced by a Spanish priest, Molino, who claimed it as the result of an inner light or illumination. He declared that "Only by dint of sinning can sin be quelled."</p><p><a name="fn_84"></a><a href="#fr_84">84.</a>  "Let not this surprise you," replied the abbot. "My sanctity is not the less on this account because that abides in the soul, and what I now ask of you is only a sin of the body. Do not refuse the grace heaven sends you." Boccaccio.--<i>Decameron</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_93"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 93</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_85"></a><a href="#fr_85">85.</a>  Taine.--<i>Eng. Lit.</i> I, 363.</p><a name="fn_page_94"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 94</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_86"></a><a href="#fr_86">86.</a>  The unmarried state of the clergy was in itself one of the chief causes of sexual excess. The enormously numerous clergy became a perilous plague for female morality in town and village. The peasants endeavored to preserve their wives and daughters from clerical seduction by accepting no pastor who did not bind himself to take a concubine. In all towns there were brothels belonging to the municipality, to the sovereign, to the church, the proceeds of which flowed into the treasury of proprietors.</p><p><a name="fn_87"></a><a href="#fr_87">87.</a>  Draper.--<i>Intellectual Development of Europe</i>, 498.</p><p><a name="fn_88"></a><a href="#fr_88">88.</a>  Men in orders are sometimes deceived by the devil that they marry unrighteously and foredo themselves by the adulteries in which they continue. <i>Institutes of Polity, Civil and Ecclesiastical</i>, 437.</p>
 <p>There is ground for the assumption that the Canon which bound all the active members of the church to perpetual celibacy, and thus created an impenetrable barrier between them and the outer world, was one of the efficient methods in creating and sustaining both the temporal and spiritual power on the Romish Church. Taine.--<i>English Literature</i>.</p><p><a name="fn_89"></a><a href="#fr_89">89.</a>  All steps are necessary to make up the ladder. The vices of men become steps in the ladder one by one as they are remounted. The virtues of man are steps indeed, necessary not by any means to be dispensed with, yet though they create a fair atmosphere and a happy future, they are useless if they stand alone. The whole nature of man must be used wisely by the one who desires to enter the way. Seek it by plunging into the mysterious and glorious depth of your inmost being. Seek it by testing all experience, by utilizing the senses in order to understand the growth of meaning of individuality and the beauty and obscurity of those other divine fragments which are struggling side by side with you and from the race to which you belong.--<i>Light on the Path</i>, Rule XX.</p><p><a name="fn_90"></a><a href="#fr_90">90.</a>  "What in the world makes you look so sullen?" asked the young man as he took his arm and they walked towards the palace. "I am tormented with wicked thoughts," answered Eugene gloomily. "What kind? They can easily be cured." "How?" "By yielding to them." <i>Dialogue in Balsac's Pére Goriot</i>.</p><p><a name="fn_91"></a><a href="#fr_91">91.</a>  <i>1st Corinthians</i> VII, 36.</p><a name="fn_page_95"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 95</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_91"></a><a href="#fr_91">91.</a>  Lirabrock.--<i>History of the Inquisition</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_96"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 96</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_93"></a><a href="#fr_93">93.</a>  Carema reported that the parish priest of Naples was not convicted though several women deposed that he had seduced them. He was, however, tortured and suspended for a year when he again entered his duties.</p><p><a name="fn_94"></a><a href="#fr_94">94.</a>  Lea.--<i>Sacerdotal Celibacy</i>, p. 422.</p>
 <p>The secrecy with which the Inquisition worked may be conjectured from the fact. that during the whole time its officers were busy gathering evidence upon which to condemn Galileo, his friends in Rome, none of whom occupied high position in the church, not only did not suspect his danger, but constantly wrote him in the most encouraging terms.</p><a name="fn_page_97"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 97</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_95"></a><a href="#fr_95">95.</a>  The acts of the Metropolital Visitation of the Archbishops of Wareham states that in the Diocese of Bangor and St. Davids, in time of Henry VIII., more than eighty priests were actually presented for incontinence.</p><p><a name="fn_96"></a><a href="#fr_96">96.</a>  Against this separation the bitter animosity of Pope Leo XIII. was seen in his refusal of the gifts tendered him by the royal family of Italy at the time of his jubilee.</p><p><a name="fn_97"></a><a href="#fr_97">97.</a>  And the summary was not brief. Dwight.--<i>Roman Republic</i> in 1849, p. 115. Pope John XIII., having appeared before the council to give an account of his conduct he was proved by thirty-seven witnesses, the greater part of whom were bishop's and priests, of having been guilty of fornication, adultery, incest, sodomy, theft and murder. It was also proved by a legion of witnesses that he had seduced and violated 300 nuns.--<i>The Priest, Woman and Confessional</i>, p. 268. Henry III., bishop of Liege, was deposed in 1274 for having sixty-five illegitimate children. Lecky.--<i>Hist. European Morals</i>, p. 350. This same bishop boasted at a public banquet that in twenty two months fourteen children had been born to him. Ibid, Vol. 2, p. 349. It was openly asserted that 100,000 women in England were made dissolute by the clergy. Draper.--<i>Intellectual Development of Europe</i>. p. 498.</p><p><a name="fn_98"></a><a href="#fr_98">98.</a>  <i>Familiar Discourses</i> and other works. In Rome are born such a multitude bastards that they are constrained to build particular monasteries, where they are brought up and the pope is named their father. When any great processions are held in Rome, then the said bastards go all before, the pope.--<i>Familiar Discourses</i>, 383.</p>
 <p>After Pope Gregory confirmed celibacy he found 6,000 heads of infants in a fish pond, which caused him to again favor the marriage of priests.--<i>Ibid</i>. Bishop Metz, to my knowledge, hath lost the annual revenue of 500 crowns, which he was wont to receive from the county for pardoning of whoring and adultery. <i>Ibid</i>, 260.</p><a name="fn_page_98"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 98</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_99"></a><a href="#fr_99">99.</a>  In 1874, an old Catholic priest of Switzerland, about to follow Père Hyacinthe's example in abandoning celibacy, announced his betrothal in the following manner: "I marry because I wish to remain an honorable man. In the seventeenth century it was a proverbial expression, 'As corrupt as a priest,' and this might be said to-day. I marry, therefore, because I wish to get out of the Ultramontane slough."--<i>Galignani's Messenger</i>, September 19, 1874.</p><p><a name="fn_100"></a><a href="#fr_100">100.</a>  See <i>Biographical Sketch</i>. [Died January 16, 1899.]</p><a name="fn_page_99"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 99</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_101"></a><a href="#fr_101">101.</a>  pp. 86 to 140.</p><a name="fn_page_100"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 100</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_102"></a><a href="#fr_102">102.</a>  To be found in <i>The Priest, the Woman and the Confessional</i>.</p><a name="fn_page_101"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 101</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_103"></a><a href="#fr_103">103.</a>  <i>Ibid</i>, p. 77-8.</p><a name="fn_page_103"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 103</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_104"></a><a href="#fr_104">104.</a>  <i>Ibid</i>, p. 287</p><a name="fn_page_104"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 104</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_105"></a><a href="#fr_105">105.</a>  A Shenandoah correspondent of the Pittsburgh Commercial Advertiser, June 5. 1885, wrote:</p>
 <p>SHENANDOAH, PA., June 5.--Father Wolonski, of this place, the only priest of the Uniate Greek Church in this country, has been recalled to Europe.</p>
 <p>The Uniate Greek Church, it will be remembered, comprehends those Christians who, while they follow the Greek rite, observe the general discipline of the Greek Church and make use of the Greek liturgy, are yet united with the Church of Rome, admitting the double procession of the Spirit and the supremacy of the Roman Pontiff, and accepting all the doctrinal decisions subsequent to the Greek schism which have force as articles of faith in the Roman Church. The usage of the Church as to the law of celibacy is, with the consent of the Roman Pontiff, the same as among the other Greeks, and Father Wolonski brought a wife with him to Shenandoah when he came here last December. This fact has made both the priest and his religion, subjects of great importance here, and the attention they have received has resulted in his recall to Limberg, Austria, the see of the diocese from which he was transferred here.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">FATHER WOLONSKI AND THE ARCHBISHOP.</p>
 <p>When Father Wolonski arrived in Philadelphia he visited the Cathedral and sought an interview with Archbishop Ryan, but when that gentleman discovered that he was married he refused to treat with him. The priest then came to Shenandoah, as directed by Bishop Sembratowicz, of Limberg, who sent him on his mission. Father O'Reilly, of the Irish Catholic Church, warned his congregation, under pain of excommunication, to shun the church and priest, at the same time tacitly denying that the Roman Church recognized the right of any priest to marry. The matter led to great controversy, during which Father Wolonski established his congregation, and arrangements have been made for the erection of a church. To avoid further trouble, however, the Bishop of Limberg has selected and sent an unmarried priest to succeed him, and Father Wolonski will return to Austria. Father Wolonski is an intelligent and highly-educated gentleman, and has made a large number of friends during the few months he has been here. He speaks several languages, and during his stay here acquired a remarkable knowledge of English. He has worked incessantly since his arrival here for the temporal as well as the spiritual comfort of his people, and has made a large circle of acquaintances, who will regret his departure from the town.</p><a name="fn_page_107"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 107</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_106"></a><a href="#fr_106">106.</a>  And yet the world "does move," and the experience of the church is much that of the big elephant jumbo, who in opposing his vast form to a train of cars met his death at the engine.</p><p><a name="fn_107"></a><a href="#fr_107">107.</a>  The Chili mantas and skirts of white flannel are worn by penitentes, or women who have committed some heinous sin and thus advertise their penitence; or those who have taken some holy vow to get a measure nearer heaven, and go about the street with downcast eyes, looking at nothing and recognizing no one. They hover about the churches, and sit for hours crouched before some saint or crucifix, saying prayers and atoning for their sin. In the great Cathedral at Santiago, and in the smaller churches everywhere, these penitentes, in their snow-white garments, are always to be seen, on their knees, or posing in other uncomfortable postures, and looking for all the world like statues carved in marble. In the Santiago Cathedral they cluster in large groups around the confessionals, waiting to receive absolution from some fat and burly father, that they may rid their bodies of the mark of penitence they carry and their souls of sin. Some of them make vows, or are sentenced by their confessors to wear their white shrouds for a certain time, while others assume them voluntarily until they have assurance from their priest that their sin is atoned for. Ladies of the highest social position and great wealth are commonly found among the penitentes, as well as young girls of beauty and winning grace. Even the wives of merchants and bankers wander about the streets with all but their eyes covered with this white mantle, which gives notice to the world that they have sinned. The women of Chili are as pious as the men are proud, and this method of securing absolution is quite fashionable.</p>
 <p>Those souls that cannot be purged by this penitential dress retire to a convent in the outskirts of the city called the Convent of the Penitents, where they scourge themselves with whips, mortify the flesh with sackcloth, sleep in ashes and upon stone floors, and feed themselves on mouldy crusts, Some stay longer and some a less time in these houses of correction, until the priests by whose advice they go there, give them absolution; but it is seldom that the inmates are men. They are usually women who have been unfaithful to their marriage vows, or girls who have yielded to temptation. After the society season, after the carnival, at the end of the summer when people return from the fashionable resorts, and at the beginning of lent these places are full, and throngs of carriages surround them, waiting to bear back to their homes the belles who are sent here and can find no room to remain.</p>
 <p>For those whose sins have been too great to be washed out by this process, for those whose shame has been published to the world and are unfitted under social laws to associate with the pure, other convents are open, established purposely all a refuge or House of Detention. Young mothers without husbands are here cared for, and their babes are taken to an orphan asylum in the neighborhood to be reared by the nuns for the priesthood and other religious orders. it is the practice for parents to send wayward daughters to these homes, while society is given to understand that they are elsewhere visiting friends or finishing their education, After a time they return to their families and no questions are asked.</p><a name="fn_page_110"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 110</font></a><br>
 <p><a name="fn_108"></a><a href="#fr_108">108.</a>  Too long have the people out of respect for the church, maintained silence in the presence of gross abuses, while their families have been ruined. I am a husband and a father, and I do not wish the honor of my name and my family to be at the mercy of a wolf who may introduce himself with the viaticum in his hands, I am a father, and I do not wish that the sacred candor of my child should be exposed to the lecherous attempts of a wretch in a soutane. The religious authorities are on the eve of witnessing honest men follow their wives, their daughters, and even their little boys to the confessional, to assure themselves if the hand that holds there the balance of divine justice is the hand of a respectable man or the hand of a blackguard who should receive the lash in public with his neck in the pillory.--<i>Letter from a gentleman</i>.</p>
 <p>A recent article in the Canada "Review" asks if after giving to the clergy riches, respect and the highest positions, it is too much to ask that they should leave to the people their wives? Our wives and daughters whom they steal from us by the aid of religion, and more especially of the confessional. An immediate, firm and vigorous reform is needed. Our wives and daughters must be left alone. Let the clergy keep away from the women, and religion and the Catholics will be better off. This must be done and at once.--<i>Montreal Correspondence of the Toronto Mail</i>, September 15, 1897.</p></body>