<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Africa</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="jas034.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="jas036.htm">Next</a> 
 <br> <a href="jas035n.htm">[Note]</a></center>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">35. Tumble-bug and Anansi.</h3>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Moses Hendricks, Mandeville.</p>
 <p>Anansi and Tumble-bug took a job once. After they got their pay Anansi said to Tumble-bug, "We mus' buy something so as to have a good feed." They bought a bunch of plantain and a keg of butter.</p>
 <p>They commence to eat. Anansi dip, Tumble-bug dip. Anansi said, "No, my Tumble-bug, when I go 'pluck-um', you mus' go 'tip'!" However, Tumble-bug dip all the same. Anansi got vex an' box him. Tumble-bug fawn dead. Anansi get frightened, said, "Hi! Tumble-bug, the least bit of fun I make with you, you dead?" Tumble-bug never shake. Anansi run, leave the butter an' the plantain an' everything, take to the woods for it. Tumble-bug wake</p>
 <font size="2"><p>[1. A soiled garment should never be left about lest it be used by the sorcerer to bewitch the owner. Burning such a garment produces a skin disease exactly like a burn, according to the common belief.]</p>
 </font><p>{p. 46}</p>
 <p>up an' eat up the plantain an' the butter. After that he fly away after Anansi now.</p>
 <p>When he got in the woods near where Anansi was, he hid himself against a tree give a sound like a man cutting. Anansi sing out, "Who are you?" Tumble-bug said, "Gentleman servant cutting bread-nut fo' gentleman horse." Say, "Hear any news?"--"Yes."--"What you hear?"--"Anansi kill Tumble-bug,--life for life!" Anansi start running an' Tumble-bug after him. He run out to a place call 'Dead man country', get among the dry trash, and that's where he live ever since.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="jas036.htm">Next: 36. Horse and Anansi.</a></center>
 </body>