<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Africa</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="jas046.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="jas048.htm">Next</a> 
 <br> <a href="jas047n.htm">[Note]</a></center>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">47. Why John-crow has a Bald Head.</h3>
 <h5 align="CENTER">a. The Baptism.</h5>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Margaret Brown, St. Anne's Bay.</p>
 <p>Anansi always has a grudge wid John-crow; he say whenever he make his nest, de Crow fly on it an' catch it up an' he never</p>
 <font size="2"><p>[1. The repetition is distributive and means "until to-day."]</p>
 </font><p>{p. 57}</p>
 <p>can make his nest, so he have a hatred for Crow. He say he was going to married and he was going to invite no one but Crow. An' he have a big dinner an' no one was at de table but Crow. So after de eat an' drink done, he said he was going to have a baptism but he don't baptize wid not'ing but boiling water. So after de water's boiling, he took it off an' order Crow to sit round de copper an' so he dip ev'ry one head into de water, an' dat why Crow have bald-head to-day.</p>
 <h5 align="CENTER">b. The Dance.</h5>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Henry Spence, Bog, Westmoreland.</p>
 <p>Anansi and John Crow had a ball one night, so dey fin' dinner de night fe all de dancer. John Crow a great 'tepper, can 'tep better'n Anansi. So as Anansi fin' John Crow can dance neater dan him, he get bex. So after de dinner de pop was hot, so he said to John Crow him mus' dance up to de pop. So jus' to get rid of John Crow de night, he got a ladle an' dash on John Crow wid de hot pop right up on de head, an' all John Crow head 'trip off. All de John Crow in dis worl' never have ne feder upon i' head <b><i>heah;</i></b> Anansi bu'n 'em off wid hot pop.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="jas048.htm">Next: 48. Why Dog is always Looking.</a></center>
 </body>