<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Africa</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="jas_07.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="jas151.htm">Next</a> 
 <br> <a href="jas150n.htm">[Note]</a></center>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Old-time Fools.</h3>
 <h5 align="CENTER">I.</h5>
 <p>The master send out one of them for a clock. When he get part of the way home the clock strike. An' say to the clock, "If you talk on me head again I mash you' mout'!" An' up come again the clock strike. An' he said, "Don' I tell you if you talk again I mash you mout'? An' up came the clock strike again. An' him put down the clock, say, "If you can talk, you mus' walk!" An' as the clock couldn't walk, take a piece a 'tick an' mash it up! An' take up the clock an' put it 'pon the head. An' when he go in, Massa ask him how did the clock mash up, an' said the clock a talk 'pon the head an' him put him down to walk an' he won't walk an' he mash it up. An' the massa call the driver an' give him a good flogging.</p>
 <h5 align="CENTER">II.</h5>
 <p>Master sen' them out for two jug o' rum, an' when they come to the river, they say they want a drink. An' one come top o' the bridge an' sen' the other down into the river an' say he t'rowing out the rum in the river, when the water taste he mus' tell him. An' he t'row out the whole jug an' he couldn't taste it. An' after he t'row out the first jug, say, "What kin' of rum is this have no 'trength?" An' him begin on the other jug an' him t'row out the whole of that again, an' him couldn't taste. An' they take the two empty jug an' go home to the master, an' they get a flogging for it.</p>
 <h5 align="CENTER">III.</h5>
 <p>Dey gwine cut a big cotton-tree. Den one of de Congo men said him don' want de cotton-tree to fall down in <b><i>him</i></b> groun', so mak one big <b><i>cotta</i></b>[1] put on head so go ketch de cotton-tree when it go fall down. Cotton-tree fall down kill him.</p>
 <font size="2"><p>[1. A ring-shaped pack made of banana leaves to protect the head when carrying burdens.]</p>
 </font><p>{p. 180}</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="jas151.htm">Next: Duppy Stories.</a></center>
 </body>