<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Buddhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="sbe4907.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="sbe4909.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <!----------------------p. 62---------------------->
 
 <p><a name="p.%2062">{p. 62}</a></p>
 
 <h2 align="center">BOOK VI.</h2>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p>   1. Then when the sun, the eye of the world, was just risen, he, the noblest of men, beheld the hermitage of the son of Bh<i>ri</i>gu,</p>
 
 <p>   2. Its deer all asleep in quiet trust, its birds tranquilly resting,--seeing it he too became restful, and he felt as if his end was attained.</p>
 
 <p>   3. For the sake of ending his wonder and to show reverence for the penances observed, and as expressing his own conformity therewith[1], he alighted from the back of his horse.</p>
 
 <p>   4. Having alighted, he stroked the horse, exclaiming, 'All is saved,' and he spoke well-pleased to <i>Kh</i>a<i>m</i>daka, bedewing him as it were with tears from his eyes:</p>
 
 <p>   5. 'Good friend, thy devotion to me and thy courage of soul have been proved by thy thus following this steed whose speed is like that of Târkshya[2].</p>
 
 <p>   6. 'Bent even though I am on other business, I am wholly won in heart by thee,--one who has such a love for his master, and at the same time is able to carry out his wish.</p>
 
 <p>   7. 'One can be able without affection, and affectionate though unable; but one like thee, at once affectionate and able, is hard to find in the world.</p>
 
 <p><small>[1. Svâ<i>m</i> <i>k</i>ânumaritâ<i>m</i> rakshan. [The Tibetan has the obscure ran·gi rjes·su bsrun·va la=sva+anu+rakshan? H.W.]</small></p>
 
 <p>2. An old mythic representation of the sun as a horse.]</p>
 
 <!----------------------p. 63---------------------->
 
 <p><a name="p.%2063">{p. 63}</a></p>
 
 <p>   8. 'I am pleased with this noble action of thine; this feeling is seen towards me, even though I am regardless of conferring rewards.</p>
 
 <p>   9. 'Who would not be favourably disposed to one who stands to him as bringing him reward? but even one's own people commonly become mere strangers in a reverse of fortune[1].</p>
 
 <p>   10. 'The son is maintained for the sake of the family, the father is honoured for the sake of our own (future) support; the world shows kindness for the sake of hope; there is no such a thing as unselfishness without a motive.</p>
 
 <p>   11. 'Why speak many words? in short, thou hast done me a very great kindness; take now my horse and return, I have attained the desired wood.'</p>
 
 <p>   12. Thus having spoken, the mighty hero in his desire to show perfect gentleness[2] unloosed his ornaments and gave them to the other, who was deeply grieved.</p>
 
 <p>   13. Having taken a brilliant jewel whose effect illumined his diadem, he stood, uttering these words, like the mountain Ma<i>m</i>dara with the sun resting on it:</p>
 
 <p>   14. 'By thee with this jewel, O <i>Kh</i>a<i>m</i>da, having offered him repeated obeisance, the king, with his loving confidence still unshaken, must be enjoined to stay his grief.</p>
 
 <p>   15. '"I have entered the ascetic-wood to destroy old age and death,--with no thirst for heaven, with no lack of love nor feeling of anger.</p>
 
 <p><small>[1. <i>G</i>anîbhavati may be a quaint expression for para<i>g</i>ano bhavati,--this seems the meaning of the Tibetan. Or we might read <i>g</i>anyo bhavati.</small></p>
 
 <p>2. Ân<i>ris</i>a<i>m</i>sa (for ân<i>ris</i>a<i>m</i>sya), see Pâ<i>n</i>ini V, 1, 130 ga<i>n</i>a.]</p>
 
 <!----------------------p. 64---------------------->
 
 <p><a name="p.%2064">{p. 64}</a></p>
 
 <p>   16. '"Do not think of mourning for me who am thus gone forth from my home; union, however long it may last, in time will come to an end.</p>
 
 <p>   17. '"Since separation is certain, therefore is my mind fixed on liberation; how shall there not be repeated severings from one's kindred?</p>
 
 <p>   18. '"Do not think of mourning for me who am gone forth to leave sorrow behind; it is the thralls of passion, who are attached to desires, the causes of sorrow, for whom thou shouldst mourn.</p>
 
 <p>   19. '"This was the firm persuasion of our predecessors,--I as one departing by a common road am not to be mourned for by my heir.</p>
 
 <p>   20. '"At a man's death there are doubtless heirs to his wealth; but heirs to his merit are hard to find on the earth or exist not at all.</p>
 
 <p>   21. '"Even though thou sayest, 'He is gone at a wrong time to the wood,'--there is no wrong time for religious duty (dharma), life being fragile as it is.</p>
 
 <p>   22. '"Therefore my determination is, 'I must seek my supreme good this very day;' what confidence can there be in life, when death stands as our adversary?"</p>
 
 <p>   23. 'Do thou address the king, O friend, with these and such-like words; and do thou use thy efforts so that he may not even remember me.</p>
 
 <p>   24. 'Yea, do thou repeat to the king our utter unworthiness; through unworthiness affection is lost,--and where affection is lost, there is no sorrow.'</p>
 
 <p>   25. Having heard these words, <i>Kh</i>a<i>m</i>da, overwhelmed with grief, made reply with folded hands, his voice choked by tears:</p>
 
 <p>   26. 'At this state of mind of thine, causing affliction</p>
 
 <!----------------------p. 65---------------------->
 
 <p><a name="p.%2065">{p. 65}</a></p>
 
 <p>to thy kindred, my mind, O my lord, sinks down like an elephant in the mud of a river.</p>
 
 <p>   27. 'To whom would not such a determination as this of thine cause tears, even if his heart were of iron,--how much more if it were throbbing with love?</p>
 
 <p>   28. 'Where[1] is this delicacy of limb, fit to lie only in a palace,--and where is the ground of the ascetic forest, covered with the shoots of rough ku<i>s</i>a grass?</p>
 
 <p>   29. 'When, on hearing thy resolve, I first brought thee this horse,--it was fate only, O my lord, which made me do it, mastering my will.</p>
 
 <p>   30. 'But how could I, O king, by mine own will, knowing this thy decision,--carry back the horse to the sorrow of Kapilavastu?</p>
 
 <p>   31. 'Surely thou wilt not abandon, O hero, that fond old king, so devoted to his son, as a heretic might the true religion?</p>
 
 <p>   32. 'And her, thy second mother, worn with the care of bringing thee up,--thou wilt not surely forget her, as an ingrate a benefit?</p>
 
 <p>   33. 'Thou wilt not surely abandon thy queen, endowed with all virtues, illustrious for her family, devoted to her husband and with a young son, as a coward the royal dignity within his reach?</p>
 
 <p>   34 'Thou wilt not abandon the young son of Ya<i>s</i>odharâ, worthy of all praise, thou the best of the cherishers of religion and fame, as a dissolute spendthrift his choicest glory?</p>
 
 <p>   35, 'Or even if thy mind be resolved to abandon thy kindred and thy kingdom, thou wilt not, O master, abandon me,--thy feet are my only refuge.</p>
 
 <p><small>[1. A common expression (which occurs also in Persian poetry) to imply the incompatibility of two things.]</small></p>
 
 <!----------------------p. 66---------------------->
 
 <p><a name="p.%2066">{p. 66}</a></p>
 
 <p>   36. 'I cannot go to the city with my soul thus burning, leaving thee behind in the forest as Sumitra[1] left the son of Raghu.</p>
 
 <p>   37. 'What will the king say to me, returning to the city without thee? or what shall I say to thy queens by way of telling them good news?</p>
 
 <p>   38. 'As for what thou saidst, "thou must repeat my unworthiness to the king"--how shall I speak what is false of thee as of a sage without a fault?</p>
 
 <p>   39. 'Or even if I ventured to speak it with a heart ashamed and a tongue cleaving to my mouth, who would think of believing it?</p>
 
 <p>   40. 'He who would tell of or believe the fierceness of the moon, might tell of or believe thy faults, O physician of faults.</p>
 
 <p>   41. 'Him who is always compassionate and who never fails to feel pity, it ill befits to abandon one who loves;--turn back and have mercy on me.'</p>
 
 <p>   42. Having heard these words of <i>Kh</i>a<i>m</i>da overcome with sorrow,--self-possessed with the utmost firmness the best of speakers answered:</p>
 
 <p>   43. 'Abandon this distress, <i>Kh</i>a<i>m</i>da, regarding thy separation from me,--change is inevitable in corporeal beings who are subject to different births.</p>
 
 <p>   44. 'Even if I through affection were not to abandon my kindred in my desire for liberation, death would still make us helplessly abandon one another.</p>
 
 <p>   45. 'She, my mother, by whom I was borne in the womb with great thirst and pains,--where am I now with regard to her, all her efforts fruitless, and where is she with regard to me?</p>
 
 <p>   46. 'As birds go to their roosting-tree and then</p>
 
 <p><small>[1. This is the Sumantra of the Râmâya<i>n</i>a II, 57.]</small></p>
 
 <!----------------------p. 67---------------------->
 
 <p><a name="p.%2067">{p. 67}</a></p>
 
 <p>depart, so the meeting of beings inevitably ends in separation.</p>
 
 <p>   47. 'As clouds, having come together, depart asunder again, such I consider the meeting and parting of living things.</p>
 
 <p>   48. 'And since this world goes away, each one of us deceiving the other,--it is not right to think anything thine own in a time of union which is a dream.</p>
 
 <p>   49. 'Since the trees are parted from the innate colour of their leaves, why should there not still more be the parting of two things which are alien to each other?</p>
 
 <p>   50. 'Therefore, since it is so, grieve not, my good friend, but go; or if thy love lingers, then go and afterwards return.</p>
 
 <p>   51. 'Say, without reproaching us, to the people in Kapilavastu, "Let your love for him be given up, and hear his resolve.</p>
 
 <p>   52. '"Either he will quickly come back, having destroyed old age and death; or else he will himself perish, having failed in his purpose and lost hold of every support."'</p>
 
 <p>   53. Having heard his words, Ka<i>m</i>thaka, the noblest of steeds, licked his feet with his tongue and dropped hot tears.</p>
 
 <p>   54. With his hand whose fingers were united with a membrane and which was marked with the auspicious svastika, and with its middle part curved[1], the prince stroked him and addressed him like a friend:</p>
 
 <p>   55. 'Shed not tears, Ka<i>m</i>thaka, this thy perfect</p>
 
 <p><small>[1. Professor Kielhorn suggests kakra-madhyena, 'with a wheel in its centre,' cf. VIII, 55.]</small></p>
 
 <!----------------------p. 68---------------------->
 
 <p><a name="p.%2068">{p. 68}</a></p>
 
 <p>equine nature has been proved,--bear with it, this thy labour will soon have its fruit.'</p>
 
 <p>   56. Then seizing the sharp jewelled sword which was in <i>Kh</i>a<i>m</i>daka's hand, he resolutely drew out from the sheath the blade decked with golden ornaments, like a serpent from its hole.</p>
 
 <p>   57. Having drawn it forth, dark blue like a blue lotus petal, he cut his decorated tiara and his hair, and he tossed it with its scattered muslin into the air as a grey goose into a lake.</p>
 
 <p>   58. And the heavenly beings, with a longing to worship it, seized it respectfully as it was thrown up; and the divine hosts paid it due adoration in heaven with celestial honours.</p>
 
 <p>   59. Having thus divorced his ornaments and banished all royal magnificence from his head, and seeing his muslin floating away like a golden goose, the stedfast prince desired a sylvan dress.</p>
 
 <p>   60. Then a celestial being, wearing the form of a hunter, pure in heart, knowing his thoughts, approached near him in dark-red garments; and the son of the <i>S</i>âkya king thus addressed him:</p>
 
 <p>   61. 'Thy red garments are auspicious, the sign of a saint; but this destructive bow is not befitting; therefore, my good friend, if there is no strong preference in the matter, do thou give me that dress and take this of mine.'</p>
 
 <p>   62. The hunter replied, 'It has given me my desire[1], O giver of desires, as by this I have inspired</p>
 
 <p><small>[1. I have taken ârât as from â + râ but Professor Kielhorn suggests that it might mean 'near.' 'Although in this dress I make the deer come confidently close to me and then kill them, yet take it if you want it.' [The Tibetan seems to have read kâmasârât--<sub>°</sub>dod·pa sñin·po las, 'from essence of desire.']]</small></p>
 
 <!----------------------p. 69---------------------->
 
 <p><a name="p.%2069">{p. 69}</a></p>
 
 <p>animals with confidence and then killed them; but if thou hast need of it, O thou who art like Indra, accept it at once and give me the white dress.'</p>
 
 <p>   63. With extreme joy he then took that sylvan dress and gave away the linen one; and the hunter, assuming his heavenly form, having taken the white garment, went to heaven.</p>
 
 <p>   64. Then the prince and the attendant of the horse were filled with wonder as he was thus going, and forthwith they paid great honour anew to that sylvan dress.</p>
 
 <p>   65. Then the great-souled one, having dismissed the weeping <i>Kh</i>a<i>m</i>da, and wearing his fame veiled by the sign of the red garment, went towards the hermitage, like the king of mountains wrapped in an evening cloud.</p>
 
 <p>   66. While his master, thus regardless of his kingdom, was going to the ascetic-wood in mean garments, the groom, tossing up his arms, wailed bitterly and fell on the ground.</p>
 
 <p>   67. Having looked again he wept aloud, and embraced the horse Ka<i>m</i>thaka with his arms; and then, hopeless and repeatedly lamenting, he went in body to the city, not in soul.</p>
 
 <p>   68. Sometimes he pondered, sometimes he lamented, sometimes he stumbled, and sometimes he fell; and so going along, wretched through his devoted attachment, he performed all kinds of actions in the road without conscious will.</p>
 
 <hr>
 <center><a href="sbe4909.htm">Next: Book VII of the Buddha-<i>k</i>arita</a></center>
 </body>