<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_13a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_15a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question XIV</h2>
 <h3>The Enormity of Witches is Considered, and it is shown that the Whole Matter should be rightly Set Forth and Declared.</h3></center>
 
         
 Concerning the enormity of crimes, it is asked whether the crimes of witches 
 exceed, both in guilt, in pain, and in loss, all the evils which God allows 
 and has permitted from the beginning of the world up till now. And it seems 
 that they do not, especially as regards guilt. For the sin which a man 
 commits when he could easily avoid it is greater than the sin which another 
 man commits when he could not so easily avoid it. This is shown by S. 
 Augustine, <i>de Ciuit. Dei</i>: There is great wickedness in sinning when 
 it is so easy not to sin. But Adam, and others who have sinned when in a 
 state of perfection or even of grace, could more easily because of the help 
 of grace have avoided their sins — especially Adam who was created in grace 
 — than many witches, who have not shared in such gifts. Therefore the sins 
 of such are greater than all the crimes of witches.<br>
 
         
 And again in respect of punishment: the greatest punishment is due to the 
 greater blame. But Adam's sin was the most heavily punished, as is plainly 
 proved by the fact that both his guilt and his punishment are shown in all 
 his posterity by the inheritance of original sin. Therefore his sin is 
 greater than all other sins.<br>
 
         
 And again, the same is argued in respect of loss. For according to S. 
 Augustine: A thing is evil in that it takes away from the good; therefore 
 where there is the more good lost, there the greater evil has gone before. 
 But the sin of our first parent brought the greatest loss both to nature and 
 to grace, since it deprived us of innocence and immortality; and no 
 subsequent sin has brought such loss, therefore, etc.<br>
 
         
 But the contrary side: that which includes the most causes of evil is the 
 greater evil, and such are the sins of witches. For they can, with God's 
 permission, bring every evil upon that which is good by nature and in form, 
 as is declared in the Papal Bull. Besides, Adam sinned only in doing that 
 which was wrong in one of two ways; for it was forbidden, but was not wrong 
 in itself: but witches and other sinners sin in doing that which is wrong 
 in both ways, wrong in itself, and forbidden, such as murders and many other 
 forbidden things. Therefore their sins are heavier than other sins.<br>
 
         
 Besides, sin which comes from definite malice is heavier than sin which 
 comes from ignorance. But witches, out of great malice, despise the Faith 
 and the sacraments of the Faith, as many of them have confessed.<br>
 
         
 <i>Answer</i>. The evils which are perpetrated by modern witches exceed all 
 other sin which God has ever permitted to be done, as was said in the title 
 of this Question. And this can be shown in three ways, in so far as they are 
 sins involving perversity of character, though it is different with the sins 
 that contravene the other Theological virtues. First in general, by 
 comparing their works indifferently with any other worldly crimes. Secondly 
 in particular, by considering the species of the superstition and into what 
 pact they have entered with the devil. And thirdly, by comparing their sins 
 with the sins of the bad Angels and even with that of our first parents.<br>
 
         
 And first, sin is threefold, involving guilt, punishment, and loss. Good 
 also is correspondingly threefold, involving righteousness, felicity, and 
 use. And righteousness corresponds with the guilt, felicity with punishment, 
 and use with loss.<br>
 
         
 That the guilt of witches exceeds all other sins is apparent in this way. 
 For according to the teaching of S. Thomas (II, 22, art. 2), there is in the 
 matter of sin much that may be considered whereby the gravity or lightness 
 of the sin may be deduced; and the same sin may be found heavy in one and 
 light in another. For example, we can say that in fornication a young man 
 sins, but an old man is mad. Yet those sins are, simply speaking, the heavier 
 which are not only attended by the more extensive and more powerful 
 circumstances, but are in their nature and quantity of a more essentially 
 serious sort.<br>
 
         
 And so we can say that, though the sin of Adam was in some respects heavier 
 than all other sins, inasmuch as he fell to the instigation of a smaller 
 temptation, since it came only from within; and also because he could more 
 easily have resisted on account of the original justice in which he was 
 created: nevertheless in the form and quantity of sin, and in other respects 
 which aggravate the sin the more in that it is the cause of many yet 
 heavier sins, the sins of witches exceed all other sins. And this will be 
 made still clearer in two ways.<br>
 
         
 For one sin is said to be greater than another in one or other of the 
 following respects: in causality, as was the sin of Lucifer; in generality, 
 as Adam's sin; in hideousness, as was the sin of Judas; in the difficulty 
 of forgiving it, as is the sin against the Holy Ghost; in danger, as in the 
 sin of covetousness; in inclination, as is the sin of the flesh; in the 
 offending of the Divine Majesty, as is the sin of idolatry and infidelity; 
 in the difficulty of combating it, as the sin of pride; in blindness of mind, 
 as the sin of anger. Accordingly, after the sin of Lucifer, the works of 
 witches exceed all other sins, in hideousness since they deny Him crucified, 
 in inclination since the commit nastiness of the flesh with devils, in 
 blindness of mind since in a pure spirit of malignity the rage and bring 
 every injury upon the souls and bodies of men and beasts, as has been shown 
 from what has been said before.<br>
 
         
 And this, indeed, is indicated, according to S. Isidore, by the word. For 
 they are called witches (<i>maleficae</i>) on account of the enormity of 
 their crimes, as has been said above.<br>
 
         
 Our contention is also deduced from the following. There are two gradations 
 in sin, a turning away, and a change of heart. See our quotation from S. 
 Augustine: Sin is to reject the incommutable good, and to cleave to things 
 that are variable. And the turning away from God is as it were formal, just 
 as the change of heart is as it were material. Therefore the more a man is 
 separated from God by it, the heavier is the sin. And since infidelity is 
 the chief cause of man's separation from God, the infidelity of witches 
 stands out as the greatest of sins. And this is given the name of Heresy, 
 which is Apostasy from the Faith; and in this witches sin throughout their 
 whole lives.<br>
 
         
 For the sin of infidelity consists in opposing the Faith; and this may come 
 about in two ways, by opposing a faith which has not yet been received, or 
 by opposing it after it has been received. Of the first sort is the 
 infidelity of the Pagans or Gentiles. In the second way, the Christian Faith 
 may be denied in two ways: either by denying the prophecies concerning it, 
 or by denying the actual manifestation of its truth. And the first of these 
 is the infidelity of the Jews, and the second the infidelity of Heretics.<br>
 
         
 It is clear from this that the heresy of witches is the most heinous of the 
 three degrees of infidelity; and this fact is proved both by reason and 
 authority. For it is said in II. S. <i>Peter</i> ii: It has been better for 
 them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known 
 it, to turn from it. And it is reasonable to suppose that, just as he who 
 does not perform what he has promised commits a greater sin than he who does 
 not perform what he never promised, so the infidelity of the heretics, who 
 while professing the faith of the Gospel fight against it by corrupting it, 
 is a greater sin than that of the Jews and Pagans.<br>
 
         
 And again, the Jews sin more greatly than the Pagans; for they received the 
 prophecy of the Christian Faith in the Old Law, which they corrupt through 
 badly interpreting it, which is not the case with the Pagans. Therefore 
 their infidelity is a greater sin than that of the Gentiles, who never 
 received the Faith of the Gospel. But concerning Apostasy, S. Thomas says in 
 the <i>Second of the Second</i>, question 12: Apostasy means a turning away 
 from God and religion, and this may happen according to the different ways 
 by which man is joined to God; that is, by faith, or by the subjection of 
 the will to obedience, or by religion and Holy Orders. S. Raymund and 
 Hostiensis say that Apostasy is a rash departure from the state of faith or 
 obedience or Religion. Now if that which precedes is removed, that which 
 follows from it is also removed; but the converse proposition is not true. 
 Therefore Apostasy from the Faith is a greater sin than the other two forms 
 of infidelity, since in its case a precedent Religion has been removed.<br>
 
         
 But according to S. Raymund, a man is not to be judged an Apostate or 
 deserter, however far and long he may have strayed, unless he shows by his 
 subsequent life that he has not though of returning to the Faith. And this 
 would be shown in the case of a cleric if he were to marry a wife, or commit 
 some similar crime. In the same way it is an Apostasy of disobedience when 
 a man wilfully spurns the teaching of the Church and the Bishops. And such a 
 man must be convicted of his infamy, and be excommunicated.<br>
 
         
 Now when we speak of the Apostasy of witches, we mean the Apostasy of 
 perfidy; and this is so much the more heinous, in that it springs from a pact 
 made with the enemy of the Faith and the way of salvation. For witches are 
 bound to make this pact, which is exacted by that enemy either in part or 
 wholly. For we Inquisitors have found some witches who have denied all the 
 articles of Faith, and others who have denied only a certain number of them; 
 but they are all bound to deny true and sacramental confession. And so, even 
 the Apostasy of Julian does not seem to have been so great, although in 
 other respects he did more harm against the Church; but we cannot speak of 
 that here.<br>
 
         
 But it may be incidentally objected that it is possible that they may keep 
 the Faith in the thoughts of their hearts, which God alone, and not even 
 any Angel, can see into; but do reverence and obedience to the devil only 
 in outward form. The answer to this seems to be that there are two degrees 
 of the Apostasy of perfidy. One consists in outward acts of infidelity, 
 without the formation of any pact with the devil, as when one lives in the 
 lands of the infidels and conforms his life to that of the Mohammedans. The 
 other consists in a pact made with the devil by one who lives in Christian 
 lands, In the first case, men who keep the Faith in their hearts but deny it 
 in their outward acts, though they are not Apostates or Heretics, are guilty 
 of deadly sin. For in this way Solomon showed reverence to the gods of his 
 wives. And no one can be excused on the ground that he does this through 
 fear; for S. Augustine says: It is better to die of hunger than to be fed by 
 Idolaters. But however much witches may retain the Faith in their hearts 
 while denying it with their lips, they are still to be judged Apostates, 
 since they have made a treaty with death and a compact with hell. Wherefore 
 S. Thomas (II, 4), speaking of such magic works, and of those who in any way 
 seek help from devils, says: They are all Apostates from the Faith, by reason 
 of a pact made with the Devil, either in word, when some invocation is used, 
 or by some deed, even if there is no actual sacrifice. For no man can serve 
 two masters.<br>
 
         
 To the same effect writes Blessed Albertus Magnus, where he asks whether 
 the sin of Magicians and Astrologers is an Apostasy from the Faith. And he 
 answers: In such there is always Apostasy either of word or of deed. For if 
 any invocations are made, then there is an open pact made with the devil, 
 and it is plainly Apostasy in word. But if their magic is simply a matter 
 of action, then it is Apostasy in deed. And since in all these there is 
 abuse of the Faith, seeing that they look for from the devil what they 
 ought to look for from God, therefore they are always to be judged Apostates. 
 See how clearly they set forth two degrees of Apostasy, understanding a 
 third, namely, that of thought. And even if this last is lacking, yet 
 witches are judged to be Apostates in word and deed. Therefore, as will be 
 shown, they must be subject to the punishment of Heretics and Apostates.<br>
 
         
 And there is in them a third enormity of crime, exceeding all other heresies. 
 For S. Augustine (XXVIII, 1 and 2) tells us that the whole life of infidels 
 is a sin; and the gloss on <i>Romans</i> xiv says that everything which 
 comes not of faith is sin. What then is to be thought of the whole life of 
 witches, that is, of all their other actions which are not pleasing to the 
 devil, such as fasting, attending church, communicating, and other things? 
 For in all these things they commit deadly sin, as is shown as follows. So 
 far have they fallen in sin that, although they have not lost all power of 
 amendment (since sin does not corrupt the whole good of their nature, and a 
 natural light yet remains in them); yet, because of their homage given to 
 the devil, and unless they be absolved from it, all their works, even when 
 they appear to be good, are rather of an evil nature. And this is not seen 
 to be the case with other infidels.<br>
 
         
 For according to S. Thomas in the <i>Second of the Second</i>, question 10, 
 Whether every action of an infidel is a sin; he says that the deeds of the 
 unfaithful which are, of themselves, good, such as fasting, almsgiving, and 
 deeds of that sort, are no merit to them because of their infidelity, which 
 is a most grievous sin. Yet sin does not corrupt the whole good of their 
 nature, and there remains in them a natural light. Therefore not ever deed 
 of theirs is mortal sin, but only those which proceed from their very 
 infidelity, or are related to it. For example, a Saracen fasts, to observe 
 the law of Mohammed as to fasting, and a Jew observes his Feast days; but in 
 such things he is guilty of mortal sin. And in this way is to be understood 
 the above dictum of S. Augustine, that the whole life of infidels is sin.
 
 
 <center><i>That Witches Deserve the heaviest Punishment above All the 
 Criminals of the World.</i></center>
 
 
         
 The crimes of witches, then, exceed the sins of all others; and we now 
 declare what punishment they deserve, whether as Heretics or as Apostates. 
 Now Heretics, according to S. Raymund, are punished in various ways, as by 
 excommunication, deposition, confiscation of their goods, and death. The 
 reader can be fully informed concerning all these by consulting the law 
 relating to the sentence of excommunication. Indeed even their followers, 
 protectors, patrons and defenders incur the heaviest penalties. For, besides 
 the punishment of excommunication inflicted upon them, Heretics, together 
 with their patrons, protectors and defenders, and with their children to the 
 second generation on the father's side, and to the first degree on the 
 mother's side, are admitted to no benefit or office of the Church. And if a 
 Heretic have Catholic children, for the heinousness of his crime they are 
 deprived of their paternal inheritance. And if a man be convicted, and 
 refuse to be converted and abjure his heresy, he must at once be burned, if 
 he is a layman. For if they who counterfeit money are summarily put to death, 
 how much more must they who counterfeit the Faith? But if he is a cleric, 
 after solemn degradation he is handed over to the secular Court to be put to 
 death. But if they return to the Faith, they are to be imprisoned for life. 
 But in practice they are treated more leniently after recantation than they 
 should be according to the judgement of the Bishops and Inquisition, as will 
 be shown in the Third Part, where the various methods of sentencing such are 
 treated of; that is to say, those who are arrested and convicted and have 
 recanted their error.<br>
 
         
 But to punish witches in these ways does not seem sufficient, since they are 
 not simple Heretics, but Apostates. More than this, in their very apostasy 
 they do not deny the Faith for any fear of men or for any delight of the 
 flesh, as has been said before; but, apart from their abnegation, even give 
 homage to the very devils by offering them their bodies and souls. Is is 
 clear enough from this that, however much they are penitent and return to 
 the Faith, they must not be punished like other Heretics with lifelong 
 imprisonment, but must be made to suffer the extreme penalty. And because of 
 the temporal injury which they do to men and beasts in various ways, the 
 laws demand this. Is is even equally culpable to learn as it is to teach 
 such iniquities, say the laws concerning Soothsayers. Then how much more 
 emphatically do they speak concerning witches, where they say that the 
 penalty for them is the confiscation of their goods and decapitation. The 
 laws also say much concerning those who by witchcraft provoke a woman to 
 lust, or, conversely, cohabit with beasts. But these matters were touched 
 upon on the First Question.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_15a.htm">Next: Question XV</a><br>It is Shown that, on Account of the Sins of Witches, the Innocent are often Bewitched, yea, Sometimes even for their Own Sins.<br>
 </center>
 </body>