<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_07a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_09a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question VIII</h2>
 <h3>Whether Witches can Hebetate the Powers of Generation or Obstruct the Venereal Act.</h3></center>
 
         
 Now the fact that adulterous drabs and whores are chiefly given to 
 witchcraft is substantiated by the spells which are cast by witches upon the 
 act of generation. And to make the truth more clear, we will consider the 
 arguments of those who are in disagreement with us on this matter. And first 
 it is argued that such a bewitching is not possible, because if it were it 
 would apply equally to those who are married; and if this were conceded, 
 then, since matrimony is God's work and witchcraft is the devil's, the 
 devil's work would be stronger than God's. But if it is allowed that it can 
 only affect fornicators and the unmarried, this involves a return to the 
 opinion that witchcraft does not really exist, but only in men's imagination; 
 and this was refuted in the First Question. Or else some reason will be 
 found why it should affect the unmarried and not the married; and the only 
 possible reason is that matrimony is God's work. And since, according to the 
 Theologians, this reason is not valid, there still remains the argument 
 that it would make the devil's work stronger than God's; and since it would 
 be unseemly to make such an assertion, it is also unseemly to maintain that 
 the venereal act can be obstructed by witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 Again, the devil cannot obstruct the other natural actions, such as eating, 
 walking and standing, as is apparent from the fact that, if he could, he 
 could destroy the whole world.<br>
 
         
 Besides, since the venereal act is common to all women, if it were obstructed 
 it would be so with reference to all women; but this is not so, and therefore 
 the first argument is good. For the facts prove that it is not so; for when 
 a man says that he has been bewitched, he is still quite capable as regards 
 other women, though not with her with whom he is unable to copulate; and 
 the reason for this is that he does not wish to, and therefore cannot effect 
 anything in the matter.<br>
 
         
 On the contrary and true side is the chapter in the Decretals (If by 
 sortilege, etc.): as is also the opinion of all the Theologians and Canonists, 
 where they treat of the obstruction to marriage caused by witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 There is also another reason: that since the devil is more powerful than 
 man, and a man can obstruct the generative powers by means of frigid herbs 
 or anything else that can be thought of, therefore much more can the devil 
 do this, since he has greater knowledge and cunning.<br>
 
         
 <i>Answer</i>. The truth is sufficiently evident from two matters which have 
 already been argued, although the method of obstruction has not been 
 specifically declared. For it has been shown that witchcraft does not exist 
 only in men's imaginations, and not in fact; but that truly and actually 
 in numerable bewitchments can happen, with the permission of God. It has 
 been shown, too, that God permits it more in the case of the generative 
 powers, because of their greater corruption, than in the case of other 
 human actions. But concerning the method by which such obstruction is 
 procured, it is to be noted that it does not affect only the generative 
 powers, but also the powers of the imagination or fancy.<br>
 
         
 And as to this, Peter of Palude (III, 34) notes five methods. For he says 
 that the devil, being a spirit, has power over a corporeal creature to cause 
 or prevent a local motion. Therefore he can prevent bodies from approaching 
 each other, either directly or indirectly, by interposing himself in some 
 bodily shape. In this way it happened to the young man who was betrothed to 
 an idol and nevertheless married a young maiden, and was consequently unable 
 to copulate with her. Secondly, he can excite a man to that act, or freeze 
 his desire for it, by the virtue of secret things of which he best knows the 
 power. Thirdly, he can also disturb a man's perception and imagination as to 
 make the woman appear loathsome to him: since he can, as had been said, 
 influence the imagination. Fourthly, he can directly prevent the erection of 
 that member which is adapted to fructification, just as he can prevent local 
 motion. Fifthly, he can prevent the flow of the vital essence to the members 
 in which lie the motive power; by closing as it were the seminary ducts, so 
 that it does not descend to the generative channels, or falls back from 
 them, or does not project from them, or in any of many ways fails in its 
 function.<br>
 
         
 And he continues in agreement with what has been treated of above by other 
 Doctors. For God allows the devil more latitude in respect of this act, 
 through which sin was first spread abroad, than of other human acts. 
 Similarly, serpents are more subject to magic spells than are other animals. 
 And a little later he says: It is the same in the case of a woman, for the 
 devil can so darken her understanding that she considers her husband so 
 loathsome that not for all the world would she allow him to lie with her.<br>
 
         
 Later he wishes to find the reason why more men than women are bewitched in 
 respect of that action; and he says that such obstruction generally occurs 
 in the matter of erection, which can more easily happen to men; and therefore 
 more men than women are bewitched. It might also be said that, the greater 
 part of witches being women, they lust more for men than for women. Also 
 they act in the despite of married women, finding every opportunity for 
 adultery when the husband is able to copulate with other women but not with 
 his own wife; and similarly the wife also has to seek other lovers.<br>
 
         
 He adds also that God allows the devil to afflict sinners more bitterly than 
 the just. Wherefore the Angel said to Tobias: He gives the devil power over 
 those who are given up to lust. But he has power also against the just 
 sometimes, as in the case of Job, but not in respect of the genital 
 functions. Wherefore they ought to devote themselves to confession and other 
 good works, lest the iron remain in the wound, and it be in vain to apply 
 remedies. So much for Peter. But the method of removing such effects will be 
 shown in the Second Part of this work.
 
 
 <center><i>Some Incidental Doubts on the subject of Copulation<br>prevented 
 by Evil Spells are made Clear.</i></center>
 
 
         
 But incidentally, if it is asked why this function is sometimes obstructed 
 in respect of one woman but not of another, the answer, according to S. 
 Bonaventura, is this. Either the enchantress of witch afflicts in this way 
 those persons upon whom the devil has determined; or it is because God will 
 not permit it to be inflicted on certain persons. For the hidden purpose of 
 God in this is obscure, as is shown in the case of the wife of Tobias. And 
 he adds:<br>
 
         
 If it is asked how the devil does this, it is to be said that he obstructs 
 the genital power, not intrinsically by harming the organ, but extrinsically 
 by rendering it useless. Therefore, since it is an artificial and not a 
 natural obstruction, he can make a man impotent towards one woman but not 
 towards others: by taking away the inflammation of his lust for her, but 
 not for other women, either through his own power, or through some herb or 
 stone, or some occult natural means. And this agrees with the words of 
 Peter of Palude.<br>
 
         
 Besides, since impotency in this act is sometimes due to coldness of nature, 
 or some natural defect, it is asked how it is possible to distinguish 
 whether it is due to witchcraft of not. Hostiensis gives the answer in his 
 <i>Summa</i> (but this must not be publicly preached): When the member is in 
 no way stirred, and can never perform the act of coition, this is a sign 
 of frigidity of nature; but when it is stirred and becomes erect, but yet 
 cannot perform, it is a sign of witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 It is to be noted also that impotence of the member to perform the act is 
 not the only bewitchment; but sometimes the woman is caused to be unable to 
 conceive, or else she miscarries.<br>
 
         
 Note, moreover, that according to what is aid down by the Canons, whoever 
 through desire of vengeance or for hatred does anything to a man or a woman 
 to prevent them from begetting or conceiving must be considered a homicide. 
 And note, further, that the Canon speaks of loose lovers who, to save their 
 mistresses from shame, use contraceptives, such as potions, or herbs that 
 contravene nature, without any help from devils. And such penitents are to 
 be punished as homicides. But witches who do such things by witchcraft are 
 by law punishable by the extreme penalty, as had been touched on above in 
 the First Question.<br>
 
         
 And for a solution of the arguments; when it is objected that these things 
 cannot happen to those joined together in matrimony, it is further to be 
 noted that, even if the truth in this matter had not already been made 
 sufficiently plain, yet these things can truly and actually happen just as 
 much to those who are married as to those who are not. And the prudent reader 
 who has plenty of books, will refer to the Theologians and the Canonists, 
 especially where they speak of the impotent and bewitched. He will find them 
 in agreement in condemning two errors: especially with regard to married 
 people who seem to think that such bewitchment cannot happen to those who 
 are joined in matrimony, advancing the reason that the devil cannot destroy 
 the works of God.<br>
 
         
 And the first error which they condemn is that of those who say that there 
 is no witchcraft in the world, but only in the imagination of men who, 
 through their ignorance of hidden causes which no man yet understands, 
 ascribe certain natural effects to witchcraft, as though they were effected 
 not by hidden causes, but by devils working either by themselves or in 
 conjunction with witches. And although all other Doctors condemn this error 
 as a pure falsehood, yet S. Thomas impugns it more vigorously and stigmatizes 
 it as actual heresy, saying that this error proceeds from the root of 
 infidelity. And since infidelity in a Christian is accounted heresy, 
 therefore such deserve to be suspected as heretics. And this matter was 
 touched on in the First Question, though it was not there declared so 
 plainly. For if anyone considers the other sayings of S. Thomas in other 
 places, he will find the reasons why he affirms that such an error proceeds 
 from the root of infidelity.<br>
 
         
 For in his questions concerning Sin, where he treats of devils, and in his 
 first question, whether devils have bodies that naturally belong to them, 
 among many other matters he makes mention of those who referred every 
 physical effect to the virtue of the stars; to which they said that the 
 hidden causes of terrestrial effects were subject. And he says: It must be 
 considered that the Peripatetics,the followers of Aristotle, held that devils 
 did not really exist; but that those things which are attributed to devils 
 proceeded from the power of the stars and other natural phenomena. Wherefore 
 S. Augustine says (<i>de Ciuitate Dei</i>, X), that it was the opinion of 
 Porphyry that from herbs and animals, and certain sounds and voice, and from 
 figures and figments observed in the motion of the stars, powers 
 corresponding to the stars were fabricated on earth by men in order to 
 explain various natural effect. And the error of these is plain, since they 
 referred everything to hidden causes in the stars, holding that devils were 
 only fabricated by the imagination of men.<br>
 
         
 But this opinion is clearly proved to be false by S. Thomas in the same 
 work; for some works of devils are found which can in no way proceed from 
 any natural cause. For example, when one who is possessed by devil speaks in 
 an unknown language; and many other devil's works are found, both in the 
 Rhapsodic and the Necromantic arts, which can in no way proceed except from 
 some Intelligence, which may be naturally good but is evil in its intention. 
 And therefore, because of these incongruities, other Philosophers were 
 compelled to admit that there were devils. Yet they afterwards fell into 
 various errors, some thinking that the souls of men, when they left their 
 bodies, became devils. For this reason many Soothsayers have killed children, 
 that they might have their souls as their co-operators; and many other 
 errors are recounted.<br>
 
         
 From this it is clear that not without reason does the Holy Doctor say that 
 such an opinion proceeds from the root of infidelity. And anyone who wishes 
 may read S. Augustine (<i>de Ciuitate Dei</i>, VIII, IX) on the various 
 errors of infidels concerning the nature of devils. And indeed the common 
 opinion of all Doctors, quoted in the above-mentioned work, against those 
 who err in this way by denying that there are any witches, is very weighty 
 in its meaning, even if it is expressed in few words. For they say that they 
 who maintain that there is no witchcraft in the world go contrary to the 
 opinion of all the Doctors, and of the Holy Scripture; and declare that 
 there are devils, and that devils have power over the bodies and imaginations 
 of men, with the permission of God. Wherefore, those who are the instruments 
 of the devils, at whose instance the devil at times do mischief to a 
 creature, they call witches.<br>
 
         
 Now in the Doctor's condemnation of this first error nothing is said 
 concerning those joined together in matrimony; but this is made clear in 
 their condemnation of the second error of believing that, though witchcraft 
 exists and abounds in the world, even against carnal copulation, yet, since 
 no such bewitchment can be considered to be permanent, it never annuls a 
 marriage that has already been contracted. Here is where they speak of those 
 joined in matrimony. Now in refuting this error (for we do so, even though 
 it is little to the point, for the sake of those who have not many books), 
 it is to be noted that they refute it by maintaining that it is against all 
 precedent, and contrary to all laws both ancient and modern.<br>
 
         
 Wherefore the Catholic Doctors make the following distinction, that impotence 
 caused by witchcraft is either temporary or permanent. And if it is 
 temporary, then it does not annul the marriage. Moreover, it is presumed 
 to be temporary of they are able to healed of the impediment within three 
 years from their cohabitation, having taken all possible pain, either 
 through the sacraments of the Church, or through other remedies, to be 
 cured. But if they are not then cured by any remedy, from that time it is 
 presumed to be permanent. And in that case it either precedes both the 
 contracting of a marriage, and annuls one that is not yet contracted; or 
 else it follows the contract of marriage but precedes its consummation, 
 and then also, according to some, it annuls the previous contract. (For it 
 is said in Book XXXII, quest. 1. cap. 1 that the confirmation of a marriage 
 consists in its carnal office.) Or else it is subsequent to the 
 consummation of the marriage, and then the matrimonial bond is not annulled. 
 Much is noted there concerning impotence by Hostiensis, and Godfrey, and the 
 Doctors and Theologians.<br>
 
         
 <i>To the arguments</i>. As to the first, it is made sufficiently clear from 
 what has been said. For as to the argument that God's works can be destroyed 
 by the devil's works, if witchcraft has power against those who are married, 
 it has no force; rather does the opposite appear, since the devil can do 
 nothing without God's permission. For he does not destroy by main force 
 like a tyrant, but through some extrinsic art, as is proved above. And the 
 second argument is also made quite clear, why God allows this obstruction 
 more in the case of the venereal act than of other acts. But the devil has 
 power also over other acts, when God permits. Wherefore it is not sound to 
 argue that he could destroy the whole world. And the third objection is 
 similarly answered by what has been said.
 
 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_09a.htm">Next: Question IX</a><br>Whether Witches may work some Prestidigatory Illusion so that the Male Organ appears to be entirely removed and separate from the Body.<br>
 </center>
 </body>