<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_11a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_13a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question XII</h2>
 <h3>Whether the Permission of Almighty God is an Accompaniment of Witchcraft.</h3></center>
 
         
 Now we must consider the Divine permission itself, touching which four 
 things are asked. First, whether it is necessary that this permission should 
 accompany a work of witchcraft. Secondly, that God in His justice permits a 
 creature naturally sinful to perpetrate witchcraft and other horrid crimes, 
 the other two necessary concomitants being presupposed. Thirdly, that the 
 crime of witchcraft exceeds all other evils which God permits to be done. 
 Fourthly, in what way this matter should be preached to the people.<br>
 
         
 Concerning the third postulate of this First Part, namely, the Divine 
 permission, it is asked: Whether it is as Catholic to affirm the Divine 
 permission in these works of witches, as it is quite heretical to contradict 
 such an affirmation? And it is argued that it is not heretical to maintain 
 that God does not permit so great power to the devil in this sort of 
 witchcraft. For it is Catholic, and not heretical, to refute such things as 
 appear to be to the disparagement of the Creator. And it is submitted that 
 it is Catholic to maintain that the devil is not allowed such power of 
 injuring men, since to hold the opposite opinion seems to be a disparagement 
 of the Creator. For it would then follow that not everything is subject to 
 the Divine providence, since the all-wise Provider keeps away, as far as 
 possible, all defect and evil from those for whom He cares. And if the works 
 of witchcraft are permitted by God, they are not kept away by Him: and if 
 He does not keep them away, the God Himself is not a wise Provider, and all 
 things are not subject to His providence. But since this is false, therefore 
 it is false that God permits witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 And again, to permit a thing to happen presupposes in him who permits it 
 that either he can prevent it from happening if he wishes, or he cannot 
 prevent it even if he wishes; and neither of these suppositions can apply 
 to God. For in the first case, such a man would be thought spiteful, and in 
 the second case impotent. Then it is incidentally asked: As to that 
 bewitchment that happened to Peter, if God could have prevented it, and did 
 not do so, then God is either despiteful or He does not care for all; but if 
 He could not have prevented it even if He wished, the He is not omnipotent. 
 But since it is not possible to maintain the opinion that God does not care 
 for all, and the rest, therefore it cannot be said that witchcraft is done 
 with the permission of God.<br>
 
         
 Besides, he who is responsible to himself and is the master of his own 
 actions is not subject to the permission or providence of any governor. But 
 men were made responsible to themselves by God, according to <i>Ecclesiasticus</i> 
 xv: God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his counsel. 
 In particular, the sins which men do are left in their own counsel, according 
 to their hearts' desire. Therefore not all evils are subject to Divine 
 permission.<br>
 
         
 Yet again, S. Augustine says in the <i>Enchiridion</i>, as does also 
 Aristotle in the ninth book of <i>Metaphysics:</i> It is better not to know 
 certain vile things than to know them, but all that is good is to be 
 ascribed to God. Therefore God does not prevent the very vile works of 
 witchcraft, whether He permits or not. See also S. Paul in I. <i>Corinthians</i> 
 ix: Doth God take care of oxen? And the same holds good of the other 
 irrational beasts. Wherefore God takes no care whether they are bewitched or 
 not, since they are not subject to His permission, which proceeds from His 
 providence.<br>
 
         
 Again, that which happens of necessity has no need of provident permission 
 or prudence. This is clearly shown in Aristotle's <i>Ethics</i>, Book II: 
 Prudence is a right reasoning concerning things which happen and are subject 
 to counsel and choice. But several effects of witchcraft happen of necessity; 
 as when for some reason, or owing to the influence of stars, diseases come, 
 or any other things which we judge to be witchcraft. Therefore they are not 
 always subject to Divine permission.<br>
 
         
 And again, if men are bewitched by Divine permission, then it is asked: Why 
 does this happen to one more than to another? If it be said that it is 
 because of sin, which abounds more in one than in another, this does not 
 seem valid; for then the greater sinners would be the more bewitched, but 
 this is manifestly not so, since they are less punished in this world. As it 
 is said: Well is it for the liars. But, if this argument were good, they 
 also would be bewitched. Finally, it is clear from the fact that innocent 
 children and other just men suffer most from witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 But against these arguments: it is submitted that God permits evil to be 
 done, though He does not wish it; and this is for the perfecting of the 
 universe. See Dionysius, <i>de Diuin. Nom.</i> III: Evil will be for all 
 time, even to the perfecting of the universe. And S. Augustine in the 
 <i>Enchiridion:</i> In all things good and evil consists the admirable 
 beauty of the universe. So that what is said to be evil is well ordained, 
 and kept in its due place commends more highly that which is good; for good 
 things are more pleasing and laudable when compared with bad. S. Thomas also 
 refutes the opinion of those who say that, although God has no wish for evil 
 (since no creature seeks for evil, either in its natural, or its animal, or 
 in its intellectual appetite, which is the will, whose object is good), yet 
 He is willing that evil should exist and be done. This he says to be false; 
 since God neither wishes evil to be done, nor wishes it not to be done, but 
 is willing to allow evil to be done; and this is good for the perfecting of 
 the universe.<br>
 
         
 And why it is erroneous to say that God wishes evil to be and to be done, 
 for the good of the universe, he says is for the following reason. Nothing 
 is to be judged good except what is good in itself and not by accident. As 
 the virtuous man is judge good in his intellectual nature, not in his animal 
 nature. But evil is not of itself ordained for good, but by accident. For 
 against the intention of those who do evil, good results. In this way, 
 against the intention of witches, or against the intention of tyrants, was 
 it that through their persecutions the patience of the martyrs shone out 
 clearly.<br>
 
         
 <i>Answer</i>. This question is as difficult to understand as it is 
 profitable to elucidate. For there is among the arguments, not so much of 
 Laymen as of certain Wise men, this in common; that they do not believe that 
 such horrible witchcraft as had been spoken of is permitted by God; being 
 ignorant of the causes of this Divine permission. And by reason of this 
 ignorance, since witches are not put down with the vengeance that is due to 
 them, they seem now to be depopulating the whole of Christianity. Therefore 
 that both learned and unlearned may be satisfied in each way, according to 
 the opinion of the Theologians, we make our answer by the discussion of two 
 difficulties. And first, that he world is so subject to the Divine providence 
 that He Himself provides for all. Secondly, that in His justice He permits 
 the prevalence of sin, which consists of guilt, punishment, and loss, by 
 reason of His two first permissions, namely, the fall of the Angels and that 
 of our first parents. From which also it will be clear that obstinately to 
 disbelieve this smacks of heresy, since such a man implicates himself in the 
 errors of the infidels.<br>
 
         
 And as for the first, it is to be noted that, presupposing that which pertains 
 to the providence of God (see <i>Wisdom</i> xiv: Thy providence, O Father, 
 governeth all things), we ought also to maintain that all things are subject 
 to His providence, and that also He immediately provides for all things. And 
 to make this clear, let us first refute a certain contrary error. For taking 
 the text in <i>Job</i> xxii: Thick clouds are a covering to him that He 
 seeth not us; and He walketh in the circuit of heaven: some have thought that 
 the doctrine pf S. Thomas, I, 22, means that only incorruptible things are 
 subject to Divine providence, such as the separate Essences, and the stars, 
 with also the species of lower things, which are also incorruptible; but 
 they said that the individuals of the species, being corruptible, were not 
 so subject. Wherefore they said that all lower things which are in the world 
 are subject to Divine providence in the universal, but not in the particular 
 or individual sense. But to others this opinion did not seem tenable, since 
 God cares for the other animals just as He does for men. Therefore the Rabbi 
 Moses, wishing to hold a middle course, agreed with their opinion in saying 
 that all corruptible things are not individually entirely subject to Divine 
 governance, but only in a universal sense, as has been said before; but he 
 excepted men from the generality of corruptible things, because of the 
 splendid nature of their intellect, which is comparable with the of the 
 separate Essences. And so, according to his opinion, whatever witchcraft 
 happens to men comes from the Divine permission; but not such as happens to 
 the animals or to the other fruits of the earth.<br>
 
         
 Now though this opinion is nearer to the truth than that which altogether 
 denies the providence of God in worldly matters, maintaining that the world 
 was made by chance, as did Democritus and the Epicureans, yet it is not 
 without great fallacy. For it must be said that everything is subject to 
 Divine providence, not only in the general, but also in the particular sense; 
 and that the bewitching not only of men, but also of animals and the fruits 
 of the earth, comes from Divine and provident permission. And this is 
 plainly true; the providence and ordinance of things to some end extend just 
 so far as the causality of them itself extends. To take an example from 
 things that are subject to some master; they are so far subject to his 
 providence as they are themselves under his control. But the causality which 
 is of God is the original agent, and extends itself to all beings, not only 
 in a general but also in an individual sense, and not only to things 
 incorruptible. Therefore, since all things must be of God, so all things are 
 cared for by Him, that is, are ordained to some end.<br>
 
         
 This point is touched by S. Paul in <i>Romans</i> xiii: All things which are 
 from God were ordained by Him. Which is to say that, just as all things come 
 from God, so also are all things ordained by Him, and are consequently 
 subject to His providence. For the providence of God is to be understood as 
 nothing else than the reason, that is, the cause of the ordering of things 
 to a purpose. Therefore, in so far as all things are a part of one purpose, 
 so also are they subject to the providence of God. And God knows all things, 
 not only in the mass generally, but also in the individual particularly. Now 
 the knowledge which God has of things created is to be compared with a 
 craftsman's knowledge of his work: therefore, just as all his work is subject 
 to the order and providence of a craftsman, so are all things subject to the 
 order and providence of God.<br>
 
         
 But this does not provide a satisfactory explanation of the fact that God in 
 justice permits evil and witchcraft to be in the world, although He is 
 Himself the provider and governor of all things; for it would seem that, if 
 this is conceded, He ought to keep away all evil from those for whom He 
 cares. For we see among men that a wise provider does all that he can to 
 keep away all defect and harm from those who are his care; therefore why 
 does not God, in the same way, keep away all evil? It must be noted that a 
 particular and an universal controller or provider are two very different 
 matters. For the particular controller must of necessity keep away all the 
 harm he can, since he is not able to extract good out of evil. But God is 
 the universal controller of the whole world, and can extract much good from 
 particular evils; as through the persecution of the tyrants came the patience 
 of the martyrs, and through the works of witches come the purgation or 
 proving of the faith of the just, as will be shown. Therefore it is not God's 
 purpose to prevent all evil, lest the universe should lack the cause of 
 much good. Wherefore S. Augustine says in the <i>Enchiridion:</i> So 
 merciful is Almighty God, that He would not allow any evil to be in His 
 works unless He were so omnipotent and good that He can bring good even out 
 of evil.<br>
 
         
 And we have an example of this in the actions of natural things. For 
 although the corruptions and defects which occur in natural things are 
 contrary to the purpose of that particular thing (as when a thief is hanged, 
 or when animals are killed for human food), they are yet in accordance with 
 the universal purpose of nature (as that man's life and property should be 
 kept intact); and thus the universal good is preserved. For it is necessary 
 for the conservation of the species that the death of one should be the 
 preservation of another. For lions are kept alive by the slaughter of other 
 animals.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_13a.htm">Next: Question XIII</a><br>Herein is set forth the Question, concerning the Two Divine Permissions which God justly allows, namely, that the Devil, the Author or all Evil, should Sin, and that our First Parents should Fall, from which Origins the Works of Witches are justly suffered to take place.<br>
 </center>
 </body>