<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_01a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_03a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question II</h2>
 <h3>If it be in Accordance with the Catholic Faith to maintain that in Order to bring about some Effect of Magic, the Devil must intimately co-operate with the Witch, or whether one without the other, that is to say, the Devil without the Witch, or conversely, could produce such an Effect.</h3></center>
 
 
         
 If it be in accordance with the Catholic Faith to maintain that in order to 
 bring about some effect of magic, the devil must intimately co-operate with 
 the witch, or whether one without the other, that is to say, the devil 
 without the witch, or conversely, could produce such an effect.
 <br>
 
         
 And the first argument is this: That the devil can bring about an effect of 
 magic without the co-operation of any witch. So S. Augustine holds. All things 
 which visibly happen so that they can be seen, may (it is believed) be the 
 work of the inferior powers of the air. But bodily ills and ailments are 
 certainly not invisible, nay rather, they are evident to the senses, therefore 
 they can be brought about by devils. Moreover, we learn from the Holy 
 Scriptures of the disasters which fell upon Job, how fire fell from heaven 
 and striking the sheep and the servants consumed them, and how a violent 
 wind threw down the four corners of a house so that it fell upon his 
 children and slew them all. The devil by himself without the co-operation 
 of any witches, but merely by God's permission alone, was able to bring about 
 all these disasters. Therefore he can certainly do many things which are 
 often ascribed to the work of witches.
 <br>
 
         
 And this is obvious from the account of the seven husbands of the maiden 
 Sara, whom a devil killed. Moreover, whatever a superior power is able to do, 
 it is able to do without reference to a power superior to it, and a superior 
 power can all the more work without reference to an inferior power. But an 
 inferior power can cause hailstorms and bring about diseases without the 
 help of a power greater than itself. For Blessed Albertus Magnus in his work 
 <i>De passionibus aeris</i> says that rotten sage, 
 if used as he explains, and thrown into running water, will arouse most 
 fearful tempests and storms.<br>
 
         
 Moreover, it may be said that the devil makes use of a witch, not because he 
 has need of any such agent, but because he is seeking the perdition of the 
 witch. We may refer to what Aristotle says in the 3rd book of his 
 <i>Ethics</i>. 
 Evil is a voluntary act which is proved by the fact that nobody performs an 
 unjust action, and a man who commits a rape does this for the sake of 
 pleasure, not merely doing evil for evil's sake. Yet the law punishes those 
 who have done evil as if they had acted merely for the sake of doing evil. 
 Therefore if the devil works by means of a witch he is merely employing an 
 instrument; and since an instrument depends upon the will of the person who 
 employs it and does not act of its own free will, therefore the guilt of the 
 action ought not to be laid to the charge of the witch, and in consequence 
 she should not be punished.
 
 <p>
         
 But an opposite opinion holds that the devil cannot so easily and readily 
 do harm by himself to mankind, as he can harm them through the instrumentality 
 of witches, although they are his servants. In the first place we may 
 consider the act of generation. But for every act which has an effect upon 
 another some kind of contact must be established, and because the devil, who 
 is a spirit, can have no such actual contact with a human body, since there 
 is nothing common of this kind between them, therefore he uses some human 
 instruments, and upon these he bestows the power of hurting by bodily touch. 
 And many hold this to be proven by the text, and the gloss upon the text, in 
 the 
 3rd chapter of S. Paul's Epistle to the <i>Galatians</i>: 
 O senseless Galatians, who hath bewitched you that you should not obey the 
 truth? And the gloss upon this passage refers to those who have singularly 
 fiery and baleful eyes, who by a mere look can harm others, especially 
 young children. And Avicenna also bears this out, 
 <i>Naturalism</i>, Book 3, c. the last, when he says; “Very often the 
 soul may have as much influence upon the body of another to the same extent 
 as it has upon its own body, for such is the influence of the eyes of anyone 
 who by his glance attracts and fascinates another.” And the same 
 opinion is maintained by Al-Gazali in the 5th book and 10th c. of his 
 <i>Physics</i>. Avicenna also suggests, although he does not put this opinion 
 forward as irrefutable, that the power of the imagination can actually change 
 or seem to change extraneous bodies, in cases where the power of the 
 imagination is too unrestrained; and hence we father that the power of the 
 imagination is not to be considered as distinct from a man's other sensible 
 powers, since it is common to them all, but to some extent it includes all 
 those other powers. And this is true, because such a power of the imagination 
 can change adjacent bodies, as, for example, when a man is able to walk along 
 some narrow beam which is stretched down the middle of a street. But yet if 
 this beam were suspended over deep water he would not dare to walk along it, 
 because his imagination would most strongly impress upon his mind the idea 
 of falling, and therefore his body and the power of his limbs would not obey 
 his imagination, and they would not obey the contrary thereto, that is to 
 say, walking directly and without hesitation. This change may be compared to 
 the influence exercised by the eyes of a person who has such influence, and 
 so a mental change is brought about although there is not any actual and 
 bodily change.<br>
 
         
 Moreover, if it be argued that such a change is cause by a living body owing 
 to the influence of the mind upon some other living body, this answer may be 
 given. In the presence of a murderer blood flows from the wounds in the 
 corpse of the person he has slain. Therefore without any mental powers bodies 
 can produce wonderful effects, and so a living man if he pass by near the 
 corpse of a murdered man, although he may not be aware of the dead body, is 
 often seized with fear.<br>
 
         
 Again, there are some things in nature which have certain hidden powers, the 
 reason for which man does not know; such, for example, is the lodestone, 
 which attracts steel and many other such things, which S. Augustine mentions 
 in the 20th book <i>Of the City of God</i>.
 
 </p><p>
         
 And so women in order to bring about changes in the bodies of others 
 sometimes make use of certain things, which exceed our knowledge, but this 
 is without any aid from the devil. And because these remedies are mysterious 
 we must not therefore ascribe them to the power of the devil as we should 
 ascribe evil spells wrought by witches.<br>
 
         
 Moreover, witches use certain images and other strange periapts, which they 
 are wont to place under the lintels of the doors of houses, or in those 
 meadows where flocks are herding, or even where men congregate, and thus 
 they cast spells over their victims, who have oft-times been known to die. 
 But because such extraordinary effects can proceed from these images it 
 would appear that the influence of these images is in proportion to the 
 influence of the stars over human bodies, for as natural bodies are influenced 
 by heavenly bodies, so may artificial bodies likewise be thus influenced. 
 But natural bodies may find the benefit of certain secret but good influences. 
 Therefore artificial bodies may receive such influence. Hence it is plain 
 that those who perform works of healing may well perform them by means of 
 such good influences, and this has no connexion at all with any evil power.
 
 </p><p>
         
 Moreover, it would seem that most extraordinary and miraculous events come 
 to pass by the working of the power of nature. For wonderful and terrible 
 and amazing things happen owing to natural forces. And this S. Gregory points 
 out in his <i>Second Dialogue</i>. The Saints 
 perform miracles, sometimes by a prayer, sometimes by their power alone. 
 There are examples of each; S. Peter by praying raised 
 to life Tabitha, who was dead. By rebuking Ananias and Sapphira, who 
 were telling a lie, he slew the without any prayer. Therefore a man by his 
 mental influence can change a material body into another, or he can change 
 such a body from health to sickness and conversely.<br>
 
         
 Moreover, the human body is nobler than any other body, but because of the 
 passions of the mind the human body changes and becomes hot or cold, as is 
 the case with angry men or men who are afraid: and so even greater change 
 takes place with regard to the effects of sickness and death, which by their 
 power can greatly change a material body.<br>
 
         
 But certain objections must be allowed. The influence of the mind cannot make 
 an impression upon any form except by the intervention of some agent, as we 
 have said above. And these are the words of S. Augustine in the book which we 
 have already quoted: It is incredible that the angels who fell from Heaven 
 should be obedient to any material things, for the obey God only. And much 
 less can a man of his natural power bring about extraordinary and evil 
 effects. The answer must be made, there are even to-day many who err greatly 
 on this point, making excuses for witches and laying the whole blame upon 
 the craft of the devil, or ascribing the changes that they work to some 
 natural alteration. These errors may be easily made clear. First, by the 
 description of witches which S. Isidore gives in his 
 <i>Etymologiae</i>, c. 9: Witches are so called on account of the 
 blackness of their guilt, that is to say, their deeds are more evil than 
 those of any other malefactors. He continues: They stir up and confound the 
 elements by the aid of the devil, and arouse terrible hailstorms and 
 tempests. Moreover, he says they distract the minds of men, driving them to 
 madness, insane hatred, and inordinate lusts. Again, he continues, by the 
 terrible influence of their spells alone, as it were by a draught of poison, 
 they can destroy life.<br>
 
         
 And the words of S. Augustine in his book on <i>The City of God</i> 
 are very much to the point, for he tells us 
 who magicians and witches really are. Magicians, who are commonly called 
 witches, are thus termed on account of the magnitude of their evil deeds. 
 These are they who by the permission of God disturb the elements, who drive 
 to distraction the minds of men, such as have lost their trust in God, and 
 by the terrible power of their evil spells, without any actual draught or 
 poison, kill human beings. As Lucan says: A mind which has not been corrupted 
 by any noxious drink perishes forspoken by some evil charm. For having 
 summoned devils to their aid they actually dare to heap harms upon mankind, 
 and even to destroy their enemies by their evil spells. And it is certain 
 that in operations of this kind the witch works in close conjunction with 
 the devil. Secondly, punishments are of four kinds: beneficial, hurtful, 
 wrought by witchcraft, and natural. Beneficial punishments are meted out by 
 the ministry of good Angels, just as hurtful punishments proceed from evil 
 spirits. Moses smote Egypt with ten plagues by the ministry of good Angels, 
 and the magicians were only able to perform three of these miracles by the 
 aid of the devil. And the pestilence which fell upon the people for three 
 days because of the sin of David who numbered the people, and the 72,000 
 men who were slain in one night in the army of Sennacherib, were miracles 
 wrought by the Angels of God, that is, by good Angels who feared God and 
 knew that they were carrying out His commands.<br>
 
         
 Destructive harm, however, is wrought by the medium of bad angels, at whose 
 hands the children of Israel in the desert were often afflicted. And those 
 harms which are simply evil and nothing more are brought about by the devil, 
 who works through the medium of sorcerers and witches. There are also 
 natural harms which in some manner depend upon the conjunction of heavenly 
 bodies, such as dearth, drought, tempests, and similar effects of nature.
 
 </p><p>
         
 It is obvious that there is a vast difference between all these causes, 
 circumstances, and happenings. For Job was afflicted by the devil with a 
 harmful disease, but this is nothing to the purpose. And if anybody who is 
 too clever and over-curious asks how it was that Job was afflicted with this 
 disease by the devil without the aid of some sorcerer or witch, let him know 
 that he is merely beating the air and not informing himself as to the real 
 truth. For in the time of Job there were no sorcerers and witches, and such 
 abominations were not yet practised. But the providence of God wished that 
 by the example of Job the power of the devil even over good men might be 
 manifested, so that we might learn to be on our guard against Satan, and, 
 moreover, by the example of this holy patriarch the glory of God shines 
 abroad, since nothing happens save what is permitted by God.
 
 </p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_03a.htm">Next: Question III</a><br>Whether Children can be Generated by Incubi and Succubi.<br>
 </center>
 </body>