<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_02a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question I</h2>
 <h3>Whether the Belief that there are such Beings as Witches is so Essential a Part of the Catholic Faith that Obstinacy to maintain the Opposite Opinion manifestly savours of Heresy.</h3></center>
 
 
         
 Whether the belief that there are such beings as witches is so essential a 
 part of the Catholic faith that obstinately to maintain the opposite opinion 
 manifestly savours of heresy. And it is argued that a firm belief in witches 
 is not a Catholic doctrine: see chapter 26, question 5, of the work of 
 Episcopus. Whoever believes that any creature can be changed for the better 
 or the worse, or transformed into another kind or likeness, except by the 
 Creator of all things, is worse than a pagan and a heretic. And so when they 
 report such things are done by witches it is not Catholic, but plainly 
 heretical, to maintain this opinion.
 <br>
 
         
 Moreover, no operation of witchcraft has a permanent effect among us. And 
 this is the proof thereof: For if it were so, it would be effected by the 
 operation of demons. But to maintain that the devil has power to change 
 human bodies or to do them permanent harm does not seem in accordance with 
 the teaching of the Church. For in this way they could destroy the whole 
 world, and bring it to utter confusion.
 <br>
 
         
 Moreover, every alteration that takes place in a human body - for example, 
 a state of health or a state of sickness - can be brought down to a question 
 of natural causes, as Aristotle has shown in his 7th book of <i>Physics</i>. 
 And the greatest of these is the influence of the stars. But the devils 
 cannot interfere with the stars. This is the opinion of Dionysius in his 
 epistle to S. Polycarp. For this alone God can do. Therefore it is evident 
 the demons cannot actually effect any permanent transformation in human 
 bodies; that is to say, no real metamorphosis. And so we must refer the 
 appearance of any such change to some dark and occult cause.
 <br>
 
         
 And the power of God is stronger than the power of the devil, so divine works 
 are more true than demoniac operations. Whence inasmuch as evil is powerful 
 in the world, then it must be the work of the devil always conflicting with 
 the work of God. Therefore as it is unlawful to hold that the devil's evil 
 craft can apparently exceed the work of God, so it us unlawful to believe 
 that the noblest works of creation, that is to say, man and beast, can be 
 harmed and spoiled by the power of the devil.
 <br>
 
         
 Moreover, that which is under the influence of a material object cannot have 
 power over corporeal objects. But devils are subservient to certain 
 influences of the stars, because magicians observe the course of certain 
 stars in order to evoke the devils. Therefore they have not the power of 
 effecting any change in a corporeal object, and it follows that witches have 
 even less power than the demons possess.
 <br>
 
         
 For devils have no power at all save by a certain subtle art. But an art 
 cannot permanently produce a true form. (And a certain author says: Writers 
 on Alchemy know that there is no hope of any real transmutation.) Therefore 
 the devils for their part, making use of the utmost of their craft, cannot 
 bring about any permanent cure - or permanent disease. But if these states 
 exist it is in truth owing to some other cause, which may be unknown, and 
 has nothing to do with the operations of either devils or witches.
 <br>
 
         
 But according to the Decretals (33) the contrary is the case. “If by 
 witchcraft or any magic art permitted by the secret but most just will of 
 God, and aided by the power of the devil, etc . . . . ” The reference here 
 is to any act of witchcraft which may hinder the end of marriage, and for 
 this impediment to take effect three things can concur, that is to say, 
 witchcraft, the devil, and the permission of God. Moreover, the stronger can 
 influence that which is less strong. But the power of the devil is stronger 
 than any human power (<i>Job xl</i>). There 
 is no power upon earth which can be compared to him, who was created so 
 that he fears none.
 <br>
 
         
 <i>Answer</i>. Here are three heretical errors which must be met, and when 
 they have been disproved the truth will be plain. For certain writers, 
 pretending to base their opinion upon the words of S. Thomas (iv, 24) when 
 he treats of impediments brought about by magic charms, have tried to 
 maintain that there is not such a thing as magic, that it only exists in the 
 imagination of those men who ascribe natural effects, the cause whereof are 
 not known, to witchcraft and spells. There are others who acknowledge indeed 
 that witches exist, but they declare that the influence of magic and the 
 effects of charms are purely imaginary and phantasmical. A third class of 
 writers maintain that the effects said to be wrought by magic spells are 
 altogether illusory and fanciful, although it may be that the devil does 
 really lend his aid to some witch.
 <br>
 
         
 The errors held by each one of these persons may thus be set forth and thus 
 confuted. For in the very first place they are shown to be plainly heretical 
 by many orthodox writers, and especially by S. Thomas, who lays down that 
 such an opinion is altogether contrary to the authority of the saints and is 
 founded upon absolute infidelity. Because the authority of the Holy 
 Scriptures says that devils have power over the bodies and over the minds of 
 men, when God allows them to exercise this power, as is plain from very many 
 passages in the Holy Scriptures. Therefore those err who say that there is 
 no such thing as witchcraft, but that it is purely imaginary, even although 
 they do not believe that devils exist except in the imagination of the 
 ignorant and vulgar, and the natural accidents which happen to a man he 
 wrongly attributes to some supposed devil. For the imagination of some men 
 is so vivid that they think they see actual figures and appearances which 
 are but the reflection of their thoughts, and then these are believed to be 
 the apparitions of evil spirits or even the spectres of witches. But this is 
 contrary to the true faith, which teaches us that certain angels fell from 
 heaven and are now devils, and we are bound to acknowledge that by their 
 very nature they can do many wonderful things which we cannot do. And those 
 who try to induce others to perform such evil wonders are called witches. 
 And because infidelity in a person who has been baptized is technically 
 called heresy, therefore such persons are plainly heretics.
 <br>
 
         
 As regards those who hold the other two errors, those, that is to say, who 
 do not deny that there are demons and that demons possess a natural power, 
 but who differ among themselves concerning the possible effects of magic and 
 the possible operations of witches: the one school holding that a witch can 
 truly bring about certain effects, yet these effects are not real but 
 phantastical, the other school allowing that some real harm does befall the 
 person or persons injured, but that when a witch imagines this damage is the 
 effect of her arts she is grossly deceived. This error seems to be based 
 upon two passages from the Canons where certain women are condemned who 
 falsely imagine that during the night they ride abroad with 
 Diana or Herodias. This may read in the Canon. Yet because such things 
 often happen by illusion are merely in the imagination, those who suppose 
 that all the effects of witchcraft are mere illusion and imagination are very 
 greatly deceived. Secondly, with regard to a man who believes or maintains 
 that a creature can be made, or changed for better or for worse, or 
 transformed into some other kind or likeness by anyone save by God, the 
 Creator of all things, alone, is an infidel and worse than a heathen. 
 Wherefore on account of these words “changed for the worse” they 
 say that such an effect if wrought by witchcraft cannot be real but must be 
 purely phantastical.
 <br>
 
         
 But inasmuch as these errors savour of heresy and contradict the obvious 
 meaning of the Canon, we will first prove our points by the divine law, 
 as also by ecclesiastical and civil law, and first in general.
 <br>
 
         
 To commence, the expressions of the Canon must be treated of in detail 
 (although the sense of the Canon will be even more clearly elucidated in the 
 following question). For the divine in many places commands that witches 
 are not only to be avoided, but also they are to be put to death, and it 
 would not impose the extreme penalty of this kind if witches did not really 
 and truly make a compact with devils in order to bring about real and true 
 hurts and harms. For the penalty of death is not inflicted except for some 
 grave and notorious crime, but it is otherwise with death of the soul, which 
 can be brought about by the power of a phantastical illusion or even by the 
 stress of temptation. This is the opinion of S. Thomas when he discusses 
 whether it be evil to make use of the help of devils (ii. 7). For in the 
 18th chapter of 
 <i>Deuteronomy</i> it is commanded that all wizards and charmers are to 
 be destroyed. Also the 19th chapter of <i>Leviticus</i> says: The soul which goeth to wizards 
 and soothsayers to commit fornication with them, I will set my face against 
 that soul, and destroy it out of the midst of my people. And again, 20: A man, or 
 woman, in whom there is a pythonical or divining spirit dying, let them die: 
 they shall stone them. Those persons are said to be pythons in whom the 
 devil works extraordinary things.
 <br>
 
         
 Moreover, this must be borne in mind, that on account of this sin Ochozias 
 fell sick and died, IV. <i>Kings I</i>. Also Saul, I <i>Paralipomenon</i>, 
 10. We have, moreover, the weighty opinions of the Fathers who have written 
 upon the scriptures and who have treated at length of the power of demons 
 and of magic arts. The writings of many doctors upon Book 2 of the Sentences 
 may be consulted, and it will be found that they all agree, that there are 
 wizards and sorcerers who by the power of the devil can produce real and 
 extraordinary effects, and these effects are not imaginary, and God permits 
 this to be. I will not mention those very many other places where S. Thomas 
 in great detail discusses operations of this kind. As, for example, in his 
 <i>Summa 
 contra Gentiles</i>, Book 3, c. 1 and 2, in part one, question 114, 
 argument 4. And in the <i>Second of the Second</i>, questions 
 92 and 94. We 
 may further consult the Commentators and the Exegetes who have written upon 
 the wise men and the magicians of Pharao, <i>Exodus</i> vii. We may also 
 consult what S. Augustine says in 
 <i>The City of God</i>, Book 18, c. 17. 
 See further his second book 
 <i>On Christian Doctrine</i>. Very many other 
 doctors advance the same opinion, and it would be the height of folly for 
 any man to contradict all these, and he could not be held to be clear of the 
 guilt of heresy. For any man who gravely errs in an exposition of Holy 
 Scripture is rightly considered to be a heretic. And whosoever thinks 
 otherwise concerning these matters which touch the faith that the Holy 
 Roman Church holds is a heretic. There is the Faith.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_02a.htm">Next: Question II</a><br>If it be in Accordance with the Catholic Faith to maintain that in Order to bring about some Effect of Magic, the Devil must intimately co-operate with the Witch, or whether one without the other, that is to say, the Devil without the Witch, or conversely, could produce such an Effect.<br>
 </center>
 </body>