<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_08a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_10a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question IX</h2>
 <h3>Whether Witches may work some Prestidigatory Illusion so that the Male Organ appears to be entirely removed and separate from the Body.</h3></center>
 
         
 Here is declared the truth about diabolic operations with regard to the male 
 organ. And to make plain the facts in this matter, it is asked whether 
 witches can with the help of devils really and actually remove the member, 
 or whether they only do so apparently by some glamour or illusion. And that 
 they can actually do so is argued <i>a fortiori</i>; for since devils can 
 do greater things than this, as killing them or carrying them from place 
 to place - as was shown above in the cases of Job and Tobias - therefore 
 they can also truly and actually remove men's members.<br>
 
         
 Again, an argument is taken from the gloss on the visitations of bad Angels, 
 in the Psalms: God punishes by means of bad Angels, as He often punished 
 the People of Israel with various diseases, truly and actually visited upon 
 their bodies. Therefore the member is equally subject to such visitations.<br>
 
         
 It may be said that this is done with the Divine permission. And in that 
 case, it has already been said that God allows more power of witchcraft over 
 the genital functions, on account of the first corruption of sin which came 
 to us from the act of generation, so also He allows greater power over the 
 actual genital organ, even to its removal.<br>
 
         
 And again, it was a greater thing to turn Lot's wife into a pillar of salt 
 than it is to take away the male organ; and that (<i>Genesis</i> xix) was a 
 real and actual, not an apparent, metamorphosis (for it is said that that 
 pillar is still to be seen), And this was done by a bad Angel; just as the 
 good Angels struck the men of Sodom with blindness, so that they could not 
 find the door of the house. And so it was with the other punishments of the 
 men of Gomorrah. The gloss, indeed, affirms that Lot's wife was herself 
 tainted with that vice, and therefore she was punished.<br>
 
         
 And again, whoever can create a natural shape can also take it away. But 
 devils have created many natural shapes, as is clear from Pharao's magicians, 
 who with the help of devils made frogs and serpents. Also S. Augustine, in 
 Book LXXXIII, says that those things which are visibly done by the lower 
 powers of the air cannot be considered to be mere illusions; but even men 
 are able, by some skilful incision, to remove the male organ; therefore 
 devils can do invisibly what others do visibly.<br>
 
         
 But on the contrary side, S. Augustine (<i>de Ciuitate Dei</i>, XVIII) says: 
 It is not to be believed that, through the art or power of devils, man's 
 body can be changed into the likeness of a beast; therefore it is equally 
 impossible that that should be removed which is essential to the truth of 
 the human body, Also he says (<i>de Trinitate</i>, III): It must not be 
 thought that this substance of visible matter is subject to the will of 
 those fallen angels; for it is subject only to God.<br>
 
         
 <i>Answer</i>. There is no doubt that certain witches can do marvellous 
 things with regard to male organs, for this agrees with what has been seen 
 and heard by many, and with the general account of what has been known 
 concerning that member through the senses of sight and touch. And as to how 
 this thing is possible, it is to be said that it can be done in two ways, 
 either actually and in fact, as the first arguments have said, or through 
 some prestige or glamour. But when it is performed by witches, it is only a 
 matter of glamour; although it is no illusion in the opinion of the sufferer. 
 For his imagination can really and actually believe that something is not 
 present, since by none of his exterior sense, such as sight or touch, can 
 he perceive that it is present.<br>
 
         
 From this it may be said that there is a true abstraction of the member in 
 imagination, although not in fact; and several things are to be noted as to 
 how this happens. And first as to two methods by which it can be done. It is 
 no wonder that the devil can deceive the outer human senses, since, as has 
 been treated of above, he can illude the inner senses, by bringing to actual 
 perception ideas that are stored in the imagination. Moreover, he deceives 
 men in their natural functions, causing that which is visible to be 
 invisible to them, and that which is tangible to be intangible, and the 
 audible inaudible, and so with the other senses. But such things are not 
 true in actual fact, since they are caused through some defect introduced 
 in the sense, such as the eyes or the ears, or the touch, by reason of which 
 defect a man's judgement is deceived.<br>
 
         
 And we can illustrate this from certain natural phenomena. For sweet wine 
 appears bitter on the tongue of the fevered, his taste being deceived not by 
 the actual fact, but through his disease. So also in the case under 
 consideration, the deception is not due to fact, since the member is still 
 actually in its place; but it is an illusion of the sense with regard to it.<br>
 
         
 Again, as has been said above concerning the generative powers, the devil 
 can obstruct that action by imposing some other body of the same colour 
 and appearance, in such a way that some smoothly fashioned body in the colour 
 of flesh is interposed between the sight and touch, and between the true 
 body of the sufferer, so that it seems to him that he can see and feel 
 nothing but a smooth body with its surface interrupted by no genital organ. 
 See the sayings of S. Thomas (2 dist. 8. artic. 5) concerning glamours and 
 illusions, and also in the second of the second, 91, and in his questions 
 concerning Sin; where he frequently quotes that of S. Augustine in Book 
 LXXXIII: This evil of the devil creeps in through all the sensual approaches; 
 he gives himself to figures, he adapts himself to colours, he abides in 
 sounds, he lurks in smells, he infuses himself into flavours.<br>
 
         
 Besides, it is to be considered that such an illusion of the sight and touch 
 can be caused not only by the interposition of some smooth unmembered body, 
 but also by the summoning to the fancy or imagination of certain forms and 
 ideas latent in the mind, in such a way that a thing is imagined as being 
 perceived then for the first time. For, as was shown in the preceding 
 question, devils can by their own power change bodies locally; and just as 
 the disposition or humour can be affected in this way, so can the natural 
 functions. I speak of things which appear natural to the imagination or 
 senses. For Aristotle in the <i>de Somno et Uigila</i> says, assigning the 
 cause of apparitions in dreams, that when an animal sleeps much blood flows 
 to the inner consciousness, and thence come ideas or impressions derived 
 from actual previous experiences stored in the mind. It has already been 
 defined how thus certain appearance convey the impressions of new 
 experiences. And since this can happen naturally, much more can the devil 
 call to the imagination the appearance of a smooth body unprovided with the 
 virile member, in such a way that the sense believe it to be an actual fact.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, some other methods are to be noted which are easier to understand 
 and to explain. For, according to S. Isidore (<i>Etym.</i> VIII, 9), a 
 glamour is nothing but a certain delusion of the senses, and especially of 
 the eyes. And for this reason it is also called a prestige, from <i>prestringo</i>, 
 since the sight of the eyes is so fettered that things seem to be other 
 than they are. And Alexander of Hales, Part 2, 
 says that a prestige, properly understood, is an illusion of the devil, 
 which is not caused by any change in matter, but only exists in the mind of 
 him who is deluded, either as to his inner or outer perceptions.<br>
 
         
 Wherefore, in a manner of speaking, we may say even of human prestidigitatory 
 art, that it can be effected in three ways. For the first, it can be done 
 without devils, since it is artificially done by the agility of men who show 
 things and conceal them, as in the case of the tricks of conjurers and 
 ventriloquists. The second method is also without the help of devils; as 
 when men can use some natural virtue in natural bodies or minerals so as to 
 impart to such objects some other appearance quite different from their true 
 appearance. Wherefore, according to S. Thomas (I, 114, 4), and several 
 others, men, by the smoke of certain smouldering or lighted herbs, can make 
 rods appear to be serpents.<br>
 
         
 The third method of delusion is effected with the help of devils, the 
 permission of God being granted. For it is clear that devils have, of their 
 nature, some power over certain earthly matters, which they exercise upon 
 them, when God permits, so that things appear to be other than they are.<br>
 
         
 And as to this third method, it is to be noted that the devil has fives 
 ways in which he can delude anyone so that he thinks a thing to be other 
 than it is. First, by an artificial tricks, as has been said; for that which 
 a man can do by art, the devil can do even better. Second, by a natural 
 method, by the application, as has been said, and interposition of some 
 substance so as to hide the true body, or by confusing it in man's fancy. 
 The third way is when in an assumed body he presents himself as being 
 something which he is not; as witness the story which S. Gregory tells in 
 his <i>First Dialogue</i> of a Nun, who ate a lettuce, which, however, as 
 the devil confessed, was not a lettuce, but the devil in the form of a 
 lettuce, or in the lettuce itself. Or as when he appeared to S. Antony in a 
 lump of gold which he found in the desert. Or as when he touches a real man, 
 and makes him appear like a brute animal, as will shortly be explained. The 
 fourth method is when he confuses the organ of sight, so that a clear thing 
 seems hazy, or the converse, or when an old woman appears to be a young girl. 
 For even after weeping the light appears different from what it was before. 
 His fifth method is by working in the imaginative power, and, by a 
 disturbance of the humours, effecting a transmutation in the forms perceived 
 by the senses, as has been treated of before, so that the senses then 
 perceive as it were fresh and new images. And accordingly, by the last three 
 of these methods, and even by the second, the devil can cast a glamour over 
 the senses of a man. Wherefore there is no difficulty in his concealing the 
 virile member by some prestige or glamour. And a manifest proof or example 
 of this, which was revealed to us in our Inquisitorial capacity, will be 
 set forth later, where more is recounted of these and other matters in the 
 Second Part of this Treatise.
 
 
 <center><i>How a Bewitchment can be Distinguished from a Natural Defect.</i></center>
 
 
         
 An incidental question, with certain other difficulties, follows. Peter's 
 member has been taken off, and he does not know whether it is by witchcraft 
 or in some other way by the devil's power, with the permission of God. Are 
 there any ways of determining or distinguishing between these? It can be 
 answered as follows. First, that those to whom such things most commonly 
 happen are adulterers or fornicators. For when they fail to respond to the 
 demand of their mistress, or if they wish to desert them and attach 
 themselves to other women, then their mistress, out of vengeance, through 
 some other power causes their members to be taken off. Secondly, it can be 
 distinguished by the fact that it is not permanent. For if it is not due to 
 witchcraft, then the loss is not permanent, but it will be restored some 
 time.<br>
 
         
 But here there arises another doubt, whether it is due to the nature of the 
 witchcraft that it is not permanent. It is answered that it can be permanent, 
 and last until death, just as the Canonists and Theologians judge concerning 
 the impediment of witchcraft in matrimony, that the temporary can become 
 permanent. For Godfrey says in his <i>Summa</i>: A bewitchment cannot always 
 be removed by him who caused it, either because he is dead, or because he 
 does not know how to remove it, or because the charm has been lost. 
 Wherefore we may say in the same way that the charm which has been worked 
 on Peter will be permanent if the witch who did it cannot heal him.<br>
 
         
 For there are three degrees of witches. For some both heal and harm; some 
 harm, but cannot heal; and some seem able only to heal, that is, to take 
 away injuries, as will be shown later. For thus it happened to us: Two 
 witches were quarreling, and while they were taunting each other one said: 
 I am not so wicked as you, for I know how to heal those whom I injure. The 
 charm will also be permanent if, before it has been healed, the witch 
 departs, either by changing her dwelling or by dying. For S. Thomas also 
 says: Any charm may be permanent when it is such as can have no human 
 remedy; or if it has a remedy, it is not known to men, or unlawful; although 
 God can find a remedy through a holy Angel who can coerce the devil, if not 
 the witch.<br>
 
         
 However, the chief remedy against witchcraft is the sacrament of Penitence. 
 For bodily infirmity often proceeds from sin. And how the charms or witches 
 can be removed will be shown in the Second Part of this Treatise, and in the 
 Second QUestion, chapter VI, where other different matters are treated of 
 and explained.
 
 
 <center><i>Solutions of the Arguments.</i></center>
 
 
         
 For the first, it is clear that there is no doubt but that, just as, with 
 God's permission, they can kill men, so also can devils taken off that 
 member, as well as others, truly and actually. But then the devils do not 
 work through the medium of witches, concerning which mention has already 
 been made. And from this the answer to the second argument is also made 
 clear. But this is to be said: that God allows more power of witchcraft over 
 the genital forces because, etc.; and therefore even allows that that member 
 should be truly and actually taken off. But it is not valid to say that this 
 always happens. For it would not be after the manner of witchcraft for it to 
 happen so; and even the witches, when they do such works, do not pretend 
 that they have not the power to restore the member when they wish to and 
 know how to do so. From which it is clear that it is not actually taken off, 
 but only by a glamour. As for the third, concerning the metamorphosis of 
 Lot's wife, we say that this was actual, and not a glamour. And as to the 
 fourth, that devils can create certain substantial shapes, and therefore can 
 also remove them: it is to be said with regard to Pharaoh's magicians that 
 they made true serpents; and that devils can, with the help of another agent, 
 produce certain effects on imperfect creatures which they cannot on men, who 
 are God's chief care. For it is said: Does God care for oxen? They can, 
 nevertheless, with the permission of God, do to men true and actual harm, 
 as also they can create a glamour of harm, and by this the answer to the 
 last argument is made clear.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_10a.htm">Next: Question X</a><br>Whether Witches can by some Glamour Change Men into Beasts.<br>
 </center>
 </body>