<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_16a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_18a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question XVII</h2>
 <h3>A Comparison of their Crimes under Fourteen Heads, with the Sins of the Devils of all and every Kind.</h3></center>
 
         
 So heinous are the crimes of witches that they even exceed the sins and the 
 fall of the bad Angels; and if this is true as to their guilt, how should it 
 not also be true of their punishments in hell? And it is not difficult to 
 prove this by various arguments with regard to their guilt. And first, 
 although the sin of Satan is unpardonable, this is not on account of the 
 greatness of his crime, having regard to the nature of the Angels, with 
 particular attention to the opinion of those who say that the Angels were 
 created only in a state of nature, and never in a state of grace. And since 
 the good of grace exceeds the good of nature, therefore the sins of those who 
 fall from a state of grace, as do the witches by denying the faith which they 
 received in baptism, exceed the sins of the Angels. And even if we say that 
 the Angels were created, but not confirmed, in grace; so also witches, though 
 they are not created in grace, have yet of their own will fallen from grace; 
 just as Satan sinned of his own will.<br> 
 
         
 Secondly, it is granted that Satan's sin is unpardonable for various other 
 reasons. For S. Augustine saus that he sinned at the instigation of none, 
 therefore his sin is justly remediable by none. And S. John Damascene says 
 that he sinned in his understanding against the character of God; and that his 
 sin was the greater by reason of the nobility of his understanding. For the 
 servant who knows the will of his master, etc. The same authority says that, 
 since Satan is incapable of repentance, therefore he is incapable of pardon; 
 and this is due to his very nature, which, being spiritual, could only be 
 changed once, when he changed it for ever; but this is not so with men, in 
 whom the flesh is always warring against the spirit. Or because he sinned in 
 the high places of heaven, whereas man sins in the earth.<br> 
 
         
 But notwithstanding all this, his sin is in many respects small in comparison 
 with the crimes of witches. First, as S. Anselm showed 
 in one of his <i>Sermons</i>, he sinned in his pride while there was yet no 
 punishment for sin. But witches continue to sin after great punishments have 
 been often inflicted upon many other witches, and after the punishments which 
 the Church teaches them have been inflicted by reason of the devil and his 
 fall; and they make light of all these, and hasten to commit, not the least 
 deadly of sins, as do other sinners who sin through infirmity or wickedness 
 yet not from habitual malice, but rather the most horrible crimes from the 
 deep malice of their hearts.<br> 
 
         
 Secondly, although the Bad Angel fell from innocence to guilt, and thence to 
 misery and punishment; yet he fell from innocence once only, in such a way 
 that he was never restored. But the sinner who is restored to innocence by 
 baptism, and again falls from it, falls very deep. And this is especially true 
 of witches, as is proved by their crimes.<br> 
 
         
 Thirdly, he sinned against the Creator; but we, and especially witches, sin 
 against the Creator and the Redeemer.<br> 
 
         
 Fourthly, he forsook God, who permitted him to sin but accorded him no pity; 
 whereas we, and witches above all, withdraw ourselves from God by our sins, 
 while, in spite of his permission of our sins, He continually pities us and 
 prevents us with His countless benefits.<br> 
 
         
 Fifthly, when he sinned, God rejected him without showing him and grace; 
 whereas we wretches run into sin although God is continually calling us 
 back.<br> 
 
         
 Sixthly, he keeps his heart hardened against a punisher; but we against a 
 merciful persuader. Both sin against God; but he against a commanding God, and 
 we against One who dies for us, Whom, as we have said, wicked witches offend 
 above all. <br><br>
 
 
 <center><i>The Solutions of the Arguments again Declare the Truth by Comparison.</i></center>
 <br>
 
         
 To the arguments. The answer to the first is clear from what was said in the 
 beginning of this whole question. It was submitted that one sin ought to be 
 thought heavier than another; and that the sins of witches are heavier than 
 all others in respect of guilt, but not in respect of the penalties that they 
 entail. To this it must be said that the punishment of Adam, just as his 
 guilt, may be considered two ways; either as touching him personally, or as 
 touching the whole of nature, that is, the posterity whcih came after him. As 
 to the first, greater sins have been committed after Adam; for he sinned only 
 in doing that which was evil, not in itself, but because it was forbidden. 
 Therefore such sins deserve the heavier punishment.<br> 
 
         
 As to the second, it is true that the greatest punishment resulted from the 
 first sin; but this is only indirectly true, in that through Adam all 
 posterity was infected with original sin, and he was the first father of all 
 those for whom the Only Son of God was able to atone by the power which was 
 ordained. Moreover, Adam in his own person, with the mediation of Divine 
 grace, repented, and was afterwards saved through the Sacrifice of Christ. But 
 the sins of witches are incomparably greater, since they are not content with 
 their own sins and perdition, but ever draw countless others after them.<br> 
 
         
 And thirdly, it follows from what has been said that it was by accident that 
 Adam's sin involved the greater injury. For he found nature uncorrupted, and 
 it was inevitable, and not of his own will, that he left it defiled; therefore 
 it does not follow that his sin was intrinsically greater than others. And 
 again, posterity would have committed the same sin if it had found nature in 
 the same state. Similarly, he who has not found grace does not commit so 
 deadly a sin as he who has found it and lost it. This is the solution of S. 
 Thomas (II, 21, art. 2), in his solution of the second argument. And if anyone 
 wishes fully to understand this solution, he must consider that even if Adam 
 had kept his original innocence, he would not have passed it down to all 
 posterity; for, as S. Anselm says, anyone coming after him could still have 
 sinned. See also S. Thomas, dist. 20, where he considers whether new-born 
 children would have been confirmed in grace; and in dist. 101, whether men who 
 are now saved would have been saved if Adam had not sinned. 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_18a.htm">Next: Question XVIII</a><br>Here follows the Method of Preaching against and Controverting Five Arguments of Laymen and Lewd Folk, which seem to be Variously Approved, that God does not Allow so Great Power to the Devil and Witches as is involved in the Performance of such Mighty Works of Witchcraft.<br>
 </center>
 </body>