<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_02a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_04a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question III</h2>
 <h3>Whether Children can be Generated by Incubi and Succubi.</h3></center>
 
 
 
         
 At first it may truly seem that it is not in accordance with the Catholic 
 Faith to maintain that children can be begotten by devils, that is to say, 
 by Incubi and Succubi: for God Himself, before 
 sin came into the world, instituted human procreation, since He created 
 woman from the rib of man to be a helpmeet unto man: And to them He said: 
 Increase, and multiply, 
 <i>Genesis</i> ii, 24. Likewise after sin had come 
 into the world, it was said to Noe: Increase, and multiply, 
 <i>Genesis</i> ix, 1. In the time of the new law also, Christ confirmed 
 this union: Have ye not read, that he who made man from the beginning, 
 <i>Made them male and female?</i> S. 
 <i>Matthew</i> xix, 4. Therefore, men cannot be begotten in any other 
 way than this.<p>
 
         
 But it may be argued that devils take their part in this generation not as 
 the essential cause, but as a secondary and artificial cause, since they 
 busy themselves by interfering with the process of normal copulation and 
 conception, by obtaining human semen, and themselves transferring it.<br>
 
         
 <i>Objection</i>. The devil can perform this act in every state of life, 
 that is to say, in the matrimonial state, or not in the matrimonial state. 
 Now he cannot perform it in the first state, because then the act of the 
 devil would be more powerful than the act of God, Who instituted and 
 confirmed this holy estate, since it is a state of continence and wedlock. 
 Nor can he effect this in any other estate: since we never read in Scripture 
 that children can be begotten in one state and not in another.</p><p>
 
         
 Moreover, to beget a child is the act of a living body, but devils cannot 
 bestow life upon the bodies which they assume; because life formally only 
 proceeds from the soul, and the act of generation is the act of the physical 
 organs which have bodily life. Therefore bodies which are assumed in this 
 way cannot either beget or bear.<br>
 
         
 Yet it may be said that these devils assume a body not in order that they 
 may bestow life upon it, but that they may by the means of this body preserve 
 human semen, and pass the semen on to another body.<br>
 
         
 <i>Objection</i>. As in the action of angels, whether they be good or bad, 
 there is nothing superfluous and useless, nor is there anything superfluous 
 and useless in nature. But the devil by his natural power, which is far 
 greater than any human bodily power, can perform any spiritual action, and 
 perform it again and again although man may not be able to discern it. 
 Therefore he is able to perform this action, although man may not be able to 
 discern when the devil is concerned therewith. For all bodily and material 
 things are on a lower scale than pure and spiritual intelligences. But the 
 angels, whether they be good or whether they be evil, are pure and spiritual 
 intelligences. Therefore they can control what is below them. Therefore the 
 devil can collect and make use as he will of human semen which belongs to 
 the body.<br>
 
         
 However, to collect human semen from one person and to transfer it to another 
 implies certain local actions. But devils cannot locally move bodies from 
 place to place. And this is the argument they put forward. The soul is 
 purely a spiritual essence, so is the devil: but the soul cannot move a 
 body from place to place except it be that body in which it lives and to 
 which it gives life: whence if any member of the body perishes it becomes 
 dead and immovable. Therefore devils cannot move a body from place to place, 
 except it be a body to which they give life. It has been shown, however, and 
 is acknowledged that devils do not bestow life on anybody, therefore they 
 cannot move human semen locally, that is, from place to place, from body to 
 body.<br>
 
         
 Moreover, every action is performed by contact, and especially the act of 
 generation. But it does not seem possible that there can be any contact 
 between the demon and human bodies, since he has not actual point of contact 
 with them. Therefore he cannot inject semen into a human body, and therefore 
 since this needs a certain bodily action, it would seem that the devil 
 cannot accomplish it.<br>
 
         
 Besides, devils have no power to move those bodies which in a natural order 
 are more closely related to them, for example the heavenly bodies, therefore 
 they have no power to move those bodies which are more distant and distinct 
 from them. The major is proved, since the power that moves and the movement 
 are one and the same thing according to Aristotle in his 
 <i>Physics</i>. It follows, therefore, that devils 
 who move heavenly bodies must be in heaven, which is wholly untrue, both in 
 our opinion, and in the opinion of the Platonists.<br>
 
         
 Moreover, S. Augustine, <i>On the Trinity</i>, III, 
 says that devils do indeed collect human semen, by means of which they are 
 able to produce bodily effects; but this cannot be done without some local 
 movement, therefore demons can transfer semen which they have collected and 
 inject it into the bodies of others. But, as Walafrid Strabo says in his 
 commentary upon <i>Exodus</i> vii, II: And Pharao 
 called the wise men and the magicians: Devils go about the earth collecting 
 every sort of seed, and can by working upon them broadcast various species. 
 See also the gloss on those words (Pharao called). And again in 
 <i>Genesis</i> vi 
 the gloss makes two comments on the words: And the sons of God saw the 
 daughters of men. First, that by the sons of God are meant the sons of Seth, 
 and by the daughters of men, the daughters of Cain. Second, that Giants 
 were created not by some incredibly act of men, but by certain devils, which 
 are shameless towards women. For the Bible says, Giants were upon the earth. 
 Moreover, even after the Flood the bodies not only of men, but also of women, 
 were pre-eminently and incredibly beautiful.</p><p>
 
         
 <i>Answer</i>. For the sake of brevity much concerning the power of the devil 
 and his works in the matter of the effects of witchcraft is left out; for 
 the pious reader either accepts it as proved, or he may, if he wish to 
 inquire, find every point clearly elucidated in the second <i>Book of 
 Sentences</i>, 5. For hw will see that the devils perform all their works 
 consciously and voluntarily; for the nature that was given them has not been 
 changed. See Dionysius in his fourth chapter on the 
 subject; their nature remained intact and very splendid, although they 
 cannot use it for any good purpose.<br>
 
         
 And as to their intelligence, he will find that they excel in three points 
 of understanding, in their age-long experience, and in the revelation of the 
 higher spirits. He will find also how, through the influence of the stars, 
 they learn the dominating characteristics of men, and so discover that some 
 are more disposed to work witchcraft that others, and that they molest 
 these chiefly for the purpose of such works.<br>
 
         
 And as to their will, the reader will find that it cleaves unchangeably to 
 evil, and that they continuously sin in pride, envy, and gross covetousness; 
 and that God, for his own glory, permits them to work against His will. He 
 will also understand how with these two qualities of intellect and will 
 devils do marvels, so that there is no power in earth which can be compared 
 to them: <i>Job xli</i>. 
 There is no power on the earth which can be compared with him, who was created 
 that he should fear no one. But here the gloss says, Although he fears no 
 one he is yet subject to the merits of the Saints.<br>
 
         
 He will find also how the devil knows the thoughts of our hearts; how he can 
 substantially and disastrously metamorphose bodies with the help of an agent; 
 how he can move bodies locally, and alter the outward and inner feelings to 
 every conceivable extent; and how he can change the intellect and will of a 
 man, however indirectly.<br>
 
         
 For although all this is pertinent to our present inquiry, we wish only to 
 draw some conclusion therefrom as to that nature of devils, and so proceed 
 to the discussion of our question.<br>
 
         
 Now the Theologians have ascribed to them certain qualities, as that they 
 are unclean spirits, yet not by very nature unclean. For according to 
 Dionysius there is in them a natural madness, a rabid concupiscence, a wanton 
 fancy, as is seen from their spiritual sins of pride, envy, and wrath. For 
 this reason they are the enemies of the human race: rational in mind, but 
 reasoning without words; subtle in wickedness, eager to hurt; ever fertile 
 in fresh deceptions, they change the perceptions and befoul the emotions of 
 men, they confound the watchful, and in dreams disturb the sleeping; they 
 bring diseases, stir up tempests, disguise themselves as angels of light, 
 bear Hell always about them; from witches they usurp to themselves the 
 worship of God, and by this means magic spells are made; they seek to get a 
 mastery over the good, and molest them to the most of their power; to the 
 elect they are given as a temptation, and always they lie in wait for the 
 destruction of men.<br>
 
         
 And although they have a thousand ways of doing harm, and have tried ever 
 since their downfall to bring about schisms in the Church, to disable 
 charity, to infect with the gall of envy the sweetness of the acts of the 
 Saints, and in every way to subvert and perturb the human race; yet their 
 power remains confined to the privy parts and the navel. See 
 <i>Job</i> xli. 
 For through the wantonness of the flesh they have much power over men; and 
 in men the source of wantonness lies in the privy parts, since it is from 
 them that the semen falls, just as in women it falls from the navel.<br>
 
         
 These things, then, being granted for a proper understanding of the question 
 of Incubi and Succubi, it must be said that it is just as Catholic a view 
 to hold that men may at times be begotten by means of Incubi and Succubi, as 
 it is contrary to the words of the Saints and even to the tradition of Holy 
 Scripture to maintain the opposite opinion. And this is proved as follows. 
 S. Augustine in one place raises this question, not indeed as regards 
 witches, but with reference to the very works of devils, and to the fables 
 of the poets, and leave the matter in some doubt; though later on he is 
 definite in the matter of Holy Scripture. For in his 
 <i>De Ciuitate Dei</i>, Book 3, chapter 2, he says: 
 We leave open the question  whether it was possible for Venus to give birth 
 to Aeneas through coition with Anchises. For a similar question arises in 
 the Scriptures, where it is asked whether evil angels lay with the daughters 
 of men, and thereby the earth was then filled with giants, that is to say, 
 preternaturally big and strong men. But he settles the question in 
 Book 5, chapter 23, 
 in these words: It is a very general belief, the truth of which is vouched 
 for by many from their own experience, or at least from heresay as having 
 been experienced by men of undoubted trustworthiness, that Satyrs and Fauns 
 (which are commonly called Incubi) have appeared to wanton women and have 
 sought and obtained coition with them. And that certain devils (which the 
 Gauls call Dusii) assiduously attempt and achieve this filthiness is vouched 
 for by so many credible witness that it would seem impudent to deny it.<br>
 
         
 Later in the same book he settles the second contention, namely, that the 
 passage in Genesis about the sons of God (that is Seth) and the daughters 
 of men (that is Cain) does not speak only of Incubi, since the existence of 
 such is not credible. In this connexion there is the gloss which we have 
 touched upon before. He says that it is not outside belief that the Giants 
 of whom the Scripture speaks were begotten not by men, but by Angels or 
 certain devils who lust after women. To the same effect is the gloss in 
 <i>Esaias</i> xiii, where the prophet foretells 
 the desolation of Babylon, and the monsters that should inhabit it. He says: 
 Owls shall dwell there, and Satyrs shall dance there. By Satyrs here devils 
 are meant; as the gloss says, Satyrs are wild shaggy creatures of the woods, 
 which are a certain kind of devils called Incubi. And again in 
 <i>Esaias</i> xxxiv, 
 where he prophesies the desolation of the land of the Idumeans because they 
 persecuted the Jews, he says: And it shall be an habitation of dragons, and 
 a court for owls. The wild beasts also of the desert shall meet . . . The 
 interlinear gloss interprets this as monsters and devils. And in the same 
 place Blessed Gregory explains these to be woodland gods under another name, 
 not those which the Greeks called Pans, and the Latins Incubi.<br>
 
         
 Similarly Blessed Isidore, in the last chapter of his 8th book, says: Satyrs 
 are they who are called Pans in Greek and Incubi in Latin. And they are 
 called Incubi from their practice of overlaying, 
 that is debauching. For they often lust lecherously after women, and 
 copulate with them; and the Gauls name them Dusii, 
 because they are diligent in this beastliness. But the devil which the 
 common people call an Incubus, the Romans called 
 a fig Faun; to which Horace said, “O Faunus, 
 love of fleeing nymphs, go gently over my lands and smiling fields.”<br>
 
         
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_04a.htm">Next: Question IV</a><br>By which Devils are the Operations of Incubus and Succubus Practised?<br>
 </center>
 </body>