<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_04a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm01_06a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 1</h1>
 <h2>Question V</h2>
 <h3>What is the Source of the Increase of Works of Witchcraft? Whence comes it that the Practice of Witchcraft hath so notably increased?</h3></center>
 
         
 Is it in any way a Catholic opinion to hold that the origin and growth of 
 witchcraft proceed from the influence of the celestial bodies; or from the 
 abundant wickedness of men, and not from the abominations of Incubi and 
 Succubi? And it seems that it springs from man's own wickedness. For S. 
 Augustine says, in Book LXXXIII, that the cause of a man's depravity lies 
 in his own will, whether he sins at his own or at another's suggestion. But 
 a witch is depraved through sin, therefore the cause of it is not the devil 
 but human will. In the same place he speaks of free-will, that everyone is 
 the cause of his own wickedness. And he reasons thus: that the sin of man 
 proceeds from free-will, but the devil cannot destroy free-will, for this 
 would militate against liberty: therefore the devil cannot be the cause of 
 that or any other sin. Again, in the book of Ecclesiastic Dogma it is said: 
 Not all our evil thoughts are stirred up by the devil, but sometimes they 
 arise from the operation of our own judgement.<br>
 
         
 Again, if the stars were not the cause of human actions both good and bad, 
 Astrologers would not so frequently foretell the truth about the result of 
 wars and other human acts: therefore they are in some way a cause.<br>
 
         
 Again, the stars influence the devils themselves in the causing of certain 
 spells; and therefore they can all the more influence men. Three proofs are 
 adduced for this assumption. For certain men who are called Lunatics are 
 molested by devils more at one time than at another; and the devils would 
 not so behave, but would rather molest them at all times, unless they 
 themselves were deeply affected by certain phases of the Moon. It is proved 
 again from the fact the Necromancers observe certain constellations for the 
 invoking of devils, which they would not do unless they knew that those 
 devils were subject to the stars.<br>
 
         
 And this is also adduced as a proof; that according to S. Augustine (<i>de 
 Ciuitate Dei</i>, 10), the devils employ certain lower bodies, such as herbs, 
 stones, animals, and certain sounds and voices, and figures. But since the 
 heavenly bodies are of more potency than the lower bodies, therefore the 
 stars are a far greater influence than these things. And witches are the 
 more in subjection in that their deeds proceed from the influence of those 
 bodies, and not from the help of evil spirits. And the argument is supported 
 from I <i>Kings</i> xvi, where Saul was vexed by a devil, but was calmed 
 when David struck his harp before him, and the evil departed.<br>
 
         
 <i>But against this</i>. It is impossible to produce an effect without its 
 cause; and the deeds of witches are such that they cannot be done without 
 the help of devils, as is shown by the description of witches in S. Isidore, 
 <i>Ethics</i> VIII. WItches are so called from the enormity of their magic 
 spells; for they disturb the elements and confound the minds of men, and 
 without any venomous draught, but merely by virtue of incantations, destroy 
 souls, etc. But this sort of effects cannot be caused by the influence of 
 the stars through the agency of a man.<br>
 
         
 Besides, Aristotle says in his <i>Ethics</i> that it is difficult to know 
 what is the beginning of the operation of thought, and shows that it must 
 be something extrinsic. For everything that begins from a beginning has some 
 cause. Now a man begins to do that which he wills; and he begins to will 
 because of some pre-suggestion; and if this is some precedent suggestion, it 
 must either proceed from the infinite, or there is some extrinsic beginning 
 which first brings a suggestion to a man. Unless indeed it be argued that 
 this is a matter of chance, from which it would follow that all human 
 actions are fortuitous, which is absurd. Therefore the beginning of good in 
 the good is said to be God, Who is not the cause of sin. But for the wicked, 
 when a man begins to be influenced towards and wills to commit sin, there 
 must also be some extrinsic cause of this. And this can be no other than the 
 devil; especially in the case of witches, as is shown above, for the stars 
 cannot influence such acts. Therefore the truth is plain.<br>
 
         
 Moreover, that which has power over the motive has also power over the 
 result which is caused by the motive. Now the motive of the will is something 
 perceived through the sense or the intellect, both of which are subject to 
 the power of the devil. For S. Augustine says in Book 83: This evil, which 
 is of the devil, creeps in by all the sensual approaches; he places himself 
 in figures, he adapts himself to colours, he attaches himself to sounds, he 
 lurks in angry and wrongful conversation, he abides in smells, he impregnates 
 with flavours and fills with certain exhalations all the channels of the 
 understanding. Therefore it is seen that it is in the devil's power to 
 influence the will, which is directly the cause of sin.<br>
 
         
 Besides, everything which has a choice of two ways needs some determining 
 factor before it proceeds to the action. And the free-will of man has the 
 choice between good and ill; therefore when he embarks upon sin, it needs 
 that he is determined by something towards ill. And this seems chiefly to 
 be done by the devil, especially in the actions of witches, whose will is 
 made up for evil. Therefore it seems that the evil will of the devil is the 
 cause of evil will in man, especially in witches. And the argument may be 
 substantiated thus; that just as a good Angel cleaves to good, so does a 
 bad Angel to evil; but the former leads a man into goodness, therefore the 
 latter leads him into evil. For it is, says Dionysius, the unalterable and 
 fixed law of divinity, that the lowest has it cause in the highest.<br>
 
         
 <i>Answer</i>. Such as contend that witchcraft has its origin in the 
 influence of the stars stand convicted of three errors. In the first place, 
 it is not possible that it originated from astromancers and casters of 
 horoscopes and fortune-tellers. For if it is asked whether the vice of 
 witchcraft in men is caused by the influence of the stars, then, in 
 consideration of the variety of men's characters, and for the upholding 
 of the true faith, a distinction must be maintained; namely, that there are 
 two ways in which it can be understood that men's characters can be caused 
 by the stars. Either completely and of necessity, or by disposition and 
 contingency. And as for the first, it is not only false, but so heretical 
 and contrary to the Christian religion, that the true faith cannot be 
 maintained in such an error. For this reason, he who argues that everything 
 of necessity proceeds from the stars takes away all merit and, in 
 consequence, all blame: also he takes away Grace, and therefore Glory. 
 For uprightness of character suffers prejudice by this error, since the 
 blame of the sinner redounds upon the stars, licence to sin without 
 culpability is conceded, and man is committed to the worship and adoration 
 of the stars.<br>
 
         
 But as for the contention that men's characters are conditionally varied by 
 the disposition of the stars, it is so far true that is it not contrary to 
 reason or faith. For it is obvious that the disposition of a body variously 
 causes many variations in the humours and character of the soul; for 
 generally the soul imitates the complexions of the body, as it said in the 
 Six Principles. Wherefore the choleric are wrathful, the sanguine are kindly, 
 the melancholy are envious, and the phlegmatic are slothful. But this is 
 not absolute; for the soul is master of its body, especially when it is 
 helped by Grace. And we see many choleric who are gently, and melancholy 
 who are kindly. Therefore when the virtue of the stars influences the 
 formation and quality of a man's humours, it is agreed that they have some 
 influence over the character, but very distantly: for the virtue of the 
 lower nature has more effect on the quality of the humours than has the 
 virtue of the stars.<br>
 
         
 Wherefore S. Augustine (<i>de Ciuitate Dei</i>, V), where he resolves a 
 certain question of two brothers who fell ill and were cured simultaneously, 
 approves the reasoning of Hippocrates rather than that of an Astronomer. 
 For Hippocrates answered that it is owing to the similarity of their humours; 
 and the Astronomer answered that it was owing the identity of their 
 horoscopes. For the Physician's answer was better, since he adduced the more 
 powerful and immediate cause. Thus, therefore, it must be said that the 
 influence of the stars is to some degree conducive to the wickedness of 
 witches, if it be granted that there is any such influence over the bodies 
 that predisposes them to this manner of abomination rather than to any 
 other sort of works either vicious or virtuous: but this disposition must 
 not be said to be necessary, immediate, and sufficient, but remote and 
 contingent.<br>
 
         
 Neither is that objection valid which is based on the book of the 
 Philosophers on the properties of the elements, where it says that kingdoms 
 are emptied and lands depopulated at the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn; 
 and it is argued from this that such things are to be understood as being 
 outside the free-will of men, and that therefore the influence of the stars 
 has power over free-will. For it is answered that in this saying the 
 Philosopher does not mean to imply that men cannot resist the influence of 
 that constellation towards dissensions, but that they will not. For Ptolemy 
 in <i>Almagest</i> says: 
 A wise man will be the master of the stars. 
 For although, since Saturn has a melancholy and bad influence and Jupiter a 
 very good influence, the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn can dispose men to 
 quarrels and discords; yet, through free-will, men can resist that 
 inclination, and very easily with the help of God's grace.<br>
 
         
 And again it is no valid objection to quote 
 S. John Damascene where he says (Book II, 
 chap. vi) that comets are often the sign of the death of kings. For it will 
 be answered that even if we follow the opinion of S. John Damascene, which 
 was, as is evident in the book referred to, contrary to the opinion of the 
 Philosophic Way, yet this is no proof of the inevitability of human actions. 
 For S. John considers that a comet is not a natural creation, nor is it one 
 of the stars set in the firmament; wherefore neither its significance nor 
 influence is natural. For he says that comets are not of the stars which 
 were created in the beginning, but that they are made for a particular 
 occasion, and then dissolved, by Divine command. This then is the opinion 
 of S. John Damascene. But God by such a sign foretells the death of kings 
 rather than of other men, both because from this may arise the confusion of 
 a kingdom. And the Angels are more careful to watch over kings for the 
 general good; and kings are born and die under the ministry of Angels.<br>
 
         
 And there is no difficulty in the opinion of the Philosophers, who say that 
 a comet is a hot and dry conglomeration, generated in the higher part of 
 space near the fire, and that a conjoined globe of that hot and dry vapour 
 assumes the likeness of a star. But unincorporated parts of that vapour 
 stretch in long extremities joined to that globe, and are a sort of adjunct 
 to it. And according to this view, not of itself but by accident, it predicts 
 death which proceeds from hot and dry infirmities. And since for the most 
 part the rich are fed on things of a hot and dry nature, therefore at such 
 times many of the rich die; among which the death of kings and princes is 
 the most notable. And this view is not far from the view of S. John 
 Damascene, when carefully considered, except as regards the operation and 
 co-operation of the Angels, which not even the philosophers can ignore. For 
 indeed when the vapours in their dryness and heat have nothing to do with 
 the generation of a comet, even then, for reasons already set out, a comet 
 may be formed by the operation of an Angel.<br>
 
         
 In this way the star which portended the death of the learned S. Thomas was 
 not one of the stars set in the firmament, but was formed by an Angel from 
 some convenient material, and, having performed it office, was again 
 dissolved.<br>
 
         
 From this we see that, whichever of those opinions we follow, the stars have 
 no inherent influence over the free-will, or, consequently, over the malice 
 and character of men.<br>
 
         
 It is to be noted also that Astronomers often foretell the truth, and that 
 their judgements are for the most part effective on one province or one 
 nation. And the reason is that they take their judgements from the stars, 
 which, according to the more probable view, have a greater, though not an 
 inevitable, influence over the actions of mankind in general, that is, over 
 one nation or province, than over one individual person; and this because 
 the greater part of one nation more closely obeys the natural disposition 
 of the body than does one single man. But this is mentioned incidentally.<br>
 
         
 And the second of the three ways by which we vindicate the Catholic 
 standpoint is by refuting the errors of those who cast Horoscopes and 
 Mathematicians who worship the goddess of 
 fortune. Of these S. Isidore (<i>Ethics</i>, VIII. 9) says that those who 
 cast Horoscopes are so called from their examination of the stars at 
 nativity, and are commonly called Mathematicians; and in the same Book, 
 chapter 2, he says that Fortune has her name from fortuitousness. and is a 
 sort of goddess who mocks human affairs in a haphazard and fortuitous manner. 
 Wherefore she is called blind, since she runs here and there with no 
 consideration for desert, and comes indifferently to good and bad. So much 
 for Isidore. But to believe that there is such a goddess, or that the harm 
 done to bodies and creatures which is ascribed to witchcraft does not 
 actually proceed from witchcraft, but from that same goddess of Fortune, 
 is sheer idolatry: and also to assert that witches themselves were born for 
 that very purpose that they might perform such deeds in the world is 
 similarly alien to the Faith, and indeed to the general teaching of the 
 Philosophers. Anyone who pleases may refer to S. Thomas in the 3rd book of 
 his <i>Summa</i> of the Faith against the Gentiles. question 87, etc., and 
 he will find much to this effect.<br>
 
         
 Nevertheless one point must not be omitted, for the sake of those who 
 perhaps have not great quantity of books. It is there noted that three things 
 are to be considered in man, which are directed by three celestial causes, 
 namely, the act of the will, the act of the intellect, and the act of the 
 body. The first of these is governed directly and soley by God, the second 
 by an Angel, and the third by a celestial body. For choice and will are 
 directly governed by God for good works, as the Scripture says in 
 <i>Proverbs</i> xxi: The heart of the king is in the hand of the Lord; he 
 turneth it whithersoever he will. And it says “the heart of the king” 
 to signify that, as the great cannot oppose His will, so are others even 
 less able to do so. Also S. Paul says: God who causeth us to wish and to 
 perform that which is good.<br>
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm01_06a.htm">Next: Question VI</a><br>Concerning Witches who copulate with Devils. Why is it that Women are chiefly addicted to Evil superstitions?<br>
 </center>
 </body>