<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a05a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a07a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter VI</h2>
 <h3>How Witches Impede and Prevent the Power of Procreation.</h3></center>
 
         
 Concerning the method by which they obstruct the procreant function both in 
 men and animals, and in both sexes, the reader my consult that which has 
 been written already on the question, Whether devils can through witches 
 turn the minds of men to love or hatred. There, after the solutions of the 
 arguments, a specific declaration is made relating to the method by which, 
 with God's permission, they can obstruct the procreant function.<br>
 
         
 But it must be noted that such obstruction is caused both intrinsically and 
 extrinsically. Intrinsically they cause it in two ways. First, when they 
 directly prevent the erection of the member which is accomodated to 
 fructification. And this need not seem impossible, when it is considered 
 that they are able to vitiate the natural use of any member. Secondly, when 
 they prevent the flow of the vital essences to the members in which resides 
 the motive force, closing up the seminal ducts so that it does not reach 
 the generative vessels, or so that it cannot be ejaculated, or is 
 fruitlessly spilled.<br>
 
         
 Extrinsically they cause it at times by means of images, or by the eating of 
 herbs; sometimes by other external means, such as cocks' testicles. But it 
 must not be thought that it is by the virtue of these things that a man is 
 made impotent, but by the occult power of devils' illusions witches by this 
 means procure such impotence, namely, that they cause man to be unable to 
 copulate, or a woman to conceive.<br>
 
         
 And the reason for this is that God allows them more power over this act, 
 by which the first sin was disseminated, than over other human actions. 
 Similarly they have more power over serpents, which are the most subject 
 to the influence of incantations, than over other animals. Wherefore it has 
 often been found by us and other Inquisitors that they have caused this 
 obstruction by means of serpents or some such things.<br>
 
         
 For a certain wizard who had been arrested confessed that for many years he 
 had by witchcraft brought sterility upon all the men and animals which 
 inhabited a certain house. Moreover, Nider tells of a wizard named 
 Stadlin who was taken in the diocese of 
 Lausanne, and confessed that in a certain house where a man and his wife 
 were loving, he had by his witchcraft successively killed in the woman's 
 womb seven children, so that for many years the woman always miscarried. And 
 that, in the same way, he had caused that all the pregnant cattle and 
 animals of the house were during those years unable to give birth to any 
 live issue. And when he was questioned as to how he had done this, and what 
 manner of charge should be preferred against him, he discovered his crime, 
 saying: I put a serpent under the threshold of the outer door of the house; 
 and if this is removed, fecundity will be restored to the inhabitants. And 
 it was as he said; for though the serpent was not found, having been 
 reduced to dust, the whole piece of ground was removed, and in the same year 
 fecundity was restored to the wife and to all the animals.<br>
 
         
 Another instance occurred hardly four years ago in Reichshofen. There was a 
 most notorious witch, who could at all times and by a mere touch bewitch 
 women and cause an abortion. Now the wife of a certain nobleman in that 
 place had become pregnant and had engaged a midwife to take care of her, and 
 had been warned by the midwife not to go out of the castle, and above all to 
 be careful not to hold any speech or conversation with that witch. After 
 some weeks, unmindful of that warning, she went out of the castle to visit 
 some women who were met together on some festive occasion; and when she had 
 sat down for a little, the witch came, and, as if for the purpose of 
 saluting her, placed both her hands on her stomach; and suddenly she felt 
 the child moving in pain. Frightened by this, she returned home and told the 
 midwife what had happened. Then the midwife exclaimed: “Alas! you have 
 already lost your child.” And so it proved when her time came; for she 
 gave birth, not to an entire abortion, but little by little to separate 
 fragments of its head and feet and hands. And the great affliction was 
 permitted by God to punish her husband, whose duty it was to bring witches 
 to justice and avenge their injuries to the Creator.<br>
 
         
 And there was in the town of Mersburg in the diocese of Constance a certain 
 young man who was bewitched in such a way that he could never perform the 
 carnal act with any woman except one. And many have heard him tell that he 
 had often wished to refuse that woman, and take flight to other lands; but 
 that hitherto he had been compelled to rise up in the night and to come very 
 quickly back, sometimes over land, and sometimes through the air as if he 
 were flying.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a07a.htm">Next: Chapter VII</a><br>How, as it were, they Deprive Man of his Virile Member.<br>
 </center>
 </body>