<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a12a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a14a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter XIII</h2>
 <h3>How Witch Midwives commit most Horrid Crimes when they either Kill Children or Offer them to Devils in most Accursed Wise.</h3></center>
 
         
 We must not omit to mention the injuries done to children by witch midwives, 
 first by killing them, and secondly by blasphemously offering them to devils. 
 In the diocese of Strasburg and in the town of Zabern there is an honest 
 woman very devoted to the Blessed Virgin MARY, who tells the following 
 experience of hers to all the guests that come to the tavern which she 
 keeps, known by the sign of the Black Eagle.<br>
 
         
 I was, she says, pregnant by my lawful husband, now dead, and as my time 
 approached, a certain midwife importuned me to engage her to assist at the 
 birth of my child. But I knew her bad reputation, and although I had 
 decided to engage another woman, pretended with conciliatory words to agree 
 to her request. But when the pains came upon me, and I had brought in another 
 midwife, the first one was very angry, and hardly a week later came into my 
 room one night with two other women, and approached the bed where I was 
 lying. And when I tried to call my husband, who was sleeping in another room, 
 all the use was taken away from my limbs and tongue, so that except for 
 seeing and hearing I could not move a muscle. And the witch, standing 
 between the other two, said: “See! this vile woman, who would not take 
 me for her midwife, shall not win through unpunished.” The other two 
 standing be her pleaded for me, saying: “She has never harmed any of 
 us.” But the witch added: “Because she has offended me I am 
 going to put something into her entrails; but, to please you, she shall not 
 feel any pain for half a year, but after that time she shall be tortured 
 enough.” So she came up and touched my belly with her hands; and it 
 seemed to me that she took out my entrails, and put in something which, 
 however, I could not see. And when they had gone away, and I had recovered 
 my power of speech, I called my husband as soon as possible, and told him 
 what had happened. But he put it down to pregnancy, and said: “You 
 pregnant women are always suffering from fancies and delusions.” And 
 when he would by no means believe me, I replied: “I have been given 
 six months' grace, and if, after that time, no torment comes to me, I shall 
 believe you.”<br>
 
         
 She related this to her son, a cleric who was then Archdeacon of the district, 
 and who came to visit her on the same day. And what happened? When exactly 
 six months had passed, such a terrible pain came into her belly that she 
 could not help disturbing everybody with her cries day and night. And 
 because, as has been said, she was most devout to the Virgin, the Queen of 
 Mercy, she fasted with bread and water every Saturday, so that she believed 
 that she was delivered by Her intercession. For one day, when she wanted to 
 perform an action of nature, all those unclean things fell from her body; 
 and she called her husband and son, and said: “Are those fancies? Did 
 I not say that after a half a year the truth would be known? Or who ever saw 
 me ear thorns, bones, and even bits of wood?” For there were brambles 
 as long as a palm, as well as a quantity of other things.<br>
 
         
 Moreover (as was said in the First Part of the work), it was shown by the 
 confession of the servant, who was brought to judgement at Breisach, that 
 the greatest injuries to the Faith as regards the heresy of witches are done 
 by midwives; and this is made clearer than daylight itself by the confessions 
 of some who were afterwards burned.<br>
 
         
 For in the diocese of Basel at the town of Dann, a witch who was burned 
 confessed that she had killed more than forty children, by sticking a 
 needle through the crowns of their heads into their brains, as they came out 
 from the womb.<br>
 
         
 Finally, another woman in the diocese of Strasburg confessed that she had 
 killed more children than she could count. And she was caught in this way. 
 She had been called from one town to another to act as midwife to a certain 
 woman, and, having performed her office, was going back home. But as she 
 went out of the town gate, the arm of a newly born child fell out of the 
 cloak she had wrapped around her, in whose folds the arm had been concealed. 
 This was seen by those who were sitting in the gateway, and when she had 
 gone on, they picked up from the ground what they took to be a piece of 
 meat; but when they looked more closely and saw that it was not a piece of 
 meat, but recognized it by its fingers as a child's arm, they reported it 
 to the magistrates, and it was found that a child had died before baptism, 
 lacking an arm. So the witch was taken and questioned, and confessed the 
 crime, and that she had, as has been said, killed more children than she 
 could count.<br>
 
         
 Now the reason for such practices is as follows: It is to be presumed that 
 witches are compelled to do such things at the command of evil spirits, and 
 sometimes against their own wills. For the devil knows that, because of the 
 pain of loss, or original sin, such children are 
 debarred from entering the Kingdom of Heaven. And by this means the Last 
 Judgement is delayed, when the devils will be condemned to eternal torture; 
 since the number of the elect os more slowly completed, on the fulfilment of 
 which the world will be consumed. And also, as has already been shown, 
 witches are taught by the devil to confect from the limbs of such children 
 an unguent which is very useful for their spells.<br>
 
         
 But in order to bring so great a sin into utter detestation, we must not 
 pass over in silence the following horrible crime. For when they do not kill 
 the child, they blasphemously offer it to the devil in this manner. As soon 
 as the child is born, the midwife, if the mother herself is not a witch, 
 carries it out of the room on the pretext of warming it, raises it up, and 
 offers it to the Prince of Devils, that is Lucifer, and to all the devils. 
 And this is done by the kitchen fire.<br>
 
         
 A certain man relates that he noticed that his wife, when her time came to 
 give birth, against the usual custom of women in childbirth, did not allow 
 any woman to approach the bed except her own daughter, who acted as midwife. 
 Wishing to know the reason for this, he hid himself in the house and saw the 
 whole order of the sacrilege and dedication to the devil, as it has been 
 described. He saw also, as it seemed to him, that without any human support, 
 but by the power of the devil, the child was climbing up the chain by which 
 the cooking-pots were suspended. In great consternation both at the terrible 
 words of the invocation of the devils, and at the other iniquitous ceremonies, 
 he strongly insisted that the child should be baptized immediately. While it 
 was being carried to the next village, where there was a church, and when 
 they had to cross a bridge over a certain river, he drew his sword and ran 
 at his daughter, who was carrying the child, saying in the hearing of two 
 others who were with them: “You shall not carry the child over the 
 bridge; for either it must cross the bridge by itself, or you shall be 
 drowned in the river.” The daughter was terrified and, together with 
 the other women in company, asked him if he were in his right mind (for he 
 had hidden what had happened from all the others except the two men who were 
 with him). Then he answered: “You vile drab, by your magic arts you 
 made the child climb the chain in the kitchen; now make it cross the bridge 
 with no on carrying it, or I shall drown you in the river.” And so, 
 being compelled, she put the child down on the bridge, and invoked the devil 
 by her art; and suddenly the child was seen on the other side of the bridge. 
 And when the child had been baptized, and he had returned home, since he now 
 had witnesses to convict his daughter of witchcraft (for he could not prove 
 the former crime of the oblation to the devil, inasmuch as he had been the 
 only witness of the sacrilegious ritual), he accused bother daughter and 
 mother before the judge after their period of purgation; and they were both 
 burned, and the crime of midwives of making that sacrilegious offering was 
 discovered.<br>
 
         
 But here the doubt arises: to what end or purpose is the sacrilegious 
 offering of children, and how does it benefit the devils? To this it can be 
 said that the devils do this for three reasons, which serve three most 
 wicked purposes. The first reason arises from their pride, which always 
 increases; as it is said: “They that hate Thee have lifted up the 
 head.” For they try as far as possible 
 to conform with divine rites and ceremonies. Secondly, they can more easily 
 deceive men under the mask of an outwardly seeming pious action. For in the 
 same way they entice young virgins and boys into their power; for though 
 they might solicit such by means of evil and corrupt men, yet they rather 
 deceive them by magic mirrors and reflections seen in witches' finger-nails, 
 and lure them on in the belief that they love chastity, whereas they hate 
 it. For the devil hates above all the Blessed Virgin, because she 
 bruised his head. Just so in this oblation 
 of children they deceive the minds of witches into the vice of infidelity 
 under the appearance of a virtuous acts. And the third reason is, that the 
 perfidy of witches may grow, to the devils' own gain, when they have 
 witches dedicated to them from their very cradles.<br>
 
         
 And this sacrilege affects the child in three ways. In the first place, 
 visible offerings to God are made of visible things, such as wine of bread 
 or the fruits of the earth, as a sign of honour and subjection to Him, as it 
 is said in <i>Ecclesiasticus</i> xxv: Thou shalt not appear empty before 
 the Lord. And such offerings cannot and must not afterwards be put to 
 profane uses. Therefore the holy Father, S. John Damascene, says: The 
 oblations which are offered in church belong only to the priests, but not 
 that they should divert them to their own uses, but that they should 
 faithfully distribute them, partly in the observance of divine worship, and 
 partly for the use of the poor. From this it follows that a child who has 
 been offered to the devil in sign of subjection and homage to him cannot 
 possibly be dedicated by Catholics to a holy life, in worthy and fruitful 
 service to God for the benefit of himself and others.<br>
 
         
 For who can say that the sins of the mothers and of other do not redound in 
 punishment upon the children? Perhaps someone will quote that saying of the 
 prophet: “The sons shall not bear the iniquity of the father.” 
 But there is that other passage in <i>Exodus</i> xx: I am a jealous God, 
 visiting the sins of the father upon the children unto the third and fourth 
 generation. Now the meaning of these two sayings is as follows. The first 
 speaks of spiritual punishment in the judgement of Heaven or God, and not in 
 the judgement of men. And this is the punishment of the soul, such as loss 
 or the forfeiture of glory, or the punishment of pain, that is, of the 
 torment of eternal fire. And with such punishments no one is punished except 
 for his own sin, either inherited as original sin or committed as actual 
 sin.<br>
 
         
 The second text speaks of those who imitate the sins of their father, as 
 Gratian has explained (I, q. 4, etc.); and 
 there he gives other explanations as to how the judgement of God inflicts 
 other punishments on a man, not only for his own sins which he has committed, 
 or which he might commit (but is prevented by punishment from committing), 
 but also for the sins of others.<br>
 
         
 And it cannot be argued that when a man is punished without cause, and 
 without sin, which should be the cause of punishment. For according to the 
 rule of law, no one must be punished without sin, unless there is some cause 
 of punishment. And we can say that there is always a most just cause, though 
 it may not be known to us: see S. Augustine, XXIV, 4. And if we cannot in 
 the result penetrate the depth of God's judgement, yet we know that what He 
 has said is true, and what He has done is just.<br>
 
         
 But there is this distinction to be observed in innocent children who are 
 offered to devils not by their mothers when they are witches, but by 
 midwives who, as we have said, secretly take from the embrace and the womb 
 of an honest mother. Such children are not so cut off from grace that they 
 must necessarily become prone to such crimes; but it is piously to be 
 believed that they may rather cultivate their mothers' virtues.<br>
 
         
 The second result to the children of this sacrilege is as follows. When a 
 man offers himself as a sacrifice to God, he recognizes God as his Beginning 
 and his End; and this sacrifice is more worthy than all the external 
 sacrifices which he makes, having its beginning in his creation and its end 
 in his glorification, as it is said: A sacrifice to God is an afflicted 
 spirit, etc. In the same way, when a witch 
 offers a child to the devils, she commends it body and soul to him as its 
 beginning and its end in eternal damnation; wherefore not without some 
 miracle can the child be set free from the payment of so great a debt.<br>
 
         
 And we read often in history of children whom their mothers, in some passion 
 or mental disturbance, have unthinkingly offered to the devil from the very 
 womb, and how it is only with the very greatest difficulty that they can, 
 when they have grown to adult age, be delivered from that bondage which the 
 devil has, with God's permission, usurped to himself. And of this the 
 <i>Book of Examples, Most Blessed Virgin MARY</i>, affords many illustrations; 
 a notable instance being that of the man whom the Supreme Pontiff was unable 
 to deliver from the torments of the devil, but at last he was sent to a holy 
 man living in the East, and finally with great difficulty was delivered from 
 his bondage through the intercession of the Most Glorious Virgin Herself.<br>
 
         
 And if God so severely punishes even such a thoughtless, I will not say 
 sacrifice, but commendation used angrily by a mother when her husband, after 
 copulating with her, says, I hope a child will come of it; and she answers, 
 May the child go to the devil! How much greater must be the punishment when 
 the Divine Majesty is offended in the way we have described!
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a14a.htm">Next: Chapter XIV</a><br>Here followeth how Witches Injure Cattle in Various Ways.<br>
 </center>
 </body>