<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a08a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a10a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter IX</h2>
 <h3>How Devils may enter the Human Body and the Head without doing any Hurt, when they cause such Metamorphosis by Means of Prestidigitation.</h3></center>
 
         
 Concerning the method of causing these illusory transmutations it may 
 further be asked: whether the devils are then inside the bodies and heads 
 of those who are deceived, and whether the latter are to be considered as 
 possessed by devils; how it can happen without injury to the inner 
 perceptions and faculties that a mental image is transferred from one inner 
 faculty to another; and whether or not such work ought to be considered 
 miraculous.<br>
 
         
 First we must again refer to a distinction between such illusory glamours; 
 for sometimes the outer perceptions only are affected, and sometimes the 
 inner perceptions are deluded and so affect the outer perceptions.<br>
 
         
 In the former case the glamour can be caused without the devils' entering 
 into the outer perceptions, and merely by an exterior illusion; as when the 
 interposition of some other body, or in some other way; or when he himself 
 assumes a body and imposes himself on the vision.<br>
 
         
 But in the latter case it is necessary that he must first occupy the head 
 and the faculties. And this is proved by authority and by reason.<br>
 
         
 And it is not a valid objection to say that two created spirits cannot be in 
 one and the same place, and that the soul pervades the whole of the body. 
 For on this question there is the authority of S. John Damascene, when he 
 says: Where the Angel is, there he operates. And S. Thomas, in the 
 <i>Second Book of Sentences</i>, dist. 7, art. 5, says: All Angels, good and 
 bad, by their natural power, which is superior to all bodily power, are able 
 to transmute our bodies.<br>
 
         
 And this is clearly true, not only by reason of the superior nobility of 
 their nature, but because the whole mechanism of the world and all corporeal 
 creatures are administered by Angels; as S. Gregory says in the 4th Dialogue: 
 In this visible world nothing can be disposed except by an invisible 
 creature. Therefore all corporeal matters are governed by the Angels, who 
 are also called, not only by the Holy Doctors but also by all the Philosophers, 
 the Powers which move the stars. It is clear also from the fact that all 
 human bodies are moved by their souls, just as all other matter is moved 
 by the stars and the Powers which move them. Any who wish may refer to S. 
 Thomas in the First Part, Quest. 90, art. 1.<br>
 
         
 From this it is concluded that, since devils operates there where they are, 
 therefore when they confuse the fancy and the inner perceptions they are 
 existing in them.<br>
 
         
 Again, although to enter the soul is possible only to God Who created it, 
 yet devils can, with God's permission, enter our bodies; and they an then 
 make impressions on the inner faculties corresponding to the bodily organs. 
 And by those impressions the organs are affected in proportion as the inner 
 perceptions are affected in the way which has been shown: that the devil 
 can draw out some image retained in a faculty corresponding to one of the 
 senses; as he draws from the memory, which is in the back part of the head, 
 an image of a horse, and locally moves that phantasm to the middle part of 
 the head, where are the cells of imaginative power; and finally to the sense 
 of reason, which is in the front of the head. And he causes such a sudden 
 change and confusion, that such objects are necessarily thought to be actual 
 things seen with the eyes. This can be clearly exemplified by the natural 
 defect in frantic men and other maniacs.<br>
 
         
 But if it is asked how he can do this without causing pain in the head, the 
 answer is easy. For in the first place he does not cause any actual physical 
 change in the organs, but only moves the mental images. And secondly, he 
 does not effect these changes by injecting any active quality which would 
 necessarily cause pain, since the devil is himself without any corporeal 
 quality, and can therefore operate without the use of any such quality. 
 Thirdly, as has been said, he effects these transmutations only by a local 
 movement from one organ to another, and not by other movements through which 
 painful transformations are sometimes caused.<br>
 
         
 And as for the objection that two spirits cannot separately exist in the 
 same place, and that, since the soul exists in the head, how can a devil be 
 there also? It is to be said that the soul is thought to reside in the 
 centre of the heart, in which it communicates with all the members by an 
 outpouring of life. An example can be taken from a spider, which feels in 
 the middle of its web when any part of the web is touched.<br>
 
         
 However, S. Augustine says in his book 
 <i>On the Spirit and Soul</i>, that it is all 
 in all, and all in every part of the body. Granting that the soul is in the 
 head, still the devil can work there; for his work is different from the 
 work of the soul. The work of the soul is in the body, to inform it and fill 
 it with life; so that it exists not merely locally, but in the whole matter. 
 But the devil works in such a part and such a place of the body, effecting 
 his changes in respect of the mental images. Therefore, since there is no 
 confusion between their respective operations, they can both exist together 
 in the same part of the body.<br>
 
         
 There is also the question whether such men are to be considered obsessed 
 or frenzied, that is, possessed of devils. But this is considered separately; 
 namely, whether it is possible through the work of witches for a man to be 
 obsessed with a devil, that is, that the devil should actually and bodily 
 possess him. And this question is specially discussed in the following 
 chapter, since it has this special difficulty, namely, whether this can be 
 caused through the operations of witches.<br>
 
         
 But as to the question whether the temporal works of witches and devils are 
 to be considered as miracles or of a miraculous nature; it is to be said 
 that they are so, in so far as they are beyond the order of created nature 
 as known to us, and are done by creatures unknown to us. But they are not 
 properly speaking miracles as are those which are outside the whole of 
 created nature; as are the miracles of God and the Saints. (See what was 
 written in the First Part of this work, in the Fifth Question, in the 
 refutation of the third error.)<br>
 
         
 But there are those who object that this sort of work must not be 
 considered miracles, but simply works of the devil; since the purpose of 
 miracles is the strengthening of the Faith, and they must not be conceded to 
 the adversary of the Faith. And also because the signs of Antichrist are 
 called lying signs by the Apostle.<br>
 
         
 First it is to be said that to work miracles is the gift of freely given 
 grace. And they can be done by bad men and bad spirits, up to the limits of 
 the power which is in them.<br>
 
         
 Wherefore the miracles wrought by the good can be distinguished from those 
 wrought by the wicked in at least three ways. First, the signs which are 
 given by the good are done by Divine power in such matters as are beyond 
 the capacity of their own natural power, such as raising the dead, and things 
 of that sort, which the devils are not able to accomplish in truth, but only 
 by an illusion: so Simon Magus moved the head of a dead man; but such 
 manifestations cannot last long. Secondly, they can be distinguished by 
 their utility; for the miracles of the good are of a useful nature, as the 
 healing of sickness, and such things. But the miracles done by witches are 
 concerned with harmful and idle things; as when they fly in the air, or 
 benumb the limbs of men, or such things. And S. Peter assigns this difference 
 in the <i>Itinerarium</i> of Clement.<br>
 
         
 The third difference relates to the Faith. For the miracles of the good are 
 ordained for the edification of the Faith and of good living; whereas the 
 miracles of the wicked are manifestly detrimental to the Faith and to 
 righteousness.<br>
 
         
 They are distinguished also by the way in which they are done. For the good 
 do miracles in a pious and reverent invocation of the Divine Name. But 
 witches and wicked men work them by certain ravings and invocations of devils.<br>
 
         
 And there is no difficulty in the fact that the Apostle called the works of 
 the devil and Antichrist lying wonders; for 
 the marvels so done by Divine permission are true in some respects and 
 false in others. They are true in so far as they are within the limits of 
 the devil's power. But they are false when he appears to do things which are 
 beyond his power, such as raising the dead, or making the blind to see. For 
 when he appears to do the former, he either enters into the dead body or 
 else removes it, and himself takes its place in an assumed aerial body; and 
 in the latter case he takes away the sight by a glamour, and then suddenly 
 restores it by taking away the disability he has caused, not by bringing 
 light to the inner perceptions, as is told in the legend of Bartholomew. 
 Indeed all the marvellous works of Antichrist and of witches can be said to 
 be lying signs, insasmuch as their only purpose is to deceive. See S. Thomas, 
 dist. 8, <i>de Uirtute Daemonum</i>.<br>
 
         
 We may also quote here the distinction which is drawn in the Compendium of 
 Theological Truth between a wonder and a miracle. For in a miracle four 
 conditions are required: that it should be done by God; that it should be 
 beyond the existing order of nature; thirdly, that it should be manifest; 
 and fourthly, that it should be for the corroboration of the Faith. But 
 since the works of witches fail to fulfil at least the first and last 
 conditions, therefore they may be called wonderful works, but nor miracles.<br>
 
         
 It can also be argued in this way. Although witches' works can in a sense 
 be said to be miraculous, yet some miracles are supernatural, some 
 unnatural, and some preternatural. And they are supernatural when they can 
 be compared with nothing in nature, or in natural power, as when a virgin 
 gives birth. They are unnatural when they are against the normal course of 
 nature but do not overstep the limits of nature, such as causing the blind 
 to see. And they are preternatural when they are done in a manner parallel 
 to that of nature, as when rods are changed into serpents; for this can be 
 done naturally also, through long putrefaction on account of seminal 
 reasons; and thus the works of magicians may be said to be marvellous.<br>
 
         
 It is expedient to recount an actual example, and then to explain it step 
 by step. There is a town in the diocese of Strasburg, the name of which it 
 is charitable and honourable to withhold, in which a workman was one day 
 chopping some wood to burn in his house. A large cat suddenly appeared and 
 began to attack him, and when he was driving it off, another even larger 
 one came and attacked him with the first more fiercely. And when he again 
 tried to drive them away, behold, three of them together attacked him, 
 jumping up at his face, and biting and scratching his legs. In great fright 
 and, as he said, more panic-stricken than he had ever been, he crossed 
 himself and, leaving his work, fell upon the cats, which were swarming over 
 the wood and again leaping at his face and throat, and with difficulty drove 
 them away by beating one on the head, another on the legs, and another on 
 the back. After the space of an hour, while he was again engaged upon his 
 task, two servants of the town magistrates came and took him as a malefactor 
 and led him into the presence of the bailiff or judge. And the judge, 
 looking at him from a distance, and refusing to hear him, ordered him to be 
 thrown into the deepest dungeon of a certain tower or prison, where those 
 who were under sentence of death were placed. The man cried out, and for 
 three days bitterly complained to the prison guards that he should suffer in 
 that way, when he was conscious of no crime; but the more the guards tried 
 to procure him a hearing, the more furious the judge became, expressing in 
 the strongest terms his indignation that so great a malefactor had not yet 
 acknowledged his crime, but dared to proclaim his innocence when the evidence 
 of the facts proved his horrible crime. But although these could not prevail 
 upon him, yet the judge was induced by the advice of the other magistrates 
 to grant the man a hearing. So when he was brought out of prison into the 
 presence of the judge, and the judge refused to look at him, the poor man 
 threw himself before the knees of the other magistrates, pleading that he 
 might know the reason for his misfortune; and the judge broke into these 
 words: You most wicked of men, how can you not acknowledge your crime? At 
 such a time on such a day you beat three respected matrons of this town, so 
 that they lie in their beds unable to rise or to move. The poor man cast his 
 mind back to the events of that day and that hour, and said: Never in all my 
 life have I struck or beaten a woman, and I can prove by credible witnesses 
 that at that time on that day I was busy chopping wood; and an hour 
 afterwards your servants found me still engaged on that task. Then the 
 judge again exclaimed in a fury: See how he tries to conceal his crime! The 
 women are bewailing their blows, they exhibit the marks, and publicly 
 testify that he struck them. Then the poor man considered more closely on 
 that even, and said: I remember that I struck some creatures at that time, 
 but they were not women. The magistrates in astonishment asked him to relate 
 what sort of creatures he had struck; and he told, to their great 
 amazement, all that had happened, as we have related it. So, understanding 
 that it was the work of the devil, they released the poor man and let him 
 go away unharmed, telling him not to speak of this matter to anyone. But it 
 could not be hidden from those devout persons present who were zealous for 
 the Faith.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a10a.htm">Next: Chapter X</a><br>Of the Method by which Devils through the Operations of Witches sometimes actually possess men.<br>
 </center>
 </body>