<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a09a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a11a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter X</h2>
 <h3>Of the Method by which Devils through the Operations of Witches sometimes actually possess men.</h3></center>
 
         
 It has been shown in the previous chapter how devils can enter the heads 
 and other parts of the body of men, and can move the inner mental images 
 from place to place. But someone may doubt whether they are able at the 
 instance of witches to obsess men entirely; or fell some uncertainty about 
 their various methods of causing such obsession without the instance of 
 witches. And to clear up these doubts we must undertake three explanations. 
 First, as to the various methods of possession. Secondly, how at the 
 instance of witches and with God's permission devils at time possess men 
 in all those ways. Thirdly, we must substantiate our arguments with facts 
 and examples.<br>
 
         
 With references to the first, we must make an exception of that general 
 method by which the devil inhabits a man in any mortal sin. S. Thomas, in 
 Book 3, quest. 3, speaks of this method where he considers the doubt 
 whether the devil always substantially possesses a man when he commits 
 mortal sin; and the reason for the doubt is that the indwelling Holy Ghost 
 always forms a man with grace, according to I. <i>Corinthians</i>, iii: Ye 
 are the temple of God, and the spirit of God dwelleth in you. And, since 
 guilt is opposed to grace, it would seem that there were opposing forces 
 in the same place.<br>
 
         
 And there he proves that to possess a man can be understood in two ways: 
 either with regard to the soul, or with regard to the body. And in the first 
 way it is not possible for the devil to possess the soul, since God alone 
 can enter that; therefore the devil is not in this way the cause of sin, 
 which the Holy Spirit permits the soul itself to commit; so there is no 
 similitude between the two.<br>
 
         
 But as to the body, we may say that the devil can possess a man in two ways, 
 just as there are two classes of men: those who are in sin, and those who 
 are in grace. In the first way, we may say that, since a man is by any 
 mortal sin brought into the devil's service, in so far as the devil provides 
 the outer suggestion of sin either to the senses or to the imagination, to 
 that extent he is said to inhabit the character of a man when he is moved 
 by every stirring temptation, like a ship in the sea without a rudder.<br>
 
         
 The devil can also essentially possess a man as is clear in the case of 
 frantic men. But this rather belongs to the question of punishment than that 
 of sin, as will be shown; and bodily punishments are not always the 
 consequence of sin, but are inflicted now upon sinners and now upon the 
 innocent. Therefore both those who are and those who are not in a state of 
 grace can, in the depth of the incomprehensible judgement of God, be 
 essentially possessed by devils. And though this method of possession is not 
 quite pertinent to our inquire, we have set it down lest it should seem 
 impossible to anyone that, with God's permission, men should at times be 
 substantially inhabited by devils at the instance of witches.<br>
 
         
 We may say, therefore, that just as there are five ways in which devils by 
 themselves, without witches, can injure and possess men, so they can also do 
 so in those ways at the instance of witches; since then God is the more 
 offended, and greater power of molesting men is allowed to the devil through 
 witches. And the methods are briefly the following, excepting the fact that 
 they sometimes plague a man through his external possessions: sometimes they 
 injure men only in their own bodies; sometimes in their and in their 
 faculties; sometimes they only tempt them inwardly and outwardly; others 
 they at times deprive of the use of their reason; others they change into 
 the appearance of irrational beasts. We shall speak of these methods singly.<br>
 
         
 But first we shall rehearse five reasons why God allows men to be possessed, 
 for the sake of preserving a due order in our matter. For sometimes a man is 
 possessed for his own advantage; sometimes for a slight sin of another; and 
 sometimes for his own venial sin; sometimes for another's heavy sin. For all 
 these reasons let no one doubt that God allows such things to be done by 
 devils at the instance of witches; and it is better to prove each of them by 
 the Scriptures, rather than by recent examples, since new things are always 
 strengthened by old examples.<br>
 
         
 For an example of the first is clearly shown in the <i>Dialogue</i> of 
 Severus, a very dear disciple of S. Martin, where 
 he tells that a certain Father of very holy life was so gifted by grace with 
 the power of expelling devils, that they were put to flight not only by his 
 words, but even by his letters or his hair-shirt. And since the Father 
 became very famous in the world, and felt himself tempted with vainglory, 
 although he manfully resisted that vice, yet, that he might be the more 
 humiliated, he prayed with his whole heart to God that he might be for five 
 months possessed by a devil; and this was done. For he was at once possessed 
 and had to be put in chains, and everything had to applied to him which is 
 customary in the case of demoniacs. But at the end of the fifth month he was 
 immediately delivered both from all vainglory and from the devil. But we 
 do not read, nor is it for the present maintained, that for this reason a 
 man can be possessed by a devil through the witchcraft of another man; 
 although, as we have said, the judgements of God are incomprehensible.<br>
 
         
 For the second reason, when someone is possessed because of the light sin of 
 another, S. Gregory gives an example. The Blessed Abbot Eleutherius, a most 
 devout man, was spending the night near a convent of virgins, who unknown to 
 him ordered to be put by his cell a young boy who used to be tormented all 
 night by the devil. But on that same night the boy was delivered from the 
 devil by the presence of the Father. When the Abbot learned of this, and the 
 boy now being placed in the holy man's monastery, after many days he began 
 to exult rather immoderately over the boy's liberation, and said to his 
 brother monks: The devil was playing his pranks with those Sisters, but he 
 had not presumed to approach this boy since he came to the servants of God. 
 And behold! the devil at once began to torment the boy. And by the tears and 
 fasting of the holy man and his brethren he was with difficulty delivered, 
 but on the same day. And indeed that an innocent person should be possessed 
 for the slight fault of another is not surprising when men are possessed by 
 devils for their own light fault, or for another's heavy sin, or for their 
 own heavy sin, and some also at the instance of witches.<br>
 
         
 Cassia, in his <i>First Collation</i> of the Abbot Serenus, gives an 
 example of how one Moses was possessed for his own venial sin. This Moses, 
 he says, was a hermit of upright and pious life; but because on one occasion 
 he engaged in a dispute with the Abbot Macharius, and went a little too far 
 in the expression of a certain opinion, he was immediately delivered up to 
 a terrible devil, who caused him to void his natural excrements through his 
 mouth. And that this scourge was inflicted by God for the sake of purgation, 
 lest any stain of his momentary fault should remain in him, is clear from 
 his miraculous cure. For by continual prayers and submission to the Abbot 
 Macharius, the vile spirit was quickly driven away and departed from him.<br>
 
         
 A similar case is that related by S. Gregory in his <i>First Dialogue</i> of 
 the nun who ate a lettuce without having first made the sign of the Cross, 
 and was set free by the Blessed Father Equitius.<br>
 
         
 In the same <i>Dialogue</i> St. Gregory tells an example of the fourth case, 
 where someone in possessed because of the heavy sin of another. The Blessed 
 Bishop Fortunatus had driven the devil from a possessed man, and the devil 
 began to walk about the streets of the city in the guise of a pilgrim, 
 crying out: Oh, the holy man Bishop Fortunatus! See, he has cast me, a 
 pilgrim, out of my lodging, and I can find no rest anywhere. Then a certain 
 man sitting with his wife and son invited the pilgrim to lodge with him, and 
 asking why he had been turned out, was delighted with the derogatory story 
 of the holy man which the pilgrim had invented. And thereupon the devil 
 entered his son, and cast him upon the fire, and killed him. And then for 
 the first time did the unhappy father understand whom he had received as a 
 guest.<br>
 
         
 And fifthly, we read many examples of men being possessed for their own 
 heavy sin, both in the Holy Scripture and in the passions of the Saints. 
 For in I. <i>Kings</i> xv, Saul was possessed for disobedience to God. And, 
 as we have said, we have mentioned all these so that it need not seem to 
 anyone impossible that men should also be possessed because of the crimes of, 
 and at the instance of, witches. And we shall be able to understand the 
 various methods of such possession by quoting actual examples.<br>
 
         
 In the time of Pope Pius II the following 
 was the experience of one of us two Inquisitors before he entered upon his 
 office in the Inquisition. A certain Bohemian from the town of Dachov 
 brought his only son, a secular priest, to Rome to be delivered, because he 
 was possessed. It happened that I, one of us Inquisitors, went into a 
 refectory, and that priest and his father came and sat down at the same 
 table with me. We saluted each other, and talked together, as is customary; 
 and the father kept sighing and praying Almighty God that his journey might 
 prove to have been successful. I felt great pity for him, and began to ask 
 what was the reason of his journey and of his sorrow. Then he, in the 
 hearing of his son who was sitting next to me at the table, answered: 
 “Alas! I have a son possessed by a devil, and with great trouble and 
 expense I have brought him here to be delivered.” And when I asked 
 where the son was, he showed me him sitting by my side. I was a little 
 frightened, and looked at him closely; and because he took his food with 
 such modesty, and answered piously to all questions, I began to doubt that 
 he was not possessed, but that some infirmity had happened to him. Then the 
 son himself told what had happened, showing how and for how long he had been 
 possessed, and saying: “A certain witch brought this evil upon me. For 
 I was rebuking her on some matter concerned with the discipline of the 
 Church, upbraiding her rather strongly since she was of an obstinate 
 disposition, when she said that after a few days that would happen to me 
 which has happened. And the devil which possesses me has told me that a 
 charm was placed by the witch under a certain tree, and that until it was 
 removed I could not be delivered; but he would not tell me which was the 
 tree.” But I would not in the least have believed his words if he had 
 not at once informed me of the facts of the case. For when I asked him about 
 the length of the intervals during which he had the use of his reason more 
 than is usual in the case of persons possessed, he answered: “I am 
 only deprived of the use of my reason when I wish to contemplate 
 holy things 
 or to visit sacred places. For the devil specifically told me in his own 
 words uttered through my mouth that, because he had up to that time been 
 much offended by my sermons to the people, we would in no way allow me to 
 preach.” For according to his father, he was a preacher full of grace, 
 and loved by all. But I, the Inquisitor, wishing for proofs, had him taken 
 for a fortnight and more to various holy places, and especially to the 
 Church of S. Praxedes the Virgin, where there 
 is part of the marble pillar to which Our Saviour was bound when He was 
 scourged, and to the place where S. Peter the Apostle was crucified; and in 
 all these places he uttered horrible cries while he was being exorcised, 
 now saying that he wished to come forth, and after a little maintaining the 
 contrary. And as we have said before, in all his behaviour he remained a 
 sober priest without any eccentricity, except during the process of any 
 exorcisms; and when these were finished, and the stole was taken from his 
 neck, he showed no sign of madness or any immoderate action. But when he 
 passed any church, and genuflected in honour of the Glorious Virgin, the 
 devil made him thrust his tongue far out of his mouth; and when he was 
 asked whether he could not restrain himself from doing this, he answered: 
 “I cannot help myself at all, for so he uses all my limbs and organs, 
 my neck, my tongue, and my lungs, whenever he pleases, causing me to speak 
 or to cry out; and I hear the words as if they were spoken by myself, but I 
 am altogether unable to restrain them; and when I try to engage in prayer 
 he attacks me more violently, thrusting out my tongue.” And there was 
 in the Church of S. Peter a column brought from Solomon's Temple, by virtue 
 of which many who are obsessed with devils are liberated, because Christ 
 had stood near it when He preached in the Temple; but even here he could not 
 be delivered, owing to the hidden purpose of God which reserved another 
 method for his liberation. For though he remained shut in by the column for 
 a whole day and night, yet on the following day, after various exorcisms 
 had been performed upon him, with a great concourse of people standing round, 
 he was asked by which part of the column Christ had stood; and he bit the 
 column with his teeth, and, crying out, showed the place, saying: “Here 
 He stood! Here He stood!” And at last he said, “I will not go 
 forth.” And when he was asked why, he answered in the Italian tongue 
 (although the poor priest did not understand that language), They all 
 practise such and such things, naming the worst vice of lustfulness. And 
 afterwards the priest asked me, saying, “Father, what did those Italian 
 words mean which came from my mouth?” And when I told him, he 
 answered, “I heard the words, but I could not understand them.” 
 Eventually it proved that this demoniac was of that sort of which the 
 Saviour spoke in the Gospel, saying: This sort goeth not out save by prayer 
 and fasting. For a venerable Bishop, who had been driven from his see by the 
 Turks, piously took compassion on him, and by fasting on bread and water for 
 forty days, and by prayers and exorcisms, at last through the grace of God 
 delivered him and sent him back to his home rejoicing.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a11a.htm">Next: Chapter XI</a><br>Of the Method by which they can Inflict Every Sort of Infirmity, generally Ills of the Graver Kind.<br>
 </center>
 </body>