<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a02a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a04a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter III</h2>
 <h3>How they are Transported from Place to Place.</h3></center>
 
         
 And now we must consider their ceremonies and in what manner they proceed in 
 their operations, first in respect of their actions towards themselves and 
 in their own persons. And among their chief operations are being bodily 
 transported from place to place, and to practise carnal connexion with 
 Incubus devils, which we shall treat of separately, beginning with their 
 bodily vectification. But here it must be noted that this transvection 
 offers a difficulty, which has often been mentioned, arising from one single 
 authority, where it is said: It cannot be admitted as true that certain 
 wicked women, perverted by Satan and seduced by the illusions and 
 phantasms of devils, do actually, as they believe and profess, ride in the 
 night-time on certain beasts with Diana, a goddess of the Pagans, or with 
 Herodias and an innumerable multitude of women, and in the untimely silence 
 of night pass over immense tracts of land, and have to obey her in all 
 things as their Mistress, etc. Wherefore the priest of God ought to preach 
 to the people that this is altogether false, and that such phantasms are 
 sent not by God, but by an evil Spirit to confuse the minds of the faithful. 
 For Satan himself transforms himself into various shapes and forms; and by 
 deluding in dreams the mind which he holds captive, leads it through devious 
 ways, etc.<br>
 
         
 And there are those who, taking their example from S. Germain and a certain 
 other man who kept watch over his daughter to determine this matter, 
 sometimes preach that this is an altogether impossible thing; and that it is 
 indiscreet to ascribe to witches and their operations such levitations, as 
 well as the injuries which happen to men, animals, and the fruits of the 
 earth; since just as they are the victims of phantasy in their transvections, 
 so also are they deluded in the matter of the harm they wreak on living 
 creatures.<br>
 
         
 But this opinion was refuted as heretical in the First Question; for it 
 leaves out of account the Divine permission with regard to the devil's 
 power, which extends to even greater things than this: and it is contrary 
 to the meaning of Sacred Scripture, and has caused intolerable damage to 
 Holy Church, since now for many years, thanks to this pestiferous doctrine, 
 witches have remained unpunished, because the secular courts have lost their 
 power to punish them. Therefore the diligent reader will consider what was 
 there set down for the stamping out of that opinion, and will for the 
 present note how they are transported, and in what ways this is possible, of 
 which some examples will be adduced.<br>
 
         
 It is shown in various ways that they can be bodily transported; and first, 
 from the operations of other Magicians. For if they could not be transported, 
 it would either be because God does not permit it, or because the devil 
 cannot do this since it is contrary to nature. It cannot be for the first 
 reason, for both greater and less things can be done by the permission of 
 God; and greater things are often done both to children and men, even to 
 just men confirmed in grace.<br>
 
         
 For when it is asked whether substitutions of children can be affected by 
 the work of devils, and whether the devil can carry a man from place to 
 place even against his will; to the first question the answer is, Yes. For 
 William of Paris says in the last part of his <i>De Uniuerso:</i> 
 Substitutions of children are, with God's permission, possible, so that the 
 devil can affect a change of the child or even a transformation. For such 
 children are always miserable and crying; and although four or five mothers 
 could hardly support enough milk for them, they never grow fat, yet are 
 heavy beyond the ordinary. But this should neither be affirmed nor denied to 
 women, on account of the great fear which it may cause them, but they should 
 be instructed to ask the opinion of learned men. For God permits this on 
 account of the sins of the parents, in that sometimes men curse their 
 pregnant wives, saying, May you be carrying a devil! or some such thing. In 
 the same way impatient women often say something of the sort. And many 
 examples have been given by other men, some of them pious men.<br>
 
         
 For Vincent of Beauvais (<i>Spec. Hist.</i>, XXVI, 43) related a story told 
 by S. Peter Damian of a five-year-old son of 
 a nobleman, who was for the time living in a monastery; and one night he 
 was carried out of the monastery into a locked mill, where he was found in 
 the morning. And when he was questioned, he said that he had been carried by 
 some men to a great feast and bidden to eat; and afterwards he was put into 
 the mill through the roof.<br>
 
         
 And what of those Magicians whom we generally call Necromancers, who are 
 often carried through the air by devils for long distances? And sometimes 
 they even persuade others to go with them on a horse, which is not really a 
 horse but a devil in that form, and, as they say, thus warn their companions 
 not to make the sign of the Cross.<br>
 
         
 And though we are two who write this book, one of us has very often seen and 
 known such men. For there is a man who was once a scholar, and is now 
 believed to be a priest in the diocese of Freising, who used to say that at 
 one time he had been bodily carried through the air by a devil, and taken to 
 the most remote parts.<br>
 
         
 There lives another priest in Oberdorf, a town near Landshut, who was at 
 that time a friend of that one of us, who saw with his own eyes such a 
 transportation, and tells how the man was borne on high with arms stretched 
 out, shouting but not whimpering. And the cause, as he tells it, was as 
 follows. A number of scholars had met together to drink beer, and they all 
 agreed that the one who fetched the beer should not have to pay anything. 
 And so one of them was going to fetch the beer, and on opening the door saw 
 a thick cloud before the grunsel, and returning in terror told his 
 companions why he would not go for the drink. Then that one of them who was 
 carried away said angrily: “Even if the devil were there, I shall 
 fetch the drink.” And, going out, he was carried through the air in 
 the sight of all the others.<br>
 
         
 And indeed it must be confessed that such things can happen not only to 
 those who are awake, but also to men who are asleep; namely, they can be 
 bodily transported through the air while they are fast asleep.<br>
 
         
 This is clear in the case of certain men who walk in their sleep on the 
 roofs of houses and over the highest buildings, and no one can oppose their 
 progress either on high or below. And if they are called by their own names 
 by the other bystanders, they immediately fall crashing to the ground.<br>
 
         
 Many think, and not without reason, that this is devils' work. For devils 
 are of many different kinds, and some, who fell from the lower choir of 
 Angels, are tortured as if for smaller sins with lighter punishments as well 
 as the punishment of damnation which they must suffer eternally. And these 
 cannot hurt anybody, at least not seriously, but for the most part carry out 
 only practical jokes. And others are Incubi or Succubi, who punish men in 
 the night, defiling them in the sin of lechery. It is not wonderful if they 
 are given also to horse-play such as this.<br>
 
         
 The truth can be deduced from the words of Cassian, <i>Collationes</i> I, 
 where he says that there is no doubt that there are as many different 
 unclean spirits as there are different desires in men. For it is manifest 
 that some of them, which the common people call Fauns, and we call Trolls, 
 which abound in Norway, are such buffoons and jokers that they haunt certain 
 places and roads and, without being able to do any hurt to those who pass 
 by, are content with mocking and deluding them, and try to weary them rather 
 than hurt them. And some of them only visit men with harmless nightmares. But 
 others are so furious and truculent that they are not content to afflict 
 with an atrocious dilation the bodies of those whom they inflate, but even 
 come rushing from on high and hasten to strike them with the most savage 
 blows. Our author means that they do not only possess men, but torture them 
 horribly, as did those which are described in <i>S. Matthew</i> viii.<br>
 
         
 From this we can conclude, first that it must not be said that witches 
 cannot be locally transported because God does not permit it. For if He 
 permits it in the case of the just and innocent, and of other Magicians, 
 how should He not in the case of those who are totally dedicated to the 
 devil? And we say with all reverence: Did not the devil take up Our Saviour, 
 and carry Him up to a high place, as the Gospel testifies?<br>
 
         
 Neither can the second argument of our opponents be conceded, that the devil 
 cannot do this thing. For it has already been shown that he has so great 
 natural power, exceeding all corporeal power, that there is no earthly 
 power that can be compared with him; as it is said: “There is no 
 power on earth that can be compared with him,” etc. Indeed the natural 
 power or virtue which is in Lucifer is so great that there is none greater 
 among the good Angels in Heaven. For just as he excelled all the Angels in 
 his nature, and not his nature, but only his grace, was diminished by his 
 Fall, so that nature still remains in him, although it is darkened and bound. 
 Wherefore the gloss on that “There is no power on earth” says: 
 Although he excels all things, yet he is subject to the merits of the 
 Saints.<br>
 
         
 Two objections which someone may bring forward are not valid. First, that 
 man's soul could resist him, and that the text seems to speak of one devil 
 in particular, since it speaks in the singular, namely Lucifer. And because 
 it was he who tempted Christ in the wilderness, and seduced the first man, 
 he is now bound in chains. And the other Angels are not so powerful, since 
 he excels them all. Therefore the other spirits cannot transport wicked men 
 through the air from place to place.<br>
 
         
 These arguments have no force. For, to consider the Angels first, even the 
 least Angel is incomparably superior to all human power, as can be proved in 
 many ways. First, a spiritual is stronger than a corporeal power, and so is 
 the power of an Angel, or even of the soul, greater than that of the body. 
 Secondly, as to the soul; every bodily shape owes its individuality to 
 matter, and, in the case of human beings, to the fact that a soul informs 
 it; but immaterial forms are absolute intelligences, and therefore have an 
 absolute and more universal power. For this reason, the soul when joined to 
 the body cannot in this way suddenly transfer its body locally or raise it 
 up in the air; although it could easily do so, with God's permission, if it 
 were separate from its body. Much more, then, is this possible to an 
 entirely immaterial spirit, such as a good or bad Angel. For a good Angel 
 transported Habacuc in a moment from Judaea 
 to Chaldaea. And for this reason it is concluded that those who by night 
 are carried in their sleep over high buildings are not carried by their own 
 souls, nor by the influence of the stars, but by some mightier power, as was 
 shown above.<br>
 
         
 Thirdly, it is the nature of the body to be moved, as to place, directly by 
 a spiritual nature; and, as Aristotle says, <i>Physics</i>, VIII, local 
 motion is the first of bodily motions; and he proves this by saying that 
 local motion is not intrinsically in the power of any body as such, but is 
 due to some exterior force.<br>
 
         
 Wherefore it is concluded, not so much from the holy Doctors as from the 
 Philosophers, that the highest bodies, that is, the stars, are moved by 
 spiritual essences, and by separate Intelligences which are good both by 
 nature and in intention. For we see that the soul is the prime and chief 
 cause of local motion in the body.<br>
 
         
 It must be said, therefore, that neither in its physical capacity nor in 
 that of its soul can the human body resist being suddenly transported from 
 place to place, with God's permission, by a spiritual essence good both in 
 intention and by nature, when the good, who are confirmed in grace, are 
 transported; or by an essence good by nature, but not good in intention, 
 when the wicked are transported. Any who wish may refer to S. Thomas in 
 three articles in Part I, question 90, and again in his question concerning 
 Sin, and also in the <i>Second Book of Sentences</i>, dist. 7, on the power 
 of devils over bodily effects.<br>
 
         
 Now the following is their method of being transported. They take the 
 unguent which, as we have said, they make at 
 the devil's instruction from the limbs of children, particularly of those 
 whom they have killed before baptism, and anoint with it a chair or a 
 broomstick; whereupon they are immediately carried up into the air, either 
 by day or by night, and either visibly or, if they wish, invisibly; for the 
 devil can conceal a body by the interposition of some other substance, as 
 was shown in the First Part of the treatise where we spoke of the glamours 
 and illusions caused by the devil. And although the devil for the most part 
 performs this by means of this unguent, to the end that children should be 
 deprived of the grace of baptism and of salvation, yet he often seems to 
 affect the same transvection without its use. For at times he transports 
 the witches on animals, which are not true animals but devils in that form; 
 and sometimes even without any exterior help they are visibly carried solely 
 by the operation of the devil's power.<br>
 
         
 Here is an instance of a visible transportation in the day-time. In the town 
 of Waldshut on the Rhine, in the diocese of Constance, there was a certain 
 witch who was so detested by the townsfolk that she was not invited to the 
 celebration of a wedding which, however, nearly all the other townsfolk were 
 present. Being indignant because of this, and wishing to be revenged, she 
 summoned a devil and, telling him the cause of her vexation, asked him to 
 raise a hailstorm and drive all the wedding guests from their dancing; and 
 the devil agreed, and raising her up, carried her through the air to a hill 
 near the town, in the sight of some shepherds. And since, as she afterwards 
 confessed, she had no water to pour into the trench (for this, as we shall 
 show, is the method they use to raise hailstorms), she made a small trench 
 and filled it with her urine instead of water, and stirred it with her 
 finger, after their custom, with the devil standing by. Then the devil 
 suddenly raised that liquid up and sent a violent storm of hailstones which 
 fell only on the dancers and townsfolk. And when they had dispersed and were 
 discussing among themselves the cause of that storm, the witch shortly 
 afterwards entered the town; and this greatly aroused their suspicions. But 
 when the shepherds had told what they had seen, their suspicions became 
 almost a certainty. So she was arrested, and confessed that she had done 
 this thing because she had not been invited to the wedding: and for this, 
 and for many other witchcrafts which she had perpetrated, she was burned.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a04a.htm">Next: Chapter IV</a><br>Here follows the Way whereby Witches copulate with those Devils known as Incubi.<br>
 </center>
 </body>