<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm01_18a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a01a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Question I</h2>
 <h3>Of those against whom the Power of Witches availeth not at all.</h3></center>
 
         
 The second main part of this work deals with the method of procedure 
 adopted by witches for the performance of their witchcraft; and these are 
 distinguished under eighteen heads, proceeding from two chief difficulties. 
 The first of these two, dealt with in the beginning, concerns protective 
 remedies, by which a man is rendered immune from witchcraft: the second, 
 dealt with at the end, concerns curative remedies, by which those who 
 are bewitched can be cured. For, as Aristotle says (<i>Physics</i>, IV), 
 prevention and cure are related to one another, and are, accidentally, 
 matters of causation. In this way the whole foundation of this horrible 
 heresy may be made clear.<br>
 
         
 In the above two divisions, the following points will be principally 
 emphasized. First, the initiation of witches, and their profession of 
 sacrilege. Second, the progress of their method of working, and of their 
 horrible observances. Third, the preventive protections against their 
 witchcrafts. And because we are now dealing with matters relating to morals 
 and behaviour, and there is no need for a variety of arguments and 
 disquisitions, since those matters which now follow under their headings 
 are sufficiently discussed in the foregoing Questions; therefore we pray 
 God that the reader will not look for proofs in every case, since it is 
 enough to adduce examples that have been personally seen or heard, or are 
 accepted at the word of credible witnesses.<br>
 
         
 In the first of the points mentioned, two matters will be chiefly examined: 
 first, the various methods of enticement adopted by the devil himself; 
 second, the various ways in which witches profess their heresy. And in the 
 second of the main points, six matters will be examined in order, relating 
 to the procedure of witchcraft, and its cure. First, the practices of witches 
 with regard to themselves and their own bodies. Second, their practices with 
 regard to other men. Third, those relating to beasts. Fourth, the mischief 
 they do to the fruits of the earth. Fifth, those kinds of witchcraft which 
 are practised by men only and not by women. Sixth, the question of removing 
 witchcraft, and how those who are bewitched may be cured. The First Question, 
 therefore, is divided into eighteen heads, since in so many ways are their 
 observances varied and multiplied.<br>
 
         
 It is asked whether a man can be so blessed by the good Angels that he 
 cannot be bewitched by witches in any of the ways that follow. And it seems 
 that he cannot, for it has already been proved that even the blameless and 
 innocent and the just are often afflicted by devils, as was Job; and many 
 innocent children, as well as countless other just men, are seen to be 
 bewitched, although not to the same extent as sinners; for they are not 
 afflicted in the perdition of their souls, but only in their worldly goods 
 and their bodies. But the contrary is indicated by the confessions of 
 witches, namely, that they cannot injure everybody, but only those whom they 
 learn, through the information of devils, to be destitute of Divine help.<br>
 
         
 <i>Answer</i>. There are three classes of men blessed by God, whom that 
 detestable race cannot injure with their witchcraft. And the first are those 
 who administer public justice against them, or prosecute them in any public 
 official capacity. The second are those who, according to the traditional 
 and holy rites of the Church, make lawful use of the power and virtue which 
 the Church by her exorcisms furnishes in the aspersion of Holy Water, the 
 taking of consecrated salt, the carrying of blessed candles on the Day of 
 the Purification of Our Lady, of palm leaves upon Palm Sunday, and men who 
 thus fortify themselves are acting so that the powers of devils are 
 diminished; and of these we shall speak later. The third class are those who, 
 in various and infinite ways, are blessed by the Holy Angels.<br>
 
         
 The reason for this in the first class will be given and proved by various 
 examples. For since, as S. Paul says, all power if from God, and a sword 
 for the avenging of the wicked and the retribution of the good, it is no 
 wonder that devils are kept at bay when justice is being done to avenge 
 that horrible crime.<br>
 
         
 To the same effect the Doctors note that there are five ways in which the 
 devil's power is hindered, either wholly or in part. First, by a limit fixed 
 by God to his power, as is seen in <i>Job</i> i and ii. Another example is 
 the case of the man we read of in the <i>Formicarius</i> of Nider, who had 
 confessed to a judge that he had invoked the devil in order that he might 
 kill an enemy of his, or do him bodily harm, or strike him dead with 
 lightning. And he said: “When I had invoked the devil that I might 
 commit such a deed with his help, he answered me that he was unable to do 
 any of those things, because the man had good faith and diligently defended 
 himself with the sign of the cross; and that therefore he could not harm him 
 in his body, but the most he could do was to destroy an eleventh part of the 
 fruit of his lands.”<br>
 
         
 Secondly, it is hindered by the application of some exterior force, as in 
 the case of Balaam's ass, <i>Numbers</i> xxii. Thirdly, by some externally 
 performed miracle of power. And there are some who are blessed with an 
 unique privilege, as will be shown later in the case of the third class of 
 men who cannot be bewitched. Fourthly, by the good providence of God, Who 
 disposes each thing severally, and causes a good Angel to stand in the 
 devil's way, as when Asmodeus killed the seven husbands of the virgin Sara, 
 but did not kill Tobias.<br>
 
         
 Fifthly, it is sometimes due to the caution of the devil himself, for at 
 times he does not wish to do hurt, in order that worse may follow from it. 
 As, for example, when he could molest the excommunicated but does not do 
 so, as in the case of the excommunicated Corinthian (I. <i>Corinthians</i> 
 v), in order that he may weaken the faith of the Church in the power of such 
 banishment. Therefore we may similarly say that, even if the administrators 
 of public justice were not protected by Divine power, yet the devils often 
 of their own accord withdraw their support and guardianship from witches, 
 either because they fear their conversion, or because they desire and hasten 
 their damnation.<br>
 
         
 This fact is proved also by actual experience. For the aforesaid Doctor 
 affirms that witches have borne witness that it is a fact of their own 
 experience that, merely because they have been taken by officials of public 
 justice, they have immediately lost all their power of witchcraft. For 
 example, a judge named Peter, whom we have mentioned before, wished his 
 officials to arrest a certain witch called 
 Stadlin; but their hands were seized with 
 so great a trembling, and such a nauseous stench came into their nostrils, 
 that they gave up hope of daring to touch the witch. And the judge commanded 
 them, saying: “You may safely arrest the wretch, for when he is 
 touched by the hand of public justice, he will lose all the power of his 
 iniquity.” And so the event proved; for he was taken and burned for 
 many witchcrafts perpetrated by him, which are mentioned here and there in 
 this work in their appropriate places.<br>
 
         
 And many more such experiences have happened to us Inquisitors in the 
 exercise of our inquisitorial office, which would turn the mind of the 
 reader to wonder if it were expedient to relate them. But since self-praise 
 is sordid and mean, it is better to pass them over in silence than to incur 
 the stigma of boastfulness and conceit. But we must except those which have 
 become so well known that they cannot be concealed.<br>
 
         
 Not long ago in the town of Ratisbon the magistrates had condemned a witch 
 to be burned, and were asked why it was that we Inquisitors were not 
 afflicted like other men with witchcraft. They answered that witches had 
 often tried to injure them, but could not. And, being asked the reason for 
 this, they answered that they did not know, unless it was because the devils 
 had warned them against doing so. For, they said, it would be impossible to 
 tell how many times they have pestered us by day and by night, now in the 
 form of apes, not of dogs or goats, disturbing us with their cries and 
 insults; fetching us from our beds at their blasphemous prayers, so that we 
 have stood outside the window of their prison, which was so high that no one 
 could reach it without the longest of ladders; and then they have seemed to 
 stick the pins with which their head-cloth was fastened violently into their 
 heads. But praise be to Almighty God, Who in His pity, and for no merit of 
 our own, has preserved us as unworthy public servants of the justice of the 
 Faith.<br>
 
         
 The reason in the case of the second class of men is self-evident. For the 
 exorcisms of the Church are for this very purpose, and are entirely 
 efficacious remedies for preserving oneself from the injuries of witches.<br>
 
         
 But if it is asked in what manner a man ought to use such protections, we 
 must speak first of those that are used without the uttering of sacred words, 
 and then of the actual sacred invocations. For in the first place it is 
 lawful in any decent habitation of men or beasts to sprinkle Holy Water for 
 the safety and securing of men and beasts, with the invocation of the Most 
 Holy Trinity and a Paternoster. For it is said in the Office of Exorcism, 
 that wherever it is sprinkled, all uncleanness is purified, all harm is 
 repelled, and no pestilent spirit can abide there, etc. For the Lord saves 
 both man and beast, according to the Prophet, each in his degree.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, just as the first must necessarily be sprinkled, so in the case of 
 a Blessed Candle, although it is more appropriate to light it, the wax of it 
 may with advantage be sprinkled about dwelling-houses. And thirdly, it is 
 expedient to place or to burn consecrated herbs in those rooms where they 
 can best be consumed in some convenient place.<br>
 
         
 Now it happened in the city of Spires, in the same year that this book was 
 begun, that a certain devout woman held conversation with a suspected witch, 
 and, after the manner of women, they used abusive words to each other. But 
 in the night she wished to put her little suckling child in its cradle, and 
 remembered her encounter that day with the suspected witch. So, fearing some 
 danger to the child, she placed consecrated herbs under it, sprinkled it 
 with Holy Water, put a little Blessed Salt to its lips, signed it with the 
 Sign of the Cross, and diligently secured the cradle. About the middle of 
 the night she heard the child crying, and, as women do, wished to embrace 
 the child, and life the cradle on to her bed. She lifted the candle, indeed, 
 but could not embrace the child, because he was not there. The poor woman, 
 in terror, and bitterly weeping for the loss of her child, lit a light, and 
 found the child in a corner under a chair, crying but unhurt.<br>
 
         
 In this it may be seen what virtue there is in the exorcisms of the Church 
 against the snares of the devil. It is manifest that Almighty God, in His 
 mercy and wisdom which extend from end to end, watches over the deeds of 
 those wicked men; and that he gently directs the witchcraft of devils, so 
 that when they try to diminish and weaken the Faith, they on the contrary 
 strengthen it and make it more firmly rooted in the hearts of many. For the 
 faithful may derive much profit from these evils; when, by reason of devils' 
 works, the faith is made strong, God's mercy is seen, and His power 
 manifested, and men are led into His keeping and to the reverence of Christ's 
 Passion, and are enlightened by the ceremonies of the Church.<br>
 
         
 There lived in a town of Wiesenthal a certain Mayor who was bewitched with 
 the most terrible pains and bodily contortions; and he discovered, not by 
 means of other witches, but from his own experience, how that witchcraft 
 had been practised on him. For he said he was in the habit of fortifying 
 himself every Sunday with Blessed Salt and Holy Water, but that he had 
 neglected to do so on one occasion owing to the celebration of somebody's 
 marriage; and on that same day he was bewitched.<br>
 
         
 In Ratisbon a man was being tempted by the devil in the form of a woman to 
 copulate, and became greatly disturbed when the devil would not desist. But 
 it came into the poor man's mind that he ought to defend himself by taking 
 Blessed Salt, as he had heard in a sermon. So, he took some Blessed Salt on 
 entering the bath-room; and the woman looked fiercely at him, and, cursing 
 whatever devil had taught him to do this, suddenly disappeared. For the 
 devil can, with God's permission, present himself either in the form of a 
 witch, or by possessing the body of an actual witch.<br>
 
         
 There were also three companions walking along a road, and two of them were 
 struck by lightning. The third was terrified, when he heard voices speaking 
 in the air, “Let us strike him too.” But another voice answered, 
 “We cannot, for to-day he has heard the words ‘The Word was 
 made Flesh.’” And he understood that he had been saved because 
 he had that day heard Mass, and, at the end of the Mass, the Gospel of S. 
 John: In the beginning was the Word, etc.<br>
 
         
 Also sacred words bound to the body are marvellously protective, if seven 
 conditions for their use are observed. But these will be mentioned in the 
 last Question of this Second Part, where we speak of curative, as here we 
 speak of preventive measures. And those sacred words help not only to 
 protect, but also to cure those who are bewitched.<br>
 
         
 But the surest protection for places, men, or animals are the words of the 
 triumphal title of our Saviour, if they be written in four places in the 
 form of a cross: IESUS † NAZARENUS † REX † IUDAEORUM †. 
 There may also be added the name of MARY and of the Evangelists, or the 
 words of S. John: The Word was made Flesh.<br>
 
         
 But the third class of men which cannot be hurt by witches is the most 
 remarkable; for they are protected by a special Angelic guardianship, both 
 within and without. Within, by the inpouring of grace; without, by the 
 virtue of the stars, that is, by the protection of the Powers which move 
 the stars. And this class is divided into two sections of the Elect: for 
 some are protected against all sorts of witchcrafts, so that they can be 
 hurt in no way; and others are particularly rendered chaste by the good 
 Angels with regard to the generative functions, just as evil spirits by 
 their witchcrafts inflame the lusts of certain wicked men towards one woman, 
 while they make them cold towards another.<br>
 
         
 And their interior and exterior protection, by grace and by the influence 
 of the stars, is explained as follows. For though it is God Himself Who 
 pours grace into our souls, and no other creature has so great power as to 
 do this (as it is said: The Lord will give grace and glory); yet, when God 
 wished to bestow some especial grace, He does so in a dispositive way 
 through the agency of a good Angel, as S. Thomas teaches us in a certain 
 place in the <i>Third Book of Sentences</i>.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a01a.htm">Next: Chapter I</a><br>Of the several Methods by which Devils through Witches Entice and Allure the Innocent to the Increase of that Horrid Craft and Company.<br>
 </center>
 </body>