<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a10a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a12a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter XI</h2>
 <h3>Of the Method by which they can Inflict Every Sort of Infirmity, generally Ills of the Graver Kind.</h3></center>
 
         
 But there is no bodily infirmity, not even leprosy or epilepsy, which cannot 
 be caused by witches, with God's permission. And this is proved by the fact 
 that no sort of infirmity is excepted by the Doctors. For a careful 
 consideration of what has already been written concerning the power of 
 devils and the wickedness of witches will show that this statement offers 
 no difficulty. Nider also deals with this subject both in his 
 <i>Book of Precepts</i> and in his 
 <i>Formicarius</i>, where he asks: Whether witches can actually injure men 
 by their witchcraft. And the question makes no exception of any infirmity, 
 however incurable. And he there answers that they can do so, and proceeds 
 to ask in what way and by what means.<br>
 
         
 And as to the first, he answers, as has been shown in the First Question of 
 the First Part of this treatise. And it is proved also by S. Isidore where 
 he describes the operations of witches (<i>Etym.</i> 8, cap. 9), and says 
 that they are called witches on account of the magnitude of their crimes; 
 for they disturb the elements by raising up storms with the help of devils, 
 they confuse the minds of men in the ways already mentioned, by either 
 entirely obstructing or gravely impeding the use of their reason. He adds 
 also that without the use of any poison, but by the mere virulence of their 
 incantations, they can deprive men of their lives.<br>
 
         
 It is proved also by S. Thomas in the <i>Second Book of Sentences</i>, dist. 
 7 and 8, and in Book IV, dist. 34, and in general all the Theologians write 
 that witches can with the help of the devil bring harm upon men and their 
 affairs in all the ways in which the devil alone can injure or deceive, 
 namely, in their affairs, their reputation, their body, their reason, and 
 their life; which means that those injuries which are caused by the devil 
 without any witch, can also be caused by a witch; and even more readily so, 
 on account of the greater offence which is given to the Divine Majesty, as 
 has been shown above.<br>
 
         
 In <i>Job</i> i and ii is found a clear case of the injury in temporal 
 affairs. The injury to reputation is shown in the history of the Blessed 
 Jerome, that the devil transformed himself into the appearance of S. 
 Silvanus, Bishop of Nazareth, a friend of S. Jerome. And this devil 
 approached a noble woman by night in her bed and began first to provoke and 
 entice her with lewd words, and then invited her to perform the sinful act. 
 And when she called out, the devil in the form of the saintly Bishop hid 
 under the woman's bed, and being sought for and found there, he in lickerish 
 language declared lyingly that he was the Bishop Silvanus. On the morrow 
 therefore, when the devil had disappeared, the holy man was scandalously 
 defamed; but his good name was cleared when the devil confessed at the tomb 
 of S. Jerome that he had done this in an assumed body.<br>
 
         
 The injury to the body is shown in the case of the Blessed Job, who was 
 stricken by the devil with terrible sores, which are explained as a form of 
 leprosy. And Sigisbert and Vincent of 
 Beauvais (<i>Spec. Hist.</i> XXV, 37) both tell that in the time of the 
 Emperor Louis II, in the diocese of Mainz, a 
 certain devil began to thrown stones and to beat at the houses as if with a 
 hammer. And then by public statements, and secret insinuations, he spread 
 discord ad troubled the minds of many. Then he excited the anger of all 
 against one man, whose lodging, where he was resting, he set on fire, and 
 said that they were all suffering for his sins. So at last that man had to 
 find his lodging in the fields. And when the priests were saying a litany 
 on this account, the devil stoned many of the people with stones till he 
 hurt them to bleeding; and sometimes he would desist, and sometimes rage; 
 and this continued for three years, until all the houses there were burned 
 down.<br>
 
         
 Exampled of the injury to the use of the reason, and of the tormenting of 
 the inner perceptions, are seen in those possessed and frenzied men of whom 
 the Gospels tell. And as for death, and that they deprive some of their 
 lives, it is proved in <i>Tobias</i> vi, in the case of the seven husbands 
 of the virgin Sara, who were killed because of their lecherous lust and 
 unbridled desired for the virgin Sara, of whom they were not worthy to be 
 the husbands. Therefore it is concluded that both by themselves, and all the 
 more with the help of witches, devils can injure men in every way without 
 exception.<br>
 
         
 But if it is asked whether injuries of this sort are to be ascribed rather 
 to devils than to witches, it is answered that, when the devils cause 
 injuries by their own direct action, then they are principally to be 
 ascribed to them. But when they work through the agency of witches for the 
 disparagement and offending of God and the perdition of souls, knowing that 
 by this means God is made more angry and allows them greater power of doing 
 evil; and because they do indeed perpetuate countless witchcrafts which the 
 devil would not be allowed to bring upon men if he wished to injure men 
 alone by himself, but are permitted, in the just and hidden purpose of God, 
 through the agency of witches, on account of their perfidy and abjuration 
 of the Catholic Faith; therefore such injuries are justly ascribed to 
 witches secondarily, however much the devil may be the principal actor.<br>
 
         
 Therefore when a woman dips a twig in water and sprinkles the water in the 
 air to make it rain, although she does not herself cause the rain, and 
 could not be blamed on that account, yet, because she has entered into a 
 pact with the devil by which she can do this as a witch, although it is the 
 devil who causes the rain, she herself nevertheless deservedly bears the 
 blame, because she is an infidel and does the devil's work, surrendering 
 herself to his service.<br>
 
         
 So also when a witch makes a waxen image or some such thing in order to 
 bewitch somebody; or when an image of someone appears by pouring molten 
 lead into water, and some injury is done upon the image, such as piercing it 
 or hurting it in any other way, when it is the bewitched man who is in 
 imagination being hurt; although the injury is actually done to the image 
 by some witch or some other man, and the devil in the same manner invisibly 
 injures the bewitched man, yet it is deservedly ascribed to the witch. For, 
 without her, God would never allow the devil to inflict the injury, nor 
 would the devil on his own account try to injure the man.<br>
 
         
 But because it has been said that in the matter of their good name the 
 devils can injure men on the own account and without the co-operation of 
 witches, there may arise a doubt whether the devils cannot also defame 
 honest women so that they are reputed to be witches, when they appear in 
 their likeness to bewitch someone; from which it would happen that such a 
 woman would be defamed without cause.<br>
 
         
 In answering this we must premise a few remarks. First, it has been said 
 that the devil can do nothing without the Divine permission, as is shown in 
 the First Part of this work in the last Question. It has also been shown 
 that God does not allow so great power of evil against the just and those 
 who live in grace, as against sinners; and as the devils have more power 
 against sinners (see the text: When a strong man 
 armed, etc.) so they are permitted by God to afflict them more than the 
 just. Finally, although they can, with God's permission, injure the just in 
 their affairs, their reputation, and their bodily health, yet, because they 
 know that this power is granted them chiefly for the increase of the merits 
 of the just, they are the less eager to injure them.<br>
 
         
 Therefore it can be said that in this difficulty there are several points to 
 be considered. First, the Divine permission. Secondly, the man who is 
 thought to be righteous, for they who are so reputed are not always actually 
 in a state of grace. Thirdly, the crime of which an innocent man would be 
 suspected; for that crime in its very origin exceeds all the crimes of the 
 world. Therefore it is to be said that it is granted that, with God's 
 permission, an innocent person, whether or not he is in a state of grace, 
 may be injured in his affairs to this particular crime and the gravity of 
 the accusation (for we have often quoted S. Isidore's saying that they 
 are called witches from the magnitude of their crimes), it can be said that 
 for an innocent person to be defamed by the devil in a way that has been 
 suggested does not seem at all possible, for many reasons.<br>
 
         
 In the first place, it is one thing to be defamed in respect of vices which 
 are committed without any expressed or tacit contract with the devil, such 
 as theft, robbery, or fornication; but quite another matter to be defamed 
 in respect of vices which it is impossible to accuse a man of having 
 perpetrated unless he has entered upon an expressed contract with the 
 devil; and such are the works of witches, which cannot be laid at their 
 door unless it is by the power of devils that they bewitch men, animals and 
 the fruits of the earth. Therefore, although the devil can blacken men's 
 reputations in respect of other vices, yet it does not seem possible for him 
 to do so in respect of this vice which cannot be perpetrated without his 
 co-operation.<br>
 
         
 Besides, it has never hitherto been known to have happened that an innocent 
 person has been defamed by the devil to such an extent that he was 
 condemned to death for this particular crime. Furthermore, when a person is 
 only under suspicion, he suffers no punishment except that which the Canon 
 prescribes for his purgation, as will be shown in the Third Part of this 
 work in the second method of sentencing witches.<br>
 
         
 And it is set down there that, if such a man fails in his purgation, he is 
 to be considered guilty, but that he should be solemnly adjured before the 
 punishment due to his sin is proceeded with and enforced. But here we are 
 dealing with actual events; and it has never yet been known that an 
 innocent person has been punished on suspicion of witchcraft, and there is 
 no doubt that God will never permit such a thing to happen.<br>
 
         
 Besides, He does not suffer the innocent who are under Angelic protection 
 to be suspected of smaller crimes, such as robbery and such things; then all 
 the more will He preserve those who are under that protection from 
 suspicion of the crime of witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 And it is no valid objection to quote the legend of S. Germanius, when 
 devils assumed the bodies of other women and sat down at table and slept 
 with the husbands, deluding the latter into the belief that those women were 
 in their own bodies eating and drinking with them, as we have mentioned 
 before. For the women in this case are not to be held guiltless. For in the 
 Canon (<i>Episcopi</i> 26. q. 2) such women are condemned for thinking that 
 they are really and actually transported, when they are so only in 
 imagination; although, as we have shown above, they are at times bodily 
 transported by devils.<br>
 
         
 But our present proposition is that they can, with God's permission, cause 
 all other infirmities, with no exception; and it is to be concluded from 
 what we have said that this is so. For no exception is made by the Doctors, 
 and there is no reason why there should be any, since, as we have often 
 said, the natural power of devils is superior to all corporeal power. And 
 we have found in our experience that this is true. For although greater 
 difficulty may be felt in believing that witches are able to cause leprosy 
 or epilepsy, since these diseases arise from some long-standing physical 
 predisposition or defect, none the less it has sometimes been found that 
 even these have been caused by witchcraft. For in the diocese of Basel, in 
 the district of Alsace and Lorraine, a certain honest labourer spoke roughly 
 to a certain quarrelsome woman, and she angrily threatened him that she 
 would soon avenge herself on him. He took little notice of her; but on the 
 same night he felt a pustule grow upon his neck, and he rubbed it a little, 
 and found his whole face and neck puffed up and swollen, and a horrible form 
 of leprosy appeared all over his body. He immediately went to his friends 
 for advice, and told them of the woman's threat, and said that he would 
 stake his life on the suspicion that this had been done to him by the magic 
 art of that same witch. In short, the woman was taken, questioned, and 
 confessed her crimes. But when the judge asked her particularly about the 
 reason for it, and how she had done it, she answered: “When that man 
 used abusive words to me, I was angry and went home; and my familiar began 
 to ask the reason for my ill humour. I told him, and begged him to avenge 
 me on the man. And he asked what I wanted him to do to him; and I answered 
 that I wished he would always have a swollen face. And the devil went away 
 and afflicted the man even beyond my asking; for I had not hoped that he 
 would infect him with such sore leprosy.” And so the woman was 
 burned.<br>
 
         
 And in the diocese of Constance, between Breisach and Freiburg, there is a 
 leprous woman (unless she has paid the debt of all flesh within these two 
 years) who used to tell to many people how the same thing had happened to 
 her by reason of a similar quarrel which took place between her and another 
 woman. For one night when she went out of the house to do something in front 
 of the door, a warm wind came from the house of the other woman, which was 
 opposite, and suddenly struck her face; and from that time she had been 
 afflicted with the leprosy which she now suffered.<br>
 
         
 And lastly, in the same diocese, in the territory of the Black Forest, a 
 witch was being lifted by a gaoler on to the pile of wood prepared for her 
 burning, and she said: ”I will pay you”; and blew into his face. 
 And he was at once afflicted with a horrible leprosy all over his body, and 
 did not survive many days. For the sake of brevity, the fearful crimes of 
 this witch, and many more instances could be recounted, are omitted. For we 
 have often found that certain people have been visited with epilepsy or the 
 falling sickness by means of eggs which have been buried with dead bodies, 
 especially the dead bodies of witches, together with other ceremonies of 
 which we cannot speak, particularly when these eggs have been given to a 
 person either in food or drink.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a12a.htm">Next: Chapter XII</a><br>Of the Way how in Particular they Afflict Men with Other Like Infirmities.<br>
 </center>
 </body>