<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a03a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a05a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter IV</h2>
 <h3>Here follows the Way whereby Witches copulate with those Devils known as Incubi.</h3></center>
 
         
 As to the method in which witches copulate with Incubus devils, six points 
 are to be noted. First, as to the devil and the body which he assumes, of 
 what element it is formed. Second, as to the act, whether it is always 
 accompanied with the injection of semen received from some other man. Third, 
 as to the time and place, whether one time is more favourable than another 
 for this practice. Fourth, whether the act is visible to the women, and 
 whether only those who were begotten in this way are so visited by devils. 
 Fifth, whether it applies only to those who were offered to the devil at 
 birth by midwives. Sixth, whether the actual venereal pleasure is greater or 
 less in this act. And we will speak first of the matter and quality of the 
 body which the devil assumes.<br>
 
         
 It must be said that he assumes an aerial body, and that it is in some 
 respects terrestrial, in so far as it has an earthly property through 
 condensation; and this is explained as follows. The air cannot of itself 
 take definite shape, except the shape of some other body in which it is 
 included. And in that case it is not bound by its own limits, but by those 
 of something else; and one part of the air continues into the next part. 
 Therefore he cannot simply assume an aerial body as such.<br>
 
         
 Know, moreover, that the air is in every way a most changeable and fluid 
 matter: and a sign of this is the fact that when any have tried to cut or 
 pierce with a sword the body assumed by a devil, they have not been able to; 
 for the divided parts of the air at once join together again. From this it 
 follows that air is in itself a very competent matter, but because it cannot 
 take shape unless some other terrestrial matter is joined with it, therefore 
 it is necessary that the air which forms the devil's assumed body should be 
 in some way inspissated, and approach the property of the earth, while still 
 retaining its true property as air. And devils and disembodied spirits can 
 effect this condensation by means of gross vapours raised from the earth, 
 and by collecting them together into shapes in which they abide, not as 
 defilers of them, but only as their motive power which give to that body the 
 formal appearance of life, in very much the same way as the soul informs the 
 body to which it is joined. They are, moreover, in these assumed and shaped 
 bodies like a sailor in a ship which the wind moves.<br>
 
         
 So when it is asked of what sort is the body assumed by the devil, it is to 
 be said that with regard to its material, it is one thing to speak of the 
 beginning of its assumption, and another thing to speak of its end. For in 
 the beginning it is just air; but in the end it is inspisated air, partaking 
 of some of the properties of the earth. And all this the devils, with God's 
 permission, can do of their own nature; for the spiritual nature is superior 
 to the bodily. Therefore the bodily nature must obey the devils in respect 
 of local motion, though not in respect of the assumption of natural shapes, 
 either accidental or substantial, except in the case of some small creatures 
 (and then only with the help of some other agent, as has been hinted before). 
 But as to local motion, no shape is beyond their power; thus they can move 
 them as they wish, in such circumstances as they will.<br>
 
         
 From this there may arise an incidental question as to what should be thought 
 when a good or bad Angel performs some of the functions of life by means of 
 true natural bodies, and not in aerial bodies; as in the case of Balaam's 
 ass, through which the Angel spoke, and when the devils take possession of 
 bodies. It is to be said that those bodies are not called assumed, but 
 occupied. See S. Thomas, II. 8, Whether Angels assume bodies. But let us 
 keep strictly to our argument.<br>
 
         
 In what way is it to be understood that devils talk with witches, see them, 
 hear them, eat with them, and copulate with them? And this is the second 
 part of this first difficulty.<br>
 
         
 For the first, it is to be said that three things are required for true 
 conversation: namely, lungs to draw in the air; and this is not only for the 
 sake of producing sound, but also to cool the heart; and even mutes have 
 this necessary quality.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, it is necessary that some percussion be made of a body in the air, 
 as a greater or less sound is made when one beats wood in the airs, or rings 
 a bell. For when a substance that is susceptible to sound is struck by a 
 sound-producing instrument, it gives out a sound according to its size, 
 which is received in the air and multiplied to the ears of the hearer, to 
 whom, if he is far off, it seems to come through space.<br>
 
         
 Thirdly, a voice is required; and it may be said that what is called Sound 
 in inanimate bodies is called Voice in living bodies. And here the tongue 
 strikes the respirations of air against an instrument or living natural 
 organ provided by God. And this is not a bell, which is called a sound, 
 whereas this is a voice. And this third requisite may clearly be exemplified 
 by the second; and I have set this down that preachers may have a method of 
 teaching the people.<br>
 
         
 And fourthly, it is necessary that he who forms the voice should mean to 
 express by means of that voice some concept of the mind to someone else, and 
 that he should himself understand what he is saying; and so manage his voice 
 by successively striking his teeth with his tongue in his mouth, by opening 
 and shutting his lips, and by sending the air struck in his mouth into the 
 outer air, that in this way the sound is reproduced in order in the ears of 
 the hearer, who then understands his meaning.<br>
 
         
 To return to the point. Devils have no lungs or tongue, though they can show 
 the latter, as well as teeth and lips, artificially made according to the 
 condition of their body; therefore they cannot truly and properly speak. But 
 since they have understanding, and when they wish to express their meaning, 
 then, by some disturbance of the air included in their assumed body, not of 
 air breathed in and out as in the case of men, they produce, not voices, but 
 sounds which have some likeness to voices, and send them articulately through 
 the outside air to the ears of the hearer. And that the likeness of a voice 
 can be made without respiration of air is clear from the case of other 
 animals which do not breathe, but are said to made a sound, as do also 
 certain other instruments, as Aristotle says in the <i>de Anima</i>. For 
 certain fishes, when they are caught, suddenly utter a cry outside the water, 
 and die.<br>
 
         
 All this is applicable to what follows, so far as the point where we treat 
 of the generative function, but not as regards good Angels. If anyone wishes 
 to inquire further into the matter of devils speaking in possessed bodies, 
 he may refer to S. Thomas in the <i>Second Book of Sentences</i>, dist. 8, 
 art. 5. For in that case they use the bodily organs of the possessed body; 
 since they occupy those bodies in respect of the limits of their corporeal 
 quantity, but not in respect of the limits of their essence, either of the 
 body or of the soul. Observe a distinction between substance and quantity, 
 or accident. But this is impertinent.<br>
 
         
 For now we must say in what manner they see and hear. Now sight is of two 
 kinds, spiritual and corporeal, and the former infinitely excels the latter; 
 for it can penetrate, and is not hindered by distance, owing to the faculty 
 of light of which it makes use. Therefore it must be said that in no way 
 does an Angel, either good or bad, see with the eyes of its assumed body, 
 nor does it use any bodily property as it does in speaking, when it uses the 
 air and the vibration of the air to produce sound which becomes reproduced 
 in the ears of the hearer. Wherefore their eyes are painted eyes. And they 
 freely appear to men in these likenesses that they may manifest to them 
 their natural properties and converse with them spiritually by these means.<br>
 
         
 For with this purpose the holy Angels have often appeared to the Fathers at 
 the command of God and with His permission. And the bad angels manifest 
 themselves to wicked men in order that men, recognizing their qualities, may 
 associate themselves with them, here in sin, and elsewhere in punishment.<br>
 
         
 S. Dionysius, at the end of his <i>Celestial Hierarchy</i>, says: In all 
 parts of the human body the Angel teaches us to consider their properties: 
 concluding that since corporeal vision is an operation of the living body 
 through a bodily organ, which devils lack, therefore in their assumed bodies, 
 just as they have the likeness of limbs, so that have the likeness of their 
 functions.<br>
 
         
 And we can speak in the same way of their hearing, which is far finer than 
 that of the body; for it can know the concept of the mind and the conversation 
 of the soul more subtly than can a man by hearing the mental concept through 
 the medium of spoken words. See S. Thomas, the <i>Second Book of Sentences</i>, 
 dist. 8. For if the secret wishes of a man are read in his face, and 
 physicians can tell the thoughts of the heart from the heart-beats and the 
 state of the pulse, all the more can such things be known by devils.<br>
 
         
 And we may say as to eating, that in the complete act of eating there are 
 four processes. Mastication in the mouth, swallowing into the stomach, 
 digestion in the stomach, and fourthly, metabolism of the necessary nutriment 
 and ejection of what is superflous. All Angels can perform the first two 
 processes fo eating in their assumed bodies, but not the third and fourth; 
 but instead of digesting and ejecting they have another power by which the 
 food is suddenly dissolved in the surrounding matter. In Christ the process 
 of eating was in all respects complete, since He had the nutritive and 
 metabolistic powers; not, be it said, for the purpose of converting food 
 into His own body, for those power were, like His body, glorified; so that 
 the food was suddenly dissolved in His body, as when one throws water on 
 to fire.
 
 
 <center>
 <i>How in Modern Time Witches perform the Carnal Act with Incubus Devils,<br>
 and how they are Multiplied by this Means.</i>
 </center>
 
 
         
 But no difficulty arises out of what has been said, with regard to our 
 principal subject, which is the carnal act which Incubi in an assumed body 
 perform with witches: unless perhaps anyone doubts whether modern witches 
 practise such abominable coitus; and whether witches had their origin in 
 this abomination.<br>
 
         
 In answering these two doubts we shall say, as to the former of them, 
 something of the activities of the witches who lived in olden times, about 
 1400 years before the Incarnation of Our Lord. It is, for example, unknown 
 whether they were addicted to these filthy practises as modern witches have 
 been since that time; for so far as we know history tells us nothing on this 
 subject. But no one who reads the histories can doubt that there have always 
 been witches, and that by their evil works much harm has been done to men, 
 animals, and the fruits of the earth, and that Incubus and Succubus devils 
 have always existed; for the traditions of the Canons and the holy Doctors 
 have left and handed down to posterity many things concerning them through 
 many hundreds of years. Yet there is this difference, that in times long 
 past the Incubus devils used to infest women against their wills, as is 
 often shown by Nider in his <i>Formicarius</i>, and by Thomas of Brabant in 
 his book on the <i>Universal Good</i>, or on <i>Bees</i>.<br>
 
         
 But the theory that modern witches are tainted with this sort of diabolic 
 filthiness is not substantiated only in our opinion, since the expert 
 testimony of the witches themselves has made all these things credible; and 
 that they do not now, as in times past, subject themselves unwillingly, but 
 willingly embrace this most foul and miserable servitude. For how many 
 women have be left to be punished by secular law in various dioceses, 
 especially in Constance and the town of Ratisbon, who have been for many 
 years addicted to these abominations, some from their twentieth and some 
 from their twelfth or thirteenth year, and always with a total or partial 
 abnegation of the Faith? All the inhabitants of those places are witnesses 
 of it. For without reckoning those who secretly repented, and those who 
 returned to the Faith, no less than forty-eight have been burned in five 
 years. And there was no question of credulity in accepting their stories 
 because they turned to free repentance; for they all agreed in this, namely, 
 that there were bound to indulge in these lewd practices in order that the 
 ranks of their perfidy might be increased. But we shall treat of these 
 individually in the Second Part of this work, where their particular deeds 
 are described; omitting those which came under the notice of our colleague 
 the Inquisitor of Como in the County of Burbia, who in the space of one 
 year, which was the year of grace 1485, caused forty-one witches to be 
 burned; who all publicly affirmed, as it is said, that they had practised 
 these abominations with devils. Therefore this matter is fully substantiated 
 by eye-witnesses, by hearsay, and the testimony of credible witnesses.<br>
 
         
 As for the second doubt, whether witches had their origin from these 
 abominations, we may say with S. Augustine that it is true that all the 
 superstitious arts had their origin in a pestilent association of men with 
 devils. For he says so in his work <i>On the Christian Doctrine:</i> All 
 this sort of practices, whether of trifling or of noxious superstition, 
 arose from some pestilent association of men with devils, as though some 
 pact of infidel and guileful friendship had been formed, and they are all 
 utterly to be repudiated. Notice here that it is manifest that, as there 
 are various kinds of superstition or magic arts, and various societies of 
 those who practise them; and as among the fourteen kinds of that art the 
 species of witches is the worst, since they have not a tacit but an overt 
 and expressed pact with the devil, and more than this, have to acknowledge 
 a form of devil-worship through abjuring the Faith; therefore it follows 
 that witches hold the worst kind of association with devils, with especial 
 reference to the behaviour of women, who always delight in vain things.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a05a.htm">Next: Chapter V</a><br>Witches commonly perform their Spells through the Sacraments of the Church. And how they Impair the Powers of Generation, and how they may Cause other Ills to happen to God's Creatures of all kinds. But herein we except the Question of the Influence of the Stars.<br>
 </center>
 </body>