<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a14a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a16a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter XV</h2>
 <h3>How they Raise and Stir up Hailstorms and Tempests, and Cause Lightning to Blast both Men and Beasts.</h3></center>
 
         
 That devils and their disciples can by witchcraft cause lightnings and 
 hailstorms and tempests, and that the devils have power from God to do this, 
 and their disciples do so with God's permission, is proved by Holy Scripture 
 in <i>Job</i> i and ii. For the devil received power from God, and 
 immediately caused it to happen that the Sabeans took away from Job fifty 
 yoke of oxen and five hundred asses, and then fire came from heaven and 
 consumed seven thousand camels, and a great wind came and smote down this 
 house, killing his seven sons and his three daughters, and all the young 
 men, that is to say, the servants, except him who brought the news, were 
 killed; and finally the devil smote the body of the holy man with the most 
 terrible sores, and caused his wife and his three friends to vex him 
 grievously.<br>
 
         
 S. Thomas in his commentary on Job says as follows: It must be confessed 
 that, with God's permission, the devils can disturb the air, raise up winds, 
 and make the fire fall from heaven. For although, in the matter of taking 
 various shapes, corporeal nature is not at the command of any Angel, either 
 good or bad, but only at that of God the Creator, yet in the matter of local 
 motion corporeal nature has to obey the spiritual nature. And this truth is 
 clearly exemplified in man himself; for at the mere command of the will, 
 which exists subjectively in the soul, the limbs are moved to perform that 
 which they have been willed to do. Therefore whatever can be accomplished 
 by mere local motion, this not only good but bad spirits can by their 
 natural power accomplish, unless God should forbid it. But winds and rain 
 and other similar disturbances of the air can be caused by the mere movement 
 of vapours released from the earth or the water; therefore the natural 
 power of devils is sufficient to cause such things. So says S. Thomas.<br>
 
         
 For God in His justice using the devils as his agents of punishment inflicts 
 the evils which come to us who live in this world. Therefore, with reference 
 to that in the Psalms: “He called a famine on the land, and wasted all 
 their substance of bread.”; the gloss says: God allowed this evil to 
 be caused by the bad Angels who are in charge of such matters; and by famine 
 is meant the Angel in charge of famine.<br>
 
         
 We refer the reader also to what has been written above on the question as 
 to whether witches must always have the devil's help to aid them in their 
 works, and concerning the three kinds of harm which the devils at times 
 inflict without the agency of a witch. But the devils are more eager to 
 injure men with the help of a witch, since in this way God is the more 
 offended, and greater power is given to them to torment and punish.<br>
 
         
 And relevant to this subject is what the Doctors have written in the 
 <i>Second book of Sentences</i>, dist. 6, on the question whether there is 
 a special place assigned to the bad Angels in the clouds of the air. For in 
 devils there are three things to be considered - their nature, their duty 
 and their sin; and by nature they belong to the empyrean of heaven, through 
 sin to the lower hell, but by reason of the duty assigned to them, as we 
 have said, as ministers of punishment to the wicked and trial to the good, 
 their place is in the clouds of the air. For they do not dwell here with us 
 on the earth lest they should plague us too much; but in the air and around 
 the fiery sphere they can so bring together the active and passive agents 
 that, when God permits, they can bring down fire and lightning from heaven.<br>
 
         
 A story is told in the <i>Formicarius</i> of 
 a certain man who had been taken, and was asked by the judge how they went 
 about to raise up hailstorms and tempests, and whether it was easy for them 
 to do so. He answered: We can easily cause hailstorms, but we cannot do all 
 the harm that we wish, because of the guardianship of good Angels. And he 
 added: We can only injure those who are deprived of God's help; but we 
 cannot hurt those who make the sign of the Cross. And this is how we got to 
 work: first we use certain words in the fields to implore the chief of the 
 devils to send one of his servants to strike the man whom we name. Then, 
 when the devil has come, we sacrifice to him a black cock at two 
 cross-roads, throwing it up into the air; and 
 when the devil has received this, he performs our wish and stirs up the air, 
 but not always in the places which we have named, and, according to the 
 permission of the living God, sends down hailstorms and lightnings.<br>
 
         
 In the same work we hear of a certain leader or heresiarch of witches named 
 Staufer, who lived in Berne and the adjacent 
 country, and used publicly to boast that, whenever he liked, he could change 
 himself into a mouse in the sight of his rivals and slip through the hands 
 of his deadly enemies; and that he had often escaped from the hands of his 
 mortal foes in this manner. But when the Divine justice wished to put an end 
 to his wickedness, some of his enemies lay in wait for him cautiously and 
 saw him sitting in a basket near a window, and suddenly pierced him through 
 with swords and spears, so that he miserably died for his crimes. Yet he 
 left behind him a disciple, named Hoppo, who had also for his master that 
 Stadlin whom we have mentioned before in the sixth chapter.<br>
 
         
 These two could, whenever they pleased, cause the third part of the manure 
 or straw or corn to pass invisibly from a neighbour's field to their own; 
 they could raise the most violent hailstorms and destructive winds and 
 lightning; could cast into the water in the sight of their parents children 
 walking by the water-side, when there was no one else in sight; could cause 
 barrenness in men and animals; could reveal hidden things to others; could 
 in many ways injure men in their affairs or their bodies; could at times 
 kill whom they would by lightning; and could cause many other plagues, when 
 and where the justice of God permitted such things to be done.<br>
 
         
 It is better to add an instance which came within our own experience. For in 
 the diocese of Constance, twenty-eight German miles from the town of 
 Ratisbon in the direction of Salzburg, a violent hailstorm destroyed all the 
 fruit, crops and vineyards in a belt one mile wide, so that the vines hardly 
 bore fruit for three years. This was brought to the notice of the 
 Inquisition, since the people clamoured for an inquiry to be held; many 
 beside all the townsmen being of the opinion that it was caused by 
 witchcraft. Accordingly it was agreed after fifteen days' formal 
 deliberation that it was a case of witchcraft for us to consider; and among 
 a large number of suspects, we particularly examined two women, one named 
 Agnes, a bath-woman, and the other Anna von Mindelheim. These two were taken 
 and shut up separately in different prisons, neither of them knowing in the 
 least what had happened to the other. On the following day the bath-woman 
 was very gently questioned in the presence of a notary by the chief 
 magistrate, a justice named Gelre very zealous for the Faith, and by the 
 other magistrates with him; and although she was undoubtedly well provided 
 with that evil gift of silence which is the constant bane of judges, and at 
 the first trial affirmed that she was innocent of any crime against man or 
 woman; yet, in the Divine mercy that so great a crime should not pass 
 unpunished, suddenly, when she had been freed from her chains, although it 
 was in the torture chamber, she fully laid bare all the crimes which she 
 had committed. For when she was questioned by the Notary of the Inquisition 
 upon the accusations which had been brought against her of harm done to men 
 and cattle, by reason of which she had been gravely suspected of being a 
 witch, although there had been no witness to prove that she had abjured the 
 Faith or performed coitus with an Incubus devil (for she had been most 
 secret); nevertheless, after she had confessed to the harm which she had 
 caused to animals and men, she acknowledged also all that she was asked 
 concerning the abjuration of the Faith, and copulation committed with an 
 Incubus devil; saying that for more than eighteen years she had given her 
 body to an Incubus devil, with a complete abnegation of the Faith.<br>
 
         
 After this she was asked whether she knew anything about the hailstorm which 
 we have mentioned, and answered that she did. And, being asked how and in 
 what way, she answered: “I was in my house, and at midday a familiar 
 came to me and told me to go with a little water on to the field or plain of 
 Kuppel (for so is it named). And when I asked what he wanted to do with the 
 water, he said that he wanted to make it rain. So I went out at the town 
 gate, and found the devil standing under a tree.” The judge asked her, 
 under which tree; and she said, “Under that one opposite that tower,” 
 pointing it out. Asked what she did under the tree, she said, “The 
 devil told me to dig a hole and pour the water into it.” Asked whether 
 they say down together, she said, “I sat down, but the devil stood 
 up.” Then she was, with what words and in what manner she had stirred 
 the water; and she answered, “I stirred it with my finger, and called 
 on the name of the devil himself and all the other devils.” Again the 
 judge asked what was done with the water, and she answered: “It 
 disappeared, and the devil took it up into the air.” Then she was 
 asked if she had any associate, and answered: “Under another tree 
 opposite I had a companion (naming the other capture witch, Anna von 
 Mindelheim), but I do not know what she did.” Finally, the bath-woman 
 was asked how long it was between the taking up of the water the hailstorm; 
 and she answered: “There was just sufficient interval of time to allow 
 me to get back to my house.”<br>
 
         
 But (and this is remarkable) when on the next day the other witch had at 
 first been exposed to the very gentlest questions, being suspended hardly 
 clear of the ground by her thumbs, after she had been set quite free, she 
 disclosed the whole matter without the slightest discrepancy from what the 
 other had told; agreeing as to the place, that it was under such a tree and 
 the other had been under another; as to the method, namely, of stirring 
 water poured into a hole in the name of the devil and all the devils; and as 
 to the interval of time, that the hailstorm had come after her devil had 
 taken the water up into the air and she had returned home. Accordingly, on 
 the third day they were burned. And the bath-woman was contrite and 
 confessed, and commended herself to God, saying that she would die with a 
 willing heart if she could escape the tortures of the devil, and held in her 
 hand a cross which she kissed. But the other witch scorned her for doing so. 
 And this one had consorted with an Incubus devil for more than twenty years 
 with a complete abjuration of the Faith, and had done far more harm than the 
 former witch to men, cattle and the fruits of the earth, as is shown in the 
 preserved record of their trial.<br>
 
         
 These instances must serve, since indeed countless examples of this sort 
 of mischief could be recounted. But very often men and beasts and 
 storehouses are struck by lightning by the power of devils; and the cause of 
 this seems to be more hidden and ambiguous, since it often appears to happen 
 by Divine permission without the co-operation of any witch. However, it has 
 been found that witches have freely confessed that they have done such things, 
 and there are various instances of it, which could be mentioned, in addition 
 to what has already been said. Therefore it is reasonable to conclude that, 
 just as easily as they raise hailstorms, so can they cause lightning and 
 storms at sea; and so no doubt at all remains on these points.
 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a16a.htm">Next: Chapter XVI</a><br>Of Three Ways in which Men and Women may be Discovered to be Addicted to Witchcraft: Divided into Three Heads: and First of the Witchcraft of Archers.<br>
 </center>
 </body>