<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02b00a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02b02a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter I</h2>
 <h3>The Remedies prescribed by the Holy Church against Incubus and Succubus Devils.</h3></center>
 
         
 IN the foregoing chapters on the First Question we have treated of the 
 methods of bewitching men, animals and the fruits of the earth, and especially 
 of the behaviour of witches in their own persons; how they seduce young 
 girls in order to increase their numbers; what is their method of profession 
 and of offering homage; how they offer to devils their own children and the 
 children of others; and how they are transported from place to place. Now I 
 say that there is no remedy for such practises, unless witches be entirely 
 eradicated by the judges, or at least punished as an example to all who may 
 wish to imitate them; but we are not immediately treating of this point, 
 which will be dealt with in the last Part of this work, where we set forth 
 the twenty ways of proceeding against and sentencing witches.<br>
 
         
 For the present we are concerned only with the remedies against the injuries 
 which they inflict; and first how men who are bewitched can be cured; 
 secondly, beasts, and thirdly, how the fruits of the earth may be secured 
 from blight or phylloxera.<br>
 
         
 With regard to the bewitchment of human beings by means of Incubus and 
 Succubus devils, it is to be noted that this can happen in three ways. 
 First, when women voluntarily prostitute themselves to Incubus devils. 
 Secondly, when men have connexion with Succubus devils; yet it does not 
 appear that men thus devilishly fornicate with the same full degree of 
 culpability; for men, being by nature intellectually stronger than women, 
 are more apt to abhor such practises.<br>
 
         
 There is in the town of Coblenz a poor man who is bewitched in this way. 
 In the presence of his wife he is in the habit of acting after the manner 
 of men with women, that is to say, of practising coition, as it were, and 
 he continues to do this repeatedly, nor have the cries and urgent appeals 
 of his wife any effect in making him desist. And after he has fornicated 
 thus two or three times, he bawls out, “We are going to start all 
 over again”; when actually there is no person visible to mortal sight 
 lying with him. And after an incredible number of such bouts, the poor man 
 at last sinks to the floor utterly exhausted. When he has recovered his 
 strength a little and is asked how this happened to him, and whether he has 
 had any women with him, he answers that he saw nothing, but his mind is in 
 some way possessed so that he can by no means refrain from such priapism. 
 And indeed he harbours a great suspicion that a certain woman bewitched him 
 in this way, because he had offended her, and she had cursed him with 
 threatening words, telling him what she would like to happen to him.<br>
 
         
 But there are no laws or ministers of justice which can proceed to the 
 avenging of so great a crime with no other warrant than a vague charge or a 
 grave suspicion; for it is held that no one ought to be condemned unless he 
 has been convicted by his own confession, or by the evidence of three 
 trustworthy witnesses, since the mere fact of the crime coupled with even the 
 gravest suspicions against some person is not sufficient to warrant the 
 punishment of that person. But this matter will be dealt with later.<br>
 
         
 As for instances where young maidens are molested by Incubus devils in this 
 way, it would take too long to mention even those that have been known to 
 happen in our own time, for there are very many well-attested stories of 
 such bewitchments. But the great difficulty of finding a remedy for such 
 afflictions can be illustrated from a story told by Thomas of Brabant in his 
 <i>Book on Bees</i>.<br>
 
         
 I saw, he writes, and heard the confession of a virgin in a religious habit, 
 who said at first that she had never been a consenting party to fornication, 
 but at the same time have been known in this way. This I could not believe, 
 but narrowly charged and exhorted her, with the most solemn adjurations, to 
 speak the truth on peril of her very soul. At last, weeping bitterly, she 
 acknowledged that she had been corrupted rather in mind than in body; and 
 that though she had afterwards grieved almost to death, and had daily 
 confessed with tears, yet by no device or study or art could she be delivered 
 from an Incubus devil, nor yet by the sign of 
 the Cross, nor by Holy Water, which are specially ordained for the expulsion 
 of devils, nor even by the Sacrament of the Body of Our Lord, which even the 
 Angels fear. But at last after many years of prayer and fasting she was 
 delivered.<br>
 
         
 It may be believed (saving a better judgement) that, after she repented and 
 confessed her sin, the Incubus devil should be regarded rather in the light 
 of a punishment for sin than as a sin in itself.<br>
 
         
 A devout nun, named Christina, in the Low Country of the Duchy of Brabant, 
 told me the following concerning this same woman. On the vigil of one 
 Pentacost the woman came to her complaining that she dared not take the 
 Sacrament because of the importunate molestation of a devil. Christina, 
 pitying her, said: “Go, and rest assured that you will receive the 
 Body of Our Lord to-morrow; for I will take your punishment upon myself.” 
 So she went away joyfully, and after praying the night slept in peace, and 
 rose up in the morning and communicated in all tranquility of the soul. But 
 Christina, not thinking of the punishment she had taken upon herself, went 
 to her rest in the evening, and as she lay in bed hear, as it were, a violent 
 attack being made upon her; and, seizing whatever it was by the throat, 
 tried to throw it off. She lay down again, but was again molested, and rose 
 up in terror; and this happened many times, whilst all the straw of her bed 
 was turned over and thrown about everywhere, so at length she perceived that 
 she was being persecuted by the malice of a devil. Thereupon she left her 
 pallet, and passed a sleepless night; and when she wished to pray, she was 
 so tormented by the devil that she said she had never suffered so much 
 before. In the morning, therefore, saying to the other woman, “I 
 renounce your punishment, and I am hardly alive to renounce it,” she 
 escaped from the violence of that wicked tempter. From this it can be seen 
 how difficult it is to cure this sort of evil, whether or not it is due to 
 witchcraft.<br>
 
         
 However, there are still some means by which these devils may be driven 
 away, of which Nider writes in his <i>Formicarius</i>. He says that there 
 are five ways by which girls or men can be delivered: first, by Sacramental 
 Confession; second, by the Sacred Sign of the Cross, or by the recital of 
 the Angelic Salutation; third, by the use of exorcisms; fourth, by moving to 
 another place; and fifth, by means of excommunication prudently employed by 
 holy men. It is evident from what has been said that the first two methods 
 did not avail the nun; but they are not on that account to be neglected, 
 for that which cures one person does not necessarily cure another, and 
 conversely. And it is a recorded fact that Incubus devils have often been 
 driven away by the Lord's Prayer, or by the sprinkling of Holy Water, and 
 also especially by the Angelic Salutation.<br>
 
         
 For S. Caesarius tells in his <i>Dialogue</i> 
 that, after a certain priest had hanged himself, his concubine entered a 
 convent, where she was carnally solicited by an Incubus. She drove him away 
 by crossing herself and using Holy Water, yet he immediately returned. But 
 when she recited the Angelic Salutation, he vanished like an arrow shot 
 from a bow; still he came back, although he did not dare to come near her, 
 because of the Ave MARIA.<br>
 
         
 S. Caesarius also refers to the remedy of Sacramental Confession. For he 
 says that the aforesaid concubine was entirely abandoned by the Incubus 
 after she was clean confessed. He tells also of a man in Leyden who was 
 plagued by a Succubus, and was entirely delivered after Sacramental 
 Confession.<br>
 
         
 He adds yet another example, of an enclosed nun, a contemplative, whom an 
 Incubus would not leave in spite of prayers and confession and other 
 religious exercises. For he persisted in forcing his way to her bed. But 
 when, acting on the advice of a certain religious man, she uttered the word 
 Benedicite, the devil at once left her.<br>
 
         
 Of the fourth method, that of moving to another place, he says that a 
 certain priest's daughter had been defiled by an Incubus and driven frantic 
 with grief; but when she went away across the Rhine, she was left in peace 
 by the Incubus. Her father, however, because he had sent her away, was so 
 afflicted by the devil that he died within three days.<br>
 
         
 He also maintains a woman who was often molested by an Incubus in her own 
 bed, and asked a devout friend of hers to come and sleep with her. She did 
 so, and was troubled all night with the utmost uneasiness and disquiet, and 
 then the first woman was left in peace. William of Paris notes also that 
 Incubus seem chiefly to molest women and girls with beautiful hair; either 
 because they devote themselves too much to the care and adornment of their 
 hair, or because they are boastfully vain about it, or because God in His 
 goodness permits this so that women may be afraid to entice men by the very 
 means by which the devils wish them to entice men.<br>
 
         
 The fifth method, that of excommunication, which is perhaps the same as 
 exorcism, is exemplified in a history of S. Bernard. In Aquitaine a woman 
 had for six years been molested by an Incubus with incredible carnal abuse 
 and lechery; and she heard the Incubus threaten her that she must not go 
 near the holy man, who was coming that way, saying: “It will avail 
 you nothing: for when he was gone away, I, who have till now been your 
 lover, will become the cruellest of tyrants to you.” None the less 
 she went to S. Bernard, and he said to her: “Take my staff and set it 
 in your bed, and may the devil do what he can.” When she had done this, 
 the devil did not dare to enter the woman's room, but threatened her terribly 
 from outside, saying that he would persecute her when S. Bernard had gone 
 away. When S. Bernard heard this from the woman, he called the people 
 together, bidding them carry lighted candles in their hands, and, with the 
 whole assembly which was gathered, excommunicated the devil, forbidding him 
 evermore to approach that woman or any other. And so she was delivered from 
 that punishment.<br>
 
         
 Here it is to be noted that the power of the Keys granted to S. Peter and 
 his successors, which resounds on the earth, is really a power of healing 
 granted to the Church on behalf of travellers who are subject to the 
 jurisdiction of the Papal power; therefore is seems wonderful that even the 
 Powers of the air can be warded off by this virtue. But it must be remembered 
 that persons who are molested by devils are under the jurisdiction of the 
 Pope and his Keys; and therefore it is not surprising if such Powers are 
 indirectly kept at bay by the virtue of the Keys, just as by the same virtue 
 the souls in purgatory can indirectly by delivered from the pains of fire; 
 insasmuch as this Power availeth upon the earth, ay, and to the relief of 
 souls that are under the earth.<br>
 
         
 But it is not seemly to discuss the Power of the Keys granted to the Head 
 of the Church as Christ's Vicar; since it is know that, for the use of the 
 Church, Christ granted to the Church and His Vicar as much power as it is 
 possible for God to grant to mere man.<br>
 
         
 And it is piously to be believed that, when infirmities inflicted by witches 
 through the power of devils, together with the witches and devils themselves, 
 are excommunicated, those who were afflicted will no longer be tormented; 
 and that they will be delivered all the sooner by the use of other lawful 
 exorcisms in addition.<br>
 
         
 There is a common report current in the districts of the river Etsch, as 
 also in other places, that by the permission of God a swarm of locusts came 
 and devoured all the vines, green leaves and crops; and that they were 
 suddenly put to flight and dispersed by means of this kind of excommunication 
 and cursing. Now it any wish that this should ascribed to some holy man, and 
 not to the virtue of the Keys, let ie be so, in the name of the Lord; but of 
 one thing we are certain, that both the power to perform miracles and the 
 power of the Keys necessarily presuppose a condition of grace in him who 
 performs that act of grace, since both these powers proceed from grace 
 granted to men who are in a state of grace.<br>
 
         
 Again, it is to be noted that, if none of the aforesaid remedies are of any 
 avail, then recourse must be had to the usual exorcisms, of which we shall 
 treat later. And if even these are not sufficient to banish the iniquity of 
 the devil, then that affliction must be considered to be an expiatory 
 punishment for sin, which should be borne in all meekness, as are other ills 
 of this sort which oppress us that they may, as it were, drive us to seek 
 God.<br>
 
         
 But it must also be remarked that sometimes persons only think they are 
 molested by an Incubus when they are not so actually; and this is more apt 
 to be the case with women than with men, for they are more timid and liable 
 to imagine extraordinary things.<br>
 
         
 In this connexion William of Paris is often quoted. He says: Many 
 phantastical apparitions occur to person suffering fro a melancholy disease, 
 especially to women, as is shown by their dreams and visions. And the reason 
 for this, as physicians know, is that women's souls are by nature far more 
 easily and lightly impressionable than men's souls. And he adds: I know that 
 I have seen a woman who thought that a devil copulated with her from inside, 
 and said she was physically conscious of such incredible things.<br>
 
         
 At time also women think they have been made pregnant by an Incubus, and 
 their bellies grow to an enormous size; but when the time of parturition 
 comes, their swelling is relieved by no more than the expulsion of a great 
 quantity of wind. For by taking ants' eggs in drink, or the seeds of spurge 
 or of the black pine, an incredible amount of wind and flatulence is 
 generated in the human stomach. And it is very easy for the devil to cause 
 these and even greater disorders in the stomach. This has been set down in 
 order that too easy credence should not be given to women, but only to 
 those whom experience has shown to be trustworthy, and to those who, by 
 sleeping in their beds or near them, know for a fact that such things as we 
 have spoken of are true.
 
 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02b02a.htm">Next: Chapter II</a><br>Remedies prescribed for Those who are Bewitched by the Limitation of the Generative Power.<br>
 </center>
 </body>