<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02b03a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02b05a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter IV</h2>
 <h3>Remedies presribed for those who by Prestidigitative Art have lost their Virile Members or have seemingly been Transformed into the Shapes of Beasts.</h3></center>
 
         
 In what has already been written it has clearly enough been shown 
 the remedies which are available for the relief of those who are 
 deluded by a glamour, and think that they have lost their virile 
 member, or have been metamorphosed into animals. For since such 
 men are entirely destitute of Divine grace, according to the 
 essential condition of those who are so bewitched, it is not 
 possible to apply a healing salve while the weapon still remains 
 in the wound. Therefore before all things they must be reconciled 
 to God by a good confession. Again, as was shown in the seventh 
 chapter of the First Question of the Second Part, such members 
 are never actually taken away from the body, but are only hidden 
 by a glamour from the senses of sight and touch. It is clear, 
 too, that those who live in grace are not so easily deluded in 
 this way, either actively or passively, in such a manner, that 
 is, that they seem to lose their members, or that those of others 
 should appear to them to be missing. Therefore the remedy as well 
 as the disease is explained in that chapter, namely, that they 
 should as far as possible come to an amicable agreement with the 
 witch herself.
 <br>
 
         
 As to those who think that they have been changed into beasts, it 
 must be known that this kind of witchcraft is more practised in 
 Easter countries than in the West; that is to say, in the East 
 witches more often bewitch other people in this way, but it 
 appears that the witches so transform themselves more frequently 
 in our part of the world; namely, when they change themselves, in 
 full sight, into the shapes of animals, as was told in the eighth 
 chapter. Therefore in their case the remedies to be used are 
 those set out in the Third Part of this work, where we deal with 
 the extermination of witches by the secular arm of the law.
 <br>
 
         
 But in the East the following remedy is used for such delusions. 
 For we have learned much of this matter from the Knights of the 
 Order of S. John of Jerusalem in Rhodes; and especially this case 
 which happened in the city of Salamis in the kingdom of Cyprus. 
 For that is a seaport, and once when a vessel was being laden 
 with merchandise suitable for a ship which is sailing into 
 foreign parts, and all her company were providing themselves with 
 victuals, one of them, a strong young man, went to the house of a 
 woman standing outside the city on the seashore, and asked her if 
 she had any eggs to sell. The woman, seeing that he was a strong 
 young man, and a merchant far away from his own country, thought 
 that on that account the people of the city would feel less 
 suspicion if he were to be lost, and said to him: “Wait a little, 
 and I will get you all that you want.” And when she went in and 
 shut the door and kept him waiting, the young man outside began 
 to call out to her to hurry, lest he should miss the ship. Then 
 the woman brought some eggs and gave them to the young man, and 
 told him to hurry back tot he ship in case he should miss it. So 
 he hastened back to the ship, which was anchored by the shore, 
 and before going on board, since the full company of his 
 companions was not yet returned, he decided to eat the eggs there 
 and refresh himself. And behold! an hour later he was made dumb 
 as if he had no power of speech; and, as he afterwards said, he 
 wondered what could have happened to him, but was unable to find 
 out. Yet when he wished to go on board, he was driven off with 
 sticks by those who yet remained ashore, and who all cried out: 
 “Look what this ass is doing! Curse the beast, you are not coming 
 on board.” The young man being thus driven away, and 
 understanding from their words that they thought he was an ass, 
 reflected and began to suspect that he had been bewitched by the 
 woman, especially since he could utter no word, although he 
 understood all that was said. And when, on again trying to board 
 the ship, he was driven off with heavier blows, he was in 
 bitterness of heart compelled to remain and watch the ship sail 
 away. And so, as he ran here and there, since everybody thought 
 he was an ass, he was necessarily treated as such. At last, under 
 compulsion, he went back to the woman’s house, and to keep 
 himself alive served her at her pleasure for three years, doing 
 no work but to bring to the house such necessities as wood and 
 corn, and to carry away what had to be carried away like a beast 
 of burden: the only consolation that was left to him being that 
 although everyone else took him for an ass, the witches 
 themselves, severally and in company, who frequented the house, 
 recognized him as a man, and he could talk and behave with them 
 as a man should.
 <br>
 
         
 Now if it is asked how burdens were placed upon him as if he were 
 a beast, we must say that this case is analogous to that of which 
 S. Augustine speaks in his <i>De Ciuitate Dei</i>, Book XVIII, 
 chapter 17, where he tells of the tavern women who changed their 
 guests into beasts of burden; and to that of the father 
 Praestantius, who thought he was a pack-horse and carried corn 
 with other animals. For the delusion caused by this glamour was 
 threefold.
 <br>
 
         
 First in its effect on the men who saw the young man not as a man 
 but as an ass; and it is shown above in Chapter VIII how devils 
 can easily cause this. Secondly, those burdens were no illusion; 
 abut when they were beyond the strength of the young man, the 
 devil invisible carried them. Thirdly, that when he was 
 consorting with others, the young man himself considered in his 
 imagination and perceptive faculties at least, which are 
 faculties belonging to the bodily organs, that he was an ass; but 
 not in his reason: for he as not so bound but that he knew 
 himself to be a man, although he was magically deluded into 
 imagining himself a beast. Nabuchodonosor provides an example of 
 the same delusion.
 <br>
 
         
 After three years had passed in this way, in the fourth year it 
 happened that the young man went one morning into the city, with 
 the woman following a long way behind; and he passed by a church 
 where Holy Mass was being celebrated, and heard the sacred-bell 
 ring at the elevation of the Host (for in that kingdom the Mass 
 is celebrated according to the Latin, and not according to the 
 Greek rite). And he turned towards the church, and, not daring to 
 enter for fear of being driven off with blows, knelt down outside 
 by bending the knees of his hind legs, and lifted his forelegs, 
 that is, his hands, joined together over his ass’s head, as it 
 was thought to be, and looked upon the elevation of the 
 Sacrament. And when some Genoese 
 merchants saw this prodigy, they followed the ass in 
 astonishment, discussing this marvel among themselves; and 
 behold! the witch came and belaboured the ass with her stick. And 
 because, as we have said, this sort of witchcraft is better known 
 in those parts, at the instance of the merchants the ass and the 
 witch were taken before the judge; where, being questioned and 
 tortured, she confessed her crime and promised to restore the 
 young man to his true shape if she might be allowed to return to 
 her house. So she was dismissed and went back to her house, where 
 the young man was restored to his former shape; and being again 
 arrested, she paid the debt which her crimes merited. And the 
 young man returned joyfully to his own country.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02b05a.htm">Next: Chapter V</a><br>Prescribed Remedies for those who are Obsessed owing to some Spell.<br>
 </center>
 </body>