<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm02a06a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm02a08a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 2</h1>
 <h2>Chapter VII</h2>
 <h3>How, as it were, they Deprive Man of his Virile Member.</h3></center>
 
         
 We have already shown that they can take away the male organ, not indeed by 
 actually despoiling the human body of it, in the manner which we have already 
 declared. And of this we shall instance a few examples.<br>
 
         
 In the town of Ratisbon a certain young man who had an intrigue with a girl, 
 wishing to leave her, lost his member; that is to say, some glamour was cast 
 over it so that he could see or touch nothing but his smooth body. In his 
 worry over this he went to a tavern to drink wine; and after he had sat 
 there for a while he got into conversation with another woman who was there, 
 and told her the cause of his sadness, explaining everything, and 
 demonstrating in his body that it was so. The woman was astute, and asked 
 whether he suspected anyone; and when he named such a one, unfolding the 
 whole matter, she said: “If persuasion is not enough, you must use 
 some violence, to induce her to restore to you your health.” So in the 
 evening the young man watched the way by which the witch was in the habit of 
 going, and finding her, prayed her to restore to him the health of his body. 
 And when she maintained that she was innocent and knew nothing about it, he 
 fell upon her, and winding a towel tightly about her neck, choked her, 
 saying: “Unless you give me back my health, you shall die at my 
 hands.” Then she, being unable to cry out, and growing black, said: 
 “Let me go, and I will heal you.” The young man then relaxed 
 the pressure of the towel, and the witch touched him with her hand between 
 the thighs, saying: “Now you have what you desire.” And the 
 young man, as he afterwards said, plainly felt, before he had verified it by 
 looking or touching, that his member had been restored to him by the mere 
 touch of the witch.<br>
 
         
 A similar experience is narrated by a certain venerable Father from the 
 Dominican House of Spires, well known in the Order for the honest of his 
 life and for his learning. “One day,” he says, “while I 
 was hearing confessions, a young man came to me and, in the course of his 
 confession, woefully said that he had lost his member. Being astonished at 
 this, and not being willing to give it easy credence, since the opinion of 
 the wise it is a mark of light-heartedness to believe too easily, I obtained 
 proof of it when I saw nothing on the young man's removing his clothes and 
 showing the place. Then, using the wisest counsel I could, I asked whether 
 he suspected anyone of having so bewitched him. And the young man said that 
 he did suspect someone, but that she was absent and living in Worms. Then I 
 said: ‘I advise you to go to her as soon as possible and try your 
 utmost to soften her with gentle words and promises’; and he did so. 
 For he came back after a few days and thanked me, saying that he was whole 
 and had recovered everything. And I believed his words, but again proved 
 them by the evidence of my eyes.”<br>
 
         
 But there are some points to be noted for the clearer understanding of what 
 has already been written concerning this matter. First, it must in no way 
 be believed that such members are really torn right away from the body, but 
 that they are hidden by the devil through some prestidigitory art so that 
 they can be neither seen nor felt. And this is proved by the authorities and 
 by argument; although is has been treated of before, where Alexander of 
 Hales says that a Prestige, properly understood, is an illusion of the devil, 
 which is not caused by any material change, but exists only in the perceptions 
 of him who is deluded, either in his interior or exterior senses.<br>
 
         
 With reference to these words it is to be noted that, in the case we are 
 considering, two of the exterior senses, namely, those of sight and touch, 
 are deluded, and not the interior senses, namely, common-sense, fancy, 
 imagination, thought, and memory. (But S. Thomas says they are only four, as 
 has been told before, reckoning fancy and imagination as one; and with some 
 reason, for there is little difference between imagining and fancying. See 
 S. Thomas, I, 79.) And these senses, and not only the exterior senses, are 
 affected when it is not a case of hiding something, but the causing 
 something to appear to a man either when he is aware or asleep.<br>
 
         
 As when a man who is awake sees things otherwise than as they are; such as 
 seeing someone devour a horse with its rider, or thinking he sees a man 
 transformed into a beast, or thinking that he is himself a beast and must 
 associate with beasts. For then the exterior senses are deluded and are 
 employed by the interior senses. For by the power of devils, with God's 
 permission, mental images long retained in the treasury of such images, 
 which is the memory, are drawn out, not from the intellectual understanding 
 in which such images are stored, but from the memory, which is the repository 
 of mental images, and is situated at the back of the head, and are presented 
 to the imaginative faculty. And so strongly are they impressed on that 
 faculty that a man has an inevitable impulse to imagine a horse or a beast, 
 when the devil draws from the memory an image of a horse or a beast; and so 
 he is compelled to think that he sees with his external eyes such a beast 
 when there is actually no such beast to see; but it seems to be so by reason 
 of the impulsive force of the devil working by means of those images.<br>
 
         
 And it need not seem wonderful that devils can do this, when even a natural 
 defect is able to effect the same result, as is shown in the case of frantic 
 and melancholy men, and in maniacs and some drunkards, who are unable to 
 discern truly. For frantic men think they see marvellous things, such as 
 beasts and other horrors, when in actual fact they see nothing. See above, 
 in the question, Whether witches can turn the minds of men to love and 
 hatred; where many thing are noted.<br>
 
         
 And, finally, the reason is self-evident. For since the devil has power over 
 inferior things, except only the soul, therefore he is able to effect 
 certain changes in those things, when God allows, so that things appear to 
 be otherwise than they are. And this he does, as I have said, either by 
 confusing and deluding the organ of sight so that a clear thing appears 
 cloudy; just as after weeping, owing to the collected humours, the light 
 appears to different from what it was before. Or by operating on the 
 imaginative faculty by a transmutation of mental images, as has been said. 
 Or by some agitation of various humours, so that matters which are earthy 
 and dry seem to be fire or water: as some people make everyone in the house 
 strip themselves naked under the impression that they are swimming in water.<br>
 
         
 It may be asked further with reference to the above method of devils, whether 
 this sort of illusions can happen indifferently to the good and to the 
 wicked: just as other bodily infirmities can, as will be shown later, be 
 brought by witches even upon those who are in a state of grace. To this 
 question, following the words of Cassian in his <i>Second Collation</i> of 
 the Abbot Sirenus, we must answer that they cannot. And from this it follows 
 that all who are deluded in this way are presumed to be in deadly sin. For 
 he says, as is clear from the words of S. Antony: The devil can in no way 
 enter the mind or body of any man, nor has the power to penetrate into the 
 thoughts of anybody, unless such a person has first become destitute of all 
 holy thoughts, and is quite bereft and denuded of spiritual contemplation.<br>
 
         
 This agrees with Boethius where he says in the 
 <i>Consolation of Philosophy:</i> 
 We had given you such arms that, if you had not thrown them away, you would 
 have been preserved from infirmity.<br>
 
         
 Also Cassian tells in the same place of two Pagan witches, each in his own 
 way malicious, who by their witchcraft sent a succession of devils into the 
 cell of S. Antony for the purpose of driving him from there by their 
 temptations; being infected with hatred for the holy man because a great 
 number of people visited him every day. And though these devils assailed him 
 with the keenest of spurs to his thoughts, yet he drove them away by crossing 
 himself on the forehead and breast, and by prostrating himself in earnest 
 prayer.<br>
 
         
 Therefore we may say that all who are so deluded by devils, not reckoning 
 any other bodily infirmities, are lacking in the gift of divine grace. And 
 so it is said in <i>Tobias</i> vi: The devil has power against those who are 
 subject to their lusts.<br>
 
         
 This is also substantiated by what we told in the First Part in the question, 
 Whether witches can change men into the shapes of beasts. For we told of a 
 girl who was turned into a filly, as she herself and, except S. Macharius, 
 all who looked at her were persuaded. But the devil could not deceive the 
 senses of the holy man; and when she was brought to him to be healed, he saw 
 true woman and not a horse, while on the other hand everyone else exclaimed 
 that she seemed to be a horse. And the Saint, by his prayers, freed her and 
 the others from that illusion, saying that this had happened to her because 
 she had not attended sufficiently to holy things, nor used as she should 
 Holy Confession and the Eucharist. And for this reason, because in her 
 honesty she would not consent to the shameful proposal of a young man, who 
 had caused a Jew who was a witch to bewitch the girl so that, by the power 
 of the devil, he turned her into a filly.<br>
 
         
 We may summarize our conclusions as follows: - Devils can, for their profit 
 and probation, injure the good in their fortunes, that is, in such exterior 
 things as riches, fame, and bodily health. This is clear from the case of 
 the Blessed Job, who was afflicted by the devil in such matters. But such 
 injuries are not of their own causing, so that they cannot be led or driven 
 into any sin, although they can be tempted both inwardly and outwardly in 
 the flesh. But the devils cannot afflict the good with this sort of 
 illusions, either actively or passively.<br>
 
         
 Not actively, but deluding their senses as they do those of others who are 
 not in a state of grace. And not passively, by taking away their male organs 
 by some glamour. For in these two respects they could never injure Job, 
 especially in regard to the venereal act; for he was of such continence that 
 he was able to say: I have vowed a vow with my eyes that I shall never think 
 about a virgin, and still less about another man's wife. Nevertheless the 
 devil knows that he has great power over sinners (see <i>S. Luke</i> xi: 
 When a strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace).<br>
 
         
 But it may be asked, as to illusions in respect of the male organ, whether, 
 granted that the devil cannot impose this illusion on those in a state of 
 grace in a passive way, he cannot still do so in an active sense: the 
 argument being that the man in a state of grace is deluded because he ought 
 to see the member in its right place, when he who thinks it has been taken 
 away from him, as well as other bystanders, does not see in in its place; 
 but if this is conceded, it seems to be contrary to what has been said. It 
 can be said that there is not so much force in the active as in the passive 
 loss; meaning by active loss, not his who bears the loss, but his who sees 
 the loss from without, as is self-evident. Therefore, although a man in a 
 state of grace can se the loss of another, and to that extent the devil can 
 delude his senses; yet he cannot passively suffer such loss in his own body, 
 as, for example, to be deprived of his member, since he is not subject to 
 list. In the same way the converse is true, as the Angel said to Tobias: 
 Those who are given to lust, the devil has power over them.<br>
 
         
 And what, then, is to be thought of those witches who in this way sometimes 
 collect male organs in great numbers, as many as twenty or thirty members 
 together, and put them in a bird's nest, or shut them up in a box, where 
 they move themselves like living members, and eat oats and corn, as has been 
 seen by many and is a matter of common report? It is to be said that it is 
 all done by devil's work and illusion, for the senses of those who see them 
 are deluded in the way we have said. For a certain man tells that, when he 
 had lost his member, he approached a known witch to ask her to restore it 
 to him. She told the afflicted man to climb a certain tree, and that he 
 might take which he liked out of the nest in which there were several 
 members. And when he tried to take a big one, the witch said: You must not 
 take that one; adding, because it belongs to a parish priest.<br>
 
         
 All these things are caused by devils through an illusion or glamour, in the 
 manner we have said, by confusing the organ of vision by transmuting the 
 mental images in the imaginative faculty. And it must not be said that these 
 members which are shown are devils in assumed members, just as they 
 sometimes appear to witches and men in assumed aerial bodies, and converse 
 with them. And the reason is that they effect this thing by an easier 
 method, namely, by drawing out an inner mental image from the repository of 
 the memory, and impressing it on the imagination.<br>
 
         
 And if anyone wishes to say that they could go to work in a similar way, 
 when they are said to converse with witches and other men in assumed bodies; 
 that is, that they could cause such apparitions by changing the mental 
 images in the imaginative faculty, so that when men thought the devils were 
 present in assumed bodies, they were really nothing but an illusions caused 
 by such a change of the mental images in the inner perceptions.<br>
 
         
 It is to be said that, if the devil had no other purpose than merely to 
 show himself in human form, then there would be no need for him to appear in 
 an assumed body, since he could effect his purpose well enough by the 
 aforesaid illusion. But this is not so; for he has another purpose, namely, 
 to speak and eat with them, and to commit other abominations. Therefore it 
 is necessary that he should himself be present, placing himself actually in 
 sight in an assumed body. For, as S. Thomas says, Where the Angel's power 
 is, there he operates.<br>
 
         
 And it may be asked, if the devil by himself and without any witch takes 
 away anyone's virile member, whether there is any difference between one 
 sort of deprivation and the other. In addition to what has been said in the 
 First Part of this work on the question, Whether witches can take away a 
 member, he does actually take it away, and it is actually restored when it 
 has to be restored. Secondly, as it is not taken away without injury, so it 
 is not without pain. Thirdly, that he never does this unless compelled by a 
 good Angel, for by so doing he cuts off a great source of profit to him; for 
 he knows that he can work more witchcraft on that act than on other human 
 acts. For God permits him to do more injury to that than to other human acts, 
 as has been said. But none of the above points apply when he works through 
 the agency of a witch, with God's permission.<br>
 
         
 And if it is asked whether the devil is more apt to injure men and creatures 
 by himself than through a witch, it can be said that there is no comparison 
 between the two cases. For he is infinitely more apt to do harm through the 
 agency of witches. First, because he thus gives greater offence to God, by 
 usurping to himself a creature dedicated to Him. Secondly, because when God 
 is the more offended, He allows him the more power of injuring men. And 
 thirdly, for his own gains, which he places in the perdition of souls.
 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm02a08a.htm">Next: Chapter VIII</a><br>Of the Manner whereby they Change Men into the Shapes of Beasts.<br>
 </center>
 </body>