<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_06a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_08a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question VII</h2>
 <h3>In Which Various Doubts are Set Forth with Regard to the Foregoing Questions and Negative Answers. Whether the Accused is to be Imprisoned, and when she is to be considered Manifestly Taken in the Foul Heresy of Witchcraft. This is the Second Action</h3></center>
 
 
         
 It is asked first what is to be done when, as often happens, the accused 
 denies everything. We answer that the Judge has three points to consider, 
 namely, her bad reputation, the evidence of the fact, and the words of the 
 witnesses; and he must see whether all these agree together. And if, as very 
 often is the case, they do not altogether agree together, since witches are 
 variously accused of different deeds committed in some village or town; but 
 the evidences of the fact are visible to the eye, as that a child has been 
 harmed by sorcery, or, more often, a beast has been bewitched or deprived 
 of its milk; and it a number of witnesses have come forward whose evidence, 
 even if it show certain discrepancies (as that one should say she had 
 bewitched his child, another his beast, and a third should merely witness 
 to her reputation, and so with the others), but nevertheless agree in the 
 substance of the fact, that is, as to the witchcraft, and that she is 
 suspected of being a witch; although those witnesses are not enough to 
 warrant a conviction without the fact of the general report, or even with 
 that fact, as was shown above at the end of Question III, yet, taken in 
 conjunction with the visible and tangible evidence of the fact, the Judge 
 may, in consideration of these three points together, decide that the 
 accused is to be reputed, not as strongly or gravely under suspicion (which 
 suspicions will be explained later), but as manifestly taken in the heresy 
 of witchcraft; provided, that is, that the witnesses are of a suitable 
 condition and have not given evidence out of enmity, and that a sufficient 
 number of them, say six or eight or ten, have agreed together under oath. And 
 then, according to the Canon Law, he must subject her to punishment, whether 
 she has confessed her crime or not. And this is proved as follows.<br>
 
         
 For since it is said, that when all three of the above considerations are in 
 agreement, then she should be thought to be manifestly taken in heresy, it 
 must not be understood that it is necessary for all three to be in 
 agreement, but only that if this is the case the proof is all the stronger. 
 For either one instance by itself of the following two circumstances, namely, 
 the evidence of the fact and the production of legitimate witnesses, is 
 sufficient to cause a person to be reputed as manifestly taken in heresy; 
 and all the more when both these considerations are in agreement.<br>
 
         
 For when the Jurists ask in how many ways a person may be considered as 
 manifestly taken in heresy, we answer that there are three ways, as S. 
 Bernard has explained. This matter was treated of above in the First 
 Question at the beginning of this work, namely, the evidence of the fact, 
 when a person has publicly preacher heresy. But here we consider the 
 evidence of the fact provided by public threats uttered by the accused, as 
 when she said, “You shall have no healthy days,” or some such 
 thing, and the threatened effect has followed. The other two ways are the 
 legitimate proof of the case by witnesses, and thirdly by her own confession. 
 Therefore, if each of these singly is sufficient to cause a person to be 
 manifestly suspected, how much more is this the case when the reputation of 
 the accused, the evidence of the fact, and the depositions of witnesses all 
 together point to the same conclusion. It is true that S. Bernard speaks of 
 an evident fact, and we here speak of the evidence of the fact; but this is 
 because the devil does not work openly, but secretly. Therefore the injuries 
 and the instruments of witchcraft which are found constitute the evidence of 
 the fact. And whereas in other heresies an evident fact is alone sufficient, 
 here we join three proofs together.<br>
 
         
 Secondly, it is thus proved that a person so taken is to be punished 
 according to the law, even though she denies the accusation. For a person 
 taken on the evidence of the fact, or on the depositions of witnesses, either 
 confesses the crime or does not. If he confesses and is impenitent, he is to 
 be handed over to the secular courts to suffer the extreme penalty, according 
 to the chapter <i>ad abolendam</i>, or he is to be imprisoned for life, 
 according to the chapter <i>excommunicamus</i>. But if he does not confess, 
 and stoutly maintains his denial, he is to be delivered as an impenitent to 
 the power of the Civil Court to be punished in a fitting manner, as Henry 
 of Segusio shows in his <i>Summa</i>, where he treats of the manner of 
 proceeding against heretics.<br>
 
         
 It is therefore concluded that it is most just if the Judge proceeds in that 
 manner with his questions and the depositions of witnesses, since, as has 
 been said, he can in a case concerning the Faith conduct matters quite 
 plainly and in a short and summary manner; and it is meet that he should 
 consign the accused to prison for a time, or for several years, in case 
 perhaps, being depressed after a year of the squalor of prison, she may 
 confess her crimes.<br>
 
         
 But, lest it should seem that he arrives at his sentence precipitately, and 
 to show that he proceeds with all equity, let us inquire into what should 
 next be done.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_08a.htm">Next: Question VIII</a><br>Which Follows from the Preceding Question, Whether the Witch is to be Imprisoned, and of the Method of Taking her. This is the Third Action of the Judge<br>
 </center>
 </body>