<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_04a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_06a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question V</h2>
 <h3>Whether Mortal Enemies may be Admitted as Witnesses</h3></center>
 
 
         
 But if it is asked whether the Judge can admit the mortal enemies of the 
 prisoner to give evidence  against him in such a case, we answer that he 
 cannot; for the same chapter of the Canon says: You must not understand that 
 in this kind of charge a mortal personal enemy may be admitted to give 
 evidence. Henry of Segusio also makes this quite clear. But it is mortal 
 enemies that are spoken of; and it is to be noted that a witness is not 
 necessarily to be disqualified because of every sort of enmity. And a mortal 
 enmity is constituted by the following circumstances: when there is a death 
 feud or vendetta between the parties, or when there has been an attempted 
 homicide, or some serious wound or injury which manifestly shows that there 
 is mortal hatred on the part of the witness against the prisoner, And in 
 such a case it is presumed that, just as the witness has tried to inflict 
 temporal death on the prisoner by wounding him, so he will also be willing 
 to effect his object by accusing him of heresy; and just as he wished to 
 take away his life, so he would be willing to take away his good name. 
 Therefore the evidence of such mortal enemies is justly disqualified.<br>
 
         
 But there are other serious degrees of enmity (for women are easily provoked 
 to hatred), which need not totally disqualify a witness, although they 
 render his evidence very doubtful, so that full credence cannot be placed in 
 his words unless they are substantiated by independent proofs, and other 
 witnesses supply an indubitable proof of them. For the Judge must ask the 
 prisoner whether he thinks that he has any enemy who would dare to accuse 
 him of that crime out of hatred, so that he might compass his death; and if 
 he says that he has, he shall ask who that person is; and then the Judge 
 shall take note whether the person named as being likely to give evidence 
 from motives of malice has actually done so. And if it is found that this 
 is the case, and the Judge has learned from trustworthy men the cause of 
 that enmity, and if the evidence in question is not substantiated by other 
 proofs and the words of other witnesses, then he may safely reject such 
 evidence. But if the prisoner says that he hopes he has no such enemy, but 
 admits that he has had quarrels with women; or if he says that he has an 
 enemy, but names someone who, perhaps, has not given evidence, in that case, 
 even if other witnesses say that such a person has given evidence from 
 motives of enmity, the Judge must not reject his evidence, but admit it 
 together with the other proofs.<br>
 
         
 There are many who are not sufficiently careful and circumspect, and 
 consider that the depositions of such quarrelsome women should be altogether 
 rejected, saying that no faith can be placed in them, since they are nearly 
 always actuated by motives of hatred. Such men are ignorant of the subtlety 
 and precautions of magistrates, and speak and judge like men who are 
 colour-blind. But these precautions are dealt with in Questions XI and XII.
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_06a.htm">Next: Question VI</a><br>How the Trial is to be Proceeded with and Continued. And how the Witnesses are to be Examined in the Presence of Four Other Persons, and how the Accused is to be Questioned in Two Ways<br>
 </center>
 </body>