<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_22a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_24a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XXIII</h2>
 <h3>The Fourth Method of Sentencing, in the Case of one Accused upon a Light Suspicion</h3></center>
 
 
         
 THE fourth method of concluding the process on behalf of the faith is used 
 when, after the merits of the process have been diligently examined in 
 consultation with expert lawyers, the accused is found to rest under only a 
 light suspicion of heresy. And this is when the accused is not taken in 
 heresy, nor is convicted by her own confession or by the evidence of the facts 
 or by the legitimate production of witnesses, and there are no other strong or 
 vehement indications of heresy against her; but only a small and light 
 indications of such a sort as, in the opinion of the Court, to engender a 
 light suspicion against her. And such a one must be required to abjure the 
 heresy of which she is accused; and then, if she relapses into heresy, she is 
 not liable to the punishment of backsliders, although she must be more 
 severely punished than would be the case if she had not previously abjured the 
 heresy (see the Canon c. <i>accusatus</i>). The following procedure shall be 
 followed in such a case. For such an accused, if the matter be a public one, 
 will publicly make the following abjuration in the Church:<br> 
 
         
 I, N., of such a Diocese, a citizen of such a city or place, being on my 
 trial, do swear before you the Lord Bishop of such a city, and upon the Holy 
 Gospels placed before me and upon which I set my hand, that I believe in my 
 heart and profess with my lips that Holy Catholic and Apostolic Faith which 
 the Holy Roman Church believes, confesses, preaches, and observes. Also I 
 swear that I believe in my heart and profess with my lips that the Lord JESUS 
 Christ, in company with all the Saints, abominates the wicked heresy of 
 witches; and that all who follow or adhere to it will with the devil and his 
 Angels be punished in eternal fire unless they turn their hearts and are 
 reconciled by the penitence of the Holy Church. And there I abjure, renounce, 
 and revoke that heresy of which you, my Lord Bishop, and your Officers hold me 
 suspected: namely, that I have been familiar with witches, have ignorantly 
 defended their errors, have held in detestation their Inquisitors and 
 prosecutors, or that I have failed to bring their crimes to light. Also I 
 swear that I have never believed the aforesaid heresy, nor do I believe, nor 
 have I adhered, nor do I adhered to it, nor shall I ever believe, adhere to, 
 or teach it, nor do I intend to teach it. And if I should hereafter be guilty 
 of any of the aforesaid practices (which God forbid), I shall willingly submit 
 myself to the punishment provided by law for such who are so forsworn; and I 
 am ready to undergo any penance which you see fit to enjoin me for those words 
 or deeds of mine for which you hold me deservedly suspect; and I swear to 
 fulfill such penance to the best of my strength, and to omit no part of it, so 
 help me God and these Holy Gospels.<br> 
 
         
 The above abjuration shall be made in the common speech, so that all may 
 understand it. And when it is done, the Judge, if he is present, or his deputy 
 shall speak to her in the common speech to the following effect:<br> 
 
         
 My son (or daughter), you have not unworthily abjured the suspicion which we 
 entertained of you, and have purged yourself by the aforesaid abjuration. 
 Beware then lest hereafter you fall into the heresy you have abjured. For 
 although, if you should repent, you would not be delivered up to the secular 
 Court, since you made your abjuration as one under a light, and not a strong, 
 suspicion, yet you wold then be far more severely punished than you would have 
 been if you had not abjured, and you would then rest under a strong instead of 
 a light suspicion. And when you should abjure as such, and afterwards should 
 relapse, you would suffer the due punishment of a backslider, and would 
 without mercy be delivered to the secular Court to endure the extreme 
 penalty.<br> 
 
         
 But if she makes her abjuration secretly in the chamber of the Bishop or 
 Judge, which will be the case when the matter is not a public one, she shall 
 abjure in the same manner. And afterwards sentence shall be pronounced as 
 follows:<br> 
 
         
 We, by the mercy of God Bishop of such a city, or (if he is present) Judge in 
 the territory subject to such a Prince, having carefully seen and examined the 
 merits of the process conducted by us against you N., accused before us 
 heresy, find that you have committed such and such (naming them) which render 
 you lightly suspected of heresy, on account of which we have judged it proper 
 to cause you to abjure that heresy as one lightly suspected of it. But not for 
 that can you be dismissed unpunished. And that you may become more careful in 
 the future, having consulted with many eminent persons learned in the law and 
 with religious men, and having carefully weighed and digested the whole 
 matter, having only God before our eyes, and the irrefragable truth of the 
 Holy Catholic Faith, and with the Holy Gospels placed before us that our 
 sentence may proceed as from God’s countenance and that our eyes may see with 
 equity, and sitting in tribunal as Judge, we condemn, sentence, or rather 
 impose penance upon you N., standing in person here in our presence, in the 
 following manner. Namely, that never hereafter shall you knowingly hold to, 
 associate with, defend in your speech, read (if you are well learned), or 
 hereafter, etc. and let there be set down that which she has committed, on 
 account of which she was held suspected of the crime of heresy. This sentence 
 and penance were given, etc.<br> 
 
         
 And let the Notary take care that he sets it down in the process that such 
 abjuration was made as by one under a light, not a strong, suspicion of 
 heresy; for otherwise great danger might ensue.<br> 
 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_24a.htm">Next: Question XXIV</a><br>The Fifth Manner of Sentence, in the Case of one under Strong Suspicion<br>
 </center>
 </body>