<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_11a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_13a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XII</h2>
 <h3>Of the Same Matter, Declaring more Particularly how the Question of Personal Enmity is to be Investigated. The Seventh Action</h3></center>
 
 
         
 TAKE notice that only mortal enemies are debarred from giving evidence, as was shown in the 
 Fifth Question. But the Judge may consider that to come to a decision about such enmity by the 
 means we have just explained is rather dubious and unsatisfactory; and the accused or her 
 Procurator may not be willing to accept a decision arrived at on such grounds as to whether 
 the enmity is mortal or not. Therefore the Judge must use other means to decide concerning the 
 alleged enmity, so that he may not punish the innocent, but exact full justice from the guilty. 
 And though these means may savour of cunning and even guile, yet the Judge may employ them for 
 the good of the faith and the State; for even S. Paul says: But being crafty, I caught you by 
 guile. And these means are especially to be employed in the case of a prisoner who has not been 
 publically defamed, and is not suspected because of the evidence of any fact; and the Judge may 
 also employ them against prisoners who have alleged enmity on the part of the deponents, and 
 wish to know all the names of the witnesses.<br>
 
         
 The first method is this. The accused or her Advocate is given a copy of the process with the 
 names of the deponents or informers, but not in the order in which they deposed; but in such a 
 way that the name of the witness who comes first in the copy is sixth or seventh in the schedule, 
 and he who comes second is last or last but one. In this way the accused will be deceived as to 
 which witness deposed this or that. And then she will either say that they are all her enemies, 
 or not; and if she says that they all are, she will be more easily detected in a lie when the 
 cause of the enmity is investigated by the Judge; and if she names only certain ones, still the 
 cause of the enmity will be more easily investigated.<br>
 
         
 The second method is similar, when the Advocate is given a copy of the process, and separately a 
 list of the names of the deponents; but there are added other matters perpetrated elsewhere by 
 witches, but not set down in writing by the witnesses or deponents. And so the accused will not 
 be able to say definitely that this one or that one is her mortal enemy, because she does not 
 know what they have deposed against her.<br>
 
         
 The third method was touched upon in the Fifth Question above. For when the accused is 
 questioned at the end of her second examination, and before she has demanded to be defended or 
 an Advocate has been allotted to her, let her be asked whether she thinks that she has any 
 mortal enemies who, setting aside all fear of God, would falsely accuse her of the crime of 
 heresy and witchcraft. And then perhaps without thinking, and not having seen the depositions of 
 the witnesses, she will answer that she does not think that she has any such enemies. Or if she 
 says, “I think I have,” and names any of the witnesses who have laid information, 
 and the reason for that enmity is known, then the Judge will be able to investigate it with 
 more certainty afterwards, when the accused has been given separate copies of the process and of 
 the names of the witnesses, in the manner we have explained.<br>
 
         
 The fourth method is this. At the end of her second examination and confession (as we showed in 
 the Sixth Question), before she is granted any means of defence, let her be questioned as to the 
 witnesses who have laid the more serious charges against her, in this manner. “Do you know 
 So-and-so?• naming one of the witnesses; and then she will answer either Yes or No. If she 
 says No, she will not be able, after she has been given means of defence and an Advocate, to 
 plead that he is a mortal enemy, since she has said on oath that she does not know him. But if 
 she says Yes, let her be asked whether she knows or has heard that he or she has acted in any 
 way contrary to the Christian faith in the manner of a witch. Then if she says Yes, for he did 
 such and such a thing; let her be asked whether he is her friend or enemy; and she will 
 immediately answer that he is her friend, because of the testimony of such is not of very great 
 account; and consequently she will not be able afterwards to plead an oath through her Advocate 
 that he is her enemy, for she has already said that he is her friend. But if she answers that 
 she knows nothing about him, let her again be asked whether he is her friend or enemy, and she 
 will at once answer that he is her friend; for it would be futile to allege enmity on the part 
 of someone of whom she knows nothing. Therefore she says, “I am his friend, but if I knew 
 anything about him I would not fail to reveal it.” Therefore she will not be able 
 afterwards to plead that her is her enemy. Or perhaps she will from the very beginning allege 
 reasons for mortal enmity, and in that case some credence must be placed in the plea of the 
 Advocate.<br>
 
         
 A fifth method is to give the Advocate or the accused a copy of the process, with the names of 
 the informers suppressed. And then the accused will guess, and very often rightly, who has 
 deposed such and such against her. And then if she says, “So-and-so is my mortal enemy, 
 and I am willing to prove it by witnesses,” then the Judge must consider whether the 
 person named is the same person named in the schedule, and since she has said that she is 
 willing to prove it by witnesses, he will examine those witnesses and inquire into the causes 
 of the enmity, having secretly called into consultation learned and aged men of known prudence. 
 And if he finds sufficient reasons for mortal enmity, he shall reject that evidence and dismiss 
 the prisoner, unless there are other grave charges against her, sworn to by other witnesses.<br>
 
         
 And this fifth method is commonly used; and it is found in practice that witches quickly guess 
 from the copy of the process who has laid information against them. And because in such cases 
 mortal enmity is rarely found unless it arises from the wicked deeds of the witch, therefore 
 the Judge can easily come to a decision by the above means. Also it is to be noted that often 
 the informers desire to confront the witch personally, and to charge her to her face with the 
 bewitchment which has befallen them.<br>
 
         
 There is still one more method whereunto the Judge may finally have recourse, when perhaps the 
 other methods, and especially the first four, seem to some to savour too much of cunning and 
 deceit. Accordingly, to satisfy and content the scrupulous, and that no fault may be found with 
 the Judge, let him take care, after he has found by the above methods that there is no mortal 
 enmity between the accused and the deponent, but wishes to remove all grounds for complaint 
 by settling the question finally in consultation with his other assessors, to act as follows. 
 Let him give to the accused or her Advocate a copy of the process, with the names of the 
 deponents or informers suppressed. And since her defence is that she has mortal enemies, and 
 perhaps she has alleged various reasons for the enmity, whether or not the facts are in 
 agreement with her statements, let the Judge call into consultation learned men of every faculty 
 (if such can be had), or at least some honest and reputable persons (for this is the purport of 
 that statute we have so often quoted); and let him cause the whole process to be read through 
 to them from end to end by the Notary or scribe, and let the names of the witnesses be made 
 known to them, but under an oath of secrecy; and he shall first inquire whether or not they are 
 willing to be bound by such an oath, for if not the names must by no means be declared to 
 them.<br>
 
         
 Then let him tell how he has inquired in such and such a manner into the alleged enmity, and has 
 not been able to find any testimony of fact. But he shall add that, if they please, one of two 
 courses shall be pursued. Either they shall decide then and there in consultation whether the 
 evidence of any of the witnesses shall be rejected on the grounds of mortal personal enmity; or 
 let them choose three or four or five persons who have most knowledge in that town or village of 
 any friendship or enmity between the accused and the informer, who are not present at the 
 consultation, and let them be informed of the names only of the accused and the witness, but not 
 of the information which has been deposed, and let the whole question be left to their 
 judgement. If they follow the former of these courses, they cannot very well reject any witness, 
 since the Judge has already used his own methods of investigation; but by the second course 
 he protects himself perfectly, and clears himself of all ugly suspicions. And he ought to observe 
 this last method when the accused has been taken in a foreign town or country. These methods 
 will suffice for examining the question of personal enmity.
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_13a.htm">Next: Question XIII</a><br>Of the Points to be Observed by the Judge before the Formal Examination in the Place of Detention and Torture. This is the Eighth Action<br>
 </center>
 </body>