<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_33a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_35a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XXXIV</h2>
 <h3>Of the Method of passing Sentence upon a Witch who Annuls Spells wrought by Witchcraft; and of Witch Midwives and Archer-Wizards</h3></center>
 
 
         
 THE fifteenth method of bringing a process on behalf of the faith 
 to a definitive sentence is employed when the person accused of 
 heresy is not found to be one who casts injurious spells of 
 witchcraft, but one who removes them; and in such a case the 
 procedure will be as follows. The remedies which she uses will 
 either be lawful or unlawful; and if they are lawful, she is not 
 to be judged a witch but a good Christian. But we have already 
 shown at length what sort of remedies are lawful.<br> 
 
         
 Unlawful remedies, on the other hand, are to be distinguished as 
 either absolutely unlawful, or in some respect unlawful. If they 
 are absolutely unlawful, these again can be divided into two 
 classes, according as they do or do not involve some injury to 
 another party; but in either case they are always accompanied by 
 an expressed invocation of devils. But if they are only in some 
 respect unlawful, that is to say, if they are practised with only 
 a tacit, and not an expressed, invocation of devils, such are to 
 be judged rather vain than unlawful, according to the Canonists 
 and some Theologians, as we have already shown.<br> 
 
         
 Therefore the Judge, whether ecclesiastical or civil, must not 
 punish the first and last of the above practices, having rather 
 to commend the first and tolerate the last, since the Canonists 
 maintain that it is lawful to oppose vanity with vanity. But he 
 must by no means tolerate those who remove spells by an expressed 
 invocation of devils, especially those who in doing so bring some 
 injury upon a third part; and this last is said to happen when 
 the spell is taken off one person and transferred to another. And 
 we have already made it clear in a former part of this work that 
 it makes no difference whether the person to whom the spell is 
 transferred be herself a witch or not or whether or not she be 
 the person who cast the original spell, or whether it be a man or 
 any other creature.<br> 
 
         
 It may be asked what the Judge should do when such a person 
 maintains that she removes spells by lawful and not unlawful 
 means; and how the Judge can arrive at the truth of such a case. 
 We answer that he should summon her and ask her what remedies she 
 uses; but he must not rely only upon her word, for the 
 ecclesiastical Judge whose duty it is must make diligent inquiry, 
 either himself or by means of some parish priest who shall 
 examine all his parishioners after placing them upon oath, as to 
 what remedies she uses. And if, as is usually the case, they are 
 found to be superstitious remedies, they must in no way be 
 tolerated, on account of the terrible penalties laid down by the 
 Canon Law, as will be shown.<br> 
 
         
 Again, it may be asked how the lawful remedies can be 
 distinguished from the unlawful, since they always assert that 
 they remove spells by certain prayers and the use of herbs. We 
 answer that this will be easy, provided that a diligent inquiry 
 be made. For although they must necessarily conceal their 
 superstitious remedies, either that they may not be arrested, or 
 that they may the more easily ensnare the minds of the simple, 
 and therefore make great show of their use of prayers and herbs, 
 yet they can be manifestly convicted by four superstitious 
 actions as sorceresses and witches.<br> 
 
         
 For there are some who can divine secrets, and are able to tell 
 things which they could only know through the revelation of evil 
 spirits. For example: when the injured come to them to be healed, 
 they can discover and make known the cause of their injury; and 
 they can perfectly know this and tell it to those who consult 
 them.<br> 
 
         
 Secondly, they sometimes undertake to cure the injury or spell of 
 one person, but will have nothing to do with that of another. For 
 in the Diocese of Spires there is a witch in a certain place 
 called Zunhofen who, although she seems to heal many persons, 
 confesses that she can in no way heal certain others; and this is 
 for no other reason than, as the inhabitants of the place assert, 
 that the spells case on such person have been so potently wrought 
 by other witches with the help of devils that the devils 
 themselves cannot remove them. For one devil cannot or will not 
 always yield to another.<br> 
 
         
 Thirdly, it sometimes happens that they must make some 
 reservation or exception in their cure of such injuries. Such a 
 case is known to have occured in the town of Spires itself. And 
 honest woman who had been bewitched in her shins sent for a 
 diviner of this sort to come and heal her; and when the witch had 
 entered her house and looked at her, she made such an exception. 
 For she said: It there are no scales and hairs in the wound, I 
 could take out all the other evil matter. And she revealed the 
 cause of the injury, although she had come from the country from 
 a distance of two miles, saying: You quarrelled with your 
 neighbour on such a day, and therefore this had happened to you. 
 Then, having extracted from the wound many other matters of 
 various sorts, which were not scales or hairs, she restored her 
 to health.<br> 
 
         
 Fourthly, they sometimes themselves observe, or cause to be 
 observed, certain superstitious ceremonies. For instance, they 
 fix some such time as before sunrise for people to visit them; or 
 say that they cannot heal injuries which were caused beyond the 
 limits of the estate on which they live, or that they can only 
 heal two or three persons in a year. Yet they do not heal them, 
 but only seem to do so by creasing to injure them.<br> 
 
         
 We could add many other considerations as touching the condition 
 of such persons: as that, after the lapse of a certain time they 
 have incurred the reputation of leading a bad and sinful life, or 
 that they are adulteresses, or the survivors from covens of other 
 witches. Therefore their gift of healing is not derived from God 
 on account of the sanctity of their lives.<br> 
 
         
 Here we must refer incidentally to witch midwives, who surpass 
 all other witches in their crimes, as we have shown in the First 
 Part of this work. And the number of them is so great that, as 
 has been found form their confessions, it is thought they there 
 is scarcely any tiny hamlet in which at least one is not to be 
 found. And that the magistrates may in some degree meet this 
 danger, they should allow no midwife to practise without having 
 been first sworn as a good Catholic; at the same time observing 
 the other safeguards mentioned in the Second Part of this 
 work.<br> 
 
         
 Here too we must consider archer-wizards, who constitute the 
 graver danger to the Christian religion in that they have 
 obtained protection on the estates of nobles and Princes who 
 receive, patronize, and defend them. But that all such receivers 
 and protectors are more damnable than all witches, especially in 
 certain cases, is shown as follows. The Canonists and Theologians 
 divide into two classes the patrons of such archer-wizards, 
 according as they defend the error or the person. They who defend 
 the error are more damnable than the wizards themselves, since 
 they are judged to be not only heretics but heresiarchs (24, 
 quest. 3). And the laws do not make much special mention of such 
 patrons, because they do not distinguish them from other 
 heretics.<br> 
 
         
 But there are others who, while not excusing the sin, yet defend 
 the sinner. These, for example, will do all in their power to 
 protect such wizards (or other heretics) from trial and 
 punishment at the hands of the Judge acting on behalf of the 
 Faith.<br> 
 
         
 Similarly there are those in public authority, that is to say, 
 public persons such as temporal Lords, and also spiritual Lords 
 who have temporal jurisdiction, who are, either by omission or 
 commission, patrons of such wizards and heretics.<br> 
 
         
 They are their patrons by omission when they neglect to perform 
 their duty in regard to such wizards and suspects, or to their 
 followers, receivers, defenders and patrons, when they are 
 required by the Bishops or Inquisitors to do this: that is, by 
 falling to arrest them, by not guarding them carefully when they 
 are arrested, by not taking them to the place within their 
 jurisdiction which has been appointed for them, by not promptly 
 executing the sentence passed upon them, and by other such 
 derelictions of their duty.<br> 
 
         
 They are their patrons by commission when, after such heretics 
 have been arrested, they liberate them from prison without the 
 licence or order of the Bishop or Judge; or when they directly or 
 indirectly obstruct the trial, judgement, and sentence of such, 
 or act in some similar way. The penalties for this have been 
 declared in the Second Part of this work, where we treated of 
 archer-wizards and other enchanters of weapons.<br> 
 
         
 It is enough now to say that all these are by law excommunicated, 
 and incur the twelve great penalties. And if they continues 
 obstinate in that excommunication for a year, they are then to be 
 condemned as heretics.<br> 
 
         
 Who, then, are to be called receivers of such; and are they to be 
 reckoned as heretics? All they, we answer, who receive such 
 archer-wizards, enchanters of weapons, necromancers, or heretic 
 witches as are the subject of this whole work. And such receivers 
 are of two classes, as was the case with the defenders and 
 patrons of such.<br> 
 
         
 For there are some who do not receive them only once or twice, 
 but many times and often; and these are well called in Latin 
 <i>receptatores</i>, from the frequentative form of the verb. And 
 receivers of this class are sometimes blameless, since they act 
 in ignorance and there is no sinister suspicion attaching to 
 them. But sometimes they are to blame, as being well aware of the 
 sins of those whom they receive; for the Church always denounces 
 these wizards as the most cruel enemies of the faith. And if 
 nevertheless temporal Lords receive, keep and defend them, etc., 
 they are and are rightly called receivers of heretics. And with 
 regard to such, the laws say that they are to be 
 excommunicated.<br> 
 
         
 But others there are who do not often or many times receive such 
 wizards or heretics, but only once or twice; and these are not 
 properly called <i>receptatores</i>, but <i>receptores</i>, since 
 they are not frequent receivers. (Yet the Arch-deacon disagrees 
 with this view; but it is no great matter, for we are considering 
 not words but deeds.)<br> 
 
         
 But there is this difference between <i>receptatores</i> and 
 <i>receptores</i>: those temporal Princes are always 
 <i>receptatores</i> who simply will not or cannot drive away such 
 heretics. But <i>receptores</i> may be quite innocent.<br> 
 
         
 Finally, it is asked who are they who are said to be obstructors 
 of the duty of Inquisitors and Bishops against such heretics; and 
 whether they are to be reckoned as heretics. We answer that such 
 obstructors are of two kinds. For there are some who cause a 
 direct obstruction, by rashly on their own responsibility 
 releasing from gaol those who have been detained on a charge of 
 heresy, or by interfering with the process of the Inquisition by 
 wreaking some injury to witnesses on behalf of the Faith because 
 of the evidence they have given; or it may be that the temporal 
 Lord issues an order that none but himself may try such a case, 
 and that anyone charged with this crime should be brought before 
 no one but himself, and that the evidence should be given only in 
 his presence, or some similar order. And such, according to 
 Giovanni d'Andrea, are direct obstructors. They who directly 
 obstruct the process, judgement or sentence on behalf of the 
 Faith, or help, advise or favour others in doing so, although 
 they are guilty of a great sin, are not on that account to be 
 judged heretics, unless it appears in other ways that they are 
 obstinately and wilfully involved in such heresies of witches. 
 But they are to be smitten with the sword of excommunication; and 
 if they stubbornly endure that excommunication for a year, then 
 are they to be condemned as heretics.<br> 
 
         
 But others are indirect obstructors. These, as Giovanni d'Andrea 
 explains, are those who give such orders as that no one shall 
 bear arms for the capture of heretics except the servants of the 
 said temporal Lord. Such are less guilty than the former, and are 
 not heretics; but they, and also any who advise, help or 
 patronize them in such actions, are to be excommunicated; and if 
 they obstinately remain in that excommunication for a year, they 
 are then to be condemned as if they were heretics. And here it is 
 to be understood that they are in such a way to be condemned as 
 heretics that if they are willing to return, they are received 
 back to mercy, having first abjured their error; but if not, they 
 are to be handed over to the secular Court as impenitents.<br> 
 
         
 To sum up. Witch-midwives, like other witches, are to be 
 condemned and sentences according to the nature of their crimes; 
 and this is true also of those who, as we have said, remove 
 spells of witchcraft superstitiously and by the help of devils; 
 for it can hardly be doubted that, just as they are able to 
 remove them, so can they inflict them. And it is a fact  that 
 some definite agreement is formed between witches and devils 
 whereby some shall be able to hurt and others to heal, that so 
 they may more easily ensnare the minds of the simple and recruit 
 the ranks of their abandoned and hateful society. Archer-wizards 
 and enchanters of weapons, who are only protected by being 
 patronized, defended and received by temporal Lords, are subject 
 to the same penalties; and they who patronize them, etc., or 
 obstruct the officers of justice in their proceedings against 
 them, are subject to all the penalties to which the patrons of 
 heretics are liable, and are to be excommunicated. And if after 
 they have obstinately endured that excommunication for a year 
 they wish to repent, let them abjure that obstruction and 
 patronage, and if not, they must be handed over as impenitents to 
 the secular Court. And even if they have not endured their 
 excommunication for a year, such obstructors can still be 
 proceeded against as patrons of heretics.<br> 
 
         
 And all that has been said with regard to patrons, defenders, 
 receivers, and obstructors in the case of archer-wizards, etc., 
 applies equally in respect of all other witches who work various 
 injuries to men, animals, and the fruits of the earth. But even 
 the witches themselves, when in the court of conscience with 
 humble and contrite spirit they weep for their sins and make 
 clean confession asking forgiveness, are taken back to mercy. But 
 when they are known, those whose duty it is must proceed against 
 them, summoning, examining, and detaining them, and in all things 
 proceeding in accordance with the nature of their crimes to a 
 definitive and conclusive sentence, as has been shown, if they 
 wish to avoid the snare of eternal damnation by reason of the 
 excommunication pronounced upon them by the Church when they 
 deliberately fail in their duty. 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_35a.htm">Next: Question XXXV</a><br>Finally, of the Method of passing Sentence upon Witches who Enter or Cause to be Entered an Appeal, whether such be Frivolous or Legitimate and Just<br>
 </center>
 </body>