<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_15a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03c00a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XVI</h2>
 <h3>Of the fit Time and of the Method of the Second Examination. And it is the Eleventh Action, concerning the Final Precautions to be Observed by the Judge</h3></center>
 
 
         
 THERE are one or two points to be noted with regard to what we have just 
 written. First, that witches should be questioned on the more Holy Days and 
 during the solemnization of the Mass, and that the people should be exhorted 
 to pray for Divine help, not in any specific manner, but that they should 
 invoke the prayers of the Saints against all the plagues of the devil.<br> 
 
         
 Secondly, as we have said before, the Judge should wear round his neck 
 Consecrated Salt and other matters, with the Seven Words which Christ uttered 
 on the Cross written in a schedule, and all bound together. And he should, if 
 he conveniently can, wear these made into the length of Christ's stature 
 against his naked body, and bind other Holy things about him. For it is shown 
 by experience that witches are greatly troubled by these things, and can 
 hardly refrain from confessing the truth. The Relics of the Saints, too, are 
 of especial virtue.<br> 
 
         
 Having taken these precautions, and after giving her Holy Water to drink, let 
 him again begin to question her, all the time exhorting her as before. And 
 while she is raised from the ground, if she is being tortured in this way, let 
 the Judge read or cause to be read to her the depositions of the witnesses 
 with their names, saying: “See! You are convicted by the 
 witnesses.” Also, if the witnesses are willing to confront her face to 
 face, the Judge shall ask her if she will confess if the witnesses are brought 
 before her. And if she consents, let the witnesses be brought in and stand 
 before her, so that she may be contrained or shamed into confessing some of 
 her crimes.<br> 
 
         
 Finally, if he sees that she will not admit her crimes, he shall ask her 
 whether, to prove her innocence, she is ready to undergo the ordeal by red-hot 
 iron. And they all desire this, knowing that the devil will prevent them from 
 being hurt; therefore a true witch is exposed in this manner. The Judge shall 
 ask her how she can be so rash as to run so great a risk, and all shall be 
 written down; but it will be shown later that they are never to be allowed to 
 undergo this ordeal by red-hot iron.<br> 
 
         
 Let the Judge also not that when witches are questioned on a Friday, while the 
 people are gathered together at Holy Mass to await our Saviour, they very 
 often confess.<br> 
 
         
 But we must proceed to the extreme case, when after every expedient has been 
 tried the witch still maintains silence. The Judge shall then loose her and, 
 using the precautions which follow, shall take her from the place of 
 punishment to another place under a strong guard; but let him take particular 
 care not to release her on any sort of security; for when that is done, they 
 never confess the truth, but always become worse.<br> 
 
         
 But in the first place let him cause her to be well treated in the manner of 
 food and drink, and meanwhile let honest persons who are under no suspicion 
 enter to her and talk often with her on indifferent subjects, and finally 
 advise her in confidence to confess the truth, promising that the Judge will be 
 merciful to her and that they will intercede for her. And finally let the 
 Judge come in and promise that he will be merciful with the mental reservation 
 that he means he will be merciful to himself or the State; for whatever is 
 done for the safety of the State is merciful.<br> 
 
         
 But if he promises her her life, as we showed in Question XIV that he can do 
 in three ways, let it all be written down by the Notary in what words and with 
 what intention mercy was promised. And if the accused begs for mercy in this 
 way, and discovers her crime, let her be promised in a vague and general way 
 that she will receive even more than she has petitioned for, so that she may 
 speak with the greater confidence.<br> 
 
         
 As a second precaution in this case, when she refuses altogether to reveal the 
 truth, the Judge should, as we have said before, examine her friends and 
 associates without her knowledge; and if these have deposed anything which 
 might lead to her conviction, this must be diligently investigated. Also, if 
 any instruments or unguents or boxes have been found in her house, they should 
 be shown to her, and she should be asked for what purposes they have been 
 used.<br> 
 
         
 A third precaution can be taken when she still persists in her obstinancy 
 after her associates have been examined and borne witness against her, and not 
 for her. If she has no friends, let some other trustworthy man who is known to 
 be congenial to the accused and to some extent a patron of hers, enter to the 
 witch one evening and engage her in a protracted conversation. And then, if he 
 is not an accomplice, let him pretend that it is too late for him to return, 
 and stay in the prison with her, and continue talking during the night. And if 
 he is an accomplice, let them eat and drink together, and talk to each other 
 about the things they have done. And then let it be arranged that spies should 
 stand outside in a convenient place, and listen to them and take note of their 
 words, and if necessary let the have a scribe with them.<br> 
 
         
 As a fourth precaution, if she then begins to tell the truth, let the Judge on 
 no account postpone hearing her confession, even in the middle of the night, 
 buy proceed with it to the best of his ability. And if it is in the day-time, 
 let him not care if he delays his luncheon or dinner, but persist until she 
 has told the truth, at least in the main. For it is generally found that, 
 after postponements and interruptions, they 
 return to their vomit and will not reveal the truth which they began to 
 confess, having thought worse of it.<br> 
 
         
 And let the Judge take note that, after she has confessed the injuries done to 
 men and animals, he shall ask her for how many years she has had an Incubus 
 devil, and how long it is since she abjured the faith. For they never confess 
 to these matters unless they have first confessed to these matters unless they 
 have first confessed their other deeds; therefore they must be asked 
 concerning these last of all.<br> 
 
         
 As a fifth precaution, when all the above have failed, let her, if possible, 
 be led to some castle; and after she has been kept there under custody for 
 some days, let the castellan pretend that he is going on a long journey. And 
 then let some of his household, or even some honest women, visit her and 
 promise that they will set her entirely at liberty if she will teach them how 
 to conduct certain practices. And let the Judge take note that by this means 
 they have very often confessed and been convicted.<br> 
 
         
 Quite lately a witch was detained in the Castle of Königsheim near the 
 town of Schlettstadt in the Diocese of Strasburg, and could not be induced by 
 any tortures or questions to confess her crimes. But at last the castellan 
 used the method we have just described. Although he was himself present in the 
 castle, the witch thought he was away, and three of his household came in to 
 her and promised they would set her free if she would teach them how to do 
 certain things. At first she refused, saying that they were trying to entrap 
 her; but at last she asked what it was that they wanted to know. And one asked 
 how to raise a hailstorm, and another asked about carnal matters. When at 
 length she agreed to show him how to raise a hailstorm, and a bowl of water 
 had been brought in, the witch told him to stir the water with his finger, and 
 herself uttered certain words, and suddenly the place which he had named, a 
 wood near the castle, was visited by such a tempest and storm of hail as had 
 not been seen for many years.<br> 
 
         
 It yet remains to show how the Judge is to proceed in pronouncing sentence in 
 a case where all these means have failed, or what is further to be done even 
 when she has confessed her crimes, that the whole process may be brought to an 
 end; and we shall complete this Last Part of this work with a consideration of 
 these matters. 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03c00a.htm">Next: The Third Head</a><br>Which is the last Part of this Work. How the Process is to be Concluded by the Pronouncement of a Definite and Just Sentence<br>
 </center>
 </body>