<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_32a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_34a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XXXIII</h2>
 <h3>Of the Method of passing Sentence upon one who has been Accused by another Witch, who has been or is to be Burned at the Stake</h3></center>
 
 
         
 The fourteenth method of finally concluding a process on behalf 
 of the Faith is used when the person accused of heresy, after a 
 careful discussion of the circumstances of the process with 
 reference to the informant in consultation with learned lawyers, 
 is found to be accused of that heresy only by another witch who 
 has been or is to be burned. And this can happen in thirteen ways 
 in thirteen cases. For a person so accused is either found 
 innocent and is to be freely discharged; or she is found to be 
 generally defamed for that heresy; or it is found that, in 
 addition to her defamation, she is to be to some degree exposed 
 to torture; or she is found to be strongly suspected of heresy; 
 or she is found to be at the same time defamed and suspected; and 
 so on up to thirteen different cases, as was shown in the 
 Twentieth Question. <br> 
 
         
 The first case is when she is accused only by a witch in custody, 
 and is not convicted either by her own confession or by 
 legitimate witnesses, and there are no other indications found by 
 reason of which she can truly be regarded as suspect.  In such a 
 case she is to be entirely absolved, even by the secular Judge 
 himself who has either burned the deponent or is about to burn 
 her either on his own authority or on that commissioned to him by 
 the Bishop and Judge of the Ordinary Court; and she shall be 
 absolved in the manner explained in the Twentieth Question. <br> 
 
         
 The second case is when, in addition to being accused by a witch 
 in custody, she is also publicly defamed throughout the whole 
 village or city; so that she has always laboured under that 
 particular defamation, but, after the deposition of the witch, it 
 has become aggravated. <br> 
 
         
 In such a case the following should be the procedure. The Judge 
 should consider that, apart from the general report, nothing 
 particular has been proved against her by other credible 
 witnesses in the village or town; and although, perhaps, that 
 witch has deposed some serious charges against her, yet, since 
 has lost her faith by denying it to the devil, Judges should give 
 no ready credence to her words, unless there should be other 
 circumstances which aggravate that report; and then the case 
 would fall under the third and following case. Therefore she 
 should be enjoined a canonical purgation, and the sentence should 
 be pronounced as shown in the Twenty-first Question. <br> 
 
         
 And if the civil Judge orders this purgation to the be made 
 before the Bishop, and ends with a  solemn declaration that, if 
 she should fail, then, as an example to others, she should be 
 more severely sentenced by both the ecclesiastical and civil 
 Judges, well and good. But if he wishes to conduct it himself, 
 let him command her to find ten or twenty compurgators of her own 
 class, and proceed in accordance with the second method of 
 sentencing such: except that, if she has to be excommunicated, 
 then he must have recourse to the Ordinary; and this would be the 
 case if she refused to purge herself. <br> 
 
         
 The third case, then, happens when the person so accused is not 
 convicted by her own confession, not by the evidence of the 
 facts, nor by credible witnesses, nor are there any other 
 indications as to any fact in which she had ever been marked by 
 the other inhabitants of that town or village, except her general 
 reputation  among them. But the general report has become 
 intensified by the detention  of that witch in custody, as that 
 it is said that she had been her companion in everything and had 
 participated in her crimes. But even so, the accused firmly 
 denies all this, and nothing of it is known to other inhabitants, 
 or of anything to save good behaviour on her part, though her 
 companionship with the witch is admitted. <br> 
 
         
 In such a case the following is the procedure. First they are to 
 be brought face to face, and their mutual answers and 
 recriminations noted, to see whether there is any inconsistency 
 in their words by reason of which the Judge can decide from her 
 admissions and denials whether he ought to expose her to torture; 
 and if so, he can proceed as in the third manner of pronouncing a 
 sentence, explained in the Twenty-second Question, submitting her 
 to light tortures: at the same time exercising every possible 
 precaution, as we explained at length towards the beginning of 
 this Third Part, to find out whether she is innocent or guilty. 
 <br> 
 
         The fourth case is when a person 
 accused in this manner is found to be lightly suspected, either 
 because of her own confession or because of the depositions of 
 the other witch in custody. There are some who include among 
 those who should be thus lightly suspected those who go and 
 consult witches for any purpose, or have procured for themselves 
 a lover by stirring up hatred between married folk, or have 
 consorted with witches in order to obtain some temporal 
 advantage. But such are to be excommunicated as followers of 
 heretics, according to the Canon c. <i>excommunicamus</i>, where 
 it says: Similarly we judge those to be heretics who believe in 
 their errors. For the effect is presumed from the facts. 
 Therefore it seems that such are to be more severely sentenced 
 and punished than those who are under a light suspicion of heresy 
 and are to be judged from light conjectures. For example, if they 
 had performed services for witches or carried their letters to 
 them, they need not on that account believe in their errors: yet 
 they have not laid information against them, and they have 
 received wages and vails from them. But whether or not such 
 people are to be included in this case, according to the opinion 
 of learned men the procedure must be as in the case of those 
 under light suspicion, and the Judge will act as follows. Such a 
 person will either abjure heresy or will purge herself 
 canonically, as was explained in the fourth method of pronouncing 
 sentence in the Twenty-third Question. <br> 
 
         
 However, it seems that the better course is for such a person to 
 be ordered to abjure heresy, for this is more in accordance with 
 the meaning of the Canon c. <i>excommunicamus</i>, where it 
 speaks of those who are found to be only under some notable 
 suspicion. And if such should relapse, they should not incur the 
 penalty for backsliders. The procedure will be as above explained 
 in the fourth method of sentencing. <br> 
 
         
 The fifth case is when such person is found to be under a strong 
 suspicion, by reason, as before, of her own confession or of the 
 depositions of the other witch in custody. In this class some 
 include those who directly or indirectly obstruct the Court in 
 the process of trying a witch, provided that they do this 
 wittingly. <br> 
 
         
 Also they include all who give help, advice or protection to 
 those who cause such obstructions. Also those who instruct 
 summoned or captured heretics to conceal the truth or in some way 
 falsify it. Also all those who wittingly receive, or visit those 
 whom they know to be heretics, or associate with them, send them 
 gifts, or show favour to them; for all such actions, when done 
 with full knowledge, bespeak favour felt towards the sin, and not 
 to the person. And therefore they say that, when the accused is 
 guilty of any of the above actions, and has been proved so after 
 trial, then she should be sentenced in the fifth method, 
 explained in the Twenty-fourth Question; so that she must abjure 
 all heresy, under pain of being punished as a backslider. <br> 
 
         
 As to these contentions we may say that the Judge must take into 
 consideration the household and family of each several witch who 
 has been burned or is detained; for these are generally found to 
 be infected. <br> 
 
         
 For witches are instructed by devils to offer to them even their 
 own children; therefore there can be no doubt that such children 
 are instructed in all manner of crimes, as is shown in the First 
 Part of this work. <br> 
 
         
 Again, in a case of simple heresy it happens that, on account of 
 the familiarity between heretics who are akin to each other, when 
 one is convicted of heresy it follows that his kindred also are 
 strongly suspected; and the same is true of the heresy of 
 witches. <br> 
 
         
 But this present case is made clear in the chapter of the Canon 
 <i>inter sollicitudines</i>. For a certain Dean was, owing to his 
 reputation as a heretic, enjoined a canonical purgation; on 
 account of his familiarity with heretics, he had to make a public 
 abjuration; and through the scandal he was deprived of his 
 benefice, so that the scandal might be allayed. <br> 
 
         
 The sixth case is when such a person is under a grave suspicion; 
 but no simple and bare deposition by another witch in custody can 
 cause this, for there must be in addition some indication of the 
 facts, derived from certain words or deeds uttered or committed 
 by the witch in custody, in which the accused is at least said to 
 have taken some part, and shared in the evil deeds of the 
 deponent. <br> 
 
         
 To understand this, the reader should refer to what was written 
 in the Nineteenth Question, especially concerning the grave 
 degree of suspicion, how it arise from grave and convincing 
 conjectures; and how the Judge is forced to believe, on mere 
 suspicion, that a person is a heretic, although perhaps in his 
 heart he is a true Catholic. The Canonists give an example of 
 this by the case, in simple heresy, of a man summoned to answer 
 in the cause of the faith, and defiantly refusing to appear, on 
 which account he is excommunicated, and if he persists in that 
 state for a year, becomes gravely suspected of heresy. <br> 
 
         
 And so likewise in the case of person accused in the way we are 
 considering, the indications of the facts are to be examined by 
 which she is rendered gravely suspect. Let us put the case that 
 the witch in custody has asserted that the accused has taken part 
 in her evil works of witchcraft, but the accused firmly denies 
 it. What then is to be done? It will be necessary to consider 
 whether there are any facts to engender a strong suspicion of 
 her, and whether that strong suspicion can become a grave one. 
 Thus, if a man has been summoned to answer some charge, and has 
 obstinately refused to appear, he would come under a light 
 suspicion of heresy, even if he had not been summoned in a cause 
 concerning the Faith. But if he then refused to appear in a cause 
 concerning the Faith and was excommunicated for his obstinacy, 
 then he would be strongly suspected; for the light suspicion 
 would become a strong one; and if then he remained obstinate in 
 excommunication for a year, the strong suspicion would become a 
 grave one. Therefore the Judge will consider whether, by reason 
 of her familiarity with the witch in custody, the accused is 
 under a strong suspicion, in the manner shown in the fifth case 
 above; and then he must consider whether there is anything which 
 may turn that strong suspicion into a grave one. For it is 
 presumed that it is possible for this to be the case, on account 
 of the accused having perhaps shared in the crimes of the 
 detained witch, if she has had frequent intercourse with her. 
 Therefore the Judge must proceed as in the sixth method of 
 sentencing explained in the Twenty-fifth Question. But it may be 
 asked what the Judge is to do if the person so accused by a witch 
 in custody still altogether persists in her denials, in spite of 
 all indications against her. We answer as follows: <br> 
 
         
 First the Judge must consider whether those denials do or do not 
 proceed from the vice or witchcraft of taciturnity: and, as was 
 shown in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Questions of this Third 
 part, the Judge can know this from her ability or inability  to 
 shed tears, or from her insensibility under torture and quick 
 recovery of her strength afterwards. For then the grave suspicion 
 would be aggravated; and in such a case she is by no means to be 
 freely discharged, but, according to the sixth method of 
 sentencing, she must be condemned to perpetual imprisonment and 
 penance. <br> 
 
         
 But if she is not infected with the taciturnity of witches, but 
 feels the keenest pains in her torture (whereas others, as has 
 been said, become insensible to pain owing to the witchcraft of 
 taciturnity), then the Judge must fall back upon his last 
 expedient of a canonical purgation. And if this should be ordered 
 by a secular Judge, it is called a lawful vulgar purgation, since 
 it cannot be classed with other vulgar purgations. And if she 
 should fail in this purgation she will be judged guilty. <br> 
 
         
 The seventh case is when the accused is not found guilty by his 
 own confession, by the evidence of the facts, or by legitimate 
 witnesses, but is only found to be accused by a witch in custody, 
 and there are also some indications found which bring him under 
 light or strong suspicion. As, for example, that he had had great 
 familiarity with witches; in which case he would, according to 
 the Canon, have to undergo a canonical purgation on account of 
 the general report concerning him; and on account of the 
 suspicion against him he must abjure heresy, under pain of being 
 punished as a backslider if it was a strong suspicion, but not if 
 it was a light one. <br> 
 
         
 The eighth case occurs when the person so accused is found to 
 have confessed that heresy, but to be penitent, and never to have 
 relapsed. But here it is to be noted that in this and the other 
 cases, where it is a question of those who have or have not 
 relapsed, and who are or are not penitent, these distinctions are 
 made only for the benefit of Judges who are not concerned with 
 the infliction of the extreme penalty. Therefore the civil Judge 
 may proceed in accordance with the Civil and Imperial Laws, as 
 justice shall demand, in the case of one who has confessed, no 
 matter whether or not she be penitent, or whether or not she have 
 relapsed. Only he may have recourse to those thirteen methods of 
 pronouncing sentence, and act in accordance with them, if any 
 doubtful question should arise. <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_34a.htm">Next: Question XXXIV</a><br>Of the Method of passing Sentence upon a Witch who Annuls Spells wrought by Witchcraft; and of Witch Midwives and Archer-Wizards<br>
 </center>
 </body>