<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_24a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_26a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XXV</h2>
 <h3>The Sixth Kind of Sentence, in the Case of one who is Gravely Suspect</h3></center>
 
 
         
 THE sixth method of bringing to a conclusion a process on behalf 
 of the faith is used when the person accused of heresy, after a 
 careful examination of the merits of the process in consultation 
 with learned lawyers, is found to be gravely suspected of heresy. 
 And this is when the accused is not convicted of heresy by her 
 own confession or by the evidence of the facts or by the 
 legitimate productions of witnesses, but there are indications, 
 not only light or even strong, but very strong and grave, which 
 render her gravely suspected of the said heresy, and by reason of 
 which she must be judged as one gravely suspected of the said 
 heresy.<br> 
 
         
 And for a clearer understanding of this, we shall give examples 
 both of a case of simple heresy and of the heresy of witches. For 
 the case would fall under this head in simple heresy if the 
 accused were not lawfully found convicted by his own confession, 
 etc. as above, but for something which he had said or done. As, 
 for example, he may have been summoned in a case not concerning 
 the faith, and have been sentenced to excommunication; and if he 
 should continue obstinate in excommunication for a year or more, 
 he would come under a light suspicion of heresy; for such 
 behaviour is not without some suspicion of heresy. But if he 
 should then be summoned on a charge concerning the faith, and 
 should not appear but contumaciously refuse to appear, and 
 therefore be excommunicated, then he would be strongly suspected 
 of heresy; for then the light suspicion would become a strong 
 one. And if he remained obstinate in that excommunication for a 
 year, then he would be gravely suspected of heresy; for then the 
 strong suspicion would become a grave one, against which no 
 defence is admitted. And from that time such a person would be 
 condemned as a heretic, as is shown by the Canon, c. <i>cum 
 contumacia</i>, lib. 6.<br> 
 
         
 An example of a grave suspicion in the heresy of witches would be 
 when the accused has said or done anything which is practised by 
 witches when they wish to bewitch anyone. And it commonly happens 
 that they are constrained to manifest themselves by threatening 
 words, by deeds, by a look or a touch, and this is for three 
 reasons. First that their sins may be aggravated and more 
 manifest to the their Judges; secondly, that they may be the more 
 easily seduce the simple; and thirdly, that God may be the more 
 offended and they may be granted more power of injuring men. 
 Therefore a witch must be gravely suspected when, after she has 
 used such threatening words as “I will soon make you 
 feel,” or the like, some injury has befallen the person so 
 threatened or his cattle. For then she is not to be considered as 
 lightly suspected, as was the case with those who are familiar 
 with witches, or those who wish to provoke someone to inordinate 
 love. See above where we deal with the three degrees of 
 suspicion, light, strong, and grave.<br> 
 
         
 Now we must consider what procedure is to be observed in such a 
 case. For in the case of one gravely suspected of simple heresy, 
 the following is the procedure. Although he may not in actual 
 truth be a heretic, since there may not be any error in his 
 understanding, or if there is, he may not cling obstinately to it 
 in his will: nevertheless he is to be condemned as a heretic 
 because of the said grave suspicion, against which no proof is 
 admitted.<br> 
 
         
 Such a heretic is condemned in this manner. If he refuses to 
 return and abjure his heresy and give fitting satisfaction, he is 
 delivered to the secular Court to be punished. But if he is 
 willing and consents, he abjures his heresy and is imprisoned for 
 life. And the same holds good in the case of one gravely 
 suspected of the heresy of witches.<br> 
 
         
 But although the same method in the main is to be observed in the 
 case of one gravely suspected of the heresy of witches, there are 
 some differences. It is to be noted that, if the witch maintains 
 her denial, or claims that she uttered those words not with the 
 implied intention but in a vehement and womanish passion; then 
 the Judge has not sufficient warrant to sentence her to the 
 flames, in spite of the grave suspicion. Therefore he must place 
 her in prison, and cause inquiry to be made by proclamation 
 whether she has been known to have done the like before. And if 
 it is found that this is so, he must inquire whether she was then 
 publicly defamed in respect of that heresy; and from this he can 
 proceed further so that, before all else, she may be exposed to 
 an interrogation under the question and torture. And then, if she 
 shows signs of such heresy, or of the taciturnity of witches; as 
 that she should be unable to shed tears, or remain insensible 
 under torture and quickly recover her strength afterwards; then 
 he may proceed with the various precautions which we have already 
 explained where we dealt with such cases.<br> 
 
         
 And in case all should fail, then let him take note that, if she 
 has perpetrated the like before, she is not to be altogether 
 released, but must be sent to the squalor of prison for a year, 
 and be tortured, and be examined very often, especially on the 
 more Holy Days. But if, in addition to this, she has been 
 defamed, then the Judge may proceed in the manner already shown 
 in the case of simple heresy, and condemn her to the fire, 
 especially if there is a multitude of witnesses and she had often 
 been detected in similar or other deeds of witchcraft. But if he 
 wishes to be merciful, he may set her a canonical purgation, that 
 she should find twenty or thirty sponsors, sentencing her in such 
 a way that, if she should fail in her purgation, she shall be 
 condemned to the fire as convicted. And the Judge can proceed in 
 such a manner.<br> 
 
         
 And if she should purge herself, then the Judge must sentence her 
 to an abjuration of all heresy, on pain of the punishment for 
 backsliders, together with the perpetual penance, in the 
 following manner. The preparations for the abjuration will be the 
 same as were explained in the fourth and fifth methods of 
 concluding a process on behalf of the faith.<br> 
 
         
 Note that in all the following methods of pronouncing sentence, 
 when the Judge wishes to proceed in a merciful manner he can act 
 in the way we have already explained. But since secular Judges 
 use their own various methods, proceeding with rigour but not 
 always with equity, no fixed rule or method can be given for them 
 as it can for an ecclesiastical Judge, who can receive the 
 abjuration and impose a perpetual penance in the following 
 manner:<br> 
 
         
 I, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, standing in person 
 before you my venerable Lords the Bishop of such city and Judges, 
 having touched with my hands the Holy Gospel placed before me, 
 swear that I believe in my heart and profess with my lips the 
 Holy Catholic and Apostolic Faith which the Holy Roman Church 
 holds, professes, believes, preaches and teaches. And 
 consequently I abjure all heresy, and renounce and revoke all who 
 raise themselves against the Holy Roman and Apostolic Church, of 
 whatever sect or error they be. Also I swear and promise that I 
 shall never henceforward do, say, or cause to be done such and 
 such (naming them) which I have done and said, and for which, in 
 my guilt, you hold me gravely suspected of the said heresy. Also 
 I swear and promise that I will perform every penance which you 
 wish to impose upon me for the said crimes to the best of my 
 strength, and that I will not omit any part of it, so help me God 
 and the Holy Gospel. And if (which God forbid) I should hereafter 
 act in contravention of this abjuration, I here and now bind and 
 oblige myself to suffer the due punishments for backsliders, 
 however sever they may be.<br> 
 
         
 Let the Notary take care to set it down that the said abjuration 
 was made by one gravely suspected of heresy, so that if she 
 should be proved to have relapsed, she should then be judged 
 accordingly and delivered up to the secular Court.<br> 
 
         
 After this let the Bishop absolve her from the sentence of 
 excommunication which she has incurred as one gravely suspected 
 of heresy. For when a heretic returns to the faith and abjures 
 his heresy, he is to be released from the sentence of 
 excommunication which is passed on all heretics. Similarly, such 
 a one as we are considering was condemned as a heretic, as we 
 have said; but after she has abjured her heresy she is to be 
 released from excommunication; and after this absolution she is 
 to be sentenced in the following manner:<br> 
 
         
 We N., Bishop of such city, and, if he is present, Judge in the 
 territory of such Lord, seeing that you N., of such a place in 
 such a Diocese, have been accused before us of such and such 
 touching the faith (naming them), and that we have proceeded to 
 inform ourselves concerning them as justice demanded by a careful 
 examination of the merits of the process and of all that has been 
 done and said in the present case, have found that you have 
 committed such and such (naming them). Wherefore, and not without 
 reason holding you gravely suspected of such heresy (naming it), 
 we have caused you as one so suspected publicly to abjure all 
 heresy in general, as the canonical sanctions bid us. And since 
 according to those same canonical institutions all such are to be 
 condemned as heretics, but you holding to wiser counsel and 
 returning to the bosom of our Holy Mother the Church have 
 abjured, as we have said, all vile heresy, therefore we absolve 
 you from the sentence of excommunication by which you were 
 deservedly bound as one hateful to the Church of God. And if with 
 true heart and faith unfeigned you have returned to the unity of 
 the Church, you shall be reckoned from henceforth among the 
 penitent, and as from now are received back into the merciful 
 bosom of the Holy Church. But since it would be most scandalous 
 to pass over with connivent eyes and leave unpunished your 
 offences against God and your injuries to men, for it is a graver 
 matter to offend the Divine Majesty than a human monarch, and 
 that your crimes may not be an incentive for other sinners, and 
 that you may become more careful in the future and less prone to 
 commit again the aforesaid crimes, and may suffer the less 
 punishment in the next world: We the aforesaid Bishop and Judge, 
 having availed ourselves of the wise and considered advice of 
 learned men in this matter, sitting in tribunal as Judges 
 judging, having before our eyes only God and the irrefragable 
 truth of the Holy Faith, with the Holy Gospels placed before us 
 that our judgement may proceed as from the countenance of God and 
 our eyes see with equity, sentence and condemn, or rather impose 
 penance in the following manner upon you N., appearing in person 
 before us on the day and at the hour which was before assigned to 
 you. First, you shall put on over all the garments which you wear 
 a grey-blue garment after the manner of a monk’s scapulary, 
 made without a hood either before or behind, and having upon it 
 crosses of yellow cloth three palms long and two palms wide, and 
 you shall wear this garment over all others for such a length of 
 time (setting a period of one or two years, more or less as the 
 guilt of the person demands), And in the said garment and crosses 
 you shall stand in the door of such a church at such a time for 
 so long, or on the four major 
 Feasts of the Glorious Virgin, or in such and such cities in 
 the doors of such and such churches; and we sentence and condemn 
 you for life, or for such a period, to such a prison. (Let this 
 be set down as seems most to the honour of the faith, and 
 according to the greater or less guilt and obstinacy of the 
 accused.) And we expressly, and in the sure knowledge that it is 
 so ordained by canonical institution, reserve to ourselves the 
 right to mitigate the said penance, to increase it, change it, or 
 remove it, in whole or in part, as often as seems good to us. 
 This sentence was given, etc.<br> 
 
         
 And when this has been read, it shall at once be duly put into 
 execution, and she shall be clothed with the aforesaid garment 
 with the crosses as has been said. 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_26a.htm">Next: Question XXVI</a><br>The Method of passing Sentence upon one who is both Suspect and Defamed<br>
 </center>
 </body>