<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="mm03_23a.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="mm03_25a.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <center><h1>Malleus Maleficarum Part 3</h1>
 <h2>Question XXIV</h2>
 <h3>The Fifth Manner of Sentence, in the Case of one under Strong Suspicion</h3></center>
 
 
         
 THE fifth method of concluding a process on behalf of the faith 
 is used when she who is accused of heresy, after a careful 
 examination of the merits of the process in consultation with 
 learned lawyers, is found to be strongly suspected of heresy. And 
 this is when the accused is not legally taken in heresy, nor has 
 been convicted by her own confession or by the evidence of the 
 facts or by the legitimate production of witnesses; but strong 
 and weighty indications have been proved against her by reason of 
 which she is held to be under strong suspicion of heresy.<br> 
 
         
 The procedure in such a case is as follows. For such a person 
 should abjure that heresy as one strongly suspected of it, in 
 such a manner that, if she should afterwards relapse, she must be 
 delivered to the secular Court to suffer the extreme penalty. And 
 she shall make her abjuration publicly or secretly according to 
 whether she is publicly or secretly suspected, or by more or 
 less, high or low, as was just said in the case of one under a 
 light suspicion; and she must abjure that specific heresy.<br> 
 
         
 And the preparations for such an abjuration should be as follows: 
 - When the Sunday comes which has been fixed for the abjuration 
 and the hearing of the sentence or the imposition of the penance, 
 the preacher shall deliver a general sermon. After this, the 
 Notary or clerk shall publicly read out the crimes of which the 
 accused has been convicted, and those of which she is strongly 
 suspected as a heretic.<br> 
 
         
 Then the Judge or his deputy shall say to her: Behold! according 
 to that which has been read you are strongly suspected by us of 
 such heresy; wherefore it behoves you to purge yourself and 
 abjure the aforesaid heresy. And then the Book of the Gospels 
 shall be placed before her, and she shall set her hand upon it; 
 and if she can read competently, she shall be given the following 
 written abjuration, and shall read it in the presence of the 
 whole congregation.<br> 
 
         
 But if she cannot read competently, the Notary shall read it 
 phrase by phrase, and the accused shall repeat it in a loud and 
 audible voice in the following manner. The Notary or clerk shall 
 say: I, N., of such a place, and the accused person shall repeat 
 after him the same words, but always in the vulgar tongue. And so 
 on up to the end of the abjuration. And she shall abjure in the 
 following manner.<br> 
 
         
 I, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, standing my trial in 
 person in presence of you reverend Lords the Bishop of such city 
 and the Judge of the territory subject to the rule of such a 
 Lord, upon the Holy Gospels set before me and touched by my 
 hands, I swear that I believe in my heart and profess with my 
 lips that Holy Catholic and Apostolic Faith which the Holy Roman 
 Church teaches, professes, preaches, and holds. Also I swear that 
 I believe in my heart and profess with my lips that, etc. And let 
 her pronounce the Catholic article of the faith against that 
 heresy of which she is strongly suspected.<br> 
 
         
 For example, if the heresy of witchcraft is in question, let her 
 say as follows:<br> 
 
         
 I swear that I believe that not only will simple heretics and 
 schismatics be tortured in fire everlasting, but that those above 
 all will be so punished who are infected with the heresy of 
 witches, who deny before the devil that faith which they received 
 in Holy Baptism at the font, and practise demoniac lewdness for 
 the fulfilment of their evil desires, inflicting all sorts of 
 injuries upon men and animals and the fruits of the earth. And 
 consequently I abjure, renounce, and revoke that heresy, or 
 rather infidelity, which falsely and mendaciously maintains that 
 there are no witches in the world, and that no one ought to 
 believe that those injuries can be caused with the help of 
 devils; for such infidelity is, as I now recognize, expressly 
 contrary to the decision of our Holy Mother the Church and of all 
 the Catholic Doctors, as also against the Imperial laws which 
 have decreed that witches are to be burned.<br> 
 
         
 Also I swear that I have never persistently believed in the 
 aforesaid heresy, neither do I believe nor adhere to it at the 
 present, nor have I taught it, not intend to teach it, nor shall 
 teach it. Also I swear and promise that I will never do or cause 
 to be done such and such (naming them) of which you hold me 
 strongly suspected as a heretic. And if hereafter (which God 
 forbid) I should do any of the aforesaid, I am ready the undergo 
 the punishment provided by law for backsliders; and I am ready to 
 submit myself to any penance which you decide to impose upon me 
 for those deeds and words of mine for which you hold me strongly 
 suspected of the said heresy. And I swear and promise that I will 
 perform it to the best of my strength, and will omit no part of 
 it, so God and this Holy Gospel help me.<br> 
 
         
 And the said abjuration shall be made in the vulgar tongue so 
 that it may be understood by all, unless it be made only in the 
 presence of Clerics with a competent knowledge of the Latin 
 tongue. But if the abjuration be made secretly in the Bishop's 
 palace or chamber, when it is not a public matter, it shall be 
 made in a similar manner. And afterwards the Bishop shall 
 admonish her as above to beware lest she relapse and incur the 
 penalty of a backslider. And let the Notary take care that he set 
 it down how such abjuration was made by such a person as one 
 strongly suspected of heresy, so that, if she should relapse, she 
 may be punished as is proper for a backslider.<br> 
 
         
 And when this has been done, let the sentence or penance be 
 pronounced in the following manner:<br> 
 
         
 We, N., Bishop of such city, and Brother N. (if he is present), 
 Inquisitor of the sin of heresy in the domains subject to the 
 rule of such a Prince, especially deputed by the Holy Apostolic 
 See: having in mind that you, N., of such a place in such a 
 Diocese, have done such and such (naming them), as lawfully 
 appears from the carefully examined merits of the process, 
 wherefore we reasonably hold you strongly suspected of such 
 heresy, and have caused you to abjure it as one so suspected, 
 being persuaded to that course by considerations of justice and 
 the advice of men skilled in the law. But that you may be more 
 careful in the future nor become more prone to the like 
 practices, and that your crimes may not remain unpunished, and 
 that you may be an example to other sinners; having consulted 
 with many eminent and learned lawyers and Masters or Doctors of 
 the faculty of Theology, having carefully digested the whole 
 matter, and having before our eyes only God and the truth of the 
 Catholic Apostolic Faith, having set before us the Holy Gospel 
 that our judgement may proceed as from God's countenance and our 
 eyes see with equity, and sitting in tribunal as Judges, we 
 condemn, or rather impose penance in the following manner upon 
 you, N., standing here in person before us: namely, that you 
 shall never hereafter presume to do, say, or teach such and such 
 things. And let there be set down those things of which she has 
 been convicted, and by reason of which she was strongly suspected 
 of the aforesaid heresy, as well as certain others which, if she 
 were to commit them, would make her guilty of a slight relapse 
 into heresy; but this must be as the particular nature of the 
 case demands and requires. As, for example, that she should never 
 wittingly follow such practices, nor receive those whom she knows 
 to have denied the faith, etc. This sentence was given, etc.<br> 
 
         
 But it must be noted that those who are suspected, but not taken 
 in heresy, whether they be strongly or lightly suspected, must 
 not be imprisoned or confined for life. For this is the 
 punishment of those who have been heretics and afterwards 
 repented. But they may, because of their deeds for which they 
 have come under suspicion, be sent to prison for a time, and 
 afterwards, as will be seen, released.<br> 
 
         
 Neither are they to be branded with the sign of the Cross, for 
 such is the sign of a penitent heretic; and they are not 
 convicted heretics, but only suspected, therefore they are not to 
 be marked in this way. But they can be ordered either to stand on 
 certain solemn days within the doors of a church, or near the 
 altar, while Holy Mass is being celebrated, bearing in their 
 hands a lighted candle of a certain 
 weight; or else to go on some pilgrimage, or something of the 
 kind, according to the nature and requirements of the case. 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="mm03_25a.htm">Next: Question XXV</a><br>The Sixth Kind of Sentence, in the Case of one who is Gravely Suspect<br>
 </center>
 </body>