<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sagas &amp; Legends</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="egil52.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="egil54.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <center>CHAPTER LII.<br>
 <br>
 <i>Of the gathering of the host.</i><br>
 <br>
 </center>Olaf king of Scots, drew together a mighty host, and marched upon England.  When he came to Northumberland, he advanced with shield of war.  On learning this, the earls who ruled there mustered their force and went against the king.  And when they met there was a great battle, whereof the issue was that king Olaf won the victory, but earl Gudrek fell, and Alfgeir fled away, as did the greater part of the force that had followed them and escaped from the field.  And now king Olaf found no further resistance, but subdued all Northumberland.<br>
 Alfgeir went to king Athelstan, and told him of his defeat.  But as soon as king Athelstan heard that so mighty a host was come into his land, he despatched men and summoned forces, sending word to his earls and other nobles.  And with such force as he had he at once turned him and marched against the Scots.  But when it was bruited about that Olaf king of Scots had won a victory and subdued under him a large part of England, he soon had a much larger army than Athelstan, for many nobles joined him.  And on learning this, Hring and Adils, who had gathered much people, turned to swell king Olaf's army.  Thus their numbers became exceeding great.<br>
 All this when Athelstan learned, he summoned to conference his captains and his counsellors; he inquired of them what were best to do; he told the whole council point by point what he had ascertained about the doings of the Scots' king and his numbers.  All present were agreed on this, that Alfgeir was most to blame, and thought it were but his due to lose his earldom.  But the plan resolved on was this, that king Athelstan should go back to the south of England, and then for himself hold a levy of troops, coming northwards through the whole land; for they saw that the only way for the needful numbers to be levied in time was for the king himself to gather the force.<br>
 As for the army already assembled, the king set over it as commanders Thorolf and Egil.  They were also to lead that force which the freebooters had brought to the king.  But Alfgeir still held command over his own troops.  Further, the king appointed such captains of companies as he thought fit.<br>
 When Egil returned from the council to his fellows, they asked him what tidings he could tell them of the Scots' king.  He sang:<br>
 <br>
                         'Olaf one earl by furious<br>
                         Onslaught in flight hath driven,<br>
                         The other slain: a sovereign<br>
                         Stubborn in fight is he.<br>
                         Upon the field fared Gudrek<br>
                         False path to his undoing.<br>
                         He holds, this foe of England,<br>
                         Northumbria's humbled soil.'<br>
 <br>
 After this they sent messengers to king Olaf, giving out this as their errand, that king Athelstan would fain enhazel him a field and offer battle on Vin-heath by Vin-wood; meanwhile he would have them forbear to harry his land; but of the twain he should rule England who should conquer in the battle.  He appointed a week hence for the conflict, and whichever first came on the ground should wait a week for the other.  Now this was then the custom, that so soon as a king had enhazelled a field, it was a shameful act to harry before the battle was ended.  Accordingly king Olaf halted and harried not, but waited till the appointed day, when he moved his army to Vin-heath.<br>
 North of the heath stood a town.  There in the town king Olaf quartered him, and there he had the greatest part of his force, because there was a wide district around which seemed to him convenient for the bringing in of such provisions as the army needed.  But he sent men of his own up to the heath where the battlefield was appointed; these were to take camping-ground, and make all ready before the army came.  But when the men came to the place where the field was enhazelled, there were all the hazel-poles set up to mark the ground where the battle should be.<br>
 The place ought to be chosen level, and whereon a large host might be set in array.  And such was this; for in the place where the battle was to be the heath was level, with a river flowing on one side, on the other a large wood.  But where the distance between the wood and the river was least (though this was a good long stretch), there king Athelstan's men had pitched, and their tents quite filled the space between wood and river.  They had so pitched that in every third tent there were no men at all, and in one of every three but few.  Yet when king Olaf's men came to them, they had then numbers swarming before all the tents, and the others could not get to go inside.  Athelstan's men said that their tents were all full, so full that their people had not nearly enough room.  But the front line of tents stood so high that it could not be seen over them whether they stood many or few in depth.  Olaf's men imagined a vast host must be there.  King Olaf's men pitched north of the hazel-poles, toward which side the ground sloped a little.<br>
 From day to day Athelstan's men said that the king would come, or was come, to the town that lay south of the heath.  Meanwhile forces flocked to them both day and night.<br>
 But when the appointed time had expired, then Athelstan's men sent envoys to king Olaf with these words: 'King Athelstan is ready for battle, and had a mighty host.  But he sends to king Olaf these words, that he would fain they should not cause so much bloodshed as now looks likely; he begs Olaf rather to go home to Scotland, and Athelstan will give him as a friendly gift one shilling of silver from every plough through all his realm, and he wishes that they should become friends.'<br>
 When the messengers came to Olaf he was just beginning to make ready his army, and purposing to attack.  But on the messengers declaring their errand, he forebore to advance for that day.  Then he and his captains sate in council.  Wherein opinions were much divided.  Some strongly desired that these terms should be taken; they said that this journey had already won them great honour, if they should go home after receiving so much money from Athelstan.  But some were against it, saying that Athelstan would offer much more the second time, were this refused.  And this latter counsel prevailed.  Then the messengers begged king Olaf to give them time to go back to king Athelstan, and try if he would pay yet more money to ensure peace.  They asked a truce of one day for their journey home, another for deliberation, a third to return to Olaf.  The king granted them this.<br>
 The messengers went home, and came back on the third day according to promise; they now said to king Olaf that Athelstan would give all that he offered before, and over and above, for distribution among king Olaf's soldiers, a shilling to every freeborn man, a silver mark to every officer of a company of twelve men or more, a gold mark to every captain of the king's guard, and five gold marks to every earl.  Then the king laid this offer before his forces.  It was again as before; some opposed this, some desired it.  In the end the king gave a decision: he said he would accept these terms, if this too were added, that king Athelstan let him have all Northumberland with the tributes and dues thereto belonging.  Again the messengers ask armistice of three days, with this further, that king Olaf should send his men to hear Athelstan's answer, whether he would take these terms or no; they say that to their thinking Athelstan will hardly refuse anything to ensure peace.  King Olaf agreed to this and sent his men to king Athelstan.<br>
 Then the messengers ride all together, and find king Athelstan in the town that was close to the heath on the south.  King Olaf's messengers declare before Athelstan their errand and the proposals for peace.  King Athelstan's men told also with what offers they had gone to king Olaf, adding that this had been the counsel of wise men, thus to delay the battle so long as the king had not come.<br>
 But king Athelstan made a quick decision on this matter, and thus bespake the messengers: 'Bear ye these my words to king Olaf, that I will give him leave for this, to go home to Scotland with his forces; only let him restore all the property that he has wrongfully taken here in the land.  Then make we peace between our lands, neither harrying the other.  Further be it provided that king Olaf shall become my vassal, and hold Scotland for me, and be my under-king.  Go now back,' said he, 'and tell him this.'<br>
 At once that same evening the messengers turned back on their way, and came to king Olaf about midnight; they then waked up the king, and told him straightway the words of king Athelstan.  The king instantly summoned his earls and other captains; he then caused the messengers to come and declare the issue of their errand and the words of Athelstan.  But when this was made known before the soldiers, all with one mouth said that this was now before them, to prepare for battle.  The messengers said this too, that Athelstan had a numerous force, but he had come into the town on that same day when the messengers came there.<br>
 Then spoke earl Adils, 'Now, methinks, that has come to pass, O king, which I said, that ye would find tricksters in the English.  We have sat here long time and waited while they have gathered to them all their forces, whereas their king can have been nowhere near when we came here.  They will have been assembling a multitude while we were sitting still.  Now this is my counsel, O king, that we two brothers ride at once forward this very night with our troop.  It may be they will have no fear for themselves, now they know that their king is near with a large army.  So we shall make a dash upon them.  But if they turn and fly, they will lose some of their men, and be less bold afterwards for conflict with us.'<br>
 The king thought this good counsel.  'We will here make ready our army,' said he, 'as soon as it is light, and move to support you.'<br>
 This plan they fixed upon, and so ended the council.<br>
 <br>
 <br>
 
 
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="egil54.htm">Next: CHAPTER LIII. Of the fight.</a></center>
 </body>