<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Judaism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="loj101.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="loj103.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h1 align="CENTER">CONTENTS</h1>
 <p>PREFACE</p>
 <p>I. THE CREATION OF THE WORLD</p>
 <p>The First Things Created--The Alphabet--The First Day--The Second Day--The Third Day--The Fourth Day--The Fifth Day--The Sixth Day--All Things Praise the Lord.</p>
 <p>II. ADAM</p>
 <p>Man and the World--The Angels and the Creation of Man--The Creation of Adam--The Soul of Man--The Ideal Man--The Fall of Satan--Woman--Adam and Eve in Paradise--The Fall of Man--The Punishment--Sabbath in Heaven--Adam's Repentance--The Book of Raziel--The Sickness of Adam--Eve's Story of the Fall--The Death of Adam--The Death of Eve.</p>
 <p>III. THE TEN GENERATIONS</p>
 <p>The Birth of Cain--Fratricide--The Punishment of Cain--The Inhabitants of the Seven Earths--The Descendants of Cain--The Descendants of Adam and Lilith--Seth and His Descendants--Enosh--The Fall of the Angels--Enoch, Ruler and Teacher--The Ascension of Enoch--The Translation of Enoch--Methuselah.</p>
 <p>IV. NOAH</p>
 <p>The Birth of Noah--The Punishment of the Fallen Angels--The Generation of the Deluge--The Holy Book--The Inmates of the Ark--The Flood--Noah Leaves the Ark--The Curse of Drunkenness--Noah's Descendants Spread Abroad--The Depravity of Mankind--Nimrod--The Tower of Babel.</p>
 <p>V. ABRAHAM</p>
 <p>The Wicked Generations--The Birth of Abraham--The Babe Proclaims God--Abraham's First Appearance in Public--The Preacher of the True Faith--In the Fiery Furnace--Abraham Emigrates to Haran--The Star in the East--The True Believer--The Iconoclast--Abraham in Canaan--His Sojourn in Egypt--The First Pharaoh--The War of the Kings--The Covenant of the Pieces--The Birth of Ishmael--The Visit of the Angels--The Cities of Sin--Abraham Pleads for the Sinners--The Destruction of the Sinful Cities--Among the Philistines--The Birth of Isaac--Ishmael Cast Off--The Two Wives of Ishmael--The Covenant with Abimelech--Satan Accuses Abraham--The Journey to Moriah--The Akedah--The Death and Burial of Sarah--Eliezer's Mission--The Wooing of Rebekah--The Last Years of Abraham--A Herald of Death--Abraham Views Earth and Heaven--The Patron of Hebron.</p>
 <p>VI. JACOB</p>
 <p>The Birth of Esau and Jacob--The Favorite of Abraham--The Sale of the Birthright--Isaac with the Philistines--Isaac Blesses Jacob--Esau's True Character Revealed--Jacob Leaves His Father's House--Jacob Pursued by Eliphaz and Esau--The Day of Miracles--Jacob with Laban--The Marriage of Jacob--The Birth of Jacob's Children--Jacob Flees before Laban--The Covenant with Laban--Jacob and Esau Prepare to Meet--Jacob Wrestles with the Angel--The Meeting between Esau and Jacob--The Outrage at Shechem--A War Frustrated--The War with the Ninevites--The War with the Amorites--Isaac Blesses Levi and Judah--Joy and Sorrow in the House of Jacob--Esau's Campaign against Jacob--The Descendants of Esau.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="loj103.htm">Next: Chapter I: The Creation of the World</a></center>
 </body>