<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Judaism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="loj400.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="loj402.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h1 align="CENTER">CONTENTS</h1>
 <h3 align="CENTER">I. JOSHUA</h3>
 <p>The Servant of Moses--Entering the Promised Land--Conquest of the Land--The Sun Obeys Joshua--War with the Armenians--Allotment of the Land.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">II. THE JUDGES</h3>
 <p>The First Judge--Campaigns of Kenas--Othniel--Boaz and Ruth--Deborah--Gideon--Jephthah--Samson--The Crime of the Crime of the Benjamites.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">III. SAMUEL AND SAUL</h3>
 <p>Elkanah and Hannah--The Youth of Samuel--Eli and His Sons--The Activities of Samuel--The Reign of Saul--The Court of Saul.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">IV. DAVID</h3>
 <p>David's Birth and Descent--Anointed King--Encounter with Goliath--Pursued by Saul--Wars--Ahithophel--Joab--David's Piety and His Sin--Absalom's Rebellion--David's Atonement--Visitations--The Death of David--David in Paradise--The Family of David--His Tomb.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">V. SOLOMON</h3>
 <p>Solomon Punishes Joab--The Marriage of Solomon--His Wisdom-- The Queen of Sheba--Solomon Master of the Demons--The Building of the Temple--The Throne of Solomon--The Hippodrome--Lessons in Humility--Asmodeus--Solomon as Beggar--The Court of Solomon.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">VI. JUDAH AND ISRAEL</h3>
 <p>The Division of the Kingdom--Jeroboam--The Two Ahijabs--Asa-- Jehoshaphat and Ahab--Jezebel--Joram of Israel.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">VII. ELIJAH</h3>
 <p>Elijah before His Translation--After His Translation--Censor and Avenger--Intercourse with the Sages--God's Justice Vindicated--Elijah and the Angel of Death--Teacher of the Kabbalah--Forerunner of the Messiah.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">VIII. ELISHA AND JONAH</h3>
 <p>Elisha the Disciple of Elijah--The Shunammite--Gehazi--The Flight of Jonah Jonah in the Whale--The Repentance of Nineveh.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">IX. THE LATER KINGS OF JUDAH</h3>
 <p>Joash--Three Great Prophets--The Two Kingdoms Chastised--Hezekjah--Miracles Wrought for Hezekiah--Manasseh--Josiah and His Successors.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">X. THE EXILE</h3>
 <p>Zedekiah--Jeremiah--Nebuchadnezzar--The Capture of Jerusalem-- The Great Lament--Jeremiah's Journey to Babylon--Transportation of the Captives--The Sons of Moses--Ebedmelech--The Temple Vessels--Baruch--The Tombs of Baruch and Ezekie1--Daniel--The Three Men in the Furnace--Ezekiel Revives the Dead--Nebuchadnezzar a Beast--Hiram--The False Prophets--Daniel's Piety.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">XI. THE RETURN OF THE CAPTIVITY</h3>
 <p>Belshazzar's Feast--Daniel under the Persian Kings--The Grave of Daniel--Zerubbabel--Ezra--The Men of the Great Assembly.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">XII. ESTHER</h3>
 <p>The Feast for the Grandees--The Festivities in Shushan--Vashti's Banquet--The Fate of Vashti--The Follies of Ahasuerus--Mordecai Esther's Beauty and Piety--The Conspiracy Haman the Jew-baiter-- Mordecai's Pride--Casting the Lots--The Denunciation of the Jews--The Decree of Annihilation--Satan Indicts the Jews--The Dream of Mordecai Fulfilled--The Prayer of Esther--Esther Intercedes--The Disturbed Night--The Fall of Haman--The Edict of the King.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="loj402.htm">Next: Chapter I: Joshua</a></center>
 </body>