<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 470</h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK20">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd1-2-14.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>ยง XV.<br>
 ON KWAN-SHI-YIN AND KWAN-YIN.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>L</strong>IKE Avalokiteshwara, Kwan-shi-yin has passed
 through several transformations, but it is an error to say of
 him that he is a modern invention of the Northern Buddhists, for
 under another appellation he has been known from the earliest
 times. The Secret Doctrine teaches that "He who is the first
 to appear at Renovation will be the last to come before Re-absorption
 (pralaya)." Thus the logoi of all nations, from the Vedic
 Visvakarma of the Mysteries down to the Saviour of the present
 civilised nations, are the "Word" who was "in the
 beginning" (or the reawakening of the energising powers of
 Nature) with the One <strong>A</strong>BSOLUTE. Born of Fire and
 Water, before these became distinct elements, <b>IT </b>was the
 "Maker" (fashioner or modeller) of all things; "without
 him was not anything made that was made"; "in whom was
 life, and the life was the light of men"; and who finally
 may be called, as he ever has been, the Alpha and the Omega of
 manifested Nature. "The great Dragon of Wisdom is born of
 Fire and Water, and into Fire and Water will all be re-absorbed
 with him" (<em>Fa-Hwa-King</em>)<em>. </em>As this Bodhisatva
 is said "to assume any form he pleases" from the beginning
 of a Manvantara to its end, though his special birthday (memorial
 day) is celebrated according to the Kin-kwang-ming-King ("Luminous
 Sutra of Golden Light") in the second month on the nineteenth
 day, and that of "Maitreya Buddha" in the first month
 on the first day, yet the two are one. He will appear as Maitreya
 Buddha, the last of the Avatars and Buddhas, in the seventh Race.
 This belief and expectation are universal throughout the East.
 Only it is not in the <em>Kali yug</em>,<em> </em>our present
 terrifically materialistic age of Darkness, the "Black Age,"
 that a new Saviour of Humanity can ever appear. The Kali yug is
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 471 DISEASED IMAGINATION.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "l'Age d'Or" (!) only in the <em>mystic </em>writings
 of some French pseudo-Occultists. (See "La Mission des Juifs.")
 </p><p>
 Hence the ritual in the exoteric worship of this deity was founded
 on magic. The Mantras are all taken from special books kept secret
 by the priests, and each is said to work a magical effect; as
 the reciter or reader produces, by simply chanting them, a secret
 causation which results in immediate effects. Kwan-Shi-Yin is
 Avalokiteshwara, and both are forms of the seventh Universal Principle;
 while in its highest metaphysical character this deity is the
 synthetic aggregation of all the planetary Spirits, Dhyani Chohans.
 He is the "Self-manifested;" in short, the "Son
 of the Father." Crowned with seven dragons, above his statue
 there appears the inscription Pu-Tsi-K'iun-ling, "the universal
 Saviour of all living beings."
 </p><p>
 Of course the name given in the archaic volume of the Stanzas
 is quite different, but Kwan-Yin is a perfect equivalent. In a
 temple of Pu'to, the sacred island of the Buddhists in China,
 Kwan-Shi-Yin is represented floating on a black aquatic bird (<em>Kala-Hansa</em>),<em>
 </em>and pouring on the heads of mortals the elixir of life, which,
 as it flows, is transformed into one of the chief Dhyani-Buddhas
 -- the Regent of a star called the "Star of Salvation."
 In his third transformation Kwan-Yin is the informing spirit or
 genius of Water. In China the Dalai-Lama is believed to be an
 incarnation of Kwan-Shi-Yin, who in his third terrestrial appearance
 was a Bodhisattva, while the Teshu Lama is an incarnation of Amitabha
 Buddha, or Gautama.
 </p><p>
 It may be remarked <em>en passant </em>that a writer must indeed
 have a diseased imagination to discover phallic worship everywhere,
 as do the authors of "China Revealed" (McClatchey) and
 "Phallicism." The first discovers "the old phallic
 gods, represented under two evident symbols -- the Khan or Yang,
 which is the <em>membrum virile</em>,<em> </em>and the Kwan or
 Yin, the <em>pudendum muliebre.</em>"<em> </em>(See<em> </em>"<em>Phallicism</em>,"<em>
 </em>p. 273.) Such a rendering seems the more strange as Kwan-Shi-Yin
 (Avalokiteswara) and Kwan-Yin, besides being now the patron deities
 of the Buddhist ascetics, the Yogis of Thibet, are the gods of
 chastity, and are, in their esoteric meaning, not even that which
 is implied in the rendering of Mr. Rhys Davids' "Buddhism,"
 (p. 202): "The name Avalokiteshwara . . . means 'the Lord
 who looks down from on high.' "Nor is Kwan-Shi-Yin "the
 Spirit of the Buddhas present in the Church," but, literally
 interpreted, it means "the Lord that is seen," and in
 one sense, "the divine SELF perceived by Self" (the
 human) -- the Atman or seventh principle merged in the Universal,
 perceived by, or the object of perception to, Buddhi, the sixth
 principle or divine Soul in man. In a still higher sense, Avalokiteshwara
 = Kwan-Shi-Yin, referred to as the seventh Universal principle,
 is the Logos</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 472 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 perceived by the Universal Buddhi -- or Soul, as the synthetic
 aggregate of the Dhyani-Buddhas: and is not the "Spirit of
 Buddha present in the Church," but the omnipresent universal
 Spirit manifested in the temple of Kosmos or Nature. This Orientalistic
 etymology of Kwan and Yin is on a par with that of "Yogini,"
 which, we are told by Mr. Hargrave Jennings, "is a Sanskrit
 word, in the dialects pronounced Yogi or Zogee (!), and is equivalent
 to Sena, and exactly the same as Duti or Duti-Ca' -- <em>i.e.</em>,
 a sacred prostitute of the temple, worshipped as Yoni or Sakti"
 (p. 60). "The books of morality," in India, "direct
 a faithful wife to shun the society of Yogini or females who have
 been adored as Sakti . . . amongst the votaries of a most licentious
 description." Nothing should surprise us after this. And
 it is, therefore, with hardly a smile that we find another preposterous
 absurdity quoted about "Budh," as being a name "which
 signifies not only the sun as the source of generation but also
 the male organ (<em>Round Towers of Ireland; </em>quoted by Mr.
 Hargrave Jennings in "<em>Phallicism</em>,"<em> </em>p.
 264). Max Muller, in his "False Analogies," says that
 "the most celebrated Chinese scholar of his time, Abel Remusat,"
 maintains "that the three syllables I Hi Wei (in the fourteenth
 chapter of the <em>Tao-te-king</em>)<em> </em>were<em> </em>meant
 for Je-ho-vah (<em>Science of Religion</em>,<em> </em>p<em>. </em>332);
 and again, Father Amyot, who "feels certain that the three
 persons of the Trinity could be recognised" in the same work.
 And if Abel Remusat, why not Hargrave Jennings? Every scholar
 will recognise the absurdity of ever seeing in Budh, "the
 enlightened" and "the awakened," a "phallic
 symbol."
 </p><p>
 Kwan-shi-yin, then, is "the Son identical with his Father"
 mystically, or the Logos -- the word. He is called the "Dragon
 of Wisdom" in Stanza III., as all the Logoi of all the ancient
 religious systems are connected with, and symbolised by, serpents.
 In old Egypt, the God Nahbkoon, "he who unites the doubles,"
 (astral light re-uniting by its dual physiological and spiritual
 potency the divine human to its purely divine Monad, the prototype
 "in heaven" or Nature) was represented as a serpent
 on human legs, either with or without arms. It was the emblem
 of the resurrection of Nature, as also of Christ with the Ophites,
 and of Jehovah as the brazen serpent healing those who looked
 at him; the serpent being an emblem of Christ with the Templars
 also, (see the Templar degree in Masonry). The symbol of Knouph
 (Khoum also), or the soul of the world, says Champollion (<em>Pantheon</em>,<em>
 text</em> 3),<em> </em>"is represented among other forms
 under that of a huge serpent on human legs; this reptile, being
 the emblem of the good genius and the veritable Agathodaemon,
 is sometimes bearded." The sacred animal is thus identical
 with the serpent of the Ophites, and is figured on a great number
 of engraved stones, called Gnostic or Basilidean gems. This serpent
 appears with various heads (human and animal), but its gems</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 473 SNOBS, OR DRAGONS?</h6>
 
 <p>
 are always found inscribed with the name [[<em>CHNOUBIS</em>]]
 (Chnoubis). This symbol is identical with one which, according
 to Jamblichus and Champollion, was called "the first of the
 celestial gods"; the god Hermes, or Mercury with the Greeks,
 to which god Hermes Trismegistos attributes the invention of,
 and the first initiation of men into, magic; and Mercury is Budh,
 Wisdom, Enlightenment, or "Re-awakening" into the divine
 Science.
 </p><p>
 To close, Kwan-Shi-Yin and Kwan-Yin are the two aspects (male
 and female) of the same principle in Kosmos, Nature and Man, of
 divine wisdom and intelligence. They are the "Christos-Sophia"
 of the mystic Gnostics -- the Logos and its Sakti. In their longing
 for the expression of some mysteries never to be wholly comprehended
 by the profane, the Ancients, knowing that nothing could be preserved
 in human memory without some outward symbol, have chosen the (to
 us) often ridiculous images of the Kwan-Yins to remind man of
 his origin and inner nature. To the impartial, however, the Madonnas
 in crinolines and the Christs in white kid gloves must appear
 far more absurd than the Kwan-Shi-Yin and Kwan-Yin in their dragon
 garb. The subjective can hardly be expressed by the objective.
 Therefore, since the symbolic formula attempts to characterise
 that which is above scientific reasoning, and as often far beyond
 our intellects, it must needs go beyond that intellect in some
 shape or other, or else it will fade out from human remembrance.
 </p><p>
 ---------------------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>