<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 136 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA VI.</h4>
 
 <p>
 1. <strong>B</strong>Y THE POWER OF THE <strong>M</strong>OTHER
 OF <strong>M</strong>ERCY AND <strong>K</strong>NOWLEDGE (<em>a</em>),
 <strong>K</strong>WAN-<strong>Y</strong>IN,* THE "<strong>T</strong>RIPLE"
 OF <strong>K</strong>WAN-<strong>S</strong>HAI-<strong>Y</strong>IN,
 RESIDING IN <strong>K</strong>WAN-<strong>Y</strong>IN-<strong>T</strong>IEN
 (<em>b</em>), <strong>F</strong>OHAT, THE BREATH OF THEIR PROGENY,
 THE <strong>S</strong>ON OF THE <strong>S</strong>ONS, HAVING
 CALLED FORTH FROM THE LOWER ABYSS (<em>chaos</em>)<em> </em>THE
 ILLUSIVE FORM OF <strong>S</strong>IEN-<strong>T</strong>CHAN
 (<em>our Universe</em>)<em> </em>AND THE SEVEN ELEMENTS: --
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>.) The Mother of Mercy and Knowledge is called "the
 triple" of Kwan-Shai-Yin because in her correlations, metaphysical
 and cosmical, she is the "Mother, the Wife and the Daughter"
 of the <em>Logos</em>,<em> </em>just as in the later theological
 translations she became "the Father, Son and (the female)
 Holy Ghost" -- the<em> Sakti </em>or Energy -- the Essence
 of the three. Thus in the Esotericism of the Vedantins, <em>Daiviprakriti</em>,
 the<em> </em>Light manifested through Eswara, the <em>Logos,**
 </em>is at one and the same time the Mother and also the Daughter
 of the Logos or Verbum of Parabrahmam; while in that of the trans-Himalayan
 teachings it is -- in the hierarchy of allegorical and metaphysical
 theogony -- "the <strong>M</strong>OTHER" or abstract,
 ideal matter, Mulaprakriti, the Root of Nature; -- from the metaphysical
 standpoint, a correlation of Adi-Bhuta, manifested in the Logos,
 Avalokiteshwara; -- and from the purely occult and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This stanza is translated from the Chinese text, and the names,
 as the equivalents of the original terms, are preserved. The real
 esoteric nomenclature cannot be given, as it would only confuse
 the reader. The Brahmanical doctrine has no equivalent to these.
 Vach seems, in many an aspect, to approach the Chinese Kwan-yin,
 but there is no regular worship of Vach under this name in India,
 as there is of Kwan-Yin in China. No exoteric religious system
 has ever adopted a female Creator, and thus woman was regarded
 and treated, from the first dawn of popular religions, as inferior
 to man. It is only in China and Egypt that Kwan-Yin and Isis were
 placed on a par with the male gods. Esotericism ignores both sexes.
 Its highest Deity is sexless as it is formless, neither Father
 nor Mother; and its first manifested beings, celestial and terrestrial
 alike, become only gradually androgynous and finally separate
 into distinct sexes.
 </p><p>
 ** The "Theosophist" of February, 1887, p. 305, first
 lecture on the Bhagavadgita.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 137 THE MYSTERY OF THE FEMALE LOGOS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Cosmical, Fohat,* the "Son of the Son," the androgynous
 energy resulting from this "Light of the Logos," and
 which manifests in the plane of the objective Universe as the
 hidden, as much as the revealed, Electricity -- which is <strong>L</strong>IFE.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> Kwan-Yin-Tien </em>means the "melodious
 heaven of Sound," the abode of Kwan-Yin, or the "<em>Divine
 Voice</em>"<em> </em>literally. This "Voice" is
 a synonym of the <em>Verbum </em>or the Word: "Speech,"
 as the expression of thought. Thus may be traced the connection
 with, and even the origin of the Hebrew <em>Bath-Kol</em>,<em>
 </em>the "daughter of the Divine Voice," or <em>Verbum,
 </em>or the male and female Logos, the "Heavenly Man"
 or Adam Kadmon, who is at the same time Sephira. The latter was
 surely anticipated by the Hindu Vach, the goddess of Speech, or
 of the Word. For Vach -- the daughter and the female portion,
 as is stated, of Brahma, one "generated by the gods"
 -- is, in company with Kwan-Yin, with Isis (also the <em>daughter</em>,
 wife and <em>sister </em>of Osiris) and other goddesses, the female
 <em>Logos, </em>so to speak, the goddess of the <em>active </em>forces
 in Nature, the Word, Voice or Sound, and Speech. If Kwan-Yin is
 the "melodious Voice," so is Vach; "the melodious
 cow who milked forth sustenance and water" (the female principle)
 -- "who yields us nourishment and sustenance," as Mother-Nature.
 She is associated in the work of creation with the Prajapati.
 She is male and female <em>ad libitum</em>, as<em> </em>Eve is
 with Adam. And she is a form of Aditi -- the principle higher
 than <em>Ether</em> -- in Akasa, the synthesis of all the forces
 in Nature; thus Vach and Kwan-Yin are both the magic potency of
 Occult sound in Nature and Ether -- which "Voice" calls
 forth Sien-Tchan, the illusive form of the Universe out of Chaos
 and the Seven Elements.
 </p><p>
 Thus in Manu Brahma (the <em>Logos </em>also) is shown dividing
 his body into two parts, male and female, and creating in the
 latter, who is Vach, Viraj, who is himself, or Brahma again --
 it is in this way a learned Vedantin Occultist speaks of that
 "goddess," explaining the reason why Eswara (or Brahma)
 is called <em>Verbum </em>or<em> Logos</em>;<em> </em>why in fact
 it is called Sabda Brahmam: --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Says the lecturer on p. 306: "Evolution is commenced by
 the intellectual energy of the <em>Logos</em>, not merely on account
 of the potentialities locked up in <em>Mulaprakriti. </em>This
 light of the Logos is the link . . . between objective matter
 and the subjective thought of <em>Eswara </em>(or Logos). It is
 called in several Buddhist books <em>Fohat. </em>It is the one
 instrument with which the <em>Logos </em>works."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 138 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 "The explanation I am going to give you will appear thoroughly
 mystical; but if mystical, it has a tremendous significance when
 properly understood. Our old writers said that <em>Vach </em>is
 of four kinds (see Rig Veda and the Upanishads). <em>Vaikhari-Vach
 </em>is what we utter. Every kind of <em>Vaikhari-Vach </em>exists
 in its <em>Madhyama</em>,<em> </em>further in its <em>Pasyanti</em>,<em>
 </em>and ultimately in its <em>Para </em>form.* The reason why
 this Pranava is called Vach is this, that the four principles
 of the great Kosmos correspond to these four forms of <em>Vach.
 </em>Now the whole manifested solar System exists in its <em>Sukshma
 </em>form in the light or energy of the <em>Logos</em>, because
 its energy is caught up and transferred to Cosmic matter. . .
 . The whole Kosmos in its objective form is <em>Vaikhari-Vach</em>,
 the light of the <em>Logos </em>is the <em>Madhyama </em>form,
 and the Logos itself the <em>Pasyanti </em>form, and Parabrahm
 the <em>Para </em>form or aspect of that Vach. It is by the light
 of this explanation that we must try to understand certain statements
 made by various philosophers to the effect that the manifested
 Kosmos is the <em>Verbum </em>manifested as Kosmos" (see
 Lecture on the Bhagavadgita, referred to above).
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA VI. -- (<em>Continued.</em>) </h4>
 
 <p>
 2. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>S</strong>WIFT AND THE <strong>R</strong>ADIANT
 <strong>O</strong>NE PRODUCES THE SEVEN <em>Layu**</em> (<em>a</em>)
 CENTRES, AGAINST WHICH NONE WILL PREVAIL TO THE GREAT DAY "<strong>B</strong>E
 WITH US" -- AND SEATS THE UNIVERSE ON THESE ETERNAL FOUNDATIONS,
 SURROUNDING <strong>S</strong>IEN-<strong>T</strong>CHAN WITH
 THE <strong>E</strong>LEMENTARY <strong>G</strong>ERMS (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a.</em>) The seven <em>Layu </em>centres are the seven Zero
 points, using the term Zero in the same sense that Chemists do,
 to indicate a point at which, in Esotericism, the scale of reckoning
 of differentiation begins. From the Centres -- beyond which Esoteric
 philosophy allows us to perceive the dim metaphysical outlines
 of the "Seven Sons" of Life and Light, the Seven Logoi
 of the Hermetic and all other philosophers -- begins
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> Madhya </em>is said of something whose commencement and
 end are unknown, and Para means infinite. These expressions all
 relate to infinitude and to division of time.
 </p><p>
 ** From the Sanskrit <em>Laya</em>, the point of matter where
 every differentiation has ceased.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 139 FROM NO-NUMBER TO NUMBER SEVEN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the differentiation of the elements which enter into the constitution
 of our Solar System. It has often been asked what was the exact
 definition of Fohat and his powers and functions, as he seems
 to exercise those of a Personal God as understood in the popular
 religions. The answer has just been given in the comment on Stanza
 V. As well said in the Bhagavadgita Lectures, "The whole
 Kosmos must necessarily exist in the One Source of energy from
 which this light (<em>Fohat</em>)<em> </em>emanates." Whether
 we count the principles in Kosmos and man as seven or only as
 four, the forces of, and in, physical Nature are Seven; and it
 is stated by the same authority that "<em>Pragna</em>,<em>
 </em>or the capacity of perception, exists in seven different
 aspects corresponding to the seven conditions of matter"
 (<em>Personal and impersonal God</em>)<em>. </em>For, "just
 as a human being is composed of seven principles, differentiated
 matter in the Solar System exists in seven different conditions"
 (<em>ibid</em>)<em>. </em>So does Fohat.* He is One and Seven,
 and on the Cosmic plane is behind all such manifestations as light,
 heat, sound, adhesion, etc., etc., and is the "spirit"
 of <strong>E</strong>LECTRICITY, which is the <strong>L</strong>IFE
 of the Universe. As an abstraction, we call it the <strong>O</strong>NE
 <strong>L</strong>IFE; as an objective and evident Reality, we
 speak of a septenary scale of manifestation, which begins at the
 upper rung with the One Unknowable <strong>C</strong>AUSALITY,
 and ends as Omnipresent Mind and Life immanent in every atom of
 Matter. Thus, while science speaks of its evolution through brute
 matter, blind force, and senseless motion, the Occultists point
 to <em>intelligent </em><strong>L</strong>AW and <em>sentient
 </em><strong>L</strong>IFE, and add that Fohat is the guiding
 Spirit of all this. Yet he is no personal god at all, but the
 emanation of those other Powers behind him whom the Christians
 call the "Messengers" of their God (who is in reality
 only the Elohim, or rather one of the Seven Creators called Elohim),
 and we, the "Messenger of the primordial Sons of Life and
 Light."
 </p><p>
 (<em>b.</em>)<em> </em>The "Elementary Germs" with which
 he fills Sien-Tchan (the "Universe") from Tien-Sin (the
 "Heaven of Mind," literally, or that which is absolute)
 are the Atoms of Science and the Monads of Leibnitz.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Fohat" has several meanings. (See Stanza V., Commentary
 <em>et infra</em>)<em>. </em>He is called the "Builder of
 the Builders," the Force that he personifies having formed
 our Septenary chain. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 140 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA VI. -- <em>Continued.</em> </h4>
 
 <p>
 3. <strong>O</strong>F THE SEVEN (<em>elements</em>) --<em> </em>FIRST
 ONE MANIFESTED, SIX CONCEALED; TWO MANIFESTED -- FIVE CONCEALED;
 THREE MANIFESTED -- FOUR CONCEALED; FOUR PRODUCED -- THREE HIDDEN;
 FOUR AND ONE TSAN<em> </em>(<em>fraction</em>)<em> </em>REVEALED
 -- TWO AND ONE HALF CONCEALED; SIX TO BE MANIFESTED -- ONE LAID
 ASIDE (<em>a</em>). LASTLY, SEVEN SMALL WHEELS REVOLVING; ONE
 GIVING BIRTH TO THE OTHER (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a.</em>) Although these Stanzas refer to the whole Universe
 after a Mahapralaya (universal destruction), yet this sentence,
 as any student of Occultism may see, refers also by analogy to
 the evolution and final formation of the primitive (though compound)
 Seven Elements on our Earth. Of these, four elements are now fully
 manifested, while the fifth -- Ether -- is only partially so,
 as we are hardly in the second half of the Fourth Round, and consequently
 the fifth Element will manifest fully only in the Fifth Round.
 The Worlds, including our own, were of course, as germs, primarily
 evolved from the ONE Element in its second stage ("Father-Mother,"
 the differentiated World's Soul, not what is termed the "Over-Soul"
 by Emerson), whether we call it, with modern Science, Cosmic dust
 and Fire Mist, or with Occultism -- Akasa, Jivatma, divine Astral
 Light, or the "Soul of the World." But this first stage
 of Evolution was in due course of time followed by the next. No
 world, as no heavenly body, could be constructed on the objective
 plane, had not the Elements been sufficiently differentiated already
 from their primeval <em>Ilus</em>, resting in <em>Laya. </em>The
 latter term is a synonym of Nirvana. It is, in fact, the Nirvanic
 dissociation of all substances, merged after a life-cycle into
 the latency of their primary conditions. It is the luminous but
 bodiless shadow of the matter <em>that was</em>,<em> </em>the
 realm of negativeness -- wherein lie latent during their period
 of rest the active Forces of the Universe. Now, speaking of Elements,
 it is made the standing reproach of the Ancients, that they "supposed
 their Elements simple and undecomposable."* Once more this
 is an unwarrantable state-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The shades of our pre-historical ancestors might return the
 compliment to modern physicists, now that new discoveries in chemistry
 have led Mr. Crookes, <strong>F.R.S</strong>., to admit that Science
 is yet a thousand leagues from the knowledge of the compound nature
 of the simplest molecule. From him we learn that such a thing
 as a really simple [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 141 WERE THE ANCIENTS IGNORANT OF THE PHYSICAL
 SCIENCES?</h6>
 
 <p>
 ment; as, at any rate, their initiated philosophers can hardly
 come under such an imputation, since it is they who have invented
 allegories and religious myths from the beginning. Had they been
 ignorant of the Heterogeneity of their Elements they would have
 had no personifications of Fire, Air, Water, Earth, and AEther;
 their Cosmic gods and goddesses would never have been blessed
 with such posterity, with so many sons and daughters, elements
 born <em>from </em>and<em> within each respective Element</em>.
 Alchemy and occult phenomena would have been a delusion and a
 snare, even in theory, had the Ancients been ignorant of the potentialities
 and correlative functions and attributes of every element that
 enters into the composition of Air, Water, Earth, and even <em>Fire</em>
 --<em> </em>the latter a terra incognita to this day to modern
 Science, which is obliged to call it Motion, evolution of light
 and heat, state of ignition, -- defining it by its outward aspects
 in short, and remaining ignorant of its nature. But that which
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] molecule entirely homogeneous
 is <em>terra incognita </em>in chemistry. "Where are we to
 draw the line?" he asks; "is there no way out of this
 perplexity? Must we either make the elementary examinations so
 stiff that only 60 or 70 candidates can pass, or must we open
 the examination doors so wide that the number of admissions is
 limited only by the number of applicants?" And then the learned
 gentleman gives striking instances. He says: "Take the case
 of yttrium. It has its definite atomic weight, it behaved in every
 respect as a simple body, an element, to which we might indeed
 add, but from which we could not take away. Yet this yttrium,
 this supposed homogeneous whole, on being submitted to a certain
 method of fractionation, is resolved into portions not absolutely
 identical among themselves, and exhibiting a gradation of properties.
 Or take the case of didymium. Here was a body betraying all the
 recognised characters of an element. It had been separated with
 much difficulty from other bodies which approximated closely to
 it in their properties, and during this crucial process it had
 undergone very severe treatment and very close scrutiny. But then
 came another chemist, who, treating this assumed homogeneous body
 by a peculiar process of fractionation, resolved it into the two
 bodies praseodymium and neodymium, between which certain distinctions
 are perceptible. Further, we even now have no certainty that neodymium
 and praseodymium are simple bodies. On the contrary, they likewise
 exhibit symptoms of splitting up. Now, if one supposed element
 on proper treatment is thus found to comprise dissimilar molecules,
 we are surely warranted in asking whether similar results might
 not be obtained in other elements, perhaps in all elements, if
 treated in the right way. We may even ask where the process of
 sorting-out is to stop -- a process which of course pre-supposes
 variations between the individual molecules of each species. And
 in these successive separations we naturally find bodies approaching
 more and more closely to each other." (Presidential address
 before the Royal Society of Chemists, March, 1888.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 142 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 modern Science seems to fail to perceive is that, differentiated
 as may have been those simple chemical atoms -- which archaic
 philosophy called "the creators of their respective Parents,"
 fathers, brothers, husbands of their mothers, and those mothers
 the daughters of their own sons, like Aditi and Daksha, for example
 -- differentiated as these elements were in the beginning, still,
 they were not the compound bodies known to science, as they are
 now. Neither Water, Air, Earth (synonym for solids generally)
 existed in their present form, representing the three states of
 matter alone recognised by Science; for all these are the productions
 already recombined by the atmospheres of globes completely formed
 -- even to fire -- so that in the first periods of the earth's
 formation they were something quite <em>sui generis. </em>Now
 that the conditions and laws ruling our solar system are fully
 developed; and that the atmosphere of our earth, as of every other
 globe, has become, so to say, a crucible of its own, Occult Science
 teaches that there is a perpetual exchange taking place in space
 of molecules, or of atoms rather, correlating, and thus changing
 their combining equivalents on every planet. Some men of Science,
 and those among the greatest physicists and chemists, begin to
 suspect this fact, which has been known for ages to the Occultists.
 The spectroscope only shows the probable similarity (on external
 evidence) of terrestrial and sidereal substance; it is unable
 to go any farther, or to show whether atoms gravitate towards
 one another in the same way and under the same conditions as they
 are supposed to do on our planet, physically and chemically. The
 scale of temperature, from the highest degree to the lowest that
 can be conceived of, may be imagined to be one and the same in
 and for the whole Universe; nevertheless, its properties, other
 than those of dissociation and reassociation, differ on every
 planet; and thus atoms enter into new forms of existence, undreamt
 of, and incognizable to, physical Science. As already expressed
 in "Five Years of Theosophy," the essence of Cometary
 matter, for instance, "is totally different from any of the
 chemical or physical characteristics with which the greatest chemists
 and physicists of the earth are acquainted" (p. 242). And
 even that matter, during rapid passage through our atmosphere,
 undergoes a certain change in its nature. Thus not alone the elements
 of our planets, but even those of all its sisters in the Solar
 System, differ as widely from each other in their combinations,
 as from the Cosmic elements beyond our</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 143 THE SLEEP OF THE ETERNAL MOTHER.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Solar limits.* Therefore, they cannot be taken as a standard for
 comparison with the same in other worlds.** Enshrined in their
 virgin, pristine state within the bosom of the Eternal Mother,
 every atom born beyond the threshold of her realm is doomed to
 incessant differentiation. "The Mother sleeps, yet is ever
 breathing." And every breath sends out into the plane of
 manifestation her Protean products, which, carried on by the wave
 of the efflux, are scattered by Fohat, and driven toward and beyond
 this or another planetary atmosphere. Once caught by the latter,
 the atom is lost; its pristine purity is gone for ever, unless
 Fate dissociates it by leading it to "a current of EFFLUX"
 (an occult term meaning quite a different process from that which
 the ordinary term implies); when it may be carried once more to
 the borderland where it had perished, and taking its flight, not
 into Space <em>above </em>but into Space <em>within</em>,<em>
 </em>it will be brought under a state of differential equilibrium
 and happily re-absorbed. Were a truly learned Occultist-alchemist
 to write the "Life and Adventures of an Atom" he would
 secure thereby the eternal scorn of the modern chemist, perchance
 also his subsequent
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This is again corroborated by the same man of science in the
 same lecture, who quotes Clerk Maxwell, saying "that the
 elements are not absolutely homogeneous." He writes: "It
 is difficult to conceive of selection and elimination of intermediate
 varieties, for where can these eliminated molecules have gone
 to, if, as we have reason to believe, the hydrogen, &amp;c. of
 the fixed stars is composed of molecules identical in all respects
 with our own." And he adds: "In the first place we may
 call in question this absolute molecular identity, since we have
 hitherto had no means for coming to a conclusion save the means
 furnished by the spectroscope, while it is admitted that, for
 accurately comparing and discriminating the spectra of two bodies,
 they should be examined under identical states of temperature,
 pressure, and all other physical conditions. We have certainly
 seen, in the spectrum of the sun, rays which we have not been
 able to identify."
 </p><p>
 ** "Each world has its Fohat, who is omnipresent in his own
 sphere of action. But there are as many Fohats as there are worlds,
 each varying in power and degree of manifestations. The individual
 Fohats make one Universal, Collective Fohat -- the aspect-Entity
 of the one absolute Non-Entity, which is absolute Be-Ness, 'SAT.'
 "Millions and billions of worlds are produced at every Manvantara"
 -- it is said. Therefore there must be many Fohats, whom we consider
 as conscious and <em>intelligent </em>Forces. This, no doubt,
 to the disgust of scientific minds. Nevertheless the Occultists,
 who have good reasons for it, consider all the forces of Nature
 as veritable, though supersensuous, states of Matter; and as possible
 objects of perception to Beings endowed with the requisite senses.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 144 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 gratitude.* However it may be, "<em>The Breath of the Father-Mother
 issues cold and radiant and gets hot and corrupt</em>, <em>to
 cool once more, and be purified in the eternal bosom of inner
 Space</em>,"<em> </em>says the Commentary. Man absorbs cold
 pure air on the mountain-top, and throws it out impure, hot and
 transformed. Thus -- the higher atmosphere being the mouth, and
 the lower one the lungs of every globe -- the man of our planet
 breathes only the refuse of "Mother"; therefore, "he
 is doomed to die on it."**
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>The process referred to as "the small
 wheels giving birth, one to the other," takes place in the
 sixth region from above, and on the plane of the most material
 world of all in the manifested Kosmos -- our terrestrial plane.
 These "Seven Wheels" are our planetary chain (see Commentary
 Nos. 5 and 6). By "Wheels" the various spheres and centres
 of forces are generally meant; but in this case they refer to
 our septenary ring.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><h4>STANZA VI. -- <em>Continued.</em> </h4>
 
 <p>
 4. <strong>H</strong>E BUILDS THEM IN THE LIKENESS OF OLDER <strong>W</strong>HEELS
 (<em>worlds</em>),<em> </em>PLACING THEM ON THE IMPERISHABLE CENTRES
 (<em>a</em>).
 </p><p>
 <strong>H</strong>OW DOES <strong>F</strong>OHAT BUILD THEM? <strong>H</strong>E
 COLLECTS THE FIERY DUST. <strong>H</strong>E MAKES BALLS OF FIRE,
 RUNS THROUGH THEM AND ROUND THEM, INFUSING LIFE THEREINTO; THEN
 SETS THEM INTO MOTION, SOME ONE, SOME THE OTHER WAY. <strong>T</strong>HEY
 ARE COLD -- HE MAKES THEM HOT. <strong>T</strong>HEY ARE DRY --
 HE MAKES THEM MOIST. <strong>T</strong>HEY SHINE -- HE FANS AND
 COOLS THEM (<em>b</em>).
 </p><p>
 <strong>T</strong>HUS ACTS <strong>F</strong>OHAT FROM ONE <em>Twilight
 </em>TO THE OTHER DURING <strong>S</strong>EVEN <strong>E</strong>TERNITIES.***
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The Worlds are built "in the likeness of older
 Wheels" -- <em>i.e.</em>, those that existed in preceding
 Manvantaras and went into Pralaya,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Indeed, if such an imaginary Chemist happened to be intuitional,
 and would for a moment step out of the habitual groove of strictly
 "Exact Science," as the Alchemists of old did, he might
 be repaid for his audacity.
 </p><p>
 ** He who would allotropise sluggish oxygen into <em>Ozone</em>
 to a measure of alchemical activity, reducing it to its pure essence
 (for which there are means), would discover thereby a substitute
 for an "Elixir of Life" and prepare it for practical
 use.
 </p><p>
 *** A period of 311,040,000,000,000 years, according to Brahminical
 calculations.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 145 THE COSMIC PLANE, AN ILLUSION.</h6>
 
 <p>
 because the <strong>L</strong>AW for the birth, growth, and decay
 of everything in Kosmos, from the Sun to the glow-worm in the
 grass, is <strong>O</strong>NE. It is an everlasting work of perfection
 with every new appearance, but the Substance-Matter and Forces
 are all one and the same. But this <strong>L</strong>AW acts on
 every planet through minor and varying laws. The "imperishable
 Laya Centres" have a great importance, and their meaning
 must be fully understood if we would have a clear conception of
 the Archaic Cosmogony, whose theories have now passed into Occultism.
 At present, one thing may be stated. The worlds are built neither
 <em>upon</em>, nor<em> over</em>, nor<i> in</i> the<em> Laya </em>centres,
 the zero-point being a condition, not any mathematical point.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) Bear in mind that Fohat, the constructive Force of
 Cosmic Electricity, is said, metaphorically, to have sprung like
 Rudra from Brahma "from the brain of the Father and the bosom
 of the Mother," and then to have metamorphosed himself into
 a male and a female, <em>i.e.</em>, polarity, into positive and
 negative electricity. He has <em>seven sons </em>who are <em>his
 brothers; </em>and Fohat is forced to be born time after time
 whenever any two of his son-brothers indulge <em>in too close
 contact</em> -- whether an embrace or a fight. To avoid this,
 he binds together and unites those of unlike nature and separates
 those of similar temperaments. This, of course, relates, as any
 one can see, to electricity generated by friction and to the law
 involving attraction between two objects of unlike, and repulsion
 between those of like polarity. The Seven "Sons-brothers,"
 however, represent and personify the seven forms of Cosmic magnetism
 called in <em>practical Occultism </em>the "Seven Radicals,"
 whose co-operative and active progeny are, among other energies,
 Electricity, Magnetism, Sound, Light, Heat, Cohesion, etc. Occult
 Science defines all these as Super-sensuous effects in their hidden
 behaviour, and as objective phenomena in the world of senses;
 the former requiring abnormal faculties to perceive them -- the
 latter, our ordinary physical senses. They all pertain to, and
 are the emanations of, still more supersensuous spiritual qualities,
 not personated by, but belonging to, real and conscious CAUSES.
 To attempt a description of such ENTITIES would be worse than
 useless. The reader must bear in mind that, according to our teaching
 which regards this phenomenal Universe as a great <em>Illusion</em>,<em>
 </em>the nearer a body is to the <strong>U</strong>NKNOWN <strong>S</strong>UBSTANCE,
 the more it approaches <em>reality</em>,<em> </em>as being removed
 the farther</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 146 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 from this world of <em>Maya. </em>Therefore, though the molecular
 constitution of their bodies is not deducible from their manifestations
 on this plane of consciousness, they nevertheless (from the standpoint
 of the adept Occultist) possess a distinctive objective if not
 material structure, in the relatively noumenal -- as opposed to
 the phenomenal -- Universe. Men of science may term them Force
 or Forces generated by matter, or "modes of its motion,"
 if they will; Occultism sees in the effects "Elemental"
 (forces), and, in the direct causes producing them, intelligent
 <strong>D</strong>IVINE Workmen. The intimate connection of those
 Elementals (guided by the unerring hand of the Rulers) -- their
 correlation we might call it -- with the elements of pure Matter,
 results in our terrestrial phenomena, such as light, heat, magnetism,
 etc., etc. Of course we shall never agree with the American Substantialists*
 who call every Force and Energy -- whether Light, Heat, Electricity
 or Cohesion -- an "Entity"; for this would be equivalent
 to calling the noise produced by the rolling of the wheels of
 a vehicle an <em>Entity</em> --<em> </em>thus confusing and identifying
 that "noise" with the driver <em>outside</em>, and the
 guiding Master Intelligence <i>within </i>the vehicle. But we
 certainly give that name to the "drivers" and to these
 guiding Intelligences -- the ruling Dhyan Chohans, as shown. The
 "Elementals," the Nature-Forces, are the acting, though
 invisible, or rather imperceptible, secondary Causes and in themselves
 the effects of primary Causes behind the Veil of all terrestrial
 phenomena. Electricity, light, heat, etc., have been aptly termed
 the "Ghost or Shadow of Matter in Motion," <em>i.e.</em>,
 supersensuous states of matter whose effects only we are able
 to cognize. To expand, then, the simile given above. The sensation
 of light is like the sound of the rolling wheels -- a purely phenomenal
 effect, having no existence outside the observer; the proximate
 exciting cause of the sensation is comparable to the driver --
 a supersensuous state of matter in motion, a Nature-Force or Elemental.
 But, behind even this, stand -- just as the owner of the carriage
 directs the driver from within -- the higher and <em>noumenal
 </em>causes, the <em>Intelligences </em>from whose essence radiate
 these States of "<em>Mother</em>,"<em> </em>generating
 the countless milliards of Elementals or psychic Nature-Spirits,
 just as every drop of water generates its physical
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See "Scientific Arena," a monthly Journal devoted
 to current philosophical teaching and its bearing upon the religious
 thought of the Age. New York: A. Wilford Hall, Ph.D., LL.D., Editor.
 (1886, July, August, and September.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 147 PRIMORDIAL SUBSTANCE, A REALITY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 infinitesimal Infusoria. (See "Gods, Monads, and Atoms,"
 in Part III.) It is Fohat who guides the transfer of the principles
 from one planet to the other, from one star to another -- child-star.
 When a planet dies, its informing principles are transferred to
 a <em>laya </em>or sleeping centre, with potential but latent
 energy in it, which is thus awakened into life and begins to form
 itself into a new sidereal body. (<em>Vide infra</em>,<em> </em>"A
 Few Theosophical Misconceptions, etc.")
 </p><p>
 It is most remarkable that, while honestly confessing their entire
 ignorance of the true Nature of even terrestrial matter -- primordial
 substance being regarded more as a dream than as a sober reality
 -- the physicists should set themselves up as judges, nevertheless,
 of that matter, and claim to know what it is able and is not able
 to do, in various combinations. Scientists know it (matter) hardly
 skin-deep, and yet they will dogmatise. It is "a mode of
 motion" and nothing else. But the <em>force </em>that is
 inherent in a living person's breath, when blowing a speck of
 dust from the table, is also, and undeniably, "a mode of
 motion"; and it is as undeniably not a quality of the matter,
 or the particles of that speck, and it emanates from the living
 and thinking Entity that breathed, whether the impulse originated
 consciously or unconsciously. Indeed, to endow matter -- something
 of which nothing is known so far -- with an inherent quality called
 Force, of the nature of which still less is known, is to create
 a far more serious difficulty than that which lies in the acceptation
 of the intervention of our "Nature-Spirits" in every
 natural phenomenon.
 </p><p>
 The Occultists, who do not say -- if they would express themselves
 correctly -- that <em>matter</em>, but only the <em>substance
 </em>or<em> essence </em>of matter, is indestructible and eternal,
 (<em>i.e.</em>, the Root of all, <em>Mulaprakriti</em>)<em>: </em>assert
 that all the so-called Forces of Nature, Electricity, Magnetism,
 Light, Heat, etc., etc., far from being modes of motion of material
 particles, are <em>in esse</em>,<em> i.e.</em>,<em> </em>in their
 ultimate constitution, the differentiated aspects of that Universal
 Motion which is discussed and explained in the first pages of
 this volume (<em>See Proem</em>)<em>. </em>When Fohat is said
 to produce "Seven Laya Centres," it means that for formative
 or creative purposes, the <strong>G</strong>REAT <strong>L</strong>AW
 (Theists may call it God) stops, or rather modifies its perpetual
 motion on seven invisible points within the area of the manifested
 Universe. "<em>The great Breath digs through Space seven
 holes into Laya to cause them to circumgyrate during Manvantara</em>"<em>
 </em>(Occult Catechism). We</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 148 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 have said that Laya is what Science may call the Zero-point or
 line; the realm of absolute negativeness, or the one real absolute
 Force, the NOUMENON of the Seventh State of that which we ignorantly
 call and recognise as "Force"; or again the Noumenon
 of Undifferentiated Cosmic Substance which is itself an unreachable
 and unknowable object to finite perception; the root and basis
 of all states of objectivity and subjectivity too; the neutral
 axis, not one of the many aspects, but its centre. It may serve
 to elucidate the meaning if we attempt to imagine a neutral centre
 -- the dream of those who would discover perpetual motion. A "neutral
 centre" is, in one aspect, the limiting point of any given
 set of senses. Thus, imagine two consecutive planes of matter
 as already formed; each of these corresponding to an appropriate
 set of perceptive organs. We are forced to admit that between
 these two planes of matter an incessant circulation takes place;
 and if we follow the atoms and molecules of (say) the lower in
 their transformation upwards, these will come to a point where
 they pass altogether beyond the range of the faculties we are
 using on the lower plane. In fact, to us the matter of the lower
 plane there vanishes from our perception into nothing -- or rather
 it passes on to the higher plane, and the state of matter corresponding
 to such a point of transition must certainly possess special and
 not readily discoverable properties. Such "Seven Neutral
 Centres,"* then, are produced by Fohat, who, when, as Milton
 has it --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Fair foundations (are) laid whereon to build . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 quickens matter into activity and evolution.
 </p><p>
 The<em> Primordial Atom </em>(<em>anu</em>)<em> </em>cannot be
 multiplied either in its pregenetic state, or its primogeneity;
 therefore it is called "SUM TOTAL," figuratively, of
 course, as that "SUM TOTAL" is boundless. (See Addendum
 to this Book.) That which is the abyss of nothingness to the physicist,
 who knows only the world of visible causes and effects, is the
 boundless Space of the Divine <em>Plenum </em>to the Occultist.
 Among many other objections to the doctrine of an endless evolution
 and re-involution (or re-absorption) of the Kosmos, a process
 which, according to the Brahminical and Esoteric Doctrine, is
 without a beginning or an end, the Occultist is told that it cannot
 be, since "by all the admissions of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Such, we believe, is the name applied by Mr. Keely, of Philadelphia,
 the inventor of the famous "Motor" -- destined, as his
 admirers have hoped, to revolutionise the motor power of the world
 -- to what he again calls the "Etheric Centres."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 149 THE MOON IS NOT DEAD, BUT ONLY SLEEPETH.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 modern scientific philosophy it is a necessity of Nature to run
 down." If the tendency of Nature "to run down"
 is to be considered so forcible an objection to Occult Cosmogony,
 "How," we may ask, "do your Positivists and Free-thinkers
 and Scientists account for the phalanx around us of active stellar
 systems?" They had eternity to "run down" in; why,
 then, is not the Kosmos a huge inert mass? Even the moon is only
 hypothetically believed to be a dead planet, "run down,"
 and astronomy does not seem to be acquainted with many such dead
 planets.* The query is unanswerable. But apart from this it must
 be noted that the idea of the amount of "transformable energy"
 in our little system coming to an end is based purely on the fallacious
 conception of a "white-hot, incandescent Sun" perpetually
 radiating away his heat without compensation into Space. To this
 we reply that nature runs down and disappears from the objective
 plane, only to re-emerge after a time of rest out of the subjective
 and to reascend once more. Our Kosmos and Nature will run down
 only to reappear on a more perfect plane after every <strong>P</strong>RALAYA.
 The <em>matter </em>of the Eastern philosophers is not the "matter"
 and Nature of the Western metaphysicians. For what is Matter?
 And above all, what is our scientific philosophy but that which
 was so justly and so politely defined by Kant as "the Science
 of the <em>limits </em>to our Knowledge"? Where have the
 many attempts made by Science to bind, to connect, and define
 all the phenomena of organic life by mere physical and chemical
 manifestations, brought it to? To speculation generally -- mere
 soap-bubbles, that burst one after the other before the men of
 Science were permitted to discover real facts. All this would
 have been avoided, and the progress of knowledge would have proceeded
 with gigantic strides, had only Science and its philosophy abstained
 from accepting hypotheses on the mere one-sided Knowledge of <i>their</i>
 Matter.**
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The moon is <em>dead </em>only so far as regards her <em>inner</em>
 "principles" -- <em>i.e.</em>,<em> psychically </em>and
 <em>spiritually</em>,<em> </em>however absurd the statement may
 seem. Physically, she is only as a semi-paralysed body may be.
 She is aptly referred to in Occultism as the "insane mother,"
 the great sidereal lunatic.
 </p><p>
 ** The instance of Uranus and Neptune, whose satellites, four
 and one respectively, revolved, it was thought, in their orbits
 from East to West, whereas all the other satellites rotate from
 West to East, is a very good one, as showing how unreliable are
 all <em>a priori </em>speculations even when based on the strictest
 mathematical analysis. The famous hypothesis of the formation
 of our Solar System out of the nebulous rings, put [[Footnote
 continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 150 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 If no physical intellect is capable of counting the grains of
 sand covering a few miles of sea-shore; or to fathom the ultimate
 nature and essence of those grains, palpable and visible on the
 palm of the naturalist, how can any materialist limit the laws
 changing the conditions and being of the atoms in primordial chaos,
 or know anything certain about the capabilities and potency of
 their atoms and molecules before and after their formation into
 worlds? These changeless and eternal molecules -- far thicker
 in space than the grains on the ocean shore -- may differ in their
 constitution along the line of their planes of existence, as the
 soul-substance differs from its vehicle, the body. Each atom has
 seven planes of being or existence, we are taught; and each plane
 is governed by its specific laws of evolution and absorption.
 Ignorant of any, even approximate, chronological data from which
 to start in attempting to decide the age of our planet or the
 origin of the solar system, astronomers, geologists, and physicists
 are drifting with each new hypothesis farther and farther away
 from the shores of fact into the fathomless depths of speculative
 ontology.* The Law of Analogy in the plan of structure between
 the trans-Solar systems and the intra-Solar planets, does not
 necessarily bear upon the finite conditions to which every visible
 body is subject, in this our plane of being. In Occult Science
 this law is the first and most important key to Cosmic physics;
 but it has to be studied in its minutest details and, "to
 be
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] forward by Kant and
 Laplace, was chiefly based on the above fact that all the planets
 revolved in the same direction. It is on this fact, mathematically
 demonstrated during the time of Laplace, that this great astronomer,
 calculating on the theory of probabilities, offered to bet three
 milliards to one that the next planet discovered would have in
 its system the same peculiarity of motion Eastward. The immutable
 laws of scientific mathematics got "worsted by further experiments
 and observations," it was said. This idea of Laplace's mistake
 prevails generally to this day; but some astronomers have finally
 succeeded in demonstrating (?) that the mistake had been in accepting
 Laplace's assertion for a mistake; and steps to correct it without
 attracting general attention to the bevue are now being taken.
 Many such unpleasant surprises are in store for hypotheses of
 even a purely physical character. What further disillusions, then,
 may there not be in questions of a transcendental, Occult Nature?
 At any rate, Occultism teaches that the so-called "reverse
 rotation" is a fact.
 </p><p>
 * The Occultists, having most perfect faith in their own exact
 records, astronomical and mathematical, calculate the age of Humanity,
 and assert that the latter (as separate sexes) has existed in
 this Round just 18,618,727 years, as the Brahmanical teachings
 and even some Hindu calendars declare.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 151 NATURE CAN NEVER CEASE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 turned seven times," before one comes to understand it. Occult
 philosophy is the only science that can teach it. How, then, can
 anyone hang the truth or the untruth of the Occultist's proposition
 that "the Kosmos is eternal in its unconditioned collectivity,
 and finite but in its conditioned manifestations" on this
 one-sided physical enunciation that "it is a necessity of
 Nature to run down?"
 </p><p>
 ---------------------
 </p><p>
 With these verses -- the 4th Sloka of Stanza VI. -- ends that
 portion of the Stanzas which relates to the Universal Cosmogony
 after the last Mahapralaya or Universal destruction, which, when
 it comes, sweeps out of Space every differentiated thing, Gods
 as atoms, like so many dry leaves. From this verse onwards, the
 Stanzas are concerned only with our Solar System in general, with
 the planetary chains therein, inferentially, and with the history
 of our globe (the 4th and its chain) especially. All the Stanzas
 and verses which follow in this Book I. refer only to the evolution
 of, and on, our Earth. With regard to the latter, a strange tenet
 -- strange from the modern scientific stand-point only, of course
 -- is held, which ought to be made known.
 </p><p>
 But before entirely new and rather startling theories are presented
 to the reader, they must be prefaced by a few words of explanation.
 This is absolutely necessary, as these theories clash not only
 with modern science, but contradict, on certain points, earlier
 statements made by other Theosophists, who claim to base their
 explanations and renderings of these teachings on the same authority
 as we do.*
 </p><p>
 This may give rise to the idea that there is a decided contradiction
 between the expounders of the same doctrine; whereas the difference,
 in reality, arises from the incompleteness of the information
 given to earlier writers, who thus drew some erroneous conclusions
 and indulged in premature speculations, in their endeavour to
 present a complete system to the public. Thus the reader, who
 is already a student of Theosophy, must not be surprised to find
 in these pages the rectification of certain statements made in
 various Theosophical works, and also the explanation of certain
 points which have remained obscure, because they were necessarily
 left incomplete. Many are the questions upon which even the author
 of "Esoteric Buddhism" (the best and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Esoteric Buddhism" and "Man."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 152 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 most accurate of all such works) has not touched. On the other
 hand, even he has introduced several mistaken notions which must
 now be presented in their true mystic light, as far as the present
 writer is capable of doing so.
 </p><p>
 Let us then make a short break between the Slokas just explained
 and those which follow, for the Cosmic periods which separate
 them are of immense duration. This will afford us ample time to
 take a bird's eye view of some points pertaining to the Secret
 Doctrine, which have been presented to the public under a more
 or less uncertain and sometimes mistaken light.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 [[This page continued in next section]]</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-1-08.htm">Next Section</a>
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a>
 </p></body>