<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 269 THE FIRST CHAPTER OF CREATION.</h6>
 
 <h3>SUMMING UP.</h3>
 
 <blockquote>
 "The History of Creation and of this world from its beginning
 up to the present time is composed of <em>seven chapters. </em>The<em>
 seventh </em>chapter is not yet written."<br>
 (T. Subba Row, <em>Theosophist, </em>1881.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE first of these Seven chapters has been attempted
 and is now finished. However incomplete and feeble as an exposition,
 it is, at any rate, an approximation -- using the word in a mathematical
 sense -- to that which is the oldest basis for all the subsequent
 Cosmogonies. The attempt to render in a European tongue the grand
 panorama of the ever periodically recurring Law -- impressed upon
 the plastic minds of the first races endowed with Consciousness
 by those who reflected the same from the Universal Mind -- is
 daring, for no human language, save the Sanskrit -- which is that
 <em>of the Gods</em> -- can<em> </em>do so with any degree of
 adequacy. But the failures in this work must be forgiven for the
 sake of the motive.
 </p><p>
 As a whole, neither the foregoing nor what follows can be found
 in full anywhere. It is not taught in any of the six Indian schools
 of philosophy, for it pertains to their synthesis -- the seventh,
 which is the Occult doctrine. It is not traced on any crumbling
 papyrus of Egypt, nor is it any longer graven on Assyrian tile
 or granite wall. The Books of the <em>Vedanta </em>(the last word
 of human knowledge) give out but the metaphysical aspect of this
 world-Cosmogony; and their priceless thesaurus, the <em>Upanishads
 -- Upa-ni-shad </em>being a compound word meaning "the conquest
 of ignorance by the revelation of <em>secret, spiritual </em>knowledge"
 -- require now the additional possession of a Master-key to enable
 the student to get at their full meaning. The reason for this
 I venture to state here as I learned it from a Master.
 </p><p>
 The name, "<em>Upanishads</em>," is usually translated
 "esoteric doctrine." These treatises form part of the
 <em>Sruti </em>or "revealed knowledge," <em>Revelation,
 </em>in short, and are generally attached to the <em>Brahmana</em>
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 270 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 portion of the Vedas,* as their third division. There are over
 150 <em>Upanishads </em>enumerated by, and known to, Orientalists,
 who credit the oldest with being written <em>probably </em>about
 600 years B.C.; but of <em>genuine </em>texts there does not exist
 a fifth of the number. The Upanishads are to the Vedas what the
 Kabala is to the Jewish Bible. They treat of and expound the secret
 and mystic meaning of the Vedic texts. They speak of the origin
 of the Universe, the nature of Deity, and of Spirit and Soul,
 as also of the metaphysical connection of mind and matter. In
 a few words: They CONTAIN <em>the beginning and the end of</em>
 <em>all human knowledge, but they have now ceased to </em>REVEAL
 <em>it</em>, since the day of Buddha. If it were otherwise, the
 Upanishads could not be called <em>esoteric, </em>since they are
 now openly attached to the Sacred Brahmanical books, which have,
 in our present age, become accessible even to the <em>Mlechchhas</em>
 (out-<em>castes</em>)<em> </em>and the European Orientalists.
 One thing in them -- and this in all the <em>Upanishads</em> --
 invariably and constantly points to their ancient origin, and
 proves (<em>a</em>) that they were written, in some of their portions,
 <em>before </em>the caste system became the tyrannical institution
 which it still is; and (<em>b</em>) that half of their contents
 have been eliminated, while some of them were rewritten and abridged.
 "The great Teachers of the higher Knowledge and the Brahmans
 are continually represented as going to Kshatriya (military caste)
 kings to become their pupils." As Cowell pertinently remarks,
 the <em>Upanishads </em>"breathe an entirely different spirit"
 (from other Brahmanical writings), "a freedom of thought
 unknown in any earlier work except in the Rig Veda hymns themselves."
 The second fact is explained by a tradition recorded in one of
 the <strong>MSS</strong>. on Buddha's life. It says that the Upanishads
 were originally attached to their Brahmanas after the beginning
 of a reform, which led to the exclusiveness of the present caste
 system among the Brahmins, a few centuries after the invasion
 of India by the "twice-born." They were complete in
 those days, and were used for the instruction of the chelas who
 were preparing for their initiation.
 </p><h6><a name="DDE_LINK2">[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]</a>
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "The Vedas have a distinct dual meaning -- one expressed
 by the literal sense of the words, the other indicated by the
 metre and the <em>swara</em> -- intonation -- which are as the
 life of the Vedas. . . . Learned pundits and philologists of course
 deny that <em>swara</em> has anything to do with philosophy or
 ancient esoteric doctrines; but the mysterious connection between
 <em>swara </em>and<em> light</em> is one of its most profound
 secrets." (T. Subba Row, <em>Five Years of</em> <em>Theosophy,
 </em>p. 154.) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 271 OCCULTISM IN THE UPANISHADS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 This lasted so long as the Vedas and the Brahmanas remained in
 the sole and exclusive keeping of the temple-Brahmins -- while
 no one else had the right to study or even read them outside of
 the <em>sacred </em>caste. Then came Gautama, the Prince of Kapilavastu.
 After <em>learning </em>the whole of the Brahmanical wisdom in
 the <em>Rahasya </em>or the <em>Upanishads, </em>and finding that
 the teachings differed little, if at all, from those of the "Teachers
 of Life" inhabiting the snowy ranges of the Himalaya,* the
 Disciple of the Brahmins, feeling indignant because the sacred
 wisdom was thus withheld from all but the Brahmins, determined
 to save the whole world by popularizing it. Then it was that the
 Brahmins, seeing that their sacred knowledge and Occult wisdom
 was falling into the hands of the "<em>Mlechchhas,</em>"
 abridged the texts of the Upanishads, originally containing thrice
 the matter of the Vedas and the Brahmanas together, without altering,
 however, one word of the texts. They simply detached from the
 <strong>MSS</strong>. the most important portions containing the
 last word of the Mystery of Being. The key to the Brahmanical
 secret code remained henceforth with the initiates alone, and
 the Brahmins were thus in a position to publicly deny the correctness
 of Buddha's teaching by appealing to their <em>Upanishads,</em>
 silenced for ever on the chief questions. Such is the esoteric
 tradition beyond the Himalayas.
 </p><p>
 Sri Sankaracharya, the greatest Initiate living in the historical
 ages, wrote many a Bhashya on the <em>Upanishads. </em>But his
 original treatises, as there are reasons to suppose, have not
 yet fallen into the hands of the Philistines, for they are too
 jealously preserved in his <em>maths</em> (monasteries, <em>mathams</em>)<em>.
 </em>And there are still weightier reasons to believe that the
 priceless Bhashyas (Commentaries) on the esoteric doctrine of
 the Brahmins, by their greatest expounder, will remain for ages
 yet a dead letter to most of the Hindus, except the <em>Smartava</em>
 Brahmins. This sect, founded by Sankaracharya, (which is still
 very powerful in Southern India) is now almost the only one to
 produce students who have preserved sufficient knowledge to comprehend
 the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Also called "the Sons of Wisdom," and of the "Fire-Mist"
 and the "Brothers of the Sun" in the Chinese records.
 <em>Si-dzang </em>(Tibet) is mentioned in the <strong>MSS</strong>.
 of the sacred library of the province of Fo-Kien, as the great
 seat of Occult learning from time immemorial, ages before Buddha.
 The Emperor Yu, the "great" (2,207 years <strong>B</strong>.<strong>C</strong>.),
 a pious mystic and great adept, is said to have obtained his knowledge
 from the "great teachers of the Snowy Range" in Si-dzang.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 272 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 dead letter of the Bhashyas. The reason of this is that they alone,
 I am informed, have occasionally real Initiates at their head
 in their mathams, as for instance, in the "Sringa-giri,"
 in the Western Ghats of Mysore. On the other hand, there is no
 sect in that desperately exclusive caste of the Brahmins, more
 exclusive than is the Smartava; and the reticence of its followers
 to say what they may know of the Occult sciences and the esoteric
 doctrine, is only equalled by their pride and learning.
 </p><p>
 Therefore the writer of the present statement must be prepared
 beforehand to meet with great opposition and even the denial of
 such statements as are brought forward in this work. Not that
 any claim to infallibility, or to perfect correctness in every
 detail of all that which is herein said, was ever put forward.
 Facts are there, and they can hardly be denied. But, owing to
 the intrinsic difficulties of the subjects treated, and the almost
 insurmountable limitations of the English tongue (as of all other
 European languages) to express certain ideas, it is more than
 probable that the writer has failed to present the explanations
 in the best and in the clearest form; yet all that could be done
 was done under every adverse circumstance, and this is the utmost
 that can be expected of any writer.
 </p><p>
 Let us recapitulate and show, by the vastness of the subjects
 expounded, how difficult, if not impossible, it is to do them
 full justice.
 </p><p>
 (1.) The Secret Doctrine is the accumulated Wisdom of the Ages,
 and its cosmogony alone is the most stupendous and elaborate system:
 <em>e.g.,</em> even in the exotericism of the Puranas. But such
 is the mysterious power of Occult symbolism, that the facts which
 have actually occupied countless generations of initiated seers
 and prophets to marshal, to set down and explain, in the bewildering
 series of evolutionary progress, are all recorded on a few pages
 of geometrical signs and glyphs. The flashing gaze of those seers
 has penetrated into the very kernel of matter, and recorded the
 soul of things there, where an ordinary profane, however learned,
 would have perceived but the external work of form. But modern
 science believes not in the "soul of things," and hence
 will reject the whole system of ancient cosmogony. It is useless
 to say that the system in question is no fancy of one or several
 isolated individuals. That it is the uninterrupted record covering
 thousands of generations of Seers whose respective experiences
 were made to test and to verify the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 273 THE PITH AND MARROW OF OCCULTISM.</h6>
 
 <p>
 traditions passed orally by one early race to another, of the
 teachings of higher and exalted beings, who watched over the childhood
 of Humanity. That for long ages, the "Wise Men" of the
 Fifth Race, of the stock saved and rescued from the last cataclysm
 and shifting of continents, had passed their lives <em>in learning,
 not teaching. </em>How did they do so? It is answered: by checking,
 testing, and verifying in every department of nature the traditions
 of old by the independent visions of great adepts; <em>i.e., </em>men
 who have developed and perfected their physical, mental, psychic,
 and spiritual organisations to the utmost possible degree. No
 vision of one adept was accepted till it was checked and confirmed
 by the visions -- so obtained as to stand as independent evidence
 -- of other adepts, and by centuries of experiences.
 </p><p>
 (2.) The fundamental Law in that system, the central point from
 which all emerged, around and toward which all gravitates, and
 upon which is hung the philosophy of the rest, is the One homogeneous
 divine SUBSTANCE-PRINCIPLE, the one radical cause.
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . "Some few, whose lamps shone brighter, have been led
 <br>
 From cause to cause to nature's secret head,<br>
 And found that one first Principle must be. . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 It is called "Substance-Principle," for it becomes "substance"
 on the plane of the manifested Universe, an illusion, while it
 remains a "principle" in the beginningless and endless
 abstract, visible and invisible SPACE. It is the omnipresent Reality:
 impersonal, because it contains all and everything. <em>Its impersonality
 is the fundamental conception</em> of the System. It is latent
 in every atom in the Universe, and is the Universe itself. (See
 in chapters on Symbolism, "Primordial Substance, and Divine
 Thought.")
 </p><p>
 (3.) The Universe is the periodical manifestation of this unknown
 Absolute Essence. To call it "essence," however, is
 to sin against the very spirit of the philosophy. For though the
 noun may be derived in this case from the verb <em>esse, </em>"to
 be," yet IT cannot be identified with a <em>being </em>of
 any kind, that can be conceived by human intellect. IT is best
 described as neither Spirit nor matter, but both. "Parabrahmam
 and Mulaprakriti" are One, in reality, yet two in the Universal
 conception of the manifested, even in the conception of the One
 Logos, its first manifestation, to which, as the able lecturer
 in the "Notes on the Bhagavadgita" shows, IT appears
 from the objective standpoint of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 274 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 the One Logos as Mulaprakriti and not as Parabrahmam; as its <em>veil</em>
 and not the one REALITY hidden behind, which is unconditioned
 and absolute.
 </p><p>
 (4.) The Universe is called, with everything in it, MAYA, because
 all is temporary therein, from the ephemeral life of a fire-fly
 to that of the Sun. Compared to the eternal immutability of the
 ONE, and the changelessness of that Principle, the Universe, with
 its evanescent ever-changing forms, must be necessarily, in the
 mind of a philosopher, no better than a will-o'-the-wisp. Yet,
 the Universe is real enough to the conscious beings in it, which
 are as unreal as it is itself.
 </p><p>
 (5.) Everything in the Universe, throughout all its kingdoms,
 is CONSCIOUS:<em> i.e.,</em> endowed with a consciousness of its
 own kind and on its own plane of perception. We men must remember
 that because <em>we</em> do not perceive any signs -- which we
 can recognise -- of consciousness, say, in stones, we have no
 right to say that <em>no consciousness exists there. </em>There
 is no such thing as either "dead" or "blind"
 matter, as there is no "Blind" or "Unconscious"
 Law. These find no place among the conceptions of Occult philosophy.
 The latter never stops at surface appearances, and for it the
 <em>noumenal </em>essences have more reality than their objective
 counterparts; it resembles therein the mediaeval<em> Nominalists,</em>
 for whom it was the Universals that were the realities and the
 particulars which existed only in name and human fancy.
 </p><p>
 (6.) The Universe is worked and <em>guided </em>from<em> within
 outwards. </em>As above so it is below, as in heaven so on earth;
 and man -- the microcosm and miniature copy of the macrocosm --
 is the living witness to this Universal Law, and to the mode of
 its action. We see that every <em>external </em>motion, act, gesture,
 whether voluntary or mechanical, organic or mental, is produced
 and preceded by <em>internal </em>feeling or emotion, will or
 volition, and thought or mind. As no outward motion or change,
 when normal, in man's external body can take place unless provoked
 by an inward impulse, given through one of the three functions
 named, so with the external or manifested Universe. The whole
 Kosmos is guided, controlled, and animated by almost endless series
 of Hierarchies of sentient Beings, each having a mission to perform,
 and who -- whether we give to them one name or another, and call
 them Dhyan-Chohans or Angels -- are "messengers" in
 the sense only that they are the agents of Karmic and Cosmic Laws.
 They vary infinitely in their</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 275 THE NATURE OF THE CELESTIAL MEN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 respective degrees of consciousness and intelligence; and to call
 them all pure Spirits without any of the earthly alloy "which
 time is wont to prey upon" is only to indulge in poetical
 fancy. For each of these Beings either <em>was, </em>or prepares
 to become, a man, if not in the present, then in a past or a coming
 cycle (Manvantara). They are <em>perfected, </em>when not<em>
 incipient, </em>men; and differ morally from the terrestrial human
 beings on their higher (less material) spheres, only in that they
 are devoid of the feeling of personality and of the <em>human
 </em>emotional nature -- two purely earthly characteristics. The
 former, or the "perfected," have become free from those
 feelings, because (<em>a</em>) they have no longer fleshly bodies
 -- an ever-numbing weight on the Soul; and (<em>b</em>) the pure
 spiritual element being left untrammelled and more free, they
 are less influenced by<em> maya </em>than man can ever be, unless
 he is an adept who keeps his two personalities -- the spiritual
 and the physical -- entirely separated. The incipient monads,
 having never had terrestrial bodies yet, can have no sense of
 personality or EGO-ism. That which is meant by "personality,"
 being a limitation and a relation, or, as defined by Coleridge,
 "individuality existing in itself but with a nature as a
 ground," the term cannot of course be applied to non-human
 entities; but, as a fact insisted upon by generations of Seers,
 none of these Beings, high or low, have either individuality or
 personality as separate Entities, <em>i.e.,</em> they have no
 individuality in the sense in which a man says, "<em>I am
 myself and</em> no one else;" in other words, they are conscious
 of no such distinct separateness as men and things have on earth.
 Individuality is the characteristic of their respective hierarchies,
 not of their units; and these characteristics vary only with the
 degree of the plane to which those hierarchies belong: the nearer
 to the region of Homogeneity and the One Divine, the purer and
 the less accentuated that individuality in the Hierarchy. They
 are finite, in all respects, with the exception of their higher
 principles -- the immortal sparks reflecting the universal divine
 flame -- individualized and separated only on the spheres of Illusion
 by a differentiation as illusive as the rest. They are "Living
 Ones," because they are the streams projected on the Kosmic
 screen of illusion from the ABSOLUTE LIFE; beings in whom life
 cannot become extinct, before the fire of ignorance is extinct
 in those who sense these "Lives." Having sprung into
 being under the quickening influence of the uncreated beam, the
 reflection of the great Central Sun that</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 276 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 radiates on the shores of the river of Life, it is the inner principle
 in them which belongs to the waters of immortality, while its
 differentiated clothing is as perishable as man's body. Therefore
 Young was right in saying that
 </p><blockquote>
 "Angels are men of a superior kind"
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 and no more. They are neither "ministering" nor "protecting"
 angels; nor are they "Harbingers of the Most High" still
 less the "Messengers of wrath" of any God such as man's
 fancy has created. To appeal to their protection is as foolish
 as to believe that their sympathy may be secured by any kind of
 propitiation; for they are, as much as man himself is, the slaves
 and creatures of immutable Karmic and Kosmic law. The reason for
 it is evident. Having no elements of personality in their essence
 they can have no personal qualities, such as attributed by men,
 in their exoteric religions, to their anthropomorphic God -- a
 jealous and exclusive God who rejoices and feels wrathful, is
 pleased with sacrifice, and is more despotic in his vanity than
 any finite foolish man. Man, as shown in Book II., being a compound
 of the essences of all those celestial Hierarchies may succeed
 in making himself, as such, superior, in one sense, to any hierarchy
 or class, or even combination of them. "Man can neither propitiate
 nor command the <em>Devas,</em>" it is said. But, by paralyzing
 his lower personality, and arriving thereby at the full knowledge
 of the <em>non-separateness </em>of his higher SELF from the One
 absolute SELF, man can, even during his terrestrial life, become
 as "One of Us." Thus it is, by eating of the fruit of
 knowledge which dispels ignorance, that man becomes like one of
 the Elohim or the Dhyanis; and once on <em>their </em>plane the
 Spirit of Solidarity and perfect Harmony, which reigns in every
 Hierarchy, must extend over him and protect him in every particular.
 </p><p>
 The chief difficulty which prevents men of science from believing
 in divine as well as in nature Spirits is their materialism. The
 main impediment before the Spiritualist which hinders him from
 believing in the same, while preserving a blind belief in the
 "Spirits" of the Departed, is the general ignorance
 of all, except some Occultists and Kabalists, about the true essence
 and nature of matter. It is on the acceptance or rejection of
 the theory of the <em>Unity of all in Nature, in its</em> <em>ultimate
 Essence, </em>that mainly rests the belief or unbelief in the
 existence around us of other conscious beings besides the Spirits
 of the Dead.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 277 MANY BODIES BUT ONE SOUL.</h6>
 
 <p>
 It is on the right comprehension of the primeval Evolution of
 Spirit-Matter and its real essence that the student has to depend
 for the further elucidation in his mind of the Occult Cosmogony,
 and for the only sure clue which can guide his subsequent studies.
 </p><p>
 In sober truth, as just shown, every "Spirit" so-called
 is either a <em>disembodied or a future man. </em>As from the
 highest Archangel (Dhyan Chohan) down to the last conscious "Builder"
 (the inferior class of Spiritual Entities), all such are <em>men</em>,
 having lived aeons ago, in other Manvantaras, on this or other
 Spheres; so the inferior, semi-intelligent and non-intelligent
 Elementals -- are all <em>future </em>men. That fact alone --
 that a Spirit is endowed with intelligence -- is a proof to the
 Occultist that that Being must have been a <em>man, </em>and acquired
 his knowledge and intelligence throughout the human cycle. There
 is but one indivisible and absolute Omniscience and Intelligence
 in the Universe, and this thrills throughout every atom and infinitesimal
 point of the whole finite Kosmos which hath no bounds, and which
 people call SPACE, considered independently of anything contained
 in it. But the first differentiation of its <em>reflection </em>in
 the manifested World is purely Spiritual, and the Beings generated
 in it are not endowed with a consciousness that has any relation
 to the one we conceive of. They can have no human consciousness
 or Intelligence before they have acquired such, personally and
 individually. This may be a mystery, yet it is a fact, in Esoteric
 philosophy, and a very apparent one too.
 </p><p>
 The whole order of nature evinces a progressive march towards
 <em>a</em> <em>higher life. </em>There is design in the action
 of the seemingly blindest forces. The whole process of evolution
 with its endless adaptations is a proof of this. The immutable
 laws that weed out the weak and feeble species, to make room for
 the strong, and which ensure the "survival of the fittest,"
 though so cruel in their immediate action -- all are working toward
 the grand end. The very <em>fact </em>that adaptations <em>do
 </em>occur, that the fittest <em>do </em>survive in the struggle
 for existence, shows that what is called "unconscious Nature"*
 is in reality an aggregate of forces mani-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Nature taken in its abstract sense, <em>cannot</em> be "unconscious,"
 as it is the emanation from, and thus an aspect (on the manifested
 plane) of the ABSOLUTE consciousness. Where is that daring man
 who would presume to deny to vegetation and even to minerals <em>a
 consciousness of their own. </em>All he can say is, that this
 consciousness is beyond his comprehension.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 278 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 pulated by semi-intelligent beings (Elementals) guided by High
 Planetary Spirits, (Dhyan Chohans), whose collective aggregate
 forms the manifested <em>verbum </em>of the unmanifested LOGOS,
 and constitutes at one and the same time the MIND of the Universe
 and its immutable LAW.
 </p><p>
 Three distinct representations of the Universe in its three distinct
 aspects are impressed upon our thought by the esoteric philosophy:
 the PRE-EXISTING (evolved from) the EVER-EXISTING; and the PHENOMENAL
 -- the world of illusion, the reflection, and shadow thereof.
 During the great mystery and drama of life known as the Manvantara,
 real Kosmos is like the object placed behind the white screen
 upon which are thrown the Chinese shadows, called forth by the
 magic lantern. The actual figures and things remain invisible,
 while the wires of evolution are pulled by the unseen hands; and
 men and things are thus but the reflections, <em>on </em>the white
 field, of the realities <em>behind </em>the snares of <em>Mahamaya,
 </em>or the great Illusion. This was taught in every philosophy,
 in every religion, <em>ante </em>as well as <em>post </em>diluvian,
 in India and Chaldea, by the Chinese as by the Grecian Sages.
 In the former countries these three Universes were allegorized,
 in exoteric teachings, by the three trinities emanating from the
 Central eternal germ and forming with it a Supreme Unity: the
 <em>initial, </em>the <em>manifested, </em>and the <em>Creative</em>
 Triad, or the three in One. The last is but the symbol, in its
 concrete expression, of the first <em>ideal </em>two. Hence Esoteric
 philosophy passes over the necessarianism of this purely metaphysical
 conception, and calls the first one, only, the Ever Existing.
 This is the view of every one of the six great schools of Indian
 philosophy -- the <em>six principles of</em> <em>that unit body
 of </em>WISDOM <em>of which the </em>"<em>gnosis,</em>"<em>
 </em>the<em> hidden</em> knowledge, is the seventh.
 </p><p>
 The writer hopes that, superficially handled as may be the comments
 on the Seven Stanzas, enough has been given in this cosmogonic
 portion of the work to show Archaic teachings to be more <em>scientific
 </em>(in the modern sense of the word) on their very face, than
 any other ancient Scriptures left to be regarded and judged on
 their exoteric aspect. Since, however, as confessed before, this
 work <em>withholds far more than it</em> <em>gives out, </em>the
 student is invited to use his own intuitions. Our chief care is
 to elucidate that which has already been given out, and, to our
 regret, very incorrectly at times; to supplement the knowledge
 hinted at -- whenever and wherever possible -- by addi-</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 279 HERMES, OR ARISTOTLE?</h6>
 
 <p>
 tional matter; and to bulwark our doctrines against the too strong
 attacks of modern Sectarianism, and more especially against those
 of our latter-day Materialism, very often miscalled Science, whereas,
 in reality, the words "Scientists" and "Sciolists"
 ought alone to bear the responsibility for the many illogical
 theories offered to the world. In its great ignorance, the public,
 while blindly accepting everything that emanates from "authorities,"
 and feeling it to be its duty to regard every <em>dictum </em>coming
 from a man of Science as a proven fact -- the public, we say,
 is taught to scoff at anything brought forward from "heathen"
 sources. Therefore, as materialistic Scientists can be fought
 solely with their own weapons -- those of controversy and argument
 -- an<em> Addendum </em>is added to every Book contrasting our
 respective views and showing how even great authorities may often
 err. We believe that this can be done effectually by showing the
 weak points of our opponents, and by proving their too frequent
 sophisms -- made to pass for scientific <em>dicta</em> -- to be
 incorrect. We hold to Hermes and his "Wisdom" -- in
 its universal character; they -- to Aristotle as against intuition
 and the experience of the ages, fancying that Truth is the exclusive
 property of the Western world. Hence the disagreement. As Hermes
 says, "Knowledge differs much from sense; for sense is of
 things that surmount it, but Knowledge (gyi) is the end of sense"
 --<em> i.e., </em>of the illusion of our physical brain and its
 intellect; thus emphasizing the contrast between the laboriously
 acquired knowledge of the senses and mind (manas), and the intuitive
 omniscience of the Spiritual divine Soul -- Buddhi.
 </p><p>
 Whatever may be the destiny of these actual writings in a remote
 future, we hope to have proven so far the following facts:
 </p><p>
 (1) The Secret Doctrine teaches no <em>Atheism, </em>except in
 the Hindu sense of the word <em>nastika, </em>or the rejection
 of <em>idols, </em>including every anthropomorphic god. In this
 sense every Occultist is a <em>Nastika</em>.
 </p><p>
 (2) It admits a Logos or a collective "Creator" of the
 Universe; a <em>Demi-urgos</em> -- in<em> </em>the sense implied
 when one speaks of an "Architect" as the "Creator"
 of an edifice, whereas that Architect has never touched one stone
 of it, but, while furnishing the plan, left all the manual labour
 to the masons; in our case the plan was furnished by the Ideation
 of the Universe, and the constructive labour was left to the Hosts
 of intelligent Powers and Forces. But that <em>Demiurgos </em>is
 no</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 280 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>personal </em>deity, --<em> i.e.,</em> an imperfect <em>extra-cosmic
 god</em>, -- but only the aggregate of the Dhyan-Chohans and the
 other forces.
 </p><p>
 As to the latter --
 </p><p>
 (3) They are dual in their character; being composed of (<em>a</em>)<em>
 </em>the irrational <em>brute energy, </em>inherent in matter,
 and (<em>b</em>) the intelligent soul or cosmic consciousness
 which directs and guides that energy, and which is the <em>Dhyan-Chohanic
 thought reflecting the Ideation of the</em> <em>Universal mind.
 </em>This results in a perpetual series of physical manifestations
 and <em>moral effects </em>on Earth, during manvantaric periods,
 the whole being subservient to Karma. As that process is not always
 perfect; and since, however many proofs it may exhibit of a guiding
 intelligence behind the veil, it still shows gaps and flaws, and
 even results very often in evident failures -- therefore, neither
 the collective Host (Demiurgos), nor any of the working powers
 individually, are proper subjects for divine honours or worship.
 All are entitled to the grateful reverence of Humanity, however,
 and man ought to be ever striving to help the divine evolution
 of <em>Ideas, </em>by becoming to the best of his ability a <em>co-worker
 with nature </em>in the cyclic task. The ever unknowable and incognizable
 <em>Karana </em>alone, the <em>Causeless </em>Cause of all causes,
 should have its shrine and altar on the holy and ever untrodden
 ground of our heart -- invisible, intangible, unmentioned, save
 through "the still small voice" of our spiritual consciousness.
 Those who worship before it, ought to do so in the silence and
 the sanctified solitude of their Souls*; making their spirit the
 sole mediator between them and the <em>Universal Spirit, </em>their
 good actions the only priests, and their sinful intentions the
 only visible and objective sacrificial victims to the <em>Presence.
 </em>(<em>See Part II., </em>"<em>On the Hidden Deity.</em>")
 </p><p>
 (4) Matter is <em>Eternal. </em>It is the <em>Upadhi </em>(the
 physical basis) for the One infinite Universal Mind to build thereon
 its ideations. Therefore, the Esotericists maintain that there
 is no inorganic or <em>dead </em>matter in nature, the distinction
 between the two made by Science being as unfounded as it is arbitrary
 and devoid of reason.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "When thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites
 are . . . but enter into <em>thine inner chamber</em> <em>and
 having shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret</em>."
 <em>Matt.</em> <em>vi.</em>). Our Father is <em>within us</em>
 "in Secret," our 7th principle, in the "inner chamber"
 of our Soul perception. "The Kingdom of Heaven" and
 of God "<em>is within</em> <em>us</em>" says Jesus,
 not <em>outside. </em>Why are Christians so absolutely blind to
 the self-evident meaning of the words of wisdom they delight in
 mechanically repeating?</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 281 MATTER IS THE SHADOW OF SPIRIT.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Whatever Science may think, however -- and <em>exact</em> Science
 is a fickle dame, as we all know by experience -- Occultism knows
 and teaches differently, from time immemorial -- from <em>Manu</em>
 and<em> Hermes</em> down to Paracelsus and his successors.
 </p><p>
 Thus Hermes, the thrice great Trismegistus, says: "Oh, my
 son, matter <em>becomes; </em>formerly it <em>was; </em>for matter
 is the vehicle of becoming."* Becoming is the mode of activity
 of the uncreate deity. Having been endowed with the germs of becoming,
 matter (objective) is brought into birth, for the creative force
 fashions it <em>according to the ideal forms. </em>Matter not
 yet engendered had no form; it becomes when it is put into operation."
 (<em>The Definitions of Asclepios, </em>p. 134, "Virgin of
 the World.")
 </p><p>
 "Everything is the product of one universal creative effort.
 . . . There is nothing <em>dead, </em>in Nature. <em>Everything
 is organic and living, </em>and therefore the whole world appears
 to be a living organism." (Paracelsus, "<em>Philosophia
 ad Athenienes</em>," F. Hartmann's translations, p. 44.)
 </p><p>
 (5.) The Universe was evolved out of its ideal plan, upheld through
 Eternity in the unconsciousness of that which the Vedantins call
 Parabrahm. This is practically identical with the conclusions
 of the highest Western Philosophy -- "the innate, eternal,
 and self-existing Ideas" of Plato, now reflected by Von Hartmann.
 The "unknowable" of Herbert Spencer bears only a faint
 resemblance to that transcendental <em>Reality </em>believed in
 by Occultists, often appearing merely a personification of a "<em>force
 </em>behind phenomena" -- an infinite and eternal <em>Energy</em>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * To this the late Mrs. (Dr.) Kingsford, the able translator and
 compiler of the Hermetic Fragments (see "<em>The Virgin of
 the</em> <em>World</em>") remarks in a foot-note; "Dr.
 Menard observes that in Greek the same word signifies <em>to be
 born</em> and <em>to become. </em>The idea here is that the material
 of the world is in its essence eternal, but that before creation
 or 'becoming' it is in a passive and motionless condition. Thus
 it 'was' before being put into operation; now it 'becomes,' that
 is, it is mobile and progressive." And she adds the purely
 Vedantic doctrine of the Hermetic philosophy that "Creation
 is thus the period of activity (Manvantara) of God, who, according
 to Hermetic thought (or <em>which, </em>according to the Vedantin)
 has two modes -- Activity or Existence, God evolved (<em>Deus
 explicitus</em>); and Passivity of Being (Pralaya) God involved
 (<em>Deus</em> <em>implicitus</em>)<em>. </em>Both modes are perfect
 and complete, as are the waking and sleeping states of man. Fichte,
 the German philosopher, distinguished Being (Seyn) as One, which
 we know only through existence (Dasein) as the Manifold. This
 view is thoroughly Hermetic. The 'Ideal Forms' are the archetypal
 or formative ideas of the Neo-Platonists; the eternal and subjective
 concepts of things subsisting in the divine mind prior to 'becoming'"
 (p. 134).</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 282 THE SECRET DOCTRINE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 from which all things proceed, while the author of the "Philosophy
 of the Unconscious" has come (in this respect only) as near
 to a solution of the great <em>Mystery </em>as mortal man can.
 Few were those, whether in ancient or mediaeval philosophy, who
 have dared to approach the subject or even hint at it. Paracelsus
 mentions it inferentially. His ideas are admirably synthesized
 by Dr. F. Hartmann, F.T.S., in his "Life of Paracelsus."
 </p><p>
 All the <em>Christian </em>Kabalists understood well the Eastern
 root idea: The active Power, the "Perpetual motion of the
 great Breath" only awakens Kosmos at the dawn of every new
 Period, setting it into motion by means of the two contrary Forces,*
 and thus causing it to become objective on the plane of Illusion.
 In other words, that dual motion transfers Kosmos from the plane
 of the Eternal Ideal into that of finite manifestation, or from
 the <em>Noumenal </em>to the <em>Phenomenal </em>plane. Everything
 that <em>is, was, </em>and <em>will be</em>, eternally IS, even
 the countless forms, which are finite and perishable only in their
 objective, not in their <em>ideal</em> Form. They existed as Ideas,
 in the Eternity,** and, when they pass away, will exist as reflections.
 Neither the form of man, nor that of any animal, plant or stone
 has ever been <em>created, </em>and it is only on this plane of
 ours that it commenced "becoming,"<em> i.e.,</em> objectivising
 into its present materiality, or expanding <em>from</em> <em>within
 outwards, </em>from the most sublimated and supersensuous essence
 into its grossest appearance. Therefore <em>our</em> human forms
 have existed in the Eternity as astral or ethereal prototypes;
 according to which models, the Spiritual Beings (or Gods) whose
 duty it was to bring them into objective being and terrestrial
 Life, evolved the protoplasmic forms of the future <em>Egos </em>from<em>
 their own essence. </em>After which, when this human <em>Upadhi,
 </em>or basic mould was ready, the natural terrestrial Forces
 began to work on those supersensuous moulds <em>which contained,
 besides their own,</em> <em>the elements</em> <em>of all the past
 vegetable and</em> <em>future animal</em> <em>forms of this globe
 in them. </em>Therefore, man's <em>outward </em>shell passed through
 every vegetable and animal body before it assumed the human shape.
 As this will be fully
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The centripetal and the centrifugal forces, which are male and
 female, positive and negative, physical and spiritual, the two
 being the one <em>Primordial </em>Force.
 </p><p>
 ** Occultism teaches that no form can be given to anything, either
 by nature or by man, whose ideal type does not already exist on
 the subjective plane. More than this; that no such form or shape
 can possibly enter man's consciousness, or evolve in his imagination,
 which does not exist in prototype, at least as an approximation.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 283 PARACELSUS ANTICIPATED TYNDALL.</h6>
 
 <p>
 described in Book II., with the Commentaries thereupon, there
 is no need to say more of it here.
 </p><p>
 According to the Hermetico-Kabalistic philosophy of Paracelsus,
 it is Yliaster -- the ancestor of the just-born <em>Protyle, </em>introduced
 by Mr. Crookes in chemistry -- or primordial <em>Protomateria
 </em>that evolved out of itself the Kosmos.
 </p><p>
 "When Evolution took place the Yliaster divided itself. .
 . . melted and dissolved, developing from within itself the <em>Ideos
 </em>or Chaos, called re<em>spectively Mysterium magnum, Iliados,
 Limbus Major, </em>or Primordial Matter. This Primordial essence
 is of a monistic nature, and manifests itself not only as vital
 activity, a spiritual force, an invisible, incomprehensible, and
 indescribable power, but also as vital matter of which the substance
 of living beings consists." In this <em>Ideos</em> of primordial
 matter, or the <em>proto-ilos -- </em>which is the matrix of all
 created things -- is contained the substance from which everything
 is formed. It is the Chaos . . . out of which the Macrocosm, and,
 later on, by evolution and division in <em>Mysteria Specialia,*
 </em>each separate being, came into existence. "All things
 and all elementary substances were contained in it <em>in potentia
 </em>but not in <em>actu</em>"<em> -- </em>which makes the
 translator, Dr. F. Hartmann, justly observe that "it seems
 that Paracelsus anticipated the modern discovery of the 'potency
 of matter' three hundred years ago" (P. 42).
 </p><p>
 This Magnus Limbus, then, or Yliaster of Paracelsus, is simply
 our old friend "Father-Mother," <em>within, </em>before
 it appeared in Space, of the second and other Stanzas. It is the
 universal matrix of Kosmos, personified in the dual character
 of Macro- and Microcosm (or the Universe and our Globe)** by Aditi-Prakriti,
 the Spiritual and the physical nature. For we find it explained
 in Paracelsus that "the Magnus Limbus is the nursery out
 of which all creatures have grown, in the same sense as a tree
 grows out of a small seed; with the difference, however, that
 the great Limbus takes its origin from the Word, while the Limbus
 minor (the terrestrial seed or sperm) takes it from the earth.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This word is explained by Dr. Hartmann from the original texts
 of Paracelsus before him, as follows. According to this great
 Rosicrucian: "Mysterium is everything out of which something
 may be developed, which is only germinally contained in it. A
 seed is the 'Mysterium' of a plant, an egg that of a living bird,
 etc."
 </p><p>
 ** It is only the mediaeval Kabalists who, following the Jewish
 and one or two Neo-Platonists, applied the term <em>Microcosm
 </em>to man. Ancient philosophy called the Earth the Microcosm
 of the Macrocosm, and man the outcome of the two.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 284 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 The great Limbus is the seed out of which all beings have come,
 and the little Limbus is each ultimate being that reproduces its
 form, and that has itself been produced by the 'great.' The latter
 possesses all the qualifications of the great one, in the same
 sense as a son has an organization similar to that of his father."
 (<em>See Comment. Book II. para. iii.</em>)<em> . </em>. . "As
 Yliaster dissolved, <em>Ares, </em>the dividing, differentiating,
 and individualising power (<em>Fohat, </em>another old friend,)
 . . . began to act. All production took place in consequence of
 separation. There were produced out of the Ideos, the elements
 of Fire, Water, Air and Earth, whose birth, however, did not take
 place in a material mode, or by simple separation," but by
 spiritual and dynamical, not even complex, combinations -- e.g.,
 mechanical <em>mixture </em>as opposed to <em>chemical </em>combination
 -- just as fire may come out of a pebble, or a tree out of a seed,
 although there is originally no fire in the pebble, nor a tree
 in the seed. Spirit is living, and Life is Spirit, and Life and
 Spirit (<em>Prakriti Purusha</em>)<em> </em>(?) produce all things,
 but they are essentially one and not two. . . . The elements too,
 have each one its own Yliaster, because all the activity of matter
 in every form is only an effluvium of the same fount. But as from
 the seed grow the roots with their fibres, and after that the
 stalk with its branches and leaves, and lastly the flowers and
 seeds; likewise all beings were born from the elements, and consist
 of elementary substances out of which other forms may come into
 existence, bearing the characteristics of their parents."
 ("This doctrine, preached 300 years ago," remarks the
 translator, "is identical with the one that has revolutionized
 modern thought, after having been put into new shape and elaborated
 by Darwin. It was still more elaborated by Kapila in the Sankhya
 philosophy") . . . . The elements as the mothers of all creatures
 <em>are of an invisible, spiritual nature, and have souls.* </em>They
 all spring from the "<em>Mysterium Magnum.</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Philosophia ad Athenienses.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Compare this with Vishnu Purana.
 </p><p>
 "From <em>Pradhana </em>(primordial substance) presided over
 by <em>Kshetrajna </em>(embodied Spirit?) proceeds the evolution
 of those qualities....... From the great Principle <em>Mahat </em>(Universal
 Intellect, or mind)..... proceeds
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Eastern Occultist says -- "are guided and informed
 by the Spiritual Beings" the Workmen in the invisible worlds
 and behind the veil of Occult nature, or nature <em>in Abscondito.</em>
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 285 HERMES CHRISTIANIZED.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the origin of the subtle elements and from these the organs of
 sense (<em>Book I., ii.</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Thus it may be shown that all the fundamental truths of nature
 were universal in antiquity, and that the basic ideas upon spirit,
 matter, and the universe, or upon God, Substance, and man, were
 identical. Taking the two most ancient religious philosophies
 on the globe, Hinduism and Hermetism, from the scriptures of India
 and Egypt, the identity of the two is easily recognisable.
 </p><p>
 This becomes apparent to one who reads the latest translation
 and rendering of the "Hermetic Fragments" just mentioned,
 by our late lamented friend, Dr. Anna Kingsford. Disfigured and
 tortured as these have been in their passage through Sectarian
 Greek and Christian hands, the translator has most ably and intuitionally
 seized the weak points and tried to remedy them by means of explanations
 and foot-notes. And she says:.......... The creation of the visible
 world by the 'working gods' or Titans, as agents of the Supreme
 God,* is a thoroughly Hermetic idea, <em>recognisable in all religious
 systems, </em>and in accordance with modern scientific research
 (?), which shows us everywhere the Divine power operating through
 natural Forces."
 </p><p>
 "That Universal Being, that contains all, and which is all,
 put into motion the Soul and the World, all that nature comprises,
 says Hermes. In the manifold unity of universal life, the innumerable
 individualities distinguished by their variations, are, nevertheless,
 united in such a manner that the whole is one, and that everything
 proceeds from Unity." (<em>Asclepios, Part I.</em>)
 </p><p>
 "God is not a mind, but the cause that the mind is; <em>not
 a spirit, </em>but the cause that the Spirit is; not light, but
 the cause that the Light is." (<em>Divine Pymander, Book
 IX., </em>v. 64.)
 </p><p>
 The above shows plainly that "Divine Pymander," however
 much distorted in some passages by Christian "smoothing,"
 was nevertheless written by a philosopher, while most of the so-called
 "hermetic Fragments" are the production of sectarian
 pagans with a tendency towards an anthropomorphic Supreme Being.
 Yet both are the echo of the Esoteric philosophy and the Hindu
 Puranas.
 </p><p>
 Compare two invocations, one to the Hermetic "Supreme All,"
 the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * A frequent expression in the said Fragments, to which we take
 exception. The <em>Universal Mind </em>is not a <em>Being </em>or
 "God."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 286 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 other to the "Supreme All" of the later Aryans. Says
 a Hermetic Fragment cited by Suidas (see Mrs. Kingsford's "<em>The
 Virgin of the World</em>")<em>: </em>-
 </p><p>
 "I adjure thee, Heaven, holy work of the great God; I adjure
 thee, Voice of the Father, uttered in the beginning when the universal
 world was framed; I adjure thee by the word, only Son of the Father
 who upholds all things; be favourable, be favourable."
 </p><p>
 This just preceded by the following: "Thus the Ideal Light
 was before the Ideal Light, and the luminous Intelligence of Intelligence
 was always, <em>and its unity was nothing else than the Spirit
 enveloping the Universe. Out of whom is neither God nor Angels,
 nor any other essentials, for </em>He (It?) is the Lord of all
 things and the power and the Light; and all depends on Him (It)
 and is in Him (It), etc." (<em>Fragments of the writings
 of Hermes to Ammon.</em>)
 </p><p>
 This is contradicted by the very same <em>Trismegistos, </em>who
 is made to say: "To speak of God is impossible. For corporeal
 cannot express the incorporeal. . . . . That which has not any
 body nor appearance, nor form, nor matter, cannot be apprehended
 by sense. I understand, Tatios, I understand, that which it is
 impossible to define -- that is God." (<em>Physical Eclogues,
 Florilegium of Stobaeus.</em>)
 </p><p>
 The contradiction between the two passages is evident; and this
 shows (<em>a</em>) that Hermes was a generic <em>nom-de-plume
 </em>used by a series of generations of mystics of every shade,
 and (<em>b</em>) that a great discernment has to be used before
 accepting a Fragment as esoteric teaching only because it is undeniably
 ancient. Let us now compare the above with a like invocation in
 the Hindu Scriptures -- undoubtedly as old, if not far older.
 Here it is <em>Parasara, </em>the Aryan "Hermes" who
 instructs <em>Maitreya, </em>the Indian Asclepios, and calls upon
 Vishnu in his triple hypostasis.
 </p><p>
 "Glory to the unchangeable, holy, eternal Supreme Vishnu,
 of one universal nature, the mighty over all; to him who is Hiranyagarbha,
 Hari, and Sankara (Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva), the creator, the
 preserver, and the destroyer of the world; to Vasudeva, the liberator
 (of his worshippers); to him whose essence is both single and
 manifold; who is both subtile and corporeal, indiscreet and discreet;
 to Vishnu the cause of final emancipation, the cause of the creation,
 existence, the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 287 ALONE THE ETERNAL IS REST.</h6>
 
 <p>
 end of the world; <em>who is the root of the world, </em>and who
 <em>consists of the world.</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Vish. Purana,
 Book L.</em>)
 </p><p>
 This is a grand invocation, full of philosophical meaning underlying
 it; but, for the profane masses, as suggestive as is the first
 of an anthropomorphic Being. We must respect the feeling that
 dictated both; but we cannot help finding it in full disharmony
 with its inner meaning, even with that which is found in the same
 Hermetic treatise where it is said:
 </p><p>
 "Reality is not upon the earth, my son, and it cannot be
 thereon. . . . Nothing on earth is real, there are only appearances.
 . . He (man) is not real, my son, as man. The real consists solely
 in itself and remains what it is. . . Man is transient, therefore
 he is not real, he is but appearance, and appearance is the supreme
 illusion.
 </p><p>
 <em>Tatios: </em>Then the <em>celestial bodies themselves are
 not real, my father, since they also vary?</em> 
 </p><p>
 <em>Trismegistos: </em>That which is subject to birth and to change
 is not real. . . . . There is in them a certain falsity, seeing
 that they too are variable.......
 </p><p>
 <em>Tatios: </em>And what then is the primordial Reality?
 </p><p>
 <em>Trismeg.: </em>That which is one and alone, 0 Tatios; That
 which is not made of matter, nor in any body. Which has neither
 colour nor form, which changes not nor is transmitted but which
 always is."
 </p><p>
 This is quite consistent with the Vedantic teaching. The leading
 thought is Occult; and many are the passages in the Hermetic Fragments
 that belong bodily to the Secret Doctrine.
 </p><p>
 The latter teaches that the whole universe is ruled by intelligent
 and semi-intelligent Forces and Powers, as stated from the very
 beginning. Christian Theology admits and even <em>enforces </em>belief
 in such, but makes an arbitrary division and refers to them as
 "Angels" and "Devils." Science denies the
 existence of such, and ridicules the very idea. Spiritualists
 believe in the Spirits of the Dead, and, outside these, deny entirely
 any other kind or class of invisible beings. The Occultists and
 Kabalists are thus the only rational expounders of the ancient
 traditions, which have now culminated in dogmatic faith on the
 one hand, and dogmatic denials on the other. For, both belief
 and unbelief embrace but one small corner each of the infinite
 horizons of spiritual and physical manifestations; and thus both
 are right from</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 288 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 their respective standpoints, and both are wrong in believing
 that they can circumscribe the whole within their own special
 and narrow barriers; for -- they can never do so. In this respect
 Science, Theology, and even Spiritualism show little more wisdom
 than the ostrich does, when it hides its head in the sand at its
 feet, feeling sure that there can be thus nothing beyond its own
 point of observation and the limited area occupied by its foolish
 head.
 </p><p>
 As the only works now extant upon the subject under consideration
 within reach of the profane of the Western "civilized"
 races are the above-mentioned Hermetic Books, or rather Hermetic
 Fragments, we may contrast them in the present case with the teachings
 of Esoteric philosophy. To quote for this purpose from any other
 would be useless, since the public knows nothing of the Chaldean
 works which are translated into Arabic and preserved by some Sufi
 initiates. Therefore the "Definitions of Asclepios,"
 as lately compiled and glossed by Mrs. A. Kingsford, F.T.S., some
 of which sayings are in remarkable agreement with the Esoteric
 Eastern doctrine, have to be resorted to for comparison. Though
 not a few passages show a strong impression of some later Christian
 hand, yet on the whole the characteristics of the genii* and gods
 are those of eastern teachings, while concerning other things
 there are passages which differ widely in our doctrines. The following
 are a few:--
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Hermetic philosophers called <em>Theoi, </em>gods, Genii
 and Daimones (in the original texts), those Entities whom we call
 <em>Devas </em>(gods), Dhyan Chohans, <em>Chitkala </em>(Kwan-yin,
 the Buddhists call them), and by other names. The <em>Daimones
 </em>are -- in the Socratic sense, and even in the Oriental and
 Latin theological sense -- the guardian spirits of the human race;
 "those who dwell in the neighbourhood of the immortals, and
 thence watch over human affairs," as Hermes has it. In Esoteric
 parlance, they are called <em>Chitkala, </em>some of which are
 those who have furnished man with his fourth and fifth Principles
 from their own essence; and others the <em>Pitris </em>so-called.
 This will be explained when we come to the production of the <em>complete
 man. </em>The root of the name is <em>Chiti, </em>"that by
 which the effects and consequences of actions and kinds of knowledge
 are selected for the use of the soul," or conscience the
 inner Voice in man. With the Yogis, the <em>Chiti </em>is a synonym
 of <em>Mahat, </em>the first and divine intellect; but in Esoteric
 philosophy <em>Mahat </em>is the root of Chiti, its germ; and
 <em>Chiti </em>is a quality of <em>Manas </em>in conjunction with
 Buddhi, a quality that attracts to itself by spiritual affinity
 a <em>Chitkala </em>when it develops sufficiently in man. This
 is why it is said that <em>Chiti </em>is a voice acquiring mystic
 life and becoming Kwan-Yin.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 289 A FEW OCCULT APHORISMS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <strong>E</strong>XTRACTS FROM A PRIVATE COMMENTARY,* <em>hitherto
 secret:--</em> 
 </p><p>
 (xvii.) "<em>The Initial Existence in the first twilight
 of the Maha-Manwantara </em>(<em>after the </em><strong>M</strong>AHA-<strong>P</strong>RALAYA
 <em>that follows every age of Brahma</em>)<em> is a </em>CONSCIOUS
 SPIRITUAL QUALITY. <em>In the manifested </em>WORLDS (<em>solar
 systems</em>)<em> it is, in its </em>OBJECTIVE SUBJECTIVITY, <em>like
 the film from a Divine Breath to the gaze of the entranced seer.
 It spreads as it issues from </em><strong>L</strong>AYA<em>**
 throughout infinity as a colourless spiritual fluid. It is on
 the </em>SEVENTH PLANE, <em>and in its </em>SEVENTH STATE <em>in
 our planetary world.***</em> 
 </p><p>
 (xviii.) "<em>It is Substance to </em>OUR<em> spiritual sight.
 It cannot be called so by men in their </em>WAKING STATE; <em>therefore
 they have named it in their ignorance </em>'<em>God-Spirit.</em>'
 </p><p>
 (xix.) "<em>It exists everywhere and forms the first </em><strong>U</strong>PADHI<em>
 </em>(<em>foundation</em>)<em> on which our World </em>(<em>solar
 system</em>)<em> is built. Outside the latter it is to be found
 in its pristine purity only between </em>(<em>the solar systems
 or</em>)<em> the Stars of the Universe, the worlds already formed
 or forming; those in </em>LAYA <em>resting meanwhile in its bosom.
 As its substance is of a different kind from that known on earth,
 the inhabitants of the latter, seeing </em>THROUGH IT, <em>believe
 in their illusion and ignorance that it is empty space. There
 is not one finger</em>'<em>s breath </em>(ANGULA)<em> of void
 Space in the whole Boundless </em>(<em>Universe</em>).........
 </p><p>
 (xx<em>.</em>)<em> </em>"<em>Matter or Substance is septenary
 within our World, as it is so beyond it. Moreover, each of its
 states or principles is graduated into seven degrees of density.
 </em><strong>S</strong>URYA<em> </em>(<em>the Sun</em>)<em>, in
 its visible reflection, exhibits the first, or lowest state of
 the seventh, the highest state of the Universal </em>PRESENCE<em>,
 the pure of the pure, the first manifested Breath of the ever
 Unmanifested </em>SAT<em> </em>(<em>Be-ness</em>)<em>. All the
 Central physical or objective Suns are in their substance the
 lowest state of the first Principle of the </em>BREATH<em>. Nor
 are any of these any more than the </em>REFLECTIONS <em>of their
 </em>PRIMARIES <em>which are concealed from the gaze of all but
 the Dhyan Chohans, whose Corporeal substance belongs to the fifth
 division of the seventh Principle of the Mother substance, and
 is,</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This (teaching) does not refer to Prakriti-Purusha beyond the
 boundaries of our small universe.
 </p><p>
 ** The ultimate quiescent state: the <em>Nirvana</em> condition
 of the seventh Principle.
 </p><p>
 *** The teaching is all given from our plane of consciousness.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 290 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>therefore, four degrees higher than the solar reflected substance.</em>
 <em>As there are seven Dhatu </em>(<em>principal substances in
 the human body</em>)<em> so there are seven Forces in Man and
 in all Nature.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (xxi.) "<em>The real substance of the concealed </em>(<em>Sun</em>)<em>
 is a nucleus of Mother substance.</em>*<em> It is the heart and
 the matrix of all the living and existing Forces in our solar
 universe.</em> <em>It is the Kernel from which proceed to spread
 on their cyclic journeys all</em> <em>the Powers that set in action
 the atoms in their functional duties, and the focus within which
 they again meet in their </em>SEVENTH ESSENCE <em>every eleventh
 year. He who</em> <em>tells thee he has seen the sun, laugh at
 him** as</em> <em>if he had said that the</em> <em>sun moves really
 onward on his diurnal path </em>. . . .
 </p><p>
 (xxiii). "<em>It is on account of his septenary</em> <em>nature
 that the Sun is</em> <em>spoken of by the ancients as one who
 is driven</em> <em>by seven horses equal to</em> <em>the metres
 of the Vedas; or, again, that, though he is identified with the
 </em>SEVEN "<em>Gaina</em>"<em> </em>(<em>classes of
 being</em>)<em> in</em> <em>his orb, he is distinct from them,</em>***
 <em>as he is, indeed; as also that he has</em> SEVEN RAYS, <em>as
 indeed he has </em>. . . .
 </p><p>
 (xxv.) "<em>The Seven Beings in the Sun are the Seven Holy
 Ones, Self-born from the inherent power in the</em> <em>matrix
 of Mother substance. It is they who send the Seven Principal</em>
 <em>Forces, called rays, which at the beginning of Pralaya will
 centre into</em> <em>seven new Suns for the next Manvantara. The
 energy from which they spring into conscious existence in every
 Sun, is what some people call Vishnu </em>(<em>see foot-note below</em>)<em>,
 which</em> <em>is the Breath of the </em>ABSOLUTENESS.
 </p><p>
 <em>We call it the One manifested life -- itself a reflection
 of the Absolute</em>.........
 </p><p>
 (xxvi.) "<em>The latter must never be mentioned in words
 or speech LEST</em> IT SHOULD TAKE AWAY SOME OF OUR SPIRITUAL
 ENERGIES THAT ASPIRE <em>towards ITS state, gravitating ever onward
 unto </em>IT<em> spiritually, as the whole physical universe gravitates
 towards </em>ITS<em> manifested centre -- cosmically.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (xxvii.) "<em>The former -- the Initial existence -- which
 may be called</em> <em>while in</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Or the "dream of Science," the primeval really homogeneous
 matter, which no mortal can make objective in this <em>Race</em>
 or <em>Round </em>either.
 </p><p>
 ** "Vishnu in the form of the Solar active energy, neither
 ever rises nor sets, and is at once, the <em>sevenfold Sun </em>and
 distinct from it," says Vishnu Purana (Book II., Chap. 1
 1).
 </p><p>
 *** "In the same manner as a man approaches a mirror placed
 upon a stand, beholds in it his own image, so the energy or reflection
 of Vishnu (the Sun) is never disjoined but remains in the Sun
 as in a mirror that is there stationed" ("<em>Vishnu
 Purana</em>")<em>.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 291 OCCULT APHORISMS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>this state of being the </em><strong>O</strong>NE <strong>L</strong>IFE,
 <em>is, as explained, a </em><strong>F</strong>ILM<em> for creative
 or formative Purposes. It manifests in seven states, which, with
 their septenary sub-divisions, are the</em> <strong>F</strong>ORTY-NINE
 <em>Fires* mentioned in</em> <em>sacred books</em> . . . . . .
 </p><p>
 (xxix.) "<em>The first is the</em> . . . . '<em>Mother</em>'<em>
 </em>(<em>prima </em>MATERIA). <em>Separating itself into its
 primary seven states, it proceeds down cyclically; when** having
 consolidated itself in its </em>LAST<em> principle as </em>GROSS
 MATTER, it <em>revolves around itself and informs, with the seventh
 emanation of the last, the first and the lowest element </em>(<em>the
 Serpent biting its own tail</em>)<em>. In a hierarchy, or order
 of being, the seventh emanation of her last principle is:</em>
 --
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>)<em> In the mineral, the spark that lies latent in
 it, and is called to its evanescent being by the </em><strong>P</strong>OSITIVE<em>
 awakening the </em><strong>N</strong>EGATIVE (<em>and so forth</em>)<em>
 </em>. . . .
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> In the plant it is that vital and intelligent
 Force which informs the seed and develops it into the blade of
 grass, or the root and sapling. It is the germ which becomes the
 </em><strong>U</strong>PADHI <em>of the seven principles of the
 thing it resides in, shooting them out as the latter grows and
 develops.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (<em>c</em>)<em> In every animal it does the same. It is its life
 principle and vital power; its instinct and qualities; its characteristics
 and special idiosyncrasies </em>. . . .
 </p><p>
 (<em>d</em>)<em> To man, it gives all that it bestows on all the
 rest of the manifested units in nature; but develops, furthermore,
 the reflection of all its </em><strong>F</strong>ORTY-NINE <strong>F</strong>IRES
 <em>in him. Each of his seven principles is an heir in full to,
 and a partaker of, the seven principles of the </em>"<em>great
 Mother.</em>"<em> The breath of her first principle is his
 spirit </em>(<em>Atma</em>)<em>. Her second principle is </em><strong>B</strong>UDDHI
 (<em>soul</em>). <em>We call it, erroneously, the seventh. The
 third furnishes him with </em>(<em>a</em>)<em> the brain stuff
 on the physical plane, and </em>(<em>b</em>)<em> with the </em>MIND<em>
 that moves it </em>[which is the human soul. -- H. P. B.] -- <em>according
 to his organic capacities. </em>
 </p><p>
 (<em>e</em>)<em> It is the guiding Force in the Cosmic and terrestrial
 elements. It resides in the Fire provoked out of its latent into
 active being; for the whole of the seven subdivisions of the *
 * </em>*<em> principle reside in the terrestrial Fire. It whirls
 in the breeze, blows with the hurricane, and sets the air in motion,
 which </em>element<em> participates in one of its principles also.</em>
 <em>Proceeding cyclically, it regulates the motion</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In "Vishnu" and other <em>Puranas.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** See the Hermetic "Nature," "Going down cyclically
 into matter when she meets 'heavenly man.' "</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 292 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>of the water, attracts and repels the waves* according to
 fixed laws of which its seventh principle is the informing soul.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 (<em>f</em>)<em> Its four higher principles contain the germ that
 develops into the Cosmic Gods; its three lower ones breed the
 lives of the Elements </em>(<em>Elementals</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (<em>g</em>)<em> In our Solar world, the One Existence is Heaven
 and the Earth, the Root and the flower, the Action and the Thought.
 It is in the Sun, and is as present in the glow-worm. Not an atom
 can escape it. Therefore, the ancient Sages have wisely called
 it the manifested God in Nature</em>. . . ."
 </p><p>
 It may be interesting, in this connection, to remind the reader
 of what Mr. Subba Row said of the Forces -- mystically defined.
 See "<em>Five Years of Theosophy</em>"<em> </em>and
 "The Twelve Signs of the Zodiac." Thus he says:
 </p><p>
 "Kanya (the sixth sign of the Zodiac, or <em>Virgo</em>)<em>
 </em>means a Virgin, and represents <em>Sakti or Mahamaya. </em>The
 sign . . . is the 6th <em>Rasi </em>or division, and indicates
 that there are six primary forces in Nature (synthesized by the
 Seventh)" . . . These Sakti stand as follows: -
 </p><p>
 (1.) <strong>P</strong>ARASAKTI. Literally the great or Supreme
 Force or power. It means and includes the powers of <em>light
 and heat.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (2.)<strong> J</strong>NANASAKTI. . . . The power of intellect,
 of real Wisdom or Knowledge. It has two aspects:
 </p><p>
 The following are <em>some </em>of its manifestations <em>when
 placed under the influence or control of material conditions.
 </em>(a) The power of the mind in interpreting our sensations.
 (b) Its power in recalling past ideas (memory) and raising future
 expectation. (c) Its power as exhibited in what are called by
 modern psychologists "the laws of association," which
 enables it to form <em>persisting </em>connections between various
 groups of sensations and possibilities of sensations, and thus
 generate the notion or idea of an external object. (d) Its power
 in connecting our ideas together by the mysterious link of memory,
 and thus generating the notion of self or individuality; <em>some
 </em>of its manifestations when liberated <em>from the bonds of
 matter are </em>-- (<em>a</em>) Clairvoyance, (<em>b</em>) Psychometry.
 </p><p>
 (3.) <strong>I</strong>TCHASAKTI -- the <em>power of the Will.
 </em>Its most ordinary manifesta-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The writers of the above knew perfectly well the physical cause
 of the tides, of the waves, etc. It is the informing Spirit of
 the whole Cosmic solar body that is meant here, and which is referred
 to whenever such expressions are used from the mystic point of
 view.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 293 THE SEVEN POWERS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 tion is the generation of certain nerve currents which set in
 motion such muscles as are required for the accomplishment of
 the desired object.
 </p><p>
 (4.) <strong>K</strong>RIYASAKTI. The mysterious power of thought
 which enables it to produce external, perceptible, phenomenal
 results by its own inherent energy. The ancients held that <em>any
 idea will manifest itself externally if one</em>'<em>s attention
 is deeply concentrated upon it. </em>Similarly <em>an intense
 volition will be followed by the desired result.</em> 
 </p><p>
 A Yogi generally performs his wonders by means of Itchasakti and
 Kriyasakti.
 </p><p>
 (5.) <strong>K</strong>UNDALINI <strong>S</strong>AKTI. The power
 or Force which moves in a curved path. It is the Universal life-Principle
 manifesting everywhere in nature. This force includes the two
 great forces of attraction and repulsion. Electricity and magnetism
 are but manifestations of it. This is the power which brings about
 that "continuous adjustment of <em>internal relations to
 external relations</em>"<em> </em>which is the essence of
 life according to Herbert Spencer, and that "<em>continuous
 adjustment of external relations to internal relations</em>"<em>
 </em>which is the basis of transmigration of souls, <em>punar
 janman </em>(re-birth) in the doctrines of the ancient Hindu philosophers.
 A Yogi must thoroughly subjugate this power before he can attain
 Moksham. . . .
 </p><p>
 (6.) <strong>M</strong>ANTRIKA-SAKTI. The force or power of letters,
 speech or music. The <em>Mantra Shastra </em>has for its subject-matter
 this force in all its manifestations......... The influence of
 melody is one of its ordinary manifestations. The power of the
 ineffable name is the crown of this Sakti.
 </p><p>
 Modern Science has but partly investigated the first, second and
 fifth of the forces above named, but is altogether in the dark
 as regards the remaining powers. The six forces are in their unity
 represented by the<em> </em>"<em>Daiviprakriti</em>"<em>
 </em>(the Seventh, the light of the <strong>L</strong>OGOS).
 </p><p>
 The above is quoted to show the real Hindu ideas on the same.
 It is all esoteric, though not covering the tenth part of <em>what
 might be said. </em>For one, the six names of the Six Forces mentioned
 are those of <em>the six Hierarchies </em>of Dhyan Chohans synthesized
 by their <em>Primary,</em> the seventh, who personify the Fifth
 Principle of Cosmic Nature, or of the "Mother" in its
 Mystical Sense. The enumeration alone of the <em>yogi </em>Powers
 would require ten volumes. Each of these Forces has a <em>living
 Conscious Entity </em>at its head, of which entity it is an emanation.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 294 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 But let us compare with the commentary just cited the words of
 Hermes, the "thrice great":--
 </p><p>
 "The creation of Life <em>by the Sun </em>is as continuous
 as his light; nothing arrests or limits it. Around him, like an
 army of Satellites, <em>are innumerable choirs of genii. </em>These
 dwell in the neighbourhood of the Immortals, and thence watch
 over human things. They fulfil the will of the gods (Karma) <em>by
 means of storms, tempests, transitions of fire and earthquakes;
 </em>likewise by famines and wars, for the punishment of impiety.*
 . . . It is the sun who preserves and nourishes all creatures;
 and even as the Ideal World which environs the sensible world
 fills this last with the plenitude and universal variety of forms,
 so also the Sun, enfolding all in his light, accomplishes everywhere
 the birth and development of creatures." . . . "<em>Under
 his orders is the choir of Genii, </em>or rather the choirs, <em>for
 there are many and diverse, and their number corresponds to that
 of the stars. Every star has its genii, good and evil by nature,
 </em>or rather by their <em>operation, for operation is the essence
 of the genii. . </em>. . All these Genii <em>preside over mundane
 affairs,** </em>they shake and overthrow the constitution of States
 and of individuals; they <em>imprint their likeness on our Souls,
 </em>they are present in our nerves, our marrow, our veins, our
 arteries, and <em>our very brain-substance </em>. . . at the moment
 when each of us receives life and being, he is taken in charge
 by the genii (Elementals) who preside over births,*** and who
 are classed beneath the astral powers (Superhuman astral Spirits.)
 They change perpetually, not always identically, but revolving
 in circles.**** They permeate by the body two parts of the Soul,
 that it may receive from each the impress of his own energy. But
 the reasonable part of the Soul is not subject to the genii; it
 is designed
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See Stanzas <strong>III</strong>. and <strong>IV</strong>. and
 the Commentaries thereupon, especially the Comments on Stanza
 <strong>IV</strong>. "the <em>Lipika </em>and the four Maharajas,"
 the agents of Karma.
 </p><p>
 ** And "Gods" or Dhyanis, too, not only the genii or
 "guided Forces."
 </p><p>
 *** The meaning of this is that as man is composed of all the
 Great Elements: Fire, Air, Water, Earth and Ether -- the ELEMENTALS
 which belong respectively to these Elements feel attracted to
 man by reason of their co-essence. That element which predominates
 in a certain constitution will be the ruling element throughout
 life. For instance, if man has a preponderance of the Earthly,
 gnomic element, the gnomes will lead him towards assimilating
 metals -- money and wealth, and so on. "Animal man is the
 son of the animal elements out of which his Soul (life) was born,
 and animals are the mirrors of man," says Paracelsus (<em>De
 Fundamento Sapientiae</em>)<em>. </em>Paracelsus was cautious,
 and wanted the Bible to agree with what he said, and therefore
 did not say all.
 </p><p>
 **** Cyclic progress in development.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 295 UNIVERSAL ILLUSION.</h6>
 
 <p>
 for the reception of (the) God,* who enlightens it with a sunny
 ray. Those who are thus illumined are few in number, and from
 them the genii abstain: for neither genii nor Gods have any power
 in the presence of a single ray of God.** But all other men, both
 soul and body, are directed by genii, to whom they cleave, and
 whose operations they affect........... The genii have then the
 control of mundane things and our bodies serve them as instruments...........
 </p><p>
 The above, save a few sectarian points, represents that which
 was a universal belief common to all nations till about a century
 or so back. It is still as orthodox in its broad outlines and
 features among pagans and Christians alike, if one excepts a handful
 of materialists and men of Science.
 </p><p>
 For whether one calls the genii of Hermes and his "Gods,"
 "Powers of Darkness" and "Angels," as in the
 Greek and Latin Churches; or "Spirits of the Dead,"
 as in Spiritualism or, again, <em>Bhoots </em>and<em> Devas, Shaitan
 </em>or <em>Djin, </em>as they are still called in India and Mussulman
 countries -- <em>they are all one and the same thing -- </em>ILLUSION.
 Let not this, however, be misunderstood in the sense into which
 the great philosophical doctrine of the Vedantists has been lately
 perverted by Western schools.
 </p><p>
 All that which <em>is</em>, emanates from the ABSOLUTE, which,
 from this qualification alone, stands as the one and only reality
 -- hence, everything extraneous to this Absolute, the generative
 and causative Element, <em>must </em>be an illusion, most undeniably.
 But this is only so from the purely metaphysical view. A man who
 regards himself as mentally sane, and is so regarded by his neighbours,
 calls the visions of an <em>insane </em>brother -- whose hallucinations
 make <em>the victim either happy or supremely wretched, </em>as
 the case may be -- illusions and fancies likewise. But, where
 is that madman for whom the hideous shadows in his deranged mind,
 his <em>illusions, </em>are not, for the time being, as actual
 and as real as the things which his physician or keeper may see?
 Everything is relative in this Universe, everything is an illusion.
 But
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The God in man and often the incarnation of a God, a highly
 Spiritual Dhyan Chohan in him, besides the presence of his own
 seventh Principle.
 </p><p>
 ** Now, what "god" is meant here? Not God "the
 Father," the anthropomorphic fiction; for that god is the
 Elohim collectively, and has no being apart from the Host. Besides,
 such a god is finite and imperfect. It is the high Initiates and
 Adepts who are meant here by those men "few in number."
 And it is precisely those men who believe in "gods"
 and know no "God," but one Universal unrelated and unconditioned
 Deity.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 296 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the experience of any plane is an actuality for the percipient
 being, whose consciousness is on that plane; though the said experience,
 regarded from the purely metaphysical standpoint, may be conceived
 to have no objective reality. But it is not against metaphysicians,
 but against physicists and materialists that Esoteric teachings
 have to fight, and for these Vital Force, Light, Sound, Electricity,
 even to the objectively pulling force of magnetism, have no objective
 being, and are said to exist merely as "modes of motion,"
 "sensations and <em>affections </em>of matter."
 </p><p>
 Neither the Occultists generally, nor the Theosophists, reject,
 as erroneously believed by some, the views and theories of the
 modern scientists, only because these views are opposed to Theosophy.
 The first rule of our Society is to render unto Caesar what is
 Caesar's. The Theosophists, therefore, are the first to recognize
 the intrinsic value of science. But when its high priests resolve
 consciousness into a secretion from the grey matter of the brain,
 and everything else in nature into a mode of motion, we protest
 against the doctrine as being unphilosophical, self-contradictory,
 and simply absurd, from a <em>scientific </em>point of view, as
 much and even more than from the occult aspect of the esoteric
 knowledge.
 </p><p>
 For truly the astral light of the derided Kabalists has strange
 and weird secrets for him who can see in it; and the mysteries
 concealed within its incessantly disturbed waves <em>are there,
 </em>the whole body of Materialists and scoffers notwithstanding.*
 These secrets, along with
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The astral light of the Kabalists is very incorrectly translated
 by some "AEther;" the latter is confused with the hypothetical
 Ether of Science, and both are referred to by some theosophists
 as synonymous with <em>Akasa. </em>This is a great mistake.
 </p><p>
 "A characteristic of Akasa will serve to show how inadequately
 it is represented by Ether," writes the author of Rational
 Refutations, thus unconsciously helping Occultism. "In dimension
 it is infinite; it is not made up of parts; and colour, taste,
 smell, and tangibility do not appertain to it. So far forth it
 corresponds exactly to time, space, <em>Isvara, </em>("The
 Lord," but rather creative potency and soul -- <em>anima
 mundi</em>)<em>. </em>Its speciality, as compared therewith, consists
 in its being the <em>material cause of sound. </em>Except for
 its being so, one might take it to be one with vacuity" (<em>p</em>.
 120.)
 </p><p>
 It is <em>vacuity, </em>no doubt, especially for Rationalists.
 At any rate Akasa is sure to produce vacuity in the brain of a
 materialist. Nevertheless, though Akasa is not that Ether of Science,
 not even the Ether of the Occultist, who defines the latter as
 one of the principles of Akasa only, it is as certainly, together
 with its primary, the cause of sound, only a physical and spiritual,
 not a material cause by any means. The relations [[fn continued]]
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 297 NOTHING NEW UNDER THE SUN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 many other mysteries, will remain non-existent to the materialists
 of our age, in the same way as America was a non-existent myth
 for Europeans during the early part of the mediaeval ages, whereas
 Scandinavians and Norwegians had actually reached and settled
 in that very old "New World" several centuries before.
 But, as a Columbus was born to re-discover, and to force the Old
 World to believe in Antipodal countries, so will there be born
 scientists who will discover the marvels now claimed by Occultists
 to exist in the regions of Ether, with their varied and multiform
 denizens and conscious Entities. Then, <em>nolens volens, </em>Science
 will have to accept the old "Superstition," as it has
 several others. And having been once forced to accept it -- judging
 from past experience -- its learned professors will, in all probability,
 as in the case of <strong>M</strong>ESMERISM and Magnetism, now
 re-baptised Hypnotism, father the thing and reject its name. The
 choice of the new appellation will depend, in its turn, on the
 "modes of motion," the new name for the older "automatic
 physical processes among the nerve fibrils of the (Scientific)
 brain" of Moleschott; as also, very likely, upon the last
 meal of the namer; since, according to the Founder of the new
 Hylo-Idealistic Scheme, "Cerebration is generically the same
 as chylification."* Thus, were one to believe this preposterous
 proposition, the new name of the archaic thing would have to take
 its chance, on the inspiration of the namer's liver, and then
 only would these truths have a chance of becoming scientific!
 </p><p>
 But TRUTH, however distasteful to the generally blind majorities,
 has always had her champions, ready to die for her, and it is
 not the Occultists who will protest against its adoption by Science
 under whatever new name. But, until absolutely forced on the notice
 and acceptance of Scientists, many an Occult truth will be tabooed,
 as the phenomena of the Spiritualists and other psychic manifestations
 were, to be finally appropriated by its ex-traducers without the
 least acknowledgment or thanks. Nitrogen has added considerably
 to chemical knowledge, but its discoverer, Paracelsus, is to this
 day called a "quack."
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s) -------------------------------------------------]]
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[fn back]] of Ether to Akasa may be defined by applying to both
 Akasa and Ether the words said of the god in the Vedas, "So
 himself was indeed (his own) son," one being the progeny
 of the other and yet itself. This may be a difficult riddle to
 the profane, but very easy to understand for any Hindu -- though
 not even a mystic.
 </p><p>
 <em>* National Reformer, </em>January 9th, 1887. Article "Phreno-Kosmo-Biology,"
 by Dr. Lewins.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 298 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 How profoundly true are the words of H. T. Buckle, in his admirable
 "<em>History of Civilization</em>"<em> </em>(Vol. <em>
 </em>I., p. 256), when he says: -
 </p><p>
 "Owing to circumstances still unknown (Karmic provision,
 H.P.B.) there appear from time to time great thinkers, who, devoting
 their lives to a single purpose, are able to anticipate the progress
 of mankind, and to produce a religion or a philosophy by which
 important effects are eventually brought about. But if we look
 into history we shall clearly see that, although the origin of
 a new opinion may be thus due to a single man, the result which
 the new opinion produces will depend on the condition of the people
 among whom it is propagated. If either a religion or a philosophy
 is too much in advance of a nation it can do no present service
 but must bide its time* until the minds of men are ripe for its
 reception. . . . Every science, every creed has had its martyrs.
 <em>According to the ordinary course of affairs, a few generations
 pass away, and then there comes a period when these very truths
 are looked upon as commonplace facts, and a little later there
 comes another period in which they are declared to be necessary,
 and even the dullest intellect wonders </em>how they could ever
 have been denied."
 </p><p>
 It is barely possible that the minds of the present generations
 are not quite ripe for the reception of Occult truths. Such will
 be the retrospect furnished to the advanced thinkers of the Sixth
 Root Race of the history of the acceptance of Esoteric Philosophy
 -- fully and unconditionally. Meanwhile the generations of our
 Fifth Race will continue to be led away by prejudice and preconceptions.
 Occult Sciences will have the finger of scorn pointed at them
 from every street corner, and everyone will seek to ridicule and
 crush them in the name, and for the greater glory, of Materialism
 and its so-called Science. The Addendum which completes the present
 Book shows, however, in an anticipatory answer to several of the
 forthcoming Scientific objections, the true and mutual positions
 of the defendant and plaintiff. The Theosophists and Occultists
 stand arraigned by public opinion, which still holds high the
 banner of the inductive Sciences. The latter have, then, to be
 examined; and it must be shown how far their achievements and
 discoveries in the realm of natural laws are opposed, not so much
 to our claims, as to the facts in nature. The hour has now struck
 to ascertain whether the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]]-------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This is Cyclic law, but this law itself is often defied by human
 stubbornness.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 299 MEN WELCOME ERROR, AND CRUCIFY THE TRUTH.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 walls of the modern Jericho are so impregnable that no blast of
 the Occult trumpet is ever likely to make them crumble.
 </p><p>
 The so-called <em>Forces, </em>with Light and Electricity heading
 them, and the constitution of the Solar orb must be carefully
 examined; as also Gravitation and the Nebular theories. The Natures
 of Ether and of other Elements must be discussed: thus contrasting
 scientific with other Occult teachings, while revealing some of
 the hitherto secret tenets of the latter. (<em>Vide Addendum.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Some fifteen years ago, the writer was the first to repeat, after
 the Kabalists, the wise Commandments in the Esoteric Catechism.
 "Close thy mouth, lest thou shouldst speak of <em>this </em>(the
 mystery), and thy heart, lest thou shouldst think aloud; and if
 thy heart has escaped thee, bring it back to its place, for such
 is the object of our alliance." (<em>Sepher Jezireh, Book
 of Creation.</em>)<em> </em>And again: -- "This is a secret
 which gives death: close thy mouth lest thou shouldst reveal it
 to the vulgar; compress thy brain lest something should escape
 from it and fall outside." (Rules of Initiation.)
 </p><p>
 A few years later, a corner of the Veil of Isis had to be lifted;
 and now another and a larger rent is made. . . .
 </p><p>
 But old and time-honoured errors -- such as become with every
 day more glaring and self-evident -- stand arrayed in battle-order
 now, as they did then. Marshalled by blind conservatism, conceit
 and prejudice, they are constantly on the watch, ready to strangle
 every truth, which, awakening from its age-long sleep, happens
 to knock for admission. Such has been the case ever since man
 became an animal. That this proves in every case <em>moral death
 </em>to the revealers, who bring to light any of these old, old
 truths, is as certain as that it gives LIFE and REGENERATION to
 those who are fit to profit even by the little that is now revealed
 to them.
 </p><p>
 ---------------------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-2-01.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>