<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 588 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h4>XIII.<br>
 SCIENTIFIC AND ESOTERIC EVIDENCE FOR, AND OBJECTIONS TO, THE MODERN
 NEBULAR THEORY.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>O</strong>F late Esoteric Cosmogony has been frequently
 opposed by the phantom of this theory and its ensuing hypotheses.
 "Can this most scientific teaching be denied by your adepts?"
 it is asked. "Not entirely," is the reply, "but
 the admissions of the men of Science themselves <em>kill</em>
 it; and there remains nothing for the adepts to deny."
 </p><p>
 To make of Science an integral <em>whole </em>necessitates, indeed,
 the study of spiritual and psychic, as well as physical Nature.
 Otherwise it will ever be like the anatomy of man, discussed of
 old by the profane from the point of view of his shell-side and
 in ignorance of the interior work. Even Plato, the greatest philosopher
 of his country, became guilty, before his initiation, of such
 statements as that liquids pass into the stomach through the lungs.
 Without metaphysics, as Mr. H. J. Slack says, <em>real</em> science
 is inadmissible.
 </p><p>
 The nebulae exist; yet the nebular theory is wrong. A nebula exists
 in a state of entire elemental dissociation. It<em> is </em>gaseous
 and -- something else besides, which can hardly be connected with
 gases, as known to physical science; and it <em>is</em> self-luminous.
 But that is all. The sixty-two "coincidences" enumerated
 by Professor Stephen Alexander,* confirming the nebular theory,
 may all be explained by esoteric science; though, as this is not
 an astronomical work, the refutations are not attempted at present.
 Laplace and Faye come nearer to the correct theory than any; but
 of the speculations of Laplace there remains little in the present
 theory except its general features. Nevertheless, "there
 is in Laplace's theory," says John Stuart Mill, "<em>nothing
 hypothetical</em>; it is an example of legitimate reasoning from
 present effect to its past cause; it assumes nothing more than
 that objects which really exist, obey the laws which are known
 to be obeyed by all terrestrial objects resembling them."
 (<em>System of Logic</em>,<em> </em>p. 229).
 </p><p>
 This from such an eminent logician as Mill was, would be valuable,
 if it could only be proved that "terrestrial objects <em>resembling
 . </em>. ." celestial objects at such a distance as the nebulae
 are<em> </em>-- <em>resemble those objects in reality</em>,<em>
 not alone in appearance.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Another of the fallacies from the Occult stand-point, which are
 embodied in the modern theory as it now stands, is the hypothesis
 that the planets were all detached from the Sun; that they are
 bone of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<em>Smithsonian Contributions</em>,"<em> </em>xxi.,
 Art. 1, pp. 79-97.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 589 "SO FAR SHALT THOU GO . . . ."
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 his bone, and flesh of his flesh; whereas, the Sun and planets
 are only co-uterine brothers, having had the same nebular origin,
 only in a different mode from that postulated by modern astronomy.
 </p><p>
 The many objections raised against the homogeneity of original
 diffuse matter, on the ground of the uniformity in the composition
 of the fixed stars, by some opponents of the modern nebular theory,
 do not affect the question of that homogeneity at all, but only
 the said theory. Our solar nebula may not be completely homogeneous,
 or, rather, it may fail to reveal itself as such to the astronomers,
 and yet be <em>de facto </em>homogeneous. The stars do differ
 in their constituent materials and even exhibit elements quite
 unknown on earth; nevertheless, this does not affect the point
 that primeval matter -- <em>i.e.</em>,<em> </em>as it <em>appeared
 even in its first </em>differentiation from its <em>laya </em>condition*
 -- is yet to this day homogeneous, at immense distances, in the
 depths of infinitude, and likewise at points not far removed from
 the outskirts of our solar system.
 </p><p>
 Finally, there does not exist one single fact brought forward
 by the learned objectors against the "nebular theory,"
 (false as it is, and hence, <em>illogically enough</em>,<em> </em>fatal
 to the hypothesis of the homogeneity of matter,) that can withstand
 criticism. One error leads into another. A false premise will
 naturally lead to a false conclusion, although an inadmissible
 inference does not <em>necessarily </em>affect the validity of
 the major proposition of the syllogism. Thus, one may leave every
 side-issue and inference from the evidence of spectra, and lines,
 as simply provisional for the present, and abandon all matters
 of detail to physical science. The duty of the Occultist lies
 with the <em>Soul and Spirit </em>of Cosmic Space, not merely
 with its illusive appearance and behaviour. That of official physical
 science is to analyze and study its <em>shell</em> -- the <em>Ultima
 Thule </em>of<em> </em>the Universe and man, in the opinion of
 Materialism.
 </p><p>
 With the latter, Occultism has nought to do. It is only with the
 theories of such men of learning as Kepler, Kant, Oersted, and
 Sir W. Herschell, who believed in a Spiritual world, that Occult
 Cosmogony might treat, and attempt a satisfactory compromise.
 But the views of those physicists differed vastly from the latest
 modern speculations. Kant and Herschell had in their mind's eye
 speculations upon the origin and <em>the final destiny</em>,<em>
 </em>as well as the present aspect, of the Universe, from a far
 more philosophical and psychic standpoint; whereas modern Cosmology
 and Astronomy now repudiate anything like research into the mysteries
 of being. The result is what might be expected: complete failure
 and inextricable contradictions in the thousand and one varieties
 of so-called scientific theories, and in this theory as in all
 others.
 </p><p>
 The nebular hypothesis, involving the theory of the existence
 of a
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Beyond the zero-line of action.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 590 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 primeval matter, diffused in a nebulous condition, is of no modern
 date in astronomy as everyone knows. Anaximenes, of the Ionian
 school, had already taught that the sidereal bodies were formed
 through the progressive condensation of a primordial <em>pregenetic
 </em>matter, which had almost a negative weight, and was spread
 out through Space in an extremely sublimated condition.
 </p><p>
 Tycho Brahe, who viewed the Milky Way as an ethereal substance,
 thought the new star that appeared in Cassiopoeia, in 1572, had
 been formed out of that matter. ("<em>Progymnasmata</em>"<em>
 </em>p. 795.) Kepler believed the star of 1606 had been likewise
 formed out of the ethereal substance that fills the universe ("<em>De
 stella nova in pede Serpentarii</em>," p<em>. </em>115).
 He attributed to that same ether the apparition of a luminous
 ring around the moon, during the total eclipse of the sun observed
 at Naples in 1605<em>. </em>("<em>Hypotheses Cosmogoniques</em>,"<em>
 C. Wolf.</em>)<em> </em>Still later, in 1714, -- the existence
 of a self-luminous matter was recognised by Halley ("<em>Philosophical
 Transactions</em>")<em>. </em>Finally, the journal of this
 name published in 1811 the famous hypothesis on the transformation
 of the nebulae into stars, by the eminent astronomer, Sir W. Herschell
 (<em>See </em>"<em>Philosophical Transactions</em>,"<em>
 of </em>1811, p. 269, <em>et seq.</em>),<em> </em>after which
 the nebular theory was accepted by the Royal Academies.
 </p><p>
 In "Five years of Theosophy," on p. 245, an article
 headed "<em>Do</em> <em>the Adepts deny the Nebular Theory?</em>"<em>
 </em>may be read. The answer there given is "No; they do
 not deny <em>its general propositions</em>,<em> nor the approximative
 truth of the scientific </em>hypotheses. They only deny the <em>completeness
 </em>of the present, as well as the entire error of the many so-called
 "exploded" old theories, which, during the last century,
 have followed each other in such rapid succession."
 </p><p>
 This was proclaimed at the time "an evasive answer."
 Such disrespect to official science, it was argued, must be justified
 by the presentation, to replace the <em>orthodox </em>speculation,
 of another theory more complete than theirs, and having a firmer
 ground to stand upon. To this there is but one reply; it is useless
 to give out isolated theories with regard to things embodied in
 a whole and consecutive system, which, when separated from the
 main body of the teaching, would necessarily lose their vital
 coherence and thus do no good when studied independently. To be
 able to appreciate and accept the occult views on the nebular
 theory, one has to study the whole esoteric cosmogonical system.
 And the time has hardly arrived for the astronomers to be asked
 to accept <em>Fohat </em>and the divine Builders. Even the undeniably
 correct surmises of Sir W. Herschell], that had nothing "supernatural"
 in them, about the sun being called "<em>globe of fire</em>"<em>
 </em>(perhaps) <em>metaphorically</em>,<em> </em>and his early
 speculations about the nature of that which is now called the
 Nasmyth willow-leaf theory -- caused that most eminent of all
 astro-</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 591 FORCES ARE EMANATIONS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 nomers to be smiled at by other, far less eminent colleagues,
 who saw and now see in his ideas only "imaginative and fanciful
 theories." Before the whole esoteric system could be given
 out and appreciated by the astronomers, they would have to return
 to some of those "antiquated ideas," not only to those
 of Herschell, but to the dreams of the oldest Hindu astronomers,
 and to abandon their own theories, none the less "fanciful"
 because they have appeared in one case nearly 80 years and in
 the other many thousands of years later. Foremost of all they
 would have to repudiate the ideas on the Sun's <em>solidity</em>
 and <em>incandescence; </em>the sun "glowing" most undeniably,
 but not "burning." Then it is stated, with regard to
 Sir W. Herschell's view that those "objects," as he
 called the "willow leaves," are the immediate <em>sources</em>
 <em>of the solar light and heat. </em>And though the esoteric
 teaching does not regard these as he did -- namely, <em>organisms
 </em>as partaking of the nature of life," for the Solar "Beings"
 will hardly place themselves within telescopic focus -- yet it
 asserts that the whole Universe is full of such "organisms,"
 conscious and active according to the proximity or distance of
 their planes to, or from, our plane of consciousness; and that
 finally the great astronomer was right in saying that "we
 do not know that vital action is competent to develop at once
 heat, light, and electricity" while speculating on those
 supposed "organisms." For, at the risk of being laughed
 at by the whole world of physicists, the Occultists maintain that
 all the "Forces" of the Scientists have their origin
 in the <em>Vital Principle</em>,<em> </em>the ONE LIFE collectively
 of our Solar system -- that "<em>life</em>" being a
 portion, or rather one of the <em>aspects </em>of the One Universal
 LIFE.
 </p><p>
 We may, therefore, as in the article under consideration, wherein,
 on the authority of the Adepts, it was maintained that it is "sufficient
 to make a <em>resume </em>of what the solar physicists <em>do
 not know</em>,"<em> </em>--<em> </em>we may, we maintain,
 define our position with regard to the modern nebular theory and
 its evident incorrectness, by simply pointing out facts diametrically
 opposed to it in its present form. And to begin with, what does
 it teach?
 </p><p>
 Summarizing the aforesaid hypotheses, it becomes plain that Laplace's
 theory -- now made quite unrecognisable, moreover -- was an unfortunate
 one. He postulates in the first place Cosmic matter, existing
 in a state of diffuse nebulosity "so fine that its presence
 could hardly have been suspected." No attempt is made by
 him to penetrate into the arcana of being, except as regards the
 immediate evolution of our small solar system.
 </p><p>
 Consequently, whether one accepts or rejects his theory in its
 bearing upon the immediate cosmological problems presented for
 solution, he can only be said to have thrown back the mystery
 a little further. To the eternal query -- "Whence matter
 itself; whence the evolutionary impetus</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 592 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 determining its cyclic aggregations and dissolutions; whence the
 exquisite symmetry and order into which the primeval atoms arrange
 and group themselves?" -- no answer is attempted by Laplace.
 All we are confronted with, is a sketch of the <em>probable </em>broad
 principles on which the actual process is assumed to be based.
 Well, and what is this now celebrated note on the said process?
 What has he given so wonderfully new and original, that its ground-work,
 at any rate, should have served as a basis for the modern nebular
 theory? This is what one gathers from various astronomical works.
 </p><p>
 Laplace thought that, consequent on the condensation of the atoms
 of the primeval nebula, according to the "Law" of gravity,
 the now gaseous, or perhaps, partially liquid mass, acquired a
 rotatory motion. As the velocity of this rotation increased, it
 assumed the form of a thin disc; finally, the centrifugal force
 overpowering that of cohesion, huge rings were detached from the
 edge of the whirling incandescent masses, contracting necessarily
 by gravitation (as accepted) into spheroidal bodies, which would
 necessarily still continue to preserve the same orbit occupied
 previously by the outer zone from which they were separated. ("Laplace
 conceived that the external and internal zones of the ring would
 rotate with the same angular velocity, which would be the case
 with a solid ring; but the principle of equal areas requires the
 inner zones to rotate more rapidly than the outer.")* The
 velocity of the outer edge of each nascent planet, he said, exceeding
 that of the inner, there results a rotation on its axis. The more
 dense bodies would be thrown off last; and finally, during the
 preliminary state of their formation, the newly-segregated orbs
 in their turn throw off one or more satellites . . . In formulating
 the history of the rupture and planetation of rings, Laplace says:
 </p><blockquote>
 "Almost always each ring of vapours must have broken up into
 numerous masses, which, moving with a nearly uniform velocity,
 must have continued to circulate at the same distance around the
 Sun. These masses must have taken a spheroidal form with a motion
 of rotation in the same direction as their revolution, since the
 inner molecules (those nearer to the Sun) would have less actual
 velocity than the exterior ones. They must then have formed as
 many planets in a state of vapour. But, if one of them was sufficiently
 powerful to unite successively, by its attraction, all the others
 around its centre, the ring of vapours must have been thus transformed
 into a single spheroidal mass of vapours circulating around the
 Sun with a rotation in the same direction as its revolution. The
 latter case has been the more common, but the solar system presents
 us the first case, in the four small planets which move between
 Jupiter and Mars."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 While few will be found to deny "the magnificent audacity
 of this
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "World-Life." Prof. Winchell points to a good many
 mistakes of Laplace in his work; but as a <em>geologist </em>he
 is not infallible himself in his "astronomical speculations."
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 593 UNANSWERABLE QUERIES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 hypothesis," it is impossible not to recognise the insurmountable
 difficulties with which it is attended. Why, for instance, do
 we find that the satellites of Neptune and Uranus display a retrograde
 motion; that, in spite of its closer proximity to the Sun, Venus
 is less dense than the Earth? Similarly, the more distant Uranus
 is more dense than Saturn? How is it that so many variations in
 the inclination of their axes and orbits are present in the supposed
 progeny of the central orb; that such startling variations in
 the size of the planets is noticeable; that the Satellites of
 Jupiter are more dense by .288 than their primary -- that the
 phenomena of meteoric and cometic systems still remain unaccounted
 for? To quote the words of a Master: "They (the Occultists)
 find that the centrifugal theory of Western birth is unable to
 cover <em>all</em> the ground. That, unaided, it can neither account
 for every oblate spheroid, nor explain away such evident difficulties
 as are presented by the relative density of some planets. How,
 indeed, can any calculation of centrifugal force explain to us,
 for instance, why Mercury, whose rotation is, we are told, only
 about one-third that of the Earth, and its density only about
 one-fourth greater than the Earth, should have a polar compression
 <em>more than ten times as great as the latter? </em>And again,
 why Jupiter, whose equatorial rotation is said to be 'twenty-seven
 times greater, and its density only about one-fifth that of the
 earth' should have its polar compression seventeen times greater
 than that of the earth? Or why Saturn, with an equatorial velocity
 fifty-five times greater than Mercury for centripetal force to
 contend with, should have its polar compression <em>only three
 times </em>greater than Mercury's? To crown the above contradictions,
 we are asked to believe in the Central Forces, as taught by Modern
 Science, even when told that the equatorial matter of the Sun,
 with more than four times the centrifugal velocity of the Earth's
 equatorial surface, and only about one-fourth part of the gravitation
 of the equatorial matter, has not manifested any tendency to bulge
 at the Solar equator, nor shown the least flattening of the poles
 of the Solar axis. In other and clearer words, the Sun, with only
 one fourth of our Earth's density for the centrifugal force to
 work upon, has no polar compression at all! We find this objection
 made by more than one astronomer, yet never explained away satisfactorily
 so far as the 'Adepts' are aware."
 </p><p>
 "Therefore, do they (the Adepts) say, that the great men
 of science of the West, knowing . . . . . next to nothing either
 about cometary matter, centrifugal and centripetal forces, the
 nature of the nebulae, or the physical constitution of the Sun,
 the Stars, or even the Moon, are imprudent to speak as confidently
 as they do about the 'central mass of the Sun' whirling out into
 space planets, comets, and what not . . . ." "We maintain
 that it (the Sun) evolves out only the <em>life</em>-principle,
 the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 594 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Soul of those bodies, <em>giving and receiving </em>it back, in
 our solar system, as the 'Universal Life-Giver' . . . . in infinitude
 and Eternity; that the solar system is as much the <em>microcosm
 </em>of the ONE Macrocosm as man is the former when compared with
 his own little Solar Cosmos."*
 </p><p>
 The essential faculty possessed by all the cosmic and terrestrial
 elements, of generating within themselves a regular and harmonious
 series of results, a concatenation of causes and effects, is an
 irrefutable proof that they are either animated by an <em>extra
 </em>or <em>intra</em> INTELLIGENCE, or conceal such within or
 behind the <em>manifested veil. </em>Occultism does not deny the
 certainty of the mechanical origin of the Universe; it only claims
 the absolute necessity of mechanicians of some sort behind those
 Elements (or <em>within</em>)<em> </em>-- a dogma with us. It
 is not the fortuitous assistance of the atoms of Lucretius, who
 himself knew better, that built the Kosmos and all in it. Nature
 herself contradicts such a theory. Celestial space, containing
 matter so attenuated as is Ether, cannot be called on, with or
 without attraction, to explain the common motion of the sidereal
 hosts. Although the perfect accord of their mutual revolution
 indicates clearly the presence of a mechanical cause in Nature,
 Newton, who of all men had best right to trust to his deductions
 and views, was nevertheless forced to abandon the idea of ever
 explaining, by the laws of <em>known </em>Nature and its Material
 forces, the original impulse given to the millions of orbs. He
 recognised fully the limits that separate the action of natural
 Forces from that of the <strong>I</strong>NTELLIGENCES that set
 the immutable laws into order and action. And if a <strong>N</strong>EWTON
 had to renounce such hope, which of the modern materialistic pigmies
 has the right of saying: "I know better"?
 </p><p>
 To become complete and comprehensible, a cosmogonical theory has
 to start with a primordial Substance diffused throughout boundless
 Space, <em>of an intellectual and divine Nature. </em>That substance
 must be the Soul and Spirit, the Synthesis and <em>Seventh Principle
 </em>of the manifested Kosmos, and, to serve as a spiritual <em>Upadhi
 </em>to this, there must be the sixth, its vehicle<em> </em>--<em>
 primordial physical matter</em>,<em> </em>so to speak, though
 its nature must escape for ever our limited <em>normal </em>senses.
 It is easy for an astronomer, if endowed with an imaginative faculty,
 to build a theory of the emergence of the universe out of chaos,
 by simply applying to it the principles of mechanics. But such
 a universe will always prove, with respect to its scientific human
 creator, a Frankenstein's monster; it will lead him into endless
 perplexities. The application of the mechanical laws only can
 never carry the speculator beyond the objective world; nor will
 it unveil to men the origin and final destiny of Kosmos. This
 is
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> </em>"<em>Five Years of Theosophy</em>,"<em> pp.
 </em>249-50<em>. Art. </em>"<em>Do the Adepts deny the Nebular</em>
 <em>Theory?</em>" </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 595 WHAT ARE THE NEBULAE?</h6>
 
 <p>
 whither the nebular theory has led Science. In sober fact and
 truth this theory is twin sister to that of Ether, and both are
 the offsprings of necessity; one as indispensable to account for
 the transmission of light, as the other to explain the problem
 of the origin of the solar systems. The question with them is,
 how the same homogeneous matter* could, obeying the laws of Newton,
 give birth to bodies -- sun, planets, and their satellites --
 subject to conditions of identity of motion and formed of such
 heterogeneous elements.
 </p><p>
 Has the nebular theory helped to solve the problem, even if applied
 solely to bodies considered as inanimate and material? We say
 most decidedly not. What progress has it made since 1811, when
 Sir W. Herschell's paper, first presenting facts based on observation
 and showing the existence of nebular matter, made the "Sons"
 of the Royal Society "shout for joy"? Since then a still
 greater discovery has permitted, through spectrum analysis, the
 verification and corroboration of Sir W. Herschell's conjecture.
 Laplace demanded some kind of primitive "world stuff "
 to prove the idea of progressive world-evolution and growth. Here
 it is, as offered two millenniums ago.
 </p><p>
 The "world stuff," now <em>nebulae</em>,<em> </em>was
 known from the highest antiquity. Anaxagoras taught that, having
 differentiated, the subsequent commixture of heterogeneous substances
 remained motionless and unorganized, until finally "the Mind"
 -- the collective body of Dhyan Chohans, we say -- began to work
 upon and communicated to it motion and order (<em>Aristotle</em>'<em>s
 </em>"<em>Physica</em>,"<em> viii</em>,<em> </em>1<em>.</em>)
 The theory is now taken up in its first portion, that of <em>any
 </em>"Mind" interfering with it being rejected. Spectrum
 analysis reveals the existence of nebulae formed entirely of gases
 and luminous vapours. Is this the primitive nebular matter? The
 spectra reveal, it is said, the physical conditions of the matter
 which emits cosmic light. The spectra of the resolvable and the
 irresolvable nebulae are shown to be entirely different, the spectra
 of the latter showing their physical state to be that of glowing
 gas or vapour. The bright lines of one nebula reveal the existence
 of hydrogen in it, and of other material substances known and
 unknown. The same in the atmospheres of the Sun and stars. This
 leads to the direct inference that a star is formed by the condensation
 of a nebula; hence that even the metals themselves on earth are
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Had astronomers held simply, in their present state of knowledge,
 to the hypothesis of Laplace, which was simply the formation of
 the planetary system, it might in time have resulted in something
 like an approximate truth. But the two parts of the general problem,
 that of the formation of the universe, or the formation of the
 suns and stars from the primitive matter, and then the development
 of the planets around their sun, rest on quite different facts
 in nature and are even so viewed by Science itself. They are at
 the opposite poles of being.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 596 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 formed owing to the condensation of hydrogen or some other primitive
 matter, some ancestral cousin to "helium," perhaps,
 or some yet unknown stuff? <em>This does not clash with the occult
 teachings. </em>And this is the problem that chemistry is trying
 to solve; and it must succeed sooner or later in the task, accepting
 <em>nolens volens</em>,<em> </em>when it does, the esoteric teaching.
 But when this does happen, it will kill the nebular theory as
 it now stands.
 </p><p>
 Meanwhile Astronomy cannot accept in any way, if it is to be regarded
 as <em>an exact </em>science, the present theory of the filiation
 of stars -- even if occultism does so in its own way, as it explains
 this filiation differently -- because astronomy has <em>not one
 single physical datum </em>to show for it. Astronomy could anticipate
 Chemistry in proving the existence of the fact, if it could show
 a planetary nebula exhibiting a spectrum of three or four bright
 lines, gradually condensing and transforming into a star, with
 a spectrum all covered with a number of dark lines. But "the
 question of the variability of the nebula, even as to their form,
 is yet one of the mysteries of Astronomy. The data of observation
 possessed so far are of too recent an origin, too uncertain to
 permit us to affirm anything<em>.</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Cosmogonical
 Hypotheses of Wolf.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Since the discovery of the spectroscope, its magic power has revealed
 to its adepts only one single transformation of a star of this
 kind; and even that one showed directly the reverse of what is
 needed as proof in favour of the nebular theory; namely -- <em>a
 star transforming itself into a planetary nebula. </em>As told
 in <em>The Observatory </em>(<em>Vol. I.</em>,<em> p. </em>185),
 the temporary star which appeared in the constellation Cygnus,
 in November, 1876, discovered by J. F. J. Schmidt, exhibited a
 spectrum broken by very brilliant lines. Gradually, the continuous
 spectrum and most of the lines disappeared, leaving finally one
 single brilliant line, which appeared to coincide with the green
 line of the nebula.
 </p><p>
 Though this metamorphosis is not irreconcileable with the hypothesis
 of the nebular origin of the stars, nevertheless this single solitary
 case rests on no observation whatever, least of all on direct
 observation. The occurrence may have been due to several other
 causes. Since astronomers are inclined to think our planets are
 tending toward precipitation on the Sun, why should not that star
 have blazed out owing to a collision of such precipitated planets,
 or, as many suggest, the appulse of a comet? Anyhow, the only
 known instance of a star transformation since 1811 is not favourable
 to the nebular theory. Moreover, on the question of this theory,
 as in all others, astronomers disagree.
 </p><p>
 In our own age, it was Buffon, before Laplace ever thought of
 it, who, very much struck by the identity of motion in the planets,
 was the first to propose the hypothesis of the planets and their
 satellites originating in</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 597 THE META-ELEMENTS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 the bosom of the Sun. Forthwith, and for the purpose, he invented
 a special comet, supposed to have torn out, by a powerful oblique
 blow, the quantity of matter necessary to their formation. Laplace
 gave its dues to the "comet" in his "<em>Exposition
 du Systeme du Monde.</em>"<em> </em>(Note VII.) But the idea
 was seized and even improved upon by a conception of the alternate
 evolution from the Sun's central mass of planets <em>apparently
 </em>without weight or influence on the motion of the visible
 planets -- and as evidently without any more existence than the
 likeness of Moses in the moon.
 </p><p>
 But the modern theory is also a variation on the systems elaborated
 by Kant and Laplace. The idea of both was that, at the origin
 of things, all that matter which now enters into the composition
 of the planetary bodies was spread over all the space comprised
 in the solar system -- and even beyond. It was a nebula of extremely
 small density, whose condensation gradually gave birth, by a mechanism
 that has hitherto never been explained, to the various bodies
 of our systems. This is the original nebular theory, an <em>incomplete
 </em>yet faithful repetition -- a short chapter out of the large
 volume of universal <em>esoteric </em>cosmogony -- of the teachings
 in the Secret Doctrine. And both systems, Kant's and Laplace's,
 differ greatly from the modern theory, redundant with conflicting
 <em>sub</em>-theories and fanciful hypotheses.
 </p><p>
 "<em>The essence of cometary matter and of that which composes
 the stars is totally different from any of the chemical or physical
 characteristics</em> <em>with which Western Science is now acquainted.
 </em>While the spectroscope has shown the probable similarity
 (owing <em>to the chemical action of terrestrial light </em>upon
 the intercepted rays) of earthly and sidereal substance, the chemical
 actions, peculiar to the variously progressed orbs of space, have
 not been detected, nor proven to be identical with those observed
 on our own planet" -- say the Teachers (<em>op. cit.</em>)<em>.
 </em>Mr. Crookes says almost the same in the fragment quoted from
 his lecture, "<em>Elements and Meta-Elements.</em>"
 </p><blockquote>
 "At the utmost," observes C. Wolf,* "could the
 nebular hypothesis show in its favour, with W. Herschell, the
 existence of planetary nebulae in various degrees of condensation,
 and of spiral nebulae, with nuclei of condensation on the branches
 and centre.** But, in fact, the knowledge of the bond that unites
 the nebulae to the stars is yet denied to us; and lacking as we
 do direct observation, we are even debarred from establishing
 it even on the analogy of chemical composition."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 It is evident that, even if the men of science, leaving aside
 the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Member of the Institute, Astronomer of the Observatory, Paris,
 "Cosmogonical Hypotheses."
 </p><p>
 ** But the spectra of these nebulae have never yet been ascertained.
 When they are found with bright lines, then only may they be cited.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 598 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 difficulty arising for them out of such undeniable variety and
 heterogeneity of matter in the constitution of nebulae, did admit,
 with the ancients, that the origin of all the visible and invisible
 heavenly bodies must be sought for in one primordial homogeneous
 world-stuff, in a kind of PRE-<em>protyle</em>,* -- it is evident
 that this would not put an end to their perplexities. Unless they
 admit also that our actual visible Universe is merely the <em>Sthula</em>-<em>Sharira</em>,<em>
 </em>the gross body, of the sevenfold Kosmos, they will have to
 face another problem; especially if they risk maintaining that
 its now visible bodies are the result of the condensation of that
 one and single primordial matter. For mere observation shows them
 that the actions which produced the actual Universe are far more
 complex than could ever be embraced in that theory.
 </p><p>
 First of all, there are two distinct classes of <em>irresolvable</em>
 nebulae, -- as Science itself teaches.
 </p><p>
 The telescope is unable to distinguish between the two, but the
 spectroscope can, and notices, therefore, an essential difference
 between their physical constitutions.**
 </p><p>
 "Some of these," Wolf tells us, "have a spectrum
 of three or four bright lines, others a continuous spectrum. The
 first are gaseous, the others formed of a pulverulent matter.
 The former must constitute a veritable atmosphere: it is among
 these that the solar nebula of Laplace has to be placed. The latter
 form an <em>ensemble </em>of particles that may be considered
 as independent, and the rotation of which obeys the laws of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Mr. Crookes' "Protyle" must not be regarded as the
 <em>primary</em> stuff, out of which the Dhyan Chohans, in accordance
 with the immutable laws of nature, wove our solar system. This
 <em>protyle</em> cannot even be the first <em>prima</em>-<em>materia
 </em>of Kant, which that great mind saw used up in the formation
 of the worlds, and thus existing no longer in a diffused state.
 It is a MEDIATE phase in the progressive differentiation of cosmic
 substance from its normal undifferentiated state. <em>Protyle
 </em>is then the aspect assumed by matter in its middle passage
 into full objectivity.
 </p><p>
 ** "The question of the resolvability of the nebulae has
 been often presented in too affirmative a manner and quite contrary
 to the ideas expressed by the illustrious experimenter with the
 spectra of these constellations -- Mr. Huggins. Every nebula whose
 spectrum contains only bright lines is gaseous, it is said, and
 hence is irresolvable; every nebula with a continuous spectrum
 must end by resolving into stars with an instrument of sufficient
 power. This assumption is contrary at once to the results obtained,
 and to spectroscopic theory. The <em>Lyra</em> nebula, the <em>Dumb</em>-<em>bell</em>
 nebula, the central region of the nebula of Orion, appear resolvable,
 and show a spectrum of bright lines; the nebula of <em>Canis Venatici
 </em>is not resolvable, and gives a continuous spectrum. Because,
 indeed, the spectroscope informs us of the physical state of the
 constituent matter of the stars, but affords us no notions of
 their modes of aggregation. A nebula formed of gaseous globes
 (or even of nuclei, faintly luminous, surrounded by a powerful
 atmosphere) would give a spectrum of lines and be still resolvable;
 such seems to be the state of Huggins' region in the Orion nebula.
 A nebula formed of solid or fluidic particles in a state of incandescence,
 a true cloud, will give a continuous spectrum but will be <em>irresolvable.</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>C. Wolf</em>,<em> Cosmogonical Hypotheses.</em>) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 599 THE NEBULAR THEORY A ROMANCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 internal weight: such are the nebulae adopted by Kant and Faye.
 Observation allows us to place the one as the other at the very
 origin of the planetary world. But when we try to go beyond and
 ascend to the primitive chaos which has produced the totality
 of the heavenly bodies, we have first to account for the actual
 existence of these two classes of nebulae. If the primitive chaos
 were <em>a cold luminous gas</em>,*<em> </em>one could understand
 how the contraction resulting from attraction could have heated
 it and made it luminous. We have to explain the condensation of
 this gas to the state of incandescent particles, the presence
 of which is revealed to us in certain nebulae by the spectroscope.
 If the original chaos was composed of such particles, how did
 certain of their portions pass into the gaseous state, while others
 have preserved their primitive condition? . . . ."
 </p><p>
 Such is the synopsis of the objections and difficulties to the
 acceptance of the nebular theory brought forward by the French
 <em>savant</em>,<em> </em>who concludes his interesting chapter
 by declaring that: --
 </p><p>
 "The first part of the Cosmogonical problem, -- what is the
 primitive matter of chaos; and how did that matter give birth
 to the sun and stars? -- thus remains to this day in THE DOMAIN
 OF ROMANCE AND OF MERE IMAGINATION."**
 </p><p>
 If this is the last word of Science upon that subject, whither
 then should one turn in order to learn what the nebular theory
 is supposed to teach? What, in fact, is this theory? What it <em>is</em>,<em>
 </em>no one seems to know for a certainty. What it <em>is not
 </em>--<em> </em>we learn from the erudite author of the "World-Life."
 He tells us that: --
 </p><p>
 (I.) It "<em>is not a theory of the evolution </em>of the
 Universe . . . but only and primarily a genetic explanation of
 the phenomena of the solar system, and accessorily a co-ordination
 of the principal phenomena in the stellar and nebular firmament,
 <em>as far as human vision has been able to penetrate.</em>"
 </p><p>
 (II.) "That it does not regard the Comets as involved in
 that particular evolution which has produced the solar system."
 (<em>Esoteric doctrine does.</em>)<em> </em>
 </p><p>
 (It does, because it, too, recognises the comets as forms of cosmic
 existence<em> co</em>-<em>ordinated with earlier stages of nebular
 evolution; </em>and it actually assigns <em>to them chiefly </em>the
 formation of all worlds.)
 </p><p>
 (III.) "<em>That it does not deny an antecedent history of
 the luminous fire mist</em>" -- (the<em> secondary </em>stage
 of evolution in the Secret Doctrine) . . . . "and makes no
 claim to having reached an absolute beginning." And even
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </p><p>
 * See Stanza III. about "Light, or the <em>cold </em>Flame,"
 and Commentary Number 8, where it is explained that the "mother"
 (Chaos) is a cold Fire, a cool Radiance, colourless, formless,
 devoid of every quality. "Motion is the One Eternal <em>is</em>,
 and contains the potentialities of every quality in the Manvantaric
 Worlds," it is said.
 </p><p>
 **<em> Hypotheses Cosmogoniques</em>,<em> </em>C. Wolf, 1886.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 600 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 it allows that this "fire mist may have previously existed
 in a cold, nonluminous and <em>invisible </em>condition"
 . . . .
 </p><p>
 (IV.) "And that finally: it does not profess to discover
 the ORIGIN of things, <em>but only a stadium in material history</em>"
 . . . . leaving "the philosopher and theologian as free as
 they ever were to seek for the origin of the modes of being."*
 </p><p>
 But this is not all. Even the greatest philosopher of England
 -- Mr. Herbert Spencer -- arrayed himself against the fantastic
 theory by saying that (<em>a</em>) "The problem of existence
 is not resolved" by it; (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>the nebular
 hypothesis "throws no light upon the origin of diffused matter,"
 and (<em>c</em>) that "the nebular hypothesis (as it now
 stands) implies a First Cause."**
 </p><p>
 The latter, we are afraid, is more than our modern physicists
 have bargained for. Thus, it seems that the poor "hypothesis"
 can hardly expect to find help or corroboration even in the world
 of the metaphysicians.
 </p><p>
 Considering all this, the Occultists believe they have a right
 to present <em>their</em> philosophy, however misunderstood and
 ostracised it may be at present. And they maintain that this failure
 of the scientists to discover the truth is entirely due to their
 materialism and contempt for transcendental sciences. Yet although
 the scientific minds in our century are as far from the true and
 correct doctrine of Evolution as ever, there may be still some
 hope left for the future, as we find another great scientist giving
 us a faint glimmer of it.
 </p><p>
 In an article in <em>Popular Science Review </em>(Vol. <b>XIV</b>.,
 p. 252) on "Recent Researches in Minute Life," we find
 Mr. H. J. Slack, F.C.S., Sec. R.M.S., saying: "There is an
 evident convergence of all sciences, from physics to chemistry
 and physiology, toward <em>some </em>doctrine of evolution and
 development, of which the facts of Darwinism <em>will form part</em>,<em>
 </em>but what ultimate aspect this doctrine will take, there is
 little, if any, evidence to show, and <em>perhaps it will not
 be shaped by the human mind until metaphysical as well as physical
 inquiries are much more advanced.</em>"
 </p><p>
 This is a happy forecast indeed. The day <em>may </em>come, then,
 when the "Natural Selection," as taught by Mr. Darwin
 and Mr. Herbert Spencer, will form only <em>a part</em>,<em> </em>in
 its ultimate modification, of our Eastern doctrine of Evolution,
 which will be Manu and Kapila <em>esoterically explained.</em>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "World-Life," p. 196.
 </p><p>
 **<em> Westminster Review</em>,<em> XX.</em><b>,</b><em> </em>July
 27, 1868. </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-14.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>