<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 460</h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK20">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd1-2-13.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>§ XIV.<br>
 THE FOUR ELEMENTS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>M</strong>ETAPHYSICALLY and esoterically there is but
 One <b>E</b>LEMENT in nature, and at the root of it is the Deity;
 and the so-called <em>seven </em>elements, of which five have
 already manifested and asserted their existence, are the garment,
 <em>the veil</em>,<em> of that deity; </em>direct from the essence
 whereof comes <strong>M</strong>AN, whether physically, psychically,
 mentally or spiritually considered. Four elements only are generally
 spoken of in later antiquity, five admitted only in philosophy.
 For the body of ether is not fully manifested yet, and its noumenon
 is still "the Omnipotent Father -- AEther, the synthesis
 of the rest." But what are these "<b>E</b>LEMENTS"
 whose compound bodies have now been discovered by Chemistry and
 Physics to contain numberless sub-elements, even the sixty or
 seventy of which no longer embrace the whole number suspected.
 (Vide <em>Addenda</em>,<em> </em>§§<em> </em><b>XI.</b>
 and <b>XII</b>., quotations from Mr. Crookes' Lectures.) Let us
 follow their evolution from the <em>historical </em>beginnings,
 at any rate.
 </p><p>
 The four Elements were fully characterized by Plato when he said
 that they were <em>that </em>"which<em> composes </em>and<em>
 decomposes </em>the<em> compound bodies.</em>"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 461 ON THE ELEMENTS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Hence Cosmolatry was never, even in its worst aspect, the fetishism
 which adores or worships the passive external form and matter
 of any object, but looked ever to the <em>noumenon </em>therein.
 Fire, Air, Water, Earth, were but the visible garb, the symbols
 of the informing, invisible Souls or Spirits -- the Cosmic gods
 to whom worship was offered by the ignorant, and simple, respectful
 recognition by the wiser. In their turn the <em>phenomenal </em>subdivisions
 of the noumenal Elements were informed by the Elementals, so called,
 the "Nature Spirits" of lower grades.
 </p><p>
 In the <em>Theogony </em>of Mochus, we find Ether first, and then
 the air; the two principles from which Ulom the <em>intelligible
 </em>([[<em>noetos</em>]]) God (the visible universe of matter)
 is born.*
 </p><p>
 In the Orphic hymns, the Eros-Phanes evolves from the Spiritual
 Egg, which the AEthereal winds impregnate, Wind being "the
 Spirit of God," who is said to move in AEther, "brooding
 over the chaos" -- the Divine "Idea." In the Hindu
 <em>Katakopanisad</em>,<em> </em>Purusha, the Divine Spirit, already
 stands before the original matter, from whose union springs the
 great Soul of the World, "Maha = Atma, Brahm, the Spirit
 of Life;"** these latter appellations being again identical
 with the Universal Soul, or <em>Anima Mundi</em>,<em> </em>the
 Astral Light of the Theurgists and Kabalists, being its last and
 lowest division."
 </p><p>
 The [[<em>stoicheia</em>]] (Elements) of Plato and Aristotle,
 were thus the <em>incorporeal principles </em>attached to the
 four great divisions of our Cosmic World, and it is with justice
 that Creuzer defines those primitive beliefs . . . <em>as a species
 of magism</em>,<em> a psychic paganism</em>,<em> </em>and a <em>deification
 of potencies</em>;<em> </em>a spiritualization which placed the
 believers in a close community with these potencies," (Book
 IX, p. 850). So close, indeed, that the hierarchies of those potencies
 or Forces have been classified on a graduated scale of seven from
 the ponderable to the imponderable. They are Septenary, -- not
 as an artificial aid to facilitate their comprehension -- but
 in their real <em>Cosmic </em>gradation, from their chemical (or
 physical) to their purely spiritual composition. <em>Gods</em>
 --<em> </em>with the ignorant masses -- gods independent and supreme;
 daemons with the fanatics, who, intellectual as they often may
 be, are unable to understand the Spirit of the philosophical sentence,
 <em>in pluribus unum. </em>With the hermetic philosopher they
 are FORCES <em>relatively </em>"<em>blind</em>,"<em>
 </em>or<em> </em>"<em>intelligent</em>,"<em> </em>according
 to which of the principles in them he deals with. It required
 long millenniums before they found themselves, in our cultured
 age, finally degraded into simple chemical elements.
 </p><p>
 At any rate, good Christians, and especially the Biblical Protestants,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Movers: "Phoinizer," 282.
 </p><p>
 ** Weber: "Akad. Vorles," 213, 214, etc.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 462 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ought to show more reverence for the four Elements, if they would
 show any for Moses. For the Bible manifests the consideration
 and mystic significance in which they were held by the Hebrew
 Lawgiver, on every page of the Pentateuch. The tent which contained
 the Holy of Holies " was a Cosmic Symbol, sacred, in one
 of its meanings, to the Elements, the four cardinal points, and
 <strong>E</strong>THER. Josephus shows it built in white, the
 colour of Ether. And this explains also why, in the Egyptian and
 the Hebrew temples -- according to Clemens Alexandrinus -- a gigantic
 curtain, supported by five pillars, separated the <em>sanctum
 sanctorum </em>(now represented by the altar in Christian churches)
 wherein the priests alone were permitted to enter, from the part
 accessible to the profane. By its <em>four </em>colours the curtain
 symbolized the four principal Elements, and signified the knowledge
 of the divine that the <em>five</em> senses of men can enable
 man to acquire with the help of the <em>four </em>Elements. (See
 <em>Stromata </em>I., v. § 6).
 </p><p>
 In Cory's <em>Ancient Fragments</em>,<em> </em>one of the "Chaldean
 Oracles" expresses ideas about the elements and Ether in
 language singularly like that of the <em>Unseen Universe</em>,<em>
 </em>written by two eminent scientists of our day.
 </p><blockquote>
 It states that "from ether have come all things, and to it
 all will return; that the images of all things are indelibly impressed
 upon it; and that it is the store-house of the germs or of the
 remains of all visible forms, and even ideas. It appears as if
 this case strangely corroborates our assertion that whatever discoveries
 may be made in our days will be found to have been anticipated
 by many thousand years by our 'simple-minded ancestors.' "
 -- (<i>Isis Unveiled.</i>)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Whence came the four elements and the <em>malachim </em>of the
 Hebrews? They have been made to merge, by a theological sleight-of-hand
 on the part of the Rabbins and the later Fathers of the Church
 into Jehovah, but their origin is identical with that of the Cosmic
 gods of all other nations. Their symbols, whether born on the
 shores of the Oxus, on the burning sands of Upper Egypt, or in
 the wild forests, weird and glacial, which cover the slopes and
 peaks of the sacred snowy mountains of Thessaly, or again, in
 the <em>pampas </em>of America, their symbols, we repeat, when
 traced to their source, are ever one and the same. Whether Egyptian
 or Pelasgian, Aryan or Semitic, the <em>genius loci</em>,<em>
 </em>the local god, embraced in its unity all nature; but not
 especially the four elements any more than one of their creations,
 such as trees, rivers, mounts or stars. The <em>genius loci</em>
 --<em> </em>a very late after-thought of the last sub-races of
 the Fifth Root-race, when the primitive and grandiose meaning
 had become nearly lost -- was ever the representative in his accumulated
 titles of all his colleagues. It was the god of <em>fire</em>,
 symbolised by thunder, as Jove or Agni; the god of <em>water</em>,<em>
 </em>symbolised by the fluvial bull or some sacred river or fountain,
 as Varuna, Neptune, etc.; the god of <em>air</em>, manifesting
 in the hurricane and tempest, as Vayu and Indra; and the god or
 spirit</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 463 THE COSMIC GODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of the earth, who appeared in earthquakes, like Pluto, Yama, and
 so many others.
 </p><p>
 These were the Cosmic gods, ever synthesizing all in one, as found
 in every cosmogony or mythology. Thus, the Greeks had their Dodonean
 Jupiter, who included in himself the four elements and the four
 cardinal points, and who was recognized, therefore, in old Rome
 under the pantheistic title of <em>Jupiter Mundus</em>;<em> </em>and
 who now, in modern Rome, has become the <em>Deus Mundus</em>,<em>
 </em>the one mundane god, who is made to swallow all others in
 the latest theology -- by the arbitrary decision of his special
 ministers.
 </p><p>
 As gods of Fire, Air, Water, they were <em>celestial </em>gods;
 as gods of the <em>lower region</em>,<em> </em>they were <em>infernal
 </em>deities: the latter adjective applying simply <em>to the
 Earth. </em>They were "Spirits of the Earth" under their
 respective names of Yama, Pluto, Osiris, the "Lord of the
 lower kingdom, etc., etc.," and their tellurial character
 proves it sufficiently.* The ancients knew of no worse abode after
 death than the <em>Kamaloka</em>,<em> </em>the<em> limbus </em>on
 this Earth. If it is argued that the Dodonean Jupiter was identified
 with Aidoneus, the king of the subterranean world, and <em>Dis</em>,<em>
 </em>or the Roman Pluto and the Dionysius Chthonios, the subterranean,
 wherein, according to Creuzer (I, vi., ch. 1), oracles were rendered,
 then it will become the pleasure of the Occultists to prove that
 both Aidoneus and Dionysius are the bases of Adonai, or "Jurbo
 Adonai," as Jehovah is called in Codex Nazaraeus. "Thou
 shalt not worship the Sun, who is named Adonai, whose name is
 also <em>Kadush </em>and El-El" (<em>Cod. Naz.</em>,<em>
 </em>I, 47; see also Psalm lxxxix., 18), and also "Lord Bacchus."
 Baal-Adonis of the <em>Sods </em>or Mysteries of the pre-Babylonian
 Jews became the Adonai by the Massorah, the later-vowelled Jehovah.
 Hence the Roman Catholics are right. All these Jupiters are of
 the same family; but Jehovah has to be included therein to make
 it complete. Jupiter-<em>Aerios </em>or<em> Pan</em>,<em> </em>the
 Jupiter Ammon, and the Jupiter-Bel-Moloch, are all correlations
 and one with Yurbo-Adonai, because they are all one cosmic nature.
 It is that nature and power which create the specific terrestrial
 symbol, and the physical and material fabric of the latter, which
 proves the Energy manifesting through it as <em>extrinsic.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 For primitive religion was something better than simple pre-occupation
 about physical phenomena, as remarked by Schilling; and principles,
 more elevated than we modern Sadducees know of, "were hidden
 under the transparent veil of such merely natural divinities as
 thunder,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The<em> Gehenna </em>of the Bible was a valley near Jerusalem,
 where the monotheistic Jews immolated their children to Moloch,
 if the prophet Jeremiah is to be believed on his word. The Scandinavian
 <em>Hel</em> or <em>Hela</em> was a frigid region -- again Kamaloka
 -- and the Egyptian Amenti a place of purification. (See <em>Isis
 Unveiled</em>,<em> </em>Vol. II., p. 11.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 464 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the winds, and rain." The ancients knew and could distinguish
 the <em>corporeal </em>from the <em>spiritual </em>elements, in
 the forces of nature.
 </p><p>
 The four-fold Jupiter, as the four-faced Brahma -- the aerial,
 the fulgurant, the terrestrial, and the marine god -- the lord
 and master of the four elements, may stand as a representative
 for the great Cosmic gods of every nation. While passing power
 over the fire to Hephaistos-Vulcan, over the sea, to Poseidon-Neptune,
 and over the Earth, to Pluto-Aidoneus -- the AERIAL Jove was all
 these; for <strong>AE</strong>THER, from the first, had pre-eminence
 over, and was the synthesis of, all the elements.
 </p><p>
 Tradition points to a grotto, a vast cave in the deserts of Central
 Asia, whereinto light pours through its four seemingly natural
 apertures or clefts placed crossways at the four cardinal points
 of the place. From noon till an hour before sunset that light
 streams in, of four different colours, as averred -- red, blue,
 orange-gold, and white -- owing to some either natural or artificially
 prepared conditions of vegetation and soil. The light converges
 in the centre around a pillar of white marble with a globe upon
 it, which represents our earth. It is named the "grotto of
 Zaratushta."
 </p><p>
 When included under the arts and sciences of the fourth race,
 the Atlanteans, the phenomenal manifestation of the four elements,
 justly attributed by the believers in Cosmic gods to the intelligent
 interference of the latter, assumed a scientific character. The
 <em>magic </em>of the ancient priests consisted, in those days,
 in addressing <em>their gods in their own language. </em>"The
 speech of the men of the earth cannot reach the Lords. Each must
 be addressed in the language of his respective element" --
 is a sentence which will be shown pregnant with meaning. "<em>The
 Book of Rules</em>"<em> </em>cited adds as an explanation
 of the nature of that <em>Element</em>-language: "It is composed
 of <em>sounds</em>,<em> </em>not words; of sounds, numbers and
 figures. He who knows how to blend the three, will call forth
 the response of the superintending Power" (the regent-god
 of the specific element needed).
 </p><p>
 Thus this "language" is that of <em>incantations </em>or
 of <strong>M</strong>ANTRAS, as they are called in India, sound
 being <em>the most potent and effectual magic agent</em>,<em>
 and the first of the keys which opens the door of communication
 between Mortals and the Immortals. </em>He who believes in the
 words and teachings of St. Paul, has no right to pick out from
 the latter those sentences only that he chooses to accept, to
 the rejection of others; and St. Paul teaches most undeniably
 the existence of cosmic gods and their presence among us. Paganism
 preached a dual and simultaneous evolution: "creation"
 -- "<em>spiritualem ac mundanum</em>,"<em> </em>as the
 Roman Church has it -- ages before the advent of that Roman Church.
 Exoteric phraseology has changed little with respect to divine
 hierarchies since the most palmy days of Paganism, or "Idolatry."
 Names alone have changed,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 465 A CONFESSION OF SCIENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 along with claims which have now become false pretences. For when
 Plato put in the mouth of the Highest Principle -- "Father
 AEther" or Jupiter -- these words, for instance: "The
 gods of the gods of whom I am the <em>maker </em>(<em>opifex</em>)<em>
 </em>as<em> </em>I am the father of all their works (<em>operumque
 parens</em>)"; he knew the spirit of this sentence as fully,
 we suspect, as St. Paul did, when saying: "For though there
 be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, as there
 be gods many and lords many," . . . . etc. (1 Cor. viii.
 5.)* Both knew the sense and the meaning of what they put forward
 in such guarded terms.
 </p><p>
 Says Sir W. Grove, <b>F.R.S</b>., speaking of the correlation
 of forces, "The ancients when they witnessed a natural phenomenon,
 removed from ordinary analogies, and unexplained by any mechanical
 action known to them, referred it to a soul, a spiritual or preternatural
 power. . . . Air and gases were also at first deemed spiritual,
 but subsequently they became invested with a more material character;
 and the same words [[<em>pneuma</em>]], spirit, etc., were used
 to signify the soul or a gas; the very word gas, from <em>geist</em>,<em>
 </em>a ghost or spirit, affords us an instance of the gradual
 transmutation of a spiritual into a physical conception . . .
 . . ." (P. 89.) This, the great man of science (in his preface
 to the fifth edition of "Correlation of Physical Forces")
 considers as the <em>only </em>concern of exact science, which
 has no business to meddle with the CAUSES. "Cause and effect,"
 he explains, "are therefore, in their abstract relation to
 these forces, words solely of convenience. We are totally unacquainted
 <em>with the ultimate generating power </em>of each and all of
 them, and probably shall ever remain so; we can only ascertain
 the norma of their actions; we must humbly refer their causation
 to one omnipresent influence, and content ourselves with studying
 their effects and developing, by experiment, their mutual relations"
 (p. xiv.).
 </p><p>
 This policy once accepted, and the system virtually admitted in
 the above-quoted words, namely, the <em>spirituality </em>of the
 "ultimate generating power," it would be more than illogical
 to refuse to recognise this quality which is inherent in the <em>material
 elements</em>,<em> </em>or rather, in their com-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * We cannot be taken to task by the Protestants for interpreting
 the verse from the <em>Corinthians </em>as we do; for, if the
 translation in the English Bible is made ambiguous, it is not
 so in the original texts, and the Roman Catholic Church accepts
 the words of the Apostle in their true sense. For a proof see
 the <em>Commentaries on St. Paul</em>'<em>s Epistles</em>,<em>
 </em>by St. John Chrysostom "<em>directly inspired </em>by
 the Apostle," and "who wrote under his dictation,"
 as we are assured by the Marquis de Mirville, whose works are
 approved by Rome. And St. Chrysostom says, commenting on that
 special verse, "And, though there are (in fact) they who
 are called gods . . . . -- for it seems, there are really <em>several
 gods</em> --<em> </em>withal, and for all that, the God-<em>principle
 </em>and the Superior God ceasing to remain essentially <em>one</em>
 and indivisible." . . . Thus spoke the old Initiates also,
 knowing that the worship of minor gods could never affect the
 "God <em>Principle</em>"<em> </em>(See<em> </em>de Mirville,
 "<em>Des Esprits</em>,"<em> </em>vol. ii., 322)<em>.</em>
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 466 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 pounds -- as present in the fire, air, water or earth. The ancients
 knew these powers so well, that, while concealing their true nature
 under various allegories, for the benefit (or to the detriment)
 of the uneducated rabble, they never departed from the multiple
 object in view, while inverting them. They contrived to throw
 a thick veil over the nucleus of truth concealed by the symbol,
 but they ever tried to preserve the latter as a <em>record </em>for
 future generations, sufficiently transparent to allow their wise
 men to discern that truth behind the fabulous form of the glyph
 or allegory. They are accused of <em>superstition </em>and<em>
 credulity</em>,<em> </em>those ancient sages; and this by those
 very nations, which, learned in all the modern arts and sciences,
 cultured and wise in their generation, accept to this day as their
 one living and infinite God, the anthropomorphic "Jehovah"
 of the Jews.
 </p><p>
 What were some of the alleged "superstitions"? Hesiod
 believed, for instance, that "the winds were the sons of
 the giant Typhoeus," who were chained and unchained at will
 by AEolus, and the polytheistic Greeks accepted it along with
 Hesiod. Why should not they, since the monotheistic Jews had the
 same beliefs, with other names for their <em>dramatis personae</em>,<em>
 </em>and since Christians believe in the same to this day? The
 Hesiodic AEolus, Boreas, etc., etc., were named <em>Kadim</em>,<em>
 Tzaphon</em>,<em> Daren</em>,<em> and Ruach Hajan </em>by the
 "chosen people" of Israel. What is, then, the fundamental
 difference? While the Hellenes were taught that AEolus tied and
 untied the winds, the Jews believed as fervently that their Lord
 God, "<em>with smoke coming out of his nostrils and fire
 out of his mouth</em>,<em> rode upon a cherub and did fly; </em>and
 was seen <em>upon the wings of the wind</em>"<em> </em>(<em>II.
 Sam.</em>,<em> xxii. </em>9<em> and </em>11). The expressions
 of the two nations are either both figures of speech, or both
 <em>superstitions. </em>We think they are neither; but only arise
 from a keen sense of oneness with nature, and a perception of
 the mysterious and the intelligent behind every natural phenomenon,
 which the moderns no longer possess. Nor was it "superstitious"
 in the Greek pagans to listen to the oracle of Delphi, when, at
 the approach of the fleet of Xerxes, that oracle advised them
 to "sacrifice to the Winds," if the same has to be regarded
 as <em>Divine </em>Worship in the Israelites, who sacrificed as
 often to the wind and fire -- especially to the latter element.
 Do they not say that their "God is a consuming fire"<em>
 </em>(<em>Deut. iv.</em>,<em> </em>24), who appeared generally
 <em>as </em>Fire and "encompassed by fire"? and did
 not Elijah seek for him (the Lord) in the "great strong wind,
 and in the earthquake"? Do not the Christians repeat the
 same after them? Do not they, moreover, sacrifice to this day,
 to the same "<em>God of Wind and Water?</em>"<em> </em>They
 do; because special prayers for rain, dry weather, trade-winds
 and the calming of storms on the seas exist to this hour in the
 prayer-books of the three Christian churches; and the several
 hundred sects of the Protestant religion</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 467 THE FIGHTING GODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 offer them to their God upon every threat of calamity? The fact
 that they are no more answered by Jehovah, than they were, probably,
 by Jupiter <em>Pluvius</em>,<em> </em>does not alter the fact
 of these prayers being addressed to the Power or Powers supposed
 to rule over the Elements, or of these Powers being identical
 in Paganism and Christianity; or have we to believe that such
 prayers are crass idolatry and absurd "superstition"
 <em>only </em>when addressed by a Pagan to his <em>idol</em>,<em>
 </em>and that the same superstition is suddenly transformed into
 <em>praiseworthy piety </em>and<em> religion </em>whenever the
 name of the celestial addressee is changed? But the tree <em>is
 </em>known by its fruit. And the fruit of the Christian tree being
 no better than that of the tree of Paganism, why should the former
 command more reverence than the latter.
 </p><p>
 Thus, when we are told by the Chevalier Drach, a converted Jew,
 and the Marquis de Mirville, a Roman Catholic fanatic of the French
 aristocracy, that in Hebrew <em>lightning </em>is a synonym of
 <em>fury</em>,<em> </em>and is always handled by an <em>evil </em>Spirit;
 that <em>Jupiter Fulgur</em> or <em>Fulgurans </em>is also called
 by the Christians <em>oelicius</em>,<em> </em>and denounced as
 the <em>soul of lightning</em>,<em> </em>its<em> </em>daemon*;
 we have either to apply the same explanation and definitions to
 the "Lord God of Israel," under the same circumstances,
 or renounce our right of abusing the gods and creeds of other
 nations.
 </p><p>
 The foregoing statements emanating as they do from two ardent
 and learned Roman Catholics, are, to say the least,<em> dangerous</em>,<em>
 </em>in the presence of the Bible and its prophets. Indeed, if
 Jupiter, the "chief Daemon of the Pagan Greeks," hurled
 his deadly thunder-bolts and lightnings at those who excited his
 wrath, so did the Lord God of Abraham and Jacob. We find in I.
 Samuel, that "the Lord thundered from heaven, and the most
 High uttered <em>his </em>voice, and he sent out arrows (thunder
 bolts) and scattered them (Saul's armies) with lightning, and
 discomforted them." (<em>Chap. xxii. </em>14,<em> </em>15.)
 </p><p>
 The Athenians are accused of having sacrificed to Boreas; and
 this "Demon" is charged with having submerged and wrecked
 400 ships of the Persian fleet on the rocks of Mount Pelion, and
 of having become so furious "that all the Magi of Xerxes
 could hardly counteract it by offering contra-sacrifices to Tethys"
 [<em>Herodotus </em>"Polym." cxc]. Very fortunately,
 no authenticated instance is on the records of Christian wars
 showing a like catastrophe on the same scale happening to one
 Christian fleet owing to the "prayers" of its enemy
 -- another Christian nation. But this is from no fault of theirs,
 for each prays as ardently to Jehovah for the destruction of the
 other, as the Athenians prayed to Boreas. Both resorted to a neat
 little piece of black magic <em>con amore. </em>Such abstinence
 from divine interference being hardly due to lack of
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Cosmolatry, p. 415.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 468 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 prayers, sent to a <em>common </em>Almighty God for mutual destruction,
 where, then, shall we draw the line between Pagan and Christian?
 And who can doubt that all Protestant England would rejoice and
 offer thanks to the Lord, if, during some future war, 400 ships
 of the hostile fleet were to be wrecked owing to such holy prayers.
 What is, then, the difference, we ask again, between a Jupiter,
 a Boreas, and a Jehovah? No more than this: The crime of one's
 own next-of-kin -- say of one's "father" -- is always
 excused and often exalted, whereas the crime of our neighbour's
 parent is ever gladly punished by hanging. Yet the crime is the
 same.
 </p><p>
 So far the "blessings of Christianity" do not seem to
 have made any appreciable advance on the morals of the converted
 Pagans.
 </p><p>
 The above is not a defence of Pagan gods, nor is it an attack
 on the Christian deity, nor does it mean belief in either. The
 writer is quite impartial, and rejects the testimony in favour
 of either, neither praying to, believing in, nor dreading any
 such "personal" and anthropomorphic God. The parallels
 are brought forward simply as one more curious exhibition of the
 illogical and blind fanaticism of the civilized theologian. For,
 so far, there is not a very great difference between the two beliefs,
 and there is none in their respective effects upon <em>morality</em>,<em>
 </em>or spiritual nature. The "light of Christ" shines
 upon as hideous features of the animal-man now, as the "light
 of Lucifer" did in days of old.
 </p><p>
 "Those unfortunate heathens in their superstition regard
 even the Elements as something that has comprehension! . . . .
 They still have faith in their idol Vayu -- the god or, rather,
 Demon of the Wind and Air . . . they firmly believe in the efficacy
 of their prayers, and in the powers of their Brahmins over the
 winds and storms. . . . ." (The Missionary Lavoisier, of
 Cochin, in the <em>Journal des Colonies.</em>)<em> </em>In reply
 to this, we may quote from <em>Luke viii.</em>,<em> </em>24: "And
 he (Jesus) arose and <em>rebuked the Wind and the raging of the
 Water</em>,<em> and they ceased and there was a calm</em>."
 And here is another quotation from a prayer book: . . . "Oh,
 Virgin of the Sea, blessed Mother and Lady of the Waters, stay
 thy waves . . ." etc., etc. (prayer of the Neapolitan and
 Provencal sailors, copied textually from that of the Phoenician
 mariners to their Virgingoddess Astarte.) The logical and irrepressible
 conclusion arising from the parallels brought forward, and the
 denunciation of the Missionary is this: The <em>commands </em>of
 the Brahmins to their element-gods not <em>remaining </em>"<em>ineffectual,</em>"<em>
 </em>the power of the Brahmins is thus placed on a par with that
 of Jesus. Moreover, Astarte is shown not a whit weaker in potency
 than the "Virgin of the Sea" of Christian sailors. It
 is not enough to give a dog a bad name, and then hang him; the
 dog has to be proven guilty. Boreas and Astarte may be <em>devils
 </em>in theological</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 469 PRAYER IS OFTEN SORCERY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 fancy, but, as just remarked, the tree has to be judged by its
 fruit. And once the Christians are shown as immoral and wicked
 as the pagans ever were, what benefit has humanity derived from
 its change of gods and idols?
 </p><p>
 That, however, which God and the Christian Saints are justified
 in doing, becomes a crime, if successful, in simple mortals. Sorcery
 and incantations are regarded as fables now; yet from the day
 of the <em>Institutes of Justinian </em>down to the laws against
 witchcraft of England and America -- <em>obsolete </em>but not
 repealed to this day -- such incantations, even when only suspected,
 were punished as criminal. Why punish a chimera? And still we
 read of Constantine, the Emperor, sentencing to death the philosopher
 Sopatrus <em>for unchaining the winds, </em>and thus preventing
 ships loaded with grain from arriving in time to put an end to
 famine. Pausanias, when affirming that he saw with his own eyes
 "men who by simple <em>prayers and incantations</em>"<em>
 </em>stopped a strong hail-storm, is derided. This does not prevent
 modern Christian writers from advising prayer during storm and
 danger, and believing in its efficacy. Hoppo and Stadlein two
 magicians and sorcerers -- were sentenced to death for throwing
 <em>charms on fruit </em>and transferring a harvest <em>by magic
 arts </em>from one field to another, hardly a century ago, if
 we can believe Sprenger, the famous writer, who vouches for it:
 "<em>Qui fruges excantassent segetem pellicentes incantando.</em>"
 </p><p>
 Let us close by reminding the reader that, without the smallest
 shadow of superstition, one may believe in the dual nature of
 every object on Earth -- in the spiritual and the material, the
 visible and the invisible nature, and that science virtually proves
 this, while denying its own demonstration. For if, as Sir William
 Grove has it, the electricity we handle is but the <em>result
 </em>of ordinary matter affected by something <em>invisible, the
 </em>"<em>ultimate </em>generating power" of every Force,
 the "<em>one omnipresent influence,</em>"<em> </em>then
 it only becomes natural that one should believe as the ancients
 did; namely, that every Element is <em>dual </em>in its nature.
 "ETHEREAL fire is the emanation of the KABIR proper; the
 <em>aerial </em>is but the union (correlation) of the former with
 <em>terrestrial fire, </em>and its guidance and application on
 our earthly plane belongs to a <em>Kabir </em>of a lesser dignity"
 -- an Elemental, perhaps, as an Occultist would call it; and the
 same may be said of every Cosmic Element.
 </p><p>
 No one will deny that the human being is possessed of various
 forces: magnetic, sympathetic, antipathetic, nervous, dynamical,
 occult, mechanical, mental -- every kind of force; and that the
 physical forces are all biological in their essence, seeing that
 they intermingle with, and often merge into, those forces that
 we have named intellectual and moral -- the first being the vehicles,
 so to say, the <em>upadhi, of </em>the second. No one, who does
 not deny soul in man, would hesitate in</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 470 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 saying that their presence and commingling are the very essence
 of our being; that they constitute the <em>Ego </em>in man, in
 fact. These potencies have their physiological, physical, mechanical,
 as well as their nervous, ecstatic, clairaudient, and clairvoyant
 phenomena, which are now regarded and recognised as perfectly
 natural, even by science. Why should man be the only exception
 in nature, and why cannot even the ELEMENTS have their <em>vehicles,
 </em>their "Vahans" in what we call the PHYSICAL FORCES?
 And why, above all, should such beliefs be called "superstition"
 along with the religions of old?
 </p><p>
 --------------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-2-15.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>