<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 647 ASTROLOGY A SCIENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 [[This page continued from <a href="sd1-3-16.htm">previous section]</a>]
 </p><h4>XVII.<br>
 "THE ZODIAC AND ITS ANTIQUITY."</h4>
 
 <p>
 "<strong>A</strong>LL men are apt to have a high conceit
 of their own understanding, and to be tenacious of the opinions
 they profess," said Jordan, justly adding to this -- "and
 yet almost all men <em>are guided by the understandings of others</em>,<em>
 not by their own; </em>and may be said more truly to adopt, than
 to beget, their opinions."
 </p><p>
 This becomes doubly true in the matter of scientific opinions
 upon hypotheses offered for consideration -- the prejudice and
 preconceptions of "authorities," so called, often deciding
 upon questions of the most vital importance for history. There
 are several such predetermined opinions among our learned Orientalists,
 yet few are more unjust or <em>illogical </em>than the general
 error with regard to the antiquity of the Zodiac. Thanks to the
 hobby of some German Orientalists, English and American Sanskritists
 have accepted Professor Weber's opinion that the peoples of India
 had no idea or knowledge of the Zodiac prior to the Macedonian
 invasion, and that it is from the Greeks that the ancient Hindus
 imported it into their country. We are further told, by several
 other "authorities," that no Eastern nation knew of
 the Zodiac before the Hellenes kindly acquainted their neighbours
 with their invention. <em>This</em>,<em> </em>in the face of the
 <em>Book of Job</em>,<em> </em>declared, even by themselves, to
 be the oldest in the Hebrew canon, certainly prior to Moses, and
 which speaks of the <em>making </em>"of Arcturus, Orion,
 and Pleiades (<em>Ash</em>,<em> Kesil</em>,<em> </em>and</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 648 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>Cimah</em>)<em> </em>and the chambers of the South" (ix.
 9); of Scorpio and the <em>Mazzaroths </em>-- the TWELVE SIGNS
 (xxxviii., 31, 32), which words, if they mean anything, imply
 knowledge of the Zodiac even among the nomadic Arabic tribes.
 The <em>Book of Job</em>,<em> </em>they say, precedes Homer and
 Hesiod by at least one thousand years -- the two Greek poets having
 themselves flourished some eight centuries before the Christian
 era (!!). One who prefers, by the bye, to believe Plato, who shows
 Homer flourishing far earlier, could point to a number of Zodiacal
 signs mentioned in the <em>Iliad </em>and the <em>Odyssey</em>,<em>
 </em>in the Orphic poems, and elsewhere. But since the cock-and-bull
 hypothesis of some modern critics to the effect that neither Orpheus,
 nor yet Homer and Hesiod, ever existed, it would seem time lost
 to mention these Archaic authors at all. The Arabian <em>Job </em>will<em>
 </em>suffice; unless, indeed, his volume of lamentations, along
 with the poems of the two Greeks, adding to them those of Linus,
 should now be also declared to be the patriotic forgery of the
 Jew Aristobulus. But if the Zodiac was known in the days of Job,
 how could the civilized and philosophical Hindus have remained
 ignorant of it?
 </p><p>
 Risking the arrows of modern criticism -- rather blunted by misuse
 -- the reader may be made acquainted with Bailly's learned opinion
 upon the subject. Inferred speculations may be shown to be erroneous.
 Mathematical calculations stand on more secure grounds. Taking
 as a starting point several astronomical references in <em>Job</em>,<em>
 </em>Bailly devised a very ingenious means of proving that the
 earliest founders of the science of the Zodiac belonged to an
 antediluvian, primitive people. The fact that he seems willing
 to see in Thoth, Seth, and in <em>Fohi </em>(of China), some of
 the Biblical patriarchs, does not interfere with the validity
 of his proof as to the antiquity of the Zodiac.* Even accepting,
 for argument's sake, his cautious 3700 years <b>B.C</b>. as the
 correct age of the science, this date proves in the most irrefutable
 way that it was not the Greeks who invented the Zodiac, for the
 simple reason that they did not yet exist as a nation thirty-seven
 centuries <b>B.C</b>. -- not as an <em>historical </em>race admitted
 by the critics, at any rate. Bailly then calculated the period
 at which the constellations manifested the atmospheric influence
 called by Job "sweet influences of the Pleiades"** (in
 Hebrew, <em>Chimah</em>,<em> </em>see<em> Job xxxviii. </em>31);
 of the <em>Cesil </em>(Orion); and that of the <em>desert </em>rains
 with reference to <em>Scorpio</em>,<em> </em>the eighth constellation;
 and found that in presence the eternal conformity of those divisions
 of the zodiac and names of the planets applied in the same order
 everywhere and always; and in presence of the impossibility of
 attributing it all to chance and <em>coincidence</em>,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> Astronomie Antique.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** The <em>Pleiades</em>,<em> </em>as all know, are the seven
 stars beyond the Bull, which appear at the beginning of spring.
 They have a very occult meaning in the Hindu esoteric philosophy,
 and are connected with <em>sound </em>and other mystic principles
 in Nature.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 649 THE ZODIAC IN THE BIBLE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "which never creates such similarities," there must
 be allowed for the zodiac a great antiquity indeed. (See <em>Astronomie
 Antique</em>,<em> </em>pp. 63 to 74.)
 </p><p>
 Again, if the Bible is supposed to be an authority on any matter
 (and there are some who still believe so, whether from Christian
 or Kabalistical considerations), then the zodiac is clearly mentioned
 in II Kings, xxiii. 5. Before the "book of the law"
 was "found" by Hilkiah, the high priest (xxii.), the
 signs of the zodiac were known and worshipped. They were held
 in the same adoration as the sun and moon, since the "priests,
 whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense . . . unto
 Baal, to the sun, moon, and to the planets, and to all the host
 of heaven," or the <em>twelve signs </em>or<em> constellations</em>,<em>
 </em>as the marginal note in the English Bible explains (see II.
 Kings xxiii. 5), had followed the injunction for centuries. They
 were stopped in their idolatry only by King Josiah, 624 years
 B.C.
 </p><p>
 The Old Testament is full of allusions to the twelve zodiacal
 signs, and the whole scheme is built upon it -- heroes, personages,
 and events. Thus in the dream of Joseph, who saw eleven "stars"
 bowing to the <em>twelfth</em>,<em> </em>which was <em>his </em>"star,"
 the zodiac is meant. The Roman Catholics have discovered in it,
 moreover, a prophecy of Christ, who is that twelfth star, they
 say, and the eleven apostles; the absence of the twelfth being
 also regarded as a prophetic allusion to the treachery of Judas.
 The twelve sons of Jacob are again a reference to the same, as
 justly pointed out by Villapandus (<em>Temple de Jerusalem</em>,<em>
 </em>Vol. <b>II.,</b> p. 2nd part, chap. xxx). Sir James Malcolm,
 in his <em>History of Persia </em>(ch. vii.), shows the <em>Dabistan
 </em>echoing all such traditions about the Zodiac. He traces the
 invention of it to the palmy days of the golden age of Iran, remarking
 that one of the said traditions maintains that the genii of the
 planets are represented under the same shapes and figures they
 had assumed, when <em>they showed themselves to several holy prophets</em>,<em>
 </em>and have thus led to the establishment of the rites based
 on the Zodiac.
 </p><p>
 Pythagoras, and after him Philo Judaeus, held the number 12 as
 very sacred. "The dodecahedron is a PERFECT number."
 It is the one among the signs of the Zodiac, Philo adds, that
 the sun visits in twelve months, and it is to honour that sign
 that Moses divided his nation into twelve tribes, established
 the twelve cakes (Levit. xxiv., 5) of the <em>shewbread</em>,<em>
 </em>and placed twelve precious stones around the <em>ephod </em>of
 the pontiffs. (See <em>De Profugis.</em>)
 </p><p>
 According to Seneca, Berosus taught prophecy of every future event
 and cataclysm by the Zodiac; and the time fixed by him for the
 conflagration of the world (<em>pralaya</em>),<em> </em>and another
 for a deluge, is found to answer to the time given in an ancient
 Egyptian papyrus. It comes at every renewal of the cycle of the
 sidereal year of 25,868 years. The names of the Akkadian months
 were called by, and derived from, the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 650 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 names of the signs of the Zodiac, and the Akkadians themselves
 are far earlier than the Chaldaeans. Mr. Proctor shows, in his
 <em>Myths and Marvels of Astronomy</em>,<em> </em>that the ancient
 astronomers had acquired a system of the most accurate astronomy
 2,400 years <b>B.C.</b>; the Hindus date their Kali Yug from a
 great periodical conjunction of the planets thirty-one centuries
 <b>B.C</b>.; and, withal, it is the Greeks belonging to the expedition
 of Alexander the Great, who were the instructors of the Aryan
 Hindus in astronomy!
 </p><p>
 Whether the origin of the Zodiac is Aryan or Egyptian, it is still
 of an immense antiquity. Simplicius (<b>VI</b>th cent. <b>A.D</b>.)
 writes that he had always heard that the Egyptians had kept astronomical
 observations and records for the last 630,000 years. This statement
 appears to frighten Mr. G. Massey, who remarks on this in his
 <em>Natural Genesis </em>(318)<em> </em>that "if we read
 this number of years by the month which Euxodus said the Egyptians
 termed a year, <em>that </em>would still yield the length of two
 cycles of precession (or 51,736 years)." Diogenes Laertius
 carried back the astronomical calculations of the Egyptians to
 48,863 years before Alexander the Great (<em>Proem</em>, 2)<em>.
 </em>Martianus Capella corroborates the same by telling posterity
 that the Egyptians had secretly studied astronomy for over 40,000
 years, before they imparted their knowledge to the world (<em>Astronomy
 of the Ancients</em>,<em> </em>Lewis, p. 264).
 </p><p>
 Several valuable quotations are made in the <em>Natural Genesis
 </em>with the view of supporting the author's theories, but they
 justify the teaching of the <em>Secret Doctrine </em>far more.
 For instance, Plutarch is quoted from his<em> Life of Sulla</em>,<em>
 </em>saying: "One day when the sky was serene . . . a sound
 was heard in it . . . of a trumpet, so loud, shrill and mournful,
 that it affrighted . . . the world. The Tuscan sages said that
 it <em>portended a new race of men</em>,<em> and a renovation
 of the world; for they affirmed that there were eight several
 kinds of men</em>,<em> </em>all being different in life and manners,
 and that <em>Heaven had allotted each its time</em>,<em> which
 was limited by the circuit of the great year</em>"<em> </em>(25,868
 years).
 </p><p>
 This reminds one strongly of our seven races of men, and of the
 eighth -- the "animal man" -- descended from the later
 Third Race; as also of the successive submersions and destruction
 of the continents which finally disposed of almost the entire
 bulk of that race.
 </p><p>
 "The Assyrians," says Iamblichus, "have not only
 preserved the memorials of seven and twenty myriads of years (270,000
 years) as Hipparchus says they have, but likewise of the whole
 apocatastases and periods of the seven rulers of the world."
 (Proclus, in <em>Timaeus</em>, b. I.) This is the calculation
 of the <em>Esoteric Doctrine</em>,<em> </em>as approximately as
 it can be. For 1,000,000 of years are allowed for our present
 Root-race (the Fifth), and about 850,000 years since the submersion
 of the last large island (part of the Continent), the Ruta of
 the Fourth Race, or the Atlanteans;</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 651 THE JEWISH PATRIARCHS ZODIACAL SIGNS.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 while Daitya, a small island inhabited by a mixed race, was destroyed
 about 270,000 years ago, during the glacial period or thereabouts
 (<em>vide </em>Book II.). But the Seven Rulers, or the seven great
 Dynasties of the <em>divine </em>kings belong to the traditions
 of every great people of antiquity. Wherever twelve are mentioned,
 these are invariably the 12 signs of the zodiac.
 </p><p>
 So patent is the fact, that the Roman Catholic writers -- especially
 among the French Ultramontanes -- have tacitly agreed to connect
 the twelve Jewish Patriarchs with the <em>signs </em>of the Zodiac.
 This is done in a kind of prophetico-mystic way, which would sound
 to pious and ignorant ears like a portentous sign, a tacit divine
 recognition of the "chosen people of God," whose finger
 has purposely traced in heaven, from the beginning of creation,
 the numbers of these patriarchs. For instance, these writers (De
 Mirville among others) recognise curiously enough all the characteristics
 of the 12 signs of the Zodiac, in the words addressed by the dying
 Jacob to his Sons, and in his definitions of the future of each
 Tribe. (<em>Vide Genesis</em>,<em> ch. xlix.</em>)<em> </em>Moreover,
 the respective banners of the same tribes are claimed to have
 exhibited the same symbols and the same names as the signs, repeated
 in the 12 stones of the <em>Urim </em>and<em> Thummim</em>,<em>
 </em>and on the 12 wings of the cherub. Leaving the proof of exactitude
 in the alleged correspondence to the said mystics, it is as follows:
 Man, or the <em>Aquarius</em>,<em> </em>is in the sphere of Reuben,
 who is declared as "unstable as water" (the <em>Vulgate
 </em>has it, to be "<em>rushing </em>like water,"; <em>Gemini</em>,<em>
 </em>in the strong fraternal association of Simeon and Levi; <em>Leo</em>,<em>
 </em>in that of Judah, "the strong Lion" of his tribe,
 "the lion's whelp"; the <em>Pisces</em>,<em> </em>in
 Zabulon, who "shall dwell at the haven of the sea";
 <em>Taurus</em>,<em> </em>in Issachar, because he is "a strong
 ass couching down," etc., and therefore associated with the
 stables; Virgo-<em>Scorpio</em>,<em> </em>in Dan, who is described
 as "a serpent, an adder in the path that biteth," etc.;
 <em>Capricornus </em>in Naphtali, who is "a hind (a deer)
 let loose"; <em>Cancer</em>,<em> </em>in Benjamin, for he
 is "<em>ravenous</em>";<em> Libra</em>,<em> </em>the
 "Balance," in Asher, whose "bread shall be fat";
 <em>Saggitarius </em>in Joseph, because "his bow abode in
 strength." To make up for the <em>twelfth</em> sign,<em>
 Virgo</em>,<em> </em>made independent of <em>Scorpio</em>,<em>
 </em>is Dina, the only daughter of Jacob. (See <em>Genesis xlix.</em>)<em>
 </em>Tradition shows the <em>alleged </em>tribes carrying the
 12 signs on their banners. But the Bible is, besides these, full
 of theo-cosmological and astronomical symbols and personifications.
 </p><p>
 It remains to wonder, and query -- if the actual, living Patriarch's
 destiny was so indissolubly wound up with the Zodiac -- how it
 is that after the loss of the ten tribes, ten signs out of the
 twelve have not also miraculously disappeared from the sidereal
 fields? But this is of no great concern. Let us rather busy ourselves
 with the history of the Zodiac itself.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 652 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Now the reader may be reminded of some opinions expressed on the
 subject by several of the highest authorities in Science.
 </p><p>
 Newton believed the invention of the Zodiac could be traced as
 far back as the expedition of the Argonauts; and Dulaure fixed
 its origin at 6,500 years <b>B.C</b>., just 2,496 years before
 the creation of the World according to the Bible chronology.
 </p><p>
 Creuzer believes it very easy to show that most of the theogonies
 are intimately connected with religious calendars, and point to
 the Zodiac as their prime origin -- if not identical with the
 Zodiac known to us now, then something very analogous to it. He
 feels certain that the Zodiac and its mystic relations are at
 the bottom of all the mythologies, under one form or the other,
 and that it had existed in the old form for ages before; owing
 to some singular co-ordination of events, it was brought out in
 the present defined astronomical garb. (<em>Creuzer</em>,<em>
 </em>Book <b>III</b>., page 930.)
 </p><p>
 Whether "the genii of the planets" (our Dhyan Chohans
 of supra-mundane spheres) showed themselves to "holy prophets"
 or not, as claimed in the <em>Dabistan</em>,<em> </em>it would
 seem that great laymen and warriors were favoured in the same
 way in days of old, when astrological <em>magic</em> and<em> theophania
 </em>went hand in hand in Chaldea. For Xenophon, no ordinary man,
 narrates of Cyrus, that at the moment of his death that king was
 giving ardent thanks to gods and heroes, for having <em>so often
 </em>instructed him <em>themselves </em>about the <em>signs </em>in
 heaven, [[<em>ev ouraniois semeiois</em>]] (<em>Cyropedie</em>,<em>
 </em>"Ant. du Zodiaque.")
 </p><p>
 Unless the science of the zodiac is supposed to be of the highest
 antiquity and universality, how account for its signs being traced
 in the oldest theogonies? Laplace is said to have felt struck
 with amazement at the idea of the days of Mercury (Wednesday),
 Venus (Friday), Jupiter (Thursday), Saturn (Saturday), and others
 being related to the days of the week in the same order and with
 the same names in India as in Northern Europe. "Try, if you
 can, with the present system of <em>autochthonous </em>civilizations,
 so much in fashion in our day, to explain how nations with no
 ancestry, no traditions or birthplace in common, could have succeeded
 in inventing a kind of celestial phantasmagoria, a veritable <em>imbroglio
 </em>of sidereal denominations, without sequence or object, having
 no figurative relation with the constellations they represent,
 and still less, <em>apparently</em>,<em> </em>with the phases
 of our terrestrial life they are made to signify," had there
 not been a <em>general </em>intention and a <em>universal </em>cause
 and belief, at the root of all this? (<em>Pneumatologie</em>,<em>
 </em>Vol. <b>IV</b>., p. 61.) Most truly has Dupuis asserted the
 same: "Il est impossible de decouvrir le moindre trait de
 ressemblance entre les parties du ciel et les figures que les
 astronomes y ont <em>arbitrairement </em>tracees, et de l'autre
 cote;<em> le hazard est impossible</em>,"<em> </em>he says.
 (<em>Origine des Cultes</em>,<em> </em>"Zodiaque.")
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 653 THE SIGN OF JONAS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Most certainly chance is "<em>impossible.</em>"<em>
 </em>There is no "chance" in Nature, wherein everything
 is mathematically co-ordinate and mutually related in its units.
 "Chance," says Coleridge, "is but the pseudonym
 of God (or Nature), for those particular cases which He does not
 choose to subscribe openly with His sign manual." Replace
 the word "God" by that of <em>Karma </em>and it will
 become an Eastern axiom. Therefore, the <em>sidereal </em>"prophecies"
 of the zodiac, as they are called by Christian mystics, never
 point to any one particular event, however solemn and sacred it
 may be for some one portion of humanity, but to ever-recurrent,
 periodical laws in nature, understood but by the Initiates of
 the sidereal <em>gods </em>themselves.
 </p><p>
 No occultist, no astrologer of Eastern birth, will ever agree
 with Christian mystics, or even with Kepler's mystical astronomy,
 his great science and erudition notwithstanding; simply because,
 if his premises are quite correct, his deductions therefrom are
 one-sided and biassed by Christian preconceptions. Where the latter
 finds a prophecy directly pointing at the Saviour, other nations
 see a symbol of an eternal law decreed for the actual manvantara.
 Why see in the <em>Pisces </em>a direct reference to Christ --
 one of the several world-reformers, a Saviour but for his direct
 followers, but only a great and glorious Initiate for all the
 rest -- when that constellation shines as a symbol of all the
 past, present, and future Spiritual Saviours who dispense light
 and dispel mental darkness? Christian symbologists have tried
 to prove that it was that of Ephraim (Joseph's son), the <em>elect
 </em>of Jacob, that therefore, it was at the moment of the Sun
 entering into the sign of the Fish (<em>Pisces</em>)<em> </em>that
 "the Elect Messiah, the [[<em>Ichthus</em>]] of the first
 Christians, had to be born. But, if Jesus of Nazareth was that
 Messiah -- was he really born at that "moment," or was
 he made to be so born by the adaptation of theologians, who sought
 only to make their preconceived ideas fit in with sidereal <em>facts
 </em>and popular belief? Everyone knows that the real time and
 year of the birth of Jesus are totally unknown. And it is the
 Jews, whose forefathers have made the word <em>Dag </em>signify
 both "fish" and "Messiah," who, during the
 forced development of their rabbinical language, are the first
 to deny this Christian claim. And what of the further facts that
 Brahmins also connect <em>their </em>"Messiah," the
 eternal Avatar Vishnu, with a <em>fish </em>and the Deluge, and
 that the Babylonians made of their <em>Dag</em>-<em>On</em>,<em>
 </em>equally a fish and a Messiah, the Man-Fish and Prophet?
 </p><p>
 There are those learned iconoclasts among Egyptologists, who say
 that "when the Pharisees sought a '<em>sign from heaven</em>'<em>
 </em>Jesus said, '<em>there shall no sign be given but the sign
 of Jonas</em>'<em> </em>(Mat. xvi. 4). . . . . The sign of Jonas
 is that of the Oan or fishman of Nineveh. . . . . Assuredly there
 was no other sign than that of the Sun reborn in <em>Pisces. </em>The
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 654 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 voice of the Secret Wisdom says those who are looking for signs
 can have no other than that of the returning fish-man Ichthys,
 Oannes, or Jonas -- who could not be made flesh."
 </p><p>
 It would appear that Kepler maintained it as a positive <em>fact</em>
 that, at the moment of the "incarnation," all the planets
 were in conjunction in the sign of <em>Pisces</em>,<em> </em>called
 by the Jews (the Kabalists) the "constellation of the Messiah."
 "It is in this constellation," he averred, "that
 was placed the<em> star of the Magi.</em>"<em> </em>This
 statement, quoted by Dr. Sepp (<em>Vie de notre Seigneur Jesus
 Christ</em>, Vol. I. p. 9), emboldened him to remark that "all
 the Jewish traditions while announcing that <em>star</em>,<em>
 </em>that <em>many nations </em>have seen,"(!)* added that
 "it would absorb the <em>seventy planets </em>that preside
 over the destinies of various nations on this globe."** "In
 virtue of those natural prophecies," explains Dr. Sepp, "it
 was written in the stars of the firmament that the Messiah would
 be born in the lunar year of the world 4320, in that memorable
 year when the entire choir of the planets would be feasting its
 jubilee."
 </p><p>
 There was indeed a rage, at the beginning of the present century,
 for claiming from the Hindus restoration of an alleged robbery
 from the Jews of their "gods," patriarchs, and chronology.
 It was Wilford who had recognized Noah in Prithee and in Satyavrata,
 Enos in Dhruva, and even Assur in Iswara. Yet, after being residents
 for so many years in India, some Orientalists, at least, ought
 to have known that it was not the Hindus alone who had these figures,
 or who had divided their great age into four minor ages. Nevertheless
 writers in the <em>Asiatic Researches </em>indulged in the most
 extravagant speculations.
 </p><p>
 "Christian theologians think it their duty to write against
 the long periods of Hindu chronology," argues very pertinently
 S. A. Mackey, the Norwich "philosopher, astronomer, and shoemaker."
 "But when a man of learning crucifies the names and numbers
 of the ancients, and wrings and twists them into a form which
 means something quite foreign to the intention of the ancient
 authors; but which, so mutilated, fits in with the birth of some
 maggot pre-existing in his own brain with so much exactness that
 he pretends <em>to be amazed </em>at the discovery, I cannot think
 him quite so pardonable" (<em>Key of Urania</em>)<em>.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 This is intended to apply to Captain (later Colonel) Wilford,
 but the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Whether many nations have seen that identical star, or not,
 we all know that the sepulchres of "the three Magi,"
 who rejoice in the quite <em>Teutonic </em>names of Kaspar and
 Melchior, Balthazar being the only exception, and the two having
 little of the Chaldean ring in them -- are shown by the priests
 in the famous cathedral of Cologne, where the Magian bodies are
 not only supposed, but firmly believed to have been buried.
 </p><p>
 ** This tradition about the <em>seventy planets </em>that preside
 over the destinies of nations, is based on the occult cosmogonical
 teaching that besides our own septenary chain of world-planets,
 there are many more in the solar system.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 655 CHALDEO-JUDEAN GODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 words may fit more than one of our modern Orientalists. The former
 was the first to crown his unlucky speculations in Hindu chronology
 and the Puranas by connecting the 4,320,000 years with biblical
 chronology, simply dwarfing the figures to 4,320 years (the supposed
 lunar year of the Nativity), and Dr. Sepp has simply plagiarized
 the idea from this gallant officer. Moreover, he persisted in
 seeing in them Jewish property, as well as a Christian prophecy,
 thus accusing the Aryans of having helped themselves to Semitic
 revelation, whereas it was the reverse. The Jews, moreover, need
 not be accused of despoiling the Hindus, of whose figures Ezra
 probably knew nothing. They had evidently and undeniably borrowed
 them from the Chaldeans, along with their gods. Of the 432,000
 years of the Chaldean divine Dynasties* they made 4,320 lunar
 years from the world's creation to the Christian era; as to the
 Babylonian and Egyptian Gods, they transformed them as quietly
 and modestly into Patriarchs. Every nation was more or less guilty
 of such refashioning and adaptation of a Pantheon (common once
 to all) of universal, into national, tribal gods and Heroes. It
 was their property in its new Pentateuchal garb, and no one of
 the Israelites has ever forced it upon any other nation -- least
 of all upon Europeans.
 </p><p>
 Without stopping to notice this very unscientific chronology more
 than is necessary, we may make a few remarks that may be found
 to the point. These figures of 4,320<em> lunar </em>years of the
 world (in the Bible the <em>solar </em>years are used) are not
 fanciful, as such, even if their application is quite erroneous;
 for they are only the distorted echo of the primitive esoteric,
 and later on Brahminical doctrine concerning the Yugas. A "Day"
 of Brahma equals 4,320,000,000 years, as also a "Night"
 of Brahma, or the duration of Pralaya, after which a <em>new </em><strong>S</strong>UN
 rises trium-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Every scholar is aware, of course, that the Chaldeans claimed
 the same figures (432) or (432,000) for their divine dynasties
 as the Hindus do for their Mahayuga, namely, 4,320,000. Therefore
 has Dr. Sepp, of Munich, undertaken to support Kepler and Wilford
 in their charge that the Hindus had borrowed them from the Christians,
 and the Chaldeans from the Jews, who, as claimed, expected their
 Messiah in the lunar year of the world 4,320!!! As these figures,
 according to ancient writers, were based by Berosus on the 120
 Saroses -- each of the divisions meaning six neroses of 600 years
 each, making a sum total of 432,000 years -- they do not thus
 appear peremptory. But the pious professor of Munich undertook
 to explain them in <em>the correct way. </em>He claims to have
 solved the riddle by showing that "the saros being composed
 according to Pliny of 222 synodial months, to wit, 18 years 6/10,"
 the calculator naturally fell back into the figures "given
 by Suidas," who affirmed that the 120 saroses made 2,222
 sacerdotal and cyclic years, which equalled 1,656 solar years."
 (<em>Vie de Notre Seigneur Jesus Christ</em>,<em> Vol. II.</em>,<em>
 p.</em> 417.)
 </p><p>
 Suidas said nothing of the kind, and, if he had, he would prove
 little, if anything, by it. The <em>neroses and saroses </em>were
 the same thorn in the side of <em>uninitiated </em>ancient writers,
 as the apocalyptic 666 of the "great Beast" is in that
 of the modern, and they have found their unlucky Newtons as the
 latter figures have.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 656 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 phantly over a <em>new manvantara</em>,<em> </em>for the septenary
 chain it illuminates. The teaching had penetrated into Palestine
 and Europe centuries before the Christian era (see <em>Isis Unveiled</em>
 <b>II. </b>132), and was present in the minds of the Mosaic Jews,
 who based upon it their small cycle, though it received full expression
 only through the Christian chronologers of the Bible, who adopted
 it, as also the 25th of December, the day on which all the <em>solar
 </em>gods were said to have been incarnated. What wonder, then,
 that the Messiah was <em>made </em>to be born "the <em>lunar
 </em>year of the world 4,320?" The "Son of Righteousness
 and <em>Salvation</em>"<em> </em>had once more arisen and
 had dispelled <em>pralayic </em>darkness of chaos and <em>non</em>-<em>being
 </em>on the plane of our objective little globe and chain. Once
 the subject of the adoration was settled upon, it was easy to
 make the supposed events of his birth, life, and death, fit in
 with the Zodiacal exigencies and old traditions, though they had
 to be somewhat remodelled for the occasion.
 </p><p>
 Thus what Kepler said, as a great astronomer, becomes comprehensible.
 He recognised the grand and universal importance of all such planetary
 conjunctions, "each of which" -- as he has well said
 -- "is a <em>climacteric </em>year of Humanity."* The
 rare conjunction of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars has its significance
 and importance on account of its <em>certain great results </em>--<em>
 </em>in India and China as much as it has in Europe for the respective
 mystics of all those countries. And it is certainly no better
 now than a mere assumption to maintain that nature had only Christ
 in view, when building her (to the profane) fantastic and meaningless
 constellations. If it is claimed that it was no hazard that could
 lead the archaic architects of the Zodiac, thousands of years
 ago, to mark with the asterisk (<em>a</em>) the figure of <em>Taurus</em>,<em>
 </em>with no better or more valid proof of it being <em>prophetic
 </em>of the <em>Verbum </em>or Christ than that the <em>aleph</em>
 of <em>Taurus </em>means "the ONE" and the FIRST, and
 that Christ was also the <em>alpha </em>or the ONE, then this
 "proof" may be shown strangely invalidated in more than
 one way. To begin with, the Zodiac existed before the Christian
 era, at all events; further, all the Sun-gods had been mystically
 connected with that constellation (Taurus) -- Osiris, for instance
 -- and were all called by their respective votaries "the
 First." Then the compilers of the mystical epithets given
 to the Christian Saviour, were all more or less acquainted with
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The reader has to bear in mind that the phrase "climacteric
 year" has more than the usual significance, when used by
 Occultists and Mystics. It is not only a critical period, during
 which some great change is periodically expected, whether in human
 or cosmic constitution, but it likewise pertains to spiritual
 universal changes. The Europeans called every 63rd year "the
 grand climacteric," and perhaps justly supposed those years
 to be the years produced by multiplying 7 into the odd numbers
 3, 5, 7 and 9. But <em>seven </em>is the real scale of nature,
 in Occultism, and 7 has to be multiplied in quite a different
 way and method, unknown as yet to European nations.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 657 THE DRAGON AND THE BULL.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the significance of the Zodiacal signs; and it is easier to suppose
 that they should have arranged their claims so as to answer the
 mystic signs, than that the latter should have shone as a prophecy
 for one portion of humanity, for millions of years, taking no
 heed of the numberless generations that had gone before, and those
 to be born hereafter.
 </p><p>
 "It is not simple chance," we are told, "that has
 placed in certain spheres, on a throne, the head of that bull
 (<em>Taurus</em>),<em> </em>trying to push away with the <em>ansated
 cross </em>on its horns, a <em>Dragon; </em>the more so, since
 this constellation of <em>Taurus </em>was called '<em>the great
 city of God </em>and <em>the mother of revelations</em>,'<em>
 </em>and also '<em>the interpreter of the divine voice</em>,'<em>
 </em>the <em>Apis pacis </em>of<em> </em>Hermoutis, in Egypt,
 which (as the <em>patristic </em>fathers would assure the world)
 preferred oracles that related to the birth of the Saviour"
 (<em>Pneumatologie</em>,<em> </em>iv., 71).
 </p><p>
 To this theological assumption there are several answers. <em>Firstly</em>,<em>
 </em>the<em> </em>ansated Egyptian cross, or <em>tau</em>,<em>
 </em>the Jaina cross, or Swastica, and the Christian cross have
 all the same meaning. <em>Secondly</em>,<em> </em>no peoples or
 nations except the Christians gave the significance to the Dragon
 that is given to it now. The serpent was the symbol of <strong>W</strong>ISDOM;
 and the Bull (<em>Taurus</em>)<em> </em>the symbol of physical
 or terrestrial <em>generation. </em>Thus<em> </em>the latter,
 pushing off the Dragon, or <em>spiritual</em>,<em> </em>Divine
 Wisdom, with the <em>Tau</em>,<em> </em>or Cross -- which is esoterically
 "the foundation and framework of all construction" --
 would have an entirely <em>phallic</em>,<em> </em>physiological
 meaning, had it not still another significance unknown to our
 Biblical scholars and symbologists. At any rate, it shows no special
 reference to the <em>Verbum </em>of St. John, except, perhaps,
 in a general sense. The <em>taurus </em>(which, by the way, is
 no <em>lamb</em>,<em> </em>but a bull) was sacred in every Cosmogony,
 with the Hindus as with the Zoroastrians, with the Chaldees as
 with the Egyptians. So much, every schoolboy knows.
 </p><p>
 It may perhaps help to refresh the memory of our Theosophists
 by referring them to what was said of the Virgin and the Dragon,
 and the universality of periodical births and re-births of World-Saviours
 -- solar gods -- in<em> Isis</em>,<em> </em><b>II.</b>, 490, with
 reference to certain passages in Revelations.
 </p><p>
 In 1853, the <em>savant </em>known as Erard-Mollien read before
 the Institute of France a paper tending to prove the antiquity
 of the Indian Zodiac, in the signs of which were found the root
 and philosophy of all the most important religious festivals of
 that country, the origin of which religious ceremonies goes back
 into the night of time at least 3,000 <b>B.C</b>., as the lecturer
 tried to demonstrate. The Zodiac of the Hindus, he thought, was
 far anterior to the Zodiac of the Greeks, and differed from it
 in some particulars vastly. In it one sees the <em>Dragon </em>on
 a tree, at the foot of which the "Virgin," <em>Kanya</em>-<em>Durga</em>,<em>
 </em>one of the most ancient goddesses, is placed on a <em>lion
 </em>dragging after him the <em>solar </em>car. "This is
 the reason why," he added, "this Virgin <em>Durga </em>is
 not the simple <em>memento </em>of </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 658 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 an astronomical fact, but verily the most ancient divinity of
 the Indian Olympus. She is evidently the same of whom all the
 Sibylline books spoke, those works that have been the source of
 the inspiration of Virgil; the virgin whose return was prophesied
 as a sign of universal renovation. . . . . And why," he added,
 "when we see to this day, the months named after the deity-names
 of this solar Zodiac by the Malayalim-speaking people of southern
 India -- why should that people have abandoned their ancestral
 Zodiac to burden themselves with that of the Greeks? Everything
 proves, on the contrary, that these zodiacal figures have been
 transmitted to the Greeks by the Chaldees, who got them from the
 Brahmans." (<em>See Recueil de l</em>'<em>Academie des Inscriptions</em>,<em>
 </em>1853<em>.</em>)
 </p><p>
 But all this is very poor testimony. Let us remember, however,
 also that which was said and accepted by the contemporaries of
 Volney, who, in his "Ruins of Empires," p. 360, remarks
 that as <em>Aries </em>was in its fifteenth degree 1447 <b>B.C</b>.,
 it follows that the first degree of "Libra" could not
 have coincided with the Vernal equinox more lately than 15,194
 years <b>B.C</b>., to which, if you add 1,790 years since Christ,
 it appears that 16,984 years have elapsed since the origin of
 the <em>Zodiac.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Dr. Schlegel, moreover, in his <em>Uranographie Chinoise </em>assigns
 to the Chinese Astronomical Sphere an antiquity of 18,000 years.
 (<em>Vide</em> pp. 54, 196, <em>et seq.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Nevertheless, as opinions quoted without adequate proofs are of
 little avail, it may be more useful to turn to scientific evidence.
 M. Bailly, the famous French astronomer of the last century, Member
 of the Academy, etc., etc., asserts that the Hindu systems of
 astronomy are by far the oldest, and that from them the Egyptians,
 Greeks, Romans, and even the Jews derived their knowledge. In
 support of these views he says --
 </p><p>
 "The astronomers who preceded the epoch 1,491 are, first,
 the Alexandrian Greeks; Hipparchus, who flourished 125 years before
 our era, and Ptolemy, 260 years after Hipparchus. Following these
 were the Arabs, who revived the study of astronomy in the ninth
 century. These were succeeded by the Persians and the Tartars,
 to whom we owe the tables of Massireddin in 1269, and those of
 Ulug-beg in 1437. Such is the succession of events in Asia as
 known prior to the Indian epoch 1491. What, then, is an epoch?
 It is the observation of the longitude of a star at a given moment,
 the place in the sky where it was <em>seen</em>,<em> </em>and
 which serves as a point of reference, a starting-point from which
 to calculate both the past and future positions of the star from
 its observed motion. But an epoch is useless unless the motion
 of the star has been determined. A people, new to science and
 obliged to borrow a foreign astronomy, finds no difficulty in
 fixing an epoch, since </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 659 BAILLY'S CONCLUSIONS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the only observation needed is one which can be made at any moment.
 But what it needs above all, what it is obliged to borrow, are
 those elements which depend on accurate determination, and which
 require continuous observation; above all, those motions which
 depend on time, and which can only be accurately determined by
 centuries of observation. These motions, then, must be borrowed
 from a nation which has made such observations, and has behind
 it the labours of centuries. We conclude, therefore, that a new
 people will not borrow the epochs of an ancient one, without also
 borrowing from them the 'average motions.' Starting from this
 principle we shall find that the Hindu epochs 1491 and 3102 could
 not have been derived from those of either Ptolemy or Ulug-beg."
 </p><p>
 There remains the supposition that the Hindus, comparing their
 observations in 1491 with those previously made by Ulug-beg and
 Ptolemy, used the intervals between these observations to determine
 the "average motions." The date of Ulug-beg is too recent
 for such a determination; while those of Ptolemy and Hipparchus
 were barely remote enough. But if the Hindu motions had been determined
 from these comparisons, the epochs would be connected together.
 Starting from the epochs of Ulug-beg and Ptolemy we should arrive
 at all those of the Hindus. But this is not the case. Hence foreign
 epochs were either unknown or useless to the Hindus.*
 </p><p>
 We may add to this another important consideration. When a nation
 is obliged to borrow from its neighbours the methods or the average
 motions of its astronomical tables, it has even greater need to
 borrow, besides these, the knowledge of the inequalities of the
 motions of the heavenly bodies, the motions of the apogee, of
 the nodes, and of the inclination of the ecliptic; in short, all
 those elements the determination of which requires the art of
 observing, some instrumental appliances, and great industry. All
 these astronomical elements, differing more or less with the Greeks
 of Alexandria, the Arabs, the Persians and the Tartars, exhibit
 no resemblance whatever with those of the Hindus. The latter,
 therefore, borrowed nothing from their neighbours.
 </p><p>
 Condensing Bailly's remarks, he comes to the following conclusions:
 --
 </p><p>
 If the Hindus did not borrow their epoch, they must have possessed
 a real one of their own, based on their own observations; and
 this must be either the epoch of the year 1491 after, or that
 of the year 3102 before our era, the latter preceding by 4592
 years the epoch 1491. We have to choose between these two epochs
 and to decide which of them is based on observation. But before
 stating the arguments which can and must
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * For a detailed scientific proof of this conclusion, see page
 121 of Mr. Bailly's work, where the subject is discussed technically.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 660 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 decide the question, we may be permitted to make a few remarks
 to those who may be inclined to believe that it is modern observations
 and calculations which have enabled the Hindus to determine the
 past positions of the heavenly bodies. It is far from easy to
 determine the celestial movements with sufficient accuracy to
 ascend the stream of time for 4592 years, and to describe the
 phenomena which must have occurred at that period.
 </p><p>
 We possess to-day excellent instruments; exact observations have
 been made for some two or three centuries, which already permit
 us to calculate with considerable accuracy the average motions
 of the planets; we have the observations of the Chaldeans, of
 Hipparchus and of Ptolemy, which, owing to their remoteness from
 the present time, permit us to fix these motions with greater
 certainty. Still we cannot undertake to represent with invariable
 accuracy the observations throughout the long period intervening
 between the Chaldeans and ourselves; and still less can we undertake
 to determine with exactitude events occurring 4592 years before
 our day. Cassini and Maier have each determined the secular motion
 of the moon, and they differ by 3m. 43s. This difference would
 give rise in forty-six centuries to an uncertainty of nearly three
 degrees in the moon's place. Doubtless one of these determinations
 is more accurate than the other; and it is for observations of
 very great antiquity to decide between them. But in very remote
 periods, where observations are lacking, it follows that we are
 uncertain as to the phenomena. How, then, could the Hindus have
 calculated back from the year 1491 <b>A.D</b>. to the year 3102
 before our era, if they were only recent students of astronomy?
 </p><p>
 The Orientals have never been what we are. However high an opinion
 of their knowledge we may form from the examination of their Astronomy,
 we cannot suppose them ever to have possessed that great array
 of instruments which distinguishes our modern observatories, and
 which is the product of simultaneous progress in various arts,
 nor could they have possessed that genius for discovery, which
 has hitherto seemed to belong exclusively to Europe, and which,
 supplying the place of time, causes the rapid progress of science
 and of human intelligence. If the Asiatics have been powerful,
 learned and wise, it is power and time which have produced their
 merit and success of all kinds. Power has founded or destroyed
 their empires; now it has erected edifices imposing by their bulk,
 now it has reduced them to venerable ruins; and while these vicissitudes
 alternated with each other, patience accumulated knowledge; and
 prolonged experience produced wisdom. It is the antiquity of the
 nations of the East which has erected their scientific fame.
 </p><p>
 If the Hindus possessed in 1491 a knowledge of the heavenly motions
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 661 THE BEGINNING OF KALI-YUG.</h6>
 
 <p>
 sufficiently accurate to enable them to calculate backwards for
 4,592 years, it follows that they could only have obtained this
 knowledge from very ancient observations. To grant them such knowledge,
 while refusing them the observations from which it is derived,
 is to suppose an impossibility; it would be equivalent to assuming
 that at the outset of their career they had already reaped the
 harvest of time and experience. While on the other hand, if their
 epoch of 3102 is assumed to be real, it would follow that the
 Hindus had simply kept pace with successive centuries down to
 the year 1491 of our era. Thus, time itself was their teacher;
 they knew the motions of the heavenly bodies during these periods,
 because they had seen them; and the duration of the Hindu people
 on earth is the cause of the fidelity of its records and the accuracy
 of its calculations.
 </p><p>
 It would seem that the problem as to which of the two epochs of
 3102 and 1491 is the real one ought to be solved by one consideration,
 viz., that the ancients in general, and particularly the Hindus,
 calculated, and therefore observed, eclipses only. Says Bailly:
 --
 </p><p>
 Now, there was no eclipse of the sun at the moment of the epoch
 1492; and no eclipse of the moon either 14 days before or after
 that moment. Therefore the epoch 1491 is not based on an observation.
 As regards the epoch 3102, the Brahmins of Tirvalour place it
 at sunrise on February 18th. The sun was then in the first point
 of the Zodiac according to its true longitude. The other tables
 show that at the preceding midnight the moon was in the same place,
 but according to its average longitude. The Brahmins tell us also
 that this first point, the origin of their Zodiac, was, in the
 year 3102, 54 degrees behind the equinox. It follows that the
 origin -- the first point of their Zodiac -- was therefore in
 the sixth degree of Libra.
 </p><p>
 There occurred, therefore, about this time and place an average
 conjunction; "and indeed this conjunction is given in our
 best tables: La Caille's for the sun and Maier's for the moon."
 There was no eclipse of the sun, the moon being too distant from
 her node; but fourteen days later, the moon having approached
 the node, must have been eclipsed. Maier's tables, used without
 correction for acceleration, give this eclipse; but they place
 it during the day when it could not have been observed in India.
 Cassini's tables give it as occurring at night, which shows that
 Maier's motions are too rapid for distant centuries, when the
 acceleration is not allowed for; and which also proves that in
 spite of the improvement of our knowledge we can still be uncertain
 as to the actual aspect of the heavens in past times.
 </p><p>
 Therefore we believe that as between the two Hindu epochs, the
 real one is the year 3102, because it was accompanied by an eclipse
 which could be observed, and which must have served to determine
 it. This</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 662 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 is a first proof of the truth of the longitude assigned by the
 Hindus to the sun and the moon at this instant; and this proof
 would perhaps be sufficient, were it not that this ancient determination
 becomes of the greatest importance for the verification of the
 motions of these bodies, and must therefore be borne out by every
 possible proof of its authenticity.
 </p><p>
 We notice, first, that the Hindus seem to have combined two epochs
 together into the year 3102. The Tirvalour Brahmins reckon primarily
 from the first moment of the Kali-Yug; but they have a second
 epoch placed 2d. 3h. 32m. 30s. later. The latter is the true astronomical
 epoch, while the former seems to be a civil era. But if this epoch
 of the Kali-Yug had no reality, and was the mere result of a calculation,
 why should it be thus divided? Their calculated astronomical epoch
 would have become that of the Kali-Yug, which would have been
 placed at the conjunction of the sun and the moon, as is the case
 with the epochs of the three other tables. They must have had
 some reason for distinguishing between the two; and this reason
 can only be due to the circumstances and the time of the epoch;
 which therefore could not be the result of calculation. This is
 not all; starting from the solar epoch determined by the rising
 of the sun on February 18th, 3102, and tracing back events 2d.
 3h. 32m. 30s., we come to 2h. 27m. 30s. a.m. of February 16th,
 which is the instant of the beginning of Kali-Yuga. It is curious
 that this age has not been made to commence at one of the four
 great divisions of the day. It might be suspected that the epoch
 should be midnight, and that the 2h. 27m. 30s. are a meridian
 correction. But whatever may have been the reason for fixing on
 this moment, it is plain that were this epoch the result of calculation,
 it would have been just as easy to carry it back to midnight,
 so as to make the epoch correspond to one of the chief divisions
 of the day, instead of placing it at a moment fixed by the fraction
 of a day.
 </p><p>
 2nd. The Hindus assert that at the first moment of Kali-Yug there
 was a conjunction of all the planets; and their tables show this
 conjunction while ours indicate that it might actually have occurred.
 Jupiter and Mercury were in exactly the same degree of the ecliptic;
 Mars being 8 [[degrees]] and Saturn 17 [[degrees]] distant from
 it. It follows that about this time, or some fourteen days after
 the commencement of Kali-Yug, the Hindus saw four planets emerge
 successively from the Sun's rays; first Saturn, then Mars, then
 Jupiter and Mercury, and these planets appeared united in a somewhat
 small space. Although Venus was not among them, the taste for
 the marvellous caused it to be called a general conjunction of
 all the planets. The testimony of the Brahmins here coincides
 with that of our tables; and this evidence, the result of a tradition,
 must be founded on actual observation.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 663 THE EYE OF TAURUS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 3rd. We may remark that this phenomenon was visible about a fortnight
 after the epoch, and exactly at the time when the eclipse of the
 moon must have been observed, which served to fix the epoch. The
 two observations mutually confirm each other; and whoever made
 the one must have made the other also.
 </p><p>
 4th. We may believe also that the Hindus made at the same time
 a determination of the place of the moon's node; this seems indicated
 by their calculation. They give the longitude of this point of
 the lunar orbit for the time of their epoch, and to this they
 add as a constant 40m., which is the node's motion in 12d. 14h.
 It is as if they stated that this determination was made 13 days
 after their epoch, and that to make it correspond to that epoch,
 we must add the 40m. through which the node has retrograded in
 the interval.
 </p><p>
 This observation is, therefore, of the same date as that of the
 lunar eclipse; thus giving three observations, which are mutually
 confirmatory.
 </p><p>
 5th. It appears from the description of the Hindu Zodiac given
 by M. C. Gentil, that on it the places of the stars named "The
 Eye of Taurus" and the "Wheat-ear of Virgo," can
 be determined for the commencement of the Kali-Yug.
 </p><p>
 Now, comparing these places with the actual positions, reduced
 by <em>our</em> precession of the equinoxes to the moment in question,
 we see that the point of origin of the Hindu Zodiac must lie between
 the fifth and sixth degree of Libra. The Brahmins, therefore,
 were right in placing it in the sixth degree of that sign, the
 more so since this small difference may be due to the proper motion
 of the stars which is unknown.
 </p><p>
 Thus it was yet another observation which guided the Hindus in
 this fairly accurate determination of the first point of their
 movable zodiac.
 </p><p>
 It does not seem possible to doubt the existence in antiquity
 of observations of this date. The Persians say that four beautiful
 stars were placed as guardians at the four corners of the world.
 Now it so happens that at the commencement of Kali Yug, 3000 or
 3100 years before our era, the "Eye of the Bull" and
 the "Heart of the Scorpion" were exactly at the equinoctial
 points, while the "Heart of the Lion" and the "Southern
 Fish" were pretty near the solstitial points. An observation
 of the rising of the Pleiades in the evening, seven days before
 the autumnal equinox, also belongs to the year 3000 before our
 era. This and similar observations collected in Ptolemy's calendars,
 though he does not give their authors, these observations, which
 are older than those of the Chaldeans, may well be the work of
 the Hindus. They are well acquainted with the constellation of
 the Pleiades, and while we call it vulgarly the "Poussiniere"
 they name it: <em>Pillaloo</em>-<em>codi </em>--<em> </em>the
 "Hen and chickens." This name has therefore, passed
 from people to </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 664 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 people, and comes to us from the most ancient nations of Asia.
 We see that the Hindus must have observed the rising of the Pleiades,
 and have made use of it to regulate their years and their months;
 for this constellation is also called Krittika. Now they have
 a month of the same name, and this coincidence can only be due
 to the fact that this month was announced by the rising or setting
 of the constellation in question. But what is even more decisive
 as showing that the Hindus observed the stars, and in the same
 way that we do, marking their position by their longitude, is
 a fact mentioned by Augustinus Riccius that, according to observations
 attributed to Hermes, and made 1,985 years before Ptolemy, the
 brilliant star in the Lyre and that in the Heart of the Hydra
 were each seven degrees in advance of their respective positions
 as determined by Ptolemy.
 </p><p>
 This determination seems very extraordinary. The stars advance
 regularly with respect to the equinox; and Ptolemy ought to have
 found the longitudes 28 degrees in excess of what they were 1985
 years before his time. Besides, there is a remarkable peculiarity
 about this fact; the same error or difference being found in the
 positions of both stars; therefore the error was due to some cause
 affecting both stars equally. It was to explain this peculiarity
 that the Arab Thebith imagined the stars to have an oscillatory
 movement, causing them to advance and recede alternately.
 </p><p>
 This hypothesis was easily disproved; but the observations attributed
 to Hermes remained unexplained. Their explanation, however, is
 found in Hindu Astronomy. At the date fixed for these observations,
 1985 years before Ptolemy, the first point of the Hindu Zodiac
 was 35 degrees in advance of the equinox; therefore the longitudes
 reckoned for this point are 35 degrees in excess of those reckoned
 from the equinox. But after the lapse of 1985 years the stars
 would have advanced 28 degrees, and there would remain a difference
 of only 7 degrees between the longitudes of Hermes and those of
 Ptolemy, and the difference would be the same for the two stars,
 since it is due to the difference between the starting-points
 of the Hindu Zodiac and that of Ptolemy, which reckons from the
 equinox. This explanation is so simple and natural that it must
 be true. We do not know whether Hermes, so celebrated in antiquity,
 was a Hindu, but we see that the observations attributed to him
 are reckoned in the Hindu manner, and we conclude that they were
 made by the Hindus, who, therefore, were able to make all the
 observations we have enumerated, and which we find noted in their
 tables.
 </p><p>
 6th. The observation of the year 3102, which seems to have fixed
 their epoch, was not a difficult one. We see that the Hindus,
 having once determined the moon's daily motion of 13deg. 10m.
 35sec., made</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 665 HINDU ASTRONOMICAL METHODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 use of it to divide the Zodiac into 27 constellations, related
 to the period of the moon, which takes about 27 days to describe
 it.
 </p><p>
 It was by this method that they determined the positions of the
 stars in this Zodiac; it was thus they found that a certain star
 of the Lyre was in 8h. 24m., the Heart of the Hydra in 4d. 7h.,
 longitudes which are ascribed to Hermes, but which are calculated
 on the Hindu Zodiac. Similarly, they discovered that the "Wheatear
 of Virgo" forms the commencement of their fifteenth constellation,
 and the "Eye of Taurus" the end of the fourth; these
 stars being the one in 6d. 6h. 40m., the other in 1d. 23h. 20min.
 of the Hindu Zodiac. This being so, the eclipse of Moon which
 occurred 14 days after the Kali Yug epoch, took place at a point
 between the "Wheat Ear" of Virgo and the star [[ ]]
 of the same constellation. These stars are very approximately
 a constellation apart, the one beginning the fifteenth, the other
 the sixteenth. Thus it would not be difficult to determine the
 moon's place by measuring her distance from one of these stars;
 from this they deduced the position of the sun, which is opposite
 to the moon, and then, knowing their average motions, they calculated
 that the moon was at the first point of the Zodiac according to
 her average longitude at midnight on the 17th-18th February of
 the year 3,102 before our era, and that the sun occupied the same
 place six hours later according to his true longitude; an event
 which fixes the commencement of the Hindu year.
 </p><p>
 7th. The Hindus state that 20,400 years before the age of Kali
 Yug, the first point of their Zodiac coincided with the vernal
 equinox, and that the sun and moon were in conjunction there.
 This epoch is obviously fictitious;* but we may inquire from what
 point, from what epoch, the Hindus set out in establishing it.
 Taking the Hindu values for the revolution of the sun and moon,
 viz., 365d. 6h. 12m. 30s., and 27d. 7h. 43m. 13s., we have --
 </p><blockquote>
 20,400 revolutions of the sun = 7,451,277d. 2h.<br>
 272,724 revolutions of the moon = 7,451,277d. 7h.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Such is the result obtained by starting from the Kali Yuga epoch;
 and the assertion of the Hindus, that there was a conjunction
 at the time stated, is founded on their tables; but if, using
 the same elements, we start from the era of the year 1491, or
 from another placed in the year 1282, of which we shall speak
 later, there will always be a difference of almost one or two
 days. It is both just and natural, in verifying the Hindu calculations,
 to take those among their elements which give the same result
 as they had themselves arrived at, and to set out from that one
 among their epochs which enables us to arrive at
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Why it should be "fictitious" can <em>never </em>be
 made plain by European scientists.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 666 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the fictitious epoch in question. Hence, since to make this calculation
 they must have set out from their real epoch, the one which was
 founded on an observation and not from any of those which were
 derived by this very calculation from the former, it follows that
 their real epoch was that of the year 3102 before our era.
 </p><p>
 8th. The Tiravalore Brahmins give the Moon's motion as 7d. 2h.
 8m. on the movable Zodiac, and as 9d. 7h. 45m. 1s. as referred
 to the equinox in a great period of 1,600,984 days, or 4,386 years
 and 94 days. We believe this motion to have been determined by
 observation; and we must state at the outset that this period
 is of an extent which renders it but ill suited to the calculation
 of the mean motions.
 </p><p>
 In their astronomical calculations the Hindus make use of periods
 of 248, 3,031, and 12,372 days; but, apart from the fact that
 these periods, though much too short, do not present the inconvenience
 of the former, they contain an exact number of revolutions of
 the moon referred to its apogee. They are in reality mean motions.
 The great period of 1,600,984 is not a sum of accumulated revolutions;
 there is no reason why it should contain 1,600,984 rather than
 1,600,985 days. It would seem that observation alone must have
 fixed the number of days and marked the beginning and end of the
 period. This period ends on the 21st of May, 1282, of our era
 at 5h. 15m. 30s. at Benares. The moon was then in apogee, according
 to the Hindus,
 </p><blockquote>
 and her longitude was ... 7d. 13h. 45m. 1s.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 Maier gives the longitude as ... 7d. 13h. 53m. 48s.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 And places the apogee at ... ... 7d. 14h. 6m. 54s.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The determination of the moon's place by the Brahmins thus differs
 only by nine minutes from ours, and that of the apogee by twenty-two
 minutes, and it is very evident that they could only have obtained
 this agreement with our best tables and this exactitude in the
 celestial positions by observation. If then, observation fixed
 the end of this period, there is every reason to believe that
 it determined its commencement. But then this motion, determined
 directly, and from nature, would of necessity be in close agreement
 with the true motions of the heavenly bodies.
 </p><p>
 And in fact the Hindu motion during this long period of 4,883
 years, does not differ by a minute from that of Cassini, and agrees
 equally with that of Maier. Thus two peoples, the Hindus and the
 Europeans, placed at the two extremities of the world, and perhaps
 as distant by their institutions, have obtained precisely the
 same results as regards the moon's motions; and an agreement which
 would be inconceivable, if it were not based on the observation
 and mutual imitation of nature. We must remark that the four tables
 of the Hindus are all copies of the same Astronomy. It cannot
 be denied that the Siamese tables existed</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 667 THE ARYAN HINDUS VINDICATED.</h6>
 
 <p>
 in 1687, when they were brought from India by M. de la Loubere.
 At that time the tables of Cassini and Maier were not in existence,
 and thus the Hindus were already in possession of the exact motion
 contained in these tables, while we did not yet possess it.* It
 must, therefore, be admitted that the accuracy of this Hindu motion
 is the point of observation. It is exact throughout this period
 of 4,383 years, because it was taken from the sky itself -- and
 if observation determined its close, it fixed its commencement
 also. It is the longest period which has been observed and of
 which the recollection is preserved in the annals of Astronomy.
 It has its origin in the epoch of the year 3102, B.C., and it
 is a demonstrative proof of the reality of that epoch.
 </p><p>
 Bailly is referred to at such length, as he is one of the few
 scientific men who have tried to do full justice to the Astronomy
 of the Aryans. From John Bentley down to Burgess' "Surya-Siddhanta,"
 not one astronomer has been fair enough to the most learned people
 of Antiquity. However distorted and misunderstood the Hindu Symbology,
 no Occultist can fail to do it justice once that he knows something
 of the Secret Sciences; nor will he turn away from their metaphysical
 and mystical
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The following is an answer to those men of science who might
 suspect that our Astronomy was carried to India and communicated
 to the Hindus by our Missionaries. 1st. Hindu astronomy has its
 own peculiar forms, characterized by their originality; if it
 had been our astronomy translated, great skill and knowledge would
 have been needed to disguise the theft. 2nd. When adopting the
 mean movement of the moon, they would have adopted also the inclination
 of the ecliptic, the equation of the sun's centre, the length
 of the year; these elements differ completely from ours, and are
 remarkably accurate as applying to the epoch of 3102; while they
 would be exceedingly erroneous if they had been calculated for
 last century. 3rd, finally, our missionaries could not have communicated
 to the Hindus in 1687 the tables of Cassini, which were not then
 in existence; they could have known only the mean motions of Tycho,
 Riccioli, Copernicus, Bouilland, Kepler, Longomontanus, and those
 of the tables of Alphonso. I will now give a tabular view of these
 mean motions for 4383 years and 94 days: --
 </p><blockquote>
 Table. ------------- Mean Motion. --- Difference from Hindu.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 Alphonso ..............9d 7h 2m 47s ... - 0h 42m 14s<br>
 Copernicus .......... 9d 6h 2m 13s .... - 1h 42m 48s<br>
 Tycho .................. 9d 7h 54m 40s .. + 0h 9m 39s<br>
 Kepler ................. 9d 6h 57m 35s .. - 0h 47m 26s<br>
 Longomontanus ... 9d 7h 2m 13s .... - 0h 42m 48s<br>
 Bouilland ............. 9d 6h 48m 8s .... - 0h 58m 53s<br>
 Riccioli ................ 9d 7h 53m 57s .. + 0h 8m 56s<br>
 Cassini ................ 9d 7h 44m 11s ... - 0h 0m 50s <br>
 Indian .................. 9d 7h 45m 1s
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 None of these mean motions, except Cassini's, agrees with that
 of the Hindus, who therefore, did not borrow their mean motions,
 since their figures agree only with those of Cassini, whose tables
 were not in existence in 1687. This mean motion of the moon belongs,
 therefore, to the Hindus, who could only have obtained it by observation."
 -- Bailly's "<em>Traite de l</em>'<em>Astronomie Indienne
 et Orientale.</em>"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 668 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 interpretation of the Zodiac, even though the whole Pleiades of
 Royal Astronomical Societies rise in arms against their mathematical
 rendering of it. The descent and re-ascent of the Monad or Soul
 cannot be disconnected from the Zodiacal signs, and it looks more
 natural, in the sense of the fitness of things, to believe in
 a mysterious sympathy between the metaphysical soul and the bright
 constellations, and in the influence of the latter on the former,
 than in the absurd notion that the creators of Heaven and Earth
 have placed in heaven the types of twelve vicious Jews. And if,
 as the author of <em>The Gnostics </em>asserts, the aim of all
 the Gnostic schools and the later Platonists "was to accommodate
 the old faith to the influence of Buddhistic theosophy, the <em>very
 essence of which was that the innumerable gods of the Hindu mythology
 were but names for the </em><strong>E</strong>NERGIES <em>of the
 First Triad in its successive </em><b>AVATARS</b> <em>or manifestations
 unto man</em>,"<em> </em>whither can we turn to trace these
 theosophic ideas to their very root -- better than to old Indian
 wisdom? We say it again: archaic Occultism would remain incomprehensible
 to all, if it were rendered otherwise than through the more familiar
 channels of Buddhism and Hinduism. For the former is the emanation
 of the latter; and both are children of one mother -- ancient
 <em>Lemuro</em>-<em>Atlantean Wisdom.</em> 
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-18.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>