<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite><a name="DDE_LINK1"></a><a name="DDE_LINK3"></a>The
 Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 403 IDENTITY OF TYPOLOGY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK20">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd1-2-09.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>ยง X.<br>
 TREE, SERPENT, AND CROCODILE WORSHIP.</h4>
 
 <blockquote>
 "Object of horror or of adoration, men have for the serpent
 an implacable hatred, or prostrate themselves before its genius.
 Lie calls it, Prudence claims it, Envy carries it in its heart,
 and Eloquence on its caduceus. In hell it arms the whip of the
 Furies; in heaven Eternity makes of it its symbol."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 DE CHATEAUBRIAND.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE Ophites asserted that there were several
 kinds of genii, from god to man; that the relative superiority
 of these was ruled by the degree</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 404 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of light that was accorded to each; and they maintained that the
 serpent had to be constantly called upon and to be thanked for
 the signal service it had rendered humanity. For it taught Adam
 that if he ate of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and
 evil, he would raise his being immensely by the learning and wisdom
 he would thus acquire. Such was the exoteric reason given.
 </p><p>
 It is easy to see whence the primal idea of this dual, Janus-like
 character of the Serpent: the good and the bad. This symbol is
 one of the most ancient, because the reptile preceded the bird,
 and the bird the mammal. Thence the belief, or rather the superstition,
 of the savage tribes who think that the souls of their ancestors
 live under this form, and the general association of the Serpent
 with the tree. The legends about the various things it represents
 are numberless; but, as most of them are allegorical, they have
 now passed into the class of fables based on ignorance and dark
 superstition. For instance, when Philostratus narrates that the
 natives of India and Arabia fed on the heart and liver of serpents
 in order to learn the language of all the animals, the serpent
 being credited with that faculty, he certainly never meant his
 words to be accepted literally. (See <em>De Vita Apollonii</em>,<em>
 </em>lib.<em> </em>1, c. xiv.) As will be found more than once
 as we proceed, the "Serpent" and "Dragon"
 were the names given to the "Wise Ones," the initiated
 adepts of olden times. It was their wisdom and their learning
 that were devoured or assimilated by their followers, whence the
 allegory. When the Scandinavian Sigurd is fabled to have roasted
 the heart of Fafnir, the Dragon, whom he had slain, becoming thereby
 the wisest of men, it meant the same thing. Sigurd had become
 learned in the runes and magical charms; he had received the "word"
 from an initiate of that name, or from a sorcerer, after which
 the latter died, as many do, after "passing the word."
 Epiphanius lets out a secret of the Gnostics while trying to expose
 their <em>heresies. </em>The Gnostic Ophites, he says, had a reason
 for honouring the Serpent: <em>it was because he taught the primeval
 men the Mysteries </em>(<em>Adv. Haeres. </em>37). Verily so;
 but they did not have Adam and Eve in the garden in their minds
 when teaching this dogma, but simply that which is stated above.
 The <em>Nagas </em>of the Hindu and Tibetan adepts were human
 <em>Nagas </em>(Serpents), not reptiles. Moreover, the Serpent
 has ever been the type of consecutive or serial rejuvenation,
 of <strong>I</strong>MMORTALITY and <strong>T</strong>IME.
 </p><p>
 The numerous and extremely interesting readings, the interpretations
 and facts about Serpent worship, given in "The Natural Genesis,"
 are very ingenious and scientifically correct. But they are far
 from covering the <em>whole </em>of the meanings implied. They
 divulge only the astronomical and physiological mysteries, with
 the addition of some cosmic phenomena. On the lowest plane of
 materiality the Serpent was, no doubt,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 405 THE DEGRADATION OF THE SYMBOL.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "the great mystery in the mysteries," and was, very
 likely, "adopted as a type of feminine pubescence, on account
 of its sloughing and self-renewal." It was so, however, only
 with regard to mysteries concerning terrestrial <em>animal </em>life,
 for as symbol of "<em>reclothing </em>and rebirth in the
 (universal) mysteries" its "<em>final phase</em>"<em>*</em>
 -- or<em> </em>shall we rather say its incipient and culminating
 phases -- they were not of this plane. They were generated in
 the pure realm of ideal light, and having accomplished the round
 of the whole cycle of adaptations and symbolism, the "mysteries"
 returned from whence they had come -- into the essence of <em>immaterial
 </em>causality. They belonged to the highest gnosis. And surely
 this could have never obtained its name and fame solely on account
 of its penetration into physiological and especially feminine
 functions!
 </p><p>
 As a symbol, the Serpent had as many aspects and occult meanings
 as the Tree itself; the "Tree of Life," with which it
 was emblematically and almost indissolubly connected. Whether
 viewed as a metaphysical or a physical symbol, the Tree and Serpent,
 jointly, or separately, have never been so degraded by antiquity
 as they are now, in this our age of the breaking of idols, not
 for truth's sake, but to glorify the more gross matter. The revelations
 and interpretations in "The Rivers of Life" would have
 astounded the worshippers of the Tree and Serpent in the days
 of archaic Chaldean and Egyptian wisdom; and even the early Saivas
 would have recoiled in horror at the theories and suggestions
 of the author of the said work. "The notion of Payne Knight
 and Inman that the cross or Tau is simply a copy of the male organs
 in a triadic form is radically false," writes Mr. G. Massey,
 who proves what he says. But this is a statement that could be
 as justly applied to almost all the modern interpretations of
 ancient symbols. "The Natural Genesis," a monumental
 work of research and thought, the most complete on that subject
 that has ever been published, covering as it does a wider field,
 and explaining much more than all the symbologists who have hitherto
 written, does not yet go beyond the "psycho-theistic"
 stage of ancient thought. Nor were Payne Knight and Inman altogether
 wrong; except in entirely failing to see that their interpretations
 of the "Tree of Life," as the cross and phallus, fitted
 the symbol, and approximated it, only on the lowest and last stage
 of the evolutionary development of the idea of the GIVER OF LIFE.
 It was the last and the grossest physical transformation of nature,
 in animal, insect, bird, and even plant; for biune, creative magnetism,
 in the form of the attraction of the contraries, or sexual polarization,
 acts in the constitution of reptile and bird as it does in that
 of man. Moreover, the modern symbologists and Orientalists --
 from first to last --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The <em>Natural Genesis</em>,<em> </em>by Gerald Massey, Vol.
 1, p. 340. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 406 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 being ignorant of the real mysteries revealed by occultism, can
 necessarily see but this last stage. If told that this mode of
 procreation, which the whole world of being has now in common
 on this earth, is but a passing phase, a physical means of furnishing
 the conditions to, and producing the phenomena of life which will
 alter with this, and disappear with the next Root-Race -- they
 would laugh at such a superstitious and unscientific idea. But
 the most learned Occultists assert this because <em>they know
 </em>it. The universe of living beings, of all those which procreate
 their species, is the living witness to the various modes of procreation
 in the evolution of animal and human species and races; and the
 naturalist ought to sense this truth intuitionally, even though
 he is yet unable to demonstrate it. And how could he, indeed,
 with the present modes of thought! The landmarks of the archaic
 history of the past are few and scarce, and those that men of
 science come across are mistaken for finger-posts of our little
 era. Even so-called "universal" (?) history embraces
 but a tiny field in the almost boundless space of the unexplored
 regions of our latest, fifth Root-Race. Hence, every fresh sign-post,
 every new glyph of the hoary Past that is discovered, is added
 to the old stock of information, to be interpreted on the same
 lines of pre-existing conceptions, and without any reference to
 the special cycle of thought which that particular glyph may belong
 to. How can Truth ever come to light if this method is never changed!
 </p><p>
 Thus, in the beginning of their joint existence as a glyph of
 Immortal Being, the Tree and Serpent were divine imagery, truly.
 The tree <em>was reversed</em>,<em> </em>and its roots were generated
 in Heaven and grew out of the Rootless Root of all-being. Its
 trunk grew and developed, crossing the planes of Pleroma, it shot
 out crossways its luxuriant branches, first on the plane of hardly
 differentiated matter, and then downward till they touched the
 terrestrial plane. Thus, the Asvattha, tree of Life and Being,
 whose destruction alone leads to immortality, is said in the Bhagavatgita
 to grow with its roots above and its branches below (ch. xv.).
 The roots represent the Supreme Being, or First Cause, the LOGOS;
 but one has to go beyond those roots to <em>unite oneself with
 Krishna</em>,<em> </em>who, says Arjuna (<b>XI</b>.), is "greater
 than Brahman, and First Cause . . . the indestructible, that which
 is, that which is not, and what is beyond them." Its boughs
 are Hiranyagharba (Brahma or Brahman in his highest manifestations,
 say Sridhara and Madhusudana), the highest Dhyan Chohans or Devas.
 The Vedas are its leaves. He only who goes <em>beyond </em>the
 roots shall never return, <em>i.e.</em>, shall reincarnate no
 more during this "age" of Brahma.
 </p><p>
 It is only when its pure boughs had touched the terrestrial mud
 of the garden of Eden, of our Adamic race, that this Tree got
 soiled by the contact and lost its pristine purity; and that the
 Serpent of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 407 THE SEVEN-HEADED DRAGONS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Eternity -- the heaven-born <strong>L</strong>OGOS -- was finally
 degraded. In days of old -- of the <em>divine Dynasties </em>on
 Earth -- the now dreaded Reptile was regarded as the first beam
 of light that radiated from the abyss of divine Mystery. Various
 were the forms which it was made to assume, and numerous the natural
 symbols adapted to it, as it crossed aeons of Time: as from Infinite
 Time itself -- <em>Kala</em> --<em> </em>it fell into the space
 and time evolved out of human speculation. These forms were Cosmic
 and astronomical, theistic and pantheistic, abstract and concrete.
 They became in turn the Polar Dragon and the Southern Cross, the
 <em>Alpha Draconis </em>of the Pyramid, and the Hindu-Buddhist
 Dragon, which ever threatens, yet never swallows the Sun during
 its eclipses. Till then, the Tree remained ever green, for it
 was sprinkled by the waters of life; the great Dragon, ever divine,
 so long as it was kept within the precincts of the sidereal fields.
 But the tree grew and its lower boughs touched at last the infernal
 regions -- our Earth. Then the great serpent Nidhogg -- he who
 devours the corpses of the evil-doers in the "Hall of Misery"
 (human life), so soon as they are plunged into "Hwergelmir,"
 the roaring cauldron (of human passions) -- gnawed the World-tree.
 The worms of materiality covered the once healthy and mighty roots,
 and are now ascending higher and higher along the trunk; while
 the Midgard-snake coiled at the bottom of the Seas, encircles
 the Earth, and, through its venomous breath, makes her powerless
 to defend herself.
 </p><p>
 They are all seven-headed, the dragons and serpents of antiquity
 -- "one head for each race, and every head with seven hairs
 on it," as the allegory has it. Aye, from Ananta, the Serpent
 of Eternity which carries Vishnu through the Manvantara, from
 the original primordial Sesha, whose seven heads become "one
 thousand heads" in the Puranic fancy, down to the seven-headed
 Akkadian Serpent. This typifies the Seven principles throughout
 nature and man; the highest or <em>middle </em>head being the
 seventh. It is not of the Mosaic, Jewish Sabbath that Philo speaks
 in his <em>Creation of the World</em>,<em> </em>when saying that
 the world was completed "according to the perfect nature
 of number 6." For, "<em>when that reason </em>(<em>nous</em>)<em>
 which is holy in accordance with the number seven</em>,<em> has
 entered the soul </em>(rather the living body), the number six
 is thus arrested, and all the mortal things which that number
 makes." And again: "Number 7 is the festival day of
 all the earth, the <em>birthday of the world. </em>I know not
 whether any one would be able to celebrate the number 7 in adequate
 terms." . . . (Par. pp. 30 and 419). The author of <em>The
 Natural Genesis </em>thinks that "the Septenary of Stars
 seen in the great bear (the <em>Septarshis</em>)<em> </em>and
 seven-headed Dragon furnished a visible origin for the symbolic
 seven of time above. The goddess of the seven stars," he
 adds --</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 408 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 "Was the mother of time, as Kep; whence Kepti and Sebti for
 the two times and number seven. So this is the star of the Seven
 by name. Sevekt (Kronos), the Son of the goddess, has the name
 of the seven or seventh. So has Sefekh Abu who builds the house
 on high, as Wisdom (Sophia) built hers with seven pillars. . .
 The primary Kronotypes were seven, and thus the beginning of time
 in heaven is based on the number and the name of seven, on account
 of the starry demonstrators. The seven stars as they turned round
 annually kept pointing, as it were, with the forefinger of the
 right hand, and describing a circle in the upper and lower heaven.*
 The number seven naturally suggested a measure by seven, that
 led to what may be termed <i>Sevening,</i> and to the marking
 and mapping out of the circle in seven corresponding divisions
 which were assigned to the seven great constellations; and thus
 was formed the celestial heptanomis of Egypt in the heavens. .
 . . When the stellar heptanomis was broken up and divided into
 four quarters, it was multiplied by four, and the twenty-eight
 signs took the place of the primary seven constellations, the
 lunar zodiac of twenty-eight days being the registered result.**
 . . . In the Chinese arrangement the four sevens are given to
 four genii that preside over the four cardinal points. . . ."
 (In Chinese Buddhism and Esotericism the genii are represented
 by four Dragons -- the "Maharajahs" of the Stanzas.)
 "The seven Northern constellations make up the Black Warrior;
 the seven Eastern (Chinese autumn) constitute the White Tiger;
 the seven Southern are the Vermilion Bird; and the seven Western
 (called Vernal) are the Azure Dragon. Each of these four Spirits
 presides over its heptanomis during one lunar week. The genetive
 of the first heptanomis (Typhon of the Seven Stars) now took a
 lunar character; . . . in this phase we find the goddess Sefekh,
 whose name signifies number 7, is the feminine word, or <i>logos
 </i>in place of the mother of Time, who was the earlier <i>Word</i>,<i>
 </i>as goddess of the Seven Stars" ("Typology of Time,"
 Vol. II. p. 313,<i> Nat. Gen.</i>)<i>.</i> 
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The author shows that it was the goddess of the Great Bear and
 mother of Time who was in Egypt from the earliest times the "<i>Living
 Word</i>,"<i> </i>and that "Sevekh-Kronus, whose type
 was the Crocodile-Dragon, the pre-planetary form of Saturn, was
 called her son and consort; he was her Word-Logos" (p. 321,<i>
 </i>Vol. I.).
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The above is quite plain, but it was not the knowledge of astronomy
 only that led the ancients to the process of <em>Sevening. </em>The
 primal cause goes far deeper and will be explained in its place.
 </p><p>
 The above quotations are no digressions. They are brought forward
 as showing (<em>a</em>) the reason why a full Initiate was called
 a "Dragon," a "Snake" a "Naga";
 and (<em>b</em>) that our septenary division was used by the priests
 of the earliest dynasties in Egypt, for the same reason and on
 the same basis as by us. This needs further elucidation, however.
 As already stated, that which Mr. G. Massey calls the four genii
 of the four cardinal points; and the Chinese, the Black Warrior,
 White Tiger, Ver-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * For the same reason the division of the principles in man into
 seven are thus reckoned, as they describe the same circle in the
 human higher and lower nature.
 </p><p>
 ** Thus the septenary division is the oldest and preceded the
 four-fold division. It is the root of archaic classification.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 409 DRAGON AND CROCODILE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 milion Bird, and Azure Dragon, is called in the Secret Books,
 -- the "Four Hidden Dragons of Wisdom" and the "Celestial
 Nagas." Now, as shown, the seven-headed or septenary <strong>D</strong>RAGON-<strong>L</strong>OGOS
 had been in course of time split up, so to speak, into four heptanomic
 parts or twenty-eight portions. Each lunar week has a distinct
 occult character in the lunar month; each day of the twenty-eight
 has its special characteristics; as each of the twelve constellations,
 whether separately or in combination with other signs, has an
 occult influence either for good or for evil. This represents
 the sum of knowledge that men can acquire on this earth; yet few
 are those who acquire it, and still fewer are the wise men who
 get to the root of knowledge symbolized by the great Root Dragon,
 the spiritual LOGOS of these visible signs. But those who do,
 receive the name of "Dragons," and they are the "Arhats
 of the Four Truths of the 28 Faculties," or attributes, and
 have always been so called.
 </p><p>
 The Alexandrian Neo-Platonists asserted that to become real <em>Chaldees
 </em>or Magi, one had to master the science or knowledge of the
 periods of the Seven Rectors of the world, in whom is all wisdom.
 In "Proclus in<em> Timaeus</em>,"<em> </em>b.<em> </em>1,
 Jamblichus is credited with another version, which does not however,
 alter, the meaning. He says that "the Assyrians have not
 only preserved the records of seven and twenty myriads of years,
 as Hipparchus says they have, but likewise of the whole apocatastases
 and periods of the Seven Rulers of the World." The legends
 of every nation and tribe, whether civilized or savage, point
 to the once universal belief in the great wisdom and cunning of
 the Serpents. They are "charmers." They hypnotise the
 bird with their eye, and man himself, very often, does not feel
 above their fascinating influence; therefore the symbol is a most
 fitting one.
 </p><p>
 The crocodile is the Egyptian dragon. It was the dual symbol of
 Heaven and Earth, of Sun and Moon, and was made sacred, in consequence
 of its amphibious nature, to Osiris and Isis. According to Eusebius,
 the Egyptians represented the sun in a ship as its pilot, this
 ship being carried along by a crocodile "to show the motion
 of the Sun in the moyst (Space)",<em> </em>(<em>Prepar. Evang.</em>,
 1, 3, c. 3). The crocodile was moreover, the symbol of Egypt herself
 -- the <em>lower</em>,<em> </em>as being the more swampy of the
 two countries. The Alchemists claim another interpretation. They
 say that the symbol of the sun in the ship on the Ether of Space
 meant that the hermetic matter is the principle, or basis, of
 gold, or again the <em>philosophical </em>sun; the water, within
 which the crocodile is swimming, is that water or matter made
 liquid; the ship herself, finally, representing the vessel of
 nature, in which the sun, or the sulphuric, igneous principle,
 acts as a pilot: because it is the sun</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 410 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 which conducts the work by his action upon the <em>moist </em>or<em>
 mercury. </em>The above is only for the Alchemists.
 </p><p>
 The Serpent became the type and symbol of evil, and of the Devil,
 only during the middle ages. The early Christians -- besides the
 Ophite Gnostics -- had their dual Logos: the Good and the Bad
 Serpent, the Agathodaemon and the Kakodaemon. This is demonstrated
 by the writings of Marcus, Valentinus, and many others, and especially
 in <em>Pistis Sophia</em> --<em> </em>certainly a document of
 the earliest centuries of Christianity. On the marble sarcophagus
 of a tomb, discovered in 1852 near the Porta Pia, one sees the
 scene of the adoration of the Magi, "or else," remarks
 the late C. W. King in "<em>The Gnostics</em>,"<em>
 </em>"the<em> </em>prototype of that scene, the 'Birth of
 the New Sun.'" The mosaic floor exhibited a curious design
 which might have represented either (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>Isis
 suckling the babe Harpocrates, or (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>the Madonna
 nursing the infant Jesus. In the smaller sarcophagi that surrounded
 the larger one, eleven leaden plates rolled like scrolls were
 found, three of which have been deciphered. The contents of these
 ought to be regarded as final proof of a much-vexed question,
 for they show that either the early Christians, up to the VIth
 Century, were <em>bond fide </em>pagans, or that dogmatic Christianity
 was borrowed wholesale, and passed in full into the Christian
 Church -- Sun, Tree, Serpent, Crocodile and all.
 </p><blockquote>
 "On the first is seen Anubis . . . holding out a scroll;
 at his feet are two female busts; below all are two serpents entwined
 . . . a corpse swathed up like a mummy. In the second scroll .
 . . is Anubis, holding out a cross, the "Sign of Life."
 Under his feet lies the corpse encircled in the numerous folds
 of a huge serpent, the Agathodaemon, guardian of the deceased.
 . . . . In the third scroll, Anubis bears on his arm . . . . .
 the outline of . . a complete Latin cross . . . At the god's foot
 is a rhomboid, the Egyptian 'Egg of the World,' towards which
 crawls a serpent coiled into a circle . . . . Under the busts
 is the letter [[omega]] repeated <i>seven </i>times in a line,
 reminding one of the 'names' . . . Very remarkable also is the
 line of characters, apparently Palmyrene, upon the legs of the
 first Anubis. As for the figure of the <i>serpent</i>,<i> </i>supposing
 these talismans to emanate not from the Isiac but the newer Ophite
 creed, it may well stand for that "True and perfect Serpent,"
 who leads forth the souls of all that put their trust in him out
 of the Egypt of the body, and through the Red Sea of Death into
 the Land of Promise, saving them on their way from the Serpents
 of the Wilderness, that is, from the Rulers of the Stars."
 (King's "Gnostics," p. 366.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 And this "True and Perfect Serpent" is the seven-lettered
 God who is now credited with being Jehovah, and Jesus <em>One
 with him. </em>To this Seven-vowelled god the candidate for initiation
 is sent by Christos, in the<em> Pistis Sophia</em>,<em> </em>a
 work earlier than St. John's <em>Revelation</em>,<em> </em>and
 evidently of the same school. "The (Serpent of the) Seven
 Thunders uttered</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 411 THE MYSTERY OF THE SEVEN THUNDERS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 these seven vowels," but "Seal up those things which
 the seven thunders uttered, and write them not," says Revelation.
 "Do ye seek after these mysteries?" inquiries Jesus
 in <em>Pistis Sophia. </em>"No mystery is more excellent
 than they (the seven vowels): for they shall bring your souls
 unto the Light of Lights" -- <em>i.e.</em>, true Wisdom.
 "Nothing, therefore, is more excellent than the mysteries
 which ye seek after, saving only the <em>mystery of the Seven
 Vowels and their </em><strong>F</strong>ORTY AND NINE <em>Powers</em>,<em>
 </em>and the numbers thereof."
 </p><p>
 In India, it was <em>the mystery of the Seven </em><strong>F</strong>IRES
 and their forty-nine fires or aspects, or "the members thereof,"
 just the same.
 </p><p>
 These seven vowels are represented by the Swastika signs on the
 crowns of the seven heads of the Serpent of Eternity, in India,
 among esoteric Buddhists, in Egypt, in Chaldea, etc. etc., and
 among the Initiates of every other country. It is on the Seven
 zones of <em>post mortem </em>ascent, in the Hermetic writings,
 that the "mortal" leaves, on each, one of his "Souls"
 (or Principles); until arrived on the plane above all zones he
 remains as the great Formless Serpent of absolute wisdom -- or
 the Deity itself. The seven-headed serpent has more than one signification
 in the Arcane teachings. It is the seven-headed <em>Draco</em>,<em>
 </em>each of whose heads is a star of the Lesser Bear; but it
 was also, and pre-eminently, the Serpent of Darkness (<em>i.e.</em>,
 inconceivable and incomprehensible) whose seven heads were the
 seven <em>Logoi</em>,<em> </em>the reflections of the one and
 first manifested Light -- the universal <strong>L</strong>OGOS.
 </p><p>
 --------------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-2-11.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>