<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 554 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 [[This page continued from <a href="sd1-3-09.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>X.<br>
 THE COMING FORCE.</h4>
 
 <p>
 ITS POSSIBILITIES AND IMPOSSIBILITIES.
 </p><p>
 Shall we say that Force is "moving matter," or "matter
 in motion," and a manifestation of energy; or that matter
 and force are the phenomenal differentiated aspects of the one
 primary, undifferentiated Cosmic Substance?
 </p><p>
 This query is made with regard to that Stanza which treats of
 <strong>F</strong>OHAT and his "Seven brothers or <em>Sons</em>,"
 in other words, of the <em>cause </em>and the <em>effects </em>of
 Cosmic Electricity, the latter called, in Occult parlance, <em>the</em>
 <em>seven primary </em>forces of Electricity, whose purely phenomenal,
 and hence <em>grossest </em>effects are alone cognizable by physicists
 on the cosmic and especially on the terrestrial plane. These include,
 among other things, Sound, Light, Colour, etc., etc. Now what
 does physical Science tell us of these "Forces"? <strong>S</strong>OUND,
 it says, is a <em>sensation </em>produced by the impact of atmospheric
 molecules on the <em>tympanum</em>,<em> </em>which, by setting
 up delicate tremors in the auditory apparatus, thus communicate
 themselves to the brain. <strong>L</strong>IGHT is the <em>sensation
 </em>caused by the impact of inconceivably minute vibrations of
 ether on the <em>retina </em>of the eye.
 </p><p>
 So, too, we say. But this is simply the effect produced in <em>our
 </em>atmosphere and its immediate surroundings, all, in fact,
 which falls within the range of our terrestrial consciousness.
 <em>Jupiter Pluvius </em>sent his symbol in drops of rain, of
 water composed, as is believed, of two "elements," which
 chemistry dissociates and recombines. The compound molecules are
 in its power, but their atoms still elude its grasp. Occultism
 sees in all these Forces and manifestations a ladder, the lower
 rungs of which belong to <em>exoteric </em>physics, and the higher
 are traced to a living, intelligent, invisible Power, which is,
 as a rule, the unconcerned, and exceptionally, the conscious cause
 of the sense-born phenomenon designated as this or another natural
 law.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 555 DIVINE, INFERNAL, OR TERRESTRIAL FORCE?
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 We say and maintain that <strong>S</strong>OUND, for one thing,
 is a tremendous Occult power; that it is a stupendous force, of
 which the electricity generated by a million of Niagaras could
 never counteract the smallest potentiality when directed with
 <em>occult knowledge</em>. Sound may be produced of such a nature
 that the pyramid of Cheops would be raised in the air, or that
 a dying man, nay, one at his last breath, would be revived and
 filled with new energy and vigour.
 </p><p>
 For Sound generates, or rather attracts together, the elements
 that produce an <em>ozone</em>,<em> </em>the fabrication of which
 is beyond chemistry, but within the limits of Alchemy. It may
 even <em>resurrect </em>a man or an animal whose astral "vital
 body" has not been irreparably separated from the physical
 body by the severance of the magnetic or odic chord. <em>As one
 saved thrice from death </em>by that power, the writer ought to
 be credited with knowing personally something about it.
 </p><p>
 And if all this appears too <em>unscientific </em>to be even noticed,
 let Science explain to what mechanical and physical laws known
 to it, is due the recently produced phenomena of the so-called
 "Keely motor?" What is it that acts as the formidable
 generator of invisible but tremendous force, of that power which
 is not only capable of driving an engine of 25 horse-power, but
 has even been employed to lift the machinery bodily? Yet this
 is done simply by drawing a fiddle-bow across a tuning fork, as
 has been repeatedly proven. For the <em>etheric </em>Force, discovered
 by the well-known (in America and now in Europe) John Worrell
 Keely, of Philadelphia, is no <em>hallucination. </em>Notwithstanding
 his failure to utilize it, a failure prognosticated and maintained
 by some Occultists from the first, the phenomena exhibited by
 the discoverer during the last few years have been wonderful,
 almost miraculous, not in the sense of the <em>supernatural</em>*<em>
 </em>but of the <em>superhuman. </em>Had Keely been permitted
 to succeed, he might have reduced a whole army to atoms in the
 space of a few seconds as easily as he reduced a dead ox to the
 same condition.
 </p><p>
 The reader is now asked to give a serious attention to that newly-discovered
 potency which the discoverer has named "Inter-Etheric Force
 and Forces."
 </p><p>
 In the humble opinion of the Occultists, as of his immediate friends,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The word "supernatural" implies <em>above or outside</em>
 of nature. Nature and Space are one. Now Space for the metaphysician
 exists outside of any act of sensation, and is a purely subjective
 representation; materialism, which would connect it forcibly with
 one or the other datum of sensation, notwithstanding. For our
 senses, <em>it is fairly</em> <em>subjective </em>when independent
 of anything within it. How then can any phenomenon, or anything
 else, <em>step outside of or be performed beyond</em> <em>that
 which has</em> <em>no limits?</em> But when spacial extension
 becomes simply conceptual, and is thought of in an idea connected
 with certain actions, as by the materialists and the physicists,
 then again they have hardly a right to define and claim that which
 can or cannot be produced by Forces generated within even limited
 spaces, as they have not even an approximate idea of what those
 forces are.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 556 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Mr. Keely, of Philadelphia, was, and still is, at the threshold
 of some of the greatest secrets of the Universe; of that chiefly
 on which is built the whole mystery of physical Forces, and the
 esoteric significance of the "Mundane Egg" symbolism.
 Occult philosophy, viewing the manifested and the unmanifested
 Kosmos as a UNITY, symbolizes the ideal conception of the former
 by that "Golden Egg" with two poles in it. It is the
 positive pole that acts in the manifested world of matter, while
 the negative is lost in the unknowable absoluteness of SAT --
 "<em>Be</em>-<em>ness.</em>"*<em> </em>Whether this
 agrees with the philosophy of Mr. Keely, we cannot tell, nor does
 it really much matter. Nevertheless, his ideas about the ethero-material
 construction of the Universe look strangely like our own, being
 <em>in this respect </em>nearly identical. This is what we find
 him saying in an able pamphlet compiled by Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore,
 an American lady of wealth and position, whose incessant efforts
 in the pursuit of truth can never be too highly appreciated: --
 "Mr. Keely, in explanation of the working of his engine,
 says: 'In the conception of any machine heretofore constructed,
 the medium for inducing a neutral centre has never been found.
 If it had, the difficulties of perpetual-motion seekers would
 have ended, and this problem would have become an established
 and operating fact. It would only require an introductory impulse
 of a few pounds, on such a device, to cause it to run for centuries.
 In the conception of my vibratory engine, I did not seek to attain
 perpetual motion; but a circuit is formed that actually has <em>a
 neutral centre</em>,<em> </em>which is in a condition to be vivified
 by my vibratory ether, and, while under operation by said substance,
 is really a machine that is virtually independent of the mass
 (or globe),** and it is the wonderful velocity of the vibratory
 circuit which makes it so. Still, with all its perfection, it
 requires to be fed with the vibratory ether to make it an independent
 motor . . . ."
 </p><p>
 "All structures require a foundation in strength according
 to the weight of the mass they have to carry, but the foundations
 of the universe rest on a vacuous point far more minute than a
 molecule; in fact, to express this truth properly, on an <em>inter</em>-<em>etheric
 point</em>,<em> </em>which requires an infinite mind to understand
 it. To look down into the depths of an etheric centre is precisely
 the same as it would be to search into the broad space of heaven's
 ether to find the end, with this difference: that one is the positive
 field, while the other is the negative field . . . ."
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It is not correct, when speaking of <em>idealism</em>,<em> </em>to
 show it based upon "the old ontological assumptions that
 things or entities exist independently of each other, and otherwise
 than as terms of relations" (Stallo). At any rate, it is
 incorrect to say so of idealism in Eastern philosophy and <em>its</em>
 cognition, for it is just the reverse.
 </p><p>
 ** Independent, in a certain sense, but not <em>disconnected </em>with
 it.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 557 AN UNCONSCIOUS OCCULTIST.</h6>
 
 <p>
 This, as easily seen, is precisely the Eastern doctrine. His inter-etheric
 point is the laya-point of the Occultists, which, however, does
 not require "an infinite mind to <em>understand </em>it,"
 but only a specific intuition and ability to trace its hiding-place
 in this world of matter. Of course, the <em>laya centre </em>cannot
 be produced, but an <em>inter</em>-<em>etheric vacuum </em>can
 -- as proved in the production of bell-sounds in space. Mr. Keely
 speaks as an unconscious Occultist, nevertheless, when he remarks
 in his theory of planetary suspension: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "As regards planetary volume, we would ask in a scientific
 point of view, How can the immense difference of volume in the
 planets exist without disorganising the harmonious action that
 has always characterised them? I can only answer this question
 properly by entering into a progressive analysis, starting on
 the rotating etheric centres that were fixed by the Creator* with
 their attractive or accumulative power. If you ask what power
 it is that gives to each etheric atom its inconceivable velocity
 of rotation (or introductory impulse), I must answer that no finite
 mind will ever be able to conceive what it is. The philosophy
 of accumulation is the only proof that such a power has been given.
 The area, if we can so speak, of such an atom, presents to the
 attractive or magnetic, the elective or propulsive, all the receptive
 force and all the antagonistic force that characterises a planet
 of the largest magnitude; consequently, as the accumulation goes
 on, the perfect equation remains the same. When this minute centre
 has once been fixed, the power to rend it from its position would
 necessarily have to be so great as to displace the most immense
 planet that exists. When this atomic neutral centre is displaced,
 the planet must go with it. The neutral centre carries the full
 load of any accumulation from the start, and remains the same,
 for ever balanced in the eternal space."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Mr. Keely illustrates his idea of "a neutral centre"
 in this way: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "We will imagine that, after an accumulation of a planet
 of any diameter, say, 20,000 miles, more or less, for the size
 has nothing to do with the problem; there should be a displacement
 of all the material, with the exception of a crust 5,000 miles
 thick, leaving an intervening void between this crust and a centre
 of the size of an ordinary billiard ball, it would then require
 a force as great to move this small central mass as it would to
 move the shell of 5,000 miles thickness. Moreover, this small
 central mass would carry the load of this crust for ever, keeping
 it equidistant; and there could be no opposing power, however
 great, that could bring them together. The imagination staggers
 in contemplating the immense load which bears upon this point
 of centre, where weight ceases. . . . This is what we understand
 by a neutral centre."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 And what Occultists understand by a "laya centre."
 </p><p>
 The above is pronounced "unscientific" by many. But
 so is everything that is not sanctioned and kept on strictly orthodox
 lines by physical science. Unless the explanation given by the
 inventor himself is accepted -- and his explanations, being, as
 observed, quite <em>orthodox </em>from
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "By<em> Fohat</em>,<em> </em>more likely," would be
 an Occultist's reply.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 558 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the spiritual and the Occult stand-points, if not from that of
 materialistic speculative (called <em>exact</em>)<em> </em>Science,
 are therefore ours in this particular -- what can science answer
 to <em>facts </em>already seen which it is no longer possible
 for anyone to deny? Occult philosophy divulges few of its most
 important vital mysteries. It drops them like precious pearls,
 one by one, far and wide apart, and only when forced to do so
 by the evolutionary tidal wave that carries on humanity slowly,
 silently, but steadily toward the dawn of the Sixth-Race mankind.
 For once out of the safe custody of their legitimate heirs and
 keepers, those mysteries cease to be occult: they fall into the
 public domain and have to run the risk of becoming in the hands
 of the selfish -- of the <em>Cains </em>of the human race -- curses
 more often than blessings. Nevertheless, whenever such individuals
 as the discoverer of <em>Etheric Force </em>--<em> </em>John Worrell
 Keely -- men with peculiar psychic and mental capacities* are
 born, they are generally and more frequently helped than allowed
 to go unassisted; groping on their way, though, if left to their
 own resources, falling very soon victims to martyrdom and unscrupulous
 speculators. Only they are helped <em>on the condition that they</em>
 <em>should not become</em>,<em> whether consciously or unconsciously</em>,<em>
 an additional</em> <em>peril to their age: a danger to the poor</em>,<em>
 </em>now offered in daily holocaust by the less wealthy to the
 very wealthy.** This necessitates a short digression and an explanation.
 </p><p>
 Some twelve years back, during the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition,
 the writer, in answering the earnest queries of a theosophist,
 one of the earliest admirers of Mr. Keely, repeated to him what
 she had heard in quarters, information from which she could never
 doubt.
 </p><p>
 It had been stated that the inventor of the "Self-Motor"
 was what is called, in the jargon of the Kabalists, a "<em>natural</em>-<em>born
 </em>magician." That he was and would remain unconscious
 of the full range of his powers, and would work out merely those
 which he had found out and ascertained in his own nature -- <em>firstly</em>,
 because, attributing them to a wrong source, he could never give
 them full sway; and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The reason for such psychic capacities is given farther on.
 </p><p>
 ** The above was written two years ago, at a time when hopes of
 success for the "Keely Motor" were at their highest.
 What was then said by the writer proved true, in every word, and
 now only a few remarks are added to it with regard to the failure
 of his expectations, so far, which has now been admitted by the
 discoverer himself. Though, however, the word <em>failure </em>is
 here used the reader should understand it in a relative sense,
 for as Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore explains: "What Mr. Keely does
 admit is that, baffled in applying vibratory force to mechanics,
 upon his first and second lines of experimental research, he was
 obliged either to confess a <em>commercial </em>failure, or to
 try a third departure from his base or principle; seeking success
 through another channel."<br>
 . . And this "channel" is on the <em>physical </em>plane.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 559 THE FIRST-BORN OF ETHER.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>secondly</em>,<em> </em>because it was beyond his power to
 pass to others that which was <em>a capacity inherent in his special
 nature. </em>Hence the whole secret could not be made over permanently
 to anyone for practical purposes or use.*
 </p><p>
 Individuals born with such a capacity are not <em>very rare. </em>That
 they are not heard of more frequently is due to the fact that
 they live and die, in almost every case, in utter ignorance of
 being possessed of <em>abnormal </em>powers at all. Mr. Keely
 possesses powers which are called "abnormal" just because
 they happen in our day to be as little known as blood circulation
 was before Harvey's time. Blood existed, and it behaved as it
 does at present in the first man born from woman; and so does
 that <em>principle </em>in man which can control and guide etheric
 vibratory force. At any rate it exists in all those mortals whose
 <em>inner selves </em>are<em> primordially connected</em>,<em>
 by reason of their direct descent</em>,<em> with that group of
 Dhyan-Chohans </em>who are called "<em>the first</em>-<em>born
 of Ether.</em>"<em> </em>Mankind, psychically considered,
 is divided into various groups, each of which is connected with
 one of the Dhyanic groups that first formed <em>psychic</em> man;<em>
 </em>(<em>see paragraphs</em> 1, 2, 3,<em> </em>4, 5 <em>in the
 Commentary to Stanza VII.</em>)<em> </em>Mr. Keely being greatly
 favoured in this respect, and moreover, besides his psychic temperament,
 being intellectually a genius in mechanics, may thus achieve most
 wonderful results. He has achieved some already -- more than any
 mortal man, <em>not initiated into the final mysteries</em>,<em>
 </em>has achieved in this age up to the present day. What he has
 done is certainly quite sufficient "to demolish with the
 hammer of Science the idols of Science" -- the idols of matter
 with the feet of clay -- as his friends justly predict and say
 of him. Nor would the writer for a moment think of contradicting
 Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore, when in her paper on "Psychic Force
 and Etheric Force," she states that Mr. Keely, as a philosopher,
 "is great enough in soul, wise enough in mind, and sublime
 enough in courage to overcome all difficulties, and to stand at
 last before the world as the greatest discoverer and inventor
 in the world."
 </p><p>
 And again she writes: -- "Should Keely do no more than lead
 scientists from the dreary realms where they are groping into
 the open field of elemental force, where gravity and cohesion
 are disturbed in their haunts and diverted to use; where, from
 unity of origin, emanates infinite energy in diversified forms,
 he will achieve immortal fame. Should he demonstrate, to the destruction
 of materialism, that the universe is animated by a mysterious
 principle to which matter, however perfectly organized, is absolutely
 subservient, he will be a greater spiritual benefactor to our
 race than the modern world has yet found in any man. Should he
 be able to substitute, in the treatment of disease,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * We learn that these remarks are not applicable to Mr. Keely's
 latest discovery; time alone can show the exact limit of his achievements.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 560 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the finer forces of nature for the grossly material agencies which
 have sent more human beings to their graves than war, pestilence
 and famine combined, he will merit and receive the gratitude of
 mankind. All this and more will he do, if he and those who have
 watched his progress, day by day for years, are not too sanguine
 in their expectations."
 </p><p>
 Writing in the T. P. S. ("Theosophical Publication Society")
 series (No. 9), the same lady, in her pamphlet, "Keely's
 Secrets," brings forward a passage from an article, written
 a few years ago by the writer of the present volume, in her journal,
 the <em>Theosophist</em>,<em> </em>in these words: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The author of No. 5 of the pamphlets issued by the Theosophical
 Publication Society, 'What is Matter and What is Force,' says
 therein, 'The men of science have just found out "a fourth
 state of matter," whereas the Occultists have penetrated
 years ago beyond the sixth, and therefore do not infer, but know
 of, the existence of the seventh, the last.' This knowledge comprises
 one of the secrets of Keely's so-called 'compound secret.' It
 is already known to many that his secret includes 'the augmentation
 of energy,' the insulation of the ether, and the adaptation of
 dynaspheric force to machinery."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 It is just because Keely's discovery would lead to a knowledge
 of one of the most occult secrets, a secret which can never be
 allowed to fall into the hands of the masses, that his failure
 to push his discoveries to their logical end seems certain to
 Occultists. But of this more presently. Even in its limitations
 this discovery may prove of the greatest benefit. For: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Step by step, with a patient perseverance which some day
 the world will honour, this man of genius has made his researches,
 overcoming the colossal difficulties which again and again raised
 up in his path what seemed to be (to all but himself) insurmountable
 barriers to further progress: but never has the world's index
 finger so pointed to an hour when all is making ready for the
 advent of the new form of force that mankind is waiting for. Nature,
 always reluctant to yield her secrets, is listening to the demands
 made upon her by her master, necessity. The coal mines of the
 world cannot long afford the increasing drain made upon them.
 Steam has reached its utmost limits of power, and does not fulfil
 the requirements of the age. It knows that its days are numbered.
 Electricity holds back, with bated breath, dependent upon the
 approach of her sister colleague. Air ships are riding at anchor,
 as it were, waiting for the force which is to make aerial navigation
 something more than a dream. As easily as men communicate with
 their offices from their homes by means of the telephone, so will
 the inhabitants of separate continents talk across the ocean.
 Imagination is palsied when seeking to foresee the grand results
 of this marvellous discovery, when once it is applied to art and
 mechanics. In taking the throne which it will force steam to abdicate,
 dynaspheric force will rule the world with a power so mighty in
 the interests of civilization, that no finite mind can conjecture
 the results. Laurence Oliphant, in his preface to 'Scientific
 Religion,' says: 'A new moral future is dawning upon the human
 race -- one, certainly, of which it stands much in need.' In no
 way could this 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 561 ETHERIC WAVES.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 new moral future be so widely, so universally, commenced as by
 the utilizing of dynaspheric force to beneficial purposes in life.
 . . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The Occultists are ready to admit all this with the eloquent writer.
 Molecular vibration is, undeniably, "Keely's legitimate field
 of research," and the discoveries made by him will prove
 wonderful -- yet <em>only in his hands and through himself. </em>The
 world so far will get but that with which it can be safely entrusted.
 The truth of this assertion has, perhaps, not yet quite dawned
 upon the discoverer himself, since he writes that he is absolutely
 certain that he will accomplish all that he has promised, and
 will then give it out to the world; but it must dawn upon him,
 and at no very far distant date. And what he says in reference
 to his work is a good proof of it: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "In considering the operation of my engine, the visitor,
 in order to have even an approximate conception of its <i>modus
 operandi</i>,<i> </i>must discard <i>all thought of engines that
 are operated upon the principle of pressure and exhaustion</i>,<i>
 by the expansion of steam or other analogous gas which impinges
 upon an abutment</i>,<i> such as the piston of a steam</i>-<i>engine.
 </i>My engine has neither piston nor eccentrics, nor is there
 one grain of pressure exerted in the engine, whatever may be the
 size or capacity of it.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "My system, in every part and detail, both in the developing
 of my power and in every branch of its utilization, <i>is based
 and founded on sympathetic vibration. </i>In no other way would
 it be possible to awaken or develop my force, and equally impossible
 would it be to operate my engine upon any other principle. . .
 . . . .This, however, is the true system; and henceforth all my
 operations will be conducted in this manner -- that is to say,
 my power will be generated, my engines run, my cannon operated,
 <i>through a wire.</i> 
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "It has been only after years of incessant labour, and the
 making of almost innumerable experiments, involving not only the
 construction of a great many most peculiar mechanical structures,
 and the closest investigation and study of the phenomenal properties
 of the substance 'ether,' <i>per se</i>,<i> </i>produced, that
 I have been able to dispense with complicated mechanism, and to
 obtain, as I claim, <i>mastery over the subtle and strange force
 with which I am dealing</i>."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The passages underlined by us, are those which bear directly on
 the occult side of the application of the vibratory force, or
 what Mr. Keely calls "sympathetic vibration." The "wire"
 is already a step below, or downward from the pure etheric plane
 into the terrestrial. The discoverer has produced marvels -- the
 word "miracle" is not too strong -- when acting through
 the inter-etheric Force alone, the fifth and sixth principles
 of Akasa. From a "generator" six feet long, he has come
 down to one "no larger than an old-fashioned silver watch;"
 and this by itself is a miracle of <em>mechanical </em>(but not
 spiritual) genius. But, as well expressed by his great patroness
 and defender, Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore,<em> </em>"the two forms
 of force which he has been experimenting with, and the phenomena
 attending them, are the very antithesis of each other." One
 was generated and acted upon by and</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 562 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 through himself. No one, who should have repeated the thing done
 by himself, <em>could have produced the same results. </em>It
 was "Keely's ether" that acted truly, while "Smith's
 or Brown's" ether would have remained for ever barren of
 results. For Keely's difficulty has hitherto been to produce a
 machine which would develop and regulate the "force"
 without the intervention of any "will power" or personal
 influence, whether conscious or unconscious of the operator. In
 this he has failed, so far as others were concerned, for <em>no
 one but himself</em> could operate on his "machines."
 Occultly this was a far more advanced achievement than the "success"
 which he anticipates from his "wire," but the results
 obtained from the <em>fifth and sixth planes </em>of the etheric
 (or Astral) Force, <em>will</em> <em>never be permitted to serve
 for purposes of commerce and traffic. </em>That Keely's organism
 is directly connected with the production of the marvellous results
 is proven by the following statement emanating from one who knows
 the great discoverer intimately.
 </p><p>
 At one time the shareholders of the "Keely Motor Co."
 put a man in his workshop for the express purpose of discovering
 his secret. After six months of close watching, he said to J.
 W. Keely one day: "I know how it is done, now." They
 had been setting up a machine together, and Keely was manipulating
 the stop-cock which turned the force on and off. "Try it,
 then," was the answer. The man turned the cock, and nothing
 came. "Let me see you do it again," the man said to
 Keely. The latter complied, and the machinery operated at once.
 Again the other tried, but without success. Then Keely put his
 hand on his shoulder and told him to try once more. He did so,
 with the result of an instantaneous production of the current.
 This fact, if true, settles the question.
 </p><p>
 We are told that Mr. Keely defines electricity "as a certain
 form of atomic vibration." In this he is quite right; but
 this is electricity on the terrestrial plane, and through terrestrial
 correlations. He estimates --
 </p><p>
 Molecular vibrations at 100,000,000 per second.<br>
 Inter-molecular vibrations at 300,000,000 per second<br>
 Atomic vibrations at 900,000,000 per second<br>
 Inter-atomic vibrations at 2,700,000,000 per second<br>
 AEtheric vibrations at 8,100,000,000 pper second<br>
 Inter-AEtheric vibrations at 24,300,000,000 per second
 </p><p>
 This proves our point. There are no vibrations that could be counted
 or even estimated at an <em>approximate </em>rate beyond "the
 realm of the <em>fourth son of Fohat</em>,"<em> </em>using
 an occult phraseology, or that motion which corresponds to the
 formation of Mr. Crookes' radiant matter, or lightly called some
 years ago the "fourth state of matter" -- <em>on this
 our plane.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 563 A PREMATURE DISCOVERY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 If the question is asked why Mr. Keely was not allowed to pass
 a certain limit, the answer is easy; because that which he has
 unconsciously discovered, is the terrible sidereal Force, known
 to, and named by the Atlanteans MASH-MAK, and by the Aryan Rishis
 in their <em>Ashtar Vidya </em>by a name that we do not like to
 give. It is the <em>vril</em> of Bulwer Lytton's "Coming
 Race," and of the coming races of our mankind. The name vril
 may be a fiction; the Force itself is a fact doubted as little
 in India as the existence itself of their Rishis, since it is
 mentioned in all the secret works.
 </p><p>
 It is this vibratory Force, which, when aimed at an army from
 an <em>Agni Rath </em>fixed on a flying vessel, a balloon, according
 to the instructions found in <em>Ashtar Vidya</em>,<em> </em>reduced
 to ashes 100,000 men and elephants, as easily as it would a dead
 rat. It is allegorised in the <em>Vishnu Purana</em>,<em> </em>in
 the Ramayana and other works, in the fable about the sage Kapila
 whose <em>glance </em>made a mountain of ashes of King Sagara's
 60,000 sons, and which is explained in the esoteric works, and
 referred to as the <em>Kapilaksha </em>--<em> </em>"Kapila's
 Eye."
 </p><p>
 And is it this Satanic Force that our generations were to be allowed
 to add to their stock of Anarchist's baby-toys, known as melenite,
 dynamite clock-works, explosive oranges, "flower baskets,"
 and such other innocent names? Is it this destructive agency,
 which, once in the hands of some modern Attila, <em>e.g.</em>,
 a blood-thirsty anarchist, would reduce Europe in a few days to
 its primitive chaotic state with no man left alive to tell the
 tale -- is this force to become the common property of all men
 alike?
 </p><p>
 What Mr. Keely has already done is grand and wonderful in the
 extreme; there is enough work before him in the demonstration
 of his new system to "humble the pride of those scientists
 who are materialistic, by revealing those mysteries which lie
 behind the world of matter," without revealing it <em>nolens
 volens </em>to all. For surely Psychists and Spiritualists --
 of whom there are a good number in the European armies -- would
 be the first to experience personally the fruits of such mysteries
 revealed. Thousands of them would find themselves (and perhaps
 with the populations of whole countries to keep them company)
 in blue Ether very soon, were such a Force to be even entirely
 discovered, let alone made publicly known. The discovery in its
 completeness is by several thousand -- or shall we say hundred
 thousand? -- years <em>too premature. </em>It will be at its appointed
 place and time only when the great roaring flood of starvation,
 misery, and underpaid labour ebbs back again -- as it will when
 happily at last the just demands of the many are attended to;
 when the proletariat exists but in name, and the pitiful cry for
 bread, that rings throughout the world unheeded, has died away.
 This may be hastened by the spread of learning,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 564 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and by new openings for work and emigration, with better prospects
 than exist now, <em>and on some new continent that may appear.
 </em>Then only will "Keely's Motor and Force," as <em>originally
 contemplated </em>by himself and friends, be in demand, because
 <em>it will be more needed by the poor than by the wealthy.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 Meanwhile the force discovered by him will work through <em>wires</em>,<em>
 </em>and this, if he succeeds, will be quite sufficient in the
 present generation to make of him the greatest discoverer of this
 age.
 </p><p>
 What Mr. Keely says of <em>Sound and Colour </em>is also correct
 from the Occult stand-point. Hear him talk as though he were the
 nursling of the "Gods-revealers," and had gazed all
 his life into the depths of Father-Mother AEther.
 </p><p>
 In comparing the tenuity of the atmosphere with that of the etheric
 flows, obtained by him from his invention for breaking up the
 molecules of air by vibration, Keely says that: --
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . "It is as platina to hydrogen gas. Molecular separation
 of air brings us to the first sub-division only; inter-molecular,
 to the second; atomic, to the third; inter-atomic, to the fourth;
 etheric, to the fifth; and inter-etheric, to the sixth sub-division,
 or positive association with luminiferous ether.* In my introductory
 argument I have contended that this is the vibratory envelope
 of all atoms. In my definition of atom I do not confine myself
 to the <i>sixth </i>sub-division where this luminiferous ether
 is developed in its crude form as far as my researches prove.**
 I think this idea will be pronounced by the physicists of the
 present day, a wild freak of the imagination. Possibly, in time,
 a light may fall upon this theory that will bring its simplicity
 forward for scientific research. At present I can only compare
 it to some planet in a dark space, where the light of the sun
 of science has not yet reached it. . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "I assume that sound, like odour, is a real substance of
 unknown and wonderful tenuity, emanating from a body where it
 has been induced by percussion and throwing out absolute corpuscles
 of matter, inter-atomic particles, with velocity of 1,120 feet
 per second; in vacuo 20,000. The substance which is thus disseminated
 is a part and parcel of the mass agitated, and, if kept under
 this agitation continuously, would, in the course of a certain
 cycle of time, become thoroughly absorbed by the atmosphere; or,
 more truly, would pass through the atmosphere to an elevated point
 of tenuity corresponding to the condition of sub-division that
 governs its liberation from its parent body." . . .
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "The sounds from vibratory forks, set so as to produce etheric
 chords, while disseminating their tones (compound), permeate most
 thoroughly all substances that come under the range of their atomic
 bombardment. The clapping of a bell <i>in vacuo </i>liberates
 these atoms with the same velocity and volume as one in the open
 air; and were the agitation of the bell kept up continuously for
 a few millions of centuries it would
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <h6>* This also is the division, made by the Occultists, under
 other names.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ** Quite so, since there is the <em>seventh </em>beyond, which
 begins the same enumeration, from the first to the last, on another
 and higher plane.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 565 THE SECRETS OF SOUND AND ODOUR.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 thoroughly return to its primitive element; and, if the chamber
 were hermetically sealed, and strong enough, the vacuous volume
 surrounding the bell would be brought to a pressure of many thousands
 of pounds to the square inch, by the tenuous substance evolved.
 In my estimation, sound truly defined is the disturbance of atomic
 equilibrium, rupturing actual atomic corpuscles; and the substance
 thus liberated must certainly be a certain order of etheric flow.
 Under these conditions, is it unreasonable to suppose that, if
 this flow were kept up, and the body thus robbed of its element,
 it would in time disappear entirely? All bodies are formed primitively
 from this highly tenuous ether, animal, vegetable, and mineral,
 and they are only returned to their high gaseous condition when
 brought under a state of differential equilibrium." . . .
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "As regards odour, we can only get some definite idea of
 its extreme and wondrous tenuity by taking into consideration
 that a large area of atmosphere can be impregnated for a long
 series of years from a single grain of musk; which, if weighed
 after that long interval, will be found to be not appreciably
 diminished. The great paradox attending the flow of odorous particles
 is that they can be held under confinement in a glass vessel!
 Here is a substance of much higher tenuity than the glass that
 holds it, and yet it cannot escape. It is as a sieve with its
 meshes large enough to pass marbles, and yet holding fine sand
 which cannot pass through; in fact, a molecular vessel holding
 an atomic substance. This is a problem that would confound those
 who stop to recognize it. But infinitely tenuous as odour is,
 it holds a very crude relation to the substance of sub-division
 that governs a magnetic flow (a flow of sympathy, if you please
 to call it so). This sub-division comes next to sound, but is
 above sound. The action of the flow of a magnet coincides somewhat
 to the receiving and distributing portion of the human brain,
 giving off at all times a depreciating ratio of the amount received.
 It is a grand illustration of the control of mind over matter,
 which gradually depreciates the physical till dissolution takes
 place. The magnet on the same ratio gradually loses its power
 and becomes inert. If the relations that exist between mind and
 matter could be equated and so held, we would live on in our physical
 state eternally, as there would be no physical depreciation. But
 this physical depreciation leads, at its terminus, to the source
 of a much higher development -- viz., the liberation of the pure
 ether from the crude molecular; which, in my estimation, is to
 be much desired." -- (From Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore's paper,
 "<i>The New Philosophy</i>.")
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 It may be remarked that, save a few small divergencies, no Adept
 nor Alchemist could have explained the above <em>any better</em>,<em>
 in the light of modern Science</em>,<em> </em>however much the
 latter may protest against the novel views. This is, in all its
 fundamental principles, if not details, <em>Occultism pure and
 simple</em>,<em> </em>yet withal, modern <em>natural philosophy
 </em>as well.
 </p><p>
 This "New Force," or whatever Science may call it, the
 effects of which are undeniable -- admitted by more than one naturalist
 and physicist who has visited Mr. Keely's laboratory and witnessed
 personally its tremendous effects -- what is it? Is it a "mode
 of motion," also, "<em>in Vacuo</em>,"<em> </em>since
 there is no matter to generate it except <em>Sound</em> -- another
 "mode of motion," no doubt, a <em>sensation </em>caused
 like</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 566 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 colour by vibrations? Fully as we believe in these vibrations
 as the proximate -- the immediate -- cause of such sensations,
 we as absolutely reject the one-sided scientific theory that there
 is <em>no factor </em>to be considered as external to us, other
 than etheric or atmospheric vibrations.*
 </p><p>
 There <em>is </em>a <em>transcendental </em>set of causes put
 in motion -- so to speak -- in the occurrence of these phenomena,
 which, <em>not being in relation to our narrow range of cognition</em>,<em>
 </em>can only be traced to their source and their nature, and
 understood by the Spiritual faculties of the Adept. They are,
 as Asclepios puts it to the King, "incorporeal corporealities"
 -- such as "appear in the mirror," and "abstract
 forms" that <em>we see</em>,<em> hear</em>,<em> and smell</em>,<em>
 </em>in our dreams, and visions. What have the "modes of
 motion," light, and ether to do with these? Yet we see, hear,
 and smell, and touch them, <em>ergo </em>they are as much <em>realities
 </em>to us in our dreams, as any other thing on this plane of
 Maya.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In this case the American "Substantialists" are not
 wrong (though too anthropomorphic and material in their views
 to be accepted by the Occultists) when arguing through Mrs. M.
 S. Organ, M.D., that "there must be positive entitative properties
 in objects which have a constitutional relation to the nerves
 of animal sensations, or there can be no perception. No impression
 <em>of any kind can be made </em>upon brain, nerve, or mind --
 no stimulus to action -- unless there is an actual and direct
 communication of a substantial force." ("Substantial"
 as far as it appears in the usual sense of the word in this universe
 of <em>illusion </em>and MAYA, of course; not so <em>in reality.</em>)<em>
 </em>"That force may be the most refined and sublimated immaterial
 Entity (?). Yet it must exist; for no sense, element, or faculty
 of the human being can have a perception, or be stimulated into
 action, without some substantial force coming in contact with
 it. This is the fundamental law pervading the whole organic and
 mental world. In the true philosophical sense there is no such
 thing as independent action: for every force or substance is correlated
 to some other force or substance. We can with just as much truth
 and reason assert that no substance possesses any inherent gustatory
 property or any olfactory property -- that taste and odour are
 simply sensations caused by vibrations; and hence mere illusions
 of animal perceptions. . . ."</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-11.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>