<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 529 MYSTERIOUS SUN FLUID.</h6>
 
 <h4>VIII.<br>
 LIFE, FORCE, OR GRAVITY.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE<em> imponderable </em>fluids have had their
 day; "mechanical Forces" are less talked about; Science
 has put on a new face for this last quarter of a century; but
 gravitation has remained, owing its life to new combinations after
 the old ones had nearly killed it. It may answer scientific hypotheses
 very well, but the question is whether it answers as well to truth,
 and represents a fact in nature. Attraction by itself is <em>not
 </em>sufficient to explain merely planetary motion; how can it
 presume to explain the rotatory motion in the infinitudes of Space?
 Attraction alone will never fill all the gaps, unless a special
 impulse is admitted for every sidereal body, and the rotation
 of every planet with its satellites is shown to be due to some
 <em>one cause </em>combined with attraction. And even then, says
 an astronomer ("<em>Philosophie Naturelle</em>,"<em>
 art. </em>142), Science would have to name that cause.
 </p><p>
 Occultism has named it for ages, and so have all the ancient philosophers;
 but then all such beliefs are now proclaimed exploded superstitions.
 The "extra cosmic" God has killed every possibility
 of belief in <em>intra</em> cosmic intelligent Forces, yet who,
 or what is the original <em>pusher </em>in that motion? "When
 we have learned the cause, <em>unique et speciale</em>,<em> </em>that
 pushes, we will be ready to combine it with the one which attracts,"
 says Francoeur ("<em>Astronomie</em>,"<em> p. </em>342).
 And again -- "Attraction between the celestial bodies is
 only repulsion: it is <em>the Sun that drives them incessantly
 onward; </em>for otherwise, their motion would stop."
 </p><p>
 If ever this theory of the Sun-Force being the primal cause of
 all life on earth and motion in heaven is accepted, and if that
 other far bolder one of Herschell -- about certain organisms in
 the Sun -- is accepted even as a provisional hypothesis, then
 will our teachings be vindicated, and esoteric allegory shown
 to have anticipated Modern Science by millions of years, probably,
 for these are the Archaic teachings. Marttanda (the Sun) watches
 and threatens -- without abandoning the central position to which
 his Mother, Aditi, relegated him -- his seven brothers, the planets;
 "he pursues them, turning slowly around himself . . . and
 follows them from afar, moving in the same direction that they
 do, on the path that encircles their houses" -- or the orbit.
 (<em>See Comment to Stanza IV.</em>,<em> Book I.</em>)<em> </em>It
 is the Sun-fluids or Emanations that impart all motion and awaken
 all into life, in the Solar System. It is attraction and repulsion,
 but not as understood by modern physics and according to the law
 of gravity; but in harmony with <em>the laws of Manvantaric motion</em>
 de- </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 530 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 signed from the early <em>Sandhya</em>,<em> </em>the Dawn of the
 rebuilding and higher <em>reformation </em>of the System. These
 laws are immutable; but the motion of all the bodies, which motion
 is diverse and alters with every <em>minor </em>Kalpa -- is regulated
 by the <em>Movers</em>,<em> </em>the Intelligences within the
 Cosmic Soul. Are we so very wrong in believing all this? Well,
 here is a modern and a great man of Science who, speaking of vital
 electricity, uses language far more akin to Occultism than to
 modern materialistic thought. We refer the sceptical reader to
 an article on "The Source of Heat in the Sun," by Robert
 Hunt , F.R.S., (in "<em>Popular Science Review</em>,"<em>
 </em>Vol. IV., p. 148), who, speaking of the luminous envelope
 of the Sun and its "peculiar curdy appearance," says:
 --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Arago proposed that this envelope should be called the Photosphere,
 a name now generally adopted. By the elder Herschell, the surface
 of this photosphere was compared to mother-of-pearl. . . . . It
 resembles the Ocean on a tranquil summer-day, when its surface
 is slightly crisped by a gentle breeze. . . . Mr. Nasmyth has
 discovered a more remarkable condition than any that had previously
 been suspected . . . objects which are peculiarly lens-shaped
 . . . . like 'willow leaves . . . . different in size . . . .
 . not arranged in any order crossing each other in all directions
 . . . . . with an irregular motion among themselves . . . . .
 . . They are seen approaching to and receding from each other,
 and sometimes assuming new angular positions, so that the appearance
 . . . . . has been compared to a dense shoal of fish, which, indeed,
 they resemble in shape. . . . The size of these objects gives
 a grand idea of the gigantic scale upon which physical (?) operations
 are carried out in the Sun. They cannot be less than 1,000 miles
 in length, and from two to three hundred miles in breadth. <i>The
 most probable conjecture which has been offered </i>respecting
 those leaf or lens-like objects, is <i>that the photosphere* </i>is
 an immense ocean of gaseous matter (what kind of "matter?")
 . . . in a state of intense (apparent) incandescence, and that
 they are perspective projections of the sheets of flame. . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Solar "flames" seen through telescopes are <em>reflections</em>,<em>
 </em>says Occultism. But see what Occultists have to say to this
 in Book I.
 </p><blockquote>
 "Whatever they may be (those sheets of flame), <i>it is evident
 they are the immediate sources of solar heat and light. </i>Here
 we have a surrounding envelope of photogenic matter,** which pendulates
 with mighty energies, and by communicating its motion to the ethereal
 medium in stellar space, produces heat and light in far distant
 worlds. We have said that those forms have been compared to certain
 organisms, and Herschell says, 'Though it would be too daring
 to speak of such organizations as <i>partaking of life </i>[why
 not?],*** yet we do not know that vital action is competent to
 develop heat, light, and electricity.' . . <i>. Can it be that
 there is truth in this fine thought? May the pulsing of vital
 matter</i> 
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * And the <em>central mass</em>,<em> </em>too, as will be found,
 or rather the centre of the reflection.
 </p><p>
 ** That "matter" is just like the reflection in a mirror
 of the flame from a "photogenic" <em>lamp</em>-<em>wick.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 *** <em>See </em>"<em>Five Years of Theosophy</em>,"<em>
 </em>p. 258 -- answer to this speculation of Herschell's.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 531 SUN-FORCE AND EARTH-FORCE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 <i>in the central Sun of our System be the source of all that
 life which crowds the earth, and without doubt overspreads the
 other planets, to which the Sun is the mighty Minister?</i>"
 . . .
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Occultism answers these queries in the affirmative; and Science
 will find this to be the case, one day.
 </p><p>
 Again, on p. 156, Mr. Hunt writes: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "But regarding Life -- Vital Force -- as a power far more
 exalted than either light, heat, or electricity, and indeed <i>capable
 of exerting a controlling power over them all</i>"<i> </i>(this
 is absolutely occult). . . . . "we are certainly disposed
 to view with satisfaction that speculation which supposes the
 photosphere to be <i>the primary seat of vital power</i>,<i> </i>and
 to regard <i>with a poetic pleasure that hypothesis which refers
 the Solar energies to Life.</i>"
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Thus, we have an important scientific corroboration for one of
 our fundamental dogmas -- namely, that (<em>a</em>) the Sun is
 the store-house of Vital Force, which <em>is </em>the<em> Noumenon
 </em>of Electricity; and (<em>b</em>) that it is from its mysterious,
 never-to-be-fathomed depths, that issue those life currents which
 thrill through Space, as through the organisms of every living
 thing on Earth. For see what another eminent physician says, who
 calls this (our life-fluid) "nervous Ether." Change
 a few sentences in the article, extracts from which now follow,
 and you have another <em>quasi</em>-<em>Occult treatise </em>on
 Life Force. This once, it is again Dr. B. W. Richardson, F.R.S.,
 who gives his views in the "<em>Popular Science Review</em>,"<em>
 Vol. X.</em>,<em> p. </em>380-3, on "Nervous Ether,"
 as he has on "Sun-Force" and "Earth-Force":
 --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The idea attempted to be conveyed by the theory is, that
 between the molecules of the matter, solid or fluid, of which
 the nervous organisms, and, indeed, of which all the organic parts
 of a body are composed, there exists a refined subtle medium,
 vaporous or gaseous, which holds the molecules in a condition
 for motion upon each other, and for arrangement and rearrangement
 of form; a medium by and through which all motion is conveyed;
 by and through which the one organ or part of the body is held
 in communion with the other parts, by which and through which
 the outer living world communicates with the living man: a medium,
 which, being present, enables the phenomena of life to be demonstrated,
 and which, being universally absent, leaves the body actually
 dead. . . . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 And the whole Solar System falls into <em>Pralaya </em>--<em>
 </em>the author might have added. But let us read further:
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . "I use the word <i>Ether </i>in its general sense as
 meaning a very light, vaporous or gaseous matter; I use it, in
 short, as the astronomer uses it when he speaks of the Ether of
 Space, by which he means a subtle but material medium. . . . .
 When I speak of a <i>nervous </i>Ether, I do not convey that the
 ether is existent in nervous structure only: I believe truly that
 it is a special part of the nervous organization; but, as nerves
 pass into all structures that have capacities for movement and
 sensibilities, so the nervous ether passes into all such parts;
 and as the nervous ether is, according to my view, a direct product
 from blood, so we may look upon it as a part of the atmosphere
 of the blood. 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 532 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 . . . The evidence in favour of the existence of an elastic medium
 pervading the nervous matter and capable of being influenced by
 simple pressure is all-convincing. . . . In nervous structure
 there is, unquestionably, a true nervous fluid, <i>as our predecessors
 </i>taught<i>*</i> The precise chemical (?)** composition of this
 fluid is not yet well known; the physical characters of it have
 been little studied. Whether it moves in currents, we do not know;
 whether it circulates, we do not know; whether it is formed in
 the centres and passes from them to the nerves, or whether it
 is formed everywhere where blood enters nerve, we do not know.
 The exact uses of the fluid we do not consequently know. It occurs
 to my mind, however, that the veritable fluid of nervous matter
 is not of itself sufficient to act as the subtle medium that connects
 the outer with the inner universe of man and animal. I think --
 and this is the modification I suggest to the older theory --
 there must be another form of matter present during life; a matter
 which exists in the condition of vapour or gas, which pervades
 the whole nervous organism, <i>surrounds as an enveloping</i>
 <i>atmosphere*** </i>each molecule of nervous structure, and is
 the medium of all motion, communicated to and from the nervous
 centres. . . . When it is once fairly presented to the mind that
 during life <i>there is in the animal body a finely diffused form
 of matter</i>,<i> </i>a vapour filling every part -- and even
 stored in some parts; a matter constantly renewed by the vital
 chemistry; a matter as easily disposed of as the breath, after
 it has served its purpose -- a new flood of light breaks on the
 Intelligence ." . . . .
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 A new flood of light is certainly thrown on the wisdom of ancient
 and mediaeval Occultism and its votaries. For Paracelsus wrote
 the same thing more than three hundred years ago, namely, in the
 sixteenth century, as follows: --
 </p><p>
 "The whole of the Microcosm is potentially contained in the
 <em>Liquor Vitae</em>,<em> </em>a nerve fluid . . . in which is
 contained the nature, quality, character, and essence of beings."
 . . . (<em>De Generatione Hominis</em>). . . . "The Archaeus
 or <em>Liquor Vitae </em>is an essence that is equally distributed
 in all parts of the human body. . . . The <em>Spiritus Vitae </em>takes
 its origin from the<em> Spiritus Mundi. </em>Being an <em>emanation
 of the latter</em>,<em> </em>it contains the elements of all cosmic
 influences, and is therefore the cause by which the action of
 the stars (cosmic forces) upon the invisible body of man (his
 <em>vital lingasharira</em>)<em> </em>may be explained."
 (<em>De Viribus Membrorum. </em>See<em> </em>"Life of Paracelsus"
 by Franz Hartmann, <b>M.D., F.T.S.</b>)
 </p><p>
 Had Dr. Richardson studied all the secret works of Paracelsus,
 he would not have been obliged to confess so often -- "we
 do not know" . . . . "it is not known to us" .
 . . . etc., etc. Nor would he have ever pronounced the following
 sentence, recanting the best portions of his independent <em>rediscovery</em>,<em>
 </em>in which he says (<em>p</em>. 384): --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Paracelsus for one, who called it <em>liquor vitae</em>,<em>
 </em>and<em> Archaeus.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** Rather <em>alchemical </em>--<em> </em>"composition."
 </p><p>
 *** "This vital force . . . radiates around man like a luminous
 sphere" . . . says Paracelsus in <em>Paragranum.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 533 PANTHEISM OR MONOTHEISM.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 "It may be urged that in this line of thought is included
 no more than the theory of the existence of the ether . . . .
 supposed to pervade space. . . . . It may be said that this universal
 ether pervades all the organism of the animal body as from without,
 and as part of every organization. This view would be Pantheism
 physically discovered <i>if it were true </i>(<i>!!</i>) It fails
 to be true because it would destroy the individuality of every
 individual sense. . . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 We fail to see it, and <em>we know </em>it is not so. Pantheism
 <em>may</em> be "physically <em>rediscovered.</em>"
 It was known, seen, and felt by the whole of antiquity. Pantheism
 manifests itself in the vast expanse of the starry heavens, in
 the breathing of the seas and oceans and the quiver of life of
 the smallest blade of grass. Philosophy rejects one <em>finite
 </em>and<em> imperfect </em>God in the universe, as the anthropomorphic
 deity of the monotheist is represented by his followers. It repudiates
 in its name of <em>Philo</em>-<em>Theo</em>-<em>Sophia </em>the
 grotesque idea that Infinite, <em>Absolute </em>Deity should,
 or rather <em>could</em>,<em> </em>have any, whether direct or
 indirect, relation to finite illusive evolutions of matter, and
 therefore cannot imagine a universe <em>outside </em>that Deity,
 or the latter absent from the smallest speck of animate or inanimate
 substance.* Why either the Ether of Space, or "nervous Ether"
 should "destroy the individuality of every sense" seems
 incomprehensible for one acquainted with the real nature of that
 "nervous ether" under its Sanskrit, or rather esoteric
 and Kabalistic name. Dr. Richardson agrees that --
 </p><blockquote>
 "If we did not individually produce the medium of communication
 between ourselves and the outer world, if it were produced from
 without and adapted <i>to one kind of vibration alone</i>,<i>
 </i>there were fewer senses required than we possess: for, taking
 two illustrations only -- ether of light is not adapted for sound,
 and yet we hear as well as see; while air, the medium of motion
 of sound, is not the medium of light, and yet we see and hear."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This is not so. The opinion that "Pantheism <em>fails to
 be true </em>because it would destroy the individuality of every
 individual sense" shows that all the conclusions of the learned
 doctor are based on the modern physical theories, though he would
 fain reform them. But he will find it impossible to do this unless
 he allows the existence of spiritual senses to replace the gradual
 atrophy of the physical. "We see and hear," in accordance
 (of course in Dr. Richardson's mind) with the explanations of
 the phenomena of sight and hearing, by that same materialistic
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This does not mean that every bush, tree or stone is God or
 <em>a</em> god; but only that every speck of the manifested material
 of Kosmos belongs to and is the substance of "God,"
 however low it may have fallen in its cyclic gyration through
 the Eternities of the ever becoming,; and also that every such
 speck individually, and Kosmos collectively, is an aspect and
 a reminder of that universal <em>One Soul </em>--<em> </em>which
 philosophy refuses to call God, thus limiting the eternal and
 ever-present root and essence.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 534 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 science which postulates that we cannot see and hear otherwise.
 The Occultists and mystics know better. The Vedic Aryans were
 as familiar with the mysteries of sound and colour as our physiologists
 are on the physical plane, but they had mastered the secrets of
 both on planes inaccessible to the materialist. They knew of a
 double set of senses; spiritual and material. In a man who is
 deprived of one or more senses, the remaining become the more
 developed: <em>e.g</em>., the blind man will recover his sight
 through the senses of touch, of hearing, etc., and he who is deaf
 will be able to hear through sight, by <em>seeing audibly </em>the
 words uttered by the lips and mouth of the speaker. But these
 are cases that belong to the world of matter still. The spiritual
 senses, those that act on a higher plane of consciousness are
 rejected <em>a priori </em>by physiology because the latter is
 ignorant of the sacred science. It limits the action of ether
 to vibrations, and, dividing it from air -- though air is simply
 <em>differentiated </em>and compound ether -- makes it assume
 functions to fit in with the special theories of the physiologist.
 But there is more real science in the teachings of the Upanishads
 when these are correctly understood, than the Orientalists, who
 do not understand them at all, are ready to admit. <em>Mental
 as well as physical correlations of the seven senses </em>(seven
 on the physical and seven on the mental planes) are clearly explained
 and defined in the Vedas, and especially in the Upanishad called
 Anugita: "The indestructible and the destructible, such is
 the double manifestation of the Self. Of these the indestructible
 is the existent (the true essence or nature of Self, the underlying
 principles). The manifestation as an individual (or entity) is
 called the destructible." Thus speaks the <b>A</b>SCETIC
 in Anugita; and also: "Every one who is twice-born (initiated)
 knows such is the teaching of the ancients. . . . . Space is the
 first entity. . . . . Now Space (<em>Akasa</em>,<em> </em>or the
 noumenon of Ether) has one quality . . . and that is sound only
 . . . and the qualities of sound are Shadga, Rishabha, Gandhara,
 Madhyama, Panchama, and beyond these five Nishada and Dhaivata";
 (the Hindu gamut). These seven notes of the scale are the principles
 of sound. (<em>Vide </em>ch. xxxvi. of <em>Anugita.</em>) The
 qualities of every Element, as of every sense, are septenary,
 and to judge and dogmatize on them from their manifestation (likewise
 sevenfold in itself) on the material or objective plane above
 is quite arbitrary. For it is only by the <strong>S</strong>ELF
 emancipating itself from these (seven) causes of illusion that
 one acquires the knowledge (secret wisdom) of the qualities of
 objects of sense on their dual plane of manifestation -- the visible
 and the invisible. Thus it is said: --
 </p><p>
 "State this wonderful mystery . . . . . Hear the assignment
 of causes exhaustively. The nose, and the tongue, and the eye,
 and the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 535 THE SEVEN PHYSICAL SENSES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 skin, and the ear as the fifth (organ of sense) Mind and Understanding,*
 these seven (senses) should be understood to be the causes of
 (the knowledge of their) qualities. Smell, and taste, and colour,
 sound, and touch as the fifth, the object of the mental operation,
 and the object of the Understanding (the highest spiritual sense
 or perception), <em>these seven are causes of action. </em>He
 who smells, he who eats, he who sees, he who speaks, and he who
 hears as the fifth, he who thinks, and he who understands, these
 seven should be regarded as the <em>causes of the agents</em>.**
 These (the agents) being possessed of qualities (<em>sattwa</em>,<em>
 rajas</em>,<em> tamas</em>),<em> </em>enjoy<em> </em>their own
 qualities, agreeable and disagreeable" (<em>Anugita</em>)<em>.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 Then one reads in the Bhagavadgita (chap. vii.) the Deity (or
 Krishna) saying: --
 </p><p>
 ". . . . Only some know me truly. Earth, Water, Fire, Air,
 Space (or<em> Akasa</em>,<em> </em>AEther), Mind, Understanding
 and Egoism (or the perception of all the former on the illusive
 plane). . . This is <em>a lower </em>form of my nature. Know (that
 there is) another (form of my) nature, and higher than this, which
 is animate, O you of mighty arms! and by which this Universe is
 upheld. . . . All this is woven upon me, like numbers of pearls
 upon a thread (<em>Mundakopanishad</em>,<em> </em>p. 298). . .
 . I<em> am the taste </em>in the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The division of the physical senses into five, comes to us from
 great antiquity. But while adopting the number, no modern philosopher
 has asked himself how these senses could exist, <em>i.e.</em>,
 be perceived and used in a self-conscious way, unless there was
 the <em>sixth </em>sense, mental perception to register and record
 them; and (this for the Metaphysicians and Occultists) the <strong>S</strong>EVENTH
 to preserve the spiritual fruition and remembrance thereof, as
 in a Book of Life which belongs to Karma. The ancients divided
 the senses into five, simply because their teachers (the Initiates)
 stopped at the <em>hearing</em>,<em> </em>as being that sense
 which developed in the <em>physical plane </em>(got dwarfed rather,
 limited to this plane) only at the beginning of the Fifth Race.
 (The Fourth Race already had begun to lose the <em>spiritual </em>condition,
 so pre-eminently developed in the Third Race.)
 </p><p>
 ** The modern commentators, failing to comprehend the subtle meaning
 of the ancient Scholiasts, take this sentence, "causes of
 the agents," to mean "that the powers of smelling, etc.,
 when attributed to the Self, make him appear as an agent, as an
 active principle" (!), which is entirely fanciful. These
 "seven" are understood to be the causes of the Agents,
 because "the objects are causes, as their enjoyment causes
 an impression." It means esoterically that they, these seven
 senses, <em>are caused by the </em><strong>A</strong>GENTS, which
 are the "deities," for what does, or can, the sentence
 which follows this one mean? "Thus," it is said, "these
 seven (senses) are the causes of emancipation" (<em>i.e.</em>,
 when these causes are made ineffectual). "And among the learned
 (the wise Initiates) who understand the qualities <em>which are
 in</em> <em>the position </em>(in the nature, rather) <em>of the
 deities</em>,<em> </em>each in its place," means simply that
 the "learned" understand the nature of the <em>noumenoi</em>
 of the various phenomena; and that "qualities," in this
 instance, mean the qualities of the high planetary or Elementary
 gods or Intelligences, which rule the elements and their <em>products</em>,<em>
 </em>and not at all "the senses," as the modern commentator
 thinks. For the "learned do not suppose their senses to have
 aught to do with them, any more than with their <strong>S</strong>ELF."
 (<em>Vide </em>pp. 278 and 279 of the VIII. Vol. of "The
 Sacred Books of the East." <em>Anugita.</em>) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 536 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 water, O son of Kunti! I am the light of the sun and moon. I am
 . . . sound ('<em>i.e.</em>, the Occult essence which underlies
 all these and the other qualities of the various things mentioned,'
 <em>Transl.</em>),<em> </em>in space . . . the fragrant smell
 in the earth, refulgence in the fire . . . etc., etc."
 </p><p>
 Truly, then, one should study Occult philosophy before one begins
 to verify and seek the mysteries of nature on its surface alone,
 as he alone "who knows the truth about the qualities of nature,
 who understands the creation of all entities . . . is emancipated"
 from error. Says the "preceptor": "Accurately understanding
 the great tree of which the unperceived (Occult nature, the root
 of all) is the sprout from the seed (Parabrahmam) which consists
 of the understanding (<em>Mahat</em>,<em> </em>or the universal
 intelligent Soul) as its trunk, the branches of which are the
 great egoism,* in the holes of which are the sprouts, namely,
 the senses, of which the great (Occult, or invisible) elements
 are the flower-bunches,** the gross elements (the gross objective
 matter), the smaller boughs, which are always possessed of leaves,
 always possessed of flowers . . . . which is eternal and the seed
 of which is the Brahman (the deity); and cutting it with that
 excellent sword -- knowledge (secret wisdom) -- one attains immortality
 and casts off birth and death."
 </p><p>
 This is the Tree of Life, the Asvattha tree, only <em>after </em>the
 cutting of which the slave of life and death, <strong>M</strong>AN,
 can be emancipated.
 </p><p>
 But the men of Science know nought, nor will they hear of the
 "Sword of Knowledge" used by the adepts and ascetics.
 Hence the one-sided remarks of the most liberal among them, based
 on and flowing from undue importance given to the arbitrary divisions
 and classification of physical science. Occultism heeds them very
 little, and nature still less. The whole range of physical phenomena
 proceed from the<em> Primary </em>of Ether -- Akasa, as dual-natured
 Akasa proceeds from undifferentiated <em>Chaos</em>,<em> </em>so-called,
 the latter being the primary <em>aspect </em>of<em> </em>Mulaprakriti,
 the root-matter and the first abstract Idea one can form of Parabrahmam.
 Modern Science may divide its hypothetically conceived ether in
 as many ways as it likes; the <em>real</em> AEther of Space will
 remain as it is throughout. It has its seven principles, as all
 the rest of nature has, and where there was no Ether <em>there
 would be no sound</em>,<em> </em>as<em> </em>it is the vibrating
 sound-board in nature in all of its seven differentiations. This
 is the first mystery the Initiates of old have learned. Our present
 normal physical senses were (from our present point of view) abnormal
 in those days of slow and progressive downward evolution and fall
 into matter. And there was a day when all that which in our modern
 times is regarded as phenomena, so puzzling to the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> Ahamkara</em>,<em> </em>I suppose, that <em>Egoship </em>(or
 Ahamship) which leads to every error.
 </p><p>
 ** The elements are the five tanmatras of earth, water, fire,
 air and ether, the producers of the grosser elements.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 537 WHAT IS NERVOUS ETHER?</h6>
 
 <p>
 physiologists now compelled to believe in them -- such as thought
 transference, clairvoyance, clairaudience, etc.; in short, all
 that which is called now "wonderful and abnormal" --
 all that and much more belonged to the senses and faculties common
 to all humanity. We are, however, cycling back and cycling forward;
 <em>i.e.</em>, having lost in spirituality that which we acquired
 in physical development until almost the end of the Fourth Race,
 we (mankind) are as gradually and imperceptibly losing now in
 the physical all that we regain once more in the spiritual <em>re</em>-evolution.
 This process must go on until the period which will bring the
 Sixth Root-Race on a parallel line with the spirituality of the
 Second, long extinct mankind.
 </p><p>
 But this will hardly be understood at present. We must return
 to Dr. Richardson's hopeful though somewhat incorrect hypothesis
 about "nervous ether." Under the misleading translation
 of the word as "Space"<em> </em>(<em>Akasa</em>),<em>
 </em>it has just been shown in the ancient Hindu system as the
 "first born" of the One, having but one quality, SOUND
 (which is septenary). In esoteric language this "One"
 is the "Father" Deity, and "Sound" is synonymous
 with <em>Logos </em>(Verbum, or the <em>Son</em>)<em>. </em>Whether
 consciously or otherwise, it must be the latter; and Dr. Richardson,
 while preaching an Occult doctrine -- chooses the lowest form
 of the septenary nature of that "SOUND" and speculates
 upon it, adding: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The theory, I offer, is that the nervous Ether <i>is an
 animal product. </i>In<i> </i>different classes of animals it
 may differ in physical quality so as to be adapted to the special
 wants of the animal, but essentially it plays one part in all
 animals, and is produced, in all, in the same way. . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Herein lies the nucleus of error leading to all the resultant
 mistaken views. This "Nervous Ether" is the lowest principle
 of the Primordial Essence which is <em>Life. </em>It is <em>animal
 vitality </em>diffused in all nature and acting according to the
 conditions it finds for its activity. It is not an "animal
 product," but the living animal, the living flower or plant
 are <em>its </em>products. The animal tissues only absorb it according
 to their more or less morbid or healthy state -- as do <em>physical
 </em>materials and structures (<em>in their primogenial State
 </em>--<em> nota bene</em>)<em> </em>--<em> </em>and henceforward,
 from the moment of the birth of the Entity, are regulated, strengthened,
 and <em>fed </em>by it. It descends in a larger supply to vegetation
 in the <em>Sushumna </em>sun-ray which lights and feeds the moon,
 and it is through her beams that it pours its light upon, and
 penetrates man and animal, more during their sleep and rest, than
 when they are in full activity. Therefore Dr. Richardson errs
 again in stating that: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The nervous ether is not, according to my idea of it, in
 <i>itself active</i>,<i> nor an excitant of animal motion in the
 sense of a force; </i>but it is essential as supplying the conditions
 by which the motion is rendered possible." (It is <i>just
 the reverse.</i>) . . . . "It is the conductor of all vibrations
 of heat, of light, of sound, of electrical action, of mechanical
 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 538 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 friction.* It holds the nervous system throughout in perfect tension,
 during states of life (<i>true</i>)<i>. </i>By exercise it is
 disposed of (<i>rather generated</i>)<i> </i>. . . and when demand
 for it is greater than the supply, its deficiency is indicated
 by nervous collapse or exhaustion.** It accumulates in the nervous
 centres during sleep, bringing them, if I may so speak, to their
 due tone, and therewith raising the muscles to awakening and renewed
 life. . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Just so; this is quite correct, and as comprehensible. Therefore,
 "The body fully renewed by it, presents capacity for motion,
 fulness of form, <em>life. </em>The body bereft of it presents
 inertia, the configuration of shrunken death, <em>the evidence
 of having lost something physical that was in it when it lived.</em>"
 </p><p>
 Modern Science denies the existence of a "vital principle."
 This extract is a clear proof of its grand mistake. But this "physical
 something," that we call life-fluid -- the<em> Liquor Vitae
 </em>of Paracelsus -- has not <em>deserted the body</em>,<em>
 </em>as Dr. Richardson thinks. It has only changed its state from
 activity to passivity, and become latent owing to the too morbid
 state of the tissues, on which it has no more hold. Once the <em>rigor
 mortis </em>absolute, the "<em>Liquor Vitae</em>"<em>
 </em>will re-awaken into action, and begin its work on the atoms
 <em>chemically. </em>Brahma-Vishnu -- the creator and the Preserver
 of Life -- will have transformed himself into Siva the <em>Destroyer.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 Lastly he writes on p. 387: --
 </p><p>
 "The nervous Ether may be poisoned; it may, I mean, have
 diffused through it, by simple gaseous diffusion, other gases
 or vapours derived from without; it may derive from within products
 of substances swallowed and ingested, or gases of decomposition
 produced during disease in the body itself."
 </p><p>
 And the learned gentleman might have added on the same Occult
 principle: "That the 'nervous Ether' of one person can be
 poisoned by the 'nervous Ether' of another person or his <em>auric
 emanations. </em>But<em> </em>see what Paracelsus said of 'Nervous
 Ether'": --
 </p><p>
 "The Archaeus is of a magnetic nature, and <em>attracts or
 repels </em>other sympathetic or antipathetic forces belonging
 to the same plane. The less power of resistance for astral influences
 a person possesses, the more will he be subject to such influences.
 The vital force is not enclosed in man, but radiates (within)
 and around him like a luminous sphere (aura) and it may be made
 to act at a distance. . . . It <em>may poison the essence of life
 </em>(<em>blood</em>)<em> and cause diseases</em>,<em> </em>or
 it may purify it after
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The conductor in the sense of <em>Upadhi </em>--<em> </em>a
 material or physical basis; but, as the second principle of the
 universal Soul and <em>Vital </em>Force in Nature, it is <em>intelligently
 </em>guided by the fifth principle thereof.
 </p><p>
 ** And too great an exuberance of it in the nervous system leads
 as often to disease and death. If it were the <em>animal system
 which generated it</em>,<em> </em>such would not be the case,
 surely. Hence, the latter emergency shows its independence of
 the system, and connection with the Sun-Force, as Metcalfe and
 Professor Hunt explain it.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 539 THE LIFE-PRINCIPLE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 it has been made impure, and restore the health" (<em>Paragranum;
 </em>"<em>Life of Paracelsus</em>,"<em> </em>by Dr.
 F. Hartmann.)
 </p><p>
 That the two, Archaeus and "nervous Ether," are identical,
 is shown by the English Scientist, who says that the tension of
 it <em>generally </em>may be too high or too low; that it may
 be so "owing to local changes in the nervous matter it invests."
 . . . "Under sharp excitation it may vibrate as if in a storm
 and plunge every muscle under cerebral or spinal control into
 uncontrolled motion --unconscious convulsions."
 </p><p>
 This is called nervous excitation, but no one, except Occultists,
 knows the reason of such nervous perturbation or explains the
 <em>primary </em>causes of it. The "principle of Life"
 may kill <em>when too exuberant</em>,<em> </em>as also when there
 is too little of it. But this principle on the manifested (or
 our) plane is but the effect and the result of the <em>intelligent
 action </em>of the "Host" -- collectively, Principle
 -- the manifesting <strong>L</strong>IFE and <strong>L</strong>IGHT.
 It is itself subordinate to, and emanates from the ever-invisible,
 eternal and Absolute <strong>O</strong>NE <strong>L</strong>IFE
 in a descending and a re-ascending scale of hierarchic degrees
 -- a true septenary ladder, with <strong>S</strong>OUND (or the
 Logos) at the upper end and the Vidyadharas* (the inferior Pitris)
 at the lower.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In a recent work on the Symbolism in Buddhism and Christianity
 (in Buddhism and Roman Catholicism, rather, many later rituals
 and dogmas in Northern Buddhism in its <em>popular exoteric form</em>,<em>
 </em>being identical with those of the Latin Church) some curious
 facts are to be found. The author of this volume, with more pretensions
 than erudition, has indiscriminately crammed into his work ancient
 and modern Buddhist teachings, and sorely confused Lamaism with
 Buddhism. On page 404 of this volume, called "<em>Buddhism
 in Christendom</em>,<em> or Jesus the Essene</em>,"<em> </em>our
 <em>pseudo</em>-<em>Orientalist </em>devotes himself to criticizing
 the "Seven Principles" of the Esoteric Buddhists, and
 attempts to ridicule them. On page 405, the closing page, he speaks
 enthusiastically of the <em>Vidyadharas</em>,<em> </em>"the
 seven great legions of dead men made wise." Now, these "Vidyadharas,"
 whom some Orientalists call "demi-gods," are in fact,
 exoterically, a kind of Siddhas, "affluent in devotion,"
 and, <em>esoterically</em>,<em> </em>they are identical with the
 seven classes of Pitris, one class of which endow man in the Third
 Race with Self-Consciousness by incarnating in the human shells.
 The "Hymn to the Sun," at the end of his queer volume
 of mosaic, which endows Buddhism with a <em>personal god </em>(!!),
 is an unfortunate thrust at the very proofs so elaborately collected
 by the unlucky author.
 </p><p>
 Theosophists are fully aware that Mr. Rhys Davids has expressed
 his opinion on their beliefs likewise. He said that the theories
 propounded by the author of Esoteric Buddhism "were not Buddhism,
 and were not Esoteric." The remark is the result of (<em>a</em>)
 the unfortunate mistake of writing "Buddhism" instead
 of "Budhaism," or <em>Budhism</em>,<em> i.e.</em>,<em>
 </em>of connecting the system with Gautama's religion instead
 of with the Secret Wisdom taught by Krishna, Sankaracharya, and
 by many others, as much as by Buddha; and (<em>b</em>) of the
 impossibility of Mr. Rhys Davids knowing anything of true esoteric
 teachings. But he is, at all events, the greatest Pali and Buddhist
 scholar of the day, and whatever he may say is entitled to respectful
 hearing. But when one who knows no more of exoteric Buddhism on
 scientific and materialistic lines, than he knows of esoteric
 philosophy, defames those whom he honours with his spite, and
 assumes with the Theosophists the airs of a profound scholar,
 one can only smile and -- heartily laugh at him.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 540 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Of course, the Occultists are fully aware of the fact that the
 Vitalist "fallacy," so derided by Vogt and Huxley, is,
 nevertheless, still countenanced in very high scientific quarters,
 and, therefore, they are happy to feel that they do not stand
 alone. Thus, Professor de Quatrefages writes: --
 </p><p>
 "It is very true we do not know <em>what </em>life<em> is;
 </em>but no more do we know <em>what</em> the force <em>is </em>that
 set the stars in motion. . . . . Living beings are heavy, and
 therefore subject to gravitation; they are the seat of numerous
 and various physico-chemical phenomena which are indispensable
 to their existence, and which must be referred to the action of
 etherodynamy (electricity, heat, etc.). But these phenomena are
 here manifested <em>under the influence of another force</em>.
 . . . . Life is not antagonistic to the inanimate forces, but
 it governs and rules their action by its laws."*
 </p><p>
 --------------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<em>The Human</em> <em>Species</em>,"<em> </em>p.
 11. </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-09.htm">Next Section</a>
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a>
 </p></body>