<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 483 NO AGREEMENT AMONG SCIENTISTS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK20">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd1-3-02.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>III.<br>
 "AN LUMEN SIT CORPUS, NEC NON?"</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>M</strong>OST decidedly Light is not a body, we are told.
 Physical Sciences say Light is a Force, a vibration, the undulation
 of ether. It is the property or quality of matter, or even an
 affection thereof -- never <em>a body!</em> 
 </p><p>
 Just so. For this discovery, the knowledge -- whatever it may
 be worth -- that light or caloric is not a motion of <em>material
 particles</em>,<em> </em>Science is chiefly indebted, if not solely,
 to Sir W. Grove. It was he who was the first in a lecture at the
 London Institution, in 1842, to show that</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 484 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "light, heat, etc., etc.* are <em>affections </em>of matter
 itself, and not a distinct ethereal, 'imponderable,' fluid, (a
 state of matter <em>now</em>) permeating it." (<em>See </em>"<em>Correlation
 of the Physical Forces</em>,"<em> Preface</em>)<em>. </em>Yet,
 perhaps, for some physicists -- as for Oersted, a very eminent
 Scientist -- <strong>F</strong>ORCE and <strong>F</strong>ORCES
 were tacitly "Spirit (<em>and hence Spirits</em>)<em> in
 Nature.</em>"<em> </em>What several rather mystical Scientists
 taught was that light, heat, magnetism, electricity and gravity,
 etc., were not the final <em>causes </em>of the visible phenomena,
 including planetary motion, but themselves the Secondary <em>effects
 of other Causes</em>,<em> </em>for which Science in our day cares
 very little, but in which Occultism believes, for the Occultists
 have exhibited proofs of the validity of their claims in every
 age. And in what age were there no <em>Occultists </em>and no
 <strong>A</strong>DEPTS?
 </p><p>
 Sir Isaac Newton held to the Pythagorean corpuscular theory, and
 was also inclined to admit its consequences; which made the Count
 de Maistre hope, at one time, that Newton would ultimately lead
 Science back to the recognition of the fact that <em>Forces </em>and
 the Celestial bodies <em>were propelled and guided by Intelligences
 </em>(<em>Soirees</em>,<em> </em>vol. ii.). But de Maistre counted
 without his host. The innermost thoughts and ideas of Newton were
 perverted, and of his great mathematical learning only the mere
 physical husk was turned to account. Had poor Sir Isaac foreseen
 to what use his successors and followers would apply his "
 gravity,"** that pious and religious man would surely have
 quietly eaten his apple, and never breathed a word about any mechanical
 ideas connected with its fall.
 </p><p>
 Great contempt is shown for metaphysics generally and for onto-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Mr. Robert Ward, discussing the questions of Heat and Light
 in the November <em>Journal of Science</em>,<em> </em>1881, shows
 us how utterly ignorant is Science about one of the commonest
 facts of nature -- the heat of the sun. He says: -- "The
 question of the temperature of the sun has been the subject of
 investigation with many scientists: Newton, one of the first investigators
 of this problem, tried to determine it, and after him all the
 scientists who have been occupied with calorimetry have followed
 his example. <em>All have believed themselves successful</em>,<em>
 </em>and have formulated their results with great confidence.
 The following, in the chronological order of the publication of
 the results, are the temperatures (in centigrade degrees) found
 by each of them: Newton, 1,699,300 deg.; Pouillet, 1,461 deg.;
 Tollner, 102,200 deg.; Secchi, 5,344,840 deg.; Ericsson, 2,726,700
 deg.; Fizeau, 7,500 deg.; Waterston, 9,000,000 deg.; Spoeren,
 27,000 deg.; Deville, 9,500 deg.; Soret, 5,801,846 deg.; Vicaire,
 1,500 deg.; Rosetti, 20,000 deg. The difference is as 1,400 deg.
 against 9,000,000 deg., or no less than 8,998,600 deg.!! There
 probably does not exist in science a more astonishing contradiction
 than that revealed in these figures. And yet without doubt if
 an <em>Occultist </em>were to give out an estimate, each of these
 gentlemen would vehemently protest in the name of '<strong>E</strong>XACT'
 Science at the rejection of his special result." (From the
 <em>Theosophist.</em>)
 </p><p>
 ** According to one atheistic idealist -- Dr. Lewins -- "When
 Sir Isaac, in 1687 . . . . showed mass and atom acted upon . .
 . . by innate activity . . . . he effectually disposed of Spirit,
 Anima, or Divinity, as supererogatory."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 485 THE METAPHYSICS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 logical metaphysics especially. But we see, whenever the Occultists
 are bold enough to raise their diminished heads, that materialistic,
 physical science is honey-combed with metaphysics;* that its most
 fundamental principles, while inseparably wedded to transcendentalism,
 are nevertheless, in order to show modern science divorced from
 such "dreams," tortured and often ignored in the maze
 of contradictory theories and hypotheses. A very good corroboration
 of this charge lies in the fact that Science finds itself absolutely
 compelled to accept the "hypothetical" Ether and to
 try to explain it on the materialistic grounds of atomo-mechanical
 laws. This attempt has led directly to the most fatal discrepancies
 and radical inconsistencies between the assumed nature of Ether
 and its physical actions. A second proof is found in the many
 contradictory statements about the atom -- the most metaphysical
 object in creation.
 </p><p>
 Now, what does the modern science of physics know of AEther, the
 first concept of which belongs undeniably to ancient philosophers,
 the Greeks having borrowed it from the Aryans, and the origin
 of modern AEther being found in, and <em>disfigured </em>from,
 <strong>A</strong>KASA? This disfigurement
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Stallo's above-cited work, "Concepts of Modern Physics,"
 a volume which has called forth the liveliest protests and criticisms,
 is recommended to anyone inclined to doubt this statement. "The
 professed antagonism of Science to metaphysics," he writes,
 "has led the majority of scientific specialists to assume
 that the methods and results of empirical research are wholly
 independent of the control of the laws of thought. They either
 silently ignore, or openly repudiate, the simplest canons of logic,
 including the laws of non-contradiction and . . . resent with
 the utmost vehemence, every application of the rule of consistency
 to their hypotheses and theories . . . . and they regard an examination
 (of these) . . . . in the light of these laws as an impertinent
 intrusion of '<em>a</em> <em>priori </em>principles and methods'
 into the domains of empirical science. Persons of this cast of
 mind find no difficulty in holding that atoms are absolutely inert,
 and at the same time asserting that these atoms are perfectly
 elastic; or in maintaining that the physical universe, in its
 last analysis, resolves itself into 'dead' matter and motion,
 and yet denying that all physical energy is in reality kinetic;
 or in proclaiming that all phenomenal differences in the objective
 world are ultimately due to the various motions of absolutely
 simple material units, and, nevertheless, repudiating the proposition
 that these units are equal" . . . . (p. xix.) "The blindness
 of eminent physicists to some of the most obvious consequences
 of their own theories is marvellous . . . . When Prof. Tait, in
 conjunction with Prof. Stewart, announces that 'matter is simply
 passive' (<em>The Unseen Universe</em>,<em> </em>sec. 104), and
 then, in connection with Sir W. Thomson, declares that 'matter
 has an innate power of resisting external influences' (<em>Treat.
 on Nat. Phil.</em>,<em> </em>Vol. I., sec. 216), it is hardly
 impertinent to inquire how these statements are to be reconciled.
 When Prof. Du Bois Reymond . . . . insists upon the necessity
 of reducing all the processes of nature to motions of a substantial,
 indifferent substratum, <em>wholly destitute of quality </em>('<em>Ueber
 die Grenzen des Naturerkennens</em>,'<em> </em>p. 5), having declared
 shortly before in the same lecture that 'resolution of all changes
 in the material world into motions of atoms <em>caused by their
 constant central forces </em>would be the completion of natural
 science,' we are in a perplexity from which we have to be relieved."
 (Pref. xliii.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 486 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 is claimed to be a modification and refinement of the idea of
 Lucretius. Let us then examine the modern concept from several
 scientific volumes containing the admissions of the physicists
 themselves.
 </p><p>
 The existence of Ether is accepted by physical astronomy, in ordinary
 physics, and in chemistry. Astronomers, who first began by regarding
 it as a fluid of extreme tenuity and mobility, offering no sensible
 resistance to the motions of celestial bodies, never gave a thought
 to its continuity or discontinuity. "Its main function in
 modern astronomy has been to serve as a basis for hydrodynamical
 theories of gravitation. In physics this fluid appeared for some
 time in several <em>roles </em>in connection with the 'imponderables'"
 -- so cruelly put to death by Sir W. Grove. Some physicists have
 even identified the ether of space with those "imponderables."
 Then came their Kinetic theories; and from the date of the dynamical
 theory of heat, it was chosen in optics as a substratum for luminous
 undulations. Then, in order to explain the dispersion and polarization
 of light, physicists had to resort once more to their "scientific
 imagination" and forthwith endowed the Ether with (<em>a</em>)
 atomic or molecular structure, and (<em>b</em>) with an enormous
 elasticity, "so that its resistance to deformation far exceeded
 that of the most rigid elastic bodies" (<em>Stallo</em>)<em>.
 </em>This necessitated the <em>theory of the essential discontinuity
 of matter</em>,<em> </em>hence of Ether. After having accepted
 this discontinuity, in order to account for dispersion and polarization,
 theoretical impossibilities were discovered with regard to such
 dispersions. Cauchy's "scientific imagination" saw in
 atoms "material points without extension," and he proposed,
 in order to obviate the most formidable obstacles to the undulatory
 theory (namely, some well-known mechanical theorems which stood
 in the way), to assume that the ethereal medium of propagation,
 instead of being continuous, should consist of particles separated
 by sensible distances. Fresnel rendered the same service to the
 phenomena of polarization. E. B. Hunt upset the theories of both
 (<em>Silliman</em>'<em>s Journal</em>,<em> </em>vol. viii., p.
 364 <em>et seq.</em>)<em> </em>There are now men of Science who
 proclaim them "materially fallacious," while others
 -- the "atomo-mechanicalists" -- cling to to them with
 desperate tenacity. The supposition of an <em>atomic </em>or<em>
 molecular constitution </em>of ether is upset, moreover, by thermodynamics,
 for Clerk Maxwell showed that such a medium would be simply <em>gas.*
 </em>The hypothesis of "finite intervals" is thus proven
 of no avail as a supplement to the undulatory theory. Besides,
 eclipses fail to reveal any such variation of colour as supposed
 by Cauchy (on the assumption that the chromatic rays are propagated
 with different velocities).
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *See Clerk Maxwell's "Treatise on Electricity of Magnetism"
 and compare with Cauchy's "<em>Memoire sur la Dispersion
 de la lumiere.</em>"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 487 SCIENTIFIC IMAGINATION.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Astronomy has pointed out more than one phenomenon absolutely
 at variance with this doctrine.
 </p><p>
 Thus, while in one department of physics the atomo-molecular constitution
 of the ether is accepted in order to account for one set of special
 phenomena, in another department such a constitution is found
 quite subversive of a number of well-ascertained facts, Hirn's
 charges being thus justified (<em>vide supra</em>)<em>. </em>Chemistry
 deemed it impossible to concede enormous elasticity to the <em>ether</em>
 without depriving it of other properties, upon the assumption
 of which the construction of <em>its </em>modern theories depended.
 This ended in a final transformation of ether. The exigencies
 of the atomo-mechanical theory have led distinguished mathematicians
 and physicists to attempt to substitute for the traditional atoms
 of matter, peculiar forms of <em>vortical motion </em>in a "universal
 homogeneous, incompressible, and <em>continuous </em>material
 medium," or AEther. (<em>See Stallo.</em>)
 </p><p>
 The present writer, claiming no great scientific education, but
 only a tolerable acquaintance with modern theories, and a better
 one with Occult Sciences, picks up weapons against the detractors
 of the esoteric teaching in the very arsenal of modern Science.
 The glaring contradictions, the mutually-destructive hypotheses
 of world-renowned Scientists, their mutual accusations, denunciations
 and disputes, show plainly that, whether accepted or not, the
 Occult theories have as much right to a hearing as any of the
 so-called learned and academical hypotheses. Thus whether the
 followers of the Royal Society choose to accept ether as a <em>continuous
 </em>or a <em>discontinuous </em>fluid matters little, and is
 indifferent to the present purpose. It simply points to one certainty:
 Official Science <em>knows nothing to this day of the constitution
 of ether. </em>Let Science call it matter, if it likes; only neither
 as <em>akasa </em>nor as the one sacred AEther of the Greeks,
 is it to be found in any of the states of matter known to modern
 physics. It is MATTER on quite another plane of perception and
 being, and it can neither be analyzed by scientific apparatus,
 appreciated, nor even conceived by "scientific imagination,"
 unless the possessors thereof study the Occult Sciences. That
 which follows proves this statement.
 </p><p>
 It is clearly demonstrated by Stallo as regards the crucial problems
 of modern physics (as was done by De Quatrefages and several others
 in those of anthropology, biology, etc., etc.) that, in their
 efforts to support their individual hypotheses and systems, the
 majority of the eminent and learned materialists very often utter
 the greatest fallacies. Let us take the following case. Most of
 them reject <em>actio in distans </em>(one<em> </em>of the fundamental
 principles in the question of AEther or Akasa in Occultism), while,
 as Stallo justly observes, there is no physical action,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 488 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "which, on close examination, does not resolve itself into
 <em>actio in distans</em>"; and he proves it.
 </p><p>
 Now, metaphysical arguments, according to Professor Lodge (<em>Nature</em>,<em>
 vol. xxvii.</em>,<em> p. </em>304), are "unconscious appeals
 to experience." And he adds that if such an experience <em>is
 not conceivable</em>,<em> </em>then it does not exist, etc. In
 his own words: -- ". . . If a highly-developed mind or set
 of minds, find a doctrine about some comparatively simple and
 fundamental matter <em>absolutely unthinkable</em>,<em> </em>it
 is an evidence . . . that <em>the unthinkable state of things
 has no existence</em>,<em> etc."</em> 
 </p><p>
 And thereupon, toward the end of his lecture, Professor Lodge
 indicates that the explanation of cohesion, as well as of gravity,
 "is to be looked for in the vortex-atom theory of Sir William
 Thomson" (Stallo).
 </p><p>
 It is needless to stop to inquire whether it is to this vortex-theory,
 also, that we have to look for the dropping down on earth of the
 first life-germ by a passing meteor or comet (Sir W. Thomson's
 hypothesis). But Mr. Lodge might be reminded of the wise criticism
 on his lecture in the same "Concepts of Modern Physics."
 Noticing the above-quoted declaration by the London Professor,
 the author asks "whether . . . the elements of the vortex-theory
 are <em>familiar</em>,<em> </em>or even possible, facts of experience?
 For, if they are not, <em>clearly that theory is obnoxious to
 the same criticism which is said to invalidate the assumption
 </em>of ACTIO IN DISTANS" (p. xxiv). And then the able critic
 shows clearly what the Ether <em>is not</em>,<em> </em>nor can
 ever be, notwithstanding all scientific claims to the contrary.
 And thus he opens widely, if unconsciously, the entrance door
 to our occult teachings. For, as he says: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The medium in which the vortex-movements arise is, according
 to Professor Lodge's own express statement (NATURE, vol. xxvii.,
 p. 305), 'a perfectly homogeneous, incompressible, continuous
 body, incapable of being resolved into simple elements or atoms:
 it is, in fact, continuous, not molecular.' And after making this
 statement Professor Lodge adds: '<i>There is no other body of
 which we can say this</i>,<i> and hence the Properties of the
 aether must be somewhat </i>DIFFERENT<i> from those of ordinary
 matter</i>.' It appears, then, that the whole vortex-atom theory,
 which is offered to us as a substitute for the 'metaphysical theory'
 <i>of actio in distans</i>,<i> </i>rests upon the hypothesis of
 the existence of a material medium which is utterly <i>unknown
 to experience</i>,<i> </i>and which has properties <i>somewhat
 </i>different* from those of ordinary matter. Hence this theory,
 instead of being, as is claimed, a reduction of an unfamiliar
 fact of <i>experience </i>to a familiar fact, is,
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> </em>"<em>Somewhat </em>different!" exclaims Stallo.
 "The real import of this 'somewhat' is, that the medium in
 question <em>is not</em>,<em> in any intelligible sense</em>,<em>
 material at all</em>,<em> </em>having none of the properties of
 matter." All the properties of matter depend upon differences
 and changes, and the "hypothetical" aether here defined
 is not only destitute of differences, but incapable of difference
 and change -- (in the physical sense let us add). This proves
 that if aether is "matter" <em>it is so </em>only as
 something visible, tangible and existing, for <em>spiritual </em>senses
 alone; that it is a Being indeed -- but not of our plane: Pater
 AEther, or Akasa.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 489 THE PHYSICAL "PHANTOM."</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 on the contrary, a reduction of a fact which is perfectly familiar,
 to a fact which is not only unfamiliar, but wholly unknown, unobserved
 and unobservable. Furthermore, the alleged vortical motion of,
 or rather in, the assumed ethereal medium is . . . impossible,
 because "motion in a perfectly homogeneous, incompressible,
 and therefore continuous fluid, is not sensible motion."
 . . . . It is manifest, therefore, that wherever the vortex-atom
 theory may lead us, it certainly <i>does not lead us anywhere
 in the region of physics</i>,<i> </i>or in the domain of <i>verae</i>
 <i>causae.* </i>And I may add that, inasmuch as the hypothetical
 undifferentiated** and undifferentiable medium is clearly an involuntary
 re-ification of the old ontological concept <i>pure being</i>,<i>
 </i>the theory under discussion has all the attributes of an <i>inapprehensible
 metaphysical phantom.</i>"
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 A "phantom" indeed, which can be made apprehensible
 only by Occultism. From such scientific metaphysics to Occultism
 there is hardly one step. Those physicists who hold the view that
 the atomic constitution of matter is consistent with its penetrability,
 need not go far out of their way to be able to account for the
 greatest phenomena of Occultism, now so derided by physical scientists
 and materialists. Cauchy's "material points without extension"
 are Leibnitz's monads, and at the same time the materials out
 of which the "Gods" and other invisible powers clothe
 themselves in bodies (<em>vide infra</em>,<em> </em>"<em>Gods</em>,<em>
 Monads and Atoms</em>")<em>. </em>The disintegration and
 reintegration of "material" particles without extension
 as a chief factor in phenomenal manifestations ought to suggest
 themselves very easily as a <em>clear possibility</em>,<em> </em>at
 any rate to those few scientific minds which accept M. Cauchy's
 views. For, disposing of that property of matter which they call
 impenetrability by simply regarding the atoms as "material
 points exerting on each other attractions and repulsions which
 vary with the distances that separate them" -- the French
 theorist explains that: "From this it follows that, if it
 pleased the author of nature*** simply to <em>modify </em>the
 laws according to which the atoms attract or repel each other,
 <em>we might instantly see the hardest bodies penetrating each
 other</em>,<em> </em>the smallest particles of matter <em>occupying
 immense spaces</em>,<em> </em>or<em> </em>the largest masses reducing
 themselves to the smallest volumes, the entire universe concentrating
 itself, as it were, in a single point." (<em>Sept lecons
 de physique Generale</em>,<em> </em>p. 38 <em>et seq.</em>,<em>
 </em>ed. Moigno.)
 </p><p>
 And that "point," <em>invisible on our plane of perception
 and matter</em>,<em> </em>is<em> </em>quite visible to the eye
 of the adept who can follow and see it present on other planes.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> Verae causae </em>for physical science are <em>mayavic </em>or
 illusionary causes to the Occultist, and <em>vice versa.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 ** Very much "differentiated," on the contrary, since
 the day it left its <em>laya</em> condition.
 </p><p>
 *** For the Occultists who say that the author of nature <em>is
 nature itself</em>,<em> </em>something indistinct and inseparable
 from the Deity, it follows that those who are conversant with
 the <em>occult laws </em>of nature, and know how to change and
 provoke new conditions in ether, may -- <em>not</em> modify the
 laws, but work and do the same <em>in accordance with </em>those
 <em>immutable </em>laws. </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-04.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>