<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 411 THE MYSTERY OF THE SEVEN THUNDERS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK20">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd1-2-10.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>ยง XI.<br>
 DEMON EST DEUS INVERSUS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HIS symbolical sentence, in its many-sided forms,
 is certainly most dangerous and iconoclastic in the face of all
 the dualistic later religions -- or rather theologies -- and especially
 so in the light of Christianity. Yet it is neither just nor correct
 to say that it is Christianity which has conceived and brought
 forth Satan. As an "adversary," the opposing Power required
 by the equilibrium and harmony of things in Nature -- like Shadow
 to throw off still brighter the Light, like Night to bring into
 greater <em>relief </em>the Day, and like cold to make one appreciate
 the more the comfort of heat -- <strong>S</strong>ATAN has ever
 existed. Homogeneity is one and indivisible. But if the homogeneous
 One and Absolute is no mere figure of speech, and if heterogeneity
 in its dualistic aspect, is its offspring -- its bifurcous shadow
 or reflection -- then even that divine Homogeneity must contain
 in itself the essence of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 412 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 both good and evil. If "God" is Absolute, Infinite,
 and the Universal Root of all and everything in Nature and its
 universe, whence comes Evil or D'Evil if not from the same "Golden
 Womb" of the absolute? Thus we are forced either to accept
 the emanation of good and evil, of Agathodaemon and Kakodaemon
 as offshoots from the same trunk of the Tree of Being, or to resign
 ourselves to the absurdity of believing in two eternal Absolutes!
 </p><p>
 Having to trace the origin of the idea to the very beginnings
 of human mind, it is but just, meanwhile, to give his due even
 to the proverbial devil. Antiquity knew of no isolated, thoroughly
 and absolutely bad "god of evil." Pagan thought represented
 good and evil as twin brothers, born from the same mother -- Nature;
 so soon as that thought ceased to be Archaic, Wisdom too became
 Philosophy. In the beginning the symbols of good and evil were
 mere abstractions, Light and Darkness; then their types became
 chosen among the most natural and ever-recurrent periodical Cosmic
 phenomena -- the Day and the Night, or the Sun and Moon. Then
 the Hosts of the Solar and Lunar deities were made to represent
 them, and the Dragon of Darkness was contrasted with the Dragon
 of Light (See <em>Stanzas </em>V<em>.</em>,<em> </em>VII. of Book
 I.) The Host of Satan is a Son of God, no less than the Host of
 the B'ni Alhim, these children of God coming to "present
 themselves before the Lord," their father (see <em>Job ii.</em>)<em>.
 </em>"The Sons of God" become the "Fallen Angels"
 only after perceiving that the daughters of men <em>were fair</em>,<em>
 </em>(<em>Genesis vi.</em>)<em> </em>In the Indian philosophy,
 the <em>Suras </em>are<em> </em>among the earliest and the brightest
 gods, and become <em>Asuras </em>only when dethroned by Brahminical
 fancy. Satan never assumed an anthropomorphic, individualized
 shape, until the creation by man, of a "one <em>living</em>
 personal god," had been accomplished; and then merely as
 a matter of prime necessity. A screen was needed; a scape-goat
 to explain the cruelty, blunders, and but too-evident injustice,
 perpetrated by him for whom absolute perfection, mercy, and goodness
 were claimed. This was the first Karmic effect of abandoning a
 philosophical and logical Pantheism, to build, as a prop for lazy
 man, "a merciful father in Heaven," whose daily and
 hourly actions as <em>Natura naturans</em>,<em> </em>the "comely
 mother but stone cold," belie the assumption. This led to
 the primal twins, Osiris-Typhon, Ormazd-Ahriman, and finally Cain-Abel
 and the <em>tutti-quanti </em>of contraries.
 </p><p>
 Having commenced by being synonymous with Nature, "God,"
 the Creator, ended by being made its author. Pascal settles the
 difficulty very cunningly: "Nature has perfections, in order
 to show that she is the image of God: and defects, in order to
 show that she is <em>only </em>his<em> </em>image," he says.
 </p><p>
 The further back one recedes into the darkness of the prehistoric
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 413 DEATH IS LIFE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ages, the more philosophical does the prototypic figure of the
 later Satan appear. The first "Adversary" in individual
 human form that one meets with in old Puranic literature is one
 of her greatest Rishis and Yogis -- Narada, surnamed the "Strife-maker."
 </p><p>
 And he is a Brahmaputra, a son of Brahma, the male. But of him
 later on. Who the great "Deceiver" really is, one can
 ascertain by searching for him <em>with open eyes </em>and an
 unprejudiced mind, in every old cosmogony and Scripture.
 </p><p>
 It is the anthropomorphised <em>Demiurge</em>,<em> </em>the Creator
 of Heaven and Earth, when separated from the collective Hosts
 of his fellow-Creators, whom, so to speak, he represents and synthesizes.
 It is <em>now </em>the God of <em>theologies. </em>"The thought
 is father to the wish." Once upon a time, a philosophical
 symbol left to perverse human fancy; afterwards fashioned into
 a fiendish, deceiving, cunning, and jealous God.
 </p><p>
 Dragons and other fallen angels being described in other parts
 of this work, a few words upon the much-slandered Satan will be
 sufficient. That which the student will do well to remember is
 that, with every people except the Christian nations, the Devil
 is to this day no worse an entity than the opposite aspect in
 the dual nature of the so-called Creator. This is only natural.
 One cannot claim God as the synthesis of the whole Universe, as
 Omnipresent and Omniscient and Infinite, and then divorce him
 from evil. As there is far more evil than good in the world, it
 follows on logical grounds that either God must include evil,
 or stand as the direct cause of it, or else surrender his claims
 to absoluteness. The ancients understood this so well that their
 philosophers -- now followed by the Kabalists -- defined evil
 as the lining of God or Good: <em>Demon est Deus inversus</em>,<em>
 </em>being a very old adage. Indeed, evil is but an antagonizing
 blind force in nature; it is <em>reaction</em>,<em> opposition</em>,<em>
 </em>and <em>contrast</em>, --<em> </em>evil for some, good for
 others. There is no <em>malum in se: </em>only the shadow of light,
 without which light could have no existence, even in our perceptions.
 If evil disappeared, good would disappear along with it from Earth.
 The "Old Dragon" was pure spirit before he became matter,
 <em>passive </em>before he became <em>active. </em>In the Syro-Chaldean
 magic both Ophis and Ophiomorphos are joined in the Zodiac, at
 the sign of the Androgyne <em>Virgo-Scorpio. </em>Before its fall
 on earth the "Serpent" was <em>Ophis-Christos</em>,<em>
 </em>and after its fall it became Ophiomorphos-<strong>C</strong>HRESTOS.
 Everywhere the speculations of the Kabalists treat of Evil as
 a FORCE, which is antagonistic, but at the same time essential,
 to Good, as giving it vitality and existence, which it could never
 have otherwise. There would be no <em>life</em> possible (in the
 <em>Mayavic </em>sense) without <em>Death</em>, nor regeneration
 and reconstruction without destruction. Plants would perish in
 eternal sunlight, and so would man, who would become an automaton
 without the exercise of his free will and aspirations</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 414 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 after that sunlight, which would lose its being and value for
 him had he nothing but light. Good is infinite and eternal only
 in the eternally concealed from us, and this is why we imagine
 it eternal. On the manifested planes, one equilibrates the other.
 Few are those theists and believers in a personal God, who do
 not make of Satan the shadow of God; or who, confounding both,
 do not believe they have a right to pray to that idol asking its
 help and protection for the exercise and impunity of their evil
 and cruel deeds. "Lead us not into Temptation" is addressed
 daily to "our Father, which art in Heaven," and not
 to the Devil, by millions of human Christian hearts. They do so,
 repeating the very words put in the mouth of their Saviour, and
 do not give one thought to the fact that their meaning is contradicted
 point blank by James "the brother of the Lord." "Let
 no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot
 be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man." -- (The
 Gen. Ep. of James, i, 13). Why, then, say that it is the Devil
 who tempts us, when the Church teaches us <em>on the authority
 of Christ </em>that it is God who does so? Open any pious volume
 in which the word "temptation" is defined in its theological
 sense, and forthwith you find two definitions: (1) "Those
 afflictions and troubles <em>whereby God tries his people;</em>"<em>
 </em>(2)<em> </em>Those means and enticements which the Devil
 makes use of to <em>ensnare </em>and allure mankind. (St. James
 i., 2, 12, and Mat. vi., 13.) If accepted literally, the two teachings
 of Christ and James contradict each other, and what dogma can
 reconcile the two if the occult meaning is rejected?
 </p><p>
 Between the alternative allurements, wise will be that philosopher
 who will be able to decide where God disappears to make room for
 the Devil! Therefore when we read that "the Devil is a liar
 and the father of it," <em>i.e.</em>, INCARNATE LIE, and
 are told in the same breath that Satan -- the Devil -- was a son
 of God and the most beautiful of his archangels, rather than believe
 that Father and Son are a gigantic, personified and eternal LIE,
 we prefer to turn to Pantheism and to Pagan philosophy for information.
 </p><p>
 Once that the key to Genesis is in our hands, it is the scientific
 and symbolical Kabala which unveils the secret. The great Serpent
 of the Garden of Eden and the "Lord God" are identical,
 and so are Jehovah and Cain ONE -- that Cain who is referred to
 in theology as the "murderer" and the LIAR to God! Jehovah
 tempts the King of Israel to number the people, and Satan tempts
 him to do the same in another place. Jehovah turns into the fiery
 serpents to bite those he is displeased with; and Jehovah informs
 the brazen serpent that heals them.
 </p><p>
 These short, and seemingly contradictory, statements in the Old
 Testament (contradictory because the two Powers are separated
 instead of being regarded as the two faces of one and the same
 thing) are the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 415 THEOLOGICAL ETYMOLOGIES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 echoes -- distorted out of recognition by exotericism and theology
 -- of the universal and philosophical dogmas in nature, so well
 understood by the primitive Sages. We find the same groundwork
 in several personifications in the Puranas, only far more ample
 and philosophically suggestive.
 </p><p>
 Thus Pulastya, a "Son of God" -- one of the first progeny
 -- is made the progenitor of Demons, the Rakshasas, the tempters
 and the Devourers of men. <em>Pisacha </em>(female Demon) is a
 daughter of Daksha, a "Son of God" too, and a God, and
 the mother of all the Pisachas (<em>Padma Purana</em>)<em>. </em>The
 Demons, so called in the Puranas, are very extraordinary devils
 when judged from the standpoint of European and orthodox views
 about these creatures, since all of them -- Danavas, Daityas,
 Pisachas, and the Rakshasas -- are represented as extremely pious,
 following the precepts of the Vedas, some of them even being great
 Yogis. But they oppose the clergy and Ritualism, sacrifices and
 forms -- just what the full-blown Yogins do to this day in India
 -- and are no less respected for it, though they are allowed to
 follow neither caste nor ritual; hence all those Puranic giants
 and Titans are called Devils. The Missionaries, ever on the watch
 to show, if they can, the Hindu traditions no better than <em>a
 reflection </em>of the Jewish Bible, have evolved a whole romance
 on the alleged identity of Pulastya with Cain, and of the Rakshasas
 with the Cainites, "the accursed," the cause of the
 <em>Noachian </em>Deluge. (See the work of Abbe Gorresio, who
 "etymologises" Pulastya's name as meaning the "rejected,"
 hence Cain, if you please). Pulastya dwells in <em>Kedara</em>,<em>
 </em>he says, which means a "dug-up place," a<em> mine</em>,<em>
 </em>and Cain is shown in tradition and the Bible as the first
 worker in metals and a miner thereof!
 </p><p>
 While it is very probable that the <em>Gibborim </em>(the giants)
 of the Bible are the Rakshasas of the Hindus, it is still more
 certain that both are Atlanteans, and belong to the submerged
 races. However it may be, no Satan could be more persistent in
 slandering his enemy, or more spiteful in his hatred, than the
 Christian theologians are in cursing him as the father of every
 evil. Compare their vituperations and opinions given about the
 Devil with the philosophical views of the Puranic sages and their
 Christ-like mansuetude. When Parasara, whose father was devoured
 by a Rakshasa, was preparing himself to destroy (magically) the
 whole race, his grandsire, Vasishta, says a few extremely suggestive
 words to him. He shows the irate Sage, on his own confession,
 that there is Evil and <em>Karma</em>,<em> </em>but no "evil
 spirits." "Let thy wrath be appeased," he says.
 "The Rakshasas are not culpable; thy father's death <em>was
 the work of Karma. </em>Anger is the passion of fools; it becometh
 not a wise man. <em>By whom</em>,<em> it may be asked</em>,<em>
 is any one killed? </em>Every man <em>reaps the consequences of
 his own acts. </em>Anger, my son, is the destruction of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 416 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 all that man obtains . . . and prevents the attainment of emancipation.
 The sages shun wrath. Be not thou, my child, subject to its influence.
 Let not those <em>unoffending </em>spirits of darkness be consumed;
 let thy sacrifice cease. Mercy is the might of the righteous"
 (<em>Vishnu Purana</em>,<em> </em>Book i., ch. i.). Thus, every
 such "sacrifice" or prayer to God for help is <em>no
 better than an act of black magic. </em>That which Parasara prayed
 for, was the destruction of the Spirits of Darkness, for his personal
 revenge. He is called a <em>Pagan</em>,<em> </em>and the Christians
 have doomed him as such, to eternal hell. Yet, in what respect
 is the prayer of sovereigns and generals, who pray before every
 battle for the destruction of their enemy, any better? Such a
 prayer is in every case <em>black magic </em>of the worst kind,
 concealed like a demon "Mr. Hyde" under a sanctimonious
 "Dr. Jekyll."
 </p><p>
 In human nature, evil denotes only the polarity of matter and
 Spirit, a struggle for life between the two manifested Principles
 in Space and Time, which principles are one <em>per se</em>,<em>
 </em>inasmuch they are rooted in the Absolute. In Kosmos, the
 equilibrium must be preserved. The operations of the two contraries
 produce harmony, like the centripetal and centrifugal forces,
 which are necessary to each other -- mutually inter-dependent
 -- "in order that both should live." If one is arrested,
 the action of the other will become immediately self-destructive.
 </p><p>
 Since the personification called Satan has been amply analyzed
 from its triple aspect -- in the Old Testament, Christian theology
 and the ancient Gentile attitude of thought -- those who would
 learn more of it are referred to Vol. II. of <strong>I</strong>SIS
 <strong>U</strong>NVEILED, chap. x. See also several sections
 in Book II., Part II. of this work. The present subject is touched
 upon and fresh explanations attempted for a very good reason.
 Before we can approach the evolution of physical and <em>divine
 </em>man, we have first to master the idea of cyclic evolution,
 to acquaint ourselves with the philosophies and beliefs of the
 four races which preceded our present race, to learn what were
 the ideas of those Titans and giants -- giants, verily, mentally
 as well as physically. The whole of antiquity was imbued with
 that philosophy which teaches the involution of spirit into matter,
 the progressive, downward cyclic descent, or active, self-conscious
 evolution. The Alexandrian Gnostics have sufficiently divulged
 the secret of initiations, and their records are full of "the
 sliding down of <em>AEons</em>"<em> </em>in their double
 qualification of Angelic Beings and Periods: the one the natural
 evolution of the other. On the other hand, Oriental traditions
 on both sides of the "black water" -- the oceans that
 separate the two <em>Easts</em> --<em> </em>are as full of allegories
 about the downfall of Pleroma, of that of the gods and Devas.
 One and all, they allegorized and explained the <strong>F</strong>ALL
 as <em>the</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 417 THE ANGELS SLANDERED.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>desire to learn and acquire knowledge</em> --<em> </em>to
 KNOW. This is the natural sequence of mental evolution, the spiritual
 becoming transmuted into the material or physical. The same law
 of descent into materiality and re-ascent into spirituality asserted
 itself during the Christian era, the reaction having stopped only
 just now, in our own special <em>sub-race.</em> 
 </p><p>
 That which, perhaps ten millenniums ago, was allegorized in <em>Pymander
 </em>in a triune character of interpretation, meant as a record
 of an astronomical, anthropological, and even alchemical fact,
 namely, the allegory of the seven rectors breaking through the
 seven circles of fire, was dwarfed into one material and anthropomorphic
 interpretation -- the rebellion and <em>Fall of the Angels. </em>The
 multivocal, profoundly philosophical narrative, under its poetical
 form of the "Marriage of Heaven with Earth," the love
 of nature for Divine form and the "Heavenly man," enraptured
 with his own beauty mirrored in nature -- <em>i.e.</em>, Spirit
 attracted into matter -- has now become, under theological handling:
 "the seven Rectors disobeying Jehovah, self admiration generating
 Satanic Pride, followed by their <strong>F</strong>ALL, Jehovah
 permitting no worship to be lost save upon himself." In short,
 the beautiful Planet-Angels, the glorious cyclic aeons of the
 ancients, became henceforward synthesized in their most orthodox
 shape in Samael, the chief of the Demons in the Talmud, "That
 great serpent with <em>twelve wings </em>that draws down after
 himself, in his Fall, the solar system, or the Titans." But
 <em>Schemal</em>, the<em> alter ego </em>and the Sabean type of
 Samael, meant, in his philosophical and esoteric aspect, the "year"
 in its astrological evil aspect, its twelve months or wings of
 unavoidable evils, in nature; and in esoteric theogony (see Chwolson
 in <strong>N</strong>ABATHEAN <strong>A</strong>GRICULTURE, Vol.
 II., p. 217), both Schemal and Samael represented a particular
 divinity. With the Kabalists they are "the Spirit of the
 Earth," the personal god that governs it, identical <em>de
 facto </em>with Jehovah. For the Talmudists admit themselves that
 <strong>S</strong>AMAEL is a god-name of one of the seven Elohim.
 The Kabalists, moreover, show the two, Schemal and Samael, as
 a symbolical form of Saturn, <strong>C</strong>HRONOS, the twelve
 wings standing for the 12 months, and the symbol in its collectivity
 representing <em>a racial cycle. </em>Jehovah and Saturn are also
 glyphically identical.
 </p><p>
 This leads in its turn to a very curious deduction from a Roman
 Catholic dogma. Many renowned writers belonging to the Latin Church
 admit that a difference exists, and should be made, between the
 Uranian Titans, the antediluvian giants (also Titans), and those
 post-diluvian giants in whom they (the Roman Catholics) <em>will</em>
 see the descendants of the mythical Ham. In clearer words, there
 is a difference to be made between the Cosmic, <em>primordial
 </em>opposing Forces -- guided by cyclic law -- the Atlantean
 human giants, and the post-diluvian great adepts, whether</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 418 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of the <em>right </em>or the <em>left </em>hand. At the same time
 they show that Michael, "the<em> generalissimos </em>of the
 fighting Celestial Host, the <em>bodyguard of Jehovah</em>,"<em>
 </em>as it would seem (see de Mirville) is also a Titan, only
 with the adjective of "divine" before the cognomen.
 Thus those "Uranides" who are called everywhere "divine
 Titans," and who, having rebelled against Kronos (Saturn),
 are therefore also shown to be the enemies of Samael (an Elohim,
 also and synonymous with Jehovah in his collectivity), are identical
 with Michael and his host. In short, the <em>roles </em>are reversed,
 all the combatants are confused, and no student is able to distinguish
 clearly which is which. Esoteric explanation may, however, bring
 some order into this confusion, in which Jehovah becomes Saturn,
 and Michael and his army, Satan and the rebellious angels, owing
 to the indiscreet endeavours of the too faithful zealots to see
 in every pagan god a devil. The true meaning is far more philosophical,
 and the legend of the first "Fall" (of the angels) assumes
 a scientific colouring when correctly understood.
 </p><p>
 Kronos stands for endless (hence immovable) Duration, without
 beginning, without an end, beyond divided Time and beyond Space.
 Those "Angels," genii, or Devas, who were born <em>to
 act in space and time</em>,<em> i.e.</em>,<em> </em>to break through
 the <em>seven circles of the superspiritual </em>planes into the
 phenomenal, or circumscribed, super-terrestrial regions, are said
 allegorically to <em>have rebelled </em>against Kronos and fought
 the (then) one living and highest God. In his turn, when Kronos
 is represented as mutilating Uranus, his father, the meaning of
 this mutilation is very simple: Absolute Time is made to become
 the finite and the conditioned; a portion is robbed from the whole,
 thus showing that Saturn, the father of the gods, has been transformed
 from <em>Eternal Duration </em>into a limited Period. Chronos
 cuts down with his scythe even the longest and (to us) seemingly
 endless cycles, yet, for all that, limited in Eternity, and puts
 down with the same scythe the mightiest rebels. Aye, not one will
 escape the scythe of Time! Praise the god or gods, or flout, one
 or both, and that scythe will not be made to tremble one millionth
 of a second in its ascending or descending course.
 </p><p>
 The Titans of Hesiod's <em>Theogony </em>were copied in Greece
 from the <em>Suras </em>and<em> Asuras </em>of India. These Hesiodic
 Titans, the <em>Uranides</em>,<em> </em>numbered once upon a time
 as only six, have been recently discovered to be <em>seven</em>
 --<em> </em>the seventh being called Phoreg -- in an old fragment
 relating to the Greek myth. Thus their identity with the Seven
 rectors is fully demonstrated. The origin of the "War in
 Heaven" and the <strong>F</strong>ALL has, in our mind, to
 be traced unavoidably to India, and perhaps far earlier than the
 Puranic accounts thereof. For <strong>T</strong>ARAMAYA was in
 a later age, and there are three accounts, each of a distinct
 war, to be traced in almost every Cosmogony.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 419 THE WAR OF THE GODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 The first war happened in the night of time, between the gods
 the (A)-<em>suras</em>,<em> </em>and lasted for the period of
 one "divine year."* On this occasion the deities were
 defeated by the Daityas, under the leadership of Hrada. After
 that, owing to a device of Vishnu, to whom the conquered gods
 applied for help, the latter defeated the Asuras. In the Vishnu
 Purana no interval is found between the two wars. In the Esoteric
 Doctrine, one war takes place before the building of the Solar
 system; another, on earth, at the "creation" of man;
 and a third "war" is mentioned as taking place at the
 close of the 4th Race, between its adepts and those of the 5th
 Race, <em>i.e.</em>, between the Initiates of the "Sacred
 Island" and the Sorcerers of Atlantis. We shall notice the
 first contest, as recounted by Parasara, while trying to separate
 the two accounts, purposely blended together. It is there stated
 that as the Daityas and Asuras were engaged in the duties of their
 respective orders (<em>Varna</em>)<em> </em>and followed the paths
 prescribed by holy writ, practising also religious penance (a
 queer employment for <em>demons </em>if they are <em>identical
 with our devils</em>,<em> </em>as it is claimed) -- it was impossible
 for the gods to destroy them. The prayers addressed by the gods
 to Vishnu are curious as showing the ideas involved in an anthropomorphic
 deity. Having, after their defeat, "fled to the Northern
 shore of the Milky Ocean (Atlantic Ocean),** the discomfited gods
 address many supplications "to the first
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * One "Day of Brahma" lasting 4,320,000,000 years --
 multiply this by 365! The Asuras here (no-gods, but demons) are
 still <em>Suras</em>,<em> </em>gods higher in hierarchy than such
 secondary gods as are not even mentioned in the Vedas. The duration
 of the war shows its significance, and that they are only the
 personified Cosmic powers. It is evidently for sectarian purposes
 and out of <em>odium theologicum </em>that the illusive form assumed
 by Vishnu <em>Mayamoha</em>,<em> </em>was attributed in later
 rearrangements of old texts to Buddha and the Daityas, in the
 <em>Vishnu Purana</em>, unless it was a fancy of Wilson himself.
 He also fancied he found an allusion to Buddhism in Bhagavatgita,
 whereas, as proved by K. T. Telang, he had only confused the Buddhists
 and the older Charvaka materialists. The version exists nowhere
 in other Puranas if the inference does, as Professor Wilson claims,
 in the "Vishnu Purana"; the translation of which, especially
 of Book iii., ch. xviii., where the reverend Orientalist arbitrarily
 introduces Buddha, and shows him teaching Buddhism to Daityas
 -- led to another "great war" between himself and Col.
 Vans Kennedy. The latter charged him publicly with wilfully distorting
 Puranic texts. "I affirm," wrote the Colonel at Bombay,
 in 1840, "that the Puranas do not contain what Professor
 Wilson has stated is contained in them . . . until such passages
 are produced I may be allowed to repeat my former conclusions,
 that Professor Wilson's opinion, that the Puranas as now extant
 are compilations made between the eighth and seventeenth centuries
 (<b>A.D</b>.!) rests solely <em>on gratuitous assumptions and
 unfounded assertions</em>,<em> </em>and that his reasoning in
 support of it is either futile, fallacious, contradictory, or
 improbable." (See <em>Vishnu Purana</em>,<em> </em>trans.
 by Wilson, edit. by Fitzedward Hall, Vol. V., Appendix.)
 </p><p>
 ** This statement belongs to the <em>third </em>War, since the
 terrestrial continents, seas and rivers are mentioned in connection
 with it. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 420 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of beings, the divine Vishnu," and among others this one:
 "Glory to thee, who art one with the Saints, whose perfect
 nature is ever blessed. . . . Glory to thee, <em>who art one with
 the Serpent-race</em>,<em> double-tongued</em>,<em> impetuous</em>,<em>
 cruel</em>,<em> insatiate of enjoyment </em>and abounding with
 wealth. . . . Glory to thee, . . . . O Lord, <em>who hast neither
 colour nor extension</em>,<em> </em>nor size (<em>ghana</em>),<em>
 nor any predicable qualities</em>,<em> </em>and whose essence
 (<em>rupa</em>), purest of the pure is appreciable only by holy
 <em>Paramarshi </em>(greatest of sages or Rishis). We bow to thee,
 in the nature of Brahma uncreated, undecaying (<em>avyaya</em>),<em>
 </em>who<em> art in our bodies </em>and<em> in all other bodies</em>,<em>
 and in all living creatures</em>,<em> </em>and beside whom nothing
 exists. We glorify that Vasudeva, the lord of all, who is without
 soil, the seed of all things, exempt from dissolution, unborn,
 eternal; being in essence <em>Paramapadatmavat </em>(beyond the
 condition of spirit) and in essence and substance (<em>rupa</em>),<em>
 </em>the whole of this (Universe)." (Book III., ch. xvii.,
 <em>Vish. Purana.</em>)
 </p><p>
 The above is quoted as an illustration of the vast field offered
 by the Puranas to adverse and erroneous criticism, by every European
 bigot who forms an estimate of an alien religion on mere external
 evidence. Any man accustomed to subject what he reads to thoughtful
 analysis, will see at a glance the incongruity of addressing the
 accepted "Unknowable," the formless, and attributeless
 <strong>A</strong>BSOLUTE, such as the Vedantins define <strong>B</strong>RAHMA,
 as being "one with the serpent-race, double-tongued, cruel
 and insatiable," thus associating the abstract with the concrete,
 and bestowing adjectives on that which is freed from any limitations,
 and conditionless. Even Dr. Wilson, who, after living surrounded
 by Brahmins and Pundits in India for so many years, ought to have
 known better -- even that scholar lost no opportunity to criticize
 the Hindu Scriptures on this account. Thus, he exclaims: --*
 </p><p>
 "The Puranas constantly teach incompatible doctrines! According
 to this passage, the Supreme being is not the inert cause of creation
 only, but exercises the functions of an active providence. The
 Commentator quotes a text of the Veda in support of this view:
 'Universal Soul entering into men, governs their conduct.' Incongruities,
 however, are as frequent in the Vedas as in the Puranas. . . .
 ."
 </p><p>
 Less frequent, in sober truth, than in the Mosaic Bible. But prejudice
 is great in the hearts of our Orientalists -- especially in those
 of "reverend" scholars. <strong>U</strong>NIVERSAL <strong>S</strong>OUL
 is<em> not </em>the inert Cause of Creation or (Para) Brahma,
 but simply that which we call the sixth principle of<em> intellectual
 </em>Kosmos, on the manifested plane of being. It is Mahat, or<em>
 Mahabuddhi</em>,<em> </em>the great Soul, the vehicle of Spirit,
 the first primeval reflection of the formless <strong>C</strong>AUSE,
 and that which is even <em>beyond </em><strong>S</strong>PIRIT.
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </p><p>
 * In Book I., chap. xvii., narrating the story of Prahlada --
 the Son of Hiranyakasipu, the Puranic <em>Satan</em>, the great
 enemy of Vishnu, and the King of the three worlds -- into whose
 heart Vishnu entered.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 421 THE DECEPTION OF THE GODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 So much for Professor Wilson's uncalled-for fling. As for the
 apparently incongruous appeal to Vishnu by the defeated gods,
 the explanation is there, in the text of Vishnu Purana, if Orientalists
 would only notice it.* There is Vishnu, as Brahma, and Vishnu
 <em>in his two aspects</em>,<em> </em>philosophy teaches. There
 is but one Brahma, "essentially <em>prakriti </em>and <em>Spirit</em>,"<em>
 </em>&amp;c.
 </p><p>
 Therefore, it is not Vishnu -- "the inert cause of creation"
 -- which exercised the functions of an <em>active</em> Providence,
 but the Universal Soul, that which E. Levi calls <em>Astral Light
 </em>in its material aspect. And this "Soul" is, in
 its dual aspect of spirit and matter, the true anthropomorphic
 God of the Theists; as this God is a <em>personification </em>of
 that Universal Creative Agent, pure and impure both, owing to
 its manifested condition and differentiation in this Mayavic World
 -- <em>God </em>and <em>Devil </em>-- truly. But Dr. Wilson failed
 to see how Vishnu, in this character, closely resembles the Lord
 God of Israel, "especially in his policy of deception, temptation,
 and cunning."
 </p><p>
 In the Vishnu Purana this is made as plain as can be. For it is
 said there, that "at the conclusion of their prayers (<em>stotra</em>)<em>
 </em>the gods beheld the Sovereign Deity Hari (Vishnu) armed with
 the conch, the discus, and the mace, <em>riding on Garuda. </em>."
 Now "Garuda" is the manvantaric <em>cycle</em>,<em>
 </em>as will be shown in its place. Vishnu, therefore, is the
 deity <em>in space and time</em>;<em> </em>the peculiar God of
 the Vaishnavas (a <em>tribal </em>or<em> racial God</em>,<em>
 </em>as they are called in esoteric philosophy): <em>i.e.</em>,
 one of the many Dhyanis or Gods, or Elohim, one of whom was generally
 chosen for some special reasons by a nation or a tribe, and thus
 became gradually a "God <em>above all</em> Gods" (2
 Chronicles ii. 5,) the "highest God" as Jehovah, Osiris,
 Bel, or any other of the <em>Seven </em>Regents.
 </p><p>
 "The tree is known by its fruit," -- the nature of a
 God by his actions. The latter, we have either to judge by the
 dead-letter narratives, or to accept allegorically. If we compare
 the two -- Vishnu, as the defender and champion of the defeated
 gods; and Jehovah, the defender and champion of the "chosen"
 people, so called by antiphrasis, no doubt, as it is the Jews
 who had <em>chosen </em>that "jealous" God -- we shall
 find that both use deceit and cunning. They do so on the principle
 of "the end justifying the means," in order to have
 the best of their
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This ignorance is truly and beautifully expressed in the praise
 of the Yogins to Brahma, "the upholder of the earth"
 (in Book I., chap. iv. of V. P.), when they say, "Those who
 have not practised devotion conceive erroneously of the nature
 of the world. The ignorant who do not perceive that this Universe
 is of the nature of wisdom, and judge of it as an object of perception
 only, are lost in the ocean of spiritual ignorance. But they who
 know true wisdom, and whose minds are pure, behold this whole
 world <em>as one with divine knowledge</em>,<em> </em>as one with
 thee, O God! Be favourable, O universal Spirit!"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 422 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 respective opponents and foes -- the demons. Thus while (according
 to the Kabalists) Jehovah assumes the shape of the tempting Serpent
 in the Garden of Eden; sends Satan with a special mission to tempt
 Job; and harasses and wearies Pharaoh with Sarai, Abraham's wife,
 and "<em>hardens</em>"<em> </em>his heart against Moses,
 lest there should be no opportunity for<em> plaguing </em>his
 victims "with great plagues" (<em>Genesis</em> xii.,
 <em>Exodus</em>) --<em> </em>Vishnu is made in <em>his </em>Purana
 to resort to a trick no less unworthy of any respectable god.
 </p><blockquote>
 "Have compassion upon us, O Lord, and protect us, who have
 come to thee for succour from the Daityas (demons)!" pray
 the defeated Gods. "They have seized upon the three worlds,
 and appropriated the offerings which are our portion, <i>taking
 care not to transgress the Precepts of the Veda. </i>Although
 <i>we</i>,<i> as well as they</i>,<i> are parts of thee.* </i>.
 . . . engaged as they are in the paths prescribed by the holy
 writ . . . . it is impossible for us to destroy them. Do thou,
 whose wisdom is immeasurable (<i>Ameyatman</i>) instruct us <i>in
 some </i>device by which we may be able to exterminate the enemies
 of the gods!"
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "When the mighty Vishnu heard their request, he emitted from
 his body an <i>illusory </i>form<i> </i>(<i>Mayamoha</i>,<i> </i>"the
 deluder by illusion") which he gave to the Gods and thus
 spake: "This <i>Mayamoha </i>shall<i> wholly beguile the
 Daityas</i>,<i> </i>so<i> </i>that being led astray from the path
 of the Vedas, they may be put to death. . . . Go then and fear
 not. Let this delusive vision precede you. It shall this day be
 of great service unto you, O Gods!"
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "After this, the great Delusion, <i>Mayamoha</i>,<i> </i>descending
 to earth, beheld the Daityas engaged in ascetic penances, and
 approaching them, in the semblance of a <i>Digambara </i>(naked
 mendicant) with his head shaven . . . he thus addressed them,
 in gentle accents: "Ho, lords of the Daitya race, wherefore
 is it that you practise these acts of penances?" etc., etc.
 (Book II., xviii.).
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Finally the Daityas were seduced by the wily talk of <em>Mahamoha</em>,<em>
 </em>as<em> </em>Eve was seduced by the advice of the Serpent.
 They became apostates to the Vedas. As Dr. Muir translates the
 passage: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The great Deceiver, practising illusion, next beguiled other
 Daityas, by means of many other sorts of heresy. In a very short
 time, these Asuras (-Daityas) deluded by the Deceiver (who was
 Vishnu) abandoned the entire system founded on the ordinances
 of the triple Veda. Some reviled the Vedas, others the Gods, others
 the ceremonial of sacrifice, and others the Brahmans. This, they
 exclaimed, is a doctrine which will not bear discussion. The slaughter
 of animals in sacrifice is not conducive to religious merit. To
 say that oblations of butter consumed in the fire produce any
 future reward, is the assertion of a child. . . . If it be a fact
 that a beast slain in sacrifice is exalted to heaven, why does
 not the worshipper slaughter his own father? . . . . Infallible
 utterances do not, great Asuras, fall from the skies; it is only
 assertions founded on reasoning that are accepted by me and by
 other intelligent persons like yourselves! Thus by numerous methods
 the Daityas were unsettled by the great Deceiver (<i>Reason</i>).
 . . . When
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "There was a day when the <em>Sons of God </em>came before
 the Lord, and Satan came <em>with his brothers</em>,<em> </em>also
 before the Lord" (<em>Job </em>ii., Abyss., <em>Ethiopic
 </em>text). </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 423 THE DECEPTION, AN ALLEGORY.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 they had entered on the path of error, the gods mustered all their
 energies and approached to battle. Then followed a combat between
 the gods and the Asuras; and the latter, who had abandoned the
 right road, were smitten by the former. In previous times they
 had been defended by the armour of righteousness which they bore,
 but when that had been destroyed they, also, perished." (<i>Journal
 of the Royal Asiat. Society</i>,<i> </i>Vol. <b>XIX</b>., p. 302.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Whatever may be thought of Hindus, no enemy of theirs can regard
 them as fools. A people whose holy men and sages have left to
 the world the greatest and most sublime philosophies that ever
 emanated from the minds of men, must have known the difference
 between right and wrong. Even a savage can discern white from
 black, good from bad, and deceit from sincerity and truthfulness.
 Those who had narrated this event in the biography of their god,
 must have seen that in this case it was that God who was the arch-Deceiver,
 and the Daityas, who "never transgressed the precepts of
 the Vedas," who had the sunny side in the transaction, and
 who were the true "Gods." Thence there must have been,
 and <em>there is </em>a secret meaning hidden under this allegory.
 In no class of Society, in no nation, are deceit and craft considered
 as Divine virtues -- except perhaps in the clerical classes of
 theologians and modern Jesuitism.
 </p><p>
 The Vishnu Purana,* like all other works of this kind, has passed
 at a later period into the hands of the temple-Brahmins, and the
 old <b>MSS</b>. have, no doubt, been once more tampered with by
 sectarians. But there was a time when the Puranas were esoteric
 works, and so they are still for the Initiates who can read them
 with the key that is in their possession.
 </p><p>
 Whether the Brahmin Initiates will ever give out the full meaning
 of these allegories, is a question with which the writer is not
 concerned. The present object is to show that, while honouring
 the <em>creative Powers </em>in their multiple forms, no philosopher
 could, or ever has, accepted the allegory for the true Spirit,
 except, perhaps, some philosophers belonging to the present "superior
 and civilized" Christian races. For, as shown, Jehovah is
 not one whit the superior of Vishnu on the plane of ethics. This
 is why the Occultists and even some Kabalists, whether they regard
 or not those creative Forces <em>as living and conscious Entities
 </em>-- and one does not see why they should not be so accepted
 -- will never confuse the <strong>C</strong>AUSE with the effect,
 and accept the Spirit of the Earth for Parabrahm or Ain-Soph.
 At all events they know well the true nature of what was called
 Father-AEther by the Greeks, Jupiter-Titan, etc., etc. They know
 that the soul of the <strong>A</strong>STRAL <strong>L</strong>IGHT
 is divine, and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Wilson's opinion that the "Vishnu Purana" is a production
 <em>of our era</em>,<em> </em>and that in its present form it
 is not earlier than between the VIIIth and the XVIIth (!!) century,
 is absurd beyond noticing.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 424 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 its body (the light-waves on the lower planes) infernal. This
 Light is symbolized by the "Magic Head" in the <em>Zohar</em>,<em>
 </em>the double Face on the double Pyramid: the black pyramid
 rising against a pure white ground, with <em>a white head and
 face within its black triangle; </em>the white pyramid, inverted
 -- the reflection of the first in the dark waters, showing the
 <em>black reflection of the white face</em>. . . . .
 </p><p>
 This is the "Astral Light," or <strong>D</strong>EMON
 EST <strong>D</strong>EUS <strong>I</strong>NVERSUS.
 </p><p>
 --------------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-2-12.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>