<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 506 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h3>ยง XIX.</h3>
 
 <h4>IS PLEROMA SATAN'S LAIR?</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE subject is not yet exhausted, and has to
 be examined from still other aspects.
 </p><p>
 Whether Milton's grandiose description of the three Days' Battle
 of the Angels of Light against those of Darkness justifies the
 suspicion that he must have heard of the corresponding Eastern
 tradition -- it is impossible to say. Nevertheless, if not himself
 in connection with some Mystic, then it must have been through
 some one who had obtained access to the secret works of the Vatican.
 Among these there is a tradition of the "Beni Shamash"
 -- the "children of the Sun" -- concerning the Eastern
 allegory, with far more minute details <em>in its triple</em>
 <em>version, </em>than one can get either from the <em>Book of
 Enoch, </em>or the far more recent Revelation of St. John about
 the "Old Dragon" and his various Slayers, as just shown.
 </p><p>
 It seems inexplicable to find, to this day, authors belonging
 to Mystical Societies who yet continue in their preconceived doubts
 as to the "alleged" antiquity of the "Book of Enoch."
 Thus, while the author of the "Sacred Mysteries among the
 Mayas and Quiches" is inclined to see in Enoch an Initiate
 converted to Christianity (! !) (<em>vide </em>p. 16), the English
 compiler of Eliphas Levi's works -- "The Mysteries of Magic"
 -- is also of a like opinion. He remarks that: "Outside the
 erudition of Dr. Kenealy, no modern scholarship attributes any
 more remote antiquity to the latter work (the 'Book of Enoch')
 than the fourth century <strong>B.C</strong>." (<em>Biograph.
 and Critical Essay, p. xxxviii.</em>)<em>. </em>Modern scholarship
 has been guilty of worse errors than this one. It seems but yesterday
 that the <em>greatest </em>literary critics in Europe denied the
 very authenticity of that work, together with the Orphic Hymns,
 and even the<em> Book of Hermes</em> or<em> Thot, </em>until whole
 verses from the latter were discovered on Egyptian monuments and
 tombs of the earliest dynasties. The opinion of Archbishop Laurence
 is quoted elsewhere.
 </p><p>
 The "Old Dragon" and Satan, now become singly and collectively
 the symbol of, and the theological term for, the "Fallen
 Angel," is not so described either in <em>the original Kabala
 </em>(the Chaldean "Book of Numbers") or in the modern.
 For the most learned, if not the greatest of modern Kabalists,
 namely Eliphas Levi, describes Satan in the following glowing
 terms: -- "It is that Angel who was proud enough to believe
 himself God; brave enough to buy his independence at the price
 of eternal suffering and torture; beautiful enough to have adored
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 507 THE LIVING DEVILS. </h6>
 
 <p>
 himself in full divine light; strong enough to reign in darkness
 amidst agony, and to have built himself a throne on his inextinguishable
 pyre. It is the Satan of the Republican and heretical Milton.
 . . . . the prince of anarchy, served by a hierarchy of pure Spirits
 (! ! ) . . . . "(<em>Histoire de la Magie, </em>16-17) This
 description -- one which reconciles so cunningly theological dogma
 and the Kabalistic allegory, and even contrives to include a political
 compliment in its phraseology -- is, when read in the right spirit,
 quite correct.
 </p><p>
 Yes, indeed; it is this grandest of ideals, this ever-living symbol
 -- nay apotheosis -- of self-sacrifice for the intellectual independence
 of humanity; this ever active Energy protesting against Static
 Inertia -- the principle to which Self-assertion is a crime, and
 Thought and the <em>Light of Knowledge </em>odious. It is -- as
 Eliphas says with unparalleled justice and irony -- "this
 pretended hero of tenebrous eternities, who, slanderously charged
 with ugliness, is decorated with horns and claws, which would
 fit far better his implacable tormentor -- it is he who has been
 finally transformed into a serpent -- the red Dragon." But
 Eliphas Levi was yet too subservient to his Roman Catholic authorities;
 one may add, too jesuitical, to confess that this devil was mankind,
 and never had any existence on earth outside of that mankind.*
 </p><p>
 In this, Christian theology, although following slavishly in the
 steps of Paganism, was only true to its own time-honoured policy.
 It had to isolate itself, and to assert its authority. Hence it
 could not do better than turn every pagan deity into a devil.
 Every bright sun-god of antiquity -- a glorious deity by day,
 and its own opponent and adversary by night, named the Dragon
 of Wisdom, because it was supposed to contain the germs of night
 and day -- has now been turned into the antithetical shadow of
 God, and has become <em>Satan </em>on the sole and unsupported
 authority of despotic human dogma. After which all these producers
 of light and shadow, all the Sun and the Moon Gods, were cursed,
 and thus the one God chosen out of the many, and Satan, were both
 anthropomorphised. But theology seems to have lost sight of the
 human capacity for discriminating and finally analysing all that
 is artificially forced upon its reverence. History shows in every
 race and even tribe, especially in the Semitic nations, the natural
 impulse to exalt its own tribal deity above all others to the
 hegemony
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * What <em>devil</em> could be possessed of more cunning, craft
 and cruelty than the "Whitechapel murderer" "Jack
 the Ripper" of 1888, whose unparalleled blood-thirsty and
 cool wickedness led him to slaughter and mutilate in cold blood
 seven unfortunate and <em>otherwise </em>innocent women! One has
 but to read the daily papers to find in those wife and child-beating,
 drunken brutes (husbands and fathers!), a <em>small</em> percentage
 of whom is daily brought before the courts, the complete personifications
 of the devils of Christian Hell!</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 508 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of the gods; and proves that the God of the Israelites was such
 a <em>tribal</em> <em>God, </em>and no more, even though the Christian
 Church, following the lead of the "chosen" people, is
 pleased to enforce the worship of that one particular deity, and
 to anathematize all the others. Whether originally a conscious
 or an unconscious blunder, nevertheless, it <em>was</em> one.
 Jehovah has ever been in antiquity only "a god <em>among
 </em>other<em> Gods,</em>" (lxxxii. <em>Psalm). </em>The<em>
 Lord </em>appears to Abraham, and while saying, "I am the<em>
 Almighty God,</em>" yet adds, "I will establish my covenant
 to be a God unto thee" (Abraham), and unto his <em>seed after
 him (Gen. </em>xvii. 7) -- not unto Aryan Europeans.
 </p><p>
 But then, there was the grandiose and ideal figure of Jesus of
 Nazareth to be set off against a dark background, to gain in radiance
 by the contrast; <em>and a darker one the Church could hardly
 invent. </em>Lacking the Old Testament symbology, ignorant of
 the real connotation of the name of Jehovah -- the rabbinical
 secret substitute for the ineffable and unpronounceable name --
 the Church mistook the cunningly fabricated shadow for the reality,
 the anthropomorphized <em>generative</em> symbol for the one Secondless
 Reality, the ever unknowable cause of all. As a logical sequence
 the Church, for purposes of duality, had to invent an anthropomorphic
 Devil -- created, as taught by her, by God himself. Satan has
 now turned out to be the monster fabricated by the "Jehovah-Frankenstein,"
 -- his father's curse and a thorn in the divine side -- a monster,
 than whom no earthly Frankenstein could have fabricated a more
 ridiculous bogey.
 </p><p>
 The author of "New Aspects of Life" describes the Jewish
 God very correctly from the Kabalistic stand-point as "the
 Spirit of the Earth, which had revealed itself to the Jew as Jehovah"
 (<em>p</em>. 209). "It was that Spirit again who, after the
 death of Jesus, assumed his form and personated him as the risen
 Christ" -- the doctrine of Cerinthius and several Gnostic
 sects with slight variation, as one can see. But the author's
 explanations and deductions are remarkable: "None knew .
 . . better than Moses . . . and so well as he how great was the
 power of those (gods of Egypt) with whose priests he had contended,"
 he says . . . "the gods of which Jehovah is claimed to be
 the God" (by the Jews only). "What were these gods,
 these <em>Achar </em>of which Jehovah, the<em> Achad, </em>is
 claimed to be the God . . . by overcoming them?" the author
 asks; to which our Occultism answers: "those whom the Church
 now calls the <em>Fallen Angels </em>and collectively <em>Satan,</em>
 the<em> Dragon, </em>overcome, if we have to accept <em>her</em>
 dictum, by Michael and the Host, that Michael being simply Jehovah
 himself, one of the subordinate Spirits at best." Therefore,
 the author is again right in saying: "The Greeks believed
 in the existence of . . . <em>daimons. </em>But . . . they were
 anticipated by the Hebrews, who held <em>that</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 509 JEHOVAH, A PERSONATING SPIRIT. </h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>there was a class of personating spirits </em>which they designated
 <em>demons,</em> 'personators.' Admitting with Jehovah, who expressly
 asserts it, the existence of other gods, which were personators
 of the One God, were these other gods simply a higher class of
 personating spirits, which had acquired and exercised greater
 powers? And is not personation <em>the Key</em> <em>to the mystery
 of the Spirit state? </em>But once granting this position, <em>how
 are we to know that Jehovah was not a personating Spirit, </em>a
 Spirit which arrogated to itself that it was, and thus became,
 the personator of the one unknown and unknowable God? Nay, how
 do we know that the Spirit calling itself Jehovah, in arrogating
 to itself his attributes did not thus cause its own designation
 to be imputed to the One who is in reality as nameless as incognizable?"
 (<em>pp</em>. 144-145.)
 </p><p>
 Then the author shows "that the Spirit Jehovah <em>is </em>a
 personator" on its own admission. It acknowledged to Moses
 "that it had appeared to the patriarchs as <em>the God Shaddai"</em>
 . . . . and "the <em>god Helion</em>"<em> . . . . </em>With
 the same breath it assumed the name of Jehovah; and it is on the
 faith of the assertion of this personator that the names <em>El,
 Eloah,</em> <em>Elohim,</em> and<em> Shaddai, </em>have been read
 and interpreted in juxtaposition with Jehovah as "the Lord
 God Almighty." Then when the name Jehovah became ineffable
 . . . . the designation <em>Adonai, </em>"Lord" was
 substituted for it, and" . . . . it was owing to this substitution
 that the 'Lord' passed from the Jewish to the Christian 'Word'
 and 'World' as a designation of God" (<em>p</em>. 146). And
 how are we to know, the author may add, that Jehovah was not many
 spirits personating even that seemingly one -- <em>Jod</em> or
 Jod-He?
 </p><p>
 But if the Christian Church was the first to make the existence
 of Satan a dogma, it was because, as shown in <em>Isis, </em>the
 Devil -- the powerful <em>enemy of God </em>(?<em> </em>! !) had
 to become the corner stone of the pillar of the Church. For, as
 a Theosophist, M. Jules Baissac, truly observes in his <em>"Satan
 ou le Diable"</em><i> </i>(<em>p. </em>9): "Il fallait
 eviter de paraitre autoriser le dogme du double principe en faisant
 de ce Satan createur une puissance reelle, et pour expliquer le
 mal originel, on profere contre Manes l'hypothese d'une permission
 de l'unique tout Puissant."* The choice and policy were unfortunate,
 anyhow. Either the personator of the lower god of Abraham and
 Jacob ought to have been made entirely distinct from the mystic
 "Father" of Jesus, or -- the "Fallen" Angels
 should have been left unslandered by further fictions.
 </p><p>
 Every god of the Gentiles is connected with, and closely related
 to,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * After the polymorphic Pantheism of some Gnostics came the esoteric
 <em>dualism</em> of Manes, who was accused of personifying <em>Evil</em>
 and creating of the Devil a God -- rival of God himself. We do
 not see that the Christian Church has so much improved on that
 exoteric idea of the Manicheans, for she calls God her King of
 Light, and Satan, the King of Darkness, to this day.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 510 THE SECRET DOCTRINE </h6>
 
 <p>
 Jehovah -- the <em>Elohim</em>; for they are all One <em>Host</em>,
 whose units differ only in name in the esoteric teachings. Between
 the "Obedient" and the "Fallen" Angels there
 is no difference whatever, except in their respective functions,
 or rather in the inertia of some, and the activity of others among
 those "Dhyan Chohans" or <em>Elohim</em> who were "<em>commissioned
 to create</em>," <em>i.e</em>., to fabricate the manifested
 world out of the eternal material.
 </p><p>
 The Kabbalists say that the true name of Satan is that of Jehovah
 placed upside down, for "Satan is not a black god but the
 negation of the white deity," or the <em>light of Truth</em>.
 God is light and Satan is the necessary darkness or <em>shadow</em>
 to set it off, without which pure light would be invisible and
 incomprehensible.* "For the initiates," says Eliphas
 Levi, "the devil is not a person but a creative Force, for
 Good as for Evil." They (the Initiates) represented this
 Force, which presides at physical generation, under the mysterious
 form of God <em>Pan</em> -- or Nature: whence the horns and hoofs
 of that mythical and symbolic figure, as also the Christian "goat
 of the Witches' Sabbath." With regard to this too, Christians
 have imprudently forgotten that the goat was also the victim selected
 for the atonement of all the sins of Israel, that the <em>scape-goat</em>
 was indeed the sacrificial martyr, the symbol of the greatest
 mystery on earth -- the <em>Fall</em> into generation. Only the
 Jews have long forgotten the real meaning of their (to the non-initiated)
 ridiculous hero, selected from the drama of life in the great
 mysteries enacted by them in the desert; and the Christians never
 knew it.
 </p><p>
 Eliphas Levi seeks to explain the dogma of his Church by paradoxes
 and metaphors, but succeeds very poorly in the face of the many
 volumes written by pious Roman Catholic demonologists under the
 approbation and auspices of Rome, in this nineteenth century of
 ours. For the true Roman Catholic, the devil or Satan is <em>a
 reality</em>; the drama enacted in the sidereal light according
 to the seer of Patmos -- who desired, perhaps, to improve upon
 the narrative in the "Book of Enoch" -- is as real,
 and as historical a fact as any other allegory and symbolical
 event in the Bible. But the Initiates give an explanation
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * To quote in this relation Mr. Laing in his admirable work "Modern
 Science and Modern Thought" (<em>p</em>. 222, 3<em>rd Ed.</em>):
 "From this dilemma (existence of evil in the world) there
 is no escape, unless we give up altogether the idea of an anthropomorphic
 deity, and adopt frankly the Scientific idea of a First Cause,
 inscrutable and past finding out; and of a universe whose laws
 we can trace, but of whose real essence we know nothing, <em>and
 can only suspect, or faintly discern a fundamental law which may
 make the polarity of good and evil a necessary condition of existence</em>."
 Were Science to know "the real essence," instead of
 knowing nothing of it, the faint suspicion would turn into the
 certitude of the existence of <em>such a law</em>, and the knowledge
 that this law is connected with Karma.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 511 AKASA, THE "MYSTERIUM MAGNUM."
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 which differs from that given by Eliphas Levi, whose genius and
 crafty intellect had to submit to a certain compromise dictated
 to him from Rome.
 </p><p>
 Thus, the true and <em>uncompromising </em>Kabalists admit that,
 for all purposes of Science and philosophy, it is enough that
 the profane should know that the great magic agent called by the
 followers of the Marquis de St. Martin -- the Martinists -- astral
 light, by the mediaeval Kabalists and Alchemists the Sidereal
 Virgin and the <em>Mysterium Magnum, </em>and by the Eastern Occultists
 AEther, the reflection of <em>Akasa -- </em>is that which the
 Church calls <em>Lucifer. </em>That the Latin scholastics have
 succeeded in transforming the universal soul and Pleroma, the
 <em>vehicle of Light </em>and the receptacle of all the forms,
 a force spread throughout the whole Universe, with its direct
 and indirect effects, into Satan and his works, is no news to
 any one. But now they are prepared to give out to the above-mentioned
 profane even the secrets hinted at by Eliphas Levi without <em>adequate</em>
 <em>explanation; </em>for the latter's policy of veiled revelations
 could only lead to further superstition and misunderstanding.
 What, indeed, can a student of Occultism, a <em>beginner, </em>gather
 from the following highly poetical sentences of Eliphas Levi,
 as apocalyptic as the writings of any of the Alchemists?
 </p><blockquote>
 <em>"Lucifer, </em>the Astral Light . . . . is an intermediate
 force existing in all creation, it serves to create and to destroy,
 and the Fall of Adam was an erotic intoxication which has rendered
 his generation a slave to this fatal light . . . every sexual
 passion that overpowers our senses is a whirlwind of that light
 which seeks to drag us towards the abyss of death, Folly. Hallucinations,
 visions, ecstasies are all forms of a very dangerous excitation
 due to this <em>interior</em> <em>phosphorus </em>(?)<em>. </em>Thus
 light, finally, is of the nature of fire, the intelligent use
 of which warms and vivifies, and the excess of which, on the contrary,
 dissolves and annihilates. Thus man is called upon to assume a
 sovereign empire over that (astral) light and conquer thereby
 his immortality, and is threatened at the same time with being
 intoxicated, absorbed, and eternally destroyed by it. This light,
 therefore, inasmuch as it is devouring, revengeful, and fatal,
 would thus really be hell-fire, the serpent of the legend; the
 tormented errors of which it is full, the tears and the gnashing
 of teeth of the abortive beings it devours, the phantom of life
 that escapes them, and seems to mock and insult their agony, all
 this would be the devil or Satan indeed." (<em>Histoire de
 la Magie, p. </em>197).
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 There is no <em>wrong </em>statement in all this; nothing save
 a superabundance of ill-applied metaphors, as in the application
 of Adam -- a <em>myth</em> -- to the illustration of the astral
 effects. <em>Akasa -- </em>the astral light* -- can be defined
 in a few words; it is the universal Soul, the Matrix of the Universe,
 the "Mysterium Magnum" from which all that exists is
 born by separation or <em>differentiation. </em>It<em> </em>is
 the cause of existence; it
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>*Akasa </em>is<em> not </em>the Ether of Science, as some
 Orientalists translate it.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 512 THE SECRET DOCTRINE</h6>
 
 <p>
 fills all the infinite Space; <em>is Space itself</em>, in one
 sense, or both its <em>Sixth</em> and Seventh principles.* But
 as the finite in the Infinite, as regards manifestation, this
 light must have its shadowy side -- as already remarked. And as
 the infinite can never be manifested, hence the finite world has
 to be satisfied with the <em>shadow alone</em>, which its actions
 draw upon humanity and which men attract <em>and force to activity</em>.
 Hence, while it is the <em>universal Cause</em> in its unmanifested
 unity and infinity, the Astral light becomes, with regard to Mankind,
 simply the effects of the causes produced by men in their sinful
 lives. It is not its bright denizens --- whether they are called
 Spirits of Light or Darkness -- that produce Good or Evil, but
 mankind itself that determines the unavoidable action and reaction
 in the great magic agent. It is mankind which has become the "Serpent
 of Genesis," and thus causes daily and hourly the Fall and
 sin of the "Celestial Virgin" -- which thus becomes
 the Mother of gods and devils at one and the same time; for she
 is the ever-loving, beneficent deity to all those who stir her
 <em>Soul and heart</em>, instead of attracting to themselves her
 shadowy manifested essence, called by Eliphas Levi -- "the
 fatal light" which kills and destroys. Humanity, in its units,
 can overpower and master its effects; but only by the holiness
 of their lives and by producing good causes. It has power only
 on the manifested <em>lower</em> principles -- the shadow of the
 Unknown and Incognizable Deity in Space. But in antiquity and
 <em>reality</em>, Lucifer, or <em>Luciferus</em>, is the name
 of the angelic Entity presiding over the <em>light of truth</em>
 as over the light of the day. In the great Valentinian gospel
 <em>Pistis Sophia</em> (ยง 361) it is taught that of the three
 Powers emanating from the Holy names of the Three [[<em>Tridunameis</em>]],
 that of Sophia (the Holy Ghost according to these gnostics --
 the most cultured of all), resides in the planet Venus or Lucifer.
 </p><p>
 Thus to the profane, the Astral Light may be God and Devil at
 once --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Says Johannes Tritheim, the Abbot of Spanheim, the greatest
 astrologer and Kabalist of his day: -- "The art of divine
 magic consists in the ability to perceive the essence of things
 in the light of nature (astral light), and by using the soul-powers
 of the spirit to produce material things from the unseen universe,
 and in such operations the Above and the Below must be brought
 together and made to act harmoniously. The spirit of Nature (astral
 light) is a unity, creating and forming everything, and acting
 through the instrumentality of man it may produce wonderful things.
 Such are accomplished, if you learn to know yourself. You will
 know it by the power of the spirit that is in yourself, and accomplish
 it by mixing your spirit with the essence that comes out of yourself.
 If you wish to succeed in such a work you must know how to separate
 Spirit and Life in Nature, and, moreover, to separate the astral
 soul in yourself and to make it tangible, and then the substance
 of the soul will appear visibly and tangibly rendered objective
 by the power of the spirit." -- (Quoted in Dr. Hartman's
 "Paracelsus.")</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 513 MIND, THE QUICKENING SPIRIT. </h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>Demon est Deus inversus: </em>that is to say, through every
 point of Infinite Space thrill the magnetic and electrical currents
 of <em>animate Nature, </em>the life-giving and death-giving waves,
 for death on earth becomes life on another plane. <em>Lucifer
 </em>is divine and terrestrial light, the "Holy Ghost"
 and "Satan," at one and the same time, <em>visible </em>Space
 being truly filled with the differentiated Breath invisibly; and
 the Astral Light, the manifested effects of the two who are one,
 guided and attracted by ourselves, is the <em>Karma </em>of humanity,
 both a personal and impersonal entity: personal, because it is
 the mystic name given by St. Martin to the Host of divine Creators,
 guides and rulers of this planet; <em>impersonal,</em> as the
 Cause and effect of universal Life and Death.
 </p><p>
 The <em>Fall </em>was the <em>result of man's knowledge, </em>for
 his "eyes were opened." Indeed, he was taught Wisdom
 and the hidden knowledge by the "Fallen Angel," for
 the latter had become from that day his <em>Manas, </em>Mind and
 Self-consciousness. In each of us that golden thread of continuous
 life -- periodically broken into active and passive cycles of
 sensuous existence on Earth, and super-sensuous in Devachan --
 <em>is</em> from the beginning of our appearance upon this earth.
 It is the <em>Sutratma,</em> the luminous thread of immortal <em>impersonal
 </em>monadship, on which our earthly lives or evanescent <em>Egos
 </em>are strung as so many beads -- according to the beautiful
 expression of Vedantic philosophy.
 </p><p>
 And now it stands proven that Satan, or the Red <em>Fiery </em>Dragon,
 the "Lord of Phosphorus" (brimstone was a theological
 improvement), and <em>Lucifer, </em>or "Light-Bearer,"
 is in us: it is our <em>Mind -- </em>our tempter and Redeemer,
 our intelligent liberator and Saviour from pure animalism. Without
 this principle -- the emanation of the very essence of the pure
 divine principle <em>Mahat </em>(Intelligence), which radiates
 direct from the <em>Divine</em> <em>mind </em>-- we would be surely
 no better than animals. The first man Adam was made only a <em>living
 soul </em>(nephesh), the last Adam was made a <em>quickening Spirit*:
 </em>--<em> </em>says Paul, his words referring to the building
 or <em>Creation </em>of man. Without this <em>quickening</em>
 spirit, or <em>human Mind </em>or soul, there would be no difference
 between man and beast; as there is none, in fact, between animals
 with respect to their actions. The tiger and the donkey, the hawk
 and the dove, are each one as pure and as innocent as the other,
 because <em>irresponsible. </em>Each follows its instinct, the
 tiger and the hawk killing with the same unconcern as the donkey
 eats a thistle, or the dove pecks at a grain of corn. If the Fall
 had the significance given to it by theology; if that
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The real original text of I Corinthians, rendered Kabalistically
 and esoterically would read (<em>in Chap.</em> xv<em>., verses
 </em>44 <em>and</em> 45): "It is sown a <em>soul body </em>(not
 'natural' body), it is raised a <em>spirit </em>body." St.
 Paul was an Initiate, and his words have quite a different meaning
 when read esoterically. The body "is sown in <em>weakness
 </em>(passivity); it is raised in power" (43) -- or in spirituality
 and intellect. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 514 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 fall occurred as a result of an act never intended by nature,
 -- a<em> sin,</em> how about the animals? If we are told that
 they procreate their species in consequence of that same "original
 sin," for which God cursed the earth -- hence everything
 living on it -- we will put another question. We are told by theology,
 as by Science, that the animal was on earth far earlier than man?
 We ask the former: How did it <em>procreate its species, </em>before
 the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, of the Good and the Evil,
 had been plucked off? As said: "The Christians -- far less
 clear-sighted than the great Mystic and Liberator whose name they
 have assumed, whose doctrines they have misunderstood and travestied,
 <em>and whose memory they have blackened by their deeds -- </em>took
 the Jewish Jehovah as he was, and of course strove vainly to reconcile
 the <em>Gospel of Light and Liberty </em>with the Deity of Darkness
 and Submission." (<em>"War in Heaven."</em>)<em>*</em>
 
 </p><p>
 But, it is sufficiently proven now that all the <em>soi-disant
 </em>evil Spirits who are credited with having made war on the
 gods, are identical as personalities; moreover, that all the ancient
 religions taught the same tenet save the final conclusion, which
 latter differs from the Christian. The seven primeval gods had
 all a dual state, one essential, the other accidental. In their
 essential state they were all the "Builders" or <em>Fashioners,
 </em>the Preservers and the rulers of this world, and in the accidental
 state, clothing themselves in visible corporeality, they descended
 on the earth and reigned on it as Kings and Instructors of the
 lower Hosts, who had incarnated once more upon it as men.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * By Godolphin Mitford, later in life, Murad Ali Bey. Born in
 India, the son of a Missionary, G. Mitford was converted to Islam,
 and died a Mahomedan in 1884. He was a most extraordinary Mystic,
 of a great learning and remarkable intelligence. But he left the
 Right Path and forthwith fell under Karmic retribution. As well
 shown by the author of the article quoted "The followers
 of the defeated Elohim, first massacred by the victorious Jews
 (the Jehovites), and then persuaded by the victorious Christians
 and Mohamedans, continued nevertheless. . . Some of these scattered
 sects have lost even the tradition of the true rationale of their
 belief -- to worship in secrecy and mystery the Principle of Fire,
 Light, and Liberty. Why do the Sabean Bedouins (avowedly Monotheists
 when dwelling in the Mohamedan cities) in the solitude of the
 desert night yet invoke the starry 'Host of Heaven'? Why do the
 Yezidis, the 'Devil Worshippers,' worship the 'Muluk-Taoos' --
 The 'Lord Peacock' -- the emblem of pride and of hundred-eyed
 intelligence (and of Initiation also), which was expelled from
 heaven with Satan, according to an old Oriental tradition? Why
 do the Gholaites and their kindred Mesopotamo-Iranian Mohamedan
 Sects believe in the 'Noor Illahee' -- the Light of the Elohim
 -- transmitted in <em>anastasis </em>through a hundred Prophet
 Leaders? It is because they have continued in ignorant superstition
 the traditional religion of the 'Light Deities whom Jahveh overthrew'
 (is <em>said </em>to have overthrown rather); for by overthrowing
 <em>them</em> he would have overthrown himself. The'Muluk-Taoos'
 -- is <em>Maluk </em>-- 'Ruler' as is shown in the foot-note.
 It is only a new form of Moloch, Melek, Molech, MaIayak, and <em>Malachim</em>"<em>
 -- </em>Messengers, Angels, etc.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 515 THE LOGOS AND SATAN ARE ONE. </h6>
 
 <p>
 Thus, esoteric philosophy shows that man is truly the manifested
 deity in both its aspects -- good and evil, but theology cannot
 admit this philosophical truth. Teaching the dogma of the Fallen
 Angels in its dead-letter meaning, and having made of Satan the
 corner-stone and pillar of the dogma of redemption -- to do so
 would be suicidal. Having once shown the rebellious angels <em>distinct
 from God and the Logos </em>in their personalities, the admission
 that the downfall of the <em>disobedient</em> Spirits meant simply
 their fall into generation and matter, would be equivalent to
 saying that God and Satan were identical. For since the <strong>L</strong>OGOS
 (or God) is the aggregate of that once divine Host accused of
 having fallen, it would follow that the Logos and Satan are one.
 </p><p>
 Yet such was the real philosophical view of the now disfigured
 tenet in antiquity. The <em>Verbum, </em>or the "Son,"
 was shown in a dual aspect by the Pagan Gnostics -- in fact, he
 was a <em>duality </em>in full <em>unity. </em>Hence, the endless
 and various national versions. The Greeks had Jupiter, the son
 of Chronos, the Father, who hurls him down into the depths of
 Kosmos. The Aryans had Brahma (in later theology) precipitated
 by Siva into the Abyss of Darkness, etc., etc. But the fall of
 all these Logoi and Demiurgi from their primitive exalted position,
 had in all cases one and the same esoteric signification in it;
 the <em>curse -- </em>in its philosophical meaning -- of being
 incarnated on this earth; an unavoidable rung on the ladder of
 cosmic evolution, a highly philosophical and fitting Karmic law,
 without which the presence of Evil on Earth would have to remain
 for ever a closed mystery to the understanding of true philosophy.
 To say, as the author of the<em> Esprits Tombes des Paiens </em>(p.
 347) does, that since "Christianity is made to rest on two
 pillars, that of evil ([[<i>ponerou</i>]]), and of good [[<i>Iagathou</i>]];
 on two forces, in short, [[<i>Iagathau kai kakai dunomeis</i>]]:
 hence, if we suppress the punishment of the <em>evil forces, </em>the
 protecting mission of the good Powers will have neither value
 nor sense" -- is to utter the most unphilosophical absurdity.
 If it fits in with, and explains Christian dogma, it obscures
 the facts and truths of the primitive wisdom of the ages. The
 cautious hints of Paul have all the true esoteric meaning, and
 it took centuries of scholastic casuistry to give them the present
 false colouring in their interpretation. The <em>verbum</em> and<em>
 Lucifer </em>are one in their dual aspect; and the "Prince
 of the Air" <em>(princeps aeris hujus) </em>is not the "God
 of <em>that</em> period," but an everlasting principle. If
 the latter was said to be ever <em>circling </em>around the world
 -- <em>qui circumambulat terram -- </em>the great Apostle referred
 simply to the never-ceasing cycles of human incarnations, in which
 evil will ever predominate unto the day when Humanity is redeemed
 by the true divine Enlightenment which gives the correct perception
 of things.
 </p><p>
 It is easy to disfigure vague expressions written in dead and
 long-</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 516 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 forgotten languages, and palm them off as truths and <em>revealed
 </em>facts on the ignorant masses. The identity of thought and
 meaning is the one thing that strikes the student in all the religions
 which mention the tradition of the fallen Spirits, and in those
 great religions there is not one that fails to mention and describe
 it in one or another form. Thus, Hoang-Ty, the great Spirit, sees
 his Sons, who had acquired <em>active</em> <em>wisdom, </em>falling<em>
 into the valley of Pain. </em>Their leader, the <strong>F</strong>LYING
 <strong>D</strong>RAGON, having drunk of the forbidden ambrosia,
 <em>fell to the Earth </em>with his Host (Kings). In the <em>Zend
 Avesta, </em>Angra Mainyu (Ahriman), surrounding himself with
 fire (the "Flames" -- <em>vide supra</em>)<em> </em>seeks
 to conquer the Heavens,* when Ahura Mazda, descending from the
 <em>solid</em> Heaven he inhabits, to the help of the Heavens
 <em>that revolve </em>(in<em> time</em> <em>and space, </em>the
 manifested worlds of cycles including those of incarnation), and
 the <em>Amshaspends, </em>"the seven bright Sravah,"
 accompanied by their stars, fight Ahriman, and the vanquished
 Devas fall to the Earth along with him. (<em>Acad. des Inscrip.,
 </em>Vol. xxxix., p. 690; see <em>Vendidad, </em>Farg. xix., iii.)
 In the Vendidad the Daevas are called "evil-doing,"
 and shown to rush away "into the depths of the world of hell,"
 or matter. (47.) This is an allegory showing the <em>Devas</em>
 <em>compelled to incarnate, </em>once that they have separated
 themselves from their parent essence, or, in other words, after
 the unit had become a multiple, after differentiation and manifestation.
 </p><p>
 Typhon the Egyptian, Python, the Titans, the Suras and the Asuras,
 all belong to the same legend of Spirits peopling the Earth. They
 are not "<em>demons</em> commissioned to create and organize
 this visible universe," but fashioners (the "architects")
 of the worlds, and the progenitors of man. They are the <em>Fallen
 </em>angels, metaphorically -- "the true mirrors of the Eternal
 Wisdom."
 </p><p>
 What is the absolute and complete truth as well as the esoteric
 meaning about this universal myth? The whole essence of truth
 <em>cannot</em> <em>be transmitted from mouth to ear. </em>Nor
 can any pen describe it, not even that of the recording Angel,
 unless man finds the answer in the sanctuary of his own heart,
 in the innermost depths of his divine intuitions. It is the great
 <strong>SEVENTH MYSTERY </strong>of Creation, the first and the
 last; and those who read St. John's Apocalypse may find its shadow
 lurking under the <em>seventh seal</em>. . . . It can be represented
 only in its apparent, objective form, like the eternal riddle
 of the Sphinx. If the latter threw herself into the sea and perished,
 it is not because OEdipus <em>had</em> unriddled the secret of
 the ages, but because, by anthropomorphizing the ever-spiritual
 and the subjective, he had
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * So does every Yogi and even Christian: one <em>must take the
 Kingdom of heaven by</em> <em>violence -- </em>we are taught.
 Why should such a desire make of any one a devil?</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 517 BARESMA, THE DIVINE TWIG. </h6>
 
 <p>
 dishonoured the great truth for ever. Therefore, we can give it
 only from its philosophical and intellectual planes, unlocked
 with three keys respectively -- for the last four keys of the
 seven that throw wide open the portals to the mysteries of Nature
 are in the hands of the highest Initiates, and cannot be divulged
 to the masses at large -- not in this, our century, at any rate.
 </p><p>
 The dead letter is everywhere the same. The dualism in the Mazdean
 religion, was born from exoteric interpretation. The holy "Airyaman,"
 "the bestower of weal," invoked in the prayer called
 Airyama-ishyo, is the divine aspect of Ahriman, "the deadly,
 the Dae of the Daevas" (Farg. xx., 43), and Angra Mainyu
 is the dark material aspect of the former. "Keep us from
 the Hater, O Mazda and Armaita Spenta" (Vendidad Sadah),
 has, as a prayer and invocation, an identical meaning with "Lead
 us not into temptation," and is addressed by man to the terrible
 <em>Spirit of duality </em>in man himself. For (Ahura) Mazda is
 the spiritual, divine, and purified man, and Armaita Spenta, the
 Spirit of the Earth or materiality, is the same as Ahriman or
 Angra Mainyu in one sense.
 </p><p>
 The whole of the Magian or Mazdean literature -- or what remains
 of it -- is magical, occult, hence allegorical and symbolical
 -- even its "mystery of the law" (see the Gatha in Yasna<strong>
 XLIV.</strong>). Now the Mobed and the Parsi keep their eye on
 the <em>Baresma </em>during the sacrifice, the divine twig off
 Ormazd's "tree" having been transformed into a bunch
 of metallic rods; and wonder why neither the Amesha-Spentas, nor
 "the high and beautiful golden Haomas, nor even their Vohu-Mano
 (good thoughts), nor their Rata (sacrificial offering),"
 help them much. Let them meditate on the "tree of Wisdom,"
 and study, assimilating one by one, the fruits thereof. The way
 to the tree of eternal life, the white Homa, the Gaokerena, is
 through one end of the earth to the other; and Haoma is in heaven
 as it is on earth. But to become once more a priest of it, and
 a <em>healer</em>, man must heal himself before he can heal others.
 </p><p>
 This proves once more that the so-called "myths," in
 order to be at least approximately dealt with in any degree of
 justice, have to be closely examined from all their aspects. In
 truth, every one of the <em>seven</em> <em>Keys </em>has to be
 used in its right place, and never mixed with the others, if we
 would unveil the entire cycle of mysteries. In our day of dreary
 soul-killing materialism, the ancient priest Initiates have become,
 in the opinion of our learned generations, the synonyms of clever
 impostors, kindling the fires of superstition in order to obtain
 an easier sway over the minds of men. This is an unfounded calumny,
 generated by scepticism and uncharitable thoughts. No one believed
 more in Gods -- or, we may call them, the Spiritual and now invisible
 Powers, or Spirits,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 518 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the <em>noumena </em>of the <em>phenomena </em>-- than they did;
 and they believed just <em>because they knew. </em>If, initiated
 into the Mysteries of Nature, they were forced to withhold their
 knowledge from the profane, who would have surely abused it, such
 secrecy was undeniably less dangerous than the policy of their
 usurpers and successors. The former taught only that which they
 well knew. The latter, <em>teaching what they do not know,</em>
 have invented, as a secure haven for their ignorance, a jealous
 and cruel Deity, who forbids man to pry into his mysteries under
 the penalty of damnation. As well they may, for <em>his </em>mysteries
 can at best be only hinted at in polite ears, never described.
 Turn to King's Gnostics, "Description of the Plates"
 (Plate H), and see for yourself what was the primitive Ark of
 the Covenant, according to the author, who says: "There is
 a Rabbinical tradition that the cherubin placed over it were represented
 as male and female, in the act of copulation, in order to express
 the grand doctrine of the Essence of <em>Form</em> and<em> Matter,
 </em>the two principles of all things. When the Chaldeans broke
 into the sanctuary and beheld this most astounding emblem, they
 naturally enough exclaimed, 'Is this your God, of whom you boast
 that He is such a lover of purity?' " (p. 441.)
 </p><p>
 King thinks that this tradition "savours too much of Alexandrian
 philosophy to demand any credit," to which we demur. The
 shape and form of the wings of the two cherubim standing on the
 right and left sides of the Ark, these wings meeting over the
 "Holy of Holies," are an <em>emblem</em> quite eloquent
 in itself, besides the "holy" <em>Jod</em> within the
 ark! The Mystery of Agathadaemon, whose legend states, "I
 am Chnumis, Sun of the Universe, 700," can alone solve the
 mystery of Jesus, the number of whose name is 888." It is
 not the key of St. Peter, or the Church dogma, but the <em>narthex
 </em>-- the wand of the candidate for initiation -- that has to
 be wrenched from the grasp of the long-silent Sphinx of the ages.
 Meanwhile ----
 </p><p>
 The augurs, who, upon meeting each other, have to thrust their
 tongues into their cheeks to suppress a fit of laughter, may be
 more numerous in our own age than they ever were in the day of
 Sylla.
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-2-07.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>