<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 316 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA XI.<br>
 THE CIVILIZATION AND DESTRUCTION OF THE<br>
 FOURTH AND FIFTH RACES. </h4>
 
 <p>
 -------
 </p><blockquote>
 §§ (43) The Lemuro-Atlanteans build cities and spread
 civilization. The incipient stage of anthropomorphism. (44) Their
 statues, witnesses to the size of the Lemuro-Atlanteans. (45)
 Lemuria destroyed by fire, Atlantis by water. The Flood. (46)
 The destruction of the fourth race and of the last antediluvian
 monster-animals.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 ---------------------
 </p><p>
 43. <strong>T</strong>HEY (<em>the Lemurians</em>) BUILT HUGE
 CITIES. <strong>O</strong>F RARE EARTHS AND METALS THEY BUILT.
 <strong>O</strong>UT OF THE FIRES (<em>lava</em>) VOMITED. <strong>O</strong>UT
 OF THE WHITE STONE OF THE MOUNTAINS (<em>marble</em>)<em> </em>AND
 THE BLACK STONE (<em>of the subterranean fires</em>) THEY CUT
 THEIR OWN IMAGES, IN THEIR SIZE AND LIKENESS, AND WORSHIPPED THEM
 (<em>a</em>).
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) As the History of the first two human races -- the
 last of the Lemurians and the first of the future Atlanteans --
 proceeds, we have at this point to blend the two, and speak of
 them for a time collectively.
 </p><p>
 Here reference is also made to the <em>divine</em> Dynasties,
 such as were claimed by the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Greeks, etc.,
 to have preceded their <em>human</em> kings; they are still believed
 in by the modern Hindus, and are enumerated in their sacred books.
 But of these we shall treat in their proper place. What remains
 to be shown is, that our modern geologists are now being driven
 into admitting the evident existence of submerged continents.
 But to confess their presence is not to accept that there were
 men on them during the early geological periods;* --
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This is the reason why, perhaps, even Easter Island with its
 wondrous gigantic statues -- a speaking witness to a submerged
 continent with a civilized mankind on it -- is hardly mentioned
 anywhere in the modern Encyclopaedias. Its mention is carefully
 avoided except in some books of Travels; modem science has an
 undeniable predilection for forcing upon the cultured public hypotheses,
 built on personal hobbies, as well-established evidence, for offering
 it <em>guesses </em>instead of Knowledge, and calling them "scientific
 conclusions." Its specialists will evolve a thousand and
 one contradictory speculations rather than confess an <em>awkward
 self-evident fact -</em>- pre-eminent among such specialists being
 Haeckel and his English admirers and co-thinkers. Yet "they
 are authorities" -- we are sternly reminded. What of that?
 The Pope of Rome is also an AUTHORITY and an infallible one --
 for <em>his</em> followers; whereas the remarkable fallibility
 of Scientific speculations is being proven periodically with every
 change of the moon.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 317 PRESENTMENTS OF TRUTHS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ay, men and civilized nations, not Palaeolithic savages only;
 who, under the guidance of their divine Rulers, built large cities,
 cultivated arts and sciences, and knew astronomy, architecture
 and mathematics to perfection. This primeval civilization did
 not, as one may think, immediately follow their physiological
 transformation. Between the final evolution and the first city
 built, many hundred thousands of years had passed. Yet, we find
 the Lemurians in their sixth sub-race building their first rock-cities
 out of stone and lava.* One of such great cities of primitive
 structure was built entirely of lava, some thirty miles west from
 where Easter Island now stretches its narrow piece of sterile
 ground, and was entirely destroyed by a series of volcanic eruptions.
 The oldest remains of Cyclopean buildings were all the handiwork
 of the Lemurians of the last sub-races; and an occultist shows,
 therefore, no wonder on learning that the stone relics found on
 the small piece of land called Easter Island by Captain Cook,
 are "very much like the walls of the Temple of Pachacamac
 or the Ruins of Tia-Huanuco in Peru," ("The Countries
 of the World," by Robert Brown, Vol. 4, p. 43); and that
 they are in the <strong>C</strong>YCLOPEAN STYLE. The first large
 cities, however, appeared on that region of the continent which
 is now known as the island of Madagascar. There were civilized
 people and savages in
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </p><p>
 * Our best modern novelists, who are neither Theosophists nor
 Spiritualists, begin to have, nevertheless, very psychological
 and suggestively Occult dreams: witness Mr. Louis Stephenson and
 his Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, than which no grander psychological
 essay on Occult lines exists. Has the rising novelist, Mr. Rider
 Haggard, also had a prophetic or rather a retrospective clairvoyant
 dream before he wrote "<strong>S</strong>HE"? His imperial
 Kor, the great city of the dead, whose surviving living men sailed
 northwards after the plague had killed almost a whole nation,
 seems to step out in its general outlines from the imperishable
 pages of the old archaic records. Ayesha suggests "that those
 men who sailed north may have been the fathers of the first Egyptians";
 and then seems to attempt a synopsis of certain letters of a <strong>M</strong>ASTER
 quoted in "Esoteric Buddhism." For, she says, "Time
 after time have nations, ay, and rich and strong nations, learned
 in the arts, been, and passed away, and been forgotten, so that
 no memory of them remains. This (the nation of Kor) is but one
 of several; for time eats up the work of man unless, indeed, he
 digs in caves like the people of Kor, and <em>then mayhap the
 sea swallows</em> t<em>hem, or the earthquake shakes them</em>
 <em>in</em>. . . . . Yet were not these people utterly destroyed,
 as I think. Some few remained in the other cities, for their cities
 were many. But the barbarians . . . came down upon them, and took
 their women to wife, and the race of the Amahagger that is now
 is a bastard brood of the mighty sons of Kor, and behold it dwelleth
 in the tombs with its fathers' bones. . ." (<em>pp.</em>
 180, 181.)
 </p><p>
 Here the clever novelist seems to repeat the history of all the
 now degraded and down-fallen races of humanity. The Geologists
 and Anthropologists would place at the head of humanity as descendants
 of <em>Homo primigenius, </em>the ape-man, of which "NO FOSSIL
 REMAINS ARE AS YET KNOWN TO US," but (which) "were PROBABLY
 akin to <em>the gorilla </em>and<em> orang of the present day</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Haeckel</em>)<em>. </em>In answer to whose "probably,"
 occultists point to another and a greater <em>probability -- </em>the
 one given in our text. (<em>See above.</em>) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 318 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 those days as there are now. Evolution achieved its work of perfection
 with the former, and Karma -- its work of destruction on the latter.
 The Australians and their like are the descendants of those, who,
 instead of vivifying the spark dropped into them by the "Flames,"
 extinguished it by long generations of bestiality.* The Aryan
 nations could trace their descent through the Atlanteans from
 the more spiritual races of the Lemurians, in whom the "Sons
 of Wisdom" had personally incarnated.**
 </p><p>
 It is with the advent of the divine Dynasties that the first civilizations
 were started. And while, in some regions of the Earth, a portion
 of mankind preferred leading a nomadic and patriarchal life, and
 in others savage man was hardly learning to build a fire and to
 protect himself against the Elements, his brothers -- more favoured
 than he by their <em>Karma, </em>and helped by the divine intelligence
 which informed them -- built cities, and cultivated arts and sciences.
 Nevertheless, and civilization notwithstand-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See Stanza II, <em>ante. </em>This would account for the great
 difference and variation between the intellectual capacities of
 races, nations, and individual men. While incarnating, and in
 other cases only informing the human vehicles evolved by the first
 brainless (<em>manasless</em>)<em> </em>race, the incarnating
 Powers and Principles had to make their choice between, and take
 into account, the past Karmas of the <em>Monads, </em>between
 which and their bodies they had to become the connecting link.
 Besides which, as correctly stated in "<em>Esoteric Buddhism</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>p. </em>30), "the fifth principle, or human (intellectual)
 soul, in the majority of mankind is not even yet fully developed."
 </p><p>
 ** It is said by Krishna, the <em>Logos </em>incarnate, in the
 <em>Bhagavat-gita, </em>"The seven great Rishis, the four
 preceding Manus, partaking of my nature, were born from my mind:
 from them sprang (emanated or was born) the human race and the
 world," (<em>Chap. X. Verse 6.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Here, by the seven great Rishis, the seven great <em>rupa</em>
 hierarchies or classes of Dhyan Chohans, are meant. Let us bear
 in mind that the <em>Saptarshi </em>(the seven Rishis) are the
 regents of the seven stars of the Great Bear, therefore, of the
 same nature as the angels of the planets, or the seven great Planetary
 Spirits. They were all reborn, all men on earth in various Kalpas
 and races. Moreover, "the four preceding Manus" are
 the four classes of the originally<em> arupa </em>gods -- the
 Kumaras, the Rudras, the Asuras, etc.: who are also said <em>to
 have incarnated. </em>They are not the Prajapatis, as the first
 are, but their informing principles -- some of which have incarnated
 in men, while others have made other men simply the vehicles of
 their reflections. As Krishna truly says --the same words being
 repeated later by another <em>vehicle</em> of the <strong>L</strong>OGOS
 -- "I am the same to all beings. . . . those who worship
 me (the 6th principle or the intellectual <em>divine</em> Soul,
 <em>Buddhi, </em>made conscious by its union with the higher faculties
 of <em>Manas</em>)<em> are in me, and I am</em> <em>in them.</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Ibid, </em>29.) The Logos, being no personality but
 the universal principle, is represented by all the divine Powers
 <em>born of its mind -</em>- the pure Flames, or, as they are
 called in Occultism, the "Intellectual Breaths" -- those
 angels who are said to <em>have made themselves independent, i.e.,
 </em>passed from the passive and quiescent, into the active state
 of Self-Consciousness. When this is recognised, the true meaning
 of Krishna becomes comprehensible. But see Mr. Subba Row's excellent
 lecture on the <em>Bhagavatgita,</em> ("<em>Theosophist,</em>"<em>
 April </em>1887, <em>p</em>. 444.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 319 DEGENERATION OF MANKIND.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ing, while their pastoral brethren enjoyed wondrous powers as
 their birthright, they, the builders, could now obtain theirs
 only gradually; even these being generally used for power over
 physical nature and selfish and unholy purposes. Civilization
 has ever developed the physical and the intellectual at the cost
 of the psychic and spiritual. The command and the guidance over
 his own psychic nature, which foolish men now associate with the
 supernatural, were with early Humanity innate and congenital,
 and came to man as naturally as walking and thinking. "There
 is no such thing as magic" philosophises "<strong>S</strong>HE,"
 the author forgetting that "magic" in her early day
 still meant the great SCIENCE of WIDOM, and that Ayesha could
 not possibly know anything of the modern perversion of thought
 -- "though there is such a thing as knowledge of the Secrets
 of Nature." (p. 152). But they have become "Secrets"
 only in our race, and were public property with the Third.
 </p><p>
 Gradually, mankind went down in stature, for, even before the
 real advent of the Fourth or Atlantean race, the majority of mankind
 had fallen into iniquity and sin, save the hierarchy of the "Elect,"
 the followers and disciples of the "Sons of Will and Yoga"
 -- called later the "Sons of the Fire Mist."
 </p><p>
 Then came the Atlanteans; the giants whose physical beauty and
 strength reached their climax, in accordance with evolutionary
 law, toward the middle period of their fourth sub-race. But, as
 said in the Commentary: --
 </p><p>
 <em>The last survivors of the fair child of the White Island </em>(the
 primitive Sveta-dwipa) <em>had perished ages before. Their </em>(Lemuria's)
 <em>elect, had taken shelter on the sacred Island </em>(now the
 "fabled" Shamballah, in the Gobi Desert), <em>while
 some of their accursed races, separating from the main stock,
 now lived in the jungles and underground </em>("cave-men"),
 <em>when the golden yellow race </em>(the Fourth) <em>became in
 its turn </em>"<em>black with sin.</em>"<em> From pole
 to pole the Earth had changed her face for the third time, and
 was no longer inhabited by the Sons of Sveta-dwipa, the blessed,
 and Adbhitanya, east and west, the first, the one and the pure,
 had become corrupted</em>. . . . <em>The demi-gods of the Third
 had made room for the semi-demons of the Fourth Race. Sveta-dwipa,
 whose northern parts of the Toyambudhi the seven Kumaras </em>(<em>Sanaka,
 Sananda, Sanatana, Sanatkumara, Jata, Vodhu, and Panchasikha</em>)<em>
 had visited, agreeably with exoteric tradition </em>(See the Uttara
 Khanda of the Padma Purana; Asiat. Researches also, Vol. <strong>XI</strong>.,
 pp. 99, 100); <em>the White Island had veiled her face. Her children
 now lived on the Black land, wherein, later on, Daityas from the
 seventh Dwipa </em>(<em>Pushkara</em>)<em> and Rakshasas from
 the seventh</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 320 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>climate replaced the Saddhus and the ascetics of the Third
 age, who </em>"<em>had descended to them from other and higher
 regions.</em>" . . . .
 </p><p>
 It is evident that, taken in their dead letter, the Puranas read
 as an absurd tissue of fairy tales and no better. But if one reads
 chapters <strong>I.</strong>, <strong>II</strong>. and <strong>III</strong>.
 from Book II. (Vol. II.) of Vishnu Purana and accepts <em>verbatim
 </em>its geography, geodesy, and ethnology, in the matter of Priyavrata's
 seven sons, among whom the father divides the seven <em>Dwipas
 </em>(Continental Islands); and then proceeds to study how the
 eldest son, the King of <em>Jambu-dwipa, </em>Agnidhra, apportioned
 Jambu-dwipa among his nine sons; and then how Nabhi <em>his </em>son,
 who had a <em>hundred sons </em>and apportioned all these in his
 turn -- then the reader is likely to throw the book away and pronounce
 it a farrago of nonsense. But the esoteric student will understand
 that, in the days when the Puranas were written, the true meaning
 was clear only to the Initiated Brahmins, who wrote those works
 allegorically and would not give the <em>whole </em>truth to the
 masses. And he will explain to the Orientalists who, beginning
 with Colonel Wilford and ending with Professor Weber, made and
 still are making such a mess of it, that the first three chapters
 (<em>See Wilson</em>'<em>s trans. of Vishnu Purana Book II et
 seq.</em>)<em> </em>purposely confuse the following subjects and
 events: --
 </p><p>
 I. The series of Kalpas or Ages (also of Races) are never taken
 into account; <em>e.g</em>., events which have happened in one
 being allowed to stand along with those which took place in another.
 The chronological order is entirely ignored. This is shown by
 several of the Sanskrit commentators, who explain the incompatibility
 of events and calculations in saying -- "Whenever any contradictions
 in different Puranas are observed, they are ascribed . . . to
 differences of Kalpas and the <em>like</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Vishnu
 and Bhagavata Puranas</em>).
 </p><p>
 II. The several meanings of the words "Manvantara" and
 "Kalpa" or age, are withheld, and the general one only
 given.
 </p><p>
 III. In the genealogy and geography of the Kings and their <em>Varshas
 </em>(countries) and Dwipas, they are all allowed to be regarded
 as terrestrial regions.
 </p><p>
 Now, the truth is that, without entering into too minute details,
 it is easy and permissible to show that: --
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) The Seven <em>Dwipas </em>apportioned to Priyavrata's
 septenary progeny refer to several localities: first of all to
 our planetary chain. <em>Jambu-dwipa </em>alone representing our
 globe, the six others are the (to us) invisible companion globes
 of this earth. This is shown by the very nature of the allegorical
 and symbolic descriptions. <em>Jambu </em>(dwipa) "<em>is
 in the centre of all these </em>(the so-called insular continents)
 and is surrounded" by a <em>sea of salt water </em>(lavana),
 whereas Plaksha, Salmalia, </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 321 THE HINDU SYMBOLIZATION.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Kusa, Krauncha, Saka and Pushkara, are "surrounded severally
 -- by great seas of sugar-cane juice, of wine, of clarified butter,
 of curds, of milk," etc., etc., and such like metaphorical
 names. (<em>Chap. II, Book II</em>)<em> </em>This is shown furthermore
 by --
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) Bhaskara Acharya, who uses expressions from the <em>Secret
 Doctrine </em>and its books, in his description of the sidereal
 position of all these dwipas: -- "the sea of milk and the
 sea of curds" etc., meaning the Milky Way, and the various
 congeries of nebulae; the more so, since he names "the country
 to the south of the equator <em>Bhur-loka, </em>that to the north
 <em>Bhuva-loka, Swar, Mahar, Jana, Tapo</em> and<em> Satya lokas</em>";<em>
 and </em>says: "Those lokas are gradually attained by increasing
 religious merits," <em>i.e.</em>, they are various <em>paradises.
 </em>(<em>See Bibliotheca Indica. Trans. of the Goladhyaya of
 the Siddhanta-siromani III., </em>21-44).
 </p><p>
 (<em>c</em>) That this geographical division of seven allegorical
 continents, islands, mountains, seas and countries, does not belong
 only to <em>our </em>Round nor even to <em>our </em>races (the
 name of Bharata Varsha (India) notwithstanding), is explained
 in the texts themselves by the narrator of <em>Vishnu Purana.
 </em>For he closes the first chapter by saying: "Bharata
 (the son of <em>Nabhi, </em>who gave his name to Bharata-Varsha
 or India) consigned the Kingdom to his son Sumati . . . . and
 abandoned his life at Salagrama. He was afterwards born again
 as a religious Brahman, in a distinguished family of ascetics
 . . . . under these princes (Bharata's descendants) Bharata Varsha
 was divided into nine portions, and their descendants held successively
 possession of the country for seventy-one periods of the aggregate
 of the four ages," or the reign of a Manu, representing a
 Mahayuga of 4,320,000 years.
 </p><p>
 But having said so much, Parasara suddenly explains that "this
 was the creation of Swayambhuva Manu, by which the earth was peopled
 <em>when he presided over the first Manvantara, </em>in the Kalpa
 of Varaha," <em>i.e</em>., the <em>boar</em> incarnation,
 or <em>Avatar. </em>Now every Brahmin knows that <em>it is only
 with Vaivasvata Manu </em>that<em> our </em>Humanity began on
 this Earth (or <em>Round</em>)<em>. </em>And if the Western reader
 turns to the sub-section on "<em>The Primeval Manus of Humanity,</em>"<em>
 </em>he will see that Vaivasvata is the <em>seventh </em>of the
 fourteen Manus who preside over our planetary chain during its
 life cycle: <em>i.e.</em>, that representing or standing in every
 Round for two Manus of the same name (a <em>Root </em>and a <em>Seed
 </em>Manu), he is the Root Manu of the Fourth Round, hence the
 seventh. Wilson finds in this only "an incongruity"
 (see his <em>Vishnu Purana, </em>vol. II., p. 108, footnote),
 and speculates that "the patriarchial genealogies are older
 than the chronological system of Manvantaras and Kalpas,"
 and thus "have been rather clumsily distributed amongst the
 different periods." It is nothing of the kind.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 322 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 But as Orientalists know nothing of the secret teaching, they
 will take everything <em>literally, </em>and then turn round and
 abuse the writers of that which they do not comprehend!
 </p><p>
 These genealogies embrace a period of <em>three and a half Rounds</em>;<em>
 they </em>speak of <em>pre-human </em>periods, and explain the
 descent into generation of every Manu -- the first manifested
 sparks of the <strong>O</strong>NE Unity -- and show, furthermore,
 each of these human sparks dividing into, and multiplying by,
 first, the <em>Pitars, </em>the human ancestors, then by human
 Races. No being can become God, or Deva, unless he passes through
 the human cycles. Therefore the Sloka says, "Happy are those
 who are born, even from the (latent) condition of gods, <em>as
 men, </em>in Bharata-varsha; as that is the way to . . . final
 liberation." In Jambu-dwipa, Bharata is considered <em>the
 best of its divisions, </em>because IT IS THE LAND OF WORKS. In
 it alone "it is that the succession of four Yugas (ages),
 the Krita, the Treta, the Dwapara, and Kali take place";
 when, therefore, Parasara, asked by Maitreya "to give him
 the descriptions of the Earth," returns again to the enumeration
 of the same Dwipas with the same seas, etc., as those he had described
 in the Swayambhuva Manvantara -- it is simply a <em>blind, </em>yet,
 to him who reads between the lines, the Four great Races and the
 Fifth are there, ay, with their sub-divisions, islands, and continents,
 some of which were called by the names of celestial lokas, and
 by those of other globes. Hence the confusion.
 </p><p>
 All these are called by the Orientalists "mythical"
 and "fabulous" islands and lands.* Very true, some <em>are
 not of this earth, </em>but they still exist. The "White
 Island" and <em>Atala, </em>at all events, are no myths,
 since the latter was the name contemptuously applied by the earliest
 pioneers of the Fifth Race to the land of Sin -- Atlantis, in
 general, not to Plato's island alone; and since the former was
 (<em>a</em>) the Sveta-dwipa of theogony, and (<em>b</em>) Saka-dwipa,
 or Atlantis (its earliest portions) in its beginnings. This was
 when it yet had its "seven holy rivers that washed away all
 sin," and its "seven districts, wherein there was no
 dereliction of virtue, no contention, no deviation from virtue,"
 as it was then inhabited by the caste of the <em>Magas -- that
 </em>caste which even the Brahmins acknowledged as not inferior
 to their own -- and which was
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In a lecture, Professor Pengelly, <strong>F.R.S</strong>., quoting
 Professor Oliver, makes him say "that the present Atlantic
 islands' Flora affords no substantial evidence of a former direct
 communication with the mainland of the New World," but himself
 adds that, at the same time, "at some period of the Tertiary
 epoch, N. E. Asia was united to N. W. America, perhaps by the
 line where the Aleutian chain of islands now extends." Thus
 Occult Science alone can reconcile the contradictions and hesitations
 of modern Science. Moreover, surely the argument for the existence
 of Atlantis does not rest on Botany alone.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 323 THE MAGIS IN THE DAYS OF KRISHNA.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the nursery of the first Zaratushta. The Brahmins are shown consulting
 with Gauramukha, on Narada's advice, who told them to invite the
 <em>Magas </em>as priests of the Sun in the temple built by Samba
 (the reputed) son of Krishna, who in reality had none. In this
 the Puranas are <em>historical --</em>allegory notwithstanding
 -- and Occultism is stating facts.
 </p><p>
 The whole story is told in Bhavishya Purana. It is stated that,
 having been cured by Surya (the Sun) of leprosy, Samba, having
 built a temple dedicated to the Sun, was looking for pious Brahmins
 to perform the appointed rites in it, and receive donations made
 to the God. But Narada (this virgin ascetic whom one finds in
 every age in the Puranas) advised him not to do so, as Manu forbade
 the Brahmins to receive emoluments for the performance of religious
 rites. He therefore referred Samba to Gauramukha (white face),
 the <em>Purohita </em>or<em> </em>family priest of Hgrasena, King
 of Mathura, who would tell him whom he could best employ. The
 priest directed Samba to invite the <em>Magas, </em>the worshippers
 of Surya, to discharge the duty. Ignorant of the place they lived
 in, it is Surya, the Sun himself, who directs Samba to Sakadwipa
 <em>beyond the salt water. </em>Then Samba performs the journey,
 using Garuda (Vishnu's and Krishna's vehicle, the great Bird)
 who lands him among the Magas, etc.
 </p><p>
 Now Krishna, who lived 5,000 years ago, and Narada, who is found
 reborn in every cycle (or race), besides Garuda -- the symbol
 esoterically of the great cycle -- show the allegory; yet the
 Magas are the Magi of Chaldea, and their class and worship were
 born on the earlier Atlantis, in Saka-dwipa, the Sinless. All
 the Orientalists are agreed that the Magas of Saka-dwipa are the
 forefathers of the fire-worshipping Parsis. Our quarrel with them
 rests, as usual, on their dwarfing hundreds of thousands to a
 few centuries this time: they carry the event -- Narada and Samba
 notwithstanding -- to the days of the flight of the Parsis to
 Gujerat, which is simply absurd, as that was in the <strong>VIII</strong>th
 cent. of our era. Though the Magas in the Bhavishya Purana are
 credited with still living in Saka-dwipa in the day of Krishna's
 Son, yet the last of it -- Plato's "Atlantis" -- had
 perished 6000 years before. They were Mag "late of"
 Saka-Dwipa, and lived in those days in Chaldea. This is an intentional
 confusion, again.
 </p><p>
 The earliest pioneers of the Fourth Race were not Atlanteans,
 nor yet the human <em>Asuras </em>and the <em>Rakshasas </em>which
 they became later. In those days large portions of the future
 continent of Atlantis were yet part and parcel of the Ocean floors.
 "Lemuria," as we have called the continent of the Third
 Race, was then a gigantic land.* It covered
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * As shown in the Introduction, it stands to reason that neither
 the name of Lemuria nor even Atlantis are the real <em>archaic
 </em>names of the lost continents, but have been adopted by us
 for the sake of clearness. Atlantis was the name given to those
 [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 324 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the whole area of space from the foot of the Himalayas, which
 separated it from the inland sea rolling its waves over what is
 now Tibet, Mongolia, and the great desert of Schamo (Gobi); from
 Chittagong, westward to Hardwar, and eastward to Assam. From thence,
 it stretched South across what is known to us as Southern India,
 Ceylon, and Sumatra; then embracing on its way, as we go South,
 Madagascar on its right hand and Australia and Tasmania on its
 left, it ran down to within a few degrees of the Antarctic Circle;
 when, from Australia, an inland region on the Mother Continent
 in those ages, it extended far into the Pacific Ocean, not only
 beyond Rapa-nui (Teapy, or Easter Island) which now lies in latitude
 26 S., and longitude 110 W. (<em>See Addenda to this Book II.,
 Section, </em>"<em>Proofs of the Submerged Continents.</em>")<em>
 </em>This statement seems corroborated by Science, -- even if
 only partially; as, when discussing continental trends, and showing
 the infra-Arctic masses trending generally with the Meridian,
 several ancient continents are generally mentioned, though inferentially.
 Among such the "Mascarene continent," which included
 Madagascar, stretching north and south, is spoken of, and the
 existence of another <em>ancient</em> continent running "from
 Spitzbergen to the Straits of Dover, while most of the other parts
 of Europe were sea bottom," is taught.* The latter corroborates,
 then, the Occult teaching which shows the (now) polar regions
 as the earliest of the seven cradles of Humanity, and as the tomb
 of the bulk of the mankind of that region during the Third Race,
 when the gigantic continent of Lemuria began separating into smaller
 continents. This is due, according to the explanation in the Commentary,
 to a decrease of velocity in the earth's rotation: --
 </p><p>
 "<em>When the Wheel runs at the usual rate, its extremities
 </em>(the poles) <em>agree with its middle circle </em>(equator),
 <em>when it runs slower and tilts in every direction, there is
 a great disturbance on the face of the Earth. The</em> <em>waters
 flow toward</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] portions of the submerged
 Fourth-Race continent which were "beyond the pillars of Hercules,"
 and which happened to keep above water after the general cataclysm.
 The last remnant of these -- Plato's <em>Atlantis, </em>or the
 "Poseidon" (another <em>substitute </em>or rather a
 translation of the real name) -- was the last of it some 11,000
 years ago. Most of the correct names of the countries and islands
 of both continents are given in the Puranas; but to mention them
 specially, as found in other more ancient works, such as the <em>Surya
 Siddhanta, </em>would necessitate too lengthy explanations. If,
 in earlier writings, the two seem to have been too faintly disconnected,
 this must be due to careless reading and want of reflection. If
 ages hence, Europeans are referred to as Aryans, and a reader
 confuses them with the Hindus and the latter with the Fourth Race,
 as they live (some of them) in ancient Lanka -- the blame will
 not fall on the writer.
 </p><p>
 * See Professor Dana's article, "<em>American Journal of
 Science,</em>"<strong> III</strong>, v. 442-3; Prof. Winchell's
 "<em>World Life</em>";<em> </em>and other geological
 works.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 325 ATLANTIS -- OCEAN FLOOR.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>the two ends, and new lands arise in the middle belt </em>(equatorial
 lands), <em>while those at the ends are subject to pralayas by
 submersion</em> . . . ."
 </p><p>
 And again: --
 </p><p>
 . . . "<em>Thus the wheel </em>(the Earth) <em>is subject
 to, and regulated by, the Spirit of the Moon, for the breath of
 its waters </em>(tides).<em> Toward the close of the age </em>(Kalpa)
 <em>of a great </em>(root)<em> race, the regents of the moon </em>(the
 Pitar fathers, or Pitris) <em>begin drawing harder, and thus flatten
 the wheel about its belt, when it goes down in some places and
 swells in others, and the swelling running toward the extremities</em>
 (poles) <em>new lands will arise and old ones be sucked in.</em>"
 </p><p>
 We have but to read astronomical and geological works, to see
 the meaning of the above very clearly. Scientists (<em>modern</em>
 Specialists) have ascertained the influence of the tides on the
 geological distribution of land and water on the planets, and
 the shifting of the oceans with a corresponding subsidence and
 rise of continents and new lands. Science knows, or thinks it
 knows, that this occurs periodically.* Professor Todd believes
 he can trace the series of oscillations backward to the periods
 of the earth's first incrustation. (<em>See </em>"<em>American
 Naturalist,</em>"<em> XVIII.,</em> 15 <em>et seq.</em>);
 therefore it seems easy for Science to verify the Esoteric statements.
 We propose to treat of this at greater length in the <em>Addenda.</em>
 (<em>Vide</em> § § V. and VI.)
 </p><p>
 It is asked by some Theosophists: "What will Atlantis be
 like when raised?" they understanding from a few words in
 "<em>Esoteric Buddhism</em>"<em> </em>that "old
 continents" that have been submerged will reappear. Here,
 again, there is a slight misconception. Were the <em>same </em>identical
 lands of Atlantis that were submerged to be raised again, then
 they would, indeed, be <em>barren for ages. </em>Because the Atlantic
 sea-bottom is covered with some 5,000 feet of chalk at present,
 and more is forming -- a new "cretaceous formation"
 of strata, in fact -- is no reason why, when the time for a new
 continent to appear arrives, a geological convulsion and upraising
 of the sea bottom should not dispose of these 5,000 feet of chalk
 for the formation of some mountains and 5,000 more come to the
 surface. The racial cataclysms are not a Noah's deluge of forty
 days -- a kind of Bombay monsoon.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Speaking on periodical elevation and subsidence of the equatorial
 and polar regions, and ensuing changes of climate, Mr. Winchell
 (professor of Geology at Michigan) says -- "As the movements
 here contemplated are cyclical, the same conditions would recur
 again and again; and accordingly the same fauna might return again
 and again to the same region, with intervals of occupation by
 another fauna. Progressive sedimentation would preserve the records
 of such faunal alterations; and there would be presented the phenomena
 of 'colonies' 're-apparitions' and other faunal dislocations in
 the vertical and horizontal distributions of fossil remains. These
 phenomena are well known to the student of geology." ("<em>Effects
 of Astronomical Changes</em>.") </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 326 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 That the periodical sinking and re-appearance of the mighty continents,
 now called Atlantis and Lemuria by the modern writers, is no fiction,
 will be demonstrated in the Section in which all the proofs of
 the same have been collated together. The most archaic Sanskrit
 and Tamil works teem with references to both Continents. The seven
 sacred Islands (Dwipas) are mentioned in the <em>Surya Siddhanta,
 </em>the oldest astronomical work in the whole world, and in the
 works of Asura Maya, the Atlantean astronomer whom Professor Weber
 has made out re-incarnated in Ptolemy. Yet, it is a mistake to
 call these "sacred islands" <em>Atlantean -- </em>as
 done by us; for, like everything else in the Hindu Sacred Books,
 they are made to refer to several things. The heirloom left by
 Priyavrata, the Son of Swayambhuva Manu, to his seven sons --
 was not <em>Atlantis, </em>even though one or two of these islands
 survived the subsidence of their fellows, and offered shelter,
 ages later, to Atlanteans, whose continent had been submerged
 in its turn. When originally mentioned by Parasara (<em>Vishnu
 Purana</em>)<em> </em>the seven refer to an esoteric doctrine
 which is explained further on. Of all the seven islands, Jambu-dwipa
 is the only one that is terrestrial, for <em>it is our globe.
 </em>In the Puranas every reference to the North of Meru is connected
 with that primeval Eldorado, now the North Polar region; which,
 when the magnolia blossomed there where now we see an unexplored
 endless desert of ice, was then a continent again. Science speaks
 of an ancient continent which stretched from Spitzbergen down
 to the Straits of Dover. The Secret Doctrine teaches that, in
 the earliest geological periods, these regions formed a horse-shoe-like
 continent, whose one end, the Eastern, far more northward than
 North Cornwall, included Greenland, and the other contained Behring
 Straits as an inland piece of ground, and descended southward
 in its natural trend down to the British Isles, which in those
 days must have been right under the lower curve of the semi-circle.
 This continent was raised simultaneously with the submersion of
 the equatorial portions of Lemuria. Ages later, some of the Lemurian
 remains re-appeared again on the face of the Oceans. Therefore,
 though it can be said without departing from truth that Atlantis
 is included in the Seven great insular continents, since the Fourth
 Race Atlanteans got some of the Lemurian relics, and, settling
 on the islands, included them among <em>their </em>lands and continents,
 yet a difference should be made and an explanation given, once
 that a fuller and more accurate account is attempted, as in the
 present work. Easter Island was also taken possession of in this
 manner by some Atlanteans; who, having escaped from the cataclysm
 which befell their own land, settled on that remnant of Lemuria
 only to perish thereon, when destroyed in one day by its volcanic
 fires and lava. This may be regarded as fiction by certain geographers
 and geologists; to the Occul-</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 327 ON FOOT ACROSS THE OCEANS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 tists it is <em>history. </em>What does Science know to the contrary?
 "Until the appearance of a map, published at Basle in 1522,
 wherein the name of America appears for the first time, <em>the
 latter was believed to be part of India </em>. . . . . Science
 also refuses to sanction the <em>wild </em>hypothesis that there
 was a time when the Indian peninsula at one end of the line, and
 South America at the other, were connected by a belt of islands
 and continents. The India of the pre-historic ages . . . . was
 doubly connected with the two Americas. The lands of the ancestors
 of those whom Ammianus Marcellinus calls the 'Brahmans of Upper
 India' stretched from Kashmir far into the (now) deserts of Schamo.
 A pedestrian from the north might then have reached -- hardly
 wetting his feet -- the Alaskan peninsula, through Manchooria,
 across the <em>future </em>Gulf of Tartary, the Kurile and Aleutian
 islands; while another traveller, furnished with a canoe, and
 starting from the South, could have walked over from Siam, crossed
 the Polynesian Islands and trudged into any part of the continent
 of South America." (<em>But see </em>"<em>Five years
 of Theosophy,</em>"<em> art. </em>"<em>Leaflets from
 Esoteric History,</em>"<em> pp. </em>338 <em>and </em>340.)
 This was written from the words of a <strong>M</strong>ASTER --
 a rather doubtful authority for the materialists and the sceptics.
 But here we have one of their own flock, and a bird of the same
 feather -- Ernest Haeckel, who, in <em>his </em>distribution of
 races, corroborates the statement almost <em>verbatim: . </em>.
 . . "It would seem that the region on the earth's surface
 where the evolution of these primitive men from the CLOSELY RELATED
 CATARRHINE APES (! !) took place, must be sought either in Southern
 Asia or Eastern Africa [which, by the bye, was not even in existence
 when the Third Race flourished -- <em>H.P.B.] </em>or in Lemuria.
 Lemuria is an ancient continent now sunk beneath the waters of
 the Indian Ocean, which, lying to the South of the Asia of to-day,
 stretched on the one hand eastwards to upper India and Sunda Island,
 on the other westward as far as Madagascar and Africa." (<em>See
 supra and compare </em>"<em>The Pedigree of Man,</em>"<em>
 p. </em>80-81.)
 </p><p>
 In the epoch we are treating of, the Continent of "Lemuria,"
 had already broken asunder in many places, and formed new separate
 continents. There was, nevertheless, neither Africa nor the Americas,
 still less Europe in those days, all these slumbering yet on the
 Ocean floors. Nor was there much of present Asia; for the cis-Himalayan
 regions were covered with seas, and beyond this stretched the
 "lotus leaves" of <em>Sveta-dwipa, </em>the countries
 now called Greenland, Eastern and Western Siberia, etc., etc.
 The immense Continent, which had once reigned supreme over the
 Indian, Atlantic, and Pacific Oceans, now consisted of huge islands
 which were gradually disappearing one after the other, until the
 final convulsion engulfed the last remains of it. Easter Isle,
 for instance, belongs to the earliest civilisation of the Third
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 328 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Race. Submerged with the rest, a volcanic and sudden uplifting
 of the Ocean floor, raised the small relic of the Archaic ages
 untouched, with its volcano and statues, during the Champlain
 epoch of northern polar submersion, as a standing witness to the
 existence of Lemuria. It is said that some of the Australian tribes
 are the last remnants of the last descendants of the Third Race.
 </p><p>
 In this we are again corroborated to a degree by materialistic
 Science. Haeckel, when speaking of Blumenbach's brown or Malay
 race and the Australians and Papuans, remarks: -- "There
 is much likeness between these last and the Aborigines of Polynesia,
 that Australian island-world, that <em>seems to have been once
 on a time a gigantic and continuous continent.</em>" ("<em>Pedigree
 of Man,</em>"<em> p. 82. But see footnote supra and the Addenda.</em>)
 </p><p>
 It certainly was, since it stretched, during the Third Race, east
 and west, as far as where the two Americas now lie, and since
 the present Australia is but a portion of it, as are also a few
 surviving islands sown hither and thither on the face of the Pacific
 and a large bit of California, which belonged to it. Funnily enough,
 Haeckel, in his fantastic "Pedigree of Man," considers
 "the Australians of to-day as the lineal descendants, almost
 unchanged (? !), of that <em>second </em>branch of the primitive
 human race. . . that spread northwards, at first chiefly in Asia,
 from the home of man's infancy, and seems to have been the parent
 of all the other straight-haired races of men. . . . The one,
 woolly-haired, migrated in part, westwards" . . <em>. </em>(<em>i.e</em>.,
 to Africa and northwards to New Guinea, which countries had then,
 as said, no existence as yet) . . . "the other, straight-haired,
 was evolved farther to the north in Asia . . . . and peopled Australia
 . . . " (p. 81). "Behold," writes a MASTER, "the
 relics of that once great nation (Lemuria of the Third Race) in
 <em>some </em>of the flat-headed aborigines of your Australia"
 ("<em>Esoteric Buddhism,</em>"<em> p. </em>65). But
 they belong to the last remnants of the Seventh Sub-race of the
 Third. Prof. Haeckel must also have <em>dreamt </em>a dream and
 seen for once a <em>true</em> vision!
 </p><p>
 It is to this period that we have to look for the first appearance
 of the Ancestors of those, who are termed by us the most ancient
 peoples of the world -- now called respectively the Aryan Hindus,
 the Egyptians, and the oldest Persians, on the one hand, and the
 Chaldees and Phoenicians on the other. These were governed by
 the DIVINE DYNASTIES, <em>i.e</em>., kings and rulers who had
 of mortal man only his physical appearance <em>as it was then,
 </em>but who were Beings from spheres higher and more celestial
 than our own sphere will be, long Manvantaras hence. It is useless
 of course to attempt to force their existence on sceptics.<em>
 Their</em> greatest pride consists in proving their patronymic
 denomination <em>as catarrhinides</em>;<em> </em>which fact they
 try to demonstrate on the alleged </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 329 CHANGES OF CLIMATE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 authority of the <em>Coccyx </em>appended to their <em>os sacrum,
 </em>that rudimentary tail which, if they only had it long enough,
 they would wag in joy and for ever, in honour of its eminent discoverer.
 These will remain as faithful to their ape-ancestors as Christians
 will to tailless Adam. The Secret Doctrine, however, sets right
 on this point theosophists and students of Occult Sciences.
 </p><p>
 If we regard the Second portion of the Third Race as the first
 representatives of the <em>really human race </em>with solid bones,
 then Haeckel's surmise that "the evolution of the primitive
 men took place . . . . in <em>either </em>Southern Asia or . .
 . . Lemuria" -- Africa, whether Eastern or Western being
 out of question -- is correct enough, if not entirely so. To be
 accurate, however, in the same way that the evolution of the First
 Race (from the bodies of the <em>pitars</em>)<em> </em>took place
 on seven distinctly separated regions of the (then) only Earth
 at the arctic pole -- so did the ultimate transformation of the
 Third occur: it began in those northern regions, which have just
 been described a few pages back as including Behring's Straits,
 and what there then was of dry land in Central Asia, when the
 climate was semi-tropical even in the Arctic regions and most
 adapted to the primitive wants of nascent physical man. That region,
 however, has been more than once frigid and tropical in turn since
 the appearance of man. The commentary tells us that the Third
 Race was only about the middle point of its development when:
 --
 </p><p>
 "<em>The axle of the Wheel tilted. The Sun and Moon shone
 no longer over the heads of that portion of the</em><strong> S</strong>WEAT
 <strong>B</strong>ORN; <em>people knew snow, ice, and frost, and
 men, plants, and animals were dwarfed in their growth. Those that
 did not perish </em>REMAINED AS HALF-GROWN BABES* IN SIZE AND
 INTELLECT. <em>This was the third pralaya of the races.**</em>
 
 </p><p>
 Which means again, that our globe is subject to seven periodical
 <em>entire </em>changes which go <em>pari passu </em>with the
 races. For the Secret Doctrine teaches that, during this Round,
 there must be seven terrestrial <em>pralayas, </em>three occasioned
 by the change in the inclination of the earth's axis. It is a
 <em>law </em>which acts at its appointed time, and not at all
 blindly, as science may think, but in strict accordance and harmony
 with <em>Karmic </em>law. In Occultism this inexorable law is
 referred to as "the great ADJUSTER." Science confesses
 its ignorance of the cause producing climatic vicissitudes and
 such changes in the axial direction, which are always followed
 by these vicissitudes; nor does it seem so sure of the axial changes.
 And being unable to account for them, it is prepared rather to
 deny the axial phenomena altogether, than admit the intelligent
 Karmic hand and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Half-grown babes" in comparison with their giant
 Brethren on other zones. So would we now.
 </p><p>
 ** Relates to Lemuria.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 330 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 law which alone could reasonably explain such sudden changes and
 their results. It has tried to account for them by various more
 or less fantastic speculations; one of which would be the sudden,
 and as imaginary, collision of our earth with a comet (De Boucheporn's
 hypothesis), as the cause of all the geological revolutions. But
 we prefer holding to our esoteric explanation, since <strong>F</strong>OHAT
 is as good as any comet, having, in addition, universal intelligence
 to guide him.
 </p><p>
 Thus, since Vaivasvata Manu's Humanity appeared on this Earth,
 there have already been four such axial disturbances; when the
 old continents -- save the first one -- were sucked in by the
 oceans, other lands appeared, and huge mountain chains arose where
 there had been none before. The face of the Globe was completely
 changed each time; the <em>survival of the fittest </em>nations
 and races was secured through timely help; and the unfit ones
 -- the failures -- were disposed of by being swept off the earth.
 Such sorting and shifting does not happen between sunset and sunrise,
 as one may think, but requires several thousands of years before
 the new house is set in order.
 </p><p>
 The <em>Sub</em>-races are subject to the same cleansing process,
 as also the side-branchlets (the family-Races). Let one, well-acquainted
 with astronomy and mathematics, throw a retrospective glance into
 the twilight and shadows of the Past. Let him observe, take notes
 of what he knows of the history of peoples and nations, and collate
 their respective rises and falls with what is known of astronomical
 cycles -- especially with the <em>Sidereal year, </em>equal to
 25,868 of our solar years.* If the observer is gifted with the
 faintest intuition, then will he find how the weal and woe of
 nations is intimately connected with the beginning and close of
 this sidereal cycle. True, the non-occultist has the disadvantage
 that he has no such far distant times to rely upon. He knows nothing,
 through exact Science, of what took place nearly 10,000 years
 ago; yet he may find consolation in the knowledge or -- if he
 so prefers -- speculation on the fate of every one of the modern
 nations he knows of -- about 16,000 years hence.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * There are other cycles, of course, <em>cycles within cycles
 -</em>- and this is just that which creates such a difficulty
 in the calculations of racial events. The circuit of the ecliptic
 is completed in 25,868 years. And, with regard to our Earth, it
 is calculated that the equinoctial point falls back fifty minutes
 ten seconds, annually. But there is another cycle within this
 one. It is said that "as the apsis goes forward to meet it
 at the rate of eleven minutes twenty-four seconds, annually,"
 (see the article on <em>Astronomy in Encyclopaedia Britannica</em>),
 "this would complete a revolution in one hundred and fifteen
 thousand three hundred and two years (115,302). The approximation
 of the equinox and the apsis is the sum of these motions, sixty-one
 minutes thirty-four seconds, and hence the equinox returns to
 the same position in relation to the apsis in 21,128 years."
 We have mentioned this cycle in <em>Isis Unveiled, </em>Vol. I.,
 in relation to other cycles. Each has a marked influence on its
 contemporary race. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 331 PRE-HISTORIC STATUES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Our meaning is very clear. Every sidereal year the tropics recede
 from the pole <em>four degrees </em>in each revolution from the
 equinoctial points, as the equator rounds through the Zodiacal
 constellations. Now, as every astronomer knows, at present the
 tropic is only twenty-three degrees and a fraction less than half
 a degree from the equator. Hence it has still 2 1/2 degrees to
 run before the end of the Sidereal year; which gives humanity
 in general, and our civilized races in <em>particular, </em>a
 reprieve of about 16,000 years.*
 </p><p>
 After the Great Flood of the Third Race (the Lemurians) --
 </p><p>
 "<em>Men decreased considerably in stature, and the duration
 of their lives was diminished. Having fallen down in godliness
 they mixed with animal races, and intermarried among giants and
 Pigmies </em>(the dwarfed races of the Poles) . . . <em>Many acquired
 DIVINE, more </em>-- UNLAWFUL <em>knowledge, and followed willingly
 the </em><strong>LEFT PATH.</strong>"<em> </em>(Commentary
 xxxiii.)
 </p><p>
 Thus were the Atlanteans approaching destruction in their turn.
 How many geological periods it took to accomplish this <em>fourth
 </em>destruction? Who can tell. . . . But we are told that --
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 (44.) <strong>T</strong>HEY (<em>the Atlanteans</em>)<em> </em>BUILT
 GREAT IMAGES, NINE YATIS HIGH (27<em> feet</em>)<em> -- </em>THE
 SIZE OF THEIR BODIES (<em>a</em>). <strong>L</strong>UNAR FIRES
 HAD DESTROYED THE LAND OF THEIR FATHERS (<em>the Lemurians</em>).<em>
 </em><strong>W</strong>ATER THREATENED THE <strong>F</strong>OURTH
 (<em>Race</em>) (<em>b</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>It is well worth noticing that most of the
 gigantic statues discovered on Easter Island, a portion of an
 undeniably submerged continent -- as also those found on the outskirts
 of Gobi, a region which had been submerged for untold ages --
 are all between 20 and 30 feet high. The statues found by Cook
 on Easter Island measured almost all <em>twenty-seven </em>feet
 in height, and eight feet across the shoulders. (<em>See §
 </em>"<em>Stones, Witnesses to Giants,</em>"<em> </em>at
 the end of this Stanza.) The writer is well aware that the modern
 archaeologists have decided now that "these statues are not
 very old," as declared by one of the high officials of the
 British Museum, where some of them now are. But this is one of
 those arbitrary decisions of modern science which does not carry
 much weight.
 </p><p>
 We are told that it is after the destruction of "Lemuria"
 by subterranean fires that men went on steadily decreasing in
 stature -- a process already commenced after their <em>physical
 </em><strong>F</strong>ALL <em>-</em>- and that finally, some
 millions of years after, they reached between six and seven feet,
 and are now dwindling down (as the older Asiatic races) to nearer
 five than
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See at the end of this Stanza "On the Duration of Ages
 and Cycles."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 332 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 six feet. As Pickering shows, there is in the Malay race (a sub-race
 of the Fourth Root Race) a singular diversity of stature; the
 members of the Polynesian family (Tahitians, Samoans, and Tonga
 islanders) are of a <em>higher stature than the rest of mankind</em>;<em>
 </em>but the Indian tribes and the inhabitants of the Indo-Chinese
 countries are decidedly below the general average. This is easily
 explained. The Polynesians belong to the very earliest of the
 surviving sub-races, the others to the very last and transitory
 stock. As the Tasmanians are now completely extinct, and the Australians
 rapidly dying out, so will the other old races soon follow.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>Now, how could those records have been preserved?
 we may be asked. Even the knowledge of the Zodiac is denied to
 the Hindus by our kind and learned Orientalists, who <em>conclude
 </em>that the Aryan Hindus knew nothing of it, before the Greeks
 brought it into the country. This uncalled-for slander was so
 sufficiently refuted by Bailly, and what is more, by the clear
 <em>evidence of facts, </em>as not to need very much additional
 refutation. While the Egyptians have on their Zodiacs (See <em>Denon</em>'<em>s
 </em>"<em>Voyage en Egypte</em>"<em> Vol. II.</em>)<em>
 </em>irrefutable proofs of records having embraced more than three-and-a-half
 <em>sidereal years -- </em>or about 87,000 years -- the Hindu
 calculations cover nearly thirty-three such years, or 850,000
 years. The Egyptian priests assured Herodotus that the Pole of
 the Earth and the Pole of the Ecliptic had formerly coincided.
 But, as remarked by the author of the <em>Sphinxiad, </em>"These<em>
 poor benighted </em>Hindoos have registered a knowledge of Astronomy
 for ten times 25,000 years since the (last local) <em>Flood </em>(in
 Asia), or <em>Age of Horror,</em>"<em> </em>in the latitude
 of India. And they possess recorded observations from the date
 of the first <em>Great </em>Flood within the Aryan <em>historical
 </em>memory -- that which submerged the last portions of Atlantis,
 850,000 years ago. The floods which preceded are, of course, more
 traditional than historical.
 </p><p>
 The sinking and transformation of Lemuria beginning nearly at
 the Arctic Circle (Norway), the Third Race ended its career in
 Lanka, or rather on that which became Lanka with the Atlanteans.
 The small remnant now known as Ceylon is the Northern highland
 of ancient Lanka, while the enormous island of that name was,
 in the Lemurian period, the gigantic continent described a few
 pages back. As a <strong>M</strong>ASTER says (See "<em>Esoteric
 Buddhism,</em>" p<em>.</em> 65): -- "Why should not
 your geologists bear in mind that under the continents explored
 and fathomed by them . . . . there may be hidden, deep in the
 fathomless, or rather unfathomed ocean beds, other and far older
 continents whose strata have never been geologically explored;
 and that they may some day upset entirely their present theories?
 Why not admit that our present continents have, like Lemuria and
 Atlantis,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 333 THE OLD CONTINENTS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 been several times already submerged, and had the time to re-appear
 again and bear their new groups of mankind and civilisations;
 and that at the first great geological upheaval at the next cataclysm,
 in the series of periodical cataclysms that occur from the beginning
 to the end of every Round, our already autopsized continents will
 go down and the Lemurias and Atlantises come up again?"
 </p><p>
 Not the <em>same </em>identical continents, of course.
 </p><p>
 But here an explanation is needed. No confusion need arise as
 regards the postulation of a Northern "Lemuria." The
 prolongation of that great continent into the North Atlantic Ocean
 is in no way subversive of the opinions so widely held as to the
 site of the lost Atlantis, and one corroborates the other. It
 must be noted that the Lemuria, which served as the cradle of
 the Third Root-Race, not only embraced a vast area in the Pacific
 and Indian Oceans, but extended in the shape of a horse-shoe past
 Madagascar, round "South Africa" (then a mere fragment
 in process of formation), through the Atlantic up to Norway. The
 great <em>English fresh-water deposit called the Wealden -- which
 every geologist regards as the mouth of a former great river --
 is the bed of the main stream which drained Northern Lemuria in
 the Secondary Age. </em>The former reality of this river is a
 fact of science -- will its votaries acknowledge the necessity
 of accepting the Secondary-age Northern Lemuria, which their data
 demand? Professor Berthold Seeman not only accepted the reality
 of such a mighty continent, but regarded <em>Australia and Europe
 as formerly portions of one continent -- </em>thus corroborating
 the whole "horse-shoe" doctrine already enunciated.
 No more striking confirmation of our position could be given,
 than the fact that the ELEVATED RIDGE in the Atlantic basin, 9,000
 feet in height, which runs for some two or three thousand miles
 southwards from a point near the British Islands, first slopes
 towards South America, then <em>shifts almost at right angles
 </em>to proceed in a SOUTH-EASTERLY <em>line toward the African
 coast, </em>whence it runs on southward to Tristan d'Acunha. This
 ridge is a remnant of an Atlantic continent, and, could it be
 traced further, would establish the reality of a submarine horse-shoe
 junction with a former continent in the Indian Ocean. (<em>Cf.
 chart adapted from the </em>"<em>Challenger</em>"<em>
 and </em>"<em>Dolphin</em>"<em> soundings in Mr. Donnelly</em>'<em>s,
 </em>"<em>Atlantis, the Antediluvian World,</em>"<em>
 p. </em>47.)
 </p><p>
 <em>The Atlantic portion of Lemuria </em>was the geological basis
 of what is generally known as Atlantis. The latter, indeed, must
 be regarded rather as a development of the Atlantic prolongation
 of Lemuria, than as an entirely new mass of land upheaved to meet
 the special requirements of the Fourth Root-Race. Just as in the
 case of Race-evolution, so in that of the shifting and re-shifting
 of continental masses, no hard and fast line can be drawn where
 a new order ends and another begins. Continuity in natural processes
 is never broken. Thus the Fourth Race</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 334 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Atlanteans were developed from a nucleus of Northern Lemurian
 Third Race Men, centred, roughly speaking, toward a point of land
 in what is now the mid-Atlantic Ocean. Their continent was formed
 by the coalescence of many islands and peninsulas which were upheaved
 in the ordinary course of time <em>and became ultimately the true
 home of the great Race known as the Atlanteans. </em>After this
 consummation was once attained it follows, as stated on the highest
 "occult" authority, that "Lemuria should no more
 be confounded with the Atlantis Continent, than Europe with America."
 ("<em>Esoteric Buddhism,</em>"<em> </em>p. 58.)
 </p><p>
 The above, coming from quarters so discredited by orthodox Science,
 will, of course, be regarded by it as a more or less happy fiction.
 Even the clever work of Donnelly, already mentioned, is put aside,
 notwithstanding that its statements are all confined within a
 frame of strictly scientific proofs. But we write for the future.
 Discoveries in this direction will vindicate the claims of the
 Asiatic philosophers, who maintain that Sciences -- Geology, Ethnology,
 and History included --were pursued by the Antediluvian nations
 who lived an untold number of ages ago. Future finds will justify
 the correctness of the present observations of such acute minds
 as H. A. Taine and Renan. The former shows that the civilizations
 of such archaic nations as the Egyptians, Aryans of India, Chaldeans,
 Chinese, and Assyrians are the result of preceding civilizations
 during "<em>myriads </em>of centuries";* and the latter
 points to the fact that, "Egypt at the beginning appears
 mature, old, and entirely without mythical and heroic ages, as
 if the country had never known youth. Its civilization has no
 infancy, and its art no archaic period. The civilization of the
 Old Monarchy did not begin with infancy. It was already mature."**
 To this Professor R. Owen adds that, "Egypt is recorded to
 have been a civilized and governed community <em>before </em>the
 time of Menes"; and Winchell ("Pre-Adamites," p.
 120), that "at the epoch of Menes the Egyptians were already
 a civilized and numerous people. Manetho tells us that Athotis,
 the son of this first king Menes, built the palace of Memphis;
 that he was a physician, and left <em>anatomical books.</em>"
 </p><p>
 This is quite natural if we have to believe the statements of
 Herodotus, who records in <em>Euterpe </em>(cxlii.), that the
 written history of the Egyptian priests dated from about 12,000
 years before his time. But what are 12,000 or even 120,000 years
 compared with the millions of years elapsed since the Lemurian
 period? The latter, however, has not been left without witnesses,
 its tremendous antiquity, notwithstanding. The complete records
 of the growth, development, social, and even political life of
 the Lemurians, have been preserved in the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> </em>"<em>History of English Literature,</em>"<em>
 p. </em>23.
 </p><p>
 ** Quoted in "<em>Atlantis,</em>"<em> </em>etc., p.
 132.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 335 HOW TO READ SYMBOLS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 secret annals. Unfortunately, few are those who can read them;
 and those who could would still be unable to understand the language,
 unless acquainted with all the seven keys of its symbolism. For
 the comprehension of the Occult Doctrine is based on that of the
 seven sciences; which sciences find their expression in the seven
 different applications of the secret records to the exoteric texts.
 Thus we have to deal with modes of thought on seven entirely different
 planes of Ideality. Every text relates to, and has to be rendered
 from, one of the following standpoints --
 </p><blockquote>
 1. The Realistic plane of thought;<br>
 2. The Idealistic;<br>
 3. The purely Divine or Spiritual.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The other planes too far transcend the average consciousness,
 especially of the materialistic mind, to admit of their being
 even symbolized in terms of ordinary phraseology. There is no
 purely <em>mythical </em>element in any of the ancient religious
 texts; but the mode of thought in which they were originally written
 has to be found out and closely adhered to during the process
 of interpretation. For, it is either symbolical (archaic mode
 of thought), emblematical (a later though very ancient mode of
 thought), parabolical (allegory), hieroglyphical, or again <em>logo-grammical
 -- </em>the most difficult method of all, as every letter, as
 in the Chinese language, represents a whole word. Thus, almost
 every proper name, whether in the Vedas, the "Book of the
 Dead," or the Bible (to a degree), is composed of such logograms.
 No one who is not initiated into the mystery of the occult religious
 logography can presume to know what a name in any ancient fragment
 means, before he has mastered the meaning of every letter that
 composes it. How is it to be expected that the merely profane
 thinker, however great his erudition in <em>orthodox </em>symbolism,
 so to say --<em> i.e</em>., in that symbolism which can never
 get out of the old grooves of Solar-myth and sexual-worship --
 shall penetrate into the arcana. behind the veil. One who deals
 with the husk or shell of the dead letter, and devotes himself
 to the kaleidoscopic transformation of barren word-symbols, can
 never expect to get beyond the vagaries of modern mythologists.
 </p><p>
 Thus, Vaivasvata, Xisuthrus, Deukalion, Noah, etc., etc. -- all
 the head-figures of the world-deluges, universal and partial,
 astronomical or geological -- all furnish in their very names
 the records of the causes and effects which led to the event,
 if one can but read them fully. All such deluges are based on
 events that took place in nature, and stand as <em>historical
 </em>records, therefore, whether they were sidereal, geological,
 or even simply allegorical, of a moral event on other and higher
 planes of being. This we believe has now been sufficiently demonstrated
 during the long explanation necessitated by the allegorical Stanzas.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 336 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 To speak of a race nine <em>yatis, </em>or 27 feet high, in a
 work claiming a more scientific character than "Jack the
 Giant-Killer," is a somewhat unusual proceeding. "Where
 are your proofs?" the writer will be asked. In History and
 tradition, is the answer. Traditions about a race of giants in
 days of old are universal; they exist in oral and written lore.
 India had her Danavas and Daityas; Ceylon had her Rakshasas; Greece,
 her Titans; Egypt, her colossal Heroes; Chaldea, her Izdubars
 (Nimrod); and the Jews their <em>Emims </em>of the land of Moab,
 with the famous giants, Anakim (<em>Numbers </em>xiii. 33). Moses
 speaks of Og, a king who was nine cubits high (15 ft. 4 in.) and
 four wide (Deut. iii. 11), and Goliath was "six cubits and
 a span in height" (or 10 ft. 7 in.). The only difference
 found between the "revealed Scripture" and the evidence
 furnished to us by Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Homer, Pliny,
 Plutarch, Philostratus, etc., etc., is this: While the pagans
 mention only <em>the skeletons of giants, </em>dead untold ages
 before, relics that some of <em>them had personally seen, </em>the
 Bible interpreters unblushingly demand that geology and archaeology
 should believe, that several countries were inhabited by such
 giants in the day of Moses; giants before whom the Jews were as
 grasshoppers, and who still existed in the days of Joshua and
 David. Unfortunately their own chronology is in the way. Either
 the latter or the giants have to be given up. (But see Part III.,<em>
 Addenda, </em>the closing chapter.)
 </p><p>
 Of still standing witnesses to the submerged continents, and the
 colossal men that inhabited them, there are still a few. Archaeology
 claims several such on this globe, though beyond wondering "what
 these may be" -- it never made any serious attempt to solve
 the mystery. Besides the Easter Island statues mentioned already,
 to what epoch do the colossal statues, still erect and intact
 near Bamian, belong? Archaeology assigns them to the first centuries
 of Christianity (as usual), and errs in this as it does in many
 other speculations. A few words of description will show the readers
 what are the statues of both Easter Isle and Bamian. We will first
 examine what is known of them to orthodox Science. In "<em>The
 Countries of the World</em>,"<em> by </em>Robert Brown, in
 Vol. <strong>IV</strong>., page 43, it is stated that --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Teapi, Rapa-nui, or Easter Island, is an isolated spot almost
 2,000 miles from the South American coast. . . . In length it
 is about twelve miles, in breadth four . . . and there is an extinct
 crater 1,050 feet high in its centre. The island abounds in craters,
 which have been extinct for so long that no tradition of their
 activity remains. . . .
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 " . . . But who made the great stone images (p. 44, etc.)
 which are now the chief attraction of the island to visitors?
 <i>No one knows</i>" <i>-- </i>says the reviewer. "It
 is more than likely that they were here when the present inhabitants
 (a handful of Polynesian savages) arrived. . . . Their workmanship
 <i>is </i>
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 337 THE MYSTERY OF EASTER ISLAND.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 <i>of a high order </i>. . . . and it is believed that the race
 who formed them were the frequenters of the natives of Peru and
 other portions of South America. . . Even at the date of Cook's
 visit, some of the statues, measuring 27 feet in height and eight
 across the shoulders were lying overthrown, while others still
 standing appeared much larger. One of the latter was so lofty
 that the shade was sufficient to shelter a party of thirty persons
 from the heat of the sun. The platforms on which these colossal
 images stood averaged from thirty to forty feet in length, twelve
 to sixteen broad. . . . all built of hewn stone in the Cyclopean
 style, very much like the walls of the Temple of Pachacamac, <i>or
 the ruins of Tia-Huanuco in Peru</i>"<i> </i>(vol. iii.,
 pp. 310, 311).
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 "<strong>T</strong>HERE IS NO REASON TO BELIEVE THAT ANY
 OF THE STATUES HAVE BEEN BUILT UP, BIT BY BIT, BY SCAFFOLDING
 ERECTED AROUND THEM" -- adds the journal very suggestively
 -- without explaining <em>how </em>they could be built otherwise,
 unless made by giants of the same size as the statues themselves.
 One of the best of these colossal images is now in the British
 Museum. The images at Ronororaka -- the only ones now found erect
 -- are four in number, three deeply sunk in the soil, and one
 resting on the back of its head like the head of a man asleep.
 Their types, though all are long-headed, are different; and they
 are evidently meant for portraits, as the noses, the mouths and
 chins differ greatly in form, their head-dress, moreover -- a
 kind of flat cap with a back piece attached to it to cover the
 back portion of the head --showing that the originals were no
 savages of the stone period. Verily the question may be asked
 -- "Who made them?" -- but it is not archaeology nor
 yet geology that is likely to answer, though the latter recognizes
 in the Island a portion of a submerged continent.
 </p><p>
 But who cut the Bamian, still more colossal, statues, the tallest
 and the most gigantic in the whole world, for Bartholdi's "Statue
 of Liberty" (now at New York) <em>is a dwarf </em>when compared
 with the largest of the five images. Burnes, and several learned
 Jesuits who have visited the place, speak of a mountain "<em>all
 honeycombed with gigantic cells,</em>"<em> </em>with two
 immense giants cut in the same rock. They are referred to as the
 modern <em>Miaotse </em>(<em>vide supra, </em>quotation from <em>Shoo-King</em>)<em>
 </em>the last surviving witnesses of the <em>Miaotse </em>who
 had "troubled the earth"; the Jesuits are right, and
 the Archaeologists, who see Buddhas in the largest of these statues,
 are mistaken. For all those numberless gigantic ruins discovered
 one after the other in our day, all those immense avenues of colossal
 ruins that cross North America along and beyond the Rocky Mountains,
 are the work of the Cyclopes, the true and actual Giants of old.
 "Masses of enormous human bones" were found "in
 America, near Misorte," a celebrated modern traveller tells
 us, precisely on the spot which local tradition points out as
 the landing</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 338 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 spot of those giants who overran America when it had hardly arisen
 from the waters (See "<em>De La Vega,</em>"<em> Vol.
 </em>ix., ch. ix.).*
 </p><p>
 Central Asian traditions say the same of the Bamian statues. What
 are they, and what is the place where they have stood for countless
 ages, defying the cataclysms around them, and even the hand of
 man, as in the instance of the hordes of Timoor and the Vandal-warriors
 of Nadir-Shah? Bamian is a small, miserable, half-ruined town
 in Central Asia, half-way between Cabul and Balkh, at the foot
 of Kobhibaba, a huge mountain of the Paropamisian (or Hindu-Kush)
 chain, some 8,500 feet above the level of the sea. In days of
 old, Bamian was a portion of the ancient city of Djooljool, ruined
 and destroyed to the last stone by Tchengis-Khan in the <strong>XIII</strong>th
 century. The whole valley is hemmed in by colossal rocks, which
 are full of partially natural and partially artificial caves and
 grottoes, once the dwellings of Buddhist monks who had established
 in them their <em>viharas. Such viharas </em>are to be met with
 in profusion, to this day, in the rock-cut temples of India and
 the valleys of Jellalabad. It is at the entrance of some of these
 that five enormous statues, of what is regarded as Buddha, have
 been discovered or rather <em>rediscovered </em>in our century,
 as the famous Chinese traveller, Hiouen-Thsang, speaks of, and
 saw them, when he visited Bamian in the <strong>VII</strong>th
 century.
 </p><p>
 When it is maintained that no larger statues exist on the whole
 globe, the fact is easily proven on the evidence of all the travellers
 who have examined them and taken their measurements. Thus, the
 largest is 173 feet high, or <em>seventy </em>feet higher than
 the "Statue of Liberty" now at New York, as the latter
 is only 105 feet or 34 metres high. The famous Colossus of Rhodes
 itself, between whose limbs passed easily the largest vessels
 of those days, measured only 120 to 130 feet in height. The second
 statue, cut out in the rock like the first one, is only 120 feet
 (15 feet taller than the said "Liberty").** The third
 statue is only 60 feet high -- the two others still smaller, the
 last one being only a little larger than the average tall man
 of our present race. The first and largest of the Colossi represents
 a man draped in a kind of <em>toga</em>;<em> M. </em>de Nadeylac
 thinks (See <em>infra</em>)<em> </em>that the general appearance
 of the figure, the lines of the head, the drapery, and especially
 the large hanging ears, point out undeniably that Buddha was meant
 to be represented. But the above proves nothing. Notwithstanding
 the fact
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See also "<em>Pneumatologie des Esprits</em>"<em>
 Vol. III., p. 55, de Mirville.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** The first and second have, in common with Bartholdi's Statue,
 an entrance at the foot, leading by a winding staircase cut in
 the rock up into the heads of the statues. The eminent French
 archeologist and anthropologist, the Marquis de Nadeylac, justly
 remarks in his work that there never was in ancient or in modern
 times a sculptured human figure more colossal than the first of
 the two.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 339 THE ANTEDILUVIAN BUDDHAS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 that most of the now existing figures of Buddha, represented in
 the posture of <em>Samadhi, </em>have large drooping ears, this
 is a later innovation and an afterthought. The primitive idea
 was due to esoteric allegory. The unnaturally large ears symbolize
 the omniscience of wisdom, and were meant as a reminder of the
 power of Him who <em>knows and hears all,</em> and whose benevolent
 love and attention for all creatures nothing can escape. "The
 merciful Lord, our Master, hears the cry of agony of the smallest
 of the small, beyond vale and mountain, and hastens to its deliverance":
 --says a Stanza. Gautama Buddha was an Aryan Hindu, and an approach
 to such ears is found only among the Mongolian Burmese and Siamese,
 who, as in Cochin, distort them artificially. The Buddhist monks,
 who turned the grottos of the <em>Miaotse </em>into <em>Viharas
 </em>and cells, came into Central Asia about or in the first century
 of the Christian era. Therefore Hiouen Thsang, speaking of the
 colossal statue, says that "the shining of the gold ornamentation
 that overlaid the statue" in his day "dazzled one's
 eyes," but of such gilding there remains not a vestige in
 modern times. The very drapery, in contrast to the figure itself,
 cut out in the standing rock, is made of plaster and modelled
 over the stone image. Talbot, who has made the most careful examination,
 found that this drapery belonged to a far later epoch. The statue
 itself has therefore to be assigned to a far earlier period than
 Buddhism. Whom does it represent in such case, it may be asked?
 </p><p>
 Once more tradition, corroborated by written records, answers
 the query, and explains the mystery. The Buddhist Arhats and Ascetics
 found the five statues, and many more, now crumbled down to dust,
 and as the three were found by them in colossal niches at the
 entrance of their future abode, they covered the figures with
 plaster, and, over the old, modelled new statues made to represent
 Lord Tathagata. The interior walls of the niches are covered to
 this day with bright paintings of human figures, and the sacred
 image of Buddha is repeated in every group. These frescoes and
 ornaments -- which remind one of the Byzantine style of painting
 -- are all due to the piety of the monk-ascetics, like some other
 minor figures and rock-cut ornamentations. But the five statues
 belong to the handiwork of the Initiates of the Fourth Race, who
 sought refuge, after the submersion of their continent, in the
 fastnesses and on the summits of the Central Asian mountain chains.
 Moreover, the five statues are an imperishable record of the esoteric
 teaching about the gradual evolution of the races.
 </p><p>
 The largest is made to represent the First Race of mankind, its
 ethereal body being commemorated in hard, everlasting stone, for
 the instruction of future generations, as its remembrance would
 otherwise never have</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 340 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 survived the Atlantean Deluge. The second -- 120 feet high --
 represents the sweat-born; and the third -- measuring 60 feet
 -- immortalizes the race that fell, and thereby inaugurated the
 first <em>physical </em>race, born of father and mother, the last
 descendants of which are represented in the Statues found on Easter
 Isle; but they were only from 20 to 25 feet in stature at the
 epoch when Lemuria was submerged, after it had been nearly destroyed
 by volcanic fires. The Fourth Race was still smaller, though gigantic
 in comparison with our present Fifth Race, and the series culminated
 finally in the latter. (See the following sub-section on "Cyclopean
 Ruins, and Colossal Stones as Witnesses to Giants.")
 </p><p>
 These are, then, the "Giants" of antiquity, the ante-
 and post-diluvian <em>Gibborim </em>of the Bible. They lived and
 flourished one million rather than between three and four thousand
 years ago. The <em>Anakim </em>of Joshua, whose hosts were as
 "grasshoppers" in comparison with them, are thus a piece
 of Israelite fancy, unless indeed the people of Israel claim for
 Joshua an antiquity and origin in the Eocene, or at any rate in
 the Miocene age, and change the millenniums of their chronology
 into millions of years.
 </p><p>
 In everything that pertains to prehistoric times the reader ought
 to bear the wise words of Montaigne in his mind. Saith the great
 French philosopher: --
 </p><blockquote>
 " . . . It is a sottish presumption to disdaine and condemne
 that for false, which unto us seemeth to beare no show of likelihood
 or truth: which is an ordinarie fault in those who persuade themselves
 to be of more sufficiencie than the vulgar sort.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 " . . . But reason hath taught me, that so resolutely to
 condemne a thing for false and impossible, is to assume unto himself
 the advantage to have the bounds and limits of God's will, and
 the power of our common Mother Nature tied to his sleeve, and
 that there is no greater folly in the world than to reduce them
 to the measure of our capacitie and bounds of our sufficiencie.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "If we term those things monsters or miracles to which our
 reason cannot attain, how many doe such daily present themselves
 unto our sight? Let us consider through what cloudes, and how
 blinde-folde we are led to the knowledge of most things that passe
 our hands; verily we shall finde it is rather custome than Science
 that receiveth, the strangenesse of them from us: and that those
 things, were they newly presented unto us, wee should doubtless
 deeme them as much or more unlikely and incredible than any other."
 (<i>Essays, </i>chap. xxvi.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 A fair-minded scholar should, before denying the possibility of
 <em>our </em>history and records, search modern History, as well
 as the universal traditions scattered throughout ancient and modern
 literature, for traces left by these marvellous early races. Few
 among the unbelievers suspect the wealth of corroborative evidence
 which is found scattered about and buried even in the British
 Museum alone. The</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 341 THE MATERIALISM OF THE BIBLE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 reader is asked to throw one more glance at the subject-matte<em>r
 </em>treated of in the chapter which follows: --
 </p><p>
 -------<a name="DDE_LINK19"></a> 
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK25">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 <a name="DDE_LINK20"></a><a name="DDE_LINK21"></a><a name="DDE_LINK22"></a><a name="DDE_LINK23"></a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-20.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>