<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 251 ANSWERS TO OBJECTIONS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK24">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd2-1-13.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><p>
 <strong>A</strong>RCHAIC <strong>T</strong>EACHINGS IN THE <strong>P</strong>URANAS
 AND <strong>G</strong>ENESIS.<br>
 <strong>P</strong>HYSICAL <strong>E</strong>VOLUTION.
 </p><p>
 The writer cannot give <em>too much </em>proof that the system
 of Cosmogony and Anthropogony as described actually existed, that
 its records <em>are</em> preserved, and that it is found mirrored
 even in the modern versions of ancient Scriptures.
 </p><p>
 The Puranas on the one hand, and the Jewish Scriptures on the
 other, are based on the same scheme of evolution, which, read
 esoterically and expressed in modern language, would be found
 to be quite as scientific as much of what now passes current as
 the final word of recent discovery. The only difference between
 the two schemes is, that</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 252 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the Puranas, giving as much, and perhaps more attention to the
 causes than to the effects, allude to the pre-Cosmic and pre-Genetic
 periods rather than to those of so-called Creation, whereas the
 Bible, saying only a few words of the former period, plunges forthwith
 into material genesis, and, while nearly skipping the <em>pre-Adamic
 </em>races, proceeds with its allegories concerning the Fifth
 Race.
 </p><p>
 Now, whatever the onslaught made on the Order of creation in <em>Genesis,
 </em>and its dead letter account certainly lends itself admirably
 to criticism,* he who reads the Hindu Puranas -- its allegorical
 exaggerations notwithstanding -- will find them quite in accordance
 with physical Science.
 </p><p>
 Even what appears to be the, on the face of it, perfectly nonsensical
 allegory of Brahma assuming the form of a Boar to rescue the Earth
 from under the waters, finds in the Secret Commentaries a perfectly
 scientific explanation, relating as it does to the many risings
 and sinkings, and the constant alternation of water and land from
 the earliest to the latest geological periods of our globe; for
 Science teaches us now that nine-tenths of the stratified formations
 of the earth's crust have been gradually constructed beneath water,
 at the bottom of the seas. The ancient Aryans are credited with
 having known nothing whatever of natural history, geology, and
 so on. The Jewish race is, on the other hand, proclaimed even
 by its severest critic, an uncompromising opponent of the Bible,
 (See "Modern Science and Modern Thought," p. 337), to
 have the merit of having conceived the idea of monotheism "earlier,
 and retained it more firmly, than any of the <em>less philosophical
 and more immoral religions</em> (<em>! </em>!) of the ancient
 world." Only, while we find in Biblical esotericism physiological
 sexual mysteries symbolised, and very little
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Mr. Gladstone's unfortunate attempt to reconcile the Genetic
 account with science (see <em>Nineteenth Century, </em>"Dawn
 of Creation" and the "Proem to Genesis," 1886)
 has brought upon him the Jovian thunderbolt hurled by Mr. Huxley.
 The dead-letter account warranted no such attempt; and his fourfold
 order, or division of animated creation, has turned into the stone
 which, instead of killing the fly on the sleeping friend's brow,
 killed the man instead. Mr. Gladstone killed <em>Genesis </em>for
 ever. But this does not prove that there is no esotericism in
 the latter. The fact that the Jews and all the Christians, the
 modern as well as the early sects, have accepted the narrative
 <em>literally </em>for two thousand years, shows only their ignorance;
 and shows the great ingenuity and constructive ability of the
 initiated Rabbis, who have built the two accounts --<em> the Elohistic
 </em>and the <em>Jehovistic -- </em>esoterically, and have purposely
 confused the meaning by the vowelless glyphs or word-signs in
 the original text. The six days -- <em>yom -- </em>of creation
 do mean six periods of evolution, and the seventh that of culmination
 of perfection (not of rest), and refer to the seven Rounds and
 the seven Races with a <em>distinct </em>"creation"
 in each; though the use of the words <em>boker, </em>dawn or morning,
 and <em>crib</em>, evening twilight -- which have esoterically
 the same meaning as <em>sandhya, </em>twilight, in Sanskrit --
 have led to a charge of the most crass ignorance of the order
 of evolution. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 253 MR. GLADSTONE KILLS GENESIS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 more (something for which <em>very little real philosophy is requisite</em>)<em>,
 </em>in the <em>Puranas </em>one may find the most scientific
 and philosophical "dawn of creation," which, if impartially
 analyzed and rendered into plain language from its fairy tale-like
 allegories, would show that modern zoology, geology, astronomy,
 and nearly all the branches of modern knowledge, have been anticipated
 in the ancient Science, and were known to the philosophers in
 their general features, if not in such detail as at present!
 </p><p>
 Puranic astronomy, with all its deliberate concealment and confusion
 for the purpose of leading the profane off the real track, was
 shown even by Bentley to be a real science; and those who are
 versed in the mysteries of Hindu astronomical treatises, will
 prove that the modern theories of the progressive condensation
 of nebulae, nebulous stars and suns, with the most minute details
 about the cyclic progress of asterisms -- far more correct than
 Europeans have even now -- for chronological and other purposes,
 were known in India to perfection.
 </p><p>
 If we turn to geology and zoology we find the same. What are all
 the myths and endless genealogies of the seven Prajapati, and
 their sons, the seven Rishis or Manus, and of their wives, sons
 and progeny, but a vast detailed account of the progressive development
 and evolution of animal creation, one species after the other?
 Were the highly philosophical and metaphysical Aryans -- the authors
 of the most perfect philosophical systems of transcendental psychology,
 of Codes of Ethics, and such a grammar as Panini's, of the Sankhya
 and Vedanta systems, and a moral code (Buddhism), proclaimed by
 Max Muller the most perfect on earth -- such fools, or children,
 as to lose their time in writing <em>fairy-tales</em>;<em> </em>such
 tales as the Puranas now seem to be in the eyes of those who have
 not the remotest idea of their secret meaning? What is the <em>fable,
 </em>the genealogy and origin of Kasyapa, with his twelve wives,
 by whom he had a numerous and diversified progeny of <em>nagas
 </em>(serpents), reptiles, birds, and all kinds of living things,
 and who was thus the <em>father </em>of all kinds of animals,
 but a <em>veiled </em>record of the order of evolution in <em>this
 </em>round? So far, we do not see that any Orientalist ever had
 the remotest conception of the truths concealed under the allegories
 and personifications. "The Satapatha Brahmana," says
 one, "gives <em>a not very intelligible </em>account of Kasyapa's
 origin. . . . He was the son of Marichi, the Son of Brahma, the
 father of Vivasvat, the father of Manu, the progenitor of mankind.
 . . . Having assumed the form of a tortoise, Prajapati created
 offspring. That which he created he made <em>akarot, </em>hence
 the word <em>kurma</em> (tortoise). Kasyapa means tortoise; hence
 men say: 'All creatures are descendants of Kasyapa,' etc., etc.<em>
 </em>(<em>Hindu Class. Dict.</em>)
 </p><p>
 He was all this; he was also the father of <em>Garuda, </em>the
 bird, the "King</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 254 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of the feathered tribe," who descends <em>from, </em>and
 is of one stock <em>with the reptiles, </em>the nagas; and who
 becomes their mortal enemy <em>subsequently </em>as <em>he is
 also a cycle, a period of time, when in the course of evolution
 the birds which developed from reptiles in their </em>"<em>struggle
 for life,</em>"<em> -- </em>"<em>survival of the fittest,</em>"<em>
 etc., etc., turned in preference on those they issued from, to
 devour them, </em>-- perhaps prompted by natural law, in order
 to make room for other and more perfect species. (<em>Vide</em>
 Part <strong>II</strong>., "Symbolism.")
 </p><p>
 In that admirable epitome of "Modern Science and Modern Thought,"
 a lesson in natural history is offered to Mr. Gladstone, showing
 the utter variance with it of the Bible. The author remarks that
 Geology, commencing with --
 </p><blockquote>
 " . . . the earliest known fossil, the Eozoon Canadense of
 the Laurentian, continued in a chain, every link of which is firmly
 welded, through the Silurian, with its abundance of molluscous,
 crustacean, and vermiform life and first indication of fishes;
 the Devonian, with its predominance of fish and first appearance
 of reptiles; the Mesozoic with its batrachians (or frog family);
 the Secondary formations, in which reptiles of the sea, land and
 air preponderated, and the first humble forms of vertebrate land
 animals began to appear; and finally, the Tertiary, in which mammalian
 life has become abundant, and type succeeding to type and species
 to species, are gradually differentiated and specialized, through
 the Eocene, Miocene, and Pliocene periods, until we arrive at
 the Glacial and Pre-historic periods, and at positive proof of
 the existence of man."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The same order, <em>plus </em>the description of animals unknown
 to modern science, is found in the commentaries on the Puranas
 in general, and in the Book of Dzyan -- especially. The only difference,
 a grave one, no doubt, -- as implying a spiritual and divine nature
 of man independent of his physical body in this illusionary world,
 in which the <em>false personality </em>and its cerebral basis
 alone is known to orthodox psychology -- is as follows. Having
 been in all the so-called "Seven creations," allegorizing
 the seven evolutionary changes, or the <em>sub-races, </em>we
 may call them, <em>of the First Root-race of Mankind -- </em>MAN
 was on earth in this Round from the beginning. Having passed through
 all the kingdoms of nature in the previous <em>three</em> Rounds,*
 his <em>physical </em>frame -- one adapted to the thermal conditions
 of those early periods -- was ready to receive the <em>divine
 Pilgrim </em>at the first dawn of human life, <em>i.e., </em>18,000,000
 years ago. It is only at the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Follow the law of analogy" -- the Masters teach.
 <em>Atma-Buddhi </em>is dual and <em>Manas </em>is triple; inasmuch
 as the former has two aspects, and the latter three, <em>i.e</em>.,
 as a principle <em>per se, </em>which gravitates, in its higher
 aspect, to Atma-Buddhi, and follows, in its lower nature, Kama,
 the seat of terrestrial and animal desires and passions. Now compare
 the evolution of the Races, the First and the Second of which
 are of the nature of Atma-Buddhi, their passive Spiritual progeny,
 and the Third Root-Race shows three distinct divisions or aspects
 physiologically and psychically; the earliest, sinless; the middle
 portions awakening to intelligence; and the third and last decidedly
 <em>animal:</em> <em>i.e., </em>Manas succumbs to the temptations
 of Kama.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 255 FROM WORM TO MAN. </h6>
 
 <p>
 mid-point of the 3rd Root Race that man was endowed with <em>Manas.
 </em>Once united, the <em>two </em>and then the <em>three </em>made
 one; for though the lower animals, from the amoeba to man, received
 <em>their </em>monads, in which all the higher qualities are potential,
 all have to remain dormant till each reaches its human form, before
 which stage <em>manas </em>(mind) has no development in them.*
 In the animals every principle is paralysed, and in a foetus-like
 state, save the second (vital) and the third (the astral), and
 the rudiments of the fourth (<em>Kama, </em>which is desire, instinct)
 whose intensity and development varies and changes with the species.
 To the materialist wedded to the Darwinian theory, this will read
 like a fairy-tale, a mystification; to the believer in the inner,
 spiritual man, the statement will have nothing unnatural in it.
 </p><p>
 Now the writer is certain to meet what will be termed insuperable
 objections. We shall be told that the line of embryology, the
 gradual development of every individual life, and the progress
 of what is known to take place in the order of progressive stages
 of specialization -- that all this is opposed to the idea of man
 preceding mammals. Man begins as the humblest and most primitive
 vermiform creature, "from the primitive speck of protoplasm
 and the nucleated cell in which all life originates," and
 "is developed through stages undistinguishable from those
 of fish, reptile and mammal, until the cell finally attains the
 highly specialized development of <em>the quadrumanous, </em>and<em>
 last of all, of the human type.</em>"<em> </em>(Laing, 335.)
 </p><p>
 This is perfectly scientific, and we have nothing against <em>that</em>;<em>
 </em>for all this relates to the <em>shell </em>of man -- his
 body, which in its growth is subject, of course, like every other
 (once called) morphological unit, to such metamorphoses. It is
 not those who teach the transformation of the mineral atom through
 crystallization -- which is the same function, and bears the same
 relation to its <em>inorganic </em>(<em>so-called</em>)<em> upadhi
 </em>(or basis) as the formation of <em>cells </em>to their organic
 nuclei, through plant, insect and animal into man -- it is not
 they who will reject this theory, as it will finally lead to the
 recognition of a Universal Deity in nature, ever-present and as
 ever invisible, and unknowable, and of <em>intra</em>-Cosmic gods,
 who all were men.**
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Men are made <em>complete </em>only during their third,
 toward the fourth cycle (race). They are made 'gods' for good
 and evil, and responsible only when the two arcs meet (after 31/2
 rounds towards the <em>fifth </em>Race). They are made so by the
 <em>Nirmanakaya </em>(spiritual or astral remains) of the Rudra-Kumaras,
 '<em>cursed </em>to be reborn on earth again; meaning -- <em>doomed
 in their natural turn</em> <em>to reincarnation </em>in the higher
 ascending arc of the terrestrial cycle.' (<em>Commentary IX.</em>)
 </p><p>
 ** The whole trouble is this: neither physiologists nor pathologists
 <em>will </em>recognize that the cell-germinating substance (the
 <em>cytoblastema</em>)<em> </em>and the mother-lye from which
 crystals originate, are one and the same essence, save in differentiation
 for purposes.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 256 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 But we would ask, what does science and its exact and now axiomatic
 discoveries prove against <em>our</em> Occult theory? Those who
 believe in the law of Evolution and gradual progressive development
 from a cell (which from a <em>vital</em> has become a morphological
 cell, until it awoke as protoplasm pure and simple) -- these can
 surely never limit their belief to one line of evolution. The
 types of life are innumerable; and the progress of evolution,
 moreover, does not go at the same rate in every kind of species.
 The constitution of primordial matter in the Silurian age -- we
 mean "primordial" <em>matter </em>of science -- is the
 same in every essential particular, save its degree of present
 grossness, as the primordial <em>living</em> matter of to-day.
 Nor do we find that which ought to be found, if the now orthodox
 theory of Evolution were <em>quite </em>correct, namely, a constant,
 ever-flowing progress in every species of being. Instead of that,
 what does one see? While the intermediate groups of animal being
 all tend toward a higher type, and while specializations, now
 of one type and now of another, develop through the geological
 ages, change forms, assume new shapes, appear and disappear with
 a kaleidoscopic rapidity in the description of paleontologists
 from one period to another, the two solitary exceptions to the
 general rule are those at the two opposite poles of life and type,
 namely -- <strong>M</strong>AN <em>and the lower genera of being!</em>
 
 </p><p>
 "Certain well-marked forms of living beings have existed
 through enormous epochs, surviving not only the changes of physical
 conditions, <em>but persisting comparatively unaltered, </em>while
 other forms of life have appeared and disappeared. Such forms
 may be termed 'persistent types' of life; and examples of them
 are abundant enough in both the animal and the vegetable worlds"
 (Huxley, "Proceed. of Roy. Inst.," vol. iii., p. 151).
 </p><p>
 Nevertheless, we are not given any good reason why Darwin links
 together reptiles, birds, amphibians, fishes, mollusca, etc.,
 etc., as off-shoots of a moneric ancestry. Nor are we told whether
 reptiles, for instance, are direct descendants of the amphibian,
 the latter of fishes, and fishes of lower forms -- which they
 certainly are. For the Monads have passed through all these forms
 of being up to man, on every planet, in the Three <em>preceding
 </em>Rounds; every Round, as well as every subsequent Globe, from
 A to G, having been, and still having to be the arena of the same
 evolution, only repeated each time on a more solid material basis.
 Therefore the question: -- "What relation is there between
 the Third Round astral prototypes and ordinary physical development
 in the course of the origination of pre-mammalian organic species?"
 -- is easily answered. One is the shadowy prototype of the other,
 the preliminary, hardly defined, and evanescent sketch on the
 canvas, of objects, which are destined to receive the final and
 vivid </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 257 THE CONTRADICTIONS OF SCIENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 form under the brush of the painter. The fish evolved into an
 amphibian -- a frog -- in the <em>shadows </em>of ponds, and man
 passed through all his metamorphoses on this Globe in the Third
 Round as he did in this, his Fourth Cycle. The Third Round types
 contributed to the formation of the types in this one. On strict
 analogy, the cycle of Seven Rounds in their work of the gradual
 formation of man through every kingdom of Nature, are repeated
 on a microscopical scale in the first seven months of gestation
 of a future human being. Let the student think over and work out
 this analogy. As the seven months' old unborn baby, though quite
 ready, yet needs two months more in which to acquire strength
 and consolidate; so man, having perfected his evolution during
 seven Rounds, remains two periods more in the womb of mother-Nature
 before he is born, or rather reborn a Dhyani, still more perfect
 than he was before he launched forth as a Monad on the newly built
 chain of worlds. Let the student ponder over this mystery, and
 then he will easily convince himself that, as there are also physical
 links between many classes, so there are precise domains wherein
 the astral merges into physical evolution. Of this Science breathes
 not one word. Man has evolved with and from the monkey, it says.
 But now see the contradiction.
 </p><p>
 Huxley proceeds to point out plants, ferns, club mosses, some
 of them generically identical with those now living, which are
 met with in the carboniferous epoch, for: -- "The cone of
 the oolitic <em>Araucaria </em>is hardly distinguishable from
 that of existing species. . . . . Subkingdoms of animals yield
 the same instances. The <em>globigerina </em>of the Atlantic soundings
 is identical with the cretaceous species of the same genus . .
 . the tabulate corals of the Silurian epoch are wonderfully like
 the millepores of our own seas. . . . <em>The arachnida,</em>
 the highest group of which, the scorpions, is represented in the
 coal by a genus differing only from its living congeners only
 in . . . the eyes," etc., etc.; all of which may be closed
 with Dr. Carpenter's authoritative statement about the <em>Foraminifera.
 </em>"There is no evidence," he says, "of any fundamental
 modification or advance in the Foraminiferous type from the palaeozoic
 period to the present time. . . . The Forminiferous Fauna of our
 own series probably present a greater range of variety than existed
 at any previous period; but <em>there is no indication of any
 tendency to elevation towards a higher type.</em>"<em> </em>("Introduction
 to the study of the Forminifera," p. xi.)
 </p><p>
 Now, if there is no indication of change in the Forminifera, a
 <em>protozoon </em>of the lowest type of life, mouthless and eyeless,
 except its greater variety now than before, man, who is on the
 uppermost rung of the ladder of being, indicates still less change,
 as we have seen; the skeleton of his Palaeolithic ancestor being
 even found</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 258 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 superior in some respects to his present frame. Where is, then,
 the claimed uniformity of law, the <em>absolute rule </em>for
 one species shading off into another, and, by insensible gradations,
 into higher types? We see Sir William Thomson admitting as much
 as 400,000,000 of years in the earth's history, since the surface
 of the globe became sufficiently cool to permit of the presence
 of living things;" and during that enormous lapse of time
 in the Oolitic period alone, the so-called "age of reptiles,"
 we find a most extraordinary variety and abundance of Saurian
 forms, the Amphibian type reaching <em>its highest developments.
 </em>We learn of Ichthyosauri and Plesiosauri in the lakes and
 rivers, and of winged crocodiles or lizards flying in the air.
 After which, in the Tertiary period "we find the Mammalian
 type exhibiting remarkable divergences from previously existing
 forms . . . . Mastodons, Megatheriums, and other unwieldy denizens
 of the ancient forests and plains; and subsequently," are
 notified of -<em>- </em>"<em>the gradual modification of
 one of the ramifications </em>of the Quadrumanous order, <em>into
 those beings from whom primeval man himself may claim to have
 been evolved.</em>"<em> </em>("The Beginnings of Life.")
 </p><p>
 He <em>may</em>; but no one, except materialists, can see why
 he should; as there is not the slightest necessity for it, nor
 is such an evolution warranted by facts, for those most interested
 in the proofs thereof confess their utter failure to find one
 single fact to support their theory. There is no need for the
 numberless types of life to represent the members of one progressive
 series. They are "the products of various and different evolutional
 divergences, taking place now in one direction and now in another."
 Therefore it is far more justifiable to say that the monkey evolved
 into the Quadrumanous order, than that primeval man, who has <em>remained
 stationary in his human specialization ever since his fossil is
 found in the oldest strata, </em>and of whom no variety is found
 save in colour and facial type -- has developed from a common
 ancestor together with the ape.
 </p><p>
 That man originates like other animals in a cell and develops
 "through stages undistinguishable from those of fish, reptile,
 and mammal until the cell attains the highly specialized development
 of the quadrumanous and <em>at last the human type,</em>"<em>
 </em>is an Occult axiom thousands of years old. The Kabalistic
 axiom: "A stone becomes a plant; a plant a beast; a beast
 a man; a man a God," holds good throughout the ages. Haeckel,
 in his <em>Shopfungsgeschichte, </em>shows a double drawing representing
 two embryos -- that of a dog six weeks old, and that of a man,
 eight weeks. The two, except the slight difference in the head,
 larger and wider about the brain in the man, are
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<em>Trans. </em>of Geolog. Soc. of Glasgow," vol.
 iii. Very strangely, however, he has just changed his opinion.
 The sun, he says, is only 15,000,000 old.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 259 IDENTITY OF HUMAN AND ANIMAL EMBRYOS.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 undistinguishable. "In fact, we may say that every human
 being passes through the stage of fish and reptile before arriving
 at that of mammal and finally of man. If we take him up at the
 more advanced stage where the embryo has already passed the reptilian
 form . . . for a considerable time, the line of development remains
 the same as that of other mammalia. The rudimentary limbs are
 exactly similar, the five fingers and toes develop in the same
 way, and the resemblance after the first four weeks' growth <em>between
 the embryo of a man and a dog is such that it is scarcely possible
 to distinguish them. </em>Even at the age of eight weeks the embryo
 man is an animal with a tail hardly to be distinguished from an
 embryo puppy" ("Modern Science," etc., p. 171).
 </p><p>
 Why, then, not make man and dog evolve from a common ancestor,
 or from a reptile -- <em>a Naga, </em>instead of coupling man
 with the quadrumana? This would be just as logical as the other,
 and more so. The shape and the stages of the human embryo have
 not changed since historical times, and these metamorphoses were
 known to AEsculapius and Hippocrates as well as to Mr. Huxley.
 Therefore, since the Kabalists had remarked it since prehistoric
 times, it is no new discovery. In "Isis," Vol. I., 389,
 it is noticed and half explained.
 </p><p>
 As the embryo of man has no more of the ape in it than of any
 other mammal, but <em>contains in itself the totality of the kingdoms
 of nature, </em>and since it seems to be "a persistent type"
 of life, far more so than even the Foraminifera, it seems as illogical
 to make him evolve from the ape as it would be to trace his origin
 to the frog or the dog. Both Occult and Eastern philosophies believe
 in evolution, which Manu and Kapila* give with far more clearness
 than any scientist does at present. No need to repeat that which
 was fully debated in <em>Isis Unveiled, </em>as the reader may
 find all these arguments and the description of the basis on which
 all the Eastern doctrines of Evolution rested, in our earlier
 books.** But no Occultist can accept the unreasonable proposition
 that all the now existing forms, "from the structureless
 Amoeba to man," are the direct lineal descendants of organisms
 which lived millions and millions of years before the birth of
 man, in the pre-Silurian epochs, in the sea or land-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Hence the philosophy in the allegory of the 7, 10, and finally
 21 Prajapati, Rishis, Munis, etc., who all are made the <em>fathers
 </em>of various things and beings. The order of the seven classes
 or orders of plants, animals, and even inanimate things, given
 at random in the Puranas, is found in several commentaries in
 the correct rotation. Thus, Prithu is the father of the Earth.
 He <em>milks her, </em>and makes her bear every kind of grain
 and vegetable, all enumerated and specified. Kasyapa is the father
 of all the reptiles, snakes, demons, etc., etc.
 </p><p>
 ** See Vol. I. 152,<em> et seq., </em>about the tree of evolution
 -- The "Mundane Tree."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 260 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 mud. The Occultists believe in an <em>inherent law </em>of progressive
 <em>development.* </em>Mr. Darwin never did, and says so himself.
 </p><p>
 On page 145 of the "Origin of Species" we find him stating
 that, since <em>there can be no advantage </em>"to the infusorian
 animalcule or an intestinal worm . . . to become highly organized,"
 therefore, "natural selection," <em>not including necessarily
 progressive development -- </em>leaves<em> </em>the animalcule
 and the worm (the "persistent types") quiet.
 </p><p>
 There does not appear much <em>uniform </em>law in such behaviour
 of Nature; and it looks more like the discriminative action of
 some <em>Super</em>-Natural selection; perhaps, that aspect of
 <em>Karma, </em>which Eastern Occultists would call the "Law
 of Retardation," may have something to do with it.
 </p><p>
 But there is every reason to doubt whether Mr. Darwin himself
 ever gave such an importance to <em>his </em>law -- as is given
 to it now by his atheistic followers. The knowledge of the various
 living forms in the geological periods that have gone by is very
 meagre. The reasons given for this by Dr. Bastian are very suggestive:
 (1) On account of the imperfect manner in which the several forms
 may be represented in the strata pertaining to the period; (2)
 on account of the extremely limited nature of the explorations
 which have been made in these imperfectly representative strata;
 and (3) because so many parts of the record are absolutely inaccessible
 to us -- nearly all beneath the Silurian system having been blotted
 out by time, whilst those two-thirds of the earth's surface in
 which the remaining strata are to be found are now covered over
 by seas. Hence Mr. Darwin says himself: --
 </p><p>
 "For my part, following out Lyell's metaphor, I look at the
 geological record as a history of the world imperfectly kept,
 and written in a changing dialect; <em>of this history we possess
 the last volume alone, </em>relating only to two or three countries.
 Of this volume, <em>only here and there a short chapter has been
 preserved, </em>and of each page <em>only here and there a few
 lines.</em>"
 </p><p>
 It is not on such meagre data, certainly, that the last word of
 Science can be said. Nor is it on any ground of human pride or
 unreasonable belief in man's representing even here on earth --
 (in <em>our </em>period, perhaps) -- the highest type of life,
 that Occultism denies that all the preceding forms of human life
 belonged to types lower than our own, for it is not so. But simply
 because the "missing link," such as to prove the existing
 theory undeniably, will never be found by palaeontologists. Believing
 as we do that man has evolved from, and passed through, (during
 the preceding Rounds) the lowest forms of every life, vegetable
 and animal, on earth, there is nothing very degrading in the idea
 of having the orangoutang as an ancestor of our physical form.
 Quite the reverse; as it
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Checked and modified, however, by the <em>Law of Retardation,
 </em>which imposes a restriction on the advance of all species
 when a Higher Type makes its appearance.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 261 NATURE IS UNIFORM.</h6>
 
 <p>
 would forward the Occult doctrine with regard to the final evolution
 of everything in terrestrial nature into man, most irresistibly.
 One may even enquire how it is that biologists and anthropologists,
 having once firmly accepted the theory of the descent of man from
 the ape -- how it is that they have hitherto left untouched the
 future evolution of the existing apes into man? This is only a
 logical sequence of the first theory, unless Science would make
 of man a privileged being, and his evolution a <em>non</em>-precedent
 in nature, quite a <em>special </em>and unique case. And that
 is what all this leads physical Science to. The reason, however,
 why the Occultists reject the Darwinian, and especially the Haeckelian,
 hypothesis is because it is the ape which is, in sober truth,
 a special and unique instance, not man. The pithecoid is <em>an
 accidental creation, </em>a forced growth, the result of an unnatural
 process.
 </p><p>
 The occult doctrine, is, we think, more logical. It teaches a
 cyclic, never varying law in nature, the latter having no personal,
 "special design," but acting on a uniform plan that
 prevails through the whole manvantaric period and deals with the
 land worm as it deals with man. Neither the one nor the other
 have sought to come into being, hence both are under the same
 evolutionary law, and both have to progress according to Karmic
 law. Both have started from the same neutral centre of Life and
 both have to re-merge into it at the consummation of the cycle.
 </p><p>
 It is not denied that in the preceding Round man <em>was </em>a
 gigantic apelike creature; and when we say "man" we
 ought perhaps to say, the rough mould that was developing for
 the use of man in this Round only -- the middle, or the transition
 point of which we have hardly reached. Nor was man what he is
 now during the first two and a half Root-races. That point he
 reached, as said before, only 18,000,000 years ago, during the
 secondary period, as we claim.
 </p><p>
 Till then he was, according to tradition and Occult teaching,
 "a god on earth who had fallen into matter," or generation.
 This may or may not be accepted, since the Secret Doctrine does
 not impose itself as an infallible dogma; and since, whether its
 prehistoric records are accepted or rejected, it has nothing to
 do with the question of the <em>actual </em>man and his inner
 nature, the Fall mentioned above having left no original sin on
 Humanity. But all this has been sufficiently dealt with.
 </p><p>
 Furthermore, we are taught that the transformations through which
 man passed on the descending arc -- which is centrifugal for spirit
 and centripetal for matter -- and those he prepares to go through,
 henceforward, on his ascending path, which will reverse the direction
 of the two forces -- viz., matter will become centrifugal and
 spirit centripetal -- that all such transformations <em>are next
 in store for the anthropoid ape also, </em>all those, at any rate,
 who have reached the remove next to man in this</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 262 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Round -- and these will all be men in the Fifth Round, as present
 men inhabited ape-like forms in the Third, the preceding Round.
 </p><p>
 Behold, then, in the modern denizens of the great forests of Sumatra
 the degraded and <em>dwarfed </em>examples -- "blurred copies,"
 as Mr. Huxley has it -- of ourselves, as we (the majority of mankind)
 were in the earliest sub-races of the Fourth Root-race during
 the period of what is called the "Fall into generation."
 The ape we know is not the product of natural evolution but an
 <em>accident, </em>a cross-breed between an animal being, or form,
 and man. As has been shown in the present volume (anthropogenesis),
 it is the speechless animal that first started sexual connection,
 having been the first to separate into males and females. Nor
 was it intended by Nature that man should follow the bestial example
 -- as shown by the comparatively painless procreation of their
 species by the animals, and the terrible suffering and danger
 of the same in the woman. The Ape is, indeed, as remarked in <em>Isis
 Unveiled </em>(Vol. <b>II</b> 278) "a transformation of species
 most directly connected with that of the human family -- <em>a
 hybrid branch engrafted on their own stock before the final perfection
 of the latter</em>" -- or man. The apes are millions of years
 later than the speaking human being, and are the latest contemporaries
 of our Fifth Race. Thus, it is most important to remember that
 the <em>Egos </em>of the apes are entities compelled by their
 Karma to incarnate in the animal forms, which resulted from the
 bestiality of the <em>latest </em>Third and the earliest Fourth
 Race men. They are entities who had already reached the "human
 stage" before this Round. Consequently, they form an exception
 to the general rule. The numberless traditions about Satyrs are
 no fables, but represent an extinct race of animal men. The animal
 "Eves" were their foremothers, and the human "Adams"
 their forefathers; <em>hence the Kabalistic allegory of Lilith
 or Lilatu, </em>Adam's <em>first </em>wife, whom the Talmud describes
 as a <em>charming </em>woman,<em> with long wavy hair, i.e.-</em>-
 a female hairy animal of a character now unknown, still a female
 animal, who in the Kabalistic and Talmudic allegories is called
 the female reflection of Samael, Samael-Lilith, or man-animal
 united, a being called <em>Hayo Bischat, </em>the Beast or Evil
 Beast (<em>Zohar</em>)<em>. </em>It is from this unnatural union
 that the present apes descended. The latter are truly "speechless
 men," and will become speaking animals (or men of a lower
 order) in the Fifth Round, while the adepts of a certain school
 hope that some of the Egos of the apes of a higher intelligence
 will reappear at the close of the Sixth Root-race. What their
 form will be is of secondary consideration. The form means nothing.
 Species and genera of the flora, fauna, and the highest animal,
 its crown -- man, change and vary according to the environments
 and climatic variations, not only with every Round, but every
 Root-Race likewise, as well as after every geological</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 263 MILLIONS OF YEARS HENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 cataclysm that puts an end to, or produces a turning point in
 the latter. In the Sixth Root-Race the fossils of the Orang, the
 Gorilla and the Chimpanzee will be those of extinct quadrumanous
 mammals; and new forms -- though fewer and ever wider apart as
 ages pass on and the close of the Manvantara approaches -- will
 develop from the "cast off" types of the human races
 as they revert once again to astral, out of the mire of physical,
 life. There were none before man, and they will be extinct before
 the Seventh Race develops. Karma will lead on the monads of the
 unprogressed men of our race and lodge them in the newly evolved
 human frames of the thus physiologically regenerated baboon. (But
 see Part III., <em>Addenda</em>.)
 </p><p>
 This will take place, of course, millions of years hence. But
 the picture of this cyclic precession of all that lives and breathes
 now on earth, of each species in its turn, is a true one, and
 needs no "special creation" or miraculous formation
 of man, beast, and plant <em>ex nihilo.</em> 
 </p><p>
 This is how Occult Science explains the absence of any link between
 ape and man, and shows the former evolving from the latter.<a name="DDE_LINK19"></a>
 
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK25">-------</a> 
 </p><p>
 [[This page continued in next section]] <a name="DDE_LINK20"></a><a name="DDE_LINK21"></a><a name="DDE_LINK22"></a><a name="DDE_LINK23"></a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-15.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>