<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 341 THE MATERIALISM OF THE BIBLE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 [[This page continued from <a href="sd2-1-19.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><p>
 <strong>C</strong>YCLOPEAN <strong>R</strong>UINS AND <strong>C</strong>OLOSSAL
 <strong>S</strong>TONES AS <strong>W</strong>ITNESSES TO <strong>G</strong>IANTS.
 </p><p>
 In his enormous works <em>-- Memoires addressees a l</em>'<em>Academie
 des Sciences -- </em>de Mirville, carrying out the task of proving
 the reality of the devil and showing his abode in every ancient
 and modern idol, has collected several hundred pages of "historical
 evidence" that in the days of <em>miracle </em>-- Pagan and
 Biblical -- the stones walked, spoke, delivered oracles, and even
 sung. That finally, "Christ-stone," or <em>Christ-Rock,
 </em>"the spiritual Rock" that followed "Israel"
 (I <em>Corinth. x. </em>4) "became a <em>Jupiter lapis,</em>"<em>
 </em>swallowed by his father Saturn, "under the shape of
 a stone."* We will not stop to discuss the evident misuse
 and materialization of Biblical metaphors, simply for the sake
 of proving the <em>Satanism </em>of idols, though a good deal
 might be said** on this subject. But without claiming any such
 peripateticism and innate psychic faculties for our stones, we
 may collect, in our turn, every available evidence on hand, to
 show that (<em>a</em>) had there been no giants to move about
 such colossal rocks, there could never have been a Stonehenge,
 a Carnac (Brittany) and other such Cyclopean structures; and (<em>b</em>)
 were there no such thing as MAGIC, there could never have been
 so many witnesses to <em>oracular</em> and<em> speaking </em>stones.
 </p><p>
 In the <em>Achaica </em>(p. 81) we find Pausanias confessing that,
 in beginning his work, he had regarded the Greeks as mighty <em>stupid
 </em>"for worshipping stones." But, having reached Arcadia,
 he adds: "I have changed my way of thinking." Therefore,
 without worshipping stones or stone idols and statues, which is
 the same -- a crime Roman Catholics are unwise to reproach Pagans
 with, as they do likewise -- one may be allowed to believe in
 what so many great philosophers and holy men have believed in,
 without deserving to be called an "idiot" by modern
 Pausaniases.
 </p><p>
 The reader is referred to Volume <strong>VI</strong>. of the <em>Academie
 des Inscriptions</em> (<em>Memoires, </em>p. 518, <em>et seq</em>.)<em>
 </em>if he would study the various properties of flints and pebbles
 from the standpoint of <em>Magic </em>and psychic powers. In a
 poem on <em>Stones </em>attributed to Orpheus, those stones are
 divided into <em>ophites</em> and<em> siderites, </em>"serpent-stones"
 and "star-stones." "The '<em>Ophite</em>'
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> Pierres Animees et parlantes., p. </em>283<em>. Theologie
 de la Pierre, 270.</em> 
 </p><p>
 ** Saturn is <em>Kronos -- </em>"<em>Time.</em>"<em>
 </em>His swallowing <em>Jupiter lapis </em>may turn out one day
 a prophecy. "Peter (<em>Cephas, lapis</em>)<em>, </em>is
 the <em>stone </em>on which the Church of Rome is built"
 we are assured. But <em>Kronos </em>is as sure "to <em>swallow
 </em>it" one day, as he has swallowed <em>Jupiter-lapis </em>and
 still greater characters.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 342 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 is shaggy, hard, heavy, black, and <em>has the gift of speech</em>;<em>
 </em>when one prepares to cast it away, <em>it produces a sound
 similar to the cry of a child. </em>It is by means of this stone
 that Helanos foretold the ruin of Troy, his fatherland . . "
 etc. (Falconnet.)
 </p><p>
 Sanchoniathon and Philo Byblius, in referring to these <em>betyles,
 </em>call them "<em>Animated </em>Stones." Photius repeats
 what Damascius, Asclepiades, Isidorus and the physician Eusebius
 had asserted before him. The latter (Eusebius) never parted with
 his <em>ophites, </em>which he carried in his bosom, and received
 oracles from them, delivered <em>in a small voice resembling a
 low whistling.* </em>Arnobius (a holy man who, "from a Pagan
 had become one of the <em>lights of the Church,</em>"<em>
 </em>Christians tell their readers) confesses he could never meet
 on his passage with one of such stones without putting it questions,
 "which is answered occasionally in <em>a clear and sharp
 small voice.</em>"<em> </em>Where is the difference between
 the Christian and the Pagan <em>ophites, </em>we ask?
 </p><p>
 It is also known that the famous stone at Westminster was called
 <em>liafail -- </em>"the speaking stone," -- which raised
 its voice only to name the king that had to be chosen. Cambry
 (<em>Monuments Celtiques</em>)<em> </em>says he saw it when it
 still bore the inscription: --**
 </p><blockquote>
 <i>"Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocumque locatum <br>
 Invenient lapidem, regnasse tenentur ibidem."</i> 
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Finally, Suidas speaks of a certain Heraclius, who could distinguish
 at a glance the inanimate stones from those which were endowed
 with motion; and Pliny mentions stones which "ran away when
 a hand approached them." (See <em>Dictionnaire des Religions
 par l</em>'<em>abbe Bertrand</em>;<em> art. on words Heraclius
 and Betyles.</em>)
 </p><p>
 De Mirville -- who seeks to justify the Bible -- inquires very
 pertinently, why the monstrous stones of Stonehenge were called
 in days of old <em>chior-gaur </em>(from <em>Cor</em>, "dance,"
 whence <em>chorea,</em> and <em>gaur, </em>a GIANT), or the dance
 of giants? And then he sends the reader to receive his reply from
 the Bishop of St. Gildas. But the authors of the <em>Voyage dans
 le Comte</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The same, of course, as the "small voice" heard by
 Elijah after the earthquake at the mouth of the cave. (I<em> Kings
 xix. </em>12.)
 </p><p>
 ** The rocking, or Logan, stones bear various names. The Celts
 had their <em>clacha-brath, </em>the "Destiny or judgment-stone";
 the <em>divining</em>-stone, or "stone of the ordeal"
 and the oracle stone; the moving or animated stone of the Phoenicians;
 the rumbling stone of the Irish. Brittany has its "<em>pierres
 branlantes</em>"<em> </em>at Huelgoat. They are found in
 the Old and the New Worlds: in the British Islands, France, Spain,
 Italy, Russia, Germany, etc., as in North America.<em> </em>(<em>See
 Hodson</em>'<em>s </em>"<em>Letters from North America,</em>"<em>
 Vol. </em><strong>II</strong><em>., p. </em>440.) Pliny speaks
 of several in Asia (<em>Hist. Nat. Lib. I., c. </em>96), and Apollonius
 Rhodius expatiates on the rocking stones, and says that they are
 "stones placed on the apex of a tumulus, and so sensitive
 <em>as to be movable by the mind</em>" (<em>Ackerman</em>'<em>s
 Arth. Index, p. </em>34), referring no doubt to the ancient priests
 who moved such stones by will-power and from a distance.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 343 THE "ROCKING-STONES" IN EUROPE.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>de Cornouailles, sur les traces des giants, </em>and of various
 learned works on the ruins of Stonehenge,* Carnac and West Hoadley,
 give far better and more reliable information upon this particular
 subject. In those regions -- true forests of rocks -- immense
 monoliths are found, "some weighing over 500,000 kilograms"
 (Cambry). These "hinging stones" of Salisbury Plain
 are believed to be the remains of a Druidical temple. But the
 Druids were historical men and not Cyclopes, nor giants. Who then,
 <em>if not giants, could ever raise such masses </em>(especially
 those at Carnac and West Hoadley), range them in such symmetrical
 order that they should represent the planisphere, and place them
 in such wonderful equipoise that they seem to hardly touch the
 ground, are set in motion at the slightest touch of the finger,
 and would yet resist the efforts of twenty men who should attempt
 to displace them.
 </p><p>
 We say, that most of these stones are the relics of the last Atlanteans.
 We shall be answered that all the geologists claim them to be
 of a natural origin. That, a rock when "weathering,"
 <em>i.e.</em>, losing flake after flake of its substance under
 influence of weather, assumes this form. That, the "tors"
 in West England exhibit curious forms, also produced by this cause.
 That, finally, as all scientists consider the "rocking stones
 to be of purely natural origin, wind, rain, etc., causing disintegration
 of rocks in layers" -- our statement will be justly denied,
 especially as "<em> </em>we see this process of rock-modification
 in progress around us to-day." Let us examine the case.
 </p><p>
 But read what Geology has to say, and you will learn that often
 these gigantic masses do not even belong to the countries wherein
 they are now fixed; that their geological congeners often pertain
 to strata unknown in those regions and to be found only far beyond
 the seas. Mr. William Tooke (<em>French trans., Sepulture des
 Tartares. Arch. VII, p. </em>222), speculating upon the enormous
 blocks of granite which are strewn over Southern Russia and Siberia,
 tells the reader that there, where they now rest, there are neither
 rocks nor mountains; and that they must have been brought over
 "from immense distances and with prodigious efforts."
 Charton (<em>Voyageurs Anciens et Modernes, Vol. </em>I., p. 230)
 speaks of a specimen of such rock "from Ireland," which
 had been submitted to the analysis of an eminent English geologist,
 who assigned to it a foreign origin, "<em>most probably African.</em>"
 </p><p>
 This is a strange <em>coincidence, </em>as Irish tradition attributes
 the origin of her circular stones to a <em>Sorcerer who brought
 them from Africa. </em>De Mirville sees in that sorcerer "an
 accursed <em>Hamite.</em>" We see in him a
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See, among others, "<em>History of Paganism in Caledonia,</em>"<em>
 by Dr. Th. A. Wise, </em><strong>F.R.A.S.</strong><em>, etc.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 ** Ham was no more a Titan or Giant than Shem and Japhet. They
 are either all Arkite Titans, as Faber shows them, or myths.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 344 THE SECRET DOCTRINE</h6>
 
 <p>
 dark Atlantean, or perhaps even some earlier Lemurian, who had
 survived till the birth of the British Islands -- <strong>G</strong>IANTS
 in every and any case.*
 </p><p>
 "Men," says Cambry, naively, "have nothing to do
 with it . . . for never could <em>human </em>power and industry
 undertake anything of this kind. Nature alone has accomplished
 it all (!!) and Science will demonstrate it some day" (!!)
 (p. 88). Nevertheless, it is a <em>human</em>, though gigantic
 power, which has accomplished it, and no more "nature"
 alone than god or devil.
 </p><p>
 "Science," having undertaken to demonstrate that even
 the mind and Spirit of man are simply the production of <em>blind
 forces,</em> is quite capable of accepting the task. It may come
 out some fine morning, and seek to prove that nature alone has
 marshalled the gigantic rocks of Stonehenge, traced their position
 with mathematical precision, given them the form of the Dendera
 planisphere and of the signs of the Zodiac, and brought stones
 weighing over one million of pounds flying from Africa and Asia
 to England and Ireland!
 </p><p>
 It is true that Cambry recanted later on. "I had believed
 for a long time," he says, "that <em>Nature alone </em>could
 produce those wonders . . . . but I <em>recant </em>. . . . chance
 is <em>unable to create </em>such marvellous combinations . .
 . . and those who placed the said rocks in equipoise, are the
 same who have raised the moving masses of the pond of Huelgoat,
 near Concarneau. . . . ." Dr. John Watson, quoted by the
 same author "<em>Antiquites Celtiques</em>," p. 99,
 says, when speaking of the <em>moving </em>rocks, or Rocking-Stones
 situated on the slope of Golcar (the "Enchanter"): "The
 astonishing movement of those masses poised in equilibrium made
 the Celts compare them to gods." . . . .
 </p><p>
 In "Stonehenge" (Flinders Petrie) it is said that "Stonehenge
 is built of the stone of the district, a red sandstone, or 'sarsen'
 stone, locally called 'grey wethers.' But some of the stones,
 especially those which are said to have been devoted to astronomical
 purposes, have been brought from a distance, probably the North
 of Ireland."
 </p><p>
 To close, the reflections of a man of Science, in an article upon
 the subject published in 1850 in the <em>Revue Archeologique</em>
 (<em>p.</em> 473), are worthy of being quoted. Says the paper,
 concerning the rocking stones: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Every stone is a block whose weight would try the most powerful
 machines. There are, in a word, scattered throughout the globe,
 masses, before which the word <em>materials</em> seems to remain
 inexplicable, at the sight of which imagination is confounded,
 and that had to be endowed with a name as colossal as the
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Diodorus Siculus asserts that in the days of Isis, all men were
 of a vast stature, who were denominated by the Hellenes Giants.
 [Gk chars] "[<em>Oi d</em>'<em>en Aiguptoi muthologousi kata
 ten Isidos helikian gegonenai tinas polusomatous].</em>"
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 345 LIVING, SPEAKING, AND MOVING STONES.
 </h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 things themselves. Besides which, these <em>immense rocking </em>stones,
 called sometimes <em>routers </em>-- placed upright on one of
 their sides as on a point, their equipoise being so perfect that
 the slightest touch is sufficient to set them in motion . . .
 betray a most positive knowledge of statics. Reciprocal counter-motion,
 surfaces, plane, convex and concave, in turn . . . all this allies
 them to Cyclopean monuments, of which it can be said with good
 reason, repeating after de La Vega that 'the demons seem to have
 worked on them more than men.' "*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 For once we agree with our friends and foes, the Roman Catholics,
 and ask whether such prodigies of statics and equilibrium, applied
 to masses weighing millions of pounds, can be the work of Palaeolithic
 <em>savages, </em>of cave-men, taller than the average man in
 our century, yet ordinary mortals as we are? It is no use for
 <em>our</em> purpose to refer to the various traditions attached
 to the rocking-stones. Still, it may be as well to remind the
 English reader of <em>Giraldus Cambrensis, </em>who speaks of
 such a stone on the Isle of Mona, which returned to its place,
 every effort made to keep it elsewhere notwithstanding. At the
 time of the conquest of Ireland by Henry <strong>II</strong>.,
 a Count Hugo Cestrensis, desiring to convince himself of the reality
 of the fact, tied the Mona stone to a far bigger one and had them
 thrown into the sea. On the following morning it was found in
 its accustomed place. . . The learned William of Salisbury warrants
 the fact by testifying to its presence in the wall of a church
 where he had seen it in 1554. . . And this reminds one of what
 Pliny said of the stone left by the Argonauts at Cyzicum, which
 the Cyzicans had placed in the Prytanea "whence it <em>ran
 away several times, </em>which forced them to lead it" (<em>Nat.
 Hist., XXXVI., p. </em>592)<em> </em>. . . Here we have immense
 stones stated by all antiquity to be "living, moving, speaking
 and self-perambulating." They were also capable, it seems,
 of making people run away, since they have been called <em>routers
 </em>("to put to flight," to rout) and Des Mousseaux
 shows them all to be prophetic stones and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "It is difficult," writes Creuzer, "not to suspect
 in the structures of Tiryns and Mycenae planetary forces supposed
 to be moved by celestial powers, analogous to the famous Dactyles."
 (<em>Pelasges et Cyclopes</em>)<em>. </em>To this day Science
 is ignorant on the subject of the Cyclopes. They are supposed
 to have built all the so-called "Cyclopean" works whose
 erection necessitated several regiments of Giants, and -- they
 were only seventy-seven in all (about one hundred, Creuzer thinks).
 They are called "Builders," and Occultism calls them
 the INITIATORS, who, initiating some Pelasgians, thus laid the
 foundation stone of true MASONRY. Herodotus associates the Cyclops
 with Perseus "the son of an Assyrian demon" (I. <em>VI.
 p. </em>54). Raoul Rochette found that Palaemonius, the Cyclops,
 to whom a sanctuary was raised, "was the Tyrian Hercules."
 Anyhow, he was the builder of the sacred columns of Gadir, covered
 with mysterious characters to which Apollonius of Tyana was the
 only one in his age to possess the key; and with figures which
 may still be found on the walls of Ellora, the gigantic ruins
 of the temple of Viswakarma, "the builder and artificer of
 the Gods."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 346 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 called <em>mad</em> stones (<em>see his, </em>"<em>Dieu et
 les Dieux,</em>"<em> p. </em>587). "The rocking-stone
 is accepted in Science. Why did it rock, why was it made to do
 so? One must be blind not to see that this motion was one more
 means of divination, and that they were called for this very reason
 'the stones of truth.' " (<em>de Mirville, </em>"<em>Fetichisme</em>")<em>*</em>
 
 </p><p>
 <em>This is history, </em>the Past of prehistoric times, warranting
 the same in later ages. The Dracontia, sacred to the moon and
 the serpent, were the more ancient "Rocks of Destiny"
 of older nations, whose motion, or <em>rocking, </em>was a code
 perfectly clear to the initiated priests, who alone had the key
 to this ancient <em>reading.</em> Vormius and Olaius Magnus show
 that it was according to the orders of the oracle, "whose
 voice spoke through the immense rocks raised by the colossal powers
 of ancient giants," that the kings of Scandinavia were elected.
 "In India and Persia," says Pliny, "it is she (the
 Persian Oitzoe) whom the magi had to consult for the election
 of their sovereigns" (<em>Nat. Hist., lxxxvii., chap. LIV.</em>);<em>
 </em>and he describes (<em>in chap. XXXVIII., 1. ii.</em>) a rock
 overshadowing Harpasa, in Asia, and placed in such a manner that
 "a single finger
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Messrs. Richardson and Barth are said to have been amazed at
 finding in the Desert of Sahara the same trilithic and raised
 stones they had seen in Asia, Circassia, Etruria, and in all the
 North of Europe. Mr. Rivett-Carnac, <strong>B.C.S.</strong>, of
 Allahabad, the distinguished Archaeologist, shows the same amazement
 in finding the description given by Sir J. Simpson of the cuplike
 markings on stones and rocks in England, Scotland, and other Western
 countries -- "offering an extraordinary resemblance"
 to "the marks on the trap Boulders which encircle the Barrows
 near Nagpur" (the city of Snakes). The eminent scholar saw
 in this "another and very extraordinary addition to the mass
 of evidence. . . that a branch of the nomadic tribes, who swept
 at an early date over Europe, penetrated into India also."
 We say Lemuria, Atlantis and her giants, and the earliest races
 of the Fifth Root-Race had all a hand in these betyles, lithoi,
 and "magic" stones in general. The cup marks noticed
 by Sir J. Simpson, and the "holes scooped out on the face"
 of rocks and monuments found by Mr. Rivett-Carnac "of different
 sizes varying from six inches to an inch-and-a-half in diameter,
 and in depth from one to one-and-a-half inch . . . . . . generally
 arranged in perpendicular lines presenting many permutations in
 the number and size and arrangement of the cups" -- are simply
 <em>written</em> RECORDS of the oldest races. Whosoever examines
 with attention the drawings made of such marks in the "<em>Archaeological
 Notes on Ancient Sculpturing on Rocks in Kumaon, India, etc.,</em>"
 will find in it the most primitive style of marking or recording;
 something of the sort having been adopted by the American inventors
 of the Morse code of telegraphic writing, which reminds us of
 the Ahgam writing, a combination of long and short strokes, as
 Mr. Rivett-Carnac describes it "cut on sandstone." Sweden,
 Norway, and Scandinavia are full of such <em>written </em>records,
 the Runic characters having followed the cup-marks and long and
 short strokes. In "Johannes Magnus' Infolio" one sees
 the representation of the demi-god, the giant Starchaterus (Starkad,
 the pupil of Kroszharsgrani, the Magician) who holds under each
 arm a huge stone covered with Runic characters; and Starkad, according
 to Scandinavian legend, went to Ireland and performed marvellous
 deeds in the North and South, East and West. (<em>See</em> "<em>Asgard
 and the Gods.</em>") </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 347 UNIVERSAL WITNESSES. </h6>
 
 <p>
 can move it, while the weight of the whole body makes it resist."
 Why then should not the rocking stones of Ireland, or those of
 Brinham, in Yorkshire, have served for the same mode of <em>divination
 </em>or oracular communications? The hugest of them are evidently
 the relics of the Atlanteans; the smaller ones, such as Brinham
 Rocks, with some revolving stones on their summit, are copies
 from the more ancient lithoi. Had not the bishops of the middle
 ages destroyed all the plans of the <em>Dracontia </em>they could
 lay their hands on, Science would know more of these.* As it is,
 we know that they were universally used during long prehistoric
 ages, and all for the same purposes of prophecy and MAGIC. E.
 Biot, a member of the Institute of France, published in his <em>Antiquites
 de France, Vol. </em>ix., an article showing the <em>Chatam peramba
 </em>(the Field of Death, or ancient burial ground in Malabar),
 to be identical with the old tombs at Carnac -- "a prominence
 and a central tomb." . . . "Bones are found in them
 (the tombs)," he says, "and Mr. Hillwell tells us that
 some of these are enormous, the natives (of Malabar) calling the
 tombs the dwellings of Rakshasas (giants)." Several stone
 circles, "considered the work of the <em>Panch Pandava </em>(five
 Pandus), as all such monuments are in India, so numerous in that
 country," when opened by the direction of Rajah Vasariddi,
 "were found to contain <em>human bones of a very large size.</em>"
 (<em>T. A. Wise, in </em>"<em>History of Paganism in Caledonia,</em>"<em>
 p. </em>36).
 </p><p>
 Again, de Mirville is right in his <em>generalization, </em>if
 not in his conclusions. As the long cherished theory that the
 Dracontia are mostly witnesses to "great natural geological
 commotions" (Charlton), and "are the <em>work of Nature</em>"<em>
 </em>(Cambry) is now exploded, his remarks are very just. "Before
 the <em>impossibility </em>of such a theory is asserted, we advise
 Science to reflect . . . . and, above all, no longer to class
 <em>Titans and Giants </em>among primitive legends: for their
 works are there, under our eyes, and those rocking stones will
 oscillate on their basis to the end of the world to help them
 to see clearer and realise once for all, that <em>one is not altogether
 a candidate for Charenton for believing in wonders certified to
 by the whole of Antiquity</em>"<em> </em>("<em>Fetichisme,</em>"<em>
 p. </em>288).
 </p><p>
 It is just what we can never repeat too often, though the voices
 of both Occultists and Roman Catholics are raised in the desert.
 Nevertheless, no one can fail to see that Science is as inconsistent,
 to say the least, in its modern speculations, as was ancient and
 mediaeval theology in <em>its </em>interpretations of the so-called
 <em>Revelation. </em>Science would have men descend from the pithecoid
 ape -- a transformation requiring millions of years -- and yet
 fears to make mankind older than 100,000 years! Science teaches
 the gradual transformation of species,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Charton, the Author of "<em>Voyageurs anciens et modernes,</em>"<em>
 </em>quoted by de Mirville.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 348 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 natural selection and evolution from the lowest form to the highest;
 from mollusc to fish, from reptile to bird and mammalian. Yet
 it refuses to man, who physiologically is only a higher mammal
 and animal, such transformation of his external form. But if the
 monstrous iguanodon of the Wealden may have been the ancestor
 of the diminutive iguana of to-day, why could not the monstrous
 man of the Secret Doctrine have become the modern man -- the link
 between Animal and Angel? Is there anything more unscientific
 in <em>this </em>"theory," than in that of refusing
 to man any spiritual immortal Ego, making of him an automaton,
 and ranking him, at the same time, <em>as a distinct genus </em>in
 the system of Nature? Occult Sciences may be less scientific than
 the present exact Sciences, they are withal more logical and consistent
 in their teachings. Physical forces, and natural affinities of
 atoms may be sufficient as factors to transform a plant into an
 animal; but it requires more than a mere interplay between certain
 material aggregates and their environment, to call to life a <em>fully
 conscious man</em>;<em> </em>even though he were no more indeed
 than a ramification between two "poor cousins" of the
 Quadrumanous order. Occult Sciences admit with Haeckel that (objective)
 life on our globe "is a logical postulate of Scientific natural
 history," but add that the rejection of a like <em>Spiritual
 </em>involution, from <em>within without, </em>of invisible subjective
 Spirit-life -- eternal and a Principle in Nature -- is more illogical,
 if possible, than to say that the Universe and all in it has been
 gradually built by blind forces inherent in matter, without any
 <em>external help.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Suppose an Occultist were to claim that the first grand organ
 of a cathedral had come originally into being in the following
 manner. First, there was a progressive and gradual elaboration
 in Space of an organizable material, which resulted in the production
 of a state of matter named <em>organic </em>PROTEIN. Then, under
 the influence of incident forces, those states having been thrown
 into a phase of unstable equilibrium, they slowly and majestically
 evolved into and resulted in new combinations of carved and polished
 wood, of brass pins and staples, of leather and ivory, wind-pipes
 and bellows. After which, having adapted all its parts into one
 harmonious and symmetrical machine, the organ suddenly pealed
 forth Mozart's <em>Requiem. </em>This was followed by a Sonata
 of Beethoven, etc., <em>ad infinitum</em>;<em> </em>its keys playing
 of themselves and the wind blowing into the pipes by its own inherent
 force and fancy. . . . . What would Science say to such a theory?
 Yet, it is precisely in such wise that the materialistic <em>savants
 </em>tell us that the Universe was formed, with its millions of
 beings, and man, its spiritual crown.
 </p><p>
 Whatever may have been the real inner thought of Mr. Herbert Spencer,
 when writing on the subject of the gradual transformation of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 349 IT TAKES A GOD TO BECOME A MAN.</h6>
 
 <p>
 species, what he says in it applies to our doctrine. "Construed
 in terms of evolution, every kind of being is conceived as a product
 of modifications wrought by insensible gradations <em>on a pre-existing
 kind of being.</em>" ("<em>Essays on Physiology,</em>"<em>
 </em>Subj. p. 144.) Then why, in this case, should not historical
 man be the product of a modification on a pre-existent and pre-historical
 kind of man, even supposing for argument's sake that there is
 <em>nothing </em>within him to last longer than, or live independently
 of, his physical structure? But this is not so! For, when we are
 told that "organic matters are produced in the laboratory
 by what we may literally call <em>artificial evolution</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Appendix to </em>"<em>Principles of Biology,</em>"<em>
 p. </em>482), we answer the distinguished English philosopher,
 that Alchemists and great adepts have done as much, and, indeed,
 far more, before the chemists ever attempted to "build out
 of dissociated elements complex combinations." The <em>Homunculi
 </em>of Paracelsus are a fact in Alchemy, and will become one
 in Chemistry very likely, and then Mrs. Shelley's Frankenstein
 will have to be regarded as a prophecy. But no chemist, or Alchemist
 either, will ever endow such a "Frankenstein's Monster"
 with more than animal instinct, unless indeed he does that which
 the "Progenitors" are credited with, namely, if he leaves
 his own physical body, and incarnates in the "empty form."
 But even this would be an <em>artificial, </em>not a natural man,
 for our "Progenitors" had, in the course of eternal
 evolution, to become <em>gods </em>before they became men.
 </p><p>
 The above digression, if one, is an attempt at justification before
 the few thinking men of the coming century who may read this.
 But this accounts also for the reason why the best and most spiritual
 men of our present day can no longer be satisfied with either
 Science or theology; and why they prefer any such "psychic
 craze" to the dogmatic assertions of both, neither of the
 two having anything better to offer than <em>blind </em>faith
 in their respective infallibility. <em>Universal </em>tradition
 is indeed the far safer guide in life. And universal tradition
 shows primitive man living for ages together with his Creators
 and first instructors -- the Elohim -- in the World's "Garden
 of Eden," or "Delight." We shall treat of the Divine
 Instructors in Stanza <strong>XII</strong>.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 45. <strong>T</strong>HE FIRST GREAT WATERS CAME. <strong>T</strong>HEY
 SWALLOWED THE SEVEN GREAT ISLANDS (<em>a</em>).
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 46. <strong>A</strong>LL HOLY SAVED, THE UNHOLY DESTROYED. <strong>W</strong>ITH
 THEM MOST OF THE HUGE ANIMALS PRODUCED FROM THE SWEAT OF THE EARTH
 (<em>b</em>)<em>.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 350 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (<em>a</em>) As this subject -- the fourth great deluge on our
 globe in this Round -- is fully treated in the chapters that follow
 the last Stanza, to say anything more at present would be mere
 repetition. The seven great islands (Dwipas) belonged to the continent
 of Atlantis. The secret teachings show that the "Deluge"
 overtook the Fourth, giant Race, not on account of their depravity,
 or because they had become "black with sin," but simply
 because such is the fate of every continent, which -- like everything
 else under our Sun -- is born, lives, becomes decrepit, and dies.
 This was when the Fifth Race was in its infancy.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) Thus the giants perished -- the magicians and the
 sorcerers, adds the fancy of popular tradition, but "all
 holy saved," and alone the "unholy were destroyed."
 This was due, however, as much to the <em>prevision </em>of the
 "holy" ones, who had not lost the use of their "third
 eye," as to Karma and natural law. Speaking of the subsequent
 race (our Fifth Humanity), the commentary says: --
 </p><p>
 "<em>Alone the handful of those Elect, whose divine instructors
 had gone to inhabit that Sacred Island -- </em>'<em>from whence
 the last Saviour will come</em>'<em> -- now kept mankind from
 becoming one-half the exterminator of the other </em>[as mankind
 does now -- <strong>H.P.B.</strong>]. <em>It</em> (mankind) <em>became
 divided. Two-thirds of it were ruled by Dynasties of lower, material
 Spirits of the earth, who took possession of the easily accessible
 bodies</em>;<em> one-third remained faithful, and joined with
 the nascent Fifth Race -- the divine Incarnates. When the Poles
 moved </em>(for the fourth time) <em>this did not affect those
 who were protected, and who had separated from the Fourth Race.
 Like the Lemurians -- alone the ungodly Atlanteans perished, and
 </em>'<em>were seen no more</em> . . . . ."
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-21.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>