<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><em>The Secret Doctrine</em> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 2
 </h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 519 THE "FATHER OF MORTALS." </h6>
 
 <h3>§ XX.</h3>
 
 <h4>PROMETHEUS, THE TITAN.</h4>
 
 <h5><strong>H</strong>IS <strong>O</strong>RIGIN IN <strong>A</strong>NCIENT
 <strong>I</strong>NDIA.</h5>
 
 <p>
 <strong>I</strong>N our modern day there does not exist the slightest
 doubt in the minds of the best European symbologists that the
 name Prometheus possessed the greatest and most mysterious significance
 in antiquity. While giving the history of Deukalion, whom the
 Boeotians regarded as the ancestor of the human races, and who
 was the Son of Prometheus, according to the significant legend,
 the author of the <em>Mythologie</em> <em>de la Grece Antique
 </em>remarks: "Thus Prometheus is something more than the
 archetype of humanity; he is <em>its generator. </em>In the same
 way that we saw Hephaestus moulding the first woman (Pandora)
 and endowing her with life, so Prometheus kneads the moist clay,
 of which he fashions the body of the first man whom he will endow
 with the soul-spark" (<em>Apollodorus, </em>I., 7, 1). After
 the Flood of Deukalion, Zeus, it was taught, had commanded Prometheus
 and Athena to call forth a new race of men from the mire left
 by the waters of the deluge (<em>Ovid</em>, <em>Metam. </em>1,
 81. <em> Etym. M. </em><i>v</i>. [[<i>Prometheus</i>]]); and in
 the day of Pausanias the slime which the hero had used for this
 purpose was still shown in Phocea (<em>Paus. </em>x, 4, 4). "On
 several archaic monuments one still sees Prometheus modelling
 a human body, either alone or with Athena's help" (<em>Myth.
 Grece Ant. 246</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 The same authors remind the world of another equally mysterious
 personage, though one less generally known than Prometheus, whose
 legend offers remarkable analogies with that of the Titan. The
 name of this second ancestor and generator is <em>Phoroneus, </em>the
 hero of an ancient poem, now unfortunately no longer extant --
 the<em> Phoronidae. </em>His legend was localized in Argolis,
 where a perpetual flame was preserved on his altar as a reminder
 that he was the bringer of fire upon earth (<em>Pausanias,</em>
 11, 19, 5;<em> Cf. </em>20<em>, </em>3.) A benefactor of men as
 Prometheus was, he had made them participators of every bliss
 on earth. Plato (<em>Timaeus, p. </em>22)<em>,</em> and Clemens
 Alexandrinus (<em>Strom.</em> 1<em>, p. </em>380) say that Phoroneus
 was the first man, or "the father of mortals." His genealogy,
 which assigns to him as his father Inachos, the river, reminds
 one of that of Prometheus, which makes that Titan the son of the
 Oceanid Clymene. But the mother of Phoroneus was the nymph Melia;
 a significant descent which distinguishes him from Prometheus.
 </p><p>
 Melia, Decharme thinks, is the personification of the <em>ash-tree,
 </em>whence,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 520 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 according to Hesiod, issued the race of the age of Bronze* (<em>Opera
 et</em> <em>Dies, </em>142-145); and which with the Greeks is
 the <em>celestial tree </em>common to every Aryan mythology. This
 <em>ash </em>is the Yggdrasil of the Norse antiquity, which the
 Norns sprinkle daily with the waters from the fountain of Urd,
 that it may not wither. It remains verdant till the last days
 of the Golden Age. Then the Norns -- the three sisters who gaze
 respectively into the Past, the Present, and the Future -- make
 known the decree of Fate (<em>Karma, Orlog</em>)<em>, </em>but
 men are conscious only of the Present. But when Gultweig comes
 (the golden ore) "the bewitching enchantress who, thrice
 cast into the fire, arises each time more beautiful, and fills
 the souls of gods and men with unapproachable longing, then the
 Norns . . . enter into being, and the blessed peace of childhood's
 dreams passes away, and Sin comes into existence with all its
 evil consequences . . ." and <strong>K</strong>ARMA (<em>See
 "Asgard and the Gods," p. </em>10-12)<em>. </em>The
 thrice purified Gold is -<em>- Manas, </em>the Conscious Soul.
 </p><p>
 With the Greeks, the "ash-tree" represented the same
 idea. Its luxuriant boughs are the sidereal heaven, golden by
 day and studded with stars by night -- the fruits of Melia and
 Yggdrasil, under whose protecting shadow humanity lived during
 the Golden Age without desire as without any fear . . . . "That
 tree had a fruit, or an inflamed bough, <em>which was lightning,"
 </em>Decharme guesses.
 </p><p>
 And here steps in the killing materialism of the age; that peculiar
 twist in the modern mind, which, like a Northern blast, bends
 all on its way, and freezes every intuition, allowing it no hand
 in the physical speculations of the day. After having seen in
 Prometheus no better than <em>fire by friction, </em>the learned
 author of the <em>"Mythologie de la Grece</em> <em>Antique"
 </em>perceives in this "fruit" a trifle <em>more than
 an allusion to</em> <em>terrestrial fire and its discovery. It
 is no longer fire, owing to the fall of</em> <em>lightning setting
 some dry fuel in a blaze, </em>and thus revealing all its priceless
 benefits to Palaeolithic men; -- but something more mysterious
 this time, though still as earthly. . . . "A divine bird,
 nestled in the boughs of the celestial ash-tree, stole that bough
 (or the fruit) and carried it down on the earth in its bill. Now
 the Greek word [[<i>Phoroneus</i>]] is the rigid equivalent of
 the Sanskrit word <em>bhuranyu </em>('the rapid') an epithet of
 Agni, considered as the carrier of the divine spark. Phoroneus,
 son of <em>Melia </em>or of the celestial ash, thus corresponds
 to a conception far more ancient, probably, than that one which
 transformed the <em>pramantha </em>(of the old Aryan Hindus) into
 the Greek Prometheus. Phoroneus is the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * According to the Occult teaching, three yugas passed away during
 the time of the Third Root-Race,<em> i.e</em>., the Satya, the
 Treta, and the Dvapara yuga, answering to the golden age of its
 early innocence: to the silver -- when it reached its maturity:
 and to the Bronze age, when, separating into sexes, they became
 the mighty demi-gods of old.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 521 THE POETRY OF MODERN ORIENTALISTS. </h6>
 
 <p>
 (personified) bird, that brings the heavenly lightning to the
 Earth. Traditions relating to the birth and origin of the race
 of Bronze, and those which made of Phoroneus the father of the
 Argians, are an evidence to us that this thunderbolt (or lightning),
 as in the legends of Hephaestus or Prometheus, was the origin
 of the human race" (266).
 </p><p>
 This still affords us no more than the external meaning of the
 symbols and the allegory. It is now supposed that the name of
 Prometheus has been unriddled, and the modern mythologists and
 Orientalists see in it no longer what their fathers saw on the
 authority of the whole of classical antiquity. They only find
 therein something far more appropriate to the spirit of the age,
 namely, a phallic element. But the name of Phoroneus, as well
 as that of Prometheus, bears not one, nor even two, but a series
 of esoteric meanings. Both relate to the <em>seven</em> <em>celestial
 fires; </em>to Agni Abhimanin, his three sons, and their forty-five
 sons,<em> constituting the forty-nine fires. </em>Do all these
 numbers relate only to the terrestrial mode of fire and to the
 flame of sexual passion? Did the Hindu Aryan mind never soar above
 such purely sensual conceptions? that mind which is declared by
 Prof. Max Muller to be the most spiritual and mystically inclined
 on the whole globe? The number of those fires alone ought to have
 suggested an inkling of the truth.
 </p><p>
 We are told that one is no longer permitted, in this age of rational
 thought, to explain the name of Prometheus as the old Greeks did.
 The latter, it seems, "basing themselves on the false analogy
 of [[<i>prometheus</i>]] with the verb [[<i>Promanthanein</i>]]<em>,
 </em>saw in him the type of the 'foreseeing' man, to whom, for
 the sake of symmetry, a brother was added -- Epimetheus, or 'he
 who takes counsel <em>after </em>the event.' " But now the
 Orientalists have decided otherwise. They know the real meaning
 of the two names better than those who invented them.
 </p><p>
 The legend is based upon an event of universal importance. It
 was built "to commemorate a great event which must have strongly
 impressed itself upon the imagination of the first witnesses to
 it, and its remembrance has never since faded out from popular
 memory." What is it? Laying aside every poetical <em>fiction,
 </em>all those dreams of the golden age, let us imagine -- argue
 the modern scholars -- in all its gross realism, the first miserable
 state of humanity, the striking picture of which was traced for
 us after AEschylus by Lucretius, and the exact truth of which
 is now confirmed by science; and then one may understand better
 that a new life really began for man, on that day when he saw
 the first spark produced by the friction of two pieces of wood,
 or from the veins of a flint. How could man help feeling gratitude
 to that mysterious and marvellous being which they were henceforth
 enabled to create at their will, and which was no sooner born,
 than it grew and expanded, developing with singular power. "This
 terrestrial flame,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 522 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 was it not analogous in nature to that one which they received
 from above, or that other which frightened them in the thunderbolt?"
 </p><p>
 "Was it not derived from the same source? And if its origin
 was in heaven, it must have been brought down some day on earth.
 If so, who was the powerful being, the beneficent being, god or
 man, who had conquered it? Such are the questions which the curiosity
 of the Aryans offered in the early days of their existence, and
 which found their answer in the myth of Prometheus"; (<em>Mythologie
 de la Grece</em> <em>Antique, </em>p. 258).
 </p><p>
 The philosophy of Occult Science finds two weak points in the
 above reflections, and points them out. The miserable state of
 Humanity described by AEschylus and Prometheus was no more wretched
 then, in the early days of the Aryans, than it is now. That "state"
 was limited to the savage tribes; and the now-existing savages
 are not a whit more happy or unhappy than their forefathers were
 a million years ago.
 </p><p>
 It is an accepted fact in Science that "rude implements,
 exactly resembling those in use <em>among existing savages,"
 </em>are found in river-gravels and caves geologically "implying
 an enormous antiquity." So great is that resemblance that,
 as the author of "The Modern Zoroastrian" tells us:
 "If the collection in the Colonial Exhibition of stone celts
 and arrow-heads used now by the Bushmen of South Africa were placed
 side by side with one from the British Museum of similar objects
 from Kent's Cavern or the Caves of Dordogne, no one but an expert
 could distinguish between them" (<em>p</em>. 145). And if
 there are Bushmen existing now, in our age of the highest civilization,
 who are no higher intellectually than the race of men which inhabited
 Devonshire and Southern France during the <em>Palaeolithic </em>age,
 why could not the latter have lived simultaneously with, and have
 been the contemporary of, other races as highly civilized for
 their day as we are for ours? That the sum of knowledge increases
 daily in mankind, "but that intellectual capacity does not
 increase with it," is shown when the intellect, if not the
 physical knowledge, of the Euclids, Pythagorases, Paninis, Kapilas,
 Platos, and Socrates, is compared with that of the Newtons, Kants,
 and the modern Huxleys and Haeckels. On comparing the results
 obtained by Dr. J. Barnard Davis, the Craniologist, worked out
 in 1868 (<em>Trans. of the Royal Society</em> <em>of London</em>)<em>,
 </em>with regard to the internal capacity of the skull -- its
 volume being taken as the standard and test for judging of the
 intellectual capacities -- Dr. Pfaff finds that this capacity
 among the French (certainly in the highest rank of mankind) is
 88.4 cubic inches, being thus "perceptibly smaller than that
 of the Polynesians generally, which, even among many Papuans and
 Alfuras of the lowest grade, amounts to 89 and 89.7 cubic inches";
 which shows that it is the <em>quality </em>and not the <em>quantity
 </em>of the brain that is the cause of intellectual capacity.
 The</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 523 THE BOON GIVEN BY PROMETHEUS. </h6>
 
 <p>
 average index of skulls among various races having been now recognized
 to be "one of the most characteristic marks of difference
 between different races," the following comparison is suggestive:
 "The index of breadth among the Scandinavians (is) at 75:
 among the English at 76; among Holsteiners at 77; in Bresgau at
 80; Schiller's skull shows an index of breadth even of 82 . .
 . the Madurese also 82!" Finally, the same comparison between
 the oldest skulls known and the European, brings to light the
 startling fact <em>"that most of these old skulls, belonging
 to the</em> <em>stone period, are above rather than below the
 average of the brain of the</em> <em>now living man in volume."
 </em>Calculating the measures for the height, breadth, and length
 in inches from the average measurements of several skulls, the
 following sums are obtained: --
 </p><blockquote>
 1. Old Northern skulls of the stone age . . . . 18.877 ins.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 2. Average of 48 skulls of the same period from England . . .
 . 18.858 "
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 3. Average of 7 skulls of the same period from Wales . . . . 18.649
 "
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 4. Average of 36 skulls of the stone age from France . . . . 18.220
 "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The average of the <em>now living Europeans </em>is 18.579 inches;
 of <em>Hottentots, </em>17.795 inches!
 </p><p>
 Which figures show plainly "that the size of the brain of
 the oldest populations known to us is not such as to place them
 on a lower level than that of the now living inhabitants of the
 Earth" ("<em>The Age and</em> <em>Origin of Man</em>").<em>
 </em>Besides which, they show the "missing link" vanishing
 into thin air. Of these, however, more anon: we must return to
 our direct subject.
 </p><p>
 The race which Jupiter so ardently desired "to quench, and
 plant a new one in its stead" (<em>AEsch.* </em>241), suffered
 <em>mental</em>, not physical misery. The first boon Prometheus
 gave to mortals, as he tells the "Chorus," was to hinder
 them "from <em>foreseeing </em>death" (256); he "saved
 the mortal race from sinking blasted down to Hades' gloom"
 (244); and then only, "besides" that, he gave them fire
 (260). This shows plainly the dual character, at any rate of the
 Promethean myth, if Orientalists will not accept the existence
 of the <em>seven keys </em>taught in Occultism. This relates to
 the first opening of man's spiritual perceptions, not to his first
 seeing or<em> discovering </em><i>fire</i>. For <em>fire</em>
 was never "discovered," but existed on earth since its
 beginning. It existed in the seismic activity of the early ages,
 volcanic eruptions being as frequent and constant in those periods
 as fog is in England now. And if we are told that men appeared
 so late on Earth that nearly all the volcanoes, with the exception
 of a few, were already extinct, and that geological disturbances
 had made room for a more settled state of things, we answer: Let
 a new race of men -- whether evolved from angel or gorilla --
 appear now on any uninhabited
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>* Prometheus Vinctus.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 524 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 spot of the globe, with the exception perhaps of the Sahara, and
 a thousand to one it would not be a year or two old before discovering
 fire, through the fall of lightning setting in flames grass or
 something else. This assumption, that primitive man lived ages
 on earth before he was made acquainted with fire, is one of the
 most painfully illogical of all. But old AEschylus was an initiate,
 and knew well what he was giving out.*
 </p><p>
 No occultist acquainted with symbology and the fact that Wisdom
 came to us from the East, will deny for a moment that the myth
 of Prometheus has reached Europe from Aryavarta. Nor is he likely
 to deny that in one sense Prometheus represents <em>fire by friction</em>.
 Therefore, he admires the sagacity of M. F. Baudry, who shows
 in his <em>Les Mythes</em> <em>du feu et breuvage celeste </em>(<em>Revue
 germanique, </em>1861<em> p</em>. 356)** one of the aspects of
 Prometheus and his origin from India. He shows the reader the<em>
 supposed </em>primitive process to obtain fire, still in use to-day
 in India to light the sacrificial flame. This is what he says:
 --
 </p><blockquote>
 "This process, such as it is minutely described in the Vedic
 Sutras, consists in rapidly turning a stick in a socket made in
 the centre of a piece of wood. The friction develops intense heat
 and ends by setting on fire the particles of wood in contact.
 The motion of the stick is not a continuous rotation, but a series
 of motions in contrary senses, by means of a cord fixed to the
 stick in its middle: the operator holds one of the ends in each
 hand and pulls them alternately. . . . The full process is designated
 in Sanskrit by the verb manthami, mathnani; which means 'to rub,
 agitate, shake and obtain by rubbing,' and is especially applied
 to rotatory friction, as proved by its derivation from <em>mandala,
 </em>which signifies a circle. . . . The pieces of wood serving
 for the production of fire have each their name in Sanskrit. The
 stick which turns is called <em>pramantha; </em>the discus which
 receives it is called <em>arani </em><i>and</i><em> aranî</em><i>
 </i>two aranis' designating the <em>ensemble </em>of the instrument"
 (<em>p</em>. 358<em> et seq</em>.)<em>.***</em> 
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 It remains to be seen what the Brahmins will say to this. But
 supposing Prometheus has been conceived in one of the aspects
 of his
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The modern attempt of some Greek scholars (poor and pseudo scholars,
 they would have appeared in the day of the old Greek writers!)
 to explain the real meaning of the ideas of AEschylus, which,
 being an ignorant ancient Greek, he could not express so well
 himself, is absurdly ludicrous!
 </p><p>
 ** See also his <em>Memoires de la Societe de la</em> <em>Linguistique
 </em>following the "Fire Myths," (<em>Vol.</em> I<em>,
 p.</em> 337, <em>et seq.</em>)
 </p><p>
 *** There is the <em>upper</em> and <em>nether</em> piece of timber
 used to produce this sacred fire by attrition at sacrifices, and
 it is the <em>aranî </em>which contains the socket. This
 is proven by an allegory in the <em>Vayu Purana </em>and others,
 which tell us that Nemi, the son of Ikshwaku, had left no successor,
 and that the Rishis, fearing to leave the earth without a ruler,
 introduced the king's body into the socket of an <em>aranî
 </em>-- like an upper <em>aranî </em>-- and produced from
 it a prince named Janaka. "It was by reason of the peculiar
 way in which he was engendered that he was called Janaka."
 (<em>But see Goldstucker's</em> <em>Sanskrit Dictionary at the
 word Arani.</em>)<em> </em>Devaki, Krishna's mother, in prayer
 addressed to her, is called "the aranî whose attrition
 engenders fire."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 525 GREEK IDEAS MISUNDERSTOOD. </h6>
 
 <p>
 myth as the producer of fire by means of <em>pramantha, </em>or
 as an animate and divine <em>pramantha, </em>would this imply
 that the symbolism had no other than the phallic meaning attributed
 to it by the modern symbologists? Decharme, at any rate, seems
 to have a correct glimmering of the truth; for he unconsciously
 corroborates by his remarks all that the Occult sciences teach
 with regard to the <em>Manasa </em>Devas, who have endowed man
 with the consciousness of his immortal soul: that consciousness
 which hinders man "from foreseeing death," and makes
 him <em>know </em>he is immortal.* "How has Prometheus got
 into the possession of the (divine) spark?" he asks. "Fire
 having its abode in heaven, it is there he must have gone to find
 it before he could carry it down to men, and, to approach the
 gods, he must have been a god himself." The Greeks held that
 he was of the <em>divine </em>race; the Hindus, that he was a
 Deva. Hence "with the Greeks he was the son of the Titan
 lapetos," [[<i>Iapetonides</i>]] (<em>Theog. </em>528) .
 . . . "But celestial fire belonged in the beginning to the
 gods alone; it was a treasure they reserved for themselves . .
 . over which they jealously watched . . . 'The prudent son of
 Iapetus,' says Hesiod, 'deceived Jupiter by stealing and concealing
 in the cavity of a narthex, the indefatigable fire of the resplendent
 glow' (<em>Theog. </em>565)<em> </em>. . . Thus the gift made
 by Prometheus to men was a conquest made from heaven. . . "
 "Now according to Greek ideas," (identical in this with
 those of the Occultists) "this possession forced from Jupiter,
 this human trespassing upon the property of the gods, had to be
 followed by an expiation. . . . Prometheus, moreover, belongs
 to that race of Titans who had rebelled** against the gods, and
 whom the master of Olympus had hurled down into Tartarus; like
 them, he is the genius of Evil, doomed to cruel suffering, etc.,
 etc."
 </p><p>
 That which is revolting in the explanations that follow, is the
 one-sided view taken of this grandest of all the myths. The most
 intuitional among modern writers cannot or will not rise in their
 conceptions above the level of the Earth and Cosmic phenomena.
 It is not denied that the moral idea in the myth, as presented
 in the Theogony of Hesiod, plays a certain part in the primitive
 Greek conception. The Titan is more than a thief of the celestial
 fire. He is the representation of humanity -- active, industrious,
 intelligent, but at the same time ambitious, which aims at equalling
 divine powers. Therefore it is humanity punished in the person
 of Prometheus, but it is only so with the Greeks. With the latter,
 Prometheus is not a
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The <em>monad </em>of the animal is as immortal as that of man,
 yet the brute knows nothing of this; it lives an animal life of
 sensation just as the first human would have lived, when attaining
 physical development in the Third Race, had it not been for the
 Agnishwatta and the <em>Manasa </em>Pitris.
 </p><p>
 ** The fallen angels, therefore; the <em>Asuras </em>of the Indian
 Pantheon.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 526 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 criminal, save in the eyes of the gods. In his relation with the
 Earth, he is, on the contrary, a god himself, a friend of mankind
 ([[<i>philanthropos</i>]]), which he has raised to civilization
 and initiated into the knowledge of all the arts; a conception
 which found its most poetical expounder in AEschylus. But with
 all other nations Prometheus is -- what? The fallen Angel, Satan,
 as the Church would have it? Not at all. <em>He is</em> <em>simply
 the image of the pernicious and dreaded effects of lightning.
 </em>He is the "evil fire" (<em>mal feu</em>)<em> and
 the symbol of the divine reproductive</em> <em>male organ. </em>"Reduced
 to its simple expression, the myth we are trying to explain is
 then simply a (Cosmic) genius of fire" (p. 261). It is the
 former idea (the phallic) which was <em>pre-eminently Aryan, </em>if
 we believe Ad. Kuhn (<em>in his Herabkunft des Feuers und des
 Gottertranks</em>)<em> </em>and Baudry. For --
 </p><p>
 "The fire used by man being the result of the action of <em>pramantha</em>
 in the <em>arani, </em>the Aryas <em>must have </em>ascribed (?)
 the same origin to celestial fire, and they <em>must* have </em>imagined
 (?) that a god armed with pramantha, or a divine pramantha, exercised
 in the bosom of the clouds a violent friction, which gave birth
 to lightning and thunderbolts. . . . . This idea is supported
 by the fact that, according to Plutarch's testimony (<em>Philosoph.
 Plant.,</em> iii<em>. </em>3), the Stoics thought that thunder
 was the result of the struggle of storm-clouds and lightning --
 a conflagration due to friction; while Aristotle saw in the thunderbolt
 only the action of clouds which clashed with each other. What
 was this theory, if not the scientific translation of the production
 of fire by friction? . . . . . . Everything leads us to think
 that, from the highest antiquity, and before the dispersion of
 the Aryans, it was believed that the pramantha lighted fire in
 the storm cloud as well as in the aranis." (<em>Revue Germanique,
 p. </em>368.)
 </p><p>
 Thus, suppositions and idle hypotheses are made to stand for discovered
 truths. Defenders of the Bible dead-letter could never help the
 writers of missionary tracts more effectually, than do materialistic
 Symbologists in thus taking for granted that the ancient Aryans
 based their religious conceptions on no higher thought than the
 physiological.
 </p><p>
 But it is not so, and the very spirit of Vedic philosophy is against
 such an interpretation. And if, as Decharme himself confesses,
 "this idea of the creative power of fire is explained at
 once by the ancient assimilation of the human soul to a celestial
 spark," as shown by the imagery often made use of in the
 Vedas when speaking of <em>Arani, </em>it would mean something
 higher than simply a gross sexual conception. A hymn to Agni in
 the Veda is cited as example: -- "Here is the pramantha,
 the generator is ready. Bring the mistress of the race (the female
 <em>Arani</em>)<em>. </em>Let us produce Agni by attrition, according
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The italics are ours; they show how assumptions are raised to
 laws in our day.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 527 THE SIX BROTHERS OF KRISHNA. </h6>
 
 <p>
 to ancient custom" -- which means no worse than an abstract
 idea expressed in the tongue of mortals. The "female Arani,"
 the mistress of the race, is Aditi, the mother of the gods, or
 Shekinah, eternal light -- in the world of Spirit, the "Great
 Deep" and <strong>C</strong>HAOS; or primordial Substance
 in its first remove from the <strong>U</strong>NKNOWN, in the
 manifested Kosmos. If, ages later, the same epithet is applied
 to Devaki, the mother of Krishna, or the incarnated <strong>L</strong>OGOS;
 and if the symbol, owing to the gradual and irrepressible spread
 of exoteric religions, may already be regarded as having a sexual
 significance, this in no way mars the original purity of the image.
 The subjective had been transformed into the objective; Spirit
 had fallen into matter. The universal kosmic polarity of Spirit-Substance
 had become, in human thought, the mystic, but still sexual union
 of Spirit and Matter, and had thus acquired an anthropomorphic
 colouring which it had never had in the beginning. Between the
 Vedas and the Puranas there is an abyss of which both are the
 poles, like the seventh (<em>atmic</em>) and the first or lowest
 principle (the physical body) in the Septenary constitution of
 man. The primitive, purely spiritual language of the Vedas, conceived
 many decades of millenniums earlier, had found its purely human
 expression for the purpose of describing events taking place 5,000
 years ago, the date of Krishna's death (from which day the Kali
 Yuga, or Black-Age, began for mankind).
 </p><p>
 As Aditi is called <em>Surarani </em>(the matrix or "mother"
 of the <em>sura </em>gods), so Kunti, the mother of the Pandavas,
 is called in Mahabharata <em>Pandavarani</em> -- which term is
 already <em>physiologized. </em>But Devaki, the antetype of the
 Roman Catholic Madonna, is a later anthropomorphized form of Aditi.
 The latter is the goddess mother, the "Deva-matri" of
 Seven Sons (the <em>six </em>and the <em>seven</em> Adityas of
 early Vedic times); the mother of Krishna, Devaki, has six embryos
 conveyed into her womb by Jagaddhatri (the "nurse of the
 world"), the seventh (Krishna, the Logos,) being transferred
 to that Rohini. Mary, the mother of Jesus, is the mother of seven
 children, of five sons and two daughters, (a later transformation
 of sex) in Matthew's Gospel (<em>xiii.</em> 55-56). No one of
 the worshippers of the Roman Catholic Virgin would object to reciting
 in her honour the prayer addressed by the gods to Devaki. Let
 the reader judge.
 </p><p>
 "Thou art that Prakriti (essence), infinite and subtile,
 which bore Brahma in its womb. Thou eternal being, comprising
 in thy substance the essence of all created things, wast identical
 with creation; thou wast the parent of the triform sacrifice,
 becoming the germ of all. . . . Thou art sacrifice, whence all
 fruit proceeds; thou art the <em>arani</em> whose attrition engenders
 fire" . . . . ("Womb of Light," "holy Vessel,"
 are the epithets of the Virgin). "As Aditi, thou art the
 parent of the gods. . . . Thou art Jyotsna (the morning twilight)."
 The Virgin</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 528 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 is often addressed as the "morning Star" and the "star
 of Salvation" -- the light whence day is begotten. "Thou
 art <em>Samnati </em>(humility, a daughter of Daksha), the mother
 of Wisdom; thou art <em>Niti, </em>the parent of harmony (<em>Naya</em>)<em>;
 </em>thou art modesty, the progenitrix of affection (<em>Prasraya
 or vinaya</em>); thou art desire, of whom love is born. . . .
 Thou art the mother of knowledge (<em>Avabodha</em>); patience
 (<em>Dhriti</em>)<em>, </em>the parent of fortitude (<em>Dhairya</em>)<em>
 </em>. . . . etc., etc."
 </p><p>
 Thus <em>arani </em>is shown here as the Roman Catholic "vase
 of election" and no worse. As to its primitive meaning, it
 was purely metaphysical. No unclean thought traversed these conceptions
 in the ancient mind. Even in the <em>Zohar -- </em>far less metaphysical
 than any other symbolism -- the idea is an abstraction and nothing
 more. Thus, when the <em>Zohar</em> (iii., 290) says: "All
 that which exists, all that which has been formed by the ancient,
 whose name is holy, can only exist through a male and female principle,"
 it means no more than this: "The divine Spirit of Life is
 ever coalescing with matter." It is the <strong>W</strong>ILL
 of the Deity that acts; and the idea is purely Schopenhauerian.
 "When <em>Atteekah Kaddosha, </em>the ancient and the concealed
 of the concealed, desired to form all things, it formed all things
 like male and female. This wisdom cornprises ALL when it goeth
 forth." Hence Chochmah (male wisdom) and Binah (female consciousness
 or Intellect) are said to create all between the two -- the active
 and the passive principles. As the eye of the expert jeweller
 discerns under the rough and uncouth oyster shell the pure immaculate
 pearl, enshrined within its bosom, his hand dealing with the former
 but to get at its contents, so the eye of the true philosopher
 reads between the lines of the Puranas the sublime Vedic truths,
 and corrects the form with the help of the Vedantic wisdom. Our
 Orientalists, however, never perceive the pearl under the thick
 coating of the shell, and -- act accordingly.
 </p><p>
 From all that has been said in this section, one sees clearly
 that, between the Serpent of Eden and the Devil of Christianity,
 there is an abyss. Alone the sledge hammer of ancient philosophy
 can kill this dogma.
 </p><p>
 -------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-2-08.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>