<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 2</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 351 THE "GREAT DRAGONS" AND SERPENTS.
 </h6>
 
 <h4>STANZA XII. <br>
 THE FIFTH RACE AND ITS DIVINE INSTRUCTORS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 -------
 </p><blockquote>
 §§ (47) The remnants of the first two races disappear
 for ever. Groups of the various Atlantean races saved from the
 Deluge along with the Forefathers of the Fifth. (48) The origins
 of our present Race, the Fifth. The first divine Dynasties. (49)
 The earliest glimmerings in History, now pinned to the allegorical
 chronology of the Bible, and "universal" History slavishly
 following it. -- The nature of the first instructors and civilizers
 of mankind.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 ---------------------
 </p><p>
 47. <strong>F</strong>EW (<em>men</em>) REMAINED. <strong>S</strong>OME
 YELLOW, SOME BROWN AND BLACK, AND SOME RED, REMAINED. <strong>T</strong>HE
 MOON-COLOURED (<em>of the primitive</em> <em>Divine Stock</em>)<em>
 </em>WERE GONE FOR EVER (<em>a</em>) . . . .
 </p><p>
 48. <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>F</strong>IFTH <strong>R</strong>ACE
 PRODUCED FROM THE <strong>H</strong>OLY <strong>S</strong>TOCK
 (<em>remained</em>)<em>. </em><strong>I</strong>T WAS RULED BY
 <strong>H</strong>ER <strong>F</strong>IRST <strong>D</strong>IVINE
 <strong>K</strong>INGS.
 </p><p>
 49. <strong>T</strong>HE "<strong>S</strong>ERPENTS"
 WHO RE-DESCENDED; WHO MADE PEACE WITH THE <strong>F</strong>IFTH
 (<em>Race</em>)<em>, </em>WHO TAUGHT AND INSTRUCTED IT (<em>b</em>)
 . . . .
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>This verse (47) relates to the Fifth Race.
 History does not begin with it, but living and ever-recurring
 tradition does. History -- or what is called history -- does not
 go further back than the fantastic origins of our fifth sub-race,
 a "few thousands" of years. It is the sub-divisions
 of this first sub-race of the Fifth Root-Race which are referred
 to in the sentence, "Some yellow, some brown and black, and
 some red, remained." The "moon coloured" (<em>i.e</em>.,
 the First and the Second Races) were gone for ever -- ay, without
 leaving any traces whatever; and that, so far back as the third
 "Deluge" of the Third Lemurian race, that "Great
 Dragon," whose tail sweeps whole nations out of existence
 in the twinkling of an eye. And this is the true meaning of the
 Verse in the <strong>C</strong>OMMENTARY which says:
 </p><p>
 "<em>The</em> <strong>G</strong>REAT <strong>D</strong>RAGON
 <em>has respect but for the </em>'<strong>S</strong>ERPENTS' <em>of</em>
 <strong>W</strong>ISDOM, <em>the Serpents whose holes are now
 under the triangular stones,</em>"<em> i.e., </em>"the
 Pyramids, at the four corners of the world."
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) This tells us clearly that which is mentioned more
 than once elsewhere in the Commentaries; namely, that the Adepts
 or "Wise" men of the three Races (the Third, Fourth
 and the Fifth) dwelt in subterranean habitats, generally under
 some kind of pyramidal structure, if not</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 352 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 actually under a pyramid. For such "pyramids" existed
 in the four corners of the world and were never the monopoly of
 the land of the Pharaohs, though until found scattered all over
 the two Americas, under and over ground, beneath and amidst virgin
 forests, as in plain and vale, they were supposed to be the exclusive
 property of Egypt. If the true geometrically correct pyramids
 are no longer found in European regions, many of the supposed
 early <em>neolithic </em>caves, of the colossal triangular, pyramidal
 and conical <em>menhirs </em>in the Morbihan, and Brittany generally;
 many of the Danish tumuli and even of the "giant tombs"
 of Sardinia with their inseparable companions, the <em>nuraghi,
 </em>are so many more or less clumsy copies of the pyramids. Most
 of these are the works of the first settlers on the newly-born
 continent and isles of Europe, the -- "some yellow, some
 brown and black, and some red" -- races that remained after
 the submersion of the last Atlantean continents and islands (850,000
 years ago), with the exception of Plato's Atlantean island, and
 before the arrival of the great Aryan races; while others were
 built by the earliest immigrants from the East. Those who can
 hardly accept the antiquity of the human race so far back as the
 57,000 years assigned by Dr. Dowler to the skeleton found by him
 at New Orleans on the banks of the Mississippi, will, of course,
 reject these facts. But they may find themselves mistaken some
 day. It is the foolish self-glorification of the Arcadians who
 styled themselves [[<em>proselenoi</em>]] -- older than the moon
 -- and of the people of Attica, who claimed that they had existed
 before the sun appeared in heaven, that we may disparage, not
 their undeniable antiquity. Nor can we laugh at the universal
 belief that we had giant ancestors. The fact that the bones of
 the mammoth and mastodon, and, in one case, those of a gigantic
 salamander, have been mistaken for human bones, does not make
 away with the difficulty that, of all the mammalians, man is the
 only one whom science will not allow to have dwarfed down, like
 all other animal frames, from the giant <em>homo</em> <em>diluvii
 </em>to the creature between 5 and 6 feet that he is now.
 </p><p>
 But the "Serpents of Wisdom" have preserved their records
 well, and the history of the human evolution is traced in heaven
 as it is traced on underground walls. Humanity and the <em>stars
 </em>are bound together indissolubly, because of the <em>intelligences
 </em>that rule the latter.
 </p><p>
 Modern symbologists may scoff at this and call it "fancy,"
 but "it is unquestionable that the Deluge has (ever) been
 associated in the legends of some Eastern peoples not only with
 the Pyramids, but also with the constellations," writes Mr.
 Staniland Wake <b>(</b>"<em>The Great</em> <em>Pyramid</em>").<em>
 </em>The "Old Dragon" is identical with the "great
 Flood," says Mr. Proctor (<em>in </em>"<em>Knowledge,</em>"<em>
 Vol. I., p. </em>243): "We know that in the past the constellation
 of the Dragon was at the pole, or boss, of the celestial sphere.
 In stellar temples . . . the Dragon would be the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 353 THE ASTRONOMICAL DRAGON. </h6>
 
 <p>
 uppermost or ruling constellation . . . it is singular how closely
 the constellations . . . correspond in sequence and in range of
 right ascension with the events recorded respecting the (Biblical)
 Flood."
 </p><p>
 The reasons for this <em>singularity </em>have been made clear
 in this work. But it shows only that there were <em>several </em>Deluges
 mixed up in the memories and traditions of the sub-races of the
 Fifth Race. The first great "Flood" was astronomical
 and cosmical, while several others were <em>terrestrial. </em>Yet,
 this did not prevent our very learned friend Mr. Gerald Massey
 -- an <em>Initiate</em> truly in the mysteries of the British
 Museum, still only a <em>Self</em>-initiate -- from declaring
 and insisting that <em>the Atlantean </em>submersion and Deluge
 were only the anthropomorphized fancies of ignorant people; and
 that Atlantis was no better than an <em>astronomical allegory.
 </em>Nevertheless, the great Zodiacal allegory is based upon historical
 events, and one can hardly interfere with the other; and it stands
 also to reason that every student of Occultism knows what that
 astronomical and zodiacal allegory means. Smith shows in the Nimrod
 Epic of the Assyrian tablets the real meaning of it. Its "<em>twelve
 cantos</em>"<em> </em>refer to the "annual course of
 the Sun through the twelve months of the year. Each tablet answers
 to a special month, and contains a distinct reference to the animal
 forms in the signs of the Zodiac"; the eleventh canto being
 "consecrated to Rimmon, the God of storms and of rain, and
 harmonizes with the eleventh sign of the Zodiac -- Aquarius, or
 the Waterman" (<em>Nineteenth Century,</em> 1882,<em> p</em>.
 236). But even this is preceded in the old records by the <em>pre-</em>astronomical
 Cosmic FLOOD, which became allegorized and symbolized in the above
 Zodiacal or Noah's Flood. But this has nothing to do with Atlantis.
 The Pyramids are closely connected with the ideas of both the
 Great Dragon (the constellation), the "Dragons of Wisdom,"
 or the great Initiates of the Third and Fourth Races, and the
 Floods of the Nile, regarded as a divine reminder of the great
 Atlantic Flood. The astronomical records of Universal History,
 however, are said to have had their beginnings with the Third
 Sub-race of the Fourth Root-race or the Atlanteans. When was it?
 Occult data show that even since the time of the regular establishment
 of the Zodiacal calculations in Egypt, <em>the poles have been
 thrice inverted.</em> 
 </p><p>
 We will presently return once more to this statement. Such symbols
 as are represented by the Signs of the Zodiac -- a fact which
 offers a handle to materialists upon which to hang their one-sided
 theories and opinions -- have too profound a signification, and
 their bearing upon our Humanity is too important to suffer dismissal
 in a few words. Meanwhile, we have to consider the meaning of
 that other statement which mentions (verse 48) the first <em>divine
 Kings, </em>who are said to have "redescended," guided
 and <em>instructed </em>our Fifth Race after the last deluge!
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 354 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 We shall consider this last claim historically in the sections
 that follow, but must end with a few more details on the subject
 of "Serpents."
 </p><p>
 The rough commentaries on the Archaic Stanzas have to end here.
 Further elucidation requires proofs obtained from ancient, mediaeval,
 and modern works that have treated of these subjects. All such
 evidence has now to be gathered in, collated and brought together
 in better order, so as to compel the attention of the reader to
 this wealth of historical proofs. And as the manifold meaning
 of the weird symbol -- so often referred to and suggestive of
 the "tempter of man" in the orthodox light of the church
 -- can never be too strongly insisted upon, it seems more advisable
 to exhaust the subject by every available proof at this juncture,
 even at the risk of repetition. The Titans and Kabirs have been
 invariably made out by our theologians and some pious symbologists
 as indissolubly connected with the grotesque personage called
 <em>devil,</em> and every proof to the contrary has been hitherto
 as invariably rejected and ignored; therefore, the occultist must
 neglect nothing which may tend to defeat this conspiracy of slander.
 It is proposed to divide the subjects involved in these three
 last verses into several groups, and examine them in this final
 chapter as carefully and as fully as space permits. A few more
 details may thus be added to the general evidences of antiquity,
 on the most disputed tenets of Occultism and the Esoteric Doctrine
 -- the bulk of which will be found in Part <strong>II</strong>.
 on Symbology.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <strong>S</strong>ERPENTS AND <strong>D</strong>RAGONS UNDER DIFFERENT
 <strong>S</strong>YMBOLISMS.
 </p><p>
 The name of the Dragon in Chaldea was not written phonetically,
 but was represented by two monograms, <em>probably </em>meaning,
 according to the Orientalists, "the scaly one." "This
 description," very pertinently remarks G. Smith, "of
 course might apply either to a fabulous dragon, a serpent, or
 a fish," and we may add: "It applies in one case to
 <em>Makara, </em>the tenth Zodiacal sign, meaning in Sanskrit
 a non-descript amphibious animal, generally called Crocodile,
 and really signifying something else. (<em>Vide </em>Part <strong>II</strong>.,
 "<em>The Mysteries of the Hebdomad.</em>") This, then,
 is a virtual admission that the Assyriologists, at all events,
 know nothing certain as to the status of the "Dragon"
 in ancient Chaldea, whence the Hebrews got <em>their </em>symbolism,
 only to be afterwards robbed of it by the Christians, who made
 of the "Scaly one" a living entity and a maleficent
 power.
 </p><p>
 A specimen of Dragons, "winged and scaled," may be seen
 in the British Museum. Representing the events of the Fall according
 to the same authority, there are also two figures sitting on each
 side of a tree, and holding out their hands to the "apple,"
 while at the back of the "Tree"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 355 THE NAASENIAN GNOSTICS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 is the Dragon-Serpent. Esoterically, the two figures are two "Chaldees"
 ready for initiation, the Serpent symbolising the "Initiator";
 while the jealous gods, who curse the three, are the exoteric
 profane clergy. Not much of the literal "Biblical event"
 there, as any occultist can see.
 </p><p>
 "The Great Dragon has respect but for the Serpents of Wisdom,"
 says the Stanza; thus proving the correctness of our explanation
 of the two figures and the "Serpent."
 </p><p>
 "<em>The Serpents who redescended </em>. . . . <em>who taught
 and instructed</em>" the Fifth Race. What sane man is capable
 of believing in our day that <em>real</em> serpents are hereby
 meant? Hence the rough guess, now become almost an axiom with
 the men of science, that those who wrote in antiquity upon various
 sacred Dragons and Serpents either were superstitious and credulous
 people, or were bent upon deceiving those more ignorant than themselves.
 Yet, from Homer downwards, the term implied something hidden from
 the profane.
 </p><p>
 "Terrible are the gods when they manifest themselves"
 -- those <em>gods</em> whom men call <em>Dragons. </em>And AElianus,
 treating in his "<em>De Natura</em> <em>Animalium</em>"<em>
 </em>of these Ophidean symbols, makes certain remarks which show
 that he understood well the nature of this most ancient of symbols.
 Thus he most pertinently explains with regard to the above Homeric
 verse -- "For the Dragon, while sacred and to be worshipped,
 <em>has within</em> <em>himself something still more of the divine
 nature </em>of which it is better (for others?) to remain in ignorance"
 (Book xi., ch. 17).
 </p><p>
 This "Dragon" having a septenary meaning, the highest
 and the lowest may be given. The former is identical with the
 "Self-born," the Logos (the Hindu <em>Aja</em>)<em>.
 </em>He was the second person of the Trinity, the <strong>S</strong>ON,
 with the Christian Gnostics called the Naasenians, or Serpent-Worshippers.
 His symbol was the constellation of the Dragon.* Its seven "stars"
 are the seven stars held in the hand of the "Alpha and Omega"
 in <em>Revelation. </em>In its most terrestrial meaning, the term
 "Dragon" was applied to the <em>Wise </em>men.
 </p><p>
 This portion of the religious symbolism of antiquity is very abstruse
 and mysterious, and may remain incomprehensible to the profane.
 In our modern day it so jars on the Christian ear that it can
 hardly escape, all civilization notwithstanding, being regarded
 as a direct denunciation of the most cherished Christian dogmas,
 the subject of which required, to do it justice, the pen and genius
 of Milton, whose poetical fiction has now taken root in the Church
 as a revealed dogma.
 </p><p>
 Did the allegory of the Dragon and his supposed conqueror in
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * As shown by H. Lizeray in the "Trinite Chretienne Devoilee"
 -- placed between the immutable Father (the Pole, a fixed Point)
 and mutable matter, the Dragon transmits to the latter the influences
 received by him from the Pole, whence his name -- the <em>Verbum.</em>
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 356 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Heaven originate with St. John, and in his <em>Revelation? </em>Emphatically
 we answer -- No. His "Dragon" is Neptune, the symbol
 of Atlantean magic.
 </p><p>
 To demonstrate the negation the reader is asked to examine the
 symbolism of the Serpent or the Dragon under its several aspects.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>S</strong>IDEREAL AND <strong>C</strong>OSMIC
 <strong>G</strong>LYPHS.
 </p><p>
 Every astronomer -- besides Occultists and Astrologers -- knows
 that, figuratively, the astral light, the milky way, and also
 the path of the Sun to the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, as
 well as the circles of the Sidereal or Tropical year, were always
 called "Serpents" in the allegorical and mystic phraseology
 of the adepts.
 </p><p>
 This, cosmically, as well as metaphorically. Poseidon is a "Dragon":
 "<em>Chozzar, </em>called by the profane Neptune" (Peratae
 Gnostics); the "Good and Perfect Serpent," the Messiah
 of the Naaseni, whose symbol in Heaven is <em>Draco.</em> 
 </p><p>
 But one ought to discriminate between the characters of this symbol.
 For instance: Zoroastrian Esotericism is identical with that of
 the Secret Doctrine; and when, as an example, we read in the <em>Vendidad</em>
 complaints uttered against the "Serpent," whose bites
 have transformed the beautiful, eternal spring of Airyana-Vaego,
 changing it into winter, generating disease and death, at the
 same time as mental and psychic consumption, every occultist knows
 that the Serpent alluded to is the north pole, as also the pole
 of the heavens.* The latter produces the seasons according to
 the angle at which it penetrates the centre of the earth. The
 two axes were <em>no more parallel</em>;<em> </em>hence the eternal
 spring of Airyana Vaego by the good river Daitya had disappeared,
 and "the Aryan Magi had to emigrate to Sagdiani" --
 say the exoteric accounts. But the esoteric teaching states that
 the pole had passed through the equator, and that the "land
 of bliss" of the Fourth Race, its inheritance from the Third,
 had now become the region of desolation and woe. This alone ought
 to be an incontrovertible proof of the great antiquity of the
 Zoroastrian Scriptures. The Neo-Aryans of the post-diluvian age
 could, of course, hardly recognise the mountains, on the summits
 of which their forefathers had met <em>before the Flood, </em>and
 conversed with the pure "Yazathas" (celestial Spirits
 of the Elements), whose life and <em>food </em>they had once shared.
 As shown by Eckstein (<em>Revue Archeologique,</em><strong> 8</strong><em>th
 year, </em>1885), "the Vendidad seems to point out a great
 change in the atmosphere of central Asia; strong volcanic eruptions
 and the collapse of a whole range of mountains in the neighbourhood
 of the Kara-Korum chain."
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Symbolized by the Egyptians under the form of a Serpent with
 a hawk's head.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 357 THE TWO MYSTIC POLES. </h6>
 
 <p>
 The Egyptians, according to Eusebius, who for once (and for a
 wonder) wrote the truth, symbolised Kosmos by a large fiery circle,
 representing a serpent with a hawk's head lying across its diameter.
 "Here we have the pole of the earth within the plane of the
 ecliptic, attended with all the fiery consequences that must arise
 from such a state of the heavens: when the whole Zodiac in 25,000
 (odd) years, must have reddened with the solar blaze, and <em>each
 sign must have been</em> <em>vertical </em>to the polar region."
 (<em>See Mackey</em>'<em>s </em>"<em>Sphinxiad.</em>")
 </p><p>
 Meru -- the abode of the gods -- was placed, as before explained,
 in the North Pole, while <em>Patala, </em>the nether region, was
 supposed to lie in the South. As each symbol in esoteric philosophy
 has <em>seven keys,</em> geographically, <em>Meru</em> and<em>
 Patala </em>have one significance and represent localities; while
 astronomically, they have another, and mean "the two poles,"
 which meanings ended by their being often rendered in <em>exoteric</em>
 sectarianism -- the "Mountain" and the "Pit,"
 or Heaven and Hell. If we hold at present only to the astronomical
 and geographical significance, it may be found that the ancients
 knew the topography and nature of the Arctic and Antarctic regions
 better than any of our modern astronomers; they had reasons, and
 good ones for naming one the "<em>Mountain</em>" and
 the other the "<em>Pit.</em>"<em> </em>As the author
 just quoted half explains, <em>Helion </em>and<em> Acheron </em>meant
 nearly the same: "<em>Heli-on is the Sun in</em> <em>the
 highest</em>"<em> </em>(Helios, Heli-on, the "most high");
 "and <em>Acheron</em> is 32 deg. above the pole, and 32 below
 it, the allegorical river being thus supposed to touch the northern
 horizon in the latitude of 32 degrees. The vast concave, that
 is for ever hidden from our sight and which surrounded the southern
 pole, being therefore called the <strong>P</strong>IT, while observing,
 toward the Northern pole that a certain circuit in the heavens
 always appeared above the horizon -- they called it the Mountain.
 As Meru is the high abode of the Gods, these were said to <em>ascend</em>
 and <em>descend </em>periodically; by which (astronomically) the
 <em>Zodiacal gods</em> were meant, the passing of the original
 North Pole of the Earth to the South Pole of the heaven."
 "In that age," adds the author of that curious work,
 the "<em>Sphinxiad</em>"<em> </em>and of "<em>Urania</em>'<em>s
 Key to the Revelations</em>" -- "at noon, the ecliptic
 would be parallel with the meridian, and part of the Zodiac would
 descend from the North Pole to the north horizon; crossing the
 <em>eight coils of the Serpent </em>(eight sidereal years, or
 over 200,000 solar years), which would seem like an imaginary
 <em>ladder</em> with <em>eight staves </em>reaching from the earth
 up to the pole, <em>i.e</em>., the throne of Jove. Up this ladder,
 then, the Gods, <em>i.e</em>., the signs of the Zodiac, ascended
 and descended. (Jacob's ladder and the angels) . . . . It is more
 than 400,000 years since the Zodiac formed the sides of this ladder."
 . . . .
 </p><p>
 This is an ingenious explanation, even if it is not altogether
 free from occult heresy. Yet it is nearer the truth than many
 of a more scientific</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 358 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and especially theological character. As just said, the Christian
 trinity was purely astronomical from its beginning, which made
 Rutilius say -- of those who euhemerized <em>it -- </em>"<em>Judaea
 gens, radix stultorum.</em>"
 </p><p>
 But the profane, and especially the Christian fanatics, ever in
 search of scientific corroboration for their <em>dead-letter </em>texts,
 will persist in seeing in the celestial pole the true Serpent
 of Genesis, Satan, the Enemy of mankind, instead of what it is
 -- a cosmic metaphor. <em>When the</em> <em>gods are said to forsake
 the earth, </em>it does not only mean the gods, protectors and
 instructors, but also the <em>minor </em>gods -- the regents of
 the Zodiacal signs. Yet, the former, as actual and existing Entities
 which gave birth to, nursed, and instructed mankind in its early
 youth, appear in every Scripture, in that of the Zoroastrians
 as much as in the Hindu Gospels. Ormazd, or Ahura-Mazda, the "Lord
 of Wisdom," is the synthesis of the Amshaspends (or <em>Amesha-Spenta
 -- </em>"<em>Immortal</em> Benefactors"),* the "Word,"
 however, or the <em>Logos </em>and its six highest aspects in
 Mazdyanism. These "Immortal Benefactors" are described
 <em>in Zamyad yasht </em>as the "Amesha-Spentas, the shining,
 having efficacious eyes, great, helpful . . . . imperishable and
 pure which are all seven of like mind, like speech, all seven
 doing alike . . . . which are <em>the creators and destroyers
 of the creatures </em>of Ahura-Mazda, their creators and overseers,
 their protectors and rulers . . . ."
 </p><p>
 These few lines alone indicate the dual and even the triple character
 of the Amshaspends, our Dhyan-Chohans or the "Serpents of
 Wisdom." They are identical with, and yet separate from Ormazd
 (Ahura-Mazda). They are also the Angels of the Stars of the Christians
 -- the Stary-azatas of the Zoroastrians -- or again the seven
 planets (including the sun) of every religion.** The epithet --
 "the shining having efficacious eyes" -- proves it.
 This on the physical and sidereal planes. On the spiritual, they
 are the divine powers of Ahura-Mazda; but on the astral or psychic
 plane again, they are the "Builders," the "watchers,"
 the <em>Pitar </em>(fathers), and the first Preceptors of mankind.
 </p><p>
 When mortals shall have become sufficiently spiritualised, there
 will be no more need of <em>forcing </em>them into a correct comprehension
 of ancient Wisdom. Men will <em>know </em>then, that there never
 yet was a great World-reformer, whose name has passed into our
 generation, who (<em>a</em>) was not a direct emanation of the
 <strong>L</strong>OGOS (under whatever name known to us), <em>i.e.</em>,
 <em>an essential </em>incarnation of one of "the seven,"
 of the "divine Spirit who is sevenfold"; and (<em>b</em>)
 who had not appeared before, during the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Also translated as "blissful Immortals" by Dr. W.
 Geiger; but the first is more correct.
 </p><p>
 ** These "seven" became the eight, the <em>Ogdoad, </em>of
 the later <em>materialized </em>religions, the seventh, or the
 highest principle, being no longer the pervading Spirit, the Synthesis,
 but becoming an anthropomorphic number, or additional unit.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 359 GOD AND NATURE ANTHROPOMORPHIZED.</h6>
 
 <p>
 past Cycles. They will recognise, then, the cause which produces
 in history and chronology certain riddles of the ages; the reason
 why, for instance, it is impossible <em>for them </em>to assign
 any reliable date to Zoroaster, who is found multiplied by twelve
 and fourteen in the <em>Dabistan</em>; why the Rishis and Manus
 are so mixed up in their numbers and individualities; why Krishna
 and Buddha speak of themselves as <em>re-incarnations, i.e., </em>Krishna
 is identified with the Rishi Narayana, and Gautama gives a series
 of his previous births; and why the former, especially, being
 "the <em>very supreme </em>Brahma," is yet called <em>Amsamsavatara
 -- </em>"a part of a part" only of the Supreme on Earth.
 Finally, why Osiris is a great God, and at the same time a "prince
 on Earth," who reappears in Thoth-Hermes, and why Jesus (in
 Hebrew, Joshua) of Nazareth is recognised, cabalistically, in
 Joshua, the Son of Nun, as well as in other personages. The esoteric
 doctrine explains it by saying that each of these (as many others)
 had first appeared on earth as one of the seven powers of the
 <strong>L</strong>OGOS, individualized as a God or "Angel"
 (messenger); then, mixed with matter, they had re-appeared in
 turn as great sages and instructors who "taught the Fifth
 Race," after having instructed the two preceding races, had
 ruled during the Divine Dynasties, and had finally sacrificed
 themselves, to be reborn under various circumstances for the good
 of mankind, and for its salvation at certain critical periods;
 until in their last incarnations they had become truly only "the
 parts of a part" on earth, though <em>de facto </em>the One
 Supreme in Nature.
 </p><p>
 This is the metaphysics of Theogony. And, as every "Power"
 among the SEVEN has (once individualized) in his charge one of
 the elements of creation, and rules over it,* hence the many meanings
 in every symbol, which, unless interpreted according to the esoteric
 methods, generally lead to an inextricable confusion.
 </p><p>
 Does the Western Kabalist -- generally an opponent of the Eastern
 Occultist -- require a proof? Let him open Eliphas Levi's <em>Histoire
 de</em> <em>la Magic,</em>"<em> </em>p. 53, and carefully
 examine his "<em>Grand Symbole Kabalistique</em>"<em>
 </em>of the Zohar. He will find, on the engraving given, a <em>white
 </em>man standing erect and a <em>black </em>woman upside down,<em>
 i.e</em>., standing on her head, her legs passing under the extended
 arms of the male figure, and protruding behind his shoulders,
 while their hands join at an angle on each side. Eliphas Levi
 makes of it, God and Nature; or God, "light," mirrored
 inversely in "Nature and Matter," darkness. Kabalistically
 and symbolically he is right; but only so far as emblematical
 cosmogony goes. Nor has he invented the symbol any more
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * These elements are: -- The cosmic, the terrene, the mineral,
 the vegetable, the animal, the aqueous, and finally the human
 -- in their physical, spiritual, and psychic aspects.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 360 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 than the Kabalists have: the two figures in white and black stone
 have existed in the temples of Egypt from time immemorial -- agreeably
 to tradition; and historically -- ever since the day of King Cambyses,
 who personally saw them. Therefore the symbol must have been in
 existence since nearly 2,500 years ago. This, at the very least,
 for that Persian sovereign, who was a son of Cyrus the Great,
 succeeded his father in the year 529 B.C. These figures were the
 two <em>Kabiri</em> <em>personifying the opposite poles. </em>Herodotus
 (<em>Thalia, </em>No. 77) tells posterity that when Cambyses entered
 the temple of the Kabirim, he went into an inextinguishable fit
 of laughter, on perceiving what he thought a man erect and a woman
 standing on the top of her head before him. These were the poles,
 however, whose symbol was intended to commemorate "the passing
 of the original North Pole of the Earth to the South Pole of the
 Heaven," as perceived by Mackey.* But they represented also
 the poles <em>inverted, </em>in consequence of the great inclination
 of the axis, bringing each time as a result the displacement of
 the Oceans, the submersion of the polar lands, and the consequent
 <em>upheaval </em>of new continents in the equatorial regions,
 and <em>vice</em> <em>versa. </em>These Kabirim were the "Deluge"
 gods.
 </p><p>
 This may help us to get at the key of the seemingly hopeless confusion
 among the numbers of names and titles given to one and the same
 gods, and classes of gods. Faber showed already, at the beginning
 of this century, the identity of the Corybantes, Curetes, Dioscuri,
 Anactes, Dii Magni, Idei Dactyli, Lares, Penates, Manes,** Titans,
 and Aletae with the<strong> K</strong>ABIRI. And we have shown
 that the latter were the same as the Manus, the Rishis and our
 Dhyan Chohans, who incarnated in the Elect of the Third and Fourth
 Races. Thus, while in Theogony the Kabiri-Titans were seven great
 gods: cosmically and astronomically the Titans were called Atlantes,
 because, perhaps, as Faber says, they were connected
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Who adds that the Egyptians had various ways of representing
 the angles of the Poles. Also in Perry's <em>View of the Levant
 </em>there is "a figure representing the South Pole of the
 Earth in the constellation of the Harp," in which the poles
 appear like two <em>straight rods, </em>surmounted with hawks'
 wings, but they were also often represented as serpents with heads
 of hawks, one at each end.
 </p><p>
 ** Faber and Bishop Cumberland would make them all the later pagan
 personifications, as the former writer has it, of "the Noetic
 Ark, and no other than the Patriarch (Noah) and his family"
 (!) <em>See his </em>"<em>Kabiri,</em>"<em> Vol.</em><strong>
 I</strong><em>., </em>136; because, we are told, "after the
 Deluge in commemoration of the event, the pious Noachidae had
 established a religious festival, which was, later on, corrupted
 by their <em>impious </em>descendants; demons or hero-gods; and
 at length unblushing obscenity usurped the name and garb of religion"
 (<em>Vol. I., p. </em>10.). Now this is indeed putting an extinguisher
 upon the human reasoning powers, not only of antiquity, but even
 of our present generations. Reverse the statement, and explain
 after the words "Noah and his family" that what is meant
 by that patriarch and family is simply the Jewish version of a
 Samothracian mystery, of <em>Saturn, or Kronos-Sadic and his Sons,
 </em>and then we may say <em>Amen.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 361 WHO WERE ENOCH AND THE OTHERS? </h6>
 
 <p>
 (<em>a</em>) <em>with At-al-as </em>"the divine Sun,"
 and (<em>b</em>) with <em>tit </em>"the deluge." But
 this, if true, is only the exoteric version. Esoterically, the
 meaning of their symbols depends on the appellation, or title,
 used. The seven mysterious, awe-inspiring great gods -- the <em>Dioscuri</em>,*
 the deities surrounded with the darkness of occult nature -- become
 the <em>Idei </em>(or Idaeic finger) with the adept-healer by
 metals. The true etymology of the name <em>lares </em>(now signifying
 "ghosts") must be sought in the Etruscan word "<em>lars</em>,"
 "conductor," "leader." Sanchoniathon translates
 the word <em>Aletae </em>as fire worshippers, and Tabor believes
 it derived from <em>Al-Orit, </em>"the god of fire."
 Both are right, as in both cases it is a reference to the Sun
 (the highest God), toward whom the planetary gods "gravitate"
 (astronomically and allegorically) and whom they worship. As <em>Lares,
 </em>they are truly the Solar Deities, though Faber's etymology,
 who says that "<em>lar</em>"<em> </em>is a contraction
 of "<em>El-Ar,</em>"<em> </em>the solar deity, is not
 very correct. They are the "lares," the conductors and
 leaders of men. As <em>Aletae, </em>they were the seven planets
 -- astronomically; and as <em>Lares,</em> the regents of the same,
 our protectors and rulers -- mystically. For purposes of exoteric
 or phallic worship, as also cosmically, they were the Kabiri,
 their attributes being recognised in these two capacities by the
 name of the temples to which they respectively belonged, and those
 of their priests. They all belonged, however, to the Septenary
 creative and informing groups of Dhyan Chohans. The Sabeans, who
 worshipped the "regents of the Seven planets" as the
 Hindus do their Rishis, held Seth and his son Hermes (Enoch or
 <em>Enos</em>)<em> </em>as the highest among the planetary gods.
 Seth and Enos were borrowed from the Sabeans and then disfigured
 by the Jews (exoterically); but the truth can still be traced
 about them even in <em>Genesis.** </em>Seth is the "progenitor"
 of those early men of the Third Race in whom the "Planetary"
 angels had incarnated -- a Dhyan Chohan himself, who belonged
 to the <em>informing </em>gods; and Enos (Hanoch or Enoch) or
 Hermes, was said to be <em>his son</em> -- because it was a generic
 name for all the early <em>Seers </em>("Enoichion").
 Thence the worship. The Arabic writer Soyuti says that the earliest
 records mention Seth, or <em>Set, </em>as the founder of Sabeanism;
 and therefore that the pyramids which embody the planetary system
 were regarded as the place of sepulchre of both Seth and <em>Idris
 </em>(Hermes or Enoch), (<em>See Vyse, </em>"<em>Operations,</em>"<em>
 Vol. II., p. </em>358); that thither Sabeans proceeded
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Who became later on, with the Greeks, limited only to Castor
 and Pollux. But in the days of Lemuria, the <em>Dioscuri, </em>the
 "Egg-born," were the Seven Dhyan Chohans (Agnishwatta-Kumara)
 who incarnated in the Seven Elect of the Third Race.
 </p><p>
 ** Clement of Alexandria recognized the astronomical significance
 of chapter xxv. <em>et seq. </em>of Exodus. According to the Mosaic
 doctrine, he says that the seven planets help in the generation
 of terrestrial things. The two cherubs standing on the two sides
 of the sacred tetragrammaton represent the Ursa Major and Ursa
 Minor.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 362 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 on pilgrimage, and <em>chanted prayers seven times </em>a day,
 <em>turning to the</em> <em>North </em>(the Mount Meru, Kaph,
 Olympus, etc., etc.) (<em>See Palgrave,</em> <em>Vol. II., p.
 </em>264). Abd Allatif says curious things about the Sabeans and
 their books. So does Eddin Ahmed Ben Yahya, who wrote 200 years
 later. While the latter maintains "that each pyramid was
 consecrated <em>to a star</em>"<em> </em>(a star <em>regent
 </em>rather), Abd Allatif assures us "that he had read in
 Sabean books that one pyramid was the tomb of Agathodaemon and
 the other of Hermes" (<em>Vyse, Vol. II., p. </em>342). "Agathodaemon
 was none other than Seth, and, according to some writers, Hermes
 was his son," adds Mr. Staniland Wake in "<em>The Great
 Pyramid,</em>"<em> </em>p. 57.
 </p><p>
 Thus, while in Samothrace and the oldest Egyptian temples they
 were the great Cosmic Gods (the seven and the <em>forty-nine </em>Sacred
 Fires), in the Grecian fanes their rites became mostly phallic,
 therefore to the profane, obscene. In the latter case they were
 3 and 4, or 7 -- the male and female principles -- (the <em>crux
 ansata</em>);<em> </em>this division showing why some classical
 writers held that they were only three, while others named four.
 And these were -- the Kabiri -- Axieros (in his female aspect,
 Demeter); Axio-Kersa (Persephone)*; Axiokersos (Pluto or Hades);
 and Kadmos or Kadmilos (Hermes -- not the ithyphallic Hermes mentioned
 by Herodotus (<strong>II</strong>. 51) but "he of the sacred
 legend," explained only during the Samothracian mysteries).
 This identification, due, according to the Scholiast Apollon (Rh.
 I. 217), to an indiscretion of Mnaseas, is none at all, as names
 alone do not reveal much. There were still others again who maintained,
 being as right in their way, that there were only two Kabiri.
 These were, esoterically, the two Dioscuri, Castor and Pollux,
 and exoterically, Jupiter and Bacchus. The two personified the
 terrestrial poles, geodesically; the terrestrial, and the pole
 of the heavens -- astronomically, as also the physical and the
 spiritual man. The story of Semele and Jupiter and the birth of
 Bacchus, the <em>Bimater, </em>with all the circumstances attending
 it, needs only to be read esoterically to understand the allegory.
 The parts played in the event by the fire, water, earth, etc.,
 in the many versions, will show how "the father of the gods"
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It is a curious idea -- yet one not very far from the truth,
 perhaps -- that speculation of Mackey, the self-made Adept of
 Norwich, found in his "Mythological Astronomy." He says
 that the Kabiri named Axieros and Axiokersa derived their names
 (<em>a</em>) from <em>Kab </em>or<em> Cab, </em>a measure, and
 from <em>Urim</em>, the heavens: the Kabirim being thus "a
 measure of the heavens"; and (<em>b</em>) that their distinctive
 names, implying the <em>principle of generation, </em>referred
 to the sexes. For, "the word <em>sex </em>was formerly understood
 by <em>aix</em>; which has now settled . . . . into sex."
 And he refers to "Encyclopaedia Londinus" at the word
 "<em>aspiration.</em>"<em> </em>Now if we give the aspirated
 sound to Axieros, it would be <em>Saxieros</em>;<em> </em>and
 the other pole would be <em>Saxiokersa. </em>The two poles would
 thus become the generators of the other powers of nature -- they
 would be the <em>parents: </em>therefore the most powerful gods.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 363 THE POLES, THE "HEAVENLY MEASURE."
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 and the "merry God of the wine" were also made to personify
 the two terrestrial Poles. The telluric, metalline, magnetic,
 electric and the fiery elements are all so many allusions and
 references to the cosmic and astronomic character of the diluvian
 tragedy. In astronomy, the poles are indeed the "heavenly
 measure" (<em>vide</em> note<em> supra</em>);<em> and </em>so
 are the Kabiri <em>Dioscuri, </em>as will be shown, and the Kabiri-Titans,
 to whom Diodorus ascribes the <em>invention of fire* </em>and
 the art of manufacturing iron. Moreover, Pausanias shows that
 the original Kabiric deity was Prometheus. (I. ix. p. 751.)
 </p><p>
 But the fact that, astronomically, the Titans-Kabirim were also
 the generators and regulators of the seasons, and cosmically the
 great Volcanic Energies, the gods presiding over all the metals
 and terrestrial works, does not prevent them from being, in their
 original divine characters, the beneficent Entities who, symbolized
 in Prometheus, brought light to the world, and endowed humanity
 with intellect and reason. They are pre-eminently in every theogony
 -- especially in the Hindu -- the sacred divine fires, 3, 7, or
 49, according as the allegory demands it. Their very names prove
 it, as they are the <em>Agni-putra</em> (Sons of the Fire) in
 India, and the genii of the fire under numerous names in Greece
 and elsewhere. Welcker, Maury, and now Decharme, show the name
 Kabeiron meaning "the powerful through fire," from the
 Greek word <em>[[kaio]] </em>"to burn." The Semitic
 <em>Kabirim, </em>"the powerful, the mighty, and the great,"
 answering to the Greek [[<em>megaloi dunatoi</em>]], are later
 epithets. They were universally worshipped, and their origin is
 lost in the night of time. Yet whether propitiated in Phrygia,
 Phoenicia, the Troad, Thrace, Egypt, Lemnos or Sicily, their cult
 was always connected with fire; their temples ever built in the
 most volcanic localities, and in exoteric worship they belonged
 to Chthonian divinities. Therefore Christianity has made of them
 <em>infernal gods. </em>
 </p><p>
 They are truly "the great, beneficent and powerful Gods,"
 as Cassius Hermone calls them (<em>See Macrob. Sat. I., iii.,
 c. 4, p</em>. 376). At Thebes, Kore and Demeter, the <em>Kabirim,
 </em>had a sanctuary (<em>Pausan. IX.</em> 22; 5)<em>,</em> and
 at Memphis, the Kabiri had a temple so sacred, that none, excepting
 the priests, were suffered to enter their holy precincts (<em>Herodotus
 I. ii.,</em> <em>c. </em>37). But we must not lose sight, at the
 same time, of the fact that the title of Kabiri was a generic
 one; that the Kabiri (the <em>mighty </em>gods as well as mortals),
 were of both sexes, as also terrestrial, celestial and kosmic.
 That, while in their later capacity of the Rulers of sidereal
 and terrestrial powers, a purely geological phenomenon (as it
 is now
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The word "guebra" comes from Kabiri, <em>gabiri,</em>
 and means Persian ancient fire-worshippers, or Parsis. Kabiri
 became <em>gabiri</em> and then remained as an appellation of
 the Zoroastrians in Persia. (<em>See Hyde</em>'<em>s </em>"<em>De
 Religio Persarum,</em>"<em> cap. </em>29.) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 364 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 regarded) was symbolized in the persons of those rulers, they
 were also, in the beginning of times, the rulers of mankind. When
 incarnated as Kings of the "divine Dynasties," they
 gave the first impulse to civilizations, and directed the mind
 with which they had endued men to the invention and perfection
 of all the arts and sciences. Thus the Kabiri are said to have
 appeared as the benefactors of men, and as such they lived for
 ages in the memory of nations. To them -- the Kabiri or Titans
 -- is ascribed the invention of letters (the <em>Devanagari, </em>or
 the alphabet and language of the gods), of laws and legislature;
 of architecture, as of the various modes of magic, so-called;
 and of the medical use of plants. Hermes, Orpheus, Cadmus, Asclepius,
 all those demi-gods and heroes, to whom is ascribed the revelation
 of sciences to men, and in whom Bryant, Faber, Bishop Cumberland,
 and so many other Christian writers -- too zealous for plain truth
 --would force posterity to see only pagan copies of one and sole
 prototype, named Noah -- are all generic names.
 </p><p>
 It is the Kabiri who are credited with having revealed, by <em>producing</em>
 corn or wheat, the great boon of agriculture. What <em>Isis-Osiris,
 the</em> once living Kabiria, has done in Egypt, that Ceres is
 said to have done in Sicily; they all belong to one class.
 </p><p>
 That the Serpents were ever the emblems of wisdom and prudence
 is again shown by the caduceus of Mercury, one with Thot, the
 god of wisdom, with Hermes, and so on. The two serpents, entwined
 around the rod, are phallic symbols of Jupiter and other gods
 who transformed themselves into snakes for purposes of seducing
 goddesses -- but only in the unclean fancies of profane symbologists.
 The serpent has ever been the symbol of the adept, and of his
 powers of immortality and divine knowledge. Mercury in his psychopompic
 character, conducting and guiding with the caduceus the souls
 of the dead to Hades and even raising the dead to life with it,
 is simply a very transparent allegory. It shows the dual power
 of the Secret Wisdom: the black and the white magic. It shows
 this personified Wisdom guiding the Soul after death, and its
 power to call to life that which is dead -- a very deep metaphor
 if one thinks over its meaning. Every people of antiquity reverenced
 this symbol, with the exception of Christians, who chose to forget
 the brazen Serpent of Moses, and even the implied acknowledgment
 of the great wisdom and prudence of the Serpent by Jesus himself,
 "Be ye <em>wise </em>as serpents and harmless as doves."
 The Chinese, one of the oldest nations of our Fifth Race, made
 of it the emblem of their Emperors, who are thus the degenerate
 successors of the "Serpents" or Initiates, who ruled
 the early races of the Fifth Humanity. The Emperor's throne is
 the "Dragon's Seat," and his dresses of State are embroidered
 with the likeness of the</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 365 THE VARIOUS NOAHS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Dragon. The aphorisms in the oldest books of China, moreover,
 say plainly that the "Dragon" is a human, albeit <em>divine,
 </em>Being. Speaking of the "Yellow Dragon," the chief
 of the others, the <em>Twan-ying-t</em>'<em>u, says:</em> "His
 wisdom and virtue are unfathomable . . . he does not go in company
 and does not live in herds (he is an ascetic). He wanders in the
 wilds beyond the heavens. He goes and comes, fulfilling the decree
 (Karma); at the proper seasons if there is perfection he comes
 forth, if not he remains (invisible).". . . And Kon-fu-tyu
 is made to say by Lu-lan, "The Dragon feeds in the pure water
 of Wisdom and sports in the clear waters of Life."
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <strong>O</strong>UR <strong>D</strong>IVINE <strong>I</strong>NSTRUCTORS.
 </p><p>
 Now Atlantis and the Phlegyan isle are not the only record that
 is left of the deluge. China has also her tradition and the story
 of an island or continent, which it calls Ma-li-ga-si-ma, and
 which Kaempfer and Faber spell "Maurigosima," for some
 mysterious phonetic reasons of their own. Kaempfer, in his "<em>Japan</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Appendix, p. </em>13), gives the tradition: The island,
 owing to the iniquity of its giants, sinks to the bottom of the
 ocean, and Peiru-un, the king, the Chinese Noah, escapes alone
 with his family owing to a warning of the gods through two idols.
 It is that pious prince and his descendants who have peopled China.
 The Chinese traditions speak of the divine dynasties of Kings
 as much as those of any other nations.
 </p><p>
 At the same time there is not an old fragment but shows belief
 in a multiform and even multigeneric evolution -- spiritual, psychic,
 intellectual and physical -- of human beings, just as given in
 the present work. A few of these claims have now to be considered.
 </p><p>
 Our races -- they all show -- have sprung from divine races, by
 whatever name they are called. Whether we deal with the Indian
 Rishis or Pitris; with the Chinese <em>Chim-nang </em>and<em>
 Tchan-gy -- </em>their "divine man" and demi-gods; with
 the Akkadian <em>Dingir</em> and<em> Mul-lil</em> -- the creative
 god and the "Gods of the ghost-world"; with the Egyptian
 Isis-Osiris and Thot; with the Hebrew Elohim, or again with Manco
 Capac and his Peruvian progeny -- the story varies nowhere. Every
 nation has Amshaspends* (six exoterically), ten and seven Chaldean
 Anedots,
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote continued]]---------------------------------
 </p><p>
 * The Amshaspends are six -- if Ormazd, their chief and Logos,
 is excluded. But in the secret doctrine he is the seventh and
 highest, just as Phtah is the seventh Kabir among the Kabiri.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 366 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ten and seven Sephiroth, etc., etc. One and all have been derived
 from the primitive Dhyan-Chohans of the Esoteric doctrine, or
 the "Builders" of the Stanzas (Book I.). From Manu,
 Thot-Hermes, Oannes-Dagon, and Edris-Enoch, down to Plato and
 Panadores, all tell us of seven <em>divine </em>Dynasties, of
 seven Lemurian, and seven Atlantean divisions of the Earth; of
 the seven primitive and dual gods who descend from their celestial
 abode* and reign on Earth, teaching mankind Astronomy, Architecture,
 and all the other sciences that have come down to us. These Beings
 appear first as "gods" and Creators; then they merge
 in nascent man, to finally emerge as "divine-Kings and Rulers."
 But this fact has been gradually forgotten. As Bosuage shows,
 the Egyptians themselves confessed that science flourished in
 their country only since Isis-Osiris, whom they continue to adore
 as gods, "though they had become Princes in human form."
 And he adds of Osiris-Isis (the divine androgyne: -- "It
 is said that this Prince (Isis-Osiris) built cities in Egypt,
 stopped the overflowing of the Nile; invented agriculture, the
 use of the vine, music, astronomy, and geometry."
 </p><p>
 When Abul-Feda says in his "<em>Historia Anteislamitica</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Fleisher, p.</em> 16) that the Sabean language was established
 by Seth and Edris (Enoch) -- he means by "Sabean language"
 astronomy. In the "Melelwa Nohil" (<em>MS. 47 in Nic.
 Cat.</em>)<em> </em>Hermes is called the disciple of Agathodaemon.
 And in another account (<em>See Col. Vyse</em>'<em>s 2nd Vol.
 of the </em>"<em>Pyramids</em> <em>of Ghizeh,</em>"<em>
 p. </em>364<em>, MS. </em>785<em>, Uri</em>'<em>s Cat</em>.) Agathodaemon
 is mentioned as a "<em>King of Egypt.</em>"<em> </em>Celepas
 Geraldinus gives curious traditions about Henoch. He calls him
 the "divine giant." In the "<em>Book of</em> <em>the
 various names of the Nile,</em>"<em> </em>the same author
 (the historian Ahmed-Ben-Yusouf Eltiphas) tells us of the belief
 among the Semitic Arabs that Seth (become later the Egyptian Typhon,
 Set), had been one of the seven angels (or Patriarchs in the Bible):
 then he became a mortal and Adam's son, after which he communicated
 the gift of prophecy and astronomical science to Jared, who passed
 it to his son Henoch. But Henoch (Idris) "the author of thirty
 books, was Sabaean by origin" (<em>i.e</em>., belonging to
 the <em>Saba, </em>"a Host"); "having established
 the rites and ceremonies of primitive worship, he went to the
 East, where he constructed 140 cities, of which Edessa was the
 least important, then returned to Egypt where he became its King."
 Thus, he is identified with Hermes. But there were five Hermes
 -- or rather one, who appeared -- as some Manus and Rishis did
 -- in several different characters. In the <em>Burham-i-Kati </em>he
 is mentioned as "Hormig," a name of the planet Mercury
 or Budha; and Wednes-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In the Purana it is identified with Vishnu's or Brahma's Sveta
 Dwipa of Mount Meru.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 367 HERMES IN ASTRONOMY AND ELSEWHERE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 day was sacred both to Hermes and Thot. The Hermes of Oriental
 tradition, worshipped at Phineata and said to have fled after
 the death of Argus into Egypt, civilized it under the name of
 Thoth. But under whichever of these characters, he is always credited
 with having transferred all the sciences from <em>latent to active
 potency,</em> <em>i.e.</em>, with having been the first to teach
 magic to Egypt and to Greece, <em>before the days of Magna Graecia,
 </em>and when the Greeks were not even Hellenes.
 </p><p>
 Not only Herodotus -- the "father of History" -- tells
 us of the marvellous dynasties of gods that preceded the reign
 of mortals, followed by the dynasties of demi-gods, Heroes, and
 finally men, but the whole series of classics support him; Diodorus,
 Eratosthenes, Plato, Manetho, etc., etc., repeat the same, and
 never vary the order given.
 </p><p>
 "It is, indeed," as Creuzer shows: --
 </p><p>
 "From the spheres of the stars wherein dwell the gods of
 light that wisdom descends to the inferior spheres." "In
 the system of the ancient priests (Hierophants and Adepts) all
 things without exception, gods, the genii, <em>manes </em>(souls),
 the whole world, are conjointly developed in Space and duration.
 The pyramid may be considered as the symbol of this magnificent
 hierarchy of Spirits. . . . "*
 </p><p>
 There were more efforts made by the modern historians (French
 Academicians, like Renan, chiefly) to suppress truth by ignoring
 the ancient annals of <em>divine </em>Kings, than is strictly
 consistent with honesty. But M. Renan could never be more unwilling
 than was Eratosthenes 260 years B.C. to accept the unpalatable
 fact; and yet the latter found himself obliged to recognise its
 truth. For this, the great astronomer is treated with great contempt
 by his colleagues 2,000 years later. Manetho became with them
 "a superstitious priest born and bred in the atmosphere of
 other lying priests of Heliopolis" (<em>Freret</em>)<em>.
 </em>"All those historians and priests," justly remarks
 the demonologist, de Mirville, "so <em>veracious</em> when
 repeating stories of <em>human </em>kings and men, suddenly become
 <em>extremely suspicious </em>no sooner do they go back <em>to
 their gods.</em>"<em> . </em>. . But there is the synchronistic
 table of Abydos, which, thanks to the genius of Champollion, has
 now vindicated the good faith of the priests of Egypt (Manetho's
 above all), and that of Ptolemy. In the Turin papyrus, the most
 remarkable of all, in the words of the Egyptologist, de Rouge:
 --
 </p><p>
 ". . . Champollion, struck with amazement, found that he
 had under his own eyes the whole truth. . . . It was the remains
 of a list of dynasties embracing the furthest mythoic times, or
 the REIGN OF THE GODS AND HEROES. . . . At the very outset of
 this curious
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Ch. iv. of "<em>Egypt,</em>"<em> p. </em>441.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 368 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 papyrus we have to arrive at the conviction that so far back already
 as the period of Ramses, those mythic and heroical traditions
 were just as Manetho had transmitted them to us; we see figuring
 in them, as Kings of Egypt, the gods Seb, Osiris, Horus, Thoth-Hermes,
 and the goddess Ma, a long period of centuries being assigned
 to the reign of each of these." (<em>Ann. de Philologie Chretienne,
 </em>Vol. <strong>XXXII</strong>., p. 442).
 </p><p>
 The synchronistic tables of Manetho, besides the fact that they
 were disfigured by Eusebius for dishonest purposes, had never
 gone beyond Manetho. The chronology of the divine Kings and Dynasties,
 like that of the age of humanity, has ever been in the hands of
 the priests, and was kept secret from the profane multitudes.
 </p><p>
 Africa, as a continent, it is said, appeared before Europe did;
 nevertheless it appeared later than Lemuria and even the earliest
 Atlantis. That the whole region of what is now Egypt and the deserts
 was once upon a time covered with the sea, was known firstly through
 Herodotus, Strabo, Pliny, and all the Greeks; and, secondly, through
 geology. Abyssinia was once upon a time an island; and the Delta
 was the first country occupied by the pioneer emigrants who came
 with their gods from the North-east.
 </p><p>
 When was it? History is silent upon the subject. Fortunately we
 have the Dendera Zodiac, the planisphere on the ceiling of one
 of the oldest Egyptian temples, which records the fact. This Zodiac,
 with its mysterious three <em>Virgos </em>between the <em>Lion
 </em>and <em>Libra, </em>has found its OEdipus, who understood
 the riddle of these signs, and justified the truthfulness of those
 priests who told Herodotus that: -- (<em>a</em>) The poles of
 the Earth and the Ecliptic had formerly coincided; and (<em>b</em>)
 That even since their first Zodiacal records were commenced, the
 Poles have been three times within the plane of the Ecliptic,
 as the Initiates taught.
 </p><p>
 Bailly had not sufficient words at his command to express his
 surprise at the <em>sameness </em>of all such traditions about
 the<em> divine </em>races. "What are finally," he exclaims,
 "all those reigns of Indian <em>Devas </em>and Persian <em>Peris?
 </em>. . . . Or, those reigns and dynasties of the Chinese legends;
 those Tien-hoang or the <em>Kings of Heaven, </em>quite distinct
 from the <em>Ti-hoang, </em>the Kings on Earth, and the <em>Gin-hoang
 </em>the King's men, a distinction which is in perfect accord
 with that other one made by the Greeks and the Egyptians, in enumerating
 <em>their dynasties of Gods,</em> <em>of demi-gods, and of mortals.</em>"<em>*</em>
 
 </p><p>
 "Now," says Panadoras, "it is before that time
 (Menes), that <em>the reign</em> <em>of the seven gods who rule
 the world took place. </em>It was during that period that those
 benefactors of humanity <em>descended </em>on Earth and taught
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> Histoire de l'Astronomie Ancienne.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 369 WHAT THE PRIESTS TOLD HERODOTUS. </h6>
 
 <p>
 men to calculate the course of the sun and moon by the twelve
 signs of the Ecliptic."
 </p><p>
 Nearly five hundred years before the actual era, Herodotus was
 shown by the priests of Egypt the statues of their human Kings
 and Pontiffs<em>-piromis </em>(the archi-prophets or Maha-Chohans
 of the temples), <em>born one from the other </em>(without the
 intervention of woman) who had reigned before Menes, their first
 <em>human </em>King. These statues, he says, were enormous colossi
 in wood, three hundred and forty-five in number, <em>each of which
 had his name, his history and his annals. </em>And they assured
 Herodotus* (unless the most truthful of historians, the "Father
 of History," is now accused of fibbing, <em>just in this
 instance</em>) that no historian could ever understand or write
 an account of these superhuman Kings, unless he had studied and
 learned the history <em>of the three dynasties </em>that preceded
 the human -- namely, the DYNASTIES OF THE GODS, that of demi-gods,
 and of the Heroes, or giants. These "three dynasties"
 are the three Races.**
 </p><p>
 Translated into the language of the Esoteric doctrine, these three
 dynasties would also be those of the Devas, of Kimpurushas, and
 of Danavas and Daityas -- otherwise gods, celestial spirits, and
 giants or Titans. "Happy are those who are born, even from
 the condition of gods, as men, in Bharata-Varsha!" exclaim
 the incarnated gods themselves, during the Third Root-Race. Bharata
 is India, but in this case it symbolized the chosen land in those
 days, and was considered the best of the divisions of Jambu-dwipa,
 as it was the land of active (spiritual) works <em>par excellence</em>;<em>
 </em>the land of initiation and of divine knowledge.
 </p><p>
 Can one fail to recognise in Creuzer great powers of intuition,
 when, being almost unacquainted with the Aryan Hindu philosophies,
 little known in his day, he wrote: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "We modern Europeans feel surprised when hearing talk of
 the Spirits of the Sun, Moon, etc. But we repeat again, the <i>natural
 good sense and the upright</i> 
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See also <em>Memoires a l</em>'<em>Academie, etc., of de Mirville,
 Vol. III., </em>for a mass of evidence.
 </p><p>
 ** In <em>Vishnu-Purana, Book II., chap. </em>3, 4, <em>et seq.,
 </em>may be found many corroborations of the same, if one reads
 carefully. The reigns of gods, lower gods, and men are all enumerated
 in the descriptions of the seven Islands, seven seas, seven mountains,
 etc., etc., ruled by Kings. Each king is said invariably to have
 <em>seven </em>sons, an allusion to the seven sub-races. One instance
 will do. The King of <em>Kusa dwipa </em>had seven sons (follow
 names) . . . "after whom the seven portions (Varsha) of the
 island were called. <em>There reside mankind along with Daityas
 and Danavas, as well as with spirits of</em> <em>Heaven </em>(<em>Gandharvas,
 Yakshas, Kimpurushas, etc</em>.)<em> and gods.</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Chapter iv.</em>)<em> </em>There is but one exception
 in the case of King Priyavrata, the son of the first Manu, Swayambhuva
 -- who had <em>ten</em> sons. But of these, three -- Medha, Agnibahu,
 and Putra -- became ascetics, and refused their portions. Thus
 Priyavrata divided the earth again into <em>seven</em> continents.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 370 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 <i>judgment </i>of the ancient peoples, quite foreign to our <i>entirely
 material </i>ideas upon celestial mechanics and physical sciences
 . . . could not see in the stars and planets only that which we
 see: namely, simple masses of light, or opaque bodies moving in
 circuits in sidereal space, merely according to the laws of attraction
 or repulsion; but they saw in them <i>living </i>bodies, <i>animated</i>
 by spirits as they saw the same in every kingdom of nature. .
 . . <i>This doctrine of spirits, so</i> <i>consistent and conformable
 to nature, </i>from which it was derived, formed a grand and unique
 conception, wherein the physical, the moral, and the political
 aspects were all blended together . . . "<i> </i>("<i>Egypte,</i>"<i>
 pp. </i>450<i> to</i> 455.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 It is such a conception only that can lead man to form a correct
 conclusion about his origin and the genesis of everything in the
 universe -- of Heaven and Earth, between which he is a living
 link. Without such a psychological link, and the feeling of its
 presence, no science can ever progress, and the realm of knowledge
 must be limited to the analysis of physical matter only.
 </p><p>
 Occultists believe in "spirits," because they <em>feel
 </em>(and some see) themselves surrounded on every side by them.*
 Materialists do not. They live on this earth, just as, in the
 world of insects and even of fishes, some creatures live surrounded
 by myriads of their own <em>genus, </em>without seeing, or so
 much as sensing them.**
 </p><p>
 Plato is the first sage among the classics who speaks at length
 of the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * As a general rule, <em>now</em> that the very nature of the
 <em>inner </em>man has become as blind as his physical nature,
 man is situated on this globe as the <em>Amphioxus </em>is in
 the Ocean. Surrounded by shoals and millions of various other
 fishes and creatures that see it, <em>the Amphioxus </em>species
 --having neither brain nor any of the senses possessed by the
 other classes -- sees them not. Who knows whether, on the Darwinian
 theory, these "Branchiostoma" are not the direct ancestors
 of our Materialists.
 </p><p>
 ** The Occultists have been accused of worshipping <em>gods </em>or
 devils. We deny this. Among the numberless hosts of spirits --
 <em>men </em>that were, and those who will be men -- there are
 those immeasurably superior to the human race, higher and holier
 than the highest Saint on Earth, and wiser than any mortal without
 exception. And there are those again who are no better than we
 are, as some are far worse and inferior to the lowest savage.
 It is the latter classes that command the readiest communication
 with our earth, who perceive and sense us, as the clairvoyants
 perceive and sense them. The close proximity of our respective
 abodes and planes of perception are in favour of such inter-communication
 unfortunately, as they are ever ready to interfere with our affairs
 for weal or woe. If we are asked how it is that none but sensitive
 hysterical natures, neuro- and psycho-pathic persons see and occasionally
 talk with "Spirits," we answer the question by several
 other queries. We ask: "Do you know the nature of hallucination,
 and can you define its psychic process? How can you tell that
 all such visions are due merely to physical hallucinations? What
 makes you feel so sure that mental and nervous diseases, while
 drawing a veil over our <em>normal</em> senses (so-called) <em>do
 not </em>reveal at the same time vistas unknown to the healthy
 man, by throwing open doors usually closed against your scientific
 perceptions (?): or that a psycho-spiritual faculty <em>does not
 </em>forthwith replace the loss, or the temporary atrophy, of
 a purely physical sense? It is disease, or the exuberance of nervous
 fluid which produces mediumship and visions --hallucinations,
 as you call them. But what <em>does </em>Science know even of
 mediumship?" Truly were the [[Footnote continued on next
 page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 371 A UNIVERSAL CORROBORATION.</h6>
 
 <p>
 divine Dynasties, and locates them on a vast continent which he
 calls Atlantis. Bailly was not the first nor last to believe the
 same, and he had been preceded and anticipated in this theory
 by Father Kircher. This learned Jesuit writes in "<em>OEdipus
 AEgyptiacus</em>" (<em>Vol. </em>I., p. 70): --
 </p><p>
 "I confess, for a long time I had regarded all this (dynasties
 and the Atlantis) as pure fables (<em>meras nugas</em>) to the
 day when, better instructed in Oriental languages, I judged that
 all those legends must be, after all, only the development of
 a great truth. . . . ."
 </p><p>
 As de Rougemont shows, Theopompus, in his <em>Meropis, </em>made
 the priests of Phrygia and Asia Minor speak exactly as the priests
 of Sais did when they revealed to Solon the history and fate of
 Atlantis. According to Theopompus, it was a unique continent of
 an indefinite size, and containing two countries inhabited by
 <em>two races -- </em>a fighting, warrior race, and a pious, meditative
 race,* which Theopompus symbolizes by two cities.** The pious
 "city" was <em>continually visited by</em> <em>the gods</em>;<em>
 </em>the belligerent "city" was inhabited by various
 beings <em>invulnerable </em>to iron, liable to be <em>mortally
 wounded </em>only by stone and wood."*** De Rougemont treats
 this as a pure <em>fiction </em>of Theopompus ("<em>Peuple
 Primitif,</em>"<em> vol. iii. </em>157) and even sees a fraud
 (<em>supercherie</em>)<em> </em>in the assertion of the Saitic
 priests. This was denounced by the "Demonologists" as
 illogical. In the words of De Mirville: -- "A<em> supercherie
 </em>which was based on a belief, the product of faith of the
 whole antiquity; a <em>supposition </em>which yet gave its name
 to a whole mountain chain (the Atlas); which specified with the
 greatest precision a topographical region (by placing some of
 its lands at a small distance from Cadiz and the strait of Calpetus),
 which prophesied, 2,000 years before Columbus, <em>the great</em>
 <em>trans-oceanic land </em>situated beyond that Atlantis and
 which "is reached" it said -- "by the <em>islands
 </em>not of the blessed, but of the good spirits [[<em>eudaimonia</em>]]
 (our '<em>Iles Fortunees</em>')<em> -- </em>such a supposition
 can never be an universal chimera." (<em>A word on </em>"<em>Atlantis,</em>"<em>
 p. </em>29.)
 </p><p>
 It is certain that, whether "chimera" or reality, the
 priests of the whole world had it from one and the same source:
 the universal tradition
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] modern Charcots to pay
 attention to the <em>delirium</em> of their patients from a more
 psychic standpoint, Science, and physiology especially, might
 be more benefited than they are now, and truth have a wider field
 of fact in its knowledge.
 </p><p>
 * These were the early Aryans and the bulk of the Fourth Root
 Races -- the former pious and meditative (<em>yoga</em>-contemplation),
 the latter -- a fighting race of sorcerers, who were rapidly degenerating
 owing to their uncontrolled passions.
 </p><p>
 ** The Northern and Southern Divisions of Lemuria-Atlantis. The
 Hyperborean and the Equatorial lands of the two continents. (See
 Sections about Lemuria and Atlantis in History.)
 </p><p>
 *** This is Occult and refers to the property of iron which, attracted
 by magnetic elements, is repelled by others, which are made, by
 an occult process, as impervious to it as water to a blow.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 372 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 about the third great continent which perished some 850,000 years
 ago.* A continent inhabited by two distinct races; distinct physically
 and especially morally; both deeply versed in primeval wisdom
 and the secrets of nature; mutually antagonistic in their struggle,
 during the course and progress of their double evolution. Whence
 even the Chinese teachings upon the subject, if it is but a <em>fiction?
 </em>Have they not recorded the existence once upon a time of
 a <em>holy </em>island beyond the sun (<em>Tcheou</em>)<em>,</em>
 and beyond which were situated the lands <em>of the immortal men?</em>
 (<em>See de</em> <em>Rougemont, ibid.</em>)<em> </em>Do they not
 still believe that the remnants of those <em>immortal </em>men
 -- who survived when the <em>holy </em>island had become black
 with sin and perished -- have found refuge in the great desert
 of Gobi, where they still reside invisible to all, and defended
 from approach by hosts of Spirits?
 </p><p>
 "If one has to lend ear to traditions," writes the very
 unbelieving Boulanger, ("<em>Regne des Dieux,</em>"<em>
 Introduction</em>) <em>. </em>. . "the latter place before
 the reign of Kings, that of the Heroes and demi-gods; and still
 earlier and beyond they place the marvellous reign of the gods
 and all the fables of the golden age. . . . One feels surprised
 that annals so interesting should have been rejected by almost
 all our historians. And yet the ideas communicated by them were
 once universally admitted and revered by all the peoples; not
 a few revere them still, making them the basis of their daily
 life. Such considerations seem to necessitate a less hurried judgment.
 . . . The ancients, from whom we hold these traditions, which
 <em>we accept no longer because</em> <em>we do not understand
 them now, </em>must have had motives for believing in them furnished
 by their greater proximity to the first ages, and which the distance
 that separates us from them refuses to us . . . . Plato in his
 fourth book of <em>Laws, </em>says that, long before the construction
 of the first cities, Saturn had established on earth a <em>certain
 </em>form of government under which man was very happy. As it
 is the golden age he refers to, or to that reign of gods so celebrated
 in ancient fables . . . . let us see the ideas he had of that
 happy age, and what was the occasion he had to introduce this
 <em>fable </em>into a treatise on politics. According to Plato,
 in order to obtain clear and precise ideas on royalty, its origin
 and power, one has to turn back to the first principles of history
 and tradition. Great changes, he says, have occurred in days of
 old, <em>in heaven and on earth, </em>and the present state of
 things is one of the results (<em>Karma</em>).<em> </em>Our traditions
 tell us of many marvels, of changes that have taken place in the
 course of the Sun, of Saturn's reign, and of a thousand other
 matters that remained scattered about in human memory; but <em>one
 never hears anything of the </em><strong>EVIL </strong><em>which
 has</em> 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The first continent, or island, if so preferred, "the cap
 of the North Pole," has never perished; nor will it to the
 end of the Seven Races.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 373 WHEAT BROUGHT DOWN BY THE GODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>produced those revolutions, nor of the evil which directly
 followed them. </em>Yet . . . . that Evil is the principle one
 has to talk about, to be able to treat of royalty and the origin
 of power. . . ."
 </p><p>
 That <em>evil</em>, Plato seems to see in the sameness or consubstantiality
 of the natures of the rulers and the ruled, for he says that long
 before man built his cities, in the golden age, there was naught
 but happiness on earth, for there were no needs. Why? Because
 Saturn, knowing that man could not rule man, without injustice
 filling forthwith the universe through his whims and vanity, would
 not allow any mortal to obtain power over his fellow creatures.
 To do this the god used the same means we use ourselves with regard
 to our flocks. We do not place a bullock or a ram over our bullocks
 and rams, but give them a leader, a shepherd, <em>i.e., a being
 of a species quite different from their own and of</em> <em>a
 superior nature. </em>It is just what Saturn did. He loved mankind
 and placed to rule over it no mortal King or prince but -- "Spirits
 and genii [[<em>daimones</em>]] of a divine nature more excellent
 than that of man."
 </p><p>
 It was god, the Logos (the synthesis of the Host) who thus presiding
 over the genii, became the first shepherd and leader of men.*
 When the world had ceased to be so governed and the gods retired,
 "ferocious beasts devoured a portion of mankind." "Left
 to their own resources and industry, inventors then appeared among
 them successively and discovered fire, wheat, wine; and public
 gratitude deified them . . . ."("<em>De Legibus</em>"<em>
 </em>1<em>, iv.</em>;<em> in Crit. and in Politic</em>).
 </p><p>
 And mankind was right, as fire by friction was the first mystery
 of nature, the first and chief property of matter that was revealed
 to man.
 </p><p>
 "<em>Fruits and grain, unknown to Earth to that day, were
 brought by</em> <em>the </em>'<em>Lords of Wisdom</em>'<em> for
 the benefit of those they ruled -- from other</em> <em>lokas </em>(spheres).
 . . " say the Commentaries. Now: "The earliest inventions
 (?) of mankind are the most wonderful that the race has ever made.
 . . The <em>first use of fire, </em>and the discovery of the methods
 by which it can be kindled; the domestication of animals; and,
 above all, <em>the processes by which the various cereals were
 first developed </em>out of some wild grasses (?) -- these are
 all <em>discoveries with which, in ingenuity and in importance,</em>
 <em>no subsequent discoveries may compare. </em>They are all unknown
 to history -- all lost in the light of an EFFULGENT DAWN."
 ("<em>Unity of Nature,</em>" Argyll.)
 </p><p>
 This will be doubted and denied in our proud generation. But if
 it is asserted that there are no grains and fruits <em>unknown
 to earth, </em>then we may remind the reader <em>that wheat has
 never been found in the wild state: it is</em> <em>not a product
 of the earth. </em>All the other cereals have been traced to their
 primogenital forms in various species of wild grasses, but wheat
 has
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Secret Doctrine explains and expounds that which Plato says,
 for it teaches that those "inventors" were gods and
 demi-gods (Devas and Rishis) who had become -- some deliberately,
 some forced to by Karma -- incarnated in man.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 374 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 hitherto defied the efforts of botanists to trace it to its origin.
 And let us bear in mind, in this connection, how sacred was that
 cereal with the Egyptian priests; wheat being placed even with
 their mummies, and found thousands of years later in their coffins.
 Remember: -- "The servants of Horus glean the wheat in the
 field of Aanroo. . . . wheat <em>seven cubits high.</em>"
 ("<em>Book of the Dead,</em>"<em> chap. xcix., </em>33;<em>
 and clvi., </em>4.)* The reader is referred to Stanza <strong>VII.,</strong><b>
 </b>Verse 3, Book I., wherein this verse is explained in another
 of its meanings, and also to the "<em>Book of the</em> <em>Dead,</em>"
 <em>chap. cix., </em>v. 4 <em>and 5. </em>
 </p><p>
 "I am the Queen of these regions," says the Egyptian
 Isis; "I was the first to reveal to mortals the mysteries
 of wheat and corn. . . . I am she who rises in the constellation
 of the dog . . . (Dog-star) . . . . Rejoice, O Egypt! thou who
 wert my nurse." (Book I., chap. <strong>XIV</strong>.**
 </p><p>
 Sirius was called the <em>dog-star. </em>It was the star of Mercury
 or Budha, called the great instructor of mankind, before other
 Buddhas.
 </p><p>
 The book of the Chinese Y-King, attributes the discovery of agriculture
 to "the instruction given to men by celestial genii."
 </p><p>
 "Woe, woe to the men who know nought, observe nought, nor
 will they see. . . . They are all blind*** since they remain ignorant
 how much the world is full of various and invisible creatures
 which crowd even in the most sacred places" (<em>Zohar, Part
 I., col. </em>177.)
 </p><p>
 The "Sons of God" <em>have </em>existed and <em>do </em>exist.
 From the Hindu <em>Brahmaputras and Manasaputras </em>(Sons of
 Brahma and Mind-born sons) down to the <em>B</em>'<em>ne-aleim
 </em>of the Jewish Bible, the faith of the centuries and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This is a direct reference to the esoteric division of man's
 principles symbolised by the divine wheat. The legend which inscribes
 the third Registrar of the papyrus (<em>Chap. cx. of the </em>"<em>Book
 of the Dead</em>")<em> </em>states: "This is the region
 of the <em>Manes </em>(disembodied men) <em>seven cubits high
 -- </em>to wit: those just translated and supposed to be still
 sevenfold with all their principles, even the body represented
 <em>astrally</em> in the Kama-loka or<em> Hades, </em>before their
 separation . . . . . " and, there is wheat three <em>cubits
 high</em> for mummies in a <em>state of perfection</em>"
 (<em>i.e., </em>those already separated, whose<em> three </em>higher
 principles are in Devachan "who are permitted to glean it."
 This region (Devachan) is called "the land of the re-birth
 of gods," and shown to be inhabited by Scheo, Tefnant, and
 Seb. The "region for the manes seven cubits high," (for
 the yet imperfect mummies), and the region for those "<em>in
 a state of perfection</em>"<em> </em>who "glean wheat<em>
 three </em>cubits high," is as clear as possible. The Egyptians
 had the same esoteric philosophy which is now taught by the cis-Himalayan
 adepts, who, when buried, have corn and wheat placed over them.
 </p><p>
 ** There are Egyptologists who have tried to identify Osiris with
 Menes, which is quite erroneous. Bunsen assigns to Menes an antiquity
 of 5867 years <strong>B.C</strong>., and is denounced for it by
 Christians. But "Isis-Osiris" reigned in Egypt before
 the Dendera Zodiac was painted on the ceiling of that temple,
 and that is over 75,000 years ago!
 </p><p>
 *** In the text, "corked up" or "screwed up."
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 375 "SONS OF GOD" PERFECT AND IMPERFECT.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 <em>universal </em>tradition force reason to yield to such evidence.
 Of what value is<em> independent criticism </em>so called, or
 "internal evidence" (based usually on the respective
 hobbies of the critics), in the face of the universal testimony,
 which never varied throughout the historical cycles? Read esoterically
 the sixth chapter of Genesis, which repeats the statements of
 the Secret Doctrine, only changing slightly its form, and drawing
 a different conclusion which clashes even with the <em>Zohar.
 </em>"There were giants in the earth in those days; and <em>also
 after that </em>when 'the Sons of <em>God</em>'<em> </em>(<em>b</em>'<em>ne-aleim</em>)<em>
 </em>"came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children
 to them, the same became <em>mighty men </em>which were of old,
 men of renown" (or giants).*
 </p><p>
 What does this sentence "and also after that" signify
 unless it means when explained: "There were giants in the
 earth BEFORE, <em>i.e</em>., before the sinless sons of the Third
 Race; and <em>also after that</em> when other sons of God, lower
 in nature, inaugurated sexual connection on earth (as Daksha did,
 when he saw that his <em>Manasaputras </em>would not people the
 earth)"? And then comes a long break in this chapter vi.
 of Genesis, between verses 4 and 5. For surely, it was not in
 or through the wickedness of the "mighty men" . . .
 . men of renown, among whom is placed Nimrod the "mighty
 hunter before the Lord," that "god saw that the wickedness
 of man <em>was </em>great," nor in the builders of Babel,
 for this was <em>after </em>the Deluge; but in the progeny of
 the giants who produced <em>monstra quaedam de genere giganteo,</em>
 monsters from whence sprang the lower races of men, now represented
 on earth by a few miserable dying-out tribes and the huge anthropoid
 apes.
 </p><p>
 And if we are taken to task by theologians, whether Protestant
 or Roman Catholic, we have only to refer them to their own literal
 texts. The above quoted verse was ever a dilemma, not alone for
 the men of science and Biblical scholars, but also for priests.
 For, as the Rev. Father Peronne puts it: -- "Either they
 (the B'ne-aleim) were good angels, and in such case how could
 they fall? Or they were bad (angels) and in this case could not
 be called <em>b</em>'<em>ne-aleim, </em>the "sons of <em>God.</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Praelectiones theol. ch. </em>ii.) This Biblical riddle
 -- "the real sense of which no author has ever understood,"
 as candidly confessed by Fourmont** -- can only be explained by
 the Occult doctrine, through the Zohar to the Western, and the
 <em>Book of Dzyan </em>to the Eastern. What the former says we
 have seen; what the Zohar tells us is this: <em>B</em>'<em>ne-aleim
 </em>was a name common to the <em>Malachim </em>(the good Messengers)
 and to the <em>Ischin </em>("the lower angels")<em>
 </em>(<em>Rabbi Parcha</em>).
 </p><p>
 We may add for the benefit of the demonologists that their Satan,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 *<em> Genesis vi</em>., <em>v</em>. 4.
 </p><p>
 **<em> Reflections critiques sur l</em>'<em>origine des anciens
 peuples.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 376 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "the adversary," is included in <em>Job </em>among the
 sons of God or <em>b</em>'<em>ne-aleim</em> who visit their father."
 (<em>Chapter i.</em>)<em> </em>But of this later on.
 </p><p>
 Now the Zohar says that the <em>Ischin, </em>the beautiful <em>B</em>'<em>ne-aleim</em>,
 were <em>not </em>guilty, but mixed <em>themselves with mortal
 men because they were sent</em> <em>on earth to do so.</em> (<em>Book
 of Ruth and Schadash</em>;<em> fol. </em>63,<em> col. </em>3;<em>
 Amsterdam edition</em>)<em>. </em>Elsewhere the same volume shows
 these <em>b</em>'<em>ne-aleim</em> belonging to the tenth sub-division
 of the "Thrones" (<em>Zohar, part iii.,</em> <em>col.
 </em>113<em>. But see also 1st vol. </em>184). It also explains
 that the Ischin, "men-spirits," <em>viri</em> <em>spirituales,
 </em>now that men can see them no longer, help magicians to produce,
 through their science, <em>homunculi </em>which are not <em>small
 men </em>but "men <em>smaller </em>(in the sense of <em>inferiority</em>)<em>
 </em>than men." Both show themselves under the form that
 the Ischin had then, <em>i.e</em>., gaseous and ethereal. Their
 chief is Azazel.
 </p><p>
 But Azazel, whom the Church dogma will associate with Satan, is
 nothing of the kind. Azazel is a <em>mystery, </em>as explained
 elsewhere, and it is so expressed in Maimonides, "<em>In
 More Nevochim</em>"<em> </em>(<em>chapter xxvi., p. </em>8).
 "There is an impenetrable mystery in the narrative concerning
 Azazel." And so there is, as Lanci, a librarian to the Vatican
 and one who ought to know, says -- we have quoted him before --
 that "this venerable divine name (<em>nome divino e venerabile</em>)
 has become through the pen of Biblical scholars, a <em>devil,
 </em>a wilderness, a mountain, and a he-goat" (<em>Sagra
 Scrittura</em>).<em> </em>Therefore it seems foolish to derive
 the name as Spencer does, from Ajal (separated) and El (god),
 hence "one separated from God," the <strong>D</strong>EVIL.
 In the Zohar, Azazel is rather the Sacrificial victim than the
 "formal adversary of Jehovah," as Spencer would have
 it (<em>II., pp. </em>14, 29).
 </p><p>
 The amount of malicious fancy and fiction bestowed on that "Host"
 by various fanatical writers is quite extraordinary. Azazel and
 his "host" are simply the Hebrew "Prometheus,"
 and ought to be viewed from the same standpoint. The Zohar shows
 the <em>Ischin </em>chained on the mountain in the desert, allegorically;
 thus simply alluding to those "spirits" as being chained
 to the earth during the cycle of incarnation. Azazel (or Azaziel)
 is one of the chiefs of the "transgressing" angels in
 <em>Enoch, </em>who descending upon Ardis, the top of Mount Armon,
 bound themselves by swearing loyalty to each other. It is said
 that Azaziel taught men to make swords, knives, shields, to fabricate
 mirrors (?) to make <em>one see what is behind him</em> (<em>viz.,</em>
 "<em>magic mirrors</em>").<em> </em>Amazarak taught
 all the sorcerers and dividers of roots; Amers taught the solution
 of magic; Barkayal, astrology; Akibeel, the meaning of portents
 and signs; Tamial, astronomy; and Asaradel taught the motion of
 the moon. "These seven were the first instructors of the
 Fourth man" (<em>i.e., </em>of the <em>Fourth </em>Race).
 But why should allegory be always understood as meaning all that
 its dead-letter expresses?</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 377 THE FALLACIES OF THE TWO CHURCHES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 It is the symbolical representation of the great struggle between
 divine wisdom, <em>nous, </em>and its earthly reflection, <em>Psuche,
 </em>or between Spirit and Soul, in Heaven and on Earth. In Heaven
 --because the divine <strong>M</strong>ONAD had voluntarily exiled
 itself therefrom, to descend, for incarnating purposes, to a lower
 plane and thus transform the animal of clay <em>into an immortal
 god. </em>For, as Eliphas Levi tells us, "the angels aspire
 to become men; for the perfect man, the man-god, is above even
 angels." On Earth -- because no sooner had Spirit descended
 than it was strangled in the coils of matter.
 </p><p>
 Strange to say, the Occult teaching reverses the characters; it
 is the anthropomorphous archangel with the Christians, and the
 man-like God with the Hindus, which represent matter in this case;
 and the Dragon, or Serpent, Spirit. Occult symbolism furnishes
 the key to the mystery; theological symbolics conceal it still
 more. For the former explains many a saying in the Bible and even
 in the New Testament which have hitherto remained incomprehensible;
 while the latter, owing to its dogma of Satan and his rebellion,
 has belittled the character and nature of its would-be infinite,
 absolutely perfect god, and created the greatest evil and curse
 on earth -- belief in a personal Devil. This mystery is opened
 with the key to its metaphysical symbolism now restored; while
 that of theological interpretation shows the gods and the archangels
 standing as symbols for the dead letter or dogmatic religions,
 and as arrayed against the pure truths of Spirit, naked and unadorned
 with fancy.
 </p><p>
 Many were the hints thrown out in this direction in "Isis
 Unveiled," and a still greater number of references to this
 mystery may be found scattered throughout these volumes. To make
 the point clear once for all: that which the clergy of every dogmatic
 religion -- pre-eminently the Christian -- points out as Satan,
 the enemy of God, is in reality, the highest divine Spirit --
 (occult Wisdom on Earth) -- in its naturally antagonistic character
 to every worldly, evanescent illusion, dogmatic or ecclesiastical
 religions included. Thus, the Latin Church, intolerant, bigoted
 and cruel to all who do not choose to be its slaves; the Church
 which calls itself the bride of Christ, and the trustee at the
 same time of Peter, to whom the rebuke of the Master "get
 thee behind me Satan" was justly addressed; and again the
 Protestant Church which, while calling itself Christian, paradoxically
 replaces the New Dispensation by the old "Law of Moses"
 which Christ openly repudiated: both these Churches are fighting
 against divine Truth, when repudiating and slandering the Dragon
 of esoteric (because <em>divine</em>) Wisdom. Whenever anathematizing
 the Gnostic Solar Chnouphis -- the Agathodaemon -- Christos, or
 the theosophical Serpent of Eternity, or even the Serpent of Genesis
 -- they</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 2, Page]] 378 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 are moved by the same Spirit of dark fanaticism that moved the
 Pharisees to curse Jesus by saying to him "Say we not well
 thou hast a devil?"
 </p><p>
 Read the account about Indra (Vayu) in the <em>Rig-Veda, </em>the
 occult volume <em>par excellence </em>of Aryanism, and then compare
 it with the same in the Puranas -- the exoteric version thereof,
 and the purposely garbled account of the true Wisdom religion.
 In the Rig Veda Indra is the highest and greatest of the Gods,
 and his Soma-drinking is allegorical of his highly spiritual nature.
 In the Puranas Indra becomes a profligate, and a regular drunkard
 on the Soma juice, in the terrestrial way. He is the conqueror
 of all the "enemies of the gods" -- the Daityas, Nagas
 (Serpents), Asuras, all the <em>Serpent-</em>gods,<em> </em>and
 of Vritri, the Cosmic Serpent. Indra is the St. Michael of the
 Hindu Pantheon -- the chief of the <em>militant </em>Host. Turning
 to the Bible, we find Satan, one of the "Sons of God"
 (<em>Job. i.</em> 6), becoming in exoteric interpretation the
 Devil, and the Dragon in its infernal, evil sense. But in the
 Kabala ("<em>Book</em> <em>of Numbers</em>") Samael,
 who is Satan, is shown to be identical with St. Michael, the <em>slayer
 of the Dragon. </em>How is this? For it is said that Tselem (the
 image) reflects alike Michael and Samael <em>who are one. </em>Both
 proceed, it is taught, from <em>Ruach </em>(Spirit),<em> Neschamah
 </em>(Soul) and <em>Nephesch </em>(life). In the "Chaldean
 Book of Numbers" Samael is the concealed (occult) Wisdom,
 and Michael the higher <em>terrestrial </em>Wisdom, both emanating
 from the same source but diverging after their issue from <em>the
 mundane soul, </em>which on Earth is Mahat (intellectual understanding,
 <em>or Manas </em>(the seat of Intellect). They diverge, because
 one (Michael) is <em>influenced </em>by Neschamah, while the other
 (Samael) remains <em>uninfluenced. </em>This tenet was perverted
 by the dogmatic spirit of the Church; which, loathing independent
 Spirit, uninfluenced by the external form (hence by dogma), forthwith
 made of Samael-Satan (the most wise and spiritual spirit of all)
 -- the adversary of its anthropomorphic God and sensual physical
 man, the DEVIL!
 </p><p>
 --------<a name="DDE_LINK19"></a> 
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK25">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 <a name="DDE_LINK20"></a><a name="DDE_LINK21"></a><a name="DDE_LINK22"></a><a name="DDE_LINK23"></a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd2-1-22.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd2-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>