<body bgcolor="#000000" text="#00ff00" link="#ffffff" alink="#ffffff" vlink="#ffffff">
 <font face="Arial">
 <font size="-2">
 </font></font><center>
 <a href="../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../eso/index.htm">Esoteric &amp; Occult</a>
  
 <a href="../myst.htm">Mysteries</a><br>
 <a href="../cdshop/index.htm">Buy CD-ROM</a>
  
 <a href="../books/ufo.htm">Buy Books about UFOs</a>
 <br>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="file_id.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="39dead02.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Heaven's Gate (Part 1)</h3>
 <hr>
 <font face="Courier">
 <pre>
  
  
                               ณ  ณ
                               ณ  ณ
                  ษอออออออออออออออออออออออออออออป
                  บ   T R U S T   N O   O N E   บ
                  ศอออออออออออออออออออออออออออออผ
                               ณ  ณ
                               ณ  ณ
                                /\
                               +--+
                              +----+
                             /      \               //======//
       ===\\                /        \             //     //
           \\              /          \           //====//
          ==\\            +------------+              ///
             \\======================================///
              \\====================================///
  
  
 Things to beware of in 1997:
 
 Continued 'govermental' pushes to pass legislation to take away what
 few rights remain to the American people... Beware such laws which
 purport to 'protect' children but only serve to 'control' the
 parent!! -- Beware such laws with purport to 'protect' people from
 'illegal firearms' but whose true purpose is to keep 'any' firearms
 out of the hands of the people so they can NOT resist the coming
 oppresion of the 'New World Order'!!
 
   -------------------------------------------------------------------
 
  
 Forwarded from Internet:
 -=-=-
 Subject: Re: Mass Suicide in San Diego
 
 Attention has now shifted to Marshall Applewhite who figures somewhat in
 the early history of "Heaven's Gate".
 
 Here's an entry from "Encyclopedia Jill":
 
 H.I.M. [Human Individual Metamorphosis] Flying saucer cult founded in 1975
 in the American West by Bo and Peep, an unmarried, middle-aged couple whose
 real names were Herf Applewhite and Bonnie Lu Trousdale Nettles of Houston,
 Texas. They claimed that they would lead their followers to a literal
 ascension into Heaven via spacecraft. They began holding meetings in
 various locations throughout the west when their followers began following
 them around, from one camp to another, from Oregon to Nebraska. Bo &amp; Peep
 told their followers that they would eventually be assassinated, then rise
 to lead them to the spacecraft. One devotee remarked, "We've got to get
 them killed... that's the only way we're ever going to get off!" Herf
 studied music and taught at St. Thomas College. Ms. Nettles studied nursing
 and astrology. In 1972, the couple formed the Christian Arts Center in
 Houston, sponsoring lectures on theosophy, mysticism, meditation,
 astrology, etc. The couple was living together but renounced sex. The two
 claimed that they had both come from the "heavenly kingdom" into the wombs
 of women as "space fetuses: with a mission to prepare others for the Second
 Coming and ascension of faithful into heaven via UFO. They used the names
 Bo and Peep and other nonsensical names to emphasize their anonymity.
 H.I.M.'s caravan wended its way through Colorado, Wyoming, Arizona,
 Washington, Oregon and Nebraska. Current status unknown. [Hayden Hughes,
 Brad Steiger, UFO Missionaries Extraordinary, 1976.]
 
 In "Crop Circle Connector Truthseekers 8" we find:
 
 Bo and Peep, formerly known as Bonnie Nettles and Marshall Applewhite. In
 1975 this Californian couple founded a movement called Human Individual
 Metamorphosis (HIM for short), which greatly appealed to followers of New
 Age philosophies. HIM was an early version of the present-day Ascension
 movement. Bo and Peep, also known as The Two, preached that death could be
 overcome through physical ascension into another realm beyond the confines
 of planet Earth. One of their publicity posters read: "UFOs - Why they are
 here. Who they have come for. When they will land. Two individuals say they
 were sent from the level above human and will return to that level in a
 spaceship (UFO) within the next three months. This man and woman will
 discuss how the transition from the human level to the next level is
 accomplished, and when this may be done. If you have ever entertained the
 idea that there might be a real physical level in space beyond the Earth's
 confines, you will want to attend this meeting." Members of this group were
 expected to give up their names, belongings, radios, televisions, books,
 and become celibate. They lived in communes and were forced to lead a
 detached lifestyle, in constant anticipation of their imminent physical
 ascension. Gradually, members began to get disillusioned because no-one was
 ascending and the prophecies made by Bo and Beep would pass without
 incident. Many followers were ripped off financially, and it was later
 learned that Bo and Peep had befriended one another in a psychiatric
 hospital; where she was a nurse and he was a patient. They also had
 criminal records, having been arrested on charges of car theft and credit
 card fraud...
 
 --
 HaHa
 Rarebit Dreams
 </pre>
 </font>
 
 <font face="Arial" size="-2">
 <hr>
 </font><center>
 <a href="39dead02.htm">Next: Heaven's Gate (Part 2)</a></center>
 
 </body>