<body bgcolor="#000000" text="#00ff00" link="#ffffff" alink="#ffffff" vlink="#ffffff">
 <font face="Arial">
 <font size="-2">
 </font></font><center>
 <a href="../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../eso/index.htm">Esoteric &amp; Occult</a>
  
 <a href="../myst.htm">Mysteries</a><br>
 <a href="../cdshop/index.htm">Buy CD-ROM</a>
  
 <a href="../books/ufo.htm">Buy Books about UFOs</a>
 <br>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="cni0194.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="cni0196.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">CNI News 19.5</h3>
 <hr>
 <font face="Courier">
 <pre>
  
 CNI News - Volume 19.5
 June 17, 1996
 Published by the ISCNI News Center
 Editor: Michael Lindemann
 
 The stories in this edition of CNI News are:
    1) UFO RESEARCHER ACCUSED OF PLOT AGAINST POLITICIANS
        Key Figure In "Radium Plot" Heads Long Island UFO Network
    2) CROP CIRCLE EXPERT COLIN ANDREWS REPORTS GLYPH
        DISCOVERED WITHIN STONEHENGE
    3) THE SAUCERS OF JUNE -- HISTORICAL RECOLLECTIONS
    4) SPIELBERG PLANS ANOTHER "ET"-TYPE FILM
    5) SAGAN: NEW DISCOVERIES SHOW OTHER PLANET SYSTEMS
        NOT LIKE OURS, BUT LIFE "OUT THERE" STILL LIKELY
 
 ISCNI encourages you to respond to stories in CNI News.
    * Public responses can be posted on the Forum message board in "News
 Center Feedback"
    * Private responses can be emailed to ISCNI, subj: CNI News Editor
 
 The subject matter of CNI News is inherently controversial, and the views and
 opinions reported in the news are not necessarily those of ISCNI or its
 staff.
 
 The next edition of CNI News will appear on Thursday, June 20.
 
 ========================================================
 
 1) UFO RESEARCHER ACCUSED OF PLOT AGAINST POLITICIANS
     Key Figure In "Radium Plot" Heads Long Island UFO Network
 
 RIVERHEAD, N.Y. (Reuter) - Investigators uncovered an apparent plot to
 assassinate several Long Island, New York, local politicians with radioactive
 material, Suffolk County authorities said on Thursday, June 13.
 
 District Attorney James Catterson told a news conference that two men had
 been arrested and charged with conspiracy to commit murder. The alleged plot
 was "something out of a novel," he said, with radioactive material and
 weapons discovered in a house in Bellport, Long Island.
 
 Catterson said one of the suspects, 47-year-old John Ford, was soliciting
 people to use radium isotope against Suffolk County Republican Party leader
 John Powell when an informant alerted the District Attorney's office on
 Wednesday. Ford was then recorded on tape outlining the plot.
 
 Catterson described Ford as a former court officer and president of the Long
 Island UFO Network [LIUFON]. The other man arrested was identified as
 42-year-old Joseph Mazzachelli of Manorville, but no further information was
 available on him.
 
 "The plot was where an individual obsessed with hatred for mainstream
 political figures, with ballistics people would spread radioactive material
 in the seat of [the victim's] car, in his food or some proximity to him in
 the hope that he would contract incurable diseases and cause his death,"
 Catterson said.
 
 Apart from Powell, others targeted included two other Republicans, county
 legislator Fred Towle and Brookhaven public safety director Anthony Gazzola.
 
 Long Island is the political stronghold of Republican Sen. Alfonse D'Amato,
 but he was not on the plotters' list.
 
 Investigators found five canisters of radium, a low-level radioactive
 material, in Ford's home, Catterson said.
 
 "Any potential threat to public health and safety has been eliminated,"
 Catterson said in a statement. "There is no danger to the community and the
 material has been removed to a facility capable of its proper disposal."
 
 Investigators also found a cache of rifles and handguns, ammunition, a mine
 sweeper, gas mask and assorted militia literature, the Suffolk County
 District Attorney said. It was not known whether the men belonged to a
 militia.
 
 A third suspect was arrested Friday [June 14] in the alleged plot. Police
 found a small quantity of radium and weapons in the Medford, New York home of
 Edward Zabo, who was taken into custody, officials said.
 
 Further arrests were expected, officials said.
 
 ========================================================
 
 2) CROP CIRCLE EXPERT COLIN ANDREWS REPORTS GLYPH
     DISCOVERED WITHIN STONEHENGE
 
 [CNI News has just received the following press release from Joyce Murphy
 (jmurphy@onramp.net) at Beyond Boundaries. The exact nature of the
 "discovered glyph" is unclear, but we will report further information as it
 becomes available.]
 
 World-renowned crop-circle investigator Colin Andrews reports a glyph
 discovered within Stonehenge. The very best Stonehenge investigators in the
 world, including the English Heritage Society,were not aware of any glyph's
 previous existence at this sacred site. Every square inch of Stonehenge has
 been recorded in the past, which makes this find even more amazing. Professor
 Gerald Hawkins, author of "Stonehenge Decoded" and "Beyond Sonehenge," is now
 studying the implications of the pattern which Colin says may be the
 foundation of the crop circles phenomenon.
 
 The glyph, partly covered by lichen and obviously not a fresh carving, was
 discovered shortly before dusk while Colin was in the company of a Beyond
 Boundaries group. Upon sighting the unusual symbol Colin requested the
 assistance of a Glasgow newspaper photographer who was covering a story about
 the expedition.  The side lighting on the photograph revealed more of the
 intriguing shape which is now is receiving international interest. More study
 of this phenomenon, along with investigation of current crop circles is being
 planned by Beyond Boundaries for July.
 
 For more information concerning this discovery and to obtain photos, email
 jmurphy@onramp.net or call 1-800-259-8747.
 
 ========================================================
 
 3) THE SAUCERS OF JUNE -- HISTORICAL RECOLLECTIONS
 
 [CNI News thanks UFO Roundup editor Masinaigan for permission to reprint the
 following item from Roundup number 18.]
 
 June is traditionally a big month for UFO sightings.  The famous Kenneth
 Arnold case took place on June 24, 1947.  But there have been other, equally
 interesting UFO events that took place in June. Here's a sample...
 
 June 16, 1909 -- Dong Hoi, Vietnam -- Van Thi Binh, 7, and her sisters were
 awakened by a whooshing sound at around 3 a.m.  As they looked out the
 window, they saw a glowing "bolide" flying slowly in an eastward direction
 over the city.  The bright white glow lit up the rooftops, and the "bolide"
 was seen by Vietnamese fishermen offshore. They watched it for 8 to 10
 minutes before it abruptly dropped into the South China Sea.  Although it
 couldn't possibly have been a bolide or detonating meteor (not at that slow
 speed!), it was written up as such in the French magazine L'Astronomie.  (See
 the book ANATOMY OF A PHENOMENON by Jacques Vallee, page 28)
 
 June 20, 1953 -- Brush Creek, near Willow Creek, California -- Two
 prospectors saw a UFO land in the meadow.  An occupant came out of the
 object.  He was described as 3 feet tall and wearing silvery gray
 tight-fitting garments and a hood or helmet.  Ignoring the two astounded
 miners, the occupant carried a small silver pail to the creek, filled it with
 water, and then walked back to the UFO.  Two minutes later, the UFO "shot
 into the sky without a sound."
 
 June 30, 1954 -- Goose Bay, Labrador, Canada -- A British Overseas Airways
 Corporation (BOAC) Stratocruiser airliner, piloted by Capt. James Howard,
 approached Goose Bay at 9 p.m. local time, on its New York to London flight.
  Suddenly, Capt. Howard saw a large object "something like an inverted pear
 suspended in the sky."  The UFO was accompanied by six saucers -- three
 forward, three aft.  The Goose Bay tower told Howard that there were no other
 aircraft in the area.  Capt. Howard and his co-pilot, Lee Boyd, watched as
 the large UFO reshaped itself "into what looked like a flying arrow -- an
 enormous delta-winged plane turning in to close with us."  The large UFO
 paced the BOAC Stratocruiser for over 15 minutes before departing.  Other
 witnesses included chief navigator George Allen, chief radio operator Douglas
 Cox, flight engineers Daniel Godfrey and William Stewart and stewardess
 Daphne Webster.
 
 June 26, 1972 -- Port Beaufort, South Africa -- Farm worker Boer de Klerk was
 watering cattle in a krans (pasture) at Braeside, a large farm just outside
 Port Beaufort.  Suddenly, he saw a plume of smoke in the sunny cloudless sky.
  The smoke drifted towards him and then exploded into a roaring fireball.
  Terrified, de Klerk dropped his bucket and ran to fetch the owner, Bennie
 Smit.  Rounding up a group of his workers, Smit returned to the spot and
 found the bright orange fireball flying aimlessly around the pasture.  As the
 men climbed the fence, the fireball halted, then backed away from them, and
 then climbed up, up and away.
 
 ========================================================
 
 4) SPIELBERG PLANS ANOTHER "ET"-TYPE FILM
 
 [The following item is excerpted from a longer story that appeared in AOL
 News Profiles on June 14, from Reuter/Variety.]
 
 HOLLYWOOD - Sixteen years after Steven Spielberg's "E.T. The
 Extraterrestrial" became a box office smash, the director's DreamWorks studio
 has bought a screenplay and the feature film rights to the book,
 "Extraterrestrials: A Field Guide for Earthlings," sources said.
 
 The project, which will be re-titled "Alien Zoo," is about an alien ship that
 crash lands on Earth, where the aliens are moved to a zoo. When they escape,
 they begin wreaking havoc.
 
 The project, which Disney also bid on, is a special-effects, big-budget
 vehicle. The book was published in 1994 by Camden House and was written by
 Terence Dickenson and Adolf Schaller.
 
 ========================================================
 
 5) SAGAN: NEW DISCOVERIES SHOW OTHER PLANET SYSTEMS NOT
     LIKE OURS, BUT LIFE "OUT THERE" STILL LIKELY
 
 [The following comments are excerpted from an article by Carl Sagan titled
 "So Many Suns, So Many Worlds," which appeared in Parade Magazine on June 9,
 1996. Sagan is discussing newly discovered planets around the stars 51
 Pegasi, 70 Virginis, 47 Ursae Majoris and 55 Cancri.]
 
 The masses of these planets seem to range from a little less than Jupiter to
 several times greater than Jupiter.  What is most surprising about them is
 how close to their stars they are, from 0.05 AU for 51 Pegasi to a little
 more than 2 AU for 47 Ursae Majoris. [AU = astronomical unit, the distance
 from earth to the sun or 93 million miles.]
 
 There may of course be smaller, Earthlike planets in these systems not yet
 discovered, but the layout is not like ours.  In our solar system, we have
 the small Earthlike planets on the inside and the large Jupiterlike planets
 on the outside.  For these four stars, the Jupiter-mass planets seem to be on
 the inside.  How that could be, no one now understands.
 
 As for life on these new worlds, it is no more likely than on our own
 Jupiter.  But what is probable is that these other Jupiters have moons, like
 the 16 that circle our Jupiter. Because these moons, like the giant worlds
 they orbit, are close to the local star, their temperatures, especially in
 the 70 Virginis system, might be clement enough for life.  At 35 to 40
 light-years away, these worlds are close enough for us to begin to dream of
 one day sending fast spacecraft to visit them, the data to be received by our
 descendants.
 
 To me, it appears likely that in the coming decades we will have information
 on at least hundreds of other planetary systems close to us in the vast Milky
 Way Galaxy--and perhaps even a few small blue worlds graced with water
 oceans, oxygen atmospheres and the telltale signs of wondrous life.
 
 #     #     #
 </pre>
 </font>
 
 <font face="Arial" size="-2">
 <hr>
 </font><center>
 <a href="cni0196.htm">Next: CNI News 19.6</a></center>
 
 </body>