<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Legends &amp; Sagas</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="hoe2-58.htm">Previous</a> <a href="hoe2-60.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 194------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_194"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 194</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h1 align="center">SECTION IX</h1>
 
 <h3 align="center"><i>HIDDEN TREASURES</i></h3>
 
 <p>I<small>N</small> Esthonia, as elsewhere, we meet with many stories of hidden treasure, frequently in connection with devils, and hence we place this section next to the Devil-stories. The stories of “The Courageous Barn-keeper” and of the “Gallows Dwarfs” are curious and interesting; those which follow are given here only in abstract. In all countries which have been devastated by war, traditions on hidden treasure are common. I remember once reading a story in a newspaper (but I do not know if the report was true) of a quantity of coins of Edward the Confessor and Harold being dug up in a field respecting which there was a tradition in the neighbourhood that a great treasure was concealed in it. In Esthonian as well as in Oriental tales, hidden treausures are usually under the care of non-human guardians, even when it is not said that they were specially placed under their protection. This notion
 
 <!------------------------page 195------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_195"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 195</font></a>
 
 probably persists in many countries to the present day. It is said that when Kidd, the famous pirate, buried a hoard of treasure, he used to slaughter a negro at the place, that the ghost might guard it. Stories of his hidden treasure (more or less probable) are still rife in America.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="hoe2-60.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>