<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Legends &amp; Sagas</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="hoe2-83.htm">Previous</a> <a href="hoe2-85.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h2 align="center">THE BLUE BIRD<a name="page_292_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_292_note_1"><font size="1">1</font></a> (I.).</h2>
 
 <table align="center" cellpadding="10">
 
 <tr><td><small>S<small>IURU</small>, bird and Taara’s daughter,<br> Siuru, bird of azure plumage,<br> With the shining silken feathers,<br>
 
 <!------------------------page 293------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_293"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 293</font></a>
 
 Was not reared by care of father,<br> Nor the nursing of her mother,<br> Nor affection of her sisters,<br> Nor protection of her brothers;<br> For the bird was wholly nestless,<br> Like a swallow needing shelter,<br> Where her down could grow to feathers<br> And her wing-plumes could develop;<br> Yet did Ukko wisely order,<br> And the aged Father’s wisdom<br> Gave his daughter wind-like pinions,<br> Wings of wind and cloudy pinions,<br> That his child might float upon them,<br> Far into the distance soaring.<br>  Siuru, bird and Taara’s daughter,<br> Siuru, bird of azure plumage,<br> Sailed afar into the distance,<br> And she winged her way to southward,<br> Then she turned again to northward,<br> And above three worlds went sailing.<br> One of these the world of maidens,<br> One where dwell the curly-headed,<br> One the home of prattling children,<br> Where the little ones are tended.<br>  Siuru bird outspread her pinions,<br> Wide her silken plumes expanding,<br> Soaring far aloft to heaven.<br> To the fortress of the sunlight,<br> To the lighter halls of moonlight,<br> To the little gate of copper.<br>  Siuru bird outspread her pinions,<br> 
 
 <!------------------------page 294------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_294"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 294</font></a>
 
 Wide her silken plumes expanding,<br> Soaring far into the distance,<br> Till she reached her home at evening;<br> And her father asked his daughter,<br> “Whither have thy pinions borne thee?<br> Whither didst thou take thy journey?<br> Tell me what thine eyes have witnessed.”<br>  Siuru heard and comprehended,<br> And without alarm she answered,<br> “Where my pinions have conveyed me,<br> There I scattered feathers from me;<br> Where I sailed above the country,<br> There I scattered silken feathers;<br> Where I shook and flapped my pinions,<br> From my tail I dropped the feathers:<br> What I saw with marten keenness,<br> Might be told in seven narrations,<br> Or in eight tales be recounted.<br> Long I flew on path of thunder,<br> On the roadway of the rainbow,<br> And the hailstone’s toilsome pathway;<br> Onwards thus I sailed light-hearted,<br> Heedless, far into the distance,<br> And at length three worlds discovered,<br> One the country of the maidens,<br> One where dwell the curly-headed,<br> One the world of prattling children,<br> Where the little ones are tended;<br> There it is they rear the fair ones,<br> Slender-grown and silky-headed.”<br>  “What thou heardest? speak and tell me;<br> 
 
 <!------------------------page 295------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_295"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 295</font></a>
 
 What thou sawest, let us hear it.”<br> “What then heard I, sire beloved,<br> What beheld, O dearest father?<br> There I heard the sport of maidens,<br> There I heard their mirth and sadness,<br> Jesting from the curly-headed,<br> From the little infants wailing.<br> Wherefore, said the maidens, jesting,<br> Do the curly-headed children<br> Dwell in solitude and lonely,<br> Living thus apart from nurses?<br> And they asked in every quarter,<br> Are no youths in starry regions,<br> Youths of starry birth or other,<br> Who might dwell among the maidens,<br> And amuse the curly-headed?”<br>  Ukko heard her words, and answered,<br> “Soar away, my dearest daughter,<br> Steer thy flight again to southward,<br> Sailing, far away till evening,<br> Turning then unto the northward,<br> Come before the doors of Ukko,<br> To the western mother’s threshold,<br> To the northern mother’s region;<br> Seek thou there the youths to woo them,<br> Youths that may release the maidens.”<br></small></td></tr>
 
 </table>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="hoe2-85.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 292------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_292"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 292</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_292_note_1"></a><a href="#page_292_fr_1">1</a> <i>Kalevipoeg</i>, xix. 493-583.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>