<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Legends &amp; Sagas</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="hoe2-23.htm">Previous</a> <a href="hoe2-25.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 49------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_49"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 49</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h2 align="center">THE MERMAID.<a name="page_49_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_49_note_1"><font size="1">{1}</font></a><br> (K<small>REUTZWALD.</small>)</h2>
 
 <p>I<small>N</small> the happy days of old, better men lived on earth than now, and the Heavenly Father revealed many wonders to them which are now quite concealed, or but rarely manifested to a child of fortune. It is true that the birds sing and the beasts converse as of old, but unhappily we no longer comprehend their speech, and what they say brings us neither profit nor wisdom.</p>
 
 <p> In old days a fair mermaid dwelt on the shores of the province of Lääne. She often appeared to the people, and my grandfather’s father, who was reared in the neighbourhood, sometimes saw her sitting on a rock, but the little fellow did not venture to approach her. The maiden appeared in various forms, sometimes as a foal or a calf, and sometimes under the form of some other animal. In the evening she often came among the children, and let them play with her, until some little boy mounted her back,
 
 <!------------------------page 50------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_50"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 50</font></a>
 
 when she would vanish as suddenly as if she had sunk into the ground.</p>
 
 <p> At that time old people said that in former days the maiden was to be seen on the borders of the sea almost every fine evening in the summer, sitting on a rock, and combing her long fair hair with a golden comb, and she sang such beautiful songs that it melted the hearts of her listeners. But she could not endure the gaze of men, and vanished from their sight or fled into the sea, where she rocked on the waves like a swan. We will now relate the cause of her flying from men, and no longer meeting them with her former confidence.</p>
 
 <p> In old times, long before the invasion of the Swedes, a rich farmer lived on the coast of Lääne with his wife and four sons. They obtained their food more from the sea than from the land, for fishing was a very productive industry in their days. The youngest son was very different from his brothers, even from a child. He avoided the companionship of men, and wandered about on the sea-shore and in the forest. He talked much to himself and to the birds, or to the winds and waves, but when he was in the company of others he hardly opened his mouth, but stood like one dreaming.
 
 <!------------------------page 51------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_51"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 51</font></a>
 
 When the storms raged over the sea in autumn, and the waves swelled up as high as a house and broke foaming on the beach, the boy could not contain himself in the house, but ran like one possessed, and often half-naked, to the shore. Neither wind nor weather harmed his robust body. He sprang into his boat, seized the oars, and drove like a wild goose over the crest of the raging billows far out to sea, without incurring any harm by his rashness. In the morning, when the storm had spent its fury, he was found sound asleep on the beach. If he was sent anywhere on an errand, to herd cattle in summer, or to do any other easy employment, he gave his parents only trouble. He lay down under the shadow of a bush without minding the animals, and they strayed away or trampled down the meadows and cornfields, and his brothers had often to work for hours before they could find the lost animals. The father often let the boy feel the rod severely enough, but it had no more effect than water poured on the back of a goose. When the boy grew up into a youth, he did not mend his ways. No work prospered in his negligent hands; he hacked and broke the tools, wearied out the draught cattle, and yet never did anything right.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 52------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_52"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 52</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p> His father sent him to neighbouring farmers to work, hoping that a stranger’s whip might improve the sloven, but whoever had the fellow for one week on trial sent him back again on the next. His parents rated him for a sluggard, and his brothers dubbed him “Sleepy Tony.” This soon became his nickname with everybody, though he had been christened Jüri.<a name="page_52_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_52_note_1"><font size="1">1</font></a> Sleepy Tony brought no one any good, but was only a nuisance to his parents and relatives, so that they would gladly have given a sum of money if anybody would have rid them of the lazy fellow. As nobody would put up with him any longer, his father engaged him as servant to a foreign captain, because he could not run away at sea, and because he had always been so fond of the water from a child. However, after a few weeks, nobody knows how, he escaped from the ship, and again set his lazy feet on his native soil. But he was ashamed to enter his father’s house, where he could not expect to meet with a friendly reception, so he wandered about from one place to another, and sought to get his living as he could, without working. He was a strong handsome fellow, and could talk very agreeably if he liked, although he
 
 <!------------------------page 53------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_53"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 53</font></a>
 
 had never been accustomed to talk much in his father’s house. He was now obliged to use his handsome appearance and fine tongue to ingratiate himself with the women and girls.</p>
 
 <p> One fine summer evening after sunset it happened that he was wandering alone on the beach when the clear song of the mermaid reached his ears. Sleepy Tony thought to himself, “She is a woman, at any rate, and won’t do me any harm.” He did not hesitate to approach nearer, to take a view of the beautiful bird. He climbed the highest hill, and saw the mermaid some distance off, sitting on a rock, combing her hair with a golden comb, and singing a ravishing song. The youth would have wished for more ears to listen to her song, which pierced his heart like a flame, but when he drew nearer he saw that he would have needed just as many eyes to take in the beauty of the maiden. The mermaid must have seen him coming, but she did not fly from him, as she was always wont to do when men approached. Sleepy Tony advanced to within ten paces of her, and then stopped, undecided whether to go nearer. And oh, wonderful! the mermaid rose from the stone and came to meet him with a friendly air. She gave him her hand in
 
 <!------------------------page 54------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_54"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 54</font></a>
 
 greeting, and said, “I have expected you for many days, for a fateful dream warned me of your arrival. You have neither house nor home among those of your own race. Why should you be dependent upon strangers when your parents refuse to receive you into their house? I have known you from a child, and better than men have known you, for I have often watched over and protected you when your rashness would otherwise have destroyed you. I have often guarded the rocking boat with my hands, when it would otherwise have sunk in the depths. Come with me, and you shall enjoy every happiness which your heart can desire, and you shall want for nothing. I will watch over and protect you as the apple of my eye, so that neither wind nor rain nor frost shall touch you.”</p>
 
 <p> Sleepy Tony stood for a time uncertain what to answer, though every word of the maiden was like a flaming arrow in his heart. At last he stammered out an inquiry as to whether her home was very far away. “We can reach it with the speed of the wind, if you have confidence in me,” answered the mermaid. Then Sleepy Tony remembered many sayings which he had heard about the mermaid, and his heart failed him, and he asked for three days to
 
 <!------------------------page 55------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_55"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 55</font></a>
 
 make up his mind. “I will agree to your wish,” said the mermaid, “but lest you should again be doubtful, I will put my gold ring on your finger before we part, that you may not forget to return. When we are better acquainted, this pledge may serve as an engagement ring.” She then drew off the ring, placed it on the youth’s little finger, and vanished as if she had melted into air. Sleepy Tony stood staring with wide-open eyes, and would have supposed it was all a dream, if the sparkling ring on his finger had not been proof to the contrary. But the ring seemed like a strange spirit, which left him no peace or rest anywhere. He wandered aimlessly about the shore all night, and always returned to the rock on which the maiden had been sitting; but the stone was cold and vacant. In the morning he lay down for a short time, but uneasy dreams disturbed his sleep. When he awoke, he felt neither hunger nor thirst, and all his thoughts were directed towards the evening, when he hoped to see the mermaid again. The day waned at last, and evening approached, the wind sank, the birds in the alder-bushes left off singing and tucked their tired heads under their wings, but that evening he saw the mermaid nowhere.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 56------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_56"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 56</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p> He wept bitter tears of sorrow and trouble, and reflected bitterly on his folly in having hesitated to seize the good fortune offered to him the evening before, when a cleverer fellow would have grasped at it with both hands. But regret and complaint were useless now. The night and the day which followed were equally painful to him, and his trouble weighed upon him so much that he never felt hunger. Towards sunset he sat down with an aching heart on the rock where the mermaid had sat two evenings ago. He began to weep bitterly, and exclaimed, sobbing, “If she does not come back to me, I will live no longer, but either die of hunger on this rock, or cast myself headlong into the waves, and end my miserable life in the depths of the sea.”</p>
 
 <p> I know not how long he sat thus on the rock in his distress, but at last he felt a soft warm hand laid upon his forehead. When he looked up, he saw the maiden before him, and she said tenderly, “I have seen your bitter suffering and heard your longing sighs, and could not withdraw myself longer, though the time does not expire till to-morrow night.”</p>
 
 <p> “Forgive me, forgive me, dear maiden,” stammered Sleepy Tony. “Forgive me; I was a mad
 
 <!------------------------page 57------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_57"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 57</font></a>
 
 fool not to accept the proffered happiness. The devil only knows what folly came into my head two nights ago. Carry me whither you please. I will oppose you no longer, and would joyfully give up my very life for your sake.”</p>
 
 <p> The mermaid answered smiling, “I do not desire your death, but I will take you living as my dear companion.” She took the youth by the hand, led him a few paces nearer to the sea, and bound a silk handkerchief over his eyes. Immediately Sleepy Tony felt himself embraced by two strong arms, which raised him up as if in flight, and then plunged headlong into the sea. The moment the cold water touched his body, he lost all consciousness, and knew nothing more of what was happening around him; nor was he afterwards able to tell how long this insensibility lasted.</p>
 
 <p> When he awoke, he was to experience something stranger still.</p>
 
 <p> He found himself lying on soft cushions in a silken bed, which stood in a beautiful chamber, with walls of glass covered on the inside with curtains of red satin, lest the glaring light should wake the sleeper. Some time passed before he could make out whether he was still alive, or whether he was in
 
 <!------------------------page 58------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_58"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 58</font></a>
 
 some unknown region of the dead. He rocked his limbs to and fro, took the end of his nose between his fingers, and behold, he was quite unchanged. He was dressed in a white shirt, and handsome clothes lay in a chair in front of his bed. After lying in bed for some time, and feeling himself all over to make sure that he was really alive, he got up and dressed himself.</p>
 
 <p> Presently he coughed, when two maids entered, who greeted him as “his lordship,” and wished to know what he would like for breakfast. One laid the table, and the other went to prepare the food. In a short time the table was loaded with dishes of pork, sausage, black puddings, and honey, with jugs of beer and mead, just the same as at a grand wedding-feast. Sleepy Tony, who had eaten nothing for several days before, now set to work in earnest, and ate his fill, after which he laid down on the bed to digest it. When he got up again, the waiting-maids came back, and invited his lordship to take a walk in the garden while her ladyship was dressing. He heard himself called “your lordship” so often, that he already began to feel himself such in reality, and forgot his former station.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 59------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_59"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 59</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p> In the garden he met with beauty and elegance at every step; gold and silver apples glittered among the green leaves, and even the fir and pine cones were of gold, while birds of golden plumage hopped among the twigs and branches. Two maids came from behind a bush, who were commissioned to show his lordship round the garden, and to point out all its beauties. They went farther, and reached the edge of a pond where silver-feathered geese and swans were swimming. A rosy flush as of dawn filled all the sky, but the sun was not visible. The bushes were covered with flowers which exhaled a delicious odour, and bees as large as hornets flew among the flowers. All the flowers and shrubs which our friend beheld here were far more beautiful than he had ever seen before. Presently two elegantly dressed girls appeared, who invited his lordship to meet her ladyship, who was expecting him. But first they threw a blue silken shawl over his shoulders. Who would have recognised the former Sleepy Tony in such a guise?</p>
 
 <p> In a beautiful hall, as large as a church, and built of glass like the bedroom, sat twelve fair maidens on silver chairs.<a name="page_59_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_59_note_1"><font size="1">1</font></a> Against the wall behind them was a
 
 <!------------------------page 60------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_60"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 60</font></a>
 
 dais on which two golden thrones were placed. On one throne sat the august queen, and the other was unoccupied. When Sleepy Tony crossed the threshold, all the maidens rose from their seats and saluted him respectfully, and did not sit down again until desired to do so. The lady herself remained seated, bent her head to the youth in salutation, and signed with her finger, upon which Sleepy Tony’s attendants took him between them, and conducted him to their mistress. The youth advanced with faltering steps, and did not venture to lift his eyes, for he was dazzled with all the unaccustomed splendour and magnificence. He was shown to his place on the golden throne next to the lady, and she said, “This young man is my beloved bridegroom, to whom I have plighted myself and whom I have accepted as my consort. You must show him every respect, and obey him as you obey me. Whenever I leave the house, you must amuse him and look after him and guard him as the apple of my eye. You will be severely punished if you neglect to carry out my orders exactly.”</p>
 
 <p> Sleepy Tony looked round him like one dazed, for he did not know what to make of the adventures of the night, which were more wonderful than
 
 <!------------------------page 61------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_61"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 61</font></a>
 
 wonder itself. He continually turned the question over in his mind as to whether he was awake or dreaming. The lady noticed his confusion, and rose from her throne, took him by the hand, and led him from one room to another, all of which were untenanted. At last they arrived at the twelfth chamber, which was rather smaller, but handsomer than the others. Here the lady took her crown from her bead, cast aside the gold-embroidered mantle, and when Sleepy Tony ventured to raise his eyes, he recognised that it was the mermaid at his side, and no strange lady. Oh, how quickly his courage rose and his hopes revived! He cried out joyfully, “O dear mermaid!”—but the maiden laid her hand on his mouth, and spoke very earnestly, “If you have any regard for your own happiness or for mine, never call me by that name, which has only been given to me in mockery. I am one of the daughters of the Water-Mother. There are many sisters of us, but we all live apart, each in her own place, in the sea, or in lakes and rivers, and we only see each other occasionally by some fortunate chance.” She then explained to him that she had hitherto remained unmarried, but now that she was an established ruler, she must assume the dignity
 
 <!------------------------page 62------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_62"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 62</font></a>
 
 of a royal matron. Sleepy Tony was so bewildered with this unimagined good fortune that he did not know how to express his happiness. His tongue seemed paralysed, and he could not manage to say more than Yes or No. But while he was enjoying a capital dinner and delicious beverages, his tongue was loosened, and he was not only able to talk as well as before, but to indulge in many pleasant jests.</p>
 
 <p> This agreeable life was continued on the next and on the third day, and Sleepy Tony thought he had been exalted to heaven in his living body. But before retiring to rest the mermaid said to him, “To-morrow will be Thursday, and every week I am bound by a vow to fast, and to remain apart from every one. You cannot see me at all on Thursdays until the cock has crowed thrice in the evening. My attendants will sing to you to pass the time away, and will see that you want for nothing.”</p>
 
 <p> Next morning Sleepy Tony could not find his consort anywhere. He remembered what she had told him the evening before, that he must pass this and all future Thursdays without her. The waiting-maids exerted themselves to amuse him in every
 
 <!------------------------page 63------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_63"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 63</font></a>
 
 possible manner; they sang, played, and performed elegant dances, and then set before him such food and drink that no prince by birthright could have enjoyed better, and the day passed quicker than he had expected. After supper he laid himself to rest, and when the cock had crowed three times, the fair one returned to him. The same thing happened on every following Thursday. He often implored his beloved to allow him to fast with her on Thursdays, but all to no purpose. He troubled his consort again on a Wednesday with this request, and allowed her no rest; but the mermaid said, with tears in her eyes, “Take my life, if you please; I would lay it down cheerfully; but I cannot and dare not yield to your wish to take you with me on my fast-days.”</p>
 
 <p> A year or more might have passed in this manner, when doubts arose in the mind of Sleepy Tony, which became always more tormenting, and allowed him no peace. His food became distasteful to him and his sleep refreshed him not. He feared lest the mermaid might have some other lover in secret besides himself, in whose arms she passed every Thursday, while he was obliged to pass his time with the waiting-maids. He had long ago discovered the room in which the mermaid hid herself
 
 <!------------------------page 64------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_64"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 64</font></a>
 
 on Thursdays, but how did that help him? The door was always locked, and the windows were so closely hung with double curtains on the inside that there was not an opening left as large as a needle’s eye through which a sunbeam, much less a human eye, could penetrate. But the more impossible it seemed to penetrate this secret, the more eager grew his longing to get to the very bottom of it. Although he never breathed a word of the weight upon his mind to the mermaid, she could see from his altered manner that all was not as it should be. Again and again she implored him with tears in her eyes not to torment both himself and her with evil thoughts. “I am free from every fault against you,” she declared, “and I have no secret love nor any other sin against you on my conscience. But your false suspicion makes us both miserable, and will destroy the peace of our hearts. I would gladly give up every moment of my life to you if you wished it, but I cannot allow you to come near me on my fast-days. It cannot be, for it would put an end to our love and happiness for ever. We are able to live quietly and happily together for six days in the week, and how should the separation of one day be so heavy that you cannot bear it?”</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 65------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_65"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 65</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p> She talked in this sensible way for six days, but when the following Thursday came, and the mermaid did not show herself, Sleepy Tony lost his wits, and behaved as if he was half-mad. He knew no peace, and at last one Thursday he refused to have any one with him. He ordered the waiting-maids to bring him his food and drink, and then to leave him directly, so that he remained alone like a spectre.</p>
 
 <p> This great alteration in his conduct astonished everybody, and when the mermaid heard of the matter, she almost wept her eyes out of her head, though she only gave way to her grief when no one was present. Sleepy Tony hoped that when he was alone he might have a better opportunity of inspecting the secret fasting chamber, and perhaps he might find some crack through which he could spy upon what was going on. The more he tormented himself, the more depressed became the mermaid, and although she still maintained a cheerful countenance, her friendliness no longer came from the heart as before.</p>
 
 <p> Some weeks passed by, and matters remained at a standstill, neither worse nor better, when one Thursday Sleepy Tony found a small space near the window where the curtains had slightly shifted, so
 
 <!------------------------page 66------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_66"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 66</font></a>
 
 that he could look into the chamber. The secret chamber had no floor, but looked like a great square tank, filled with water many feet deep. Herein swam his much-loved mermaid. From her head to her middle she was a beautiful woman, but from the navel downwards she was wholly a fish, covered with scales and provided with fins. Sometimes she threshed the water with her broad fish’s tail and it dashed high up.</p>
 
 <p> The spy shrunk back confounded and made his way home very sorrowfully. What would he not have given to have blotted the sight from his memory! He thought of one thing and another, but could not decide on what to do.</p>
 
 <p> In the evening the cock crowed three times as usual, but the mermaid did not come back to him. He lay awake all night, but the fair one never came. She did not return till morning, when she was clad in black mourning garments and her face was covered with a thin silk handkerchief. Then she said, weeping, “O thou unhappy one! to have brought our happy life to an end by thy folly! Thou seest me to-day for the last time, and must return to thy former condition, and this thou hast brought upon thyself. Farewell, for the last time.”</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 67------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_67"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 67</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p> There was a sudden crash and a tremendous noise, as if the floor was giving way beneath his feet, and Sleepy Tony was hurled down stunned, and could not perceive what was happening to himself or about him.</p>
 
 <p> No one knows how long afterwards it may have been when he recovered from his swoon, and found himself on the sea-shore close to the rock on which the fair mermaid had sat when she entered into the bond of friendship with him. Instead of the magnificent robes whieh be had worn every day in the dwelling of the mermaid, he found himself dressed in his old clothes, which were now much older and more ragged than he could possibly have supposed. Our friend’s happy days were over, and no remorse, however bitter, could bring them back.</p>
 
 <p> He walked on till he reached the first houses of his village. They were standing in the same places, but yet looked different. But what appeared to him much more wonderful when he looked round, was that the people were all strangers, and he did not meet a single face which he knew.</p>
 
 <p> The people all looked strangely at him, too, as though he was a monster. Sleepy Tony went on to the farm of his parents, but here too he
 
 <!------------------------page 68------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_68"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 68</font></a>
 
 encountered only strangers, who knew him not, and whom he did not know. He asked in amazement for his father and brothers, but no one could tell him anything about them. At length an infirm old man came up, leaning on a stick, and said, “Peasant, the farmer whom you ask after has been sleeping in the ground for more than thirty years, and his sons must be dead too. How comes it, my good old man, that you ask after people who have been so long forgotten?” The words “old man” took Sleepy Tony so much aback that he was unable to ask another question. He felt his limbs trembling, turned his back on the strange people, and went out at the gate. The expression “old man” left him no peace; it fell upon him with a crushing weight, and his feet refused him their office.</p>
 
 <p> He hurried to the nearest spring and gazed in the water. The pale sunken cheeks, the hollow eyes, the long grey beard and grey hair, confirmed what he had heard. This worn-out, withered form no longer bore the slightest resemblance to the youth whom the mermaid had chosen as her consort. Now he fully realised his misery for the first time, and knew that the few years that
 
 <!------------------------page 69------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_69"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 69</font></a>
 
 he appeared to have been absent had comprised the greater part of his life, for he had entered the mermaid’s house as a vigorous youth, and had returned as a spectre-like old man. There he had felt nothing of the course of time or of the wasting of his body, and he could not comprehend how the burden of old age had fallen upon him so suddenly, like the passing of a bird’s wing. What could he do now, when he was a grey stranger among strangers?</p>
 
 <p> He wandered about on the beach for a few days, from one farm to another, and good people gave him a piece of bread out of charity. He chanced to meet with a friendly young fellow, to whom he related all the adventures of his life, but the same night he disappeared. A few days afterwards the waves cast up his body on the shore. It is not known whether he threw himself into the sea, or was drowned by accident.</p>
 
 <p> After this the behaviour of the mermaid towards mankind entirely changed. She sometimes appears to children only, most often in another form, but she does not permit grown-up people to approach her, but shuns them like fire.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> Other stories relative to the Water-Mother, mermaids,
 
 <!------------------------page 70------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_70"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 70</font></a>
 
 and other beings of the water will be found in a later section.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="hoe2-25.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 49------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_49"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 49</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_49_note_1"></a><a href="#page_49_fr_1">1</a> Schiefner considers the name of this story (<i>Näki Neitsi</i>) to indicate a Swedish origin; but this seems to be very doubtful evidence, and the incidental allusion to the Swedes in the course of the narrative seems opposed to such an idea.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 52------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_52"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 52</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_52_note_1"></a><a href="#page_52_fr_1">1</a> George.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 59------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_59"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 59</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_59_note_1"></a><a href="#page_59_fr_1">1</a> Compare the story of the “Twelve Daughters.”</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>