<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Legends &amp; Sagas</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="hoe2-84.htm">Previous</a> <a href="hoe2-86.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 296------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_296"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 296</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h2 align="center">THE BLUE BIRD (II.).</h2>
 
 <p> This totally different ballad is from Neus, <i>Ehstnische Volkslieder</i>, p. 42. Neus quotes Ganander as saying that one of the names of the Finnish Wood-goddess (the spouse of Tapio) is Blue Bird. The present poem is <i>possibly</i> a fragment of a creation-myth.</p>
 
 <table align="center" cellpadding="10">
 
 <tr><td><small>Lo, the bird with azure plumage,<br> Feathers blue and eyes all lustrous,<br> Took her flight, and hovered, soaring,<br> Over forests four in number,<br> Over four woods in succession;<br> One a wood of golden pine-trees,<br> One a wood of beauteous apples,<br> One a wood of silver birch-trees,<br> One a swampy wood of lime-trees.<br></small></td></tr>
 
 <tr><td><small>Lo, the bird with azure plumage,<br> Feathers blue and eyes all lustrous,<br> Took her flight, and hovered, soaring,<br> Over lakelets three in number;<br> Three the lakes all close together,<br> And the first with wine was brimming,<br> And with ale the second foaming,<br> And the third with mead was frothing.<br></small></td></tr>
 
 <tr><td>
 
 <!------------------------page 297------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_297"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 297</font></a>
 
 <br></td></tr>
 
 <tr><td><small>Lo, the bird with azure plumage.<br> Feathers blue and eyes all lustrous,<br> Took her flight, and hovered, soaring,<br> Over three fields in succession,<br> Over three fields close together;<br> In the first the oats were growing,<br> In the second rye was waving,<br> In the third the wheat was springing.<br></small></td></tr>
 
 <tr><td><small>And the wood of golden pine-trees<br> Was a wood of youthful striplings,<br> And the wood of beauteous apples<br> Was a wood of youthful maidens.<br> And the wood of silver birch-trees<br> Was a wood of youthful matrons,<br> And the swampy wood of lime-trees<br> Was a wood of men all aged.<br></small></td></tr>
 
 <tr><td><small>And the lake with wine o’erbrimming<br> Was the lake of youthful striplings,<br> And the lake with ale up-foaming<br> Was the lake of youthful matrons,<br> And the lake where mead was frothing<br> Was the lake of youthful maidens.<br></small></td></tr>
 
 <tr><td><small>And the field where oats were growing<br> Was the field of youthful striplings,<br> And the field where rye was waving<br> Was the field of youthful matrons,<br> And the field where wheat was springing<br> Was the share of youthful maidens.<br></small></td></tr>
 
 </table>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="hoe2-86.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>