<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Legends &amp; Sagas</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="hoe2-86.htm">Previous</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 299------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_299"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 299</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h1 align="center">BIBLIOGRAPHY</h1>
 
 <p>T<small>HE</small> present list contains only books and papers which have been used or specially consulted in the preparation of this work, or which have been published in England on Esthonian tales and poems. Other books quoted are referred to in the Index and Glossary.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">B<small>LUMBERG</small>, G. <i>Quellen und Realien des Kalewipoeg, nebst Varianten und Ergänzungen</i>. Dorpat, 1869. An important work, including a map, from which we have borrowed some particulars.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">B<small>OECLER</small>, J. M. <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen, und Gewohnheiten, von Johann Wolfgang Boecler, weiland Pastor zu Kusal in Ehstland und des Consistorii in Reval Assessor. Mit auf die Gegenwart bezüglichen Anmerkungen beleuchtet von Dr. F. R. Kreutzwald</i>. St. Petersburg, 1854.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">B<small>OUQUET</small> <i>from the Baltic. All the Year Round</i>, IV. pp. 80-83 (Nov. 3, 1860), Relates to some of the legends of Vanemuine, the <i>Kalevipoeg</i>, and Koit and Aemmerik.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">D<small>IDO</small>, A. <i>Littérature orale des Estoniens, Bibliographie des principales Publications de l’Estonie, et en particulier celle du Dr. Frédéric Reinhold Kreutzwald</i>, 1804-1882. <i>Revue des Traditions Populaires</i>, VIII. pp. 353-365, 424-428, 485-495 (1893). Contains an account,
 
 <!------------------------page 300------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_300"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 300</font></a>
 
 more or less detailed, of the longer tales in Kreutzwald’s collection, a few being fully translated.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">D<small>IDO</small>, A. <i>Kalewipoeg, Épopée nationale Estonienne</i>. Op. cit. IX. pp. 137-155 (1894). Contains an analysis of the poem.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">D<small>ONNER</small>, A. <i>Kalevipoeg jumalaistarulliselta ja historialliselta kannalta katsottuna</i>. Suomi, ser. 2, vol. 5 (1866). Discusses the mythological and historical character of the <i>Kalevipoeg</i>, and its relations to the <i>Kalevala</i>, especially as regards the episode of Kullervo.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">E<small>STHONIA</small>. <i>Encyclopædia Britannica</i> (ed. IX.), vol. viii. pp. 561-563 (1878).</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">G<small>OULD</small>, S. B. <i>The Kalewipoeg. Fraser’s Magazine</i>, vol. 78, pp. 534-544 (Oct. 1868). A fragmentary account of the poem, containing some curious errors, such as “Sarwik” being translated “Hell;” but with useful comments, especially on the Kalevide’s voyage to the North Pole. We cannot see, however, that the Esthonian writings exhibit the melancholy character of a depressed nation, as Mr. Baring-Gould imagines.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">G<small>ROSSE</small>, J<small>ULIUS</small>. <i>Die Abenteuerdes Kalewiden: Esthnisches Volksmärchen</i>. Leipzig, 1875. An abstract of the story in hexameters.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">I<small>SRAEL</small>, C. C<small>HR</small>. <i>Kalewipoeg, oder die Abenteuer des Kalewiden. Eine estnische Sage frei nach dem Estnischen bearbeitet</i>. Frankfort-on-Main, 1873. A good prose abstract of the poem, somewhat rearranged.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">J<small>ANNSEN</small>, H<small>ARRY</small>. <i>Märchen und Sagen des estnischen Volkes</i>. Two Parts. Dorpat, 1881, and Riga, 1888. A selection of tales from various sources, some few being from Kreutzwald’s collection. Valuable notes are appended to Part ii.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">— <i>Esthnische Märchen. Veckenstedt’s Zeitschrift für Volkskunde</i>, i. pp. 314-317 (1889). Contains three
 
 <!------------------------page 301------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_301"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 301</font></a>
 
 stories: “The Devil’s Visit,” “The Talking Trees” (Christian variant), and “The Officious Flies.” Jannsen states that the first has already been printed in the original, and that the other two are from his own collections.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">K<small>ALEWIPOEG</small>, <i>Üks ennemuistene Eesti jut</i>. Kuopio, 1862. An earlier edition was published at Dorpat with the German translation; but this is the one which I have consulted in the preparation of this work.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">K<small>ALEWIPOEG</small>, <i>eine estnische Sage, zusammengestellt von F. R. Kreutzwald, verdeutscht von C. Reinthal und Dr. Bertram</i>. Dorpat, 1857-61.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">K<small>IRBY</small>, W. F. <i>On the Progress of Folk-lore Collections in Esthonia, with special reference to the work of Pastor Jacob Hurt. Papers and Transactions of International Folk-lore Congress</i>, 1892, pp- 427-429. Based on information published by, or received from, Prof-Kaarle Krohn of Helsingfors.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">K<small>REUTZWALD</small>, F. R. <i>Eestirahwa ennemuisted jutud. Rahwa suust korjanud ja üleskirjutanud</i>. Helsingfors, 1866. One of the first and best collections of Esthonian tales, but without notes. I believe that several later editions have been published at Dorpat.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">— <i>Ehstnische Märchen, aufgezeichnet von Friedrich Kreutzwald. Aus dem Ehstnischen übersetzt von F. Löwe, ehem. Bibliothekar a. d. Petersb. Akad. d. Wissenschaften. Nebst einem Vorwort von Anton Schiefner, und Anmerkungen von Reinhold Köhler und Anton Schiefner</i>. Halle, 1869. Includes a very close translation of most of the longer tales in Kreutzwald’s collection. The notes, too, are valuable.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">K<small>REUTZWALD</small>, Fr., und N<small>EUS</small>, H. <i>Mythische und Magische Lieder der Ehsten</i>. St. Petersburg, 1854. In Esthonian and German.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">
 
 <!------------------------page 302------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_302"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 302</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p class="hanging">K<small>ROHN</small>, K<small>AARLE</small>. <i>Die geographische Verbreitung Estnischer Lieder</i>. Kuopio, 1892. This paper is noted in “Folk-Lore,” IV. p. 19 (March, 1893).</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">L<small>ATHAM</small>, R. <i>Nationalities of Europe</i>. 2 vols. London, 1863. Vol. i. includes translations of fourteen of the principal poems from Neus’ <i>Ehstntsche Volkslieder</i>.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">L<small>ÖWE</small>, F. <i>See</i> K<small>REUTZWALD</small>.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">N<small>EUS</small>, H. <i>Ehstnische Volkslieder. Urschrift und Uebersetzung</i>. Reval, 1850-52. A collection of 119 poems in Esthonian and German, with notes.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">O<small>XENFORD</small>, J<small>OHN</small>. <i>The Esthonian Hercules. Macmillan’s Magazine</i>, vol. 30, pp. 263-272 (July 1874). An outline of the story of the <i>Kalevipoeg</i>, based on Israel’s little book.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">P<small>OPULAR</small> P<small>OETRY</small> <i>of the Esthonians</i>. Varieties of Literature from Foreign Literary Journals and Original MSS., now first published. London, 1795, pp. 22-44 (reprinted in “Folk-Lore Journal,” iii. pp. 156-169, 1885). Contains twelve specimens of lyric poetry, undoubtedly based on some German publication. The anonymous compiler makes the strange mistake of regarding the Esthonians as “Sclavonians.”</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">S<small>CHIEFNER</small>, A. <i>Ueber die ehstnische Sage vom Kalewipoeg. Bulletin de l’Académie Imperiale des Sciences de St. Petersburg</i>, ii. pp. 273-297 (1860). Contains an analysis of the first thirteen cantos of the <i>Kalevipoeg</i>, with reference to Finnish, Scandinavian, and Classical parallels.</p>
 
 <p class="hanging">S<small>CHOTT</small>. <i>Ueber finnische und estnische Heldensagen, Monatsbericht d. k.k. Akademie der Wissenschaft zu Berlin</i>, 1866, pp. 249-260.</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p>I <small>AM</small> indebted to Mr. Sydney Hartland for kindly calling my attention to one or two papers which I might otherwise have overlooked.</p>
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Legends &amp; Sagas</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a></p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>