<body>
 
 
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="af03.htm">Previous</a> <a href="af05.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h2 align="center">BEROSSUS:<br>FROM ABYDENUS.</h2>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <h3 align="center">OF THE CHALDÆAN KINGS AND THE DELUGE.</h3>
 
 <p>   So much concerning the wisdom of the Chaldæans.</p>
 
 <p>   It is said that the first king of the country was Alorus, and that he gave out a report that God had appointed him to be the Shepherd of the people: he reigned ten sari: now a sarus is esteemed to be three thousand six hundred years; a neros six hundred; and a sossus sixty.</p>
 
 <p>   After him Alaparus reigned three sari: to him succeeded Amillarus from the city of Pantibiblon, who reigned thirteen sari; in his time came up from the sea a second Annedotus, a semi-dæmon very similar in his form to Oannes: after Amillarus reigned Ammenon twelve sari, who was of the city of Pantibiblon: then Megalarus of the same place reigned eighteen sari: then Daos, the shepherd, governed for the space of ten sari; he was of Pantibiblon; in his time four double-shaped personages came up out of the sea to land, whose names were Euedocus, Eneugamus, Eneuboulus, and Anementus: afterwards in the time of Euedoreschus appeared another Anodaphus. After these reigned other kings, and last of all Sisithrus: so that in the whole, the number amounted to ten kings, and the term of their reigns to an hundred and twenty sari. (And among other things not irrelative to the subject, he continues thus concerning the deluge:) After Euedoreschus some others reigned, and then Sisithrus. To him the deity Cronus foretold that on the fifteenth day of the month Desius there would be a deluge of rain: and he commanded him to deposit all the writings whatever which were in his possession, in the city of the Sun in Sippara. Sisithrus, when he had complied with commands, sailed immediately to Armenia, and was presently inspired by God. Upon the third day after the cessation of the rain Sisithrus sent out birds, by way of experiment, that he might judge whether the flood had subsided. But the birds passing over an unbounded sea, without finding any place of rest, returned again to Sisithrus. This he repeated with other birds. And when upon the third trial he succeeded, for the birds then returned with their feet stained with mud, the gods translated him from among men. With respect to the vessel, which yet remains in Armenia, it is a custom of the inhabitants to form bracelets and amulets of its wood.—<i>Syncel. Chron.</i> 38.—<i>Euseb. Præp. Evan.</i> lib. 9.—<i>Euseb. Chron.</i> 5. 8.</p>
 
 <h3 align="center">THE TOWER OF BABEL.</h3>
 
 <p>   They say that the first inhabitants of the earth, glorying in their own strength and size, and despising the gods, undertook to raise a tower whose top should reach the sky, in the place in which Babylon now stands: but when it approached the heaven, the winds assisted the gods, and overthrew the work upon its contrivers: and its ruins are said to be still at Babylon: and the gods introduced a diversity of tongues among men, who till that time had all spoken the same language: and a war arose between Cronus and Titan. The place in which they built the tower is now called Babylon, on account of the confusion of the tongues; for confusion is by the Hebrews called Babel.—<i>Euseb. Præpe Evan.</i> lib. 9.—<i>Syncel. Chron.</i> 44.—<i>Euseb. Chron.</i> 13.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="af05.htm">Next</a></p><p>
 
 </p></body>