<body>
 <p><a name="P1102_291273"></a>
 <sup>121 </sup> John i. 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1103_291644"></a>
 <sup>122 </sup>John iv. 21.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1104_292350"></a>
 <sup>123 </sup><font face="SPIonic">ec hj</font> or <font face="SPIonic">echj</font>, i.e., next.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1105_292690"></a>
 <sup>124 </sup>Matt. xiii. 31, 322; Mark iv. 31, 322; Luke xiii. 19.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1106_292966"></a>
 <sup>125 </sup>Ps. xix. 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1108_293633"></a>
 <sup>126 </sup>The passage following obviously was in verse originally. It has l been restored to its poetic form by Schneidewin. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1110_296275"></a>
 <sup>127 </sup> Deut. xxxiii. 17.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1111_296526"></a>
 <sup>128 </sup>Gen. ii. 10.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1113_296847"></a>
 <sup>129 </sup>Gen. ii. 11-14.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1114_297542"></a>
 <sup>130 </sup>Or, "they say."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1115_298224"></a>
 <sup>131 </sup> Gen. i. 7.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1116_298430"></a>
 <sup>132 </sup>John iv. 10.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1117_298662"></a>
 <sup>133 </sup><font face="SPIonic">kerkij</font>. This word literally means the rod; or, in later times, the comb fixed into the <font face="SPIonic">iotoj</font>(i.e., the upright loom), for the purpose of Driving the threads of the woof home, thus making the web even and close. It is, among other significations, applied to bones in the leg or arm. Cruice and Schneidewin translate <font face="SPIonic">kerkij</font> by <font face="SPIonic">sriha</font>, a rendering adopted above. The allusion is made again in chap. xii. and chap. xvi, In the last passage <font face="SPIonic">kentron</font>(spur) is used instead of <font face="SPIonic">kerkij.</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="P1119_299331"></a>
 <sup>134 </sup>John i. 9, John ix. 1.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1120_299986"></a>
 <sup>135 </sup>Isa. xi. 15. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1121_300434"></a>
 <sup>136 </sup> 1 Sam. x. 1, 1 Sam. xvi. 13.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1122_300533"></a>
 <sup>137 </sup>1 Sam. xvi. 14.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1127_301161"></a>
 <sup>138 </sup>The text of this hymn is very corrupt. The Abbe Cruice explains the connection of the hymn with the foregoing exposition, and considers it to have a reference to the Metempsychosis, which forms part of the system of the Naasseni. [Bunsen, i. 36.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1131_301541"></a>
 <sup>139 </sup>Or, "nimble."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1158_303156"></a>
 <sup>140 </sup>Something is wanting after <font face="SPIonic">Perpatikh</font> in the text. Miller supplies the deficiency, and his conjecture is adopted above. Literally, it should be rendered -" the Peratic heresy, the blasphemy of which (heretics)," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1159_303415"></a>
 <sup>141 </sup>Most of what is mentioned by Hippolytus concerning this sect is new, as the chief writers on the early heresies are comparatively silent concerning the Peratae; indeed, Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Epiphanius completely so. Clemens Alexandrinus, <i>Strom</i>., vii.; (vol. ii. p. 555), mentions the Peratics, and Theodoret more fully than the rest speaks of them (<i> Haerer.fabul</i>.,i. 17). Theodoret, however, as the Abbe Cruice thinks, has appropriated his remarks from Hippolytus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1160_304394"></a>
 <sup>142 </sup><font face="SPIonic">proecester</font> or <font face="SPIonic">prosexestera</font>, contiguous. This is Miller's reading, but is devoid of sense. Proecestera, adopted by Schneidewin and Cruice, might bear the meaning of the expression par par excellence.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1161_304796"></a>
 <sup>143 </sup><font face="SPIonic">grgrnnhmenwn</font>: Miller reads <font face="SPIonic">gegennhmenon</font>, agreeing with plhqos. Bernays, in his <i>Epistola Critica</i> addressed to Bunsen, proposes the former reading.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1162_304995"></a>
 <sup>144 </sup><font face="SPIonic">eidikor</font>: some read <font face="SPIonic">idikor</font>. This term, adopted from the Platonic philosophy, is translated <i>specialis</i> by logicians, and <i>transcendentalis</i> by metaphysicians. It expresses the pre-existent form in the divine mind, according to which material objects were fashioned. The term seems out of place as used by the Peratics to denominate a corruptible and perishing world. We should rather expect <font face="SPIonic">rlikou</font>, i.e, material. (See Aristotle's masterly exposition of the subject of the <font face="SPIonic">eidoj</font> and <font face="SPIonic">ulh</font> in his <i>Metaphysics</i> book vi., and p. 64 of the analysis prefixed to the translation in Bohn's Library.)</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1163_305993"></a>
 <sup>145 </sup><font face="SPIonic">prwthj</font> or <font face="SPIonic">pro thj</font>, "antecedent to the segment." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1164_306555"></a>
 <sup>146 </sup><font face="SPIonic"> swmatikwj</font>, i.e, substantially. See Col. i. 19, ii. 9.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1166_307328"></a>
 <sup>147 </sup><font face="SPIonic">afietai</font>: some read <font face="SPIonic">afiei</font>, i.e., dismisses; some <font face="SPIonic">afiei eikh</font>, i.e., heedlessly casts off. Hippolytus, in his <i>Summary of the Peratic</i>Heresy in book x., has <font face="SPIonic">afietai eikh</font>, which Cruice translates <i>temere</i>absolvuntur. Schneidewin has in the same passage <font face="SPIonic">afietal</font> merely, and translates it <i>abjiciuintur</i>. In both places Bernays suggests <font face="SPIonic">ofioeioh</font>, i.e., those of the nature of the Serpent.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1170_309138"></a>
 <sup>148 </sup>Or, "is part of the moon."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1172_309984"></a>
 <sup>149 </sup>Some omissions here are supplied from Sextus Empiricus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1173_311732"></a>
 <sup>150 </sup>Or, "produces alterations and causes turnings." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1175_312348"></a>
 <sup>151 </sup>Celles, as observed in a former note, has two other forms in <i>The Retutation</i>, viz., Acembes and Ademes. He is called Carystius, and the other founder of the heresy Peraticus. As the latter term is frequently used to designate Eubaea, i.e., the country beyond (<font face="SPIonic"> peran</font>) the continent, it is inferred that Carystius has a simlar import. This would seem placed beyond conjecture by a passage (<i> Strom</i>., vii, vol. ii. p. 555) in Clemens Alexandrinus, already alluded to, who says that some heresies, e.g., those of the Marcionites and Basilidians, derived their denomination from the names, whereas others from the country, of their founders. As an instance of the latter, he mentions the Peratics (see note 4, p. 62, [and note 6, p. 58]).</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1176_313869"></a>
 <sup>152 </sup>Some deficiencies in the text are filled up from Sextus Empiricus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1177_314354"></a>
 <sup>153 </sup>Or, "celestial."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1178_314429"></a>
 <sup>154 </sup>This expression <font face="SPIonic">alla gar</font> requires to have the ellipsis supplied as above. It may be freely rendered "nay more." Miller reads <font face="SPIonic">Allh gar</font> i.e. "There is some other difference," etc.; but this does not agree with Sextus Empiricus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1179_314743"></a>
 <sup>155 </sup>Or, "sympathy:" <font face="SPIonic"> sumpaoeia</font> is, however, properly altered into <font face="SPIonic">asumpaoeia</font> on the authority of Sextus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1181_315349"></a>
 <sup>156 </sup>i.e., "Rulers of localities and suburbans."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1182_315888"></a>
 <sup>157 </sup>The Peratic heresy both Hippolytus and Theodoret state to have originated from Euphrates. Origen, on the other hand, states (<i> Contr. Cels</i>., vi. 28, [vol. iv. p. F86]) that Euphrates was founder of the Ophites. The inference from this is, that Origen was not author of The <i>Refutation.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P1186_316496"></a>
 <sup>158 </sup>Hippolytus at the end of this chapter mentions the title of one of their books, <font face="SPIonic">Oi proasteio ewj aiqeroj</font>, "The Suburbans up to the Air." Bunsen suggests <font face="SPIonic">Peratai ewj aiqeroj</font>, "The Transcendental Etherians." (See note 1 <i>supra</i>.)</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1187_316784"></a>
 <sup>159 </sup>The Abbe Cruice considers that the following system of cosmogony is translated into Greek from some Chaldaic or Syriac work. He recognises in it likewise a Jewish element, to be accounted for from the fact that the Jews during the Babylonish captivity imbibed the principles of the Oriental philosophy. What, therefore, is given by Hippolytus may have a Judaistic origin.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1188_317629"></a>
 <sup>160 </sup>Schneidewin considers the text here corrupt.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1189_317846"></a>
 <sup>161 </sup>The Abbe Cruice observes that the reference here is to the second book of the law ( Ex. xv. 27), where mention is made of the twelve fountains of Elim. The Hebrew word (<font face="SPTiberian"> 2 C</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="P1190_318052"></a>
 <sup>162 </sup>i.e., a poetic expression, as Cruice remarks, for closing the seal (See Job ix. 7.) </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1191_318555"></a>
 <sup>163 </sup>Schneidewin refers us to a passage from Berosus, who affirms that this person was styled Thalatta by the Greeks, Thalath by the . Chaldeans.; another demonination being Omorka, or Omoroka, or Marcaia. The Abbe Cruice, however, sets little value on these names, which, following the judgment of Scaliger, he pronounces spurious. It is unnecessary to remind scholars that the authenticity of Berosus has collapsed under the attacks of modern criticism.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1192_319585"></a>
 <sup>164 </sup>Miller suggests <font face="SPIonic">Xefelh</font>, Cruice Nebo.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1193_319685"></a>
 <sup>165 </sup>Cruicc thinks this may be a figure of the year and of twelve months.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1194_319913"></a>
 <sup>166 </sup>Miller has <font face="SPIonic">Korhn</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1195_320249"></a>
 <sup>167 </sup>Or, "air."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1196_321097"></a>
 <sup>168 </sup>Miller reads <font face="SPIonic">Mugswnhq</font>, others <font face="SPIonic">Mugsonh</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1197_321378"></a>
 <sup>169 </sup>Miller has <font face="SPIonic">Apracia</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1198_321537"></a>
 <sup>170 </sup>Miller suggests <font face="SPIonic">Bouzughj</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1199_321838"></a>
 <sup>171 </sup>Miller reads <font face="SPIonic">Flegwn/</font>. </p>
 
 </body>