<body>
 <p><a name="P1600_476484"></a>
 <sup>90 </sup>Epiphanius, Haer., xxxi. sec. 7.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1601_476972"></a>
 <sup>91 </sup>Eph. iii. 14-18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1602_477394"></a>
 <sup>92 </sup>1 Cor. ii. 14.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1606_478065"></a>
 <sup>93 </sup>Epiphanius, Haer., xxxi. 22.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1607_478252"></a>
 <sup>94 </sup>John x. 8.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1608_478365"></a>
 <sup>95 </sup>Col. i. 26.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1609_479267"></a>
 <sup>96 </sup>Luke i. 35.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1611_480476"></a>
 <sup>97 </sup>Rom. viii. 11, 12.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1612_480599"></a>
 <sup>98 </sup>Gen. iii. 19.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1613_480673"></a>
 <sup>99 </sup>Axionicus is mentioned by Tertullian only (see Tertullian, Conte. Valent., c. iv; [vol. iii. p. 505, this series]).</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1614_480812"></a>
 <sup>100 </sup>Bardesianes (or Ardesianes, as Miller's text has it) is evidently the sane with Bardesanes, mentioned by Eusebius and St. femme. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1618_482056"></a>
 <sup>101 </sup><font face="SPIonic">kathxhqh</font>. Stiller's text has <font face="SPIonic">kathxqh</font>, which is properly corrected by Bunsen into the word as translated above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1619_482461"></a>
 <sup>102 </sup>Ex. vi. 2, 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1620_483181"></a>
 <sup>103 </sup>Or, "the multitudes."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1624_484122"></a>
 <sup>104 </sup>Cruice thinks that the following extract from Plato's epistles has been added by a second hand. [Cf vol. iii. p. 181, this series.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1625_484303"></a>
 <sup>105 </sup>There are some verbal diversities between the texts of Plato and Hippolytus, which a reference will show (see Plat., <i>Epist</i>., t. ix. p. 76, ed. Bekker).</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1626_485317"></a>
 <sup>106 </sup>Some forty lines that follow in Plato's letter are omitted here.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1627_485723"></a>
 <sup>107 </sup>Here likewise there is another deficiency as compared with the original letter.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1629_486623"></a>
 <sup>108 </sup>Miller's text is, <font face="SPIonic">kai pasi ghn</font>, etc. In the German and French edition of Hippolytus we have, instead of this, <font face="SPIonic">kai Proarxhn</font>. The latter word is introduced on the authority of Epiphanius and Theodored. Bernays proposes <font face="SPIonic">Zighn</font>, and Scott <font face="SPIonic">Plasthn</font>. The Abbe Cruice considers <font face="SPIonic">Plasthn</font>an incongruous word as applied to the creation of spiritual beings. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1630_487359"></a>
 <sup>109 </sup>The word "limit" occurs twice in this sentence, and Bunsen alters the second into "Pleroma," so that the words may be rendered thus: "Valentinus supposes to be second all the Aeons that are within the Pleroma."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1631_487760"></a>
 <sup>110 </sup>This is a Gnostic hymn, and is arranged metrically by Cruice, of which the following is a translation: -All things whirled on by spirit I see, Flesh from soul depending And soul from air forth flashing, And air from aether hanging, And fruits from Bythus streaming, And from womb the infant growing.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1632_489107"></a>
 <sup>111 </sup>The text here is corrupt, but the above rendering follows the Abbe Cruice's version. Bunsen's emendation would, however, seem untenable.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1636_489346"></a>
 <sup>112 </sup>Concerning Secundus and Epiphanes, see Irenaeus, i. 11; Theodoret, <i>Haer. Fab.</i>, i. 5-9; Epiphanius, xxxii. I, 3, 4; Tertullian, <i>Adv. Valent</i>., c. xxxviii.; and St. Augustine, <i>Haer</i>., xi. Hippolytus, in his remarks on Secundus and Epiphanes, borrows from St. Irenaeus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1638_491403"></a>
 <sup>113 </sup>Concerning Ptolemaeus, see Irenaeus, i. 12; Tertullian, <i>De Praescript</i>., c. xlix.; and <i>Advers. Valent</i>., c. viii.; Epiphanius, <i>Haer</i>., xxxiii. 3-7; and Theodoret, <i>Haeret</i>. <i>Fab</i>., i. 8.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1642_492823"></a>
 <sup>114 </sup>Concerning Marcus, see Irenaeus, i. 12-18; Tertullian, <i>Praescript</i>., c. l.; Epiphanius, <i>Haer</i>., xxxiv.; <i>Theodoret</i>, <i>Haeret. Fab.</i>, i. 9; St. Augustine, <i>Haer</i>., c. xiv.; and St. Jerome's 29th Epistle.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1643_493069"></a>
 <sup>115 </sup><font face="SPIonic">energwn</font>: Bunsen reads <font face="SPIonic">drwn</font>, which has the same meaning. Cruice reads <font face="SPIonic">aiwrwn</font>, but makes no attempt at translation. Miller's reading is <font face="SPIonic">dwrwn</font>, which is obviously corrupt, but for which <font face="SPIonic">dolwn</font>has been suggested, and with good show of reason. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1644_494495"></a>
 <sup>116 </sup><font face="SPIonic">analuomenou</font>: same read <font face="SPIonic">anaduomenou</font>, which is obviously untenable.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1648_495207"></a>
 <sup>117 </sup>[ Here was an awful travesty of the heresy of a later day which introduced" the miracle of Bolsena" and the <i>Corpus-Christi</i>celebration. See Robertson, <i>Hist</i>., vol. iii. p. 604.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1652_500044"></a>
 <sup>118 </sup>[Buusen (vol. i. p 72-75) makes useful comments.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1656_500430"></a>
 <sup>119 </sup>Hippolytus has already employed this word, <font face="SPIonic">adromesteron</font>, in the <i>Proaemium</i>. It literally means, of strong or compact parts. Hippolytus, however, uses it m contrast to the expression <font face="SPIonic">Leptomerhj</font>, in reference to his <i>Summary of Heresies</i>. Bunsen thinks that Hippolytus means to say that Irenaeus expressed himself rather too strongly, and that the Marcosians, on meeting with Irenaeus' assertions, indignantly repudiated them. Dr. Wordsworth translates <font face="SPIonic">adromerwj</font>(in the <i>Proaemium</i>), "with rude generality,"-a rendering scarcely in keeping with the passage above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1658_502098"></a>
 <sup>120 </sup>The largest extract from Irenaeus is that which follows-the explanation of the heresy o( Marcus. From this to the end of book vi. occurs in Irenaeus likewise. Hippolytus' text does not always accurately correspond with that of his master. The divergence, however, is inconsiderable, and may sometimes be traceable to the error of the transcriber.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1659_503484"></a>
 <sup>121 </sup>Hippolytus uses two words to signify letters, <font face="SPIonic">oixeion</font>and <font face="SPIonic">gramma</font>. The former strictly means an articulate sound as the basis of language or of written words, and the latter the sound itself when represented by a particular symbol or sign. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1660_505112"></a>
 <sup>122 </sup>[Rev. iii. 14. A name of Christ. This word is travestied as the name <i>Logos</i>also, most profanely.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1664_507223"></a>
 <sup>123 </sup>This is Duncker's emendation, suggested by Irenaeus' text. Miller reads <font face="SPIonic">ton topon</font>, which yields scarcely any meaning.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1668_508463"></a>
 <sup>124 </sup>Hippolytus' text has been here corrected from that of Irenaeus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1669_509170"></a>
 <sup>125 </sup>This is a correction from Progenitor, on the authority of Irenaeus and Epiphanius.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1670_509276"></a>
 <sup>126 </sup><font face="SPIonic">Propatora</font>: Irenaeus reads <font face="SPIonic">Patrodora</font>, which is adopted by Schneidewin, and translated <i>patrium</i>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1674_509918"></a>
 <sup>127 </sup>The reading is doubtful. The translator adopts Scott's emendation.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1675_510249"></a>
 <sup>128 </sup>[See note 1, p. 94 <i>supra</i>, on "Amen." Comp. Irenaeus, vol. i. p. 393, this series. This name of Jesus does, indeed, run through all Scripture, in verbal and other forms; Gen. xlix, 18and in Joshua, as a foreshadowing.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1676_510482"></a>
 <sup>129 </sup>Irenaeus has "known."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1680_511039"></a>
 <sup>130 </sup><font face="SPIonic">eikonikaj</font>. This is Irenaeus' reading. Miller has <font face="SPIonic">eikonaj</font>(representations).</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1681_511563"></a>
 <sup>131 </sup><font face="SPIonic">aporroian</font>: some read <font face="SPIonic">aporian</font>, which is obviously erroneous.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1682_511695"></a>
 <sup>132 </sup><font face="SPIonic">up= auta</font> ; Irenaeus reads <font face="SPIonic">uper authn</font>, and Massuet <font face="SPIonic">upenerqen</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1683_512262"></a>
 <sup>133 </sup>The deficiency consisted in there not being three ogdoads. The sum total was twenty-four, but there was only one ogdoad-Logos and Zoe. The other two-Pater and Alethen, and Anthropos and Ecclesia-had one above and one below an ogdoad.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1684_513005"></a>
 <sup>134 </sup><font face="SPIonic">twn oktw</font>has been substituted for <font face="SPIonic">tw nohtw</font>, an obviously corrupt reading. The correction is supplied by Irenaeus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1688_514186"></a>
 <sup>135 </sup>Or, "ecnnomy."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1689_514347"></a>
 <sup>136 </sup>Christ went up with the three apostles, and was therefore the fourth Himself: by the presence of Moses and Elias, He became the sixth: Matt. xvii. 1: Mark ix. 2.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1690_514890"></a>
 <sup>137 </sup>The Greek word for dove is <font face="SPIonic">peristera</font>, the letters of which represent 801, as may be seen thus: - p=80 e=5 r=I00 s=200i=10 t=300 e=5 r=100 a=1 ___ 801 This, therefore, is equipollent with Alpha and Omega, as a is equal to I, and w to 800. [Stuff! Bunsen, very naturally, exclaims.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1691_515890"></a>
 <sup>138 </sup>Irenaeus has the sentence thus: "so also the soul in babes, lamenting and bewailing Marcus, glorifies him."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1695_516352"></a>
 <sup>139 </sup>Ps. viii. 2.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1696_516689"></a>
 <sup>140 </sup>Ps. xix. 1.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1697_516965"></a>
 <sup>141 </sup>Hippolytus here omits some passages which are to be found in Irenaeus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1698_517169"></a>
 <sup>142 </sup>Literally, "being twice two:" <font face="SPIonic">pnme</font> for <font face="SPIonic">ousai</font> read <font face="SPIonic">ousiai</font>. Irenaeus has <font face="SPIonic">epi duo ousai</font>, i.e., "which being (added) into two."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1699_517548"></a>
 <sup>143 </sup>Hippolytus has only the word "twenty-four," to which Schneidewin supplies "letters," and Irenaeus" forms," as given above. Hippolytus likewise omits the word "produced," which Irenaeus supplies. The text of the latter is <font face="SPIonic">taj eikosetessaraj apekuhsan morfaj</font>.</p>
 
 </body>