<body>
 <p><a name="P2500_819942"></a>
 <sup>72 </sup>Bunsen translates thus: "Doubt not that you will exist again," a rendering which Dr. Wordsworth controverts in favour of the one adopted above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2501_820207"></a>
 <sup>73 </sup>Bunsen translates thus: "For Christ is He whom the God of all has ordered to wash away the sins," etc. Dr. Wordsworth severely censures this rendering in a lengthened note.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2502_820802"></a>
 <sup>74 </sup><font face="SPIonic">ptwxeuei</font>, Bunsen translates,"for God acts the beggar towards thee," which is literal, though rather unintelligible. Dr. Wordsworth renders the word thus: "God has a longing for thee."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2503_821045"></a>
 <sup>75 </sup>Hippolytus, by his argument, recognises the duty not merely of overthrowing error but substantiating truth, or in other words, the negative and positive aspect of theology. His brief statement (chap. xxviii.-xxx.) in the latter department, along with being eminently reflective, constitutes a noble specimen of patristic eloquence. [This is most just: and it must be observed, that having summed up his argument against the heresies derived from carnal anil inferior sources, and shown the primal truth, he advances (in chap. xxviii.) to the Nnicene position, and proves himself one of the witnesses on whose traditive testimony that sublime formulary was given to the whole Church as the <font face="SPIonic">kthma ej aei</font>of Christendom,- a formal countersign of apostolic doctrine.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2517_823144"></a>
 <sup>76 </sup>I venture to state this to encourage young students to keep pen in hand in all their researches, and always to make notes. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2523_827532"></a>
 <sup>77 </sup>Pompey and others were called <i>imperatores</i>before the Caesars, but who includes them with the Roman emperors?</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2524_828037"></a>
 <sup>78 </sup>How St. Peter would regard it, see 1 Pet. v. 1-3. I am sorry to find Dr. Schaff, in his useful compilation, <i>History of the Christian Church</i>, vol. ii. p 166, dropping, into the old ruts of fable, after sufficiently proving just before, what I have maintained. He speaks of "the insignificance of <i>the first Popes</i>,"-meaning the early Bishops of Rome, men who minded their own business, but could not have been "insignificant" had they even imagined themselves "Popes."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2525_829106"></a>
 <sup>79 </sup>See Bossuet, <i>passim</i>, and all the Callican doctors down to our own times. In England the "supremacy" was never acknowledged nor in France, until now.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2531_830152"></a>
 <sup>80 </sup>See his Hippol., vol. i. pp. 209, 311.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2532_830299"></a>
 <sup>81 </sup>See vol. ii. p. 298, this series.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2533_830471"></a>
 <sup>82 </sup>p. 207.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2534_830638"></a>
 <sup>83 </sup>Vol. iv p 114, Elucidation II., this series. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2535_832040"></a>
 <sup>84 </sup>Even Quinet notes this. See his <i>Ultamontanism</i>, p. 40, ed. 1845.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2537_832556"></a>
 <sup>85 </sup>Bunsen gives it as the thirty-fifth, vol. i. p. 311.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2539_833352"></a>
 <sup>86 </sup>Of which we shall learn in vol. viii., this series.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2540_834329"></a>
 <sup>87 </sup>See Bingham, book ix. cap. i. sec. 9. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2545_835513"></a>
 <sup>88 </sup>Wordsworth, chap. viii. p, 93.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2550_836472"></a>
 <sup>89 </sup>See vol. I, pp. 415, 460, this series.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2557_838577"></a>
 <sup>90 </sup><i>Introduction to Greek Classics</i>, p.228. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2566_839407"></a>
 <sup>91 </sup>See vol. ii. p. 12, also iv. 210.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2567_840966"></a>
 <sup>92 </sup>See <i>Treatise on the Lapsed</i>, infra. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2577_843542"></a>
 <sup>93 </sup>Ver. 17.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2582_844040"></a>
 <sup>94 </sup>See p. v. <i>supra</i> . </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2586_846113"></a>
 <sup>95 </sup>Ps. cvi. 30-31.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2596_848350"></a>
 <sup>96 </sup>2 Thess. ii. 8.</p>
 
 </body>