<body>
 <p><a name="P1801_529036"></a>
 <sup>114 </sup><font face="SPIonic">e0mpai/gmata</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1802_529089"></a>
 <sup>115 </sup>Isa. lxvi. 3, 4.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1803_529126"></a>
 <sup>116 </sup>Christophorsonus refers this to Valerian. But evidently the <font face="SPIonic">ou[toj de/</font> introduces a different subject in Macrianus; and besides, Valerian could not be said to have been originally unworthy of the power which he aspired to.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1804_529537"></a>
 <sup>117 </sup><font face="SPIonic">to\n basi/leion u9podu=nai ko/smon</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1805_529606"></a>
 <sup>118 </sup><font face="SPIonic">a0naph/rw</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1806_529630"></a>
 <sup>119 </sup>Joannes Zonaras, in his <i>Annals</i>, states that Macrianus was lame.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1807_530093"></a>
 <sup>120 </sup><font face="SPIonic">w[n h0tu/xei</font>. So Codex Regius reads. But Codices Maz., Med., and Fuk. give <font face="SPIonic">hu0tu/xei</font>, "in which he succeeded."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1808_530258"></a>
 <sup>121 </sup><font face="SPIonic">e0cwmo/rcato</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1810_530385"></a>
 <sup>122 </sup>Eusebius introduces the extract thus: He (Dionysius) addressed also an epistle to Hermammon and the brethren in Egypt; and after giving an account of the wickedness of Decius and his successors, he states many other circumstances, and also mentions the peace of Gallienus. And it is best to hear his own relation as follows.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1811_530727"></a>
 <sup>123 </sup>This is rightly understood of Macrianus, by whose treachery Valerian came under the power of the Persians. Aurelius Victor, Syncellus, and others, testify that Valerian was overtaken by that calamity through the treachery of his generals.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1812_531463"></a>
 <sup>124 </sup>Isa. xlii. 9.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1813_531779"></a>
 <sup>125 </sup><font face="SPIonic">prosta/j</font>. But Valesius would read <font face="SPIonic">prossta/j</font>, <i>adstans.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P1814_531859"></a>
 <sup>126 </sup><font face="SPIonic">prospela/saj</font> is the reading of three of the codices and of Nicephorus; others give <font face="SPIonic">propela/saj</font>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1816_532719"></a>
 <sup>127 </sup>[Rom xiii. 4, 6. St. Paul's strong expressions in this place must explain these expressions. A prince was, <i>quoad hoc</i>, comparatively speaking, godly and pious, as he "attended continually to this very thing." So, "most religious," In the Anglican Liturgy.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1817_533082"></a>
 <sup>128 </sup>Who ever expressed himself thus,-that one after his seven years was passing his ninth year? 'I'his septennium (<font face="SPIonic">eptaethri/j</font>) must designate something peculiar, and different from the time following it. It is therefore the septennium of imperial power which he had held along with his father. In the eighth year of that empire, Macrianus possessed himself of the imperial honour specially in Egypt. After his assumption of the purple, however, Gallienus had still much authority in Egypt. At length, in the ninth year of Gallienus, that is, in 261, Macrianus the father and the two sons being slain, the sovereignty of Gallienus was recognised also among the Egyptians. And then Gallienus gave a rescript to Dionysius, Pinna, and Demetrius, bishops of Egypt, to re-establish the sacred places,-a boon which he had granted in the former year. The ninth year of Gallienus, moreover, began about the midsummer of this year; and the time at which this letter was written by Dionysius, as Eusebius observes, may be gathered from that, and falls consequently before the Paschal season of 262 A.D.-Pearson, p. 72. Gall.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1820_534234"></a>
 <sup>129 </sup>Eusebius, <i>Hist. Eccles.,</i> vii. 22. Eusebius prefaces the 21st chapter of his seventh book thus: "When peace had scarcely yet been established, he (Dionysius) returned to Alexandria. But when sedition and war again broke out, and made it impossible for him to have access to all the brethren in that city, divided as they then were into different parties, he addressed them again by an epistle at the Passover, as if he were still an exile from Alexandria." Then he inserts the epistle to Hierax; and thereafter, in ch. xxii., introduces the present excerpt thus: "After these events, the pestilence succeeding the war, and the festival being now at hand, he again addressed the brethren by letters, in which he gave the following description of the great troubles connected with that calamity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1822_535292"></a>
 <sup>130 </sup><font face="SPIonic">ou0x o@pwj tw=n e\pilu/pwn</font> is the reading of Codices Maz., Med., and Savil.; others give, less correctly, <font face="SPIonic">e0piloipwn</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1823_535501"></a>
 <sup>131 </sup>The text gives, <font face="SPIonic">a0ll' ou0d' ei/ tij perixarh\j o@n oi/nqei=en ma/lista</font>, which is put probably for the mere regular construction, <font face="SPIonic">o@n oi@ointo a0n ma/lista perixarh=</font>. Nicephorus reads, <font face="SPIonic">ei@ tij perixarh\j w@n oihqei/h</font>. The idea is, that the heathen could have no real festal time. All seasons, those apparently most joyous, no less than those evidently sorrowful, must be times void of all real rejoicing to them, until they learn the grace of God.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1824_536318"></a>
 <sup>132 </sup>Ex. xii. 30.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1827_537607"></a>
 <sup>133 </sup>Dionysius is giving a sort of summary of all the calamities which befell the Alexandrian church from the commencement of his episcopal rule: namely, first, persecution, referring to that which began in the last year of the reign of Philip; then war, meaning the civil war of which he speaks in his Epistle to Fabius; then pestilence, alluding to the sickness which began in the time of Decius, and traversed the land under Gallus and Volusianus.-Vales.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1829_538998"></a>
 <sup>134 </sup><font face="SPIonic">a0namasso/menoi ta0j a0lghdo/naj</font>. Some make this equivalent to <i>mitigantes</i>. It means properly to "wipe off," and so to become "responsible" for. Here it is used apparently to express much the same idea as the two preceding clauses. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1830_539497"></a>
 <sup>135 </sup><font face="SPIonic">mo/nhj filofrosu/nhj e@xesqai</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1831_539631"></a>
 <sup>136 </sup>The phrase <font face="SPIonic">periyhma pa/ntwn</font> refers to 1 Cor. iv. 13. Valesius supposes that among the Alexandrians it may have been a humble and complimentary form of salutation, <font face="SPIonic">e0gw/ eimi periyhma/ sou</font>; or that the expression <font face="SPIonic">periyhma pa/ntwn</font> had come to be habitually applied to the Christians by the heathen.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1833_540355"></a>
 <sup>137 </sup><font face="SPIonic">u9pti/aij xersi</font>. [See Introductory Note, p. 77.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1834_540443"></a>
 <sup>138 </sup><font face="SPIonic">kaqairou=ntej</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1835_540530"></a>
 <sup>139 </sup><font face="SPIonic">o9moforou=ntej</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1836_541294"></a>
 <sup>140 </sup>Compare Defoe, <i>Plague in London.</i>]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1839_541379"></a>
 <sup>141 </sup>Eusebius, <i>Hist. Eccles.</i>, vii. 21. The preface to this extract in Eusebius is as follows: "After this he (Dionysius) wrote also another Paschal epistle to Hierax, a bishop in Egypt, in which he makes the following statement about the sedition then prevailing at Alexandria."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1841_541874"></a>
 <sup>142 </sup>Or, for.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1842_542409"></a>
 <sup>143 </sup><font face="SPIonic">mesaita/th th=j po/lewj</font>. Codex Regius gives <font face="SPIonic">tw= po/lewn</font>. The sedition referred to as thus dividing Alexandria is probably that which broke out when Aemilianus seized the sovereignty in Alexandria. See Pollio's <i>Thirty Tyrants</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1843_542652"></a>
 <sup>144 </sup><font face="SPIonic">a@peiroj</font>. But Codices Fuk. and Savil. give <font face="SPIonic">a@poroj</font>, "impracticable."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1844_543474"></a>
 <sup>145 </sup><font face="SPIonic">a0kroto/mou</font>. It may perhaps mean "smitten" here.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1846_544287"></a>
 <sup>146 </sup><font face="SPIonic">'Ede/m</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1847_544406"></a>
 <sup>147 </sup>Written <font face="SPIonic">I'hw/n</font> in Codex Alexandrinus, but <font face="SPIonic">I'ew/n</font> in Codex Vaticanus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1848_544840"></a>
 <sup>148 </sup><font face="SPIonic">i/xw=raj</font>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1849_545443"></a>
 <sup>149 </sup><font face="SPIonic">w0moge/rontaj</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1852_546141"></a>
 <sup>150 </sup><font face="SPIonic">e0k th=j d' e9ortastikh=j e0pistolh=j</font>. From the <i>Sacred Parallels of John of Damascus</i>, Works, ii. p. 753 C, edit. Paris, 1712. In his <i>Ecclesiastical History</i>, book vii. ch. 20, Eusebius says: "In addition to these epistles, the same Dionysius also composed others about this time, designated his <i>Festival Epistles</i>, and in these he says much in commendation of the Paschal feast. One of these he addressed to Flavius, and another to Domitius and Didymus, in which he gives the canon for eight years, and shows that the Paschal feast ought not to be kept until the passing of the vernal equinox. And besides these, he wrote another epistle to his co-presbyters at Alexandria."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1863_547763"></a>
 <sup>151 </sup>P. 84, note 6.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1864_547818"></a>
 <sup>152 </sup>P. 82, note 6. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P1869_548338"></a>
 <sup>1 </sup>See, in the <i>Bibliotheca Veterum Patrum</i> of Gallandi, the Appendix to vol. xiv., added from the manuscripts, after the editor's death by an anonymous scholar.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1875_548560"></a>
 <sup>1 </sup>[Compare the <i>Metaphrase</i>, p. 9, <i>supra</i>. <i>Query</i>, are not these twin specimens of exegetical exercises in the school at Alexandria?]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1881_548843"></a>
 <sup>2 </sup>Matt i. 1.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1886_549452"></a>
 <sup>3 </sup><font face="SPIonic">eij ton ai0w=na</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1887_549495"></a>
 <sup>4 </sup><font face="SPIonic">ei0j to0u9j ai/w=naj</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1890_549815"></a>
 <sup>5 </sup><font face="SPIonic">proai/resij</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1893_550110"></a>
 <sup>6 </sup>1 Cor. iii. 19.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1894_550343"></a>
 <sup>7 </sup><font face="SPIonic">ei[pe</font>, for which <font face="SPIonic">ei\de</font>, "discerned," is suggested.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P1895_550599"></a>
 <sup>8 </sup>1 Kings iv. 32. </p>
 
 </body>