<body>
 <p><a name="P3900_1110992"></a>
 <sup>611 </sup>Matt. iii. 17.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3901_1111070"></a>
 <sup>612 </sup><i>Parat.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3902_1111241"></a>
 <sup>613 </sup><i>Inferre coneris.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3904_1111510"></a>
 <sup>614 </sup><i>Artifex.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3905_1112474"></a>
 <sup>615 </sup>Phil. ii. 7.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3906_1112682"></a>
 <sup>616 </sup><i>Hominem.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3907_1112943"></a>
 <sup>617 </sup><i>Hominem eum tantummodo ex Maria.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3908_1113093"></a>
 <sup>618 </sup>Or, effect, <i>per profectum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3909_1113216"></a>
 <sup>619 </sup>Effect. [i.e., progressively.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3910_1113370"></a>
 <sup>620 </sup>Routh puts this interrogatively = Is it then your position that He really is a man, that is to say, one who is flesh and blood' Well, but if so, then it will follow, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3911_1113735"></a>
 <sup>621 </sup>Or, <i>as.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3912_1113896"></a>
 <sup>622 </sup>Reading "sicut homo, hac opinione," for the "sicut homo ac opinione" of the Codex Casinensis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3913_1114476"></a>
 <sup>623 </sup>The Codex Casinensis reads, "hanc quaestionem diffigenter aptare tam manifestarem atque manifeste dissolverem." We follow the emendation, "hanc quaestionem diligenter aptatam manifestarem," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3914_1115143"></a>
 <sup>624 </sup>[<i>A signum verecundiae</i> which rebukes the awful inquisitiveness concerning the conception of Mary which disgraced the late pontiff, Pius IX. To what blasphemous pruriency of thought and expression has not such an invasion of decency given rise! See St. Bernard, <i>Opp.</i> tom. i. p. 392. He rebukes the heresy as profane.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3915_1115621"></a>
 <sup>625 </sup>The text gives <i>tempus recusat.</i> Routh proposes <i>tempus requirit</i> = which the occasion requires.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3916_1116868"></a>
 <sup>626 </sup>This is a purely conjectural reading, "ut dicam silex," etc. The Codex Casinensis gives, "ut dicam dilere non homo." But Routh, in reference to ch. xv., throws out the idea that we should read <i>delire</i> = thou dotard, or, lunatic. [P. 190, <i>supra</i>, as if Manes = <font face="SPIonic">maniko\j</font>.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3917_1117557"></a>
 <sup>627 </sup><i>Columbarium furem.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3918_1118005"></a>
 <sup>628 </sup>The text gives <i>suae.</i> Routh suggests <i>tuae.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3919_1118480"></a>
 <sup>629 </sup>The text is, "non solum autem, sed adventus nomen delebitur." It may perhaps be = and not the foundation, but the name, of an advent would be done away.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3920_1118899"></a>
 <sup>630 </sup>Phil. ii. 7.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3921_1119274"></a>
 <sup>631 </sup>The text gives "<i>quo</i> magnum," etc., for which we adopt "<i>quod</i> magnum," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3922_1119877"></a>
 <sup>632 </sup>Matt. iv. 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3923_1120060"></a>
 <sup>633 </sup>Or perhaps, = which was also, <i>quod erat tabernaculum</i>, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3924_1120182"></a>
 <sup>634 </sup>The Codex Casinensis gives "Ignorabat autem propter qui genuisset Filium Dei praedicabat regnum coelorum, qui erat," etc. We follow generally the emendations adopted in Migne: "Ignorabat autem propter quid genuisset Filium Dei, qui praedicabat regnum coelorum, quod erat habitaculum magnum," etc. Routh would read "genitus esset Filius Dei," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3925_1120791"></a>
 <sup>635 </sup>John xix. 37.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3926_1121503"></a>
 <sup>636 </sup>Matt. iii. 17.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3927_1122197"></a>
 <sup>637 </sup><i>Pugillum plenum solis mihi affer aut modium plenum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3928_1123133"></a>
 <sup>638 </sup>2 Cor. v. 21.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3929_1123316"></a>
 <sup>639 </sup><i>Partis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3931_1123737"></a>
 <sup>640 </sup>The text is, "et ultra ei non sinerent ad propria remeare." Routh suggests <i>ultro</i> for <i>ultra.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3932_1124842"></a>
 <sup>641 </sup>Reading <i>unus</i>, instead of "<i>vos</i>, comitibus," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3933_1124962"></a>
 <sup>642 </sup>Reading "quem etiam" instead of "quae etiam."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3934_1125207"></a>
 <sup>643 </sup>Th; Codex Casinensis gives, "ipse quidem me dicere recusavit," etc. We adopt the correction in Migne, "sed ne ipse quidem dicere recusavit," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3937_1126327"></a>
 <sup>644 </sup><i>Superiores quidem causas Domini</i>, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3938_1126802"></a>
 <sup>645 </sup>Reading "sed et optimus architectus ejus, fundamentum," etc. The Codex Casinensis has the corrupt lection, "sed et optimos architectos ei fundamentum," etc. [Had this been said of Peter?]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3939_1127022"></a>
 <sup>646 </sup>Cf. 1 Cor. iii. 10. [Had this been said of Peter, what then?]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3940_1127202"></a>
 <sup>647 </sup>Cf. Acts xiv. 23.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3941_1127578"></a>
 <sup>648 </sup>Cf. 1 Tim. iii. 1. [Clement cap. xliv., vol. 1. p. 17, this series.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3942_1128368"></a>
 <sup>649 </sup>Various other forms are found for this name Scythianus. Thus we find Scutianus and Excutianus,-forms which may have arisen through mere clerical errors. The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives Stutianus. [But see Routh, <i>R.S.</i>, vol. v. p. 186.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3944_1130068"></a>
 <sup>650 </sup>This seems the general idea meant to be conveyed. The text, which is evidently corrupt, runs thus: "in qua cum eum habitaret cum Aegyptiorum sapientiam didicisset." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "in qua cum habitaret, et Aegyptiorum," etc. In Migne it is proposed to fill up the lacunae thus: "in qua cum diu habitaret, depravatus est, cum Aegyptiorum sapientiam didicisset." Routh suggests, "in qua cum ea habitaret," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3945_1130728"></a>
 <sup>651 </sup>The Codex Casinensis reads <i>Terbonem</i> for <i>Terebinthum.</i> But in Cyril of Jerusalem, in his <i>Catechesis</i>, 6, as well as in others, we regularly find <font face="SPIonic">Te/rbinqon</font>, <i>Terbinthum</i>, or <i>Terebinthum</i>, given as the name of the disciple of Scythianus. The form <i>Tereventus</i> is also given; and the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. has <i>Terybeneus.</i> The statement made here as to these books being written by Terebinthus is not in accordance with statements made by Cyril and others, who seem to recognise Scythianus alone as the author. As to the name Terebinthus itself, C. Ritter, in his <i>Die Stupa's</i>, etc., p. 29 thinks that it is a Graecized form of a predicate of Buddha, viz, <i>Tere-hintu</i>, Lord of the Hindoos. Others take it simply to be a translation of the Hebrew <font face="SPTiberian">hl/)</font></p>
 
 <p>, the <i>terebinth.</i> See a note on this subject in Neander's <i>Church Hist.</i>, ii. 166 (Bohn). [Routh, <i>ut supra</i>, p. 187.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3946_1131714"></a>
 <sup>652 </sup><i>Capitulorum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3947_1131812"></a>
 <sup>653 </sup><i>Thesaurus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3948_1132329"></a>
 <sup>654 </sup>The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. inserts here, "omnibus quaecunque ejus fuerant congregatis" = gathering together all that was his.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3949_1132532"></a>
 <sup>655 </sup>Reading "habetur." But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives <i>habitatur</i>, is inhabited.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3950_1132946"></a>
 <sup>656 </sup>The Codex Casinensis gives, "sed aliud cujusdam homine." We adopt "sed alium Buddam nomine," with which the narratives of Cyril, Epiphanius, and others agree. Routh proposes "alio Buddam nomine" = by another name, Buddas. [Buddha is a <i>title</i>, not a name.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3951_1133362"></a>
 <sup>657 </sup>The text gives "natum esse, simul et ab angelo." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "natum se esse simulabat et ab angelo."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3952_1133593"></a>
 <sup>658 </sup>On these Persian priests, see Epiphanius on this heresy, num. 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3953_1133673"></a>
 <sup>659 </sup>Reading <i>arguebant</i>, with Routh, for <i>arguebat.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3954_1133814"></a>
 <sup>660 </sup><i>Animosa exaggeratio.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3955_1134035"></a>
 <sup>661 </sup><i>Ante seculum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3956_1134372"></a>
 <sup>662 </sup>Or, in the origins of things, <i>principiis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3957_1134728"></a>
 <sup>663 </sup><i>Particeps ejus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3958_1134757"></a>
 <sup>664 </sup>Reading <i>tunc</i> for <i>nunc.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3959_1134869"></a>
 <sup>665 </sup><i>Solarium quoddam excelsum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3960_1135198"></a>
 <sup>666 </sup>The Codex Casinensis gives, "ut inde ab aliquo convinci possit." But the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "ut ne ab aliquo," etc. We adopt, therefore, "ne ab aliquo," etc., taking the idea to be, as is suggested in Migne, that Manes went up alone, because he feared that, if observed by Parcus and Labdacus, the priests of Mithras, he might expose himself to punishment at the hands of the Persian rulers for an offence against their religion. [<i>Manes</i> here seems put for Terebinthus.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3961_1136031"></a>
 <sup>667 </sup><i>Sub terras eum detrudi per spiritum.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3963_1136621"></a>
 <sup>668 </sup>But the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "erat enim multum pecuniae arida"-for she had a great greed for money.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3964_1136899"></a>
 <sup>669 </sup>But Cyril, Epiphanius, and others, make the name Cubricus (<font face="SPIonic">Kou/brikoj</font>).</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3965_1137282"></a>
 <sup>670 </sup><i>Versuum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3966_1137659"></a>
 <sup>671 </sup>This may express with sufficient nearness the original, "nec Manem sed Manes."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3967_1137888"></a>
 <sup>672 </sup>The Codex Casinensis gives <i>sexaginta</i> regularly. The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads <i>septuaginta</i>, seventy.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3968_1138381"></a>
 <sup>673 </sup><i>Transfert</i> eos. It may be also "translated them."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3969_1139510"></a>
 <sup>674 </sup>The text gives, "edictum proposuit in vita," etc. For <i>in vita</i> it is proposed to read <i>invitans</i>; and that is confirmed by the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3970_1139799"></a>
 <sup>675 </sup>We adopt the reading "qui cubum, guod nomen est tali, ludere solent." The text gives, "qui cibum quod nomen est tale eludere solent." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. seems to read, "qui cubum quod nomen est aleae ludere solent."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3971_1140483"></a>
 <sup>676 </sup><i>Ferri talento.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3972_1140708"></a>
 <sup>677 </sup>The text gives, "quique fugientes licet nunquam cessarunt," etc. Codex Reg. Alex. Vat has, "licet nunquam cessarent" etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3974_1141244"></a>
 <sup>678 </sup>Reading "dicebam." But the Codex Casinensis gives "dicebant," and the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. has "decebat"-as became them.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3975_1141571"></a>
 <sup>679 </sup>Reading "converti ad salutem," for "conventi," etc., as it is given in the Codex Casinensis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3976_1142320"></a>
 <sup>680 </sup><i>Conscribebantur.</i> [Note this concerning the Christian books.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3977_1142440"></a>
 <sup>681 </sup>Nuntios. But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives "novitios," novices. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3978_1143510"></a>
 <sup>682 </sup>The text gives "fatigarent." But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives "fugarent"-expel.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3979_1143640"></a>
 <sup>683 </sup>The text gives "invenientes." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. more correctly has "inveniens"-when he came upon.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3981_1145601"></a>
 <sup>684 </sup>But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads "<i>Stracum</i> fluvium."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3982_1146128"></a>
 <sup>685 </sup>The text gives, "evadere potuit dum nemo eum insequeretur. Sed populus, cum Archelai quem libenter audiebant relatione teneretur." etc. The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads "evadere potuit dum ne eum insequeretur is populus, et Archelai quem libenter audiebant relatione tenerentur." Routh suggests, "dum eum nemo insequeretur, sed populus Archelai," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3983_1146678"></a>
 <sup>686 </sup>The same Codex Vat. reads Adrabion here.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3984_1147214"></a>
 <sup>687 </sup>'I'he Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. ends with these words.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3985_1147479"></a>
 <sup>688 </sup>[See p. 177, <i>supra</i> A fair discussion as to authenticity.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3986_1147557"></a>
 <sup>689 </sup><i>Inscripsi.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3987_1148991"></a>
 <sup>690 </sup>Codex Casinensis reads, "non ex Manen originem mali hujus Manes esse." We adopt the conjecture, "non ex Mane originem mali hujus manasse."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3988_1149617"></a>
 <sup>691 </sup>The following note on this Basilides may be given from Migne:-"Although Eusebius (<i>Hist. Eccles.</i>, iv. 7) tells us that the Basilides who taught heresy shortly after the times of the apostles was an Alexandrian, and opened schools of error in Egypt, the Basilides mentioned here by Archelaus may still be one and the same person with that Alexandrian, notwithstanding that it is said that he taught his heresy among the Persians. For it may very well be the case that Basilides left Alexandria, and made an attempt to infect the Persians also with his heretical dogmas. At the same time, there is no mention among ancient authorities, so far as I know, of a Persian Basilides. The Alexandrian Basilides also wrote twenty-four books on the Gospel, as the same Eusebius testifies; and these do not appear to be different from those books of <i>Tractates</i> which Archelaus cites, and from the <i>Exegetics</i>, from the twenty-third book of which certain passages are given by Clement of Alexandria in the fourth book of his <i>Stromateis.</i> It is not clear however, whether that Gospel on which Basilides wrote was the Gospel of the Apostles, or another which he made up for himself, and of which mention is made in Origen's first Homily on Luke, in Jerome's prologue to his Commentary on Matthew, and in Ambrose's prologue to the Gospel of Luke." We may add that Gieseler (<i>Studien und Kritiken</i>, i. 1830, p. 397) denies that the person meant here is Basilides the Gnostic, specially on account of the peculiar designation, <i>Basilides quidam antiquior.</i> But his objections are combated by Baur and Neander. See the <i>Church History</i> of the latter, ii. p. 50, ed. Bohn.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3989_1151676"></a>
 <sup>692 </sup>The text is, "aliis dictis proposuit adversariis." Perhaps we may read. "aliorum dicta," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3990_1152078"></a>
 <sup>693 </sup>The text is, "necessarium sermonem uberemque salutaris sermo praestavit." May it be = the word of salvation furnished the word which was requisite, etc.?</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3991_1152475"></a>
 <sup>694 </sup>The text is, "per parvulam divitis et pauperis naturam sine radice et sine loco rebus supervenientem unde pullulaverit indicat." The reading seems defective. But the general intention of this very obscure and fragmentary sentence appears to be as given above. So Neander understands it as conveying a figurative description of the two principles of light and darkness, expressed in the Zoroastrian doctrine immediately cited,-the rich being the good principle, and the poor the evil. He also supposes the phrase "without root and without place" to indicate the "absoluteness of the principle, that springs up all at once, and mixes itself up with the development of existence."-See <i>Church History</i>, ii. 51 (Bohn). Routh confesses his inability to understand what can be meant by the term <i>parvulam</i>, and suggests <i>parabolam.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3992_1153326"></a>
 <sup>695 </sup><i>Caput.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3993_1153400"></a>
 <sup>696 </sup><i>Alium.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3994_1153420"></a>
 <sup>697 </sup>Routh adopts the interrogative form here, so as to make the connection stand thus: But is this the only topic which the book contains? Does it not also contain another discussion, etc.?</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3995_1153841"></a>
 <sup>698 </sup><i>Versibus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3996_1153930"></a>
 <sup>699 </sup><i>Varietate.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3997_1154006"></a>
 <sup>700 </sup>By the <i>barbari</i> here are evidently meant the Persians.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3998_1154270"></a>
 <sup>701 </sup>Principles.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3999_1154551"></a>
 <sup>702 </sup>The text is, "non quae esse dicebantur." Routh proposes, "non quae factae, or genitae, esse dicebantur," = which were not declared to have been made. </p>
 
 </body>