<body>
 <p><a name="P6900_2168055"></a>
 <sup>220 </sup>There may be here some echo of the words (John xvii. 3), "This is eternal life, that they may know Thee, the only true God," etc.; but there is certainly not sufficient similarity to found a direct reference on, as has been done by Orelli and others.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6901_2168389"></a>
 <sup>221 </sup>i.e. souls.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6902_2168551"></a>
 <sup>222 </sup>This passage presents no difficulty in itself, its sense being obviously that, as by God's grace life is given to those who serve Him, we must strive to fit ourselves to receive His blessing. The last words, however, have seemed to some fraught with mystery, and have been explained by Heraldus at some length as a veiled or confused reference to the Lord's Supper, as following upon baptism and baptismal regeneration, which, he supposes, are referred to in the preceding words, "laying aside," etc. [It is not, however, the language of a mere catechumen.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6903_2169413"></a>
 <sup>223 </sup>These "thin plates," <i>laminae</i>, Orelli has suggested, were amulets worn as a charm against serpents.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6904_2169534"></a>
 <sup>224 </sup>ms. <i>Phyllis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6905_2169584"></a>
 <sup>225 </sup>So the edd., reading <i>instit-oribus</i> for the ms. <i>instit-ut-oribus</i>, "makers."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6906_2169744"></a>
 <sup>226 </sup>Lit., "that colds and violent suns may not," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6907_2169860"></a>
 <sup>227 </sup>Lit., "of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6909_2169974"></a>
 <sup>228 </sup>Lit., "is set before."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6910_2170102"></a>
 <sup>229 </sup>So the ms., first ed., Gelenius, Canterus, Hildebrand, reading <i>ex commodi sensu</i>, for which all the other edd., following Ursinus and Meursius, read <i>ex communi</i>-"from common sense," i.e., wisely.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6911_2170439"></a>
 <sup>230 </sup>Perhaps, as Orelli evidently understands it, "prefer Him to our own souls"-<i>animis praeponimus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6912_2170554"></a>
 <sup>231 </sup>So Oehler, reading <i>ea</i> for the ms. <i>ut</i>, omitted in all edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6913_2170742"></a>
 <sup>232 </sup>Lit., "by your own and internal exertion."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6914_2170996"></a>
 <sup>233 </sup>Lit., "of things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6915_2171130"></a>
 <sup>234 </sup>Lit., "wings will be at hand."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6916_2171268"></a>
 <sup>235 </sup>The ms. reads <i>di</i>-cimus, "say;" corrected <i>du</i>, as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6917_2171374"></a>
 <sup>236 </sup>The first four edd. read <i>res</i>, "things above," for which Stewechius reads, as above, <i>sedes.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P6918_2171638"></a>
 <sup>237 </sup><i>Sponte.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6920_2172404"></a>
 <sup>238 </sup>Here, as in c. 7, p. 436, n. 3, the edd. read <i>Phaedone</i>, with the exception of the first ed., LB., Hildebrand, and Oehler, who follow the ms. as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6921_2172739"></a>
 <sup>239 </sup>Lit., "to the end of promising."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6922_2173124"></a>
 <sup>240 </sup>Meursius suggests <i>numini</i>, "deity," on which it may be well to remark once for all, that <i>nomen</i> and <i>numen</i> are in innumerable places interchanged in one or other of the edd. The change, however, is usually of so little moment, that no further notice will be taken of it.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6923_2173548"></a>
 <sup>241 </sup>So the ms., according to Rigaltius and Hildebrand, reading <i>vitae aeternitate</i>, while Crusius asserts that the ms. gives <i>vita et</i>-"with life and eternity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6925_2173759"></a>
 <sup>242 </sup>The ms. reading is, <i>mortalis est qualitatis</i>. The first five edd. merely drop <i>est</i>-"of mortal, of neutral," etc.; LB. and the others read, <i>es et</i>, as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6926_2174081"></a>
 <sup>243 </sup>Lit., "heard from."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6927_2174192"></a>
 <sup>244 </sup>So the ms., according to Crusius, the edd. reading <i>cred-id-imus</i>-"have believed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6928_2174351"></a>
 <sup>245 </sup>Lit., "if we believe that."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6929_2174450"></a>
 <sup>246 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>ad modum obsecutionis paratum</i>-"prepared to the mode of compliance;" for which the edd. read <i>adm. executioni</i>-"quite prepared for performing," except Hildebrand, who gives <i>adm. obsecutioni</i>-"for obedience."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6930_2174755"></a>
 <sup>247 </sup>So the ms., according to Crusius, but all edd. read <i>sequ-a-tur</i> (for <i>i</i>)-"Is there anything which He has willed which it does not follow," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6931_2175450"></a>
 <sup>248 </sup>So all edd., reading <i>mutabiles</i>, except the two Roman edd. and Oehler, who gives, as the reading of the ms., <i>nu.</i>-"tottering."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6932_2175618"></a>
 <sup>249 </sup>Lit., "in the doubtful condition of their lot."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6933_2175828"></a>
 <sup>250 </sup>Lit., "which may have been of a name."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6934_2176036"></a>
 <sup>251 </sup>LB., followed by the later edd., inserted <i>si</i>, "if they are," which is certainly more consistent with the rest of the sentence.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6936_2176604"></a>
 <sup>252 </sup>The ms. reading is utterly corrupt and meaningless-<i>immortalitatis largiter est donum dei certa prolatis</i>. Gelenius, followed by Canterus, Oberthür, and Orelli, emended <i>largi-tio...certe</i>, as above. The two Roman edd. read, <i>-tatem largitus...certam</i>-"bestowed, assured immortality as God's gift on," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6937_2176975"></a>
 <sup>253 </sup>i.e., who must therefore have received it if they have it at all.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6938_2177203"></a>
 <sup>254 </sup>Lit., "out, reduced to nothing with annihilation, not to be returned from."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6939_2177575"></a>
 <sup>255 </sup>Lit., "they are held in a lasting bond," i.e., of being.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6940_2177682"></a>
 <sup>256 </sup>Plato makes the supreme God, creator of the inferior deities, assure these lesser gods that their created nature being in itself subject to dissolution, His will is a surer ground on which to rely for immortality, than the substance or mode of their own being (<i>Timaeus</i>, st. p. 41; translated by Cicero, <i>de Univ.</i>, xi., and criticised <i>de Nat. Deor.</i>, i. 8 and iii. 12). </p>
 
 <p><a name="P6941_2178206"></a>
 <sup>257 </sup>The ms. and both Roman edd. read <i>neque ullo ab-olitio-nis</i> unintelligibly, for which Gelenius proposed <i>nexusque aboltitione</i>-"and by the destruction of the bond;" but the much more suitable reading in the margin of Ursinus, translated above, <i>ullo ab alio nis-i</i>, has been adopted by later edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6942_2178642"></a>
 <sup>258 </sup>Lit., "be gifted with a saving order." So the ms., reading <i>salutari iussione</i>, followed by both Rom. edd.; LB. and Orelli read <i>vinctione</i>-"bond;" Gelenius, Canterus, Elmenh., and Oberthür, <i>m-issione</i>-"dismissal."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6943_2179065"></a>
 <sup>259 </sup>Lit., "that to the gods themselves the natures are intermediate."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6944_2179178"></a>
 <sup>260 </sup>Lit., "supreme"-<i>principali.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6945_2179592"></a>
 <sup>261 </sup>Cf. i. 48. On this passage Orelli quotes Irenaeus, i. 21, where are enumerated several gnostic theories of the creation of the world and men by angels, who are themselves created by the "one unknown Father." Arnobius is thought, both by Orelli and others, to share in these opinions, and in this discussion to hint at them, but obscurely, lest his cosmology should be confounded by the Gentiles with their own polytheistic system. It seems much more natural to suppose that we have here the indefinite statement of opinions not thoroughly digested.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6947_2180386"></a>
 <sup>262 </sup>Lit., "a generation of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6948_2180809"></a>
 <sup>263 </sup>Canterus, Elmenhorst, Oberthür, and Orelli omit <i>ut</i>, which is retained as above by the rest.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6949_2181019"></a>
 <sup>264 </sup>Lit., "obscene."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6950_2181306"></a>
 <sup>265 </sup>Elmenhorst endeavours to show that Arnobius coincides in this argument with the Epicureans, by quoting Lucr. v. 165 sqq. and Lact. vii. 5,where the Epicurean argument is brought forward, What profit has God in man, that He should have created him? In doing this, it seems not to have been observed that the question asked by Arnobius is a very different one: What place has man in the <i>world</i>, that God should be supposed to have sent him to fill it?</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6951_2182386"></a>
 <sup>266 </sup>i.e., so far from this being the case.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6953_2183564"></a>
 <sup>267 </sup>i.e., from one horse to another-<i>desultores.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6954_2184128"></a>
 <sup>268 </sup><i>Rationibus et constitutionibus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6955_2184204"></a>
 <sup>269 </sup>Lit., "it should be believed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6956_2184353"></a>
 <sup>270 </sup>Lit., "unless there were joined."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6957_2184435"></a>
 <sup>271 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>contentio</i>, which Orelli would understand as meaning "contents," which may be correct. LB. reads <i>conditio</i>-"condition," ineptly; and Ursinus in the margin, <i>completio</i>-"the filling up." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P6959_2184795"></a>
 <sup>272 </sup>So the later edd., from the margin of Ursinus, reading <i>quod temeritatis est maximae</i> for the ms. <i>quem</i>-"whom it shows the greatest rashness to speak of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6960_2184987"></a>
 <sup>273 </sup>Lit., "goddesses."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6961_2185081"></a>
 <sup>274 </sup>So Gelenius (acc. to Orelli), reading as in the margin of Ursinus, <i>terrenae circumscriptionis</i>, for the unintelligible reading of the ms., <i>temerariae</i>, retained in both Roman edd., Canterus, and (acc. to Oehler) Gelenius. LB. reads <i>metariae</i>-"a limiting by boundaries."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6962_2185572"></a>
 <sup>275 </sup>Lit., "motions."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6963_2185649"></a>
 <sup>276 </sup>Cf. Lucr., v. 229 sq. The same idea comes up again in iv. 21.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6964_2185841"></a>
 <sup>277 </sup>Lit., "in."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6965_2185906"></a>
 <sup>278 </sup>According to Hildebrand, the ms. reads <i>dissimular-ent circumscribere</i>, so that, by merely dropping <i>nt</i>, he reads, "to dissemble and cheat;" but according to Crusius, <i>iri</i> is found in the ms. between these two words, so that by prefixing <i>m</i> Sabaeus in the first ed. read <i>m-ent-iri</i> as above, followed by all other edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6966_2186314"></a>
 <sup>279 </sup>Lit., "to roll...in the mind."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6967_2186409"></a>
 <sup>280 </sup>Rigaltius and Hildebrand regard <i>decipere</i> as a gloss.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6968_2186598"></a>
 <sup>281 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>formari</i>, followed by Hildebrand and Oehler; but all the other edd. give the active form, <i>-are</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6969_2186884"></a>
 <sup>282 </sup>Lit., "from."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6970_2187193"></a>
 <sup>283 </sup>The condition, i.e., of freedom.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6971_2187501"></a>
 <sup>284 </sup>LB., seemingly received by Orelli, though not inserted into his text, reads <i>poscerent eos</i> for the ms. <i>-entur</i>, which Hildebrand modifies <i>-ent ea</i> as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6972_2188367"></a>
 <sup>285 </sup>Lit., "certain."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6973_2188422"></a>
 <sup>286 </sup>Lit., "by error."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6975_2188767"></a>
 <sup>287 </sup>Lit., "the sad necessity should be laid upon them, that," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6976_2189009"></a>
 <sup>288 </sup>Lit., "for the want of daily things," <i>diurnorun egestati</i>, for which Stewechius would read <i>diurna egestate</i>-"from daily necessity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6977_2189180"></a>
 <sup>289 </sup>Lit., "of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6978_2189397"></a>
 <sup>290 </sup>Lit., "poured forth all their blood."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6979_2189531"></a>
 <sup>291 </sup>Lit., "of their labour."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6980_2189616"></a>
 <sup>292 </sup>Lit,, "at last by force of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6981_2190274"></a>
 <sup>293 </sup>So the ms. and edd., reading <i>vilitatem</i>, for which Meursius proposed very needlessly <i>utilitatem</i>-"and at an advantage."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6982_2190543"></a>
 <sup>294 </sup>So, adhering very closely to the ms., which gives <i>e-t sanguine supputandis augere-t insomnia milibus</i>, the <i>t</i> of <i>e-t</i> being omitted and <i>n</i> inserted by all. The first five edd. read, <i>-tandi se angerent insania: millibus</i>-"harass themselves with the madness of reckoning; by miles should extend," etc.,-the only change in Heraldus and Orelli being a return to <i>insomnia</i>-"harass with sleeplessness," etc. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P6984_2191623"></a>
 <sup>295 </sup>So restored by Cujacius, followed by LB. and Orelli, reading <i>in grat-i-am</i> (ms. wants <i>i</i>) <i>voluptatemque</i>, while the first five edd. merely drop <i>-que</i>-"to the grateful pleasure," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6985_2192158"></a>
 <sup>296 </sup>Lit., "most cruel."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6986_2192214"></a>
 <sup>297 </sup>Lit., "among," <i>in oris</i>, the ms. reading, and that of the first four edd., for which the others have received from the margin of Ursinus <i>moribus</i>-"(indulging) in so fierce and savage customs."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6987_2192526"></a>
 <sup>298 </sup>Lit., "tables."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6988_2192575"></a>
 <sup>299 </sup>Lit., "they should live."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6989_2192934"></a>
 <sup>300 </sup>Lit., "lessen."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6990_2193006"></a>
 <sup>301 </sup>In the ms. this clause follows the words "loss of their purity," where it is very much in the way. Orelli has followed Heraldus in disposing of it as above, while LB. inserts it after "tips of their ears." The rest adhere to the arrangement of the ms., Ursinus suggesting instead of <i>his</i>-"with these," <i>catenis</i>-"with chains;" Heraldus, <i>linis</i>-"with strings (of pearls);" Stewechius, <i>taeniis</i>- "with fillets."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6991_2193440"></a>
 <sup>302 </sup>So LB. and Orelli reading, <i>con-fic-iendis corporibus</i> for the ms. <i>con-sp-iendis</i>, for which the others read <i>-spic-</i>, "to win attention." A conjecture by Oudendorp, brought forward by Orelli, is worthy of notice-<i>con-spu-endis</i>, "to cover," i.e., so as to hide defects.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6993_2194111"></a>
 <sup>303 </sup>Lit., "passages of ways."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6994_2194177"></a>
 <sup>304 </sup>Lit., "substitute."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6995_2194568"></a>
 <sup>305 </sup>So the later edd., reading <i>botulos</i>; the ms. and early edd. give <i>boletos</i>-"mushrooms."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6996_2194713"></a>
 <sup>306 </sup>For <i>his</i>, Heinsius proposes <i>hiris</i>-"with the intestines."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6997_2194799"></a>
 <sup>307 </sup>Lit., "in a frozen condition." As to the meaning of this there is difference of opinion: some supposing that it means, as above, preserved by means of ice, or at least frozen; while others interpret figuratively, "as hard as ice." [Our Scottish translators have used their local word, "iced <i>haggises</i>:" I have put <i>puddings</i> instead, which gives us, at least, an idea of something edible. To an American, what is iced conveys the idea of a drink. The <i>budinarius</i>, heretofore noted, probably made these iced saucisses.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6998_2195374"></a>
 <sup>308 </sup>Lit., "things"-<i>res</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6999_2195631"></a>
 <sup>309 </sup><i>Scabilla</i> were a kind of rattles or castanets moved by the feet.</p>
 
 </body>