<body>
 <p><a name="P7001_2196058"></a>
 <sup>310 </sup><i>Sambuca</i>, not corresponding to the modern triangle, but a stringed instrument of that shape. Its notes were shrill and disagreeable, and those who played on it of indifferent character.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7002_2196361"></a>
 <sup>311 </sup>So the ms. and first four edd., reading <i>virilitatem sui populo publicarent</i>. Meursius emended <i>utilitatem</i>-"made common the use," etc.; and Orelli, from the margin of Ursinus, <i>vilitatem</i>-"their vileness."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7003_2196621"></a>
 <sup>312 </sup>The ms. reads <i>in fornicibus obvi-t-ae</i>, which, dropping <i>t</i>, is the reading translated, and was received by Elmenhorst, LB., and Hildebrand, from the margin of Ursinus. The other edd. insert <i>nc</i> before <i>t</i>-"bound."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7004_2196911"></a>
 <sup>313 </sup>The translation does not attempt to bring out the force of the words <i>ad oris stuprum paratae</i>, which are read by Orelli after Ursinus and Gelenius. The text is so corrupt, and the subject so obscene, that a bare reference to the practice nay be sufficient.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7006_2197413"></a>
 <sup>314 </sup>The ms. reads, <i>habitare atque habitare juss-e-r-unt</i>. All edd. omit the first two words, the first ed. without further change; but the active verb is clearly out of place, and therefore all other edd. read <i>jussae sunt</i>, as above. Oehler, however, from <i>habitare</i> omitted by the others, would emend <i>aditare</i>, "to approach,"-a conjecture with very little to recommend it. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7007_2198300"></a>
 <sup>315 </sup>These are all substantives in the original.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7009_2198529"></a>
 <sup>316 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>non missione</i>-"not by the sending;" but, unaccountably enough, all edd. except Hildebrand and Oehler read, <i>jussione</i>-"not by the command."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7010_2198712"></a>
 <sup>317 </sup>So the ms..</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7011_2198815"></a>
 <sup>318 </sup>Lit., "royal sublimity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7012_2199027"></a>
 <sup>319 </sup>Lit., "causes."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7013_2199327"></a>
 <sup>320 </sup>The ms. and both Roman edd. read <i>abscondere</i>-"to hide," for which the other edd. read, as above, <i>abscedere</i>, from the margin of Ursinus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7015_2199875"></a>
 <sup>321 </sup>Lit., "go."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7016_2199961"></a>
 <sup>322 </sup>By Hildebrand and Oehler, <i>procreator</i> is with reason regarded as a gloss.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7017_2200292"></a>
 <sup>323 </sup>The ms., both Roman edd., and Hildebrand read <i>jussisset</i>; but this would throw the sentence into confusion, and the other edd. therefore drop <i>t.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7018_2200488"></a>
 <sup>324 </sup>LB., Hildebrand, and Oehler read <i>quorum indu-c-tae c?rceribus</i>-"led into the prisons of which," all other edd. omitting <i>c</i> as above. According to Oehler, the ms. has the former reading.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7019_2201020"></a>
 <sup>325 </sup>The ms. and both Roman edd. read <i>in-f-ernarum paterentut aliae laniatus muscularum</i>, which has no meaning, and is little improved by Galenius changing <i>ut</i> into <i>ur</i>, as no one knows what "infernal flies" are. LB. and Orelli, adopting a reading in the margin of Ursinus, change <i>intern.</i> into <i>ferarum</i>, and join <i>musc.</i> with the words which follow as above. Another reading, also suggested by Ursinus, seems preferable, however, <i>internorum...musculorum</i>-"suffer rendings (i.e., spasms) of the inner muscles."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7020_2201610"></a>
 <sup>326 </sup>Lit., "bound."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7021_2201769"></a>
 <sup>327 </sup>Lit., "dilaceration of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7023_2202298"></a>
 <sup>328 </sup>Lit., "again and more frequently."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7024_2202428"></a>
 <sup>329 </sup>Lit., "the salvation of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7025_2202512"></a>
 <sup>330 </sup>Lit., "height of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7026_2202654"></a>
 <sup>331 </sup>Lit., "things perfect, and preserving the measure of their completeness;" i.e., continuing so.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7027_2202820"></a>
 <sup>332 </sup>So the ms., LB., Oberthür and Oehler, reading <i>claudum et quod minus esset a recto</i>. All other edd. read <i>eminus</i>-"at a distance from the right."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7028_2203173"></a>
 <sup>333 </sup>Lit., "less than."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7029_2203571"></a>
 <sup>334 </sup>Lit., "material."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7030_2203723"></a>
 <sup>335 </sup>Lit., "some power latent and cruelty."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7032_2204037"></a>
 <sup>336 </sup>So the ms. and all edd.; but Orelli would change <i>item</i> into <i>iterum</i>, not seeing that the reference is to the indicated preference of his opponents for the simple truth. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7033_2204264"></a>
 <sup>337 </sup><i>Nescire</i> Hildebrand, with good reason, considers a gloss.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7034_2204650"></a>
 <sup>338 </sup><i>Nihil</i> for the ms. <i>mihi</i> which makes nonsense of the sentence.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7035_2204822"></a>
 <sup>339 </sup>This somewhat wide-spread opinion found an amusing counterpart in the doctrines of Rorarius (mentioned by Bayle, <i>Dict. Phil.</i>), who affirmed that the lower animals are gifted with reason and speech, as we are.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7036_2205263"></a>
 <sup>340 </sup>Lit., "superior."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7037_2205359"></a>
 <sup>341 </sup>Lit., "tending to no reasons."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7039_2205905"></a>
 <sup>342 </sup><i>Omni vero verissimum est certoque certissimum</i>-the superlative for the comparative.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7040_2206217"></a>
 <sup>343 </sup>Lit., "finished with the perfection of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7041_2206419"></a>
 <sup>344 </sup>Lit., "by perversity"-<i>s-c-aevitate</i>, the reading of the ms., LB., Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, all others omitting <i>c</i>-"by the rage;" except Stewechius, who reads <i>servitute</i>-"slavery."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7042_2206990"></a>
 <sup>345 </sup>Or, perhaps, "the goodness of the Supreme planted"-<i>generositas eos adsereret principalis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7044_2207695"></a>
 <sup>346 </sup>Lit., "opposition;"i.e., "the setting of one party against the other."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7045_2207822"></a>
 <sup>347 </sup>Lit., "weighed with balancing of equality."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7046_2208002"></a>
 <sup>348 </sup>Lit., "bounded by the comprehensions of names;" i.e., possibly, "the good are certainly few enough to be numbered, perhaps even to be named."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7047_2208533"></a>
 <sup>349 </sup>So LB., reading <i>ex cruciatibus</i> for the ms. <i>scruc.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7048_2208617"></a>
 <sup>350 </sup>Lit., "of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7049_2208856"></a>
 <sup>351 </sup>Lit., "admiration is sought for by the putting together"-<i>congregatione.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7051_2209480"></a>
 <sup>352 </sup>Lit., "a comparison of the worst may effect that we," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7052_2209635"></a>
 <sup>353 </sup>So all edd. except Hildebrand, who gives as the reading of the ms., <i>gui-d</i>-"what! do they assert."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7053_2209856"></a>
 <sup>354 </sup>Lit., "by the force of," <i>vi</i>,-an emendation of Heraldus for the ms. <i>in</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7054_2210096"></a>
 <sup>355 </sup>So most edd., reading <i>pertinaci</i> for the ms. <i>-ium</i>-"by the opposition of persistent virtues," which is retained in both Roman edd., Gelenius, Canterus, Hildebrand, and Oehler. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7055_2210472"></a>
 <sup>356 </sup>So Stewechius and later edd., reading <i>ut...auferant</i>, except Hildebrand, who gives as the ms. reading, <i>et...-unt</i>-"shun...and remove," etc. The first four edd. read <i>ne...afferant</i>-"that they may not bring upon themselves," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7056_2211000"></a>
 <sup>357 </sup>So the ms. and first four edd., Orelli (who, however, seems to have meant to give the other reading), and Oehler, reading <i>corri-p-i</i>, for which the others read <i>-igi</i>-"corrected," except Hildebrand, who without due reason gives <i>-rumpi</i>-"corrupted."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7057_2211605"></a>
 <sup>358 </sup>In the ms. <i>imperfectum</i> is marked as a gloss, but is retained in all edd., while <i>improbabilem</i> is omitted, except in LB., when <i>im</i> is omitted, and <i>probabilem</i> joined to the next clause-"however he may strive to be acceptable," in order to provide an object for "strive;" and with a similar purpose Orelli thrusts in <i>contrarium</i>, although it is quite clear that the verb refers to the preceding clause, "struggles to amend."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7059_2212568"></a>
 <sup>359 </sup>The ms. reads <i>se esse</i>, without meaning, from which LB., followed by Hildebrand, and Oehler derived <i>se ex se</i>-"himself of himself." The rest simply omit <i>esse</i> as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7060_2213205"></a>
 <sup>360 </sup>Lit., "hold."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7061_2213728"></a>
 <sup>361 </sup>Lit., "hold."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7062_2213773"></a>
 <sup>362 </sup>Lit., "set in the."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7064_2214136"></a>
 <sup>363 </sup>Lit., "utter the same (conjectures)," <i>easdem</i>, the reading of LB. and Hildebrand, who says that it is so in the ms.; while Crusius asserts that the ms. has <i>idem</i>, which, with Orelli's punctuation, gives-"we have the same power; since it is common (i.e., a general right) to bring forth what you ask," i.e., to put similar questions.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7065_2214522"></a>
 <sup>364 </sup>i.e., may be retorted upon you.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7066_2214691"></a>
 <sup>365 </sup>Here, as elsewhere, instead of <i>muli</i>, the ms. reads <i>milvi</i>-"kites."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7067_2214922"></a>
 <sup>366 </sup>Cf. Plato, <i>Timaeus</i>, st. p. 41, already referred to.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7068_2215060"></a>
 <sup>367 </sup>Or, perhaps, "cray-fish," <i>locusta</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7069_2215207"></a>
 <sup>368 </sup>The ms. reads <i>quidem</i>-"indeed," retained by the first four edd., but changed into <i>quia</i>-"because," by Elmenhorst, LB., and Orelli, while Oehler suggests very happily <i>si quidem</i>-"if indeed," i.e., because.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7070_2215457"></a>
 <sup>369 </sup>Lit., "from."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7071_2215560"></a>
 <sup>370 </sup><i>Rationes.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7072_2215735"></a>
 <sup>371 </sup>Cf. chs. 9 and 10 [p 416, <i>supra</i>].</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7073_2215948"></a>
 <sup>372 </sup>Orelli, retaining this as a distinct sentence, would yet enclose it in brackets, for what purpose does not appear; more especially as the next sentence follows directly from this in logical sequence.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7074_2216380"></a>
 <sup>373 </sup>Lit., "the constitutions of things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7075_2216795"></a>
 <sup>374 </sup>Lit., "did not choose the souls of the human race to be mixtures of the same purity," <i>noluit</i>, received from the margin of Ursinus by all except the first four edd., which retain the ms. <i>voluit</i>-"did choose," which is absurd. Arnobius here refers again to the passage in the <i>Timaeus</i>, p. 41 sq., but to a different part, with a different purpose. He now refers to the conclusion of the speech of the Supreme God, the first part of which is noticed in ch. 36 (cf. p. 447, n. 20). There the Creator assures the gods He has made of immortality through His grace; now His further invitation that they in turn should form men is alluded to. That they might accomplish this task, the dregs still left in the cup, in which had been mixed the elements of the world's soul, are diluted and given to form the souls of men, to which they attach mortal bodies. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7077_2218049"></a>
 <sup>375 </sup>Lit., "things not principal." Orelli here quotes from Tertullian, <i>de Anim.</i>, xxiii., a brief summary of Gnostic doctrines on these points, which he considers Arnobius to have followed throughout this discussion.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7078_2218396"></a>
 <sup>376 </sup><i>Si</i> was first inserted in LB., not being found in the ms., though demanded by the context.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7079_2218873"></a>
 <sup>377 </sup>Lit., "have begun to leave."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7081_2219046"></a>
 <sup>378 </sup>The ms. and first three edd., read <i>vobis</i>-"you," corrected <i>nobis</i>, as above, by Ursinus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7082_2219246"></a>
 <sup>379 </sup>So the ms.; but most edd., following the Brussels transcript, read <i>dominum</i>-"Lord."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7083_2219644"></a>
 <sup>380 </sup><i>Ut</i> is omitted in the ms., first four edd., and Hild.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7084_2220299"></a>
 <sup>381 </sup>So LB., reading <i>p-uncta</i> for the ms. <i>c-uncta.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7085_2220642"></a>
 <sup>382 </sup>So the ms., Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>imman-ior</i>; LB., from the margin of Ursinus, <i>major</i>-"greater;" the rest, <i>inanior</i>-"more foolish."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7086_2220927"></a>
 <sup>383 </sup>The difficulty felt by Arnobius as to the origin of evil perplexed others also; and, as Elmenhorst has observed, some of the Fathers attempted to get rid of it by a distinction between the evil of guilt and of punishment,-God being author of the latter, the devil of the former (Tertullian, <i>adv. Marcionem</i>, ii. 14). It would have been simpler and truer to have distinguished deeds, which can be done only if God will, from wickedness, which is in the sinful purpose of man s heart.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7088_2221478"></a>
 <sup>384 </sup>i.e., ills.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7089_2221715"></a>
 <sup>385 </sup>Lit., "with all the ages, in steady continuance."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7090_2222070"></a>
 <sup>386 </sup>The ms., followed by Oehler alone, reads <i>ducetis</i>-"and you will think;" while all the other edd. read, as above, <i>ducentes.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7091_2222352"></a>
 <sup>387 </sup>Here, too, there has been much unnecessary labour. These words-<i>per voluntatem</i>-as they immediately follow <i>sine deo dicere nihil fieri</i>-"to say that without God nothing is made"-were connected with the preceding clause. To get rid of the nonsense thus created, LB. emended <i>dei...voluntate</i>-"without God's will;" while Heraldus regards them as an explanation of <i>sine deo</i>, and therefore interprets the sentence much as LB. Orelli gets rid of the difficulty by calling them a gloss, and bracketing them. They are, however, perfectly in place, as will be seen above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7092_2222954"></a>
 <sup>388 </sup>Pl.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7093_2223371"></a>
 <sup>389 </sup>It would not be easy to understand why Orelli omitted these words, if we did not know that they had been accidentally omitted by Oberthür also. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7094_2224367"></a>
 <sup>390 </sup>Lit., "that apart from these it is pernicious."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7096_2224633"></a>
 <sup>391 </sup>It must be observed that this sentence is very closely connected with the last words of the preceding chapter, or the meaning may be obscured. The connection may be shown thus: This one thing- that God is author of no evil-we are assured of; but as for all other questions, we neither know, nor care to know, about them.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7097_2225143"></a>
 <sup>392 </sup>This seems the most natural arrangement; but the edd. punctuate thus: "have been connected and associated with us for that which we desire." The last part of the sentence is decidedly obscure; but the meaning may perhaps be, that the circumstances of man's life which absorb so much attention and cause such strife, have no bearing, after all, upon his salvation.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7098_2225591"></a>
 <sup>393 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>labefactare dissolvere</i>; the latter word, however, being marked as spurious.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7099_2225788"></a>
 <sup>394 </sup>Lit., "pure."</p>
 
 </body>