<body>
 <p><a name="P7100_2226271"></a>
 <sup>395 </sup>Lit., "hidden and enwrapt in darkness of nature," <i>abdita et caligine involuta naturae</i>,-the reading of all edd. except Hild. and Oehler, who follow the ms. <i>abditae cal.</i>-"enwrapt in darkness of hidden nature."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7101_2226564"></a>
 <sup>396 </sup>This has been supposed to refer to Heraclitus, as quoted by Clem. Alex., <i>Stromata</i>, v. p. 469 B., where his words are, "Neither God nor man made the world; but there was always, and is, and will be, an undying flame laying hold of its limits, and destroying them;" on which cf. p. 437. n. 8, <i>supra</i>. Here, of course, fire does not mean that perceived by the senses, but a subtle, all-penetrating energy.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7102_2227047"></a>
 <sup>397 </sup>Cf. ch. 52, p. 453.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7103_2227186"></a>
 <sup>398 </sup>Lit., "by ordinary necessity." The Stoics (Diog. Laert., vii. 134) said that the world was made by God working on uncreated matter, and that it was perishable (ยง 141), because made through that of which perception could take cognizance. Cf. ch. 31, n. 9, p. 446.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7104_2227737"></a>
 <sup>399 </sup>Orelli thinks that there is here a confusion of the parts of the world with its elements, because he can nowhere find that any philosopher has fixed the number of the elements either above or below four. The Stoics, however (Diog. Laert., vii. 134), said "that the elements (<font face="SPIonic">a0rxa/j</font> of the world are two-the active and passive;" while, of course, the cosmic theories of the early philosophers affirm that the world sprang from one, and it seems clear enough that Arnobius here uses the word "element" in this sense.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7105_2228378"></a>
 <sup>400 </sup>Lit., "its material."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7106_2228481"></a>
 <sup>401 </sup>A conjecture of Meursius adopted by Oehler, merely dropping <i>u</i> from <i>aut</i>-"or," which is read in the ms. and edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7107_2228791"></a>
 <sup>402 </sup>Lit., "refute falsities placed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7108_2229183"></a>
 <sup>403 </sup>Cf. Cicero, <i>de Nat. Deor.</i>, i. 1, 12, 19, 23, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7110_2229954"></a>
 <sup>404 </sup>Lit., "something is given to them to life." So the Stoics taught, although Chrysippus (cf. n. 9, ch. 31, p. 446) held that only the souls of the wise remained at all after death.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7111_2230525"></a>
 <sup>405 </sup>The ms., first four edd., and Oehler read <i>et rerum contrarietatibus dissonare</i>-"and that they disagree from the oppositions of things." Hild. reads <i>dissonora</i>, a word not met with elsewhere, while the other edd. merely drop the last two letters, <i>-re</i>, as above; a reading suggested in the margin of Ursinus. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7112_2231052"></a>
 <sup>406 </sup>Lit., "a most vain thing," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7113_2231412"></a>
 <sup>407 </sup>So the ms., LB., Elmenh., Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>conjectamus</i>, the other edd. reading <i>commetamur</i> or <i>-imur</i>-"measure," except Gelenius and Canterus, who read <i>commentamur</i>-"muse upon."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7115_2232124"></a>
 <sup>408 </sup>Lit., "audacity of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7116_2232229"></a>
 <sup>409 </sup>Lit., "world which holds us."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7117_2232716"></a>
 <sup>410 </sup>The first five edd. insert the mark of interrogation after "hollow:" "Whether does a solid axis," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7118_2233054"></a>
 <sup>411 </sup>So the edd. except. Hild., who retains the ms. reading <i>in scientissime</i>-"most unskilfully" (the others omitting <i>in-</i>), and Oehler, who changes <i>e</i> into <i>i</i>-"and being most witless show," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7119_2233453"></a>
 <sup>412 </sup>Lit., "touch."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7120_2233729"></a>
 <sup>413 </sup>So the later edd., reading from the margin of Ursinus <i>figi ? cur alia</i>, for the ms. <i>figuralia</i>, except LB., which reads <i>figurari</i>-"be formed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7122_2234101"></a>
 <sup>414 </sup>So the ms.; but all edd. except Hild. and Oehler omit <i>nobis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7123_2234584"></a>
 <sup>415 </sup>So the ms., reading , followed by LB.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7124_2234948"></a>
 <sup>416 </sup><i>Salsa</i>, corrected from the ms. <i>sola.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7125_2235609"></a>
 <sup>417 </sup><i>Alites et volucres</i>; i.e., according to Orelli, the birds from whose flight auguries were drawn, as opposed to the others.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7126_2236650"></a>
 <sup>418 </sup>So Heraldus, whose punctuation also is here followed, omitting <i>id est sapor</i>-"that is, taste," which Meursius and LB., followed by Orelli, amend, <i>ut est</i>-"as taste is" <i>in each thing</i>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7127_2237052"></a>
 <sup>419 </sup><i>Vel</i> is here inserted in all edd., most of which read, as above, <i>oloris</i>, which is found in the ms., in later writing, for the original, <i>coloris</i>-"colour," retained by Ursinus, LB., and Oehler.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7129_2238249"></a>
 <sup>420 </sup>Lit., "that the nature of man is."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7130_2238484"></a>
 <sup>421 </sup>So the ms., according to Crusius, reading <i>nec pro suis</i>; while, according to Hild., the reading is <i>prorsus</i>-"and are utterly without hesitation," adopted in the edd. with the substitution of <i>et</i> for <i>nec</i>-"and that they altogether hesitate," which, besides departing from the ms. runs counter to the sense.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7131_2239204"></a>
 <sup>422 </sup>Lit., "transfer to Him the undecided conversions of the breast."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7132_2239356"></a>
 <sup>423 </sup>Lit., "He can be formed by no imagination."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7133_2239546"></a>
 <sup>424 </sup>Lit., "which the obscurity of sacred divinity contains;" which Orelli interprets, "the most exalted being holds concealed from mortals."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7134_2239930"></a>
 <sup>425 </sup>Lit., "and being fixed on."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7136_2240084"></a>
 <sup>426 </sup>i.e., Christ.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7137_2240287"></a>
 <sup>427 </sup>As Heraclitus is reported to have said.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7138_2240629"></a>
 <sup>428 </sup>The ms., first five edd., and Oehler read <i>supernatum</i>, for which the other edd. read, as above, <i>semper natum</i>, from the margin of Ursinus. The soul is referred to.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7139_2241120"></a>
 <sup>429 </sup>So the later edd., following Elmenhorst, who emended <i>dico</i> for the ms. <i>dici</i>, omitted by the first four edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7141_2241611"></a>
 <sup>430 </sup>So most edd., reading <i>sciolis</i>, from the emendation of Gelenius; but the ms., first five edd,, Hild., and Oehler read <i>scholis</i>-"by some schools, and (these) arrogating very much to themselves."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7142_2242074"></a>
 <sup>431 </sup>Cf. ch. 13, p. 439; Plato, <i>Rep.</i>, ii. st. p. 364, where Glaucon speaks of certain fortune-telling vagrant seers, who persuade the rich that they have power with the gods, by means of charms and sacrifices, to cleanse from guilt; and also Origen, <i>contra Cels.</i>, i. 69, where the Magi are spoken of as being on familiar terms with evil powers, and thus able to accomplish whatever is within these spirits' power.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7143_2242690"></a>
 <sup>432 </sup>Mentioned by Servius (on <i>Aen.</i>, viii. 399) as composed by Tages, cap. 69 [p. 460, <i>supra</i>], and seemingly containing directions as to expiatory sacrifices.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7144_2242903"></a>
 <sup>433 </sup>Pl.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7145_2243203"></a>
 <sup>434 </sup>Lit., "a spirit of perpetuity." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7146_2243531"></a>
 <sup>435 </sup>i.e., than the Supreme God.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7147_2243616"></a>
 <sup>436 </sup>Lit., "are."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7148_2243807"></a>
 <sup>437 </sup>Lit., "all human things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7149_2244008"></a>
 <sup>438 </sup>i.e., reason.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7150_2244095"></a>
 <sup>439 </sup>The ms. reads <i>fuisse me risui</i>, which has no meaning; corrected, <i>fuisse irrisui</i> in most edd., and <i>derisui</i> by Meursius, Hild., and Oehler,-the sense being in either case as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7151_2244316"></a>
 <sup>440 </sup>Lit., "when it begins to approach to the feeling," <i>cum ad sensum</i>; so read by Gelenius for the unintelligible ms. <i>cum absens cum</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7153_2244737"></a>
 <sup>441 </sup>So the edd., reading <i>quid sit cum eis animis actum</i> for the ms. <i>cum ejus nimis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7154_2244850"></a>
 <sup>442 </sup>Lit., "of ancient and very old men."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7155_2245216"></a>
 <sup>443 </sup>So the ms., LB., Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>vinctionis</i>; the other edd. <i>junctionis</i>- "union."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7156_2245703"></a>
 <sup>444 </sup>Lit., "unknown questions."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7157_2245812"></a>
 <sup>445 </sup>Pl.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7158_2245844"></a>
 <sup>446 </sup>Lit., "has run over."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7160_2246209"></a>
 <sup>447 </sup>So the ms. and Oehler, reading <i>ut</i>, which is omitted in all other edd.; in this case, the words in italics are unnecessary.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7161_2246352"></a>
 <sup>448 </sup>So Orelli, reading <i>cur</i> (<i>quur</i> in most edd.) for the ms. <i>quos</i>. Instead of <i>non</i>-"not," which follows, the ms., according to Oehler, reads <i>nos</i>, and he therefore changes <i>quos</i> into <i>quaeso</i>- "I ask, does He free all of us altogether?"</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7162_2246945"></a>
 <sup>449 </sup>There is clearly no reference here to a particular passage of Scripture, but to the general tone of Christ's teaching: "Him that cometh unto me, I will in nowise cast out." Orelli, however with his usual infelicity, wishes to see a direct reference, either to Christ's words to the woman of Samaria (John iv. 13-15), or, which is rather extraordinary, to John vi. 35-37: "I am the bread of life," etc. Cf. n. 9, p. 459.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7163_2247423"></a>
 <sup>450 </sup>Lit., "the right of drinking."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7164_2247509"></a>
 <sup>451 </sup>Lit., "the kindness of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7165_2247702"></a>
 <sup>452 </sup>Lit., "what waits He for, inviting," <i>quid invitans expectat</i>; the reading of the ms., both Roman edd. and Oehler. Gelenius, followed by Canterus and Elmenhorst, changed the last word into <i>peccat</i>-"in what does He sin," adopted by the other edd., with the addition of <i>in te</i>-"against you."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7166_2248093"></a>
 <sup>453 </sup>Lit., "exposes under decision of your own right."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7167_2248217"></a>
 <sup>454 </sup>Cf. Plato, <i>Rep.</i>, ii. st. p. 379: "of a few things God would be the cause, but of many He would not;" and x. st. p. 617 fin.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7168_2248921"></a>
 <sup>455 </sup>So LB., Orelli, Oehler, adopting the emendation of Ursinus, <i>tu te muneris commoditate privaveris</i>, for the unintelligible reading of the ms., <i>tuti m. c. probaveris.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7169_2249276"></a>
 <sup>456 </sup>i.e., immortal, <i>deos</i>, so corrected by Gelenius for the ms. <i>deus</i>-"if either God made us." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7171_2249680"></a>
 <sup>457 </sup>So most edd., reading <i>inanis</i> for the ms. <i>animi</i>; retained, though not very intelligible, in LB., while Hild. reads <i>anilis</i>-"foolish."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7172_2250193"></a>
 <sup>458 </sup>So the ms. now reads <i>verti</i>; but this word, according to Pithoeus, is in a later handwriting, and some letters have been erased.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7173_2250673"></a>
 <sup>459 </sup>So the edd., reading <i>tibi desit? opem desideras tibi</i>, except Hild. and Oehler, who retain the ms. reading, <i>t. d. o. desideranti</i>-"as though He failed you desiring <i>Him</i> to bring help."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7174_2250932"></a>
 <sup>460 </sup>So Ursinus, reading <i>in ania cognomines</i> for the ms. <i>in alia</i>, which Orelli would interpret, "call the reverse of the truth."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7175_2251365"></a>
 <sup>461 </sup>Lit., "For the parts of bringing...has enjoined and given over," <i>partes...injunctum habet et traditum</i>, where it will be important to notice that Arnobius, writing rapidly, had carried with him only the general idea, and forgotten the mode in which this was expressed.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7176_2251891"></a>
 <sup>462 </sup><i>Pontificium.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7177_2252179"></a>
 <sup>463 </sup>Here, too, according to Pithoeus, there are signs of erasure.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7178_2252383"></a>
 <sup>464 </sup>i.e., admit.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7179_2252659"></a>
 <sup>465 </sup>This passage at once suggests John x. 9 and xiv. 6, and it is therefore the more necessary to notice the way in which Arnobius speaks ("so to say"), which is certainly not the tone of one quoting a passage with which he is well acquainted. [Elucidation I.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7181_2253186"></a>
 <sup>466 </sup>Lit., "bent."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7182_2253593"></a>
 <sup>467 </sup>Cf. i. 13 and 58.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7183_2253961"></a>
 <sup>468 </sup>Lit., "crops being invented."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7184_2254666"></a>
 <sup>469 </sup>So the later edd., reading <i>constiterit</i> from the margin of Ursinus; but in the ms. and first four edd. the reading is <i>constituerit</i>-"has established," for which there is no subject.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7186_2255033"></a>
 <sup>470 </sup>So the later edd., reading <i>aversionem ex</i> (LB., and preceding edd. <i>a</i>) <i>religione</i> for the ms. <i>et religionem</i>-"against us the hatred and religion of past ages."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7187_2255660"></a>
 <sup>471 </sup>Lit,, "with the condemnation of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7188_2255778"></a>
 <sup>472 </sup>This shows that the division of the people into classes was obsolete in the time of Arnobius. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7189_2256015"></a>
 <sup>473 </sup>Turnebus has explained this as merely another way of saying the <i>comitia centuriata, curiata</i> and <i>tributa</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7190_2256261"></a>
 <sup>474 </sup>So the edd. reading <i>cum paratis bella</i> (Oehler reads <i>reparantes</i>) for the ms. <i>reparatis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7191_2256444"></a>
 <sup>475 </sup>i.e., <i>per clarigationem</i>, the solemn declaration of war, if restitution was not made within thirty-three days.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7192_2256740"></a>
 <sup>476 </sup>This seems the most natural way to deal with the clause <i>et ex acuminibus auspicatis</i>, looking on the last word as an adjective, not a verb, as most edd. seem to hold it. There is great diversity of opinion as to what this omen was.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7193_2257244"></a>
 <sup>477 </sup>The ms. reads <i>in penetralibus et coliginis</i>. LB., followed by Orelli, merely omits <i>et</i>, as above while the first five edd. read <i>in pen. Vestae ignis</i>- "do you maintain the hearths of Vesta's fire." Many other readings and many explanations of the passage are also proposed.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7195_2258484"></a>
 <sup>478 </sup>i.e. Servius Tullius. The first four edd. read <i>Tullo</i>, i.e., Tullus Hostilius.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7196_2258890"></a>
 <sup>479 </sup>Cf. v. c. 1.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7198_2259752"></a>
 <sup>480 </sup>The ms. reads <i>edi in filosophia</i>; the first four edd., <i>Philos.</i>; Elmenh. and Orelli, <i>Etenim phil</i>.-"For were phil.;" LB., <i>Ede an phil.</i>-"say whether phil.," which is, however faulty in construction, as the indicative follows. Rigaltius, followed by Oehler, emended as above, <i>Medicina phil.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7199_2260315"></a>
 <sup>481 </sup>Lit., "reached the coasts of."</p>
 
 </body>