<body>
 <p><a name="P7200_2260509"></a>
 <sup>482 </sup>Lit., "of the intestines"-<i>extorum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7201_2260665"></a>
 <sup>483 </sup>In both Roman edd., <i>Theutatem</i>, i.e., Theutas. Cf. Plato, <i>Phoedrus</i>, st. p. 274.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7203_2261354"></a>
 <sup>484 </sup>i.e., Pluto.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7204_2261742"></a>
 <sup>485 </sup>Pl.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7205_2261851"></a>
 <sup>486 </sup>Lit., "Castors," i.e., Castor and Pollux. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7206_2262518"></a>
 <sup>487 </sup>i.e., <i>sine ullius seminis jactu.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7207_2262656"></a>
 <sup>488 </sup>Lit., "forms of bodily circumscription."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7209_2263548"></a>
 <sup>489 </sup>Lit., "what we do is."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7210_2263734"></a>
 <sup>490 </sup>Lit., "thing."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7211_2264826"></a>
 <sup>491 </sup>Lit., "how many steps are there of race."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7212_2265204"></a>
 <sup>492 </sup>i.e., Jupiter and Picus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7213_2265336"></a>
 <sup>493 </sup>The ms. reads <i>genitor...Latinus cujus</i>, some letters having been erased. The reading followed above-<i>genitor is cujus</i>-was suggested to Canterus by his friend Gifanius, and is found in the margin of Ursinus and Orelli.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7214_2265747"></a>
 <sup>494 </sup>Cf. above, "four hundred years ago," etc., and i. ch. 13. It is of importance to note that Arnobius is inconsistent in these statements. [In the Edinburgh edition we have here "fifteen hundred years;" etc., but it was changed, in the <i>Errata</i>, to ten hundred and fifty.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7215_2266591"></a>
 <sup>495 </sup>Lit., "be nursed with the breasts and dropt milk."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7217_2266918"></a>
 <sup>496 </sup>Lit., "of what space."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7218_2267385"></a>
 <sup>497 </sup>i.e., <i>re</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7219_2267484"></a>
 <sup>498 </sup>So the ms. according to Crusius and Livineius, reading <i>ac</i>; all edd. except Oehler read <i>aut</i>-"head (i.e., source) or fountain." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7221_2268264"></a>
 <sup>499 </sup>The ms. reads unintelligibly <i>vertitur solae</i>; for which LB., followed by the later edd. reads, as above, <i>vertimur soli.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7222_2268537"></a>
 <sup>500 </sup>Dr. Schmitz (Smith's <i>Dict., 3. v.</i> Isis) speaks of these consuls as heading the revolt against the decree of the senate, that the statues of Isis and Serapis should be removed from the Capitol. The words of Tertullian (quoting Varro as his authority) are very distinct: "The consul Gabinius...gave more weight to the decision of the senate than the popular impulse, and forbade their altars (i.e., those of Serapis, Isis, Arpocrates, and Anubis) to be set up" (<i>ad Nationes</i>, i. 10, cf. <i>Apol.</i>, 6).</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7223_2269319"></a>
 <sup>501 </sup>Cf. vii. 49.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7224_2269532"></a>
 <sup>502 </sup>Lit., "contained."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7226_2270885"></a>
 <sup>503 </sup>Pl.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7227_2271353"></a>
 <sup>504 </sup>Lit., "antiquity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7228_2271740"></a>
 <sup>505 </sup>Lit., "things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7229_2271820"></a>
 <sup>506 </sup>So Gelenius emended the ms., reading <i>potens</i>-"being able," which he changed into <i>potest</i>, as above, followed by later edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7230_2272331"></a>
 <sup>507 </sup>Lit., "by such kinds of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7231_2272376"></a>
 <sup>508 </sup>The ms. and first edd. read <i>et potestatibus potestatum</i>-"and by powers of powers;" the other edd. merely omit <i>potestatibus</i>, as above, except Oehler, who, retaining it, changes <i>potesttum</i> into <i>protestata</i>-"being witnessed to by," etc.; but there is no instance adduced in which the participle of this verb is used passively.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7233_2272931"></a>
 <sup>509 </sup>These words having been omitted by Oberthür, are omitted by Orelli also, as in previous instances.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7234_2273145"></a>
 <sup>510 </sup>The ms. and first ed. read <i>etiam moderata continuatio</i>; corrected, <i>et immod. con.</i> by Gelenius.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7235_2273787"></a>
 <sup>511 </sup>So the edd., reading <i>infantes stentoreos</i>, except Oehler, who retains the ms. reading <i>centenarios</i>, which he explains as "having a hundred" heads or hands, as the case might be, e.g., Typhon, Briareus, etc. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7236_2274583"></a>
 <sup>512 </sup>Lit., "measure."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7237_2274626"></a>
 <sup>513 </sup>Lit., "things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7238_2274751"></a>
 <sup>514 </sup>Lit., "can be changed with no novelty."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7240_2275219"></a>
 <sup>515 </sup>Lit., "provide," <i>conficiatis</i>, which, however, some would understand "consume."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7241_2275787"></a>
 <sup>516 </sup>Lit., "slaveries, their free births being taken away."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7242_2276060"></a>
 <sup>517 </sup>Lit., "and."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7243_2276340"></a>
 <sup>518 </sup>So the ms. first five edd., Hild. and Oehler, reading <i>adscribere infortunio voluptatem</i>, which is omitted in the other edd. as a gloss which may have crept in from the margin.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7244_2276683"></a>
 <sup>519 </sup>Lit., "our dark."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7246_2277026"></a>
 <sup>520 </sup>The ms. and both Roman edd. read <i>in carcerem natum inegressum</i>; LB. and later edd. have received from the margin of Ursinus the reading translated above, <i>datum</i>, omitting the last word altogether, which Oehler, however, would retain as equivalent to "not to be passed from."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7248_2278231"></a>
 <sup>521 </sup>Lit., "than an august thing."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7249_2278589"></a>
 <sup>522 </sup>Orelli refers to Arrh., i. 12; but the doctrine there insisted on is the necessity of submission to what is unavoidable. Oehler, in addition, refers to Epict., xxxii. 3, where, however, it is merely attempted to show that when anything is withheld from us, it is just as goods are unless paid for, and that we have therefore no reason to complain. Neither passage can be referred to here, and it seems as though Arnobius has made a very loose reference which cannot be specially identified. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7256_2280107"></a>
 <sup>1 </sup>The ms., followed by Oehler, reads <i>neque enim res stare...non potest, Christiana religio aut</i>-"for neither can a thing not stand,...nor will the Christian religion," etc., while L.B. merely changes <i>aut</i> into <i>et</i>-"for neither can a thing, i. e., the Christian religion,...nor will it," etc. All other edd. read as above, omitting <i>et</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7257_2280686"></a>
 <sup>2 </sup>According to Crusius and others, the ms. reads <i>finem</i>; but, according to Hild., <i>fidem</i>, as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7259_2281358"></a>
 <sup>3 </sup><i>Deus primus</i>, according to Nourry, in relation to Christ; but manifestly from the scope of the chapter, God as the fountain and source of all things.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7260_2281729"></a>
 <sup>4 </sup>Lit., " propitiate with venerations."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7261_2281934"></a>
 <sup>5 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>ducitur</i>; for which Oberthür, followed by Orelli, reads <i>dicitur</i>-" is said."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7263_2282451"></a>
 <sup>6 </sup>Lit., "whatever belongs to them feels itself to be comprehended with a tacit rendering also of honour in," etc., <i>tacita et se sentit honorificentia</i>, read by later edd. for the ms. <i>ut se sentit</i>-"but as whatever," retained by Hild. and Oehler; while the first four edd. read <i>vi</i>-"feels itself with a silent force comprehended in the honour in," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7264_2283337"></a>
 <sup>7 </sup>So LB. and Orelli, reading <i>alia etiamnum capita</i> for the ms. <i>alienum capita</i>, read in the first five edd., <i>alia non capita</i>-"are others not chiefs;" Hild., followed by Oehler, proposes <i>alia deûm capita</i>-"other gods."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7267_2284716"></a>
 <sup>8 </sup>According to Orelli's punctuation, "whether there are these gods in heaven whom," etc. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7268_2285463"></a>
 <sup>9 </sup>So LB. and later edd., from a conj. of Meursius, reading <i>diebus lustricis</i> for the ms. <i>ludibriis</i>; read by some, and understood by others, as <i>ludicris</i>, i.e., festal days.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7269_2285882"></a>
 <sup>10 </sup>The ms. followed by Hild. and Oehler, reads neque...<i>in ulla cognatione</i>-"in no relationship," for which the other edd. give <i>cognitione</i>, as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7271_2286228"></a>
 <sup>11 </sup>So all edd., reading <i>populares</i>, except Hild. and Oehler, who receive the conj. of Rigaltius, <i>populatim</i>-"among all nations;" the ms. reading popularem.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7272_2286395"></a>
 <sup>12 </sup><i>Censeri</i>, i.e, "written in the list of gods."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7273_2286527"></a>
 <sup>13 </sup>Otherwise, "how many make up the list of this name."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7274_2286677"></a>
 <sup>14 </sup>So Orelli, receiving the emendation of Barth, <i>incogniti nomine</i>, for the ms. <i>in cognitione</i>, <i>-one</i> being an abbreviation for <i>nomine</i>. Examples of such deities are the Novensiles, Consentes, etc., cc. 38-41.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7275_2287504"></a>
 <sup>15 </sup>Lit., "who, except a few gods, do not engage in the services of the rest."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7276_2287723"></a>
 <sup>16 </sup>Orelli would explain <i>pro parte consimili</i> as equivalent to <i>pro uno vero Deo</i>-"for the one true God."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7278_2287975"></a>
 <sup>17 </sup>Lit., "take the oaths of allegiance" or military oaths, using a very common metaphor applied to Christians in the preceding book, c. 5.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7279_2288220"></a>
 <sup>18 </sup>Lit., "suppliant hands." It has been thought that the word <i>supplices</i> is a gloss, and that the idea originally was that of a band of soldiers holding out their hands as they swore to be true to their country and leaders; but there is no want of simplicity and congruity in the sentence as it stands, to warrant us in rejecting the word.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7280_2289758"></a>
 <sup>19 </sup>i.e., than the inventors of such fables had shown.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7281_2290084"></a>
 <sup>20 </sup>Lit., "from us infants;" i.e., as compared with such a man as Cicero.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7282_2290178"></a>
 <sup>21 </sup><i>Secundas actiones</i>. The reference is evidently to a second speaker, who makes good his predecessor's defects.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7284_2290526"></a>
 <sup>22 </sup>Lit., "are unwilling to admit into their ear the reading of opinions," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7285_2290737"></a>
 <sup>23 </sup>Both Christians and heathen, it is probable, were concerned in the mutilation of <i>de Nat. Deorum</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7286_2291104"></a>
 <sup>24 </sup>So Gelenius, reading <i>dicta</i> for the ms. <i>dictitare.</i> The last verb is <i>comprobate</i>, read <i>reprobate</i>-"condemn," by all edd. except Hild. and Oehler. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7288_2291813"></a>
 <sup>25 </sup>Lit., "with familiarity of speech."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7289_2292049"></a>
 <sup>26 </sup>A formula used when they sought to propitiate the author of some event which could not be traced to a particular deity; referring also to the cases in which there were different Opinions as to the sex of a deity.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7290_2292566"></a>
 <sup>27 </sup>Lit., "even of mean understanding."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7291_2292858"></a>
 <sup>28 </sup>Lit., "by the renewing of perpetual succession."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7293_2292975"></a>
 <sup>29 </sup>Lit., "that gods are born."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7294_2293191"></a>
 <sup>30 </sup>Lit, "recurring," "arising again."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7295_2293411"></a>
 <sup>31 </sup>Lit., "make trial of themselves by these laws of sex."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7296_2293578"></a>
 <sup>32 </sup>Lit., "all things," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7297_2293950"></a>
 <sup>33 </sup>Lit., "if the impurity of sexual union is wanting to the gods."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7298_2294334"></a>
 <sup>34 </sup>So the first five edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7299_2294495"></a>
 <sup>35 </sup>Lit., "the other arrangement of members."</p>
 
 </body>