<body>
 <p><a name="P7800_2463756"></a>
 <sup>80 </sup>Lit., "must rut"-<i>suriant</i>, as deer. The ms., first four edd., and Elm. read <i>surgant</i>-"rise," corrected as above in the margin of Ursinus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7801_2463957"></a>
 <sup>81 </sup>Lit., "acorns"-<i>glandibus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7802_2464263"></a>
 <sup>82 </sup>The ms. reads <i>des-</i>, emended as above <i>ded-ignatus</i> by Stewechius, followed by Heraldus and Orelli.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7803_2464606"></a>
 <sup>83 </sup>i.e., he-goats are made to yield milk.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7804_2464716"></a>
 <sup>84 </sup>Lit., "praiseworthy." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7805_2465229"></a>
 <sup>85 </sup>Lit., "with."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7806_2465340"></a>
 <sup>86 </sup>So the ms., both Roman edd., LB., Hild. and Oehler, reading <i>rursus</i>, for which the others receive the emendation of Gelenius, <i>regis</i>-"the king's carelessness."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7807_2465578"></a>
 <sup>87 </sup>Lit., "the law and fate."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7808_2465965"></a>
 <sup>88 </sup>i.e., Attis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7809_2466225"></a>
 <sup>89 </sup>The ms. reads <i>satietati-s objecisset offensi</i>, corrected as above by Hild., (omitting <i>s</i>), followed by Oehler. The conjectures of previous edd. are very harsh and forced.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7811_2467014"></a>
 <sup>90 </sup>Lit., "flows."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7812_2467070"></a>
 <sup>91 </sup>Lit., "herself with sacred, herself with divine."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7813_2467798"></a>
 <sup>92 </sup>[<font face="SPIonic">graw/deij mu/qouj</font> 1 Tim. iv. 7. Compare Ignatius, vol. i. p. 62, note 3. But even the old wives' tales among Hebrews were clean in contrast with the horrible amusements here imputed even to the girls at the loom, and <i>children</i>, among the Gentiles.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7814_2468137"></a>
 <sup>93 </sup>Lit., "spoke with."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7815_2468668"></a>
 <sup>94 </sup>i.e., the part cut off and buried separately.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7817_2468940"></a>
 <sup>95 </sup>So the ms., according to Crusius, the edd. inserting <i>s</i>, <i>di-s-cere</i>-"to learn."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7818_2469241"></a>
 <sup>96 </sup>Lit., "on firmness of faith."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7819_2470032"></a>
 <sup>97 </sup>Lit., "sent to public testifying." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7821_2470612"></a>
 <sup>98 </sup>The festival of Cybele began on the 22d of March, when a pine tree was introduced into the mysteries, and continued until the 27th, which was marked by a general purification (<i>lavatio</i>), as Salmasius observed from a calendar of Constantine the Great. [An equinoctial feast, which the Church deposed by the Paschal observances. March 22 is the <i>prima sedes Paschae</i>.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7822_2471239"></a>
 <sup>99 </sup>Lit., "for solace of so great a wound."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7823_2471415"></a>
 <sup>100 </sup>So Stewechius, followed by Orelli and Oehler, reading <i>quibus Ia</i> for the ms. <i>jam</i>, which would refer the action to Cybele, whereas Arnobius expressly says (c. 7) that it was the newly wedded wife who covered the breast of Attis with wools. <i>Jam</i> is, however, received from the ms. by the other edd., except Hild., who asserts that the ms. reads <i>Iam</i>, and Elmenh., who reads <i>Ion</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7824_2472138"></a>
 <sup>101 </sup>i.e., priests of Cybele, their names being derived from the Phrygian river Gallus, whose waters were supposed to bring on frenzy ending in self-mutilation.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7825_2472496"></a>
 <sup>102 </sup>Lit., "with wailing."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7827_2472985"></a>
 <sup>103 </sup>Lit., "with."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7829_2473902"></a>
 <sup>104 </sup>Lit., "and the duty of defence itself."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7830_2474135"></a>
 <sup>105 </sup>i.e., secret rites, to which only the initiated were admitted.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7831_2474222"></a>
 <sup>106 </sup>Lit., "which you deliver"-<i>traditis</i>; so Elmenh., LB., and later edd., for the unintelligible ms. <i>tradidisse</i>, retained in both Roman edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7832_2474479"></a>
 <sup>107 </sup>Lit., "deformity affixed to all."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7833_2474785"></a>
 <sup>108 </sup>ms. <i>fetam f.</i> Cf. i. 36, n. 2, p. 422, <i>supra</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7834_2475251"></a>
 <sup>109 </sup>So Heraldus, from Plutarch, <i>Rom.</i>, 21, where Butas is said to have written on this subject (<font face="SPIonic">ai0ti/ai</font>) in elegiacs, for the ms. Putas.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7835_2475457"></a>
 <sup>110 </sup>Lit., "in like manner and with dissimulation."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7836_2475664"></a>
 <sup>111 </sup>i.e., heart, lungs, and liver, probably of a sacrifice.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7837_2475778"></a>
 <sup>112 </sup>i.e., "divination, augury," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7838_2476150"></a>
 <sup>113 </sup><i>Vis Lucilii</i>, i.e., <i>semen.</i> [He retails Pliny xxxvi. 27.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7840_2476664"></a>
 <sup>114 </sup>Cf. iv. 24. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7842_2477908"></a>
 <sup>115 </sup>So the ms. and edd., reading <i>gens illa</i>, for which Memmius proposed <i>Ilia</i>-"and all the Trojan race."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7843_2478217"></a>
 <sup>116 </sup>Lit., "riding upon"-<i>inequitare.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7844_2478640"></a>
 <sup>117 </sup>Lit., "most open."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7845_2478948"></a>
 <sup>118 </sup><i>Subsessoris.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7846_2479252"></a>
 <sup>119 </sup>Lit., "growling"-<i>fremitum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7847_2479336"></a>
 <sup>120 </sup>The ms. reads <i>primo</i>, emended as above by the brother of Canterus, followed by later edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7849_2480165"></a>
 <sup>121 </sup>i.e., <i>testiculi.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7850_2480239"></a>
 <sup>122 </sup><i>Virilitate pignoris visa.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7851_2480386"></a>
 <sup>123 </sup>So Ursinus suggested, followed by Stewechius and later edd., <i>concepti foetus revocatur ad curam</i>; the ms. reads <i>concepit</i>-"is softened and conceived," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7852_2480694"></a>
 <sup>124 </sup>Jupiter may be here called <i>Verveceus</i>, either as an epithet of Jupiter Ammon-"like a wether," or (and this seems most probable from the context), "dealing with wethers"referring to the mode in which he had extricated himself from his former difficulty, or "stupid." The ms. reads <i>virviriceus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7853_2481139"></a>
 <sup>125 </sup>Lit., "encountered"-<i>aggressus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7854_2481239"></a>
 <sup>126 </sup>Lit., "sufficiently."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7855_2481627"></a>
 <sup>127 </sup>i.e., Ceres.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7856_2481785"></a>
 <sup>128 </sup>Lit., "will any one want."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7857_2481931"></a>
 <sup>129 </sup>i.e., handed down by antiquity. [Vol. ii. p. 176, this series.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7858_2482149"></a>
 <sup>130 </sup>These seem to have been celebrated in honour of Dionysius as well as Zeus, though, in so far as they are described by Arnobius, they refer to the intrigue of the latter only. Macrobius, however (<i>Saturn.</i>, i. 18), mentions that in Thrace, Liber and Sol were identified and worshipped as Sebadius: and this suggests that we have to take but one more step to explain the use of the title to Jupiter also. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7860_2483798"></a>
 <sup>131 </sup>Lit., "of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7861_2484094"></a>
 <sup>132 </sup>Lit., "that he might be a crop of"-<i>seges</i>, a correction in the margin of Ursinus for the ms. <i>sedes</i>-"a seat."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7862_2484342"></a>
 <sup>133 </sup>So all edd., reading <i>scenarum</i> (ms. <i>scr-</i>, but <i>r</i> marked as spurious), except LB, followed by Orelli, who gives <i>sentinarum</i>-"of the dregs." Oehler supplies <i>e</i>, which the sense seems to require. [Note our author's persistent scorn of Jove <i>Opt. Max.</i>]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7863_2484760"></a>
 <sup>134 </sup>Lit., "neigh with appetites of an enraged beast."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7865_2485168"></a>
 <sup>135 </sup>This clearly refers to the <i>Aeneid</i>, x. 18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7866_2485354"></a>
 <sup>136 </sup>Lit., "on the rear part."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7867_2485401"></a>
 <sup>137 </sup><i>Suffragines.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7868_2485466"></a>
 <sup>138 </sup>So the margin of Ursinus, Elmenh. L.B., Oberth., Orelli, and Oehler, reading <i>molli fimo</i> for the ms. <i>molissimo.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7869_2485897"></a>
 <sup>139 </sup>Lit., "censorial."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7870_2486037"></a>
 <sup>140 </sup>Lit., "rage with thunders."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7871_2486161"></a>
 <sup>141 </sup>So Gelenius, followed by Stewechius and Orelli, reading <i>smilia</i> for the corrupt and unintelligible ms. <i>nullas.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7872_2486435"></a>
 <sup>142 </sup><i>Infulae</i>, besides being worn by the priest, adorned the victim, and were borne by the suppliant. Perhaps a combination of the two last ideas is meant to be suggested here.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7873_2486679"></a>
 <sup>143 </sup>i.e., seemingly so.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7874_2486921"></a>
 <sup>144 </sup>Lit., "under this axis of the world."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7875_2487134"></a>
 <sup>145 </sup>So the ms., followed by Hild. and Oehler; the other edd. reading <i>gens</i> for <i>mens.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7876_2487429"></a>
 <sup>146 </sup>Lit., "felt himself to be."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7877_2487542"></a>
 <sup>147 </sup>Lit., "would the thing not be worthy that angry and roused."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7878_2487785"></a>
 <sup>148 </sup>i.e., reduce to chaos, in which one thing would not be distinguished from another, but all be mixed up confusedly.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7880_2488279"></a>
 <sup>149 </sup>Lit., "what are your proper things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7881_2488508"></a>
 <sup>150 </sup>Every one since Salmasius (<i>ad solinum</i>, p. 750) has supposed Arnobius to have here fallen into a gross error, by confounding the Eleusinian mysteries with the Thesmophoria; an error the less accountable, because they are carefully distinguished by Clemens Alexandrinus, whom Arnobius evidently had before him, as usual. There seems to be no sufficient reason, however, for charging Arnobius with such a blunder, although in the end of ch. 26 he refers to the story just related as showing the base character of the Eleusinia (<i>Eleusiniorum vestrorum notas</i>); as he here speaks of <i>mysteria</i> (i.e., Eleusinia, <i>cf. Nepos, Alc.</i>, 3, 16) <i>et illa divina quae Thesmophoria nominantur a Graecis</i>. It should be remembered also that there was much in common between these mysteries: the story of Ceres' wanderings was the subject of both; in both there was a season of fasting to recall her sadness; both had indecent allusions to the way in which that sadness was dispelled; and both celebrated with some freedom the recovery of cheerfulness by the goddess, the great distinguishing feature of the Thesmophoria being that only women could take part in its rites. Now, as it is to the points in which the two sets of mysteries were at one that allusion is made in the passage which follows, it was only natural that Arnobius should not be very careful to distinguish the one from the other, seeing that he was concerned not with their differences, but with their coincidence. It seems difficult, therefore, to maintain that Arnobius has here convicted himself of so utter ignorance and so gross carelessness as his critics have imagined [Vol. ii. p. 176.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7882_2490984"></a>
 <sup>151 </sup>Lit., "caverns."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7883_2491172"></a>
 <sup>152 </sup>Lit., "in the whole."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7884_2491263"></a>
 <sup>153 </sup>The ms. is utterly corrupt-<i>flammis onere pressas etneis</i>, corrected as above by Gelenius from c. 35., f. <i>comprehensas.</i>-Ael.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7886_2491581"></a>
 <sup>154 </sup>Lit., "also."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7887_2491697"></a>
 <sup>155 </sup>Lit,, "(they were) earth-born who inhabited."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7888_2491796"></a>
 <sup>156 </sup>The ms. wants this name; but it has evidently been omitted by accident, as it occurs in the next line.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7889_2492014"></a>
 <sup>157 </sup>Lit., "of woolly flock."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7890_2492154"></a>
 <sup>158 </sup><i>Cecropios et qui.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7891_2492232"></a>
 <sup>159 </sup>i.e. staff-bearers.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7892_2492564"></a>
 <sup>160 </sup><i>Cinnus</i>, the chief ingredients, according to Hesychius (quoted by Oehler), being wine, honey, water, and spelt or barley. [P. 503, <i>inf.</i>]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7893_2492808"></a>
 <sup>161 </sup>Lit., "offices of humanity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7894_2492940"></a>
 <sup>162 </sup>Lit., "common health." Arnobius is here utterly forgetful of Ceres' divinity, and subjects her to the invariable requirements of nature, from which the divine might be supposed to be exempt.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7895_2493633"></a>
 <sup>163 </sup>So the conjecture of I.ivineius, adopted by Oehler, <i>gene-t-ri-cum</i> for the ms. <i>genericum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7896_2493896"></a>
 <sup>164 </sup>So Stewechius, followed by Oehler, reading <i>redit ita</i> for the ms. <i>redita</i>; the other edd. merely drop <i>a</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7897_2494227"></a>
 <sup>165 </sup><i>Omnia illa pudoris loca.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7898_2494307"></a>
 <sup>166 </sup><i>Pubi.</i></p>
 
 </body>