<body>
 <p><a name="P8400_2652172"></a>
 <sup>94 </sup>Lit., "prevailing with favourableness of omens," <i>ominum</i>, for which the ms. and first four edd. read <i>h-</i>-"of men."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8401_2652643"></a>
 <sup>95 </sup>That Arnobius had good reason to appeal to this scepticism as a fact, is evident from the lines of Juvenal (ii. 149-152): "Not even children believe that there are any Manes and subterranean realms."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8403_2653444"></a>
 <sup>96 </sup>Lit., "and." Immediately after, the ms. is corrected in later writing <i>color-es</i> (for <i>-is</i>)-"and the darkest colours."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8404_2653799"></a>
 <sup>97 </sup><i>Similiter.</i> This is certainly a suspicious reading, but Arnobius indulges occasionally in similar vague expressions.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8405_2653965"></a>
 <sup>98 </sup>Lit., "is white."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8406_2654034"></a>
 <sup>99 </sup>Or, very probably, "the membranes with (i.e., enclosing) the brains," <i>omenta cum cerebris</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8408_2655396"></a>
 <sup>100 </sup>Goats were sacrificed to Bacchus, but not, so far as is known, to Mercury. Cf. c. 16, p. 524, n. 3. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8409_2657123"></a>
 <sup>101 </sup>Lit. "by the paction of some transaction is it," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8410_2657304"></a>
 <sup>102 </sup>So all except both Roman edd., which retain the ms. reading <i>desi-d-eret</i> (corrected <i>-n-</i> by Gelenius)-"wish."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8412_2657850"></a>
 <sup>103 </sup>So the ms., Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>d-atio</i>, approved of by Stewechius also. The others read <i>r-</i>-"reasoning on behalf."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8413_2658243"></a>
 <sup>104 </sup><i>Inci-ens</i> so corrected in the margin of Ursinus for ms. <i>ing-</i>-"huge." Cf. ch. 18, p. 524, n. 10.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8414_2658426"></a>
 <sup>105 </sup>The ms. reads <i>excitata conatus</i> (according to Hild.); corrected, as above, by the insertion of <i>ad</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8415_2658861"></a>
 <sup>106 </sup><i>Quam</i>, i.e., the earth.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8416_2658958"></a>
 <sup>107 </sup>Singularly enough, for <i>fecunditate</i> Oberthür reads <i>virginitate</i>-"inextinguishable virginity," which is by no means universally desired in the earth. Orelli, as usual, copies without remark the mistake of his predecessor.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8418_2660160"></a>
 <sup>108 </sup>Lit., "more prompt to lust of hurting."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8419_2660702"></a>
 <sup>109 </sup>Lit., "nature of hurting." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8421_2662308"></a>
 <sup>110 </sup>The ms. reads <i>ad ea quae facti sunt</i>, understood seemingly as above by the edd., by supplying <i>ad</i> before <i>quae</i>. Oehler, however, proposes <i>quia</i>-"because they were made <i>for them</i>." The reading must be regarded as doubtful.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8422_2662570"></a>
 <sup>111 </sup>i.e., if sacrifices avail to counteract the malevolent dispositions of the gods.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8423_2663059"></a>
 <sup>112 </sup>Lit., "these." This clause, omitted by Oberthür, is also omitted without remark by Orelli.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8425_2664172"></a>
 <sup>113 </sup>So the edd., reading <i>farciminum</i> for the ms. <i>facinorum</i>, corrected by Hild. <i>fartorum</i>-"of stuffings." Throughout this passage hardly one of the names of these sacrificial dainties is generally agreed upon; as many are met with nowhere else, the ms. has been adhered to strictly.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8426_2664487"></a>
 <sup>114 </sup>i.e., probably the <i>hirciae</i>: of the others, <i>silicernia</i> seem to have been put on the table at funerals.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8427_2664768"></a>
 <sup>115 </sup>i.e., <i>taeda.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8428_2664835"></a>
 <sup>116 </sup>So Salmasius and Meursius corrected the ms. <i>catillaminu-a-m</i> by omitting <i>a</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8429_2665362"></a>
 <sup>117 </sup>i.e., tail-piece.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8430_2666070"></a>
 <sup>118 </sup><i>Salsamina</i>, by which is perhaps meant the grits and salt cast on the victim; but if so, Arnobius is at variance with Servius (Virgil, <i>Ecl.</i>, viii. 81), who expressly states that these were of spelt mixed only with salt; while there is no trace elsewhere of a different usage.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8431_2666481"></a>
 <sup>119 </sup>The first four edd. retain the unintelligible ms. <i>dirae.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8432_2666612"></a>
 <sup>120 </sup>i.e., the entrails. The ms., first four edd., and Elm. read <i>illa.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8433_2666722"></a>
 <sup>121 </sup>So the ms., LB., Oberthür, Orelli, Hild., and Oehler; but <i>aerumnae</i> is found in no other passage with this meaning.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8434_2666884"></a>
 <sup>122 </sup>Lit., "first heads in gullets."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8435_2667030"></a>
 <sup>123 </sup>By this, and the word which follows, we know from the etymology that "offerings" to the gods must be meant, but we know nothing more. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8437_2668313"></a>
 <sup>124 </sup>i.e., cut off for sacrifice.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8438_2668573"></a>
 <sup>125 </sup><i>Caro strebula.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8439_2668647"></a>
 <sup>126 </sup><i>Plasea.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8440_2668710"></a>
 <sup>127 </sup>The ms. reads unintelligibly <i>nomen quae</i>, corrected by Gelenius <i>omentum</i>, as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8441_2669091"></a>
 <sup>128 </sup>Lit., "admonish the ease of the palate;" a correction of Salmasius, by omitting <i>a</i> from the ms. <i>palati-a admoneant.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8442_2669520"></a>
 <sup>129 </sup><i>Naeniae.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8444_2669715"></a>
 <sup>130 </sup>Lit., "these kinds of ceremonies, too, were coupled and mixed," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8445_2670470"></a>
 <sup>131 </sup>On this Oehler remarks, that the books of Moses show that it was certainly used in the East in the most ancient times. But Arnobius has expressly restricted his statement to the use of incense "in these parts."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8446_2671062"></a>
 <sup>132 </sup><i>Pium far.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8447_2671929"></a>
 <sup>133 </sup>[See p. 519, note 1, <i>supra</i>.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8450_2674685"></a>
 <sup>134 </sup>Lit., "the returns by which the vital alternation is restored and withdrawn."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8451_2675020"></a>
 <sup>135 </sup>So the ms., Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>suffec-tionibus alienis</i>, for which the rest read <i>suffi-</i>-"the fumigations of others."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8452_2675789"></a>
 <sup>136 </sup>Lit., "feel and receive one contact."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8453_2676376"></a>
 <sup>137 </sup>Lit., "as each has been made for the touching of a thing coming from without."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8454_2676481"></a>
 <sup>138 </sup>So Gelenius and later edd., reading <i>afficitur</i> for the unintelligible reading of ms. and Roman edd., <i>efficit</i>-"effects."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8455_2677506"></a>
 <sup>139 </sup>So all edd., without remark, reading <i>cog-it-atione</i>, although "meditation" has nothing to do with the sense of smell, and has not been previously mentioned. We should probably read <i>cog-n-atione</i>- "relation," i.e., to such objects.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8457_2677892"></a>
 <sup>140 </sup>So LB. and Oehler, reading <i>ni-si</i>. (ms. <i>si</i>), and other edd. inserting <i>non</i>, the negative being absolutely necessary to the sense, and supplied in the next clause.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8458_2678103"></a>
 <sup>141 </sup>Lit., "nor will it have its cause."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8459_2678808"></a>
 <sup>142 </sup>Although this is clearly the meaning, Stewechius explained <i>solidos</i> by referring to the ancient belief that such offerings should be wholly consumed, and no fragment left.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8460_2679279"></a>
 <sup>143 </sup><i>Briae</i>, drinking-cups, but of their peculiar shape or purpose we know nothing.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8461_2679493"></a>
 <sup>144 </sup>Lit., "badly." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8462_2679831"></a>
 <sup>145 </sup>Lit., "being strangled, may be."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8464_2680363"></a>
 <sup>146 </sup>So LB., Orelli, and Oehler, reading with Salmasius <i>m-u-scos</i> (ms. <i>-i-</i>). Gelenius proposed <i>cnissas</i>, which would refer to the steam of the sacrifices.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8465_2680963"></a>
 <sup>147 </sup>Lit., "interior."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8466_2681246"></a>
 <sup>148 </sup>So most edd., reading <i>nimirum quia plus valet</i>, for which the ms., followed by both Roman edd., Hild., and Oehler, read <i>primum. q. v.</i>, which Hild. would explain "because it prevails above all <i>rather</i> than;" but this is at least very doubtful.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8468_2682665"></a>
 <sup>149 </sup><i>Vino inferio.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8469_2683099"></a>
 <sup>150 </sup>Lit., "bound by religion."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8470_2683221"></a>
 <sup>151 </sup>This is admirably illustrated in an inscription quoted by Heraldus: "Jupiter most excellent, supreme, when this day I give and dedicate to thee this altar, I give and dedicate it with these conditions and limits which I say openly to-day."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8471_2684512"></a>
 <sup>152 </sup><i>Circumscriptione verborum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8473_2685189"></a>
 <sup>153 </sup><i>Symphoniae.</i> Evidently musical instruments; but while Isidore speaks of them as a kind of drum, other writers call them trumpets and pipes. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8474_2685842"></a>
 <sup>154 </sup>At daybreak on opening, and at night on closing the temple, the priests of Isis sang hymns in praise of the goddess (cf. Jos. Scaliger, <i>Castigationes ad Cat.</i>, etc., p. 132); and to these Arnobius refers sarcastically, as though they had been calls to awake, and lullabies to sing her asleep.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8475_2686334"></a>
 <sup>155 </sup>At daybreak on opening, and at night on closing the temple, the priests of Isis sang hymns in praise of the goddess (cf. Jos. Scaliger, <i>Castigationes ad Cat.</i>, etc., p. 132); and to these Arnobius refers sarcastically, as though they had been calls to awake, and lullabies to sing her asleep.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8476_2686905"></a>
 <sup>156 </sup>i.e., March 27th, marked <i>Lavatio</i> in a calendar prepared during the reign of Constantius.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8477_2687138"></a>
 <sup>157 </sup>Lit., "and some rubbing of cinders added," <i>aliqua frictione cineris</i>; an emendation of Ursinus for the possibly correct ms. <i>anti-qua f. c.</i>-"the ancient rubbing," i.e., that practiced in early times.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8478_2687531"></a>
 <sup>158 </sup>Lit., "anniversary."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8479_2687731"></a>
 <sup>159 </sup>So the later edd., adopting the emendation of <i>ad suas usiones</i> for the corrupt ms. <i>ad</i> (or <i>ab</i>) <i>suasionibus</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8480_2687871"></a>
 <sup>160 </sup>i.e., feast at which the image of Ceres was placed on a couch, probably the <i>Cerealia</i>, celebrated in April. This passage flatly contradicts Prof. Ramsay's assertion (<i>Ant.</i>, p. 345) that <i>lectisternium</i> is not applied to a banquet offered to a goddess; while it corroborates his statement that such feasts were ordinary events, not extraordinary solemnities, as Mr. Yates says (Smith's <i>Ant.</i>, s. v.). See p. 519, n. 2.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8481_2688457"></a>
 <sup>161 </sup>Lit., "the impression of the cushions is lifted up and raised," i.e., smoothed.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8482_2688574"></a>
 <sup>162 </sup>Thus the 25th of January is marked as the birthday of the Graces, the 1st of February as that of Hercules, the 1st of March as that of Mars, in the calendar already mentioned.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8484_2688928"></a>
 <sup>163 </sup>The former dedicated to Flora (cf. iii. 25), the latter to Cybele.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8485_2689215"></a>
 <sup>164 </sup>Singular.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8486_2689351"></a>
 <sup>165 </sup>So the margin of Ursinus, Elm., LB., Orelli, Hild., and Oehler; the ms. reading not being known.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8487_2690139"></a>
 <sup>166 </sup>Lit., "in dancing motions."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8488_2690315"></a>
 <sup>167 </sup>So Meursius, Orelli, and Oehler, reading <i>existimat-ve</i>, all the others retaining the ms. <i>-ur-</i>-"Is Flora thought to be treated," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8489_2690972"></a>
 <sup>168 </sup>Lit., "adapts."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8490_2691427"></a>
 <sup>169 </sup>Here also there is doubt as to what the reading of the ms. is. The 1st ed. reads <i>sine culpa</i>-"without blame." which is hardly in keeping with the context, emended <i>causa</i>, as above, by Gelenius.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8491_2691773"></a>
 <sup>170 </sup>So Orelli explains <i>certare hos spiritu</i> as referring to a contest in which each strove to speak or sing with one breath longer than the rest. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8493_2693373"></a>
 <sup>171 </sup>Lit., "an animal of no value."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8494_2693630"></a>
 <sup>172 </sup>Lit., "the modesty of their humility."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8495_2693962"></a>
 <sup>173 </sup>Lit., "they contain their nature in a corporeal form."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8496_2694486"></a>
 <sup>174 </sup>Lit., "of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8497_2694724"></a>
 <sup>175 </sup>Cf. p. 531, n. 8.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8499_2695134"></a>
 <sup>176 </sup>Lit., "by opposition of the parts of each." Considerable difficulty has been felt as to the abrupt way in which the book ends as it is arranged in the ms. Orelli has therefore adopted the suggestion of an anonymous critic, and transposed cc. 35, 36, 37 to the end. This does not, however, meet the difficulty; for the same objection still holds good, that there is a want of connection and harmony in these concluding chapters, and that, even when thus arranged, they do not form a fitting conclusion to the whole work.</p>
 
 </body>