<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ct13.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ct15.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">11. SPIDER-OLD-WOMAN.</h3>
 <p>Spider-Old-Woman had five children. One morning she was travelling outside. She walked somewhat far (off). (Her children) were given battle (by the people) from below. Spider-Old-Woman was not at home. They (began) to fight. Not long (afterwards) they were killed. One woman was pregnant. Every one of Spider's children was married. Spider-Old-Woman did not know (about the fight). If she had seen it, the children would not have been killed. After they were killed, fire was set to their house. Nothing was left. The house burned down entirely. She (the pregnant woman) ran into a corner. The boards began to fall down, one after another. She tore off one board and lay down on her stomach. On top of her she put the board. There she listened, while the house was burning. Nothing was left.</p>
 <p>The next day Spider-Old-Woman returned. She saw that their house had disappeared. She saw no one. She began to look around the débris. With a stick she was touching those who lay on the ground in a corner. She saw there a small board. It seemed as if the board that lay (there) shook. It must have been burned on both sides. She touched it with her stick. (To her) surprise, a person was laid bare. Then she turned it over. Indeed, it was that pregnant woman. (To her) surprise, the stomach (of the woman) shook, and the woman was dead. She must have lost her breath while she was under the board,</p>
 <p><a name="page_61"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 61</font></a></p>
 <p>She knew how to take out the child. Indeed, Spider-Old-Woman took it out. Indeed, it was a boy. She put the women on one side, and gathered the bones of the children. She put them on the bank of the river. Side by side she put them (with) the women. Thus she did it. Now she was looking after her grandson, and bathed him. She worked at everything,--at his joints, body, and thighs. She twisted everything slowly. "You shall grow fast." Thus Spider-Old-Woman was talking.</p>
 <p>The people who lived below did not know it. It was supposed that she lived alone. There lived her relatives with the people who lived below. Spider-Old-Woman was continually storing up a supply of food. Not long (afterwards) the grandson grew up. He could already walk. Thus he said to his grandmother: "How would it be (if you should) make me a small bow? And also some small arrows you shall make me." Thus the grandson was talking. Indeed, she made it, a small bow. She also worked at the arrows. Thus he spoke to his grandmother: "I always see many things, but I cannot kill them." Thus he informed his grandmother. Then, indeed, he went with it. Thus she said to her grandson: "You mustn't go far away. Play close by here." Thus she said to him. It was surprising (how) far off he would go. He never told this to his grandmother whenever he returned. He killed one rabbit. He was glad when he killed it. Of all kinds of birds, he killed one (specimen). Whenever he played, he would shoot arrows upwards. He would look, when they came back, whenever they would stick in the ground. Thus he played. There he would go to get them.</p>
 <p>Once he shot an arrow upwards. Somewhat farther away the arrow stuck in the ground. He heard as if some noise had been made. So he went there. He saw <a name="page_63"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 63</font></a> the arrow and looked at it. "What may have caused this noise? It never happened (before) whenever it stuck in the ground." Thus he was thinking. Now he pulled at the arrow. The arrow was fast. Now he pulled at it. Indeed, it was a board that he had hit. Suddenly a door came open. He looked at it as he stood there. He looked inside. So he went there. He entered. Thus he was thinking: "What may this be?" Thus he was thinking. He was looking around there (in) the inside. He saw a pipe sticking in a crack. Then he saw five (pipes) sticking in a crack. He also saw five quivers hanging (on a peg), fisher-skin quivers. A bow was in (each, and each was) full of arrows. There he looked at them, thinking thus: "Why didn't my absent grandmother tell me this? Why didn't she tell it to me?" Thus he was thinking.</p>
 <p>They had five beds. Now he went out. He again shut the door as he went out. Spider- Old-Woman asked him, "Why didn't you come home soon?" Thus he said to her: "I usually go far away." Then thus he said to his grandmother: "What happened to us two, that we two are alone?"--"We two are the remnants of a slaughter. My children were killed. I was left alone." Thus she informed her grandson. "You were left in the stomach." So the next day he spoke thus to his grandmother: "I saw something big. I could not kill it. Two (things) I saw standing side by side. I just looked at them." So she took out one Indian bow and some arrows; (it was) his father's bow. "This is your father's bow. The thing you found was their sweat-house." Indeed, she gave him the bow.</p>
 <p>The grandson went, indeed. He saw two (things) standing side by side. He examined the arrows. The arrows had flint points, and the bow (was covered) with skin. Thus he thought: "Suppose I bend the bow-shaft!" It was not bent yet. Now he was about to bend one-half. <a name="page_65"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 65</font></a> He stuck it into the ground halfway up to the knees. There he put it (against) the knee. He seized it not far from the end. He was holding the shaft at the edge. He bent it. So it was bent. There he held it. He examined the arrows. The (things) he saw were standing side by side. Thus he thought: "I will hit both with one arrow." Thus he was thinking. Now, indeed, he shot at (them). He surely hit both of them. So he arrived there. "Suppose I take them home!" It looked very heavy. He took hold of and packed -them together. So he went back with it (them). Spider-Old-Woman was very glad.</p>
 <p>The relatives of Spider-Old-Woman lived there. No one knew the grandson when he grew up. "You go and see Spider-Old-Woman." Indeed, they went to see Spider-Old-Woman. Indeed, one woman went there. Spider-Old-Woman was home. She had fern-roots (and thought), "She may get hungry." The woman saw the Old Spider. The woman saw the food. She was astonished when she saw the food. "How did you get your food?"--"My grandson has grown up. He killed some deer. Enough of everything my grandson killed." Now the woman went home. She gave her enough of everything when she went home. Thus she said to her: "You must not say anything." Thus Spider-Old-Woman was talking. "You shall inform thus (only) your husband." Indeed, she informed her husband when she came back. Thus the woman said: "(It is a) surprise (how) Spider's grandson has grown up."</p>
 <p>She gave a club to her grandson, and said to him, "I will stand here. You shall hit me over my head. You shall split me in two with it." Indeed, he hit her with it. Thus she said to him: "Hit me crossways." Indeed, he hit her crossways. (Then) Spider-Old-Woman drew back. Now thus she said to her grandson: "Now it is your turn." So the grandson gave the club to that old woman. Now <a name="page_67"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 67</font></a> she said to him, "Now you stand here!" Indeed, he stood up there. Thus Spider-Old-Woman said: "Now I will hit you over the head." Now the grandson took care as he was standing. He watched her hands. He was afraid. Thus Spider-Old-Woman said: "Nothing will happen to you. (The same thing) will (happen to) you as (did to) me." Indeed, she hit him over the head. The grandson just blew off to one side. He was just smiling, as he stood, while his grandmother was looking at him. "You ought to be all right. Now stand here again. Now I will hit you crossways." Indeed, she hit him crossways. He just drew back. Thus she said to him: "Now you (are) all right."</p>
 <p>The next day they two got ready. "It is said that Spider's grandson grew up." Thus were talking the people who lived below. Surely, whatever the people who lived farther away were saying, Spider- Old-Woman heard it. Now she gave to her grandson his father's gambling-sticks. "These are your father's gambling-sticks. He always had them whenever he gambled." They were very good sticks. All sorts of things she gave to her grandson. She gave him a bow and arrows,--a quiver full of arrows and bows.</p>
 <p>Now, indeed, they two went, (he and) the grandmother. "This quiver will surely be the equal of many men." Thus she said to her grandson. Spider's grandson came to gamble. Thus they began to talk among themselves. They wished to kill Spider's grandson. Thus Spider-Old-Woman was talking: "You shall not do anything to one house. It belongs to your relatives."</p>
 <p>Indeed, they began to gamble. She staid with her grandson. The people were assembled. Thus he said to his quiver: "When I am beaten, and get out of breath, then you shall help me." Now, indeed, they gambled <a name="page_69"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 69</font></a> with Spider's grandson. His opponents were many, while he was alone. One man spoke thus: "Why are you so very slow about it? Let us kill him quickly!" He heard [it as] the man [was] talking that way. Indeed, he was on the lookout. They jumped at him. They began to hit him. He flew away just like a feather. Spider's grandson was made to stand on one side. Again they began to hit him crossways. Spider's grandson flew away backwards. He seized his club and hit one man with it. His head came off [to one side] when he hit him. He killed all of them. One man ran away. The quiver overtook him and chewed him up. (With his) women it chewed him up. (With their) children the quiver killed them (all). It chewed them all up. When it had finished, (the boy) gathered them up.</p>
 <p>Now he went home again. He did not do anything to only one house. Now, from there he turned back to his home. Thus Spider-Old-Woman said to her grandson: "Here they lie, your father and your mother." Indeed, their (dual) grandson saw them. Thus the grandson said: "Give me a cup, have some water in it." He moistened the head, and spoke thus: "You wake up, you are merely sleeping!" Also to his father he said so: "You wake up, you are merely sleeping!" Thus he said it to all. Everybody's head he moistened somewhat with water. "You (plural) get up, you are merely sleeping!" Indeed, they sat (up); and, indeed, they went back to their house.</p>
 <p>The grandson was always hunting. Spider's grandson was in the habit of killing everything. He filled the house with food. Thus Spider-Old-Woman was talking: "How would it be if you should bring them (dual) home, your grandmother and your grandfather? These two shall work. Our work is too hard. These two shall dress hides. You shall build a small house. There they two, the grandmother <a name="page_71"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 71</font></a> and the grandfather shall live." Indeed, he built a small house. Indeed, he brought home his grandfather (and his grandmother).</p>
 <p>One woman arrived from below. Thus (some one) was talking: "We will give a pretty, little woman to Spider's grandson. Indeed, it would be good." Thus spoke Spider's grandson: "I like the woman." The next day one woman arrived again. The woman who arrived saw the great quantity of food. Thus (some one) said: "We will give the little woman to Spider's grandson." He was asked, "What is your opinion, would you like her?"--"Certainly, it would be good." Spider's grandson had (now) two wives. "How would it be if you should move up here? You are always hungry. (It will be) good if you (will) live close by." Now, indeed, they moved there.</p>
 <p>Now so far (the story) goes. Thus they tell the story.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ct15.htm">Next: 12. The Giant Woman. (First Version.)</a></center>
 </body>