<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ct21.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ct23.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_127"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 127</font></a></p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">19. THE PELICAN PEOPLE.</h3>
 <p>(A man) was always afraid whenever he went out. In the evenings he would go out with a burning stick. Such was the habit of the young man. He always (did it) that way whenever he went out. Once he went out (and) spoke that way: "It seems as if from here I get frightened very much." There he threw the burning stick, (and) ran inside (into the house).</p>
 <p>The next day he crossed in a canoe. He went over the ocean. He went down to the beach. He stood there looking around. He was thinking, "In which direction shall I go?" Thus he thought, (and) started north. He had not travelled long, when he saw something. (To his) surprise, it was a canoe. He arrived there. Indeed, it was a canoe. Now he looked at it. It was a very pretty canoe. He saw tracks. "Two women must have come ashore. (These) must be the tracks of two (persons)." Now he followed them. He had not been walking very long, when suddenly he saw two women come. Thus he said to them: "From where are you two?" Thus spoke the man. "We two have been after medicine. We two will take you home, O husband!" Thus spoke the elder one. The women were pretty; the man liked them. Indeed, they two turned back. Thus they two informed him. "Our (dual) father is sick." They came to the canoe. Thus they two said to him: "We two will take you home." Indeed, they shoved the canoe (into the water). Thus they two said to him: 'Here you must lie down in the middle of the canoe. You must keep your eyes closed as you lie down. When we two tell you, then you shall look." Thus they two said to him. Indeed, he lay there. They two laid him down in the middle of the canoe. <a name="page_129"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 129</font></a> With sea-otter (hides) they two covered their (dual) husband. Now, indeed, the two women went home.</p>
 <p>He had a suspicion that the canoe was kind of rustling. Thus the man heard it. Indeed, he kept his eyes shut. Indeed, the two women went (over the water). Indeed, (one) said thus: "Now, look! We returned." Thus she said to the husband. The husband got out. He looked around when he got out. They went to the house, (they and) the husband. When they two entered the house, thus they two informed their (dual) father: "We two brought home a person."--"Where do you two have him?"--"He is standing there outside."--"You two bring in my son-in-law." Thus spoke their (dual) father. Indeed, they two brought him inside. The husband saw the sick (man) as he lay (there).</p>
 <p>They two were curing their (dual) father. Indeed, they two brought home pitch. The young man recognized the torch. "That's the torch I threw." The young man was kind of amazed. A medicine-man worked on the sick man. He nearly put (the torch) out. Thus the medicine-man was working. The young man looked. Now another medicine-man worked. He put slime clear around. (The torch) nearly went out. Thus spoke the father: "People from that part of the world know something. My son-in-law shall work on me." Thus he spoke to his children. Indeed, (one) informed (her) husband. Thus spoke the husband. "Of course, I will try." Thus spoke the young man. "You shall put something here. They shall not see me when I work." Indeed, they did so. The young man had some water in a cup. Indeed, he worked on the father-in-law. Very slowly he put the torch out. With water he put it out. The young man washed it. His father-in-law got well.</p>
 <p>There was a rumor (that) whales had come ashore. Thus (he) informed the husband. "Couldn't my son-in-law <a name="page_131"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 131</font></a> cut off a chunk? Please, you go there! My son-in-law shall cut off a piece." Indeed, they arrived there. The young man saw many people, but he nowhere saw a whale. Only (some) old dog-salmon he saw, washed ashore. They were cutting them into pieces. So he stood there for a long time and looked (on). Then he seized a small stick. He shoved the stick into the gills (of one fish), and lifted it with it. The young man brought it into the house. "Our son-in-law is very strong, since he brought a whole whale into the house." Thus spoke the father. "This is merely a habit of the people from this region." Thus (the young man) spoke. He brought the whale inside. The young man roasted the head. He frightened them when he roasted it. "Thus it is eaten in our country. It is salmon, not whale; of course, salmon." Thus spoke the young man. "They eat whale, but they look upon it as salmon." Thus spoke the young man.</p>
 <p>"Suppose I go home! They may look for me." Thus he was thinking. The young man was looked for everywhere. No one knew where he went. One morning the women got ready. The young man had two children. Indeed, they arrived (there). That's the one (who was) lost. He arrived. A whale was their lunch. "We just came to see you." Thus spoke the young man. "We will again go back." Thus he spoke. "You will not see me again." Thus spoke the young man. He gave money to each of his brothers, and also to his mother. "On the beach you shall always watch out."</p>
 <p>Indeed, they went home. Indeed, (his folks) were always watching. One morning a whale was washed ashore. They divided it into small pieces. They were selling it. They became rich.</p>
 <p>Here it ends. Thus they tell the story of the Pelican people. Only so far (the story) goes.</p>
 <p></p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ct23.htm">Next: 20. The Battle in the Air</a></center>
 </body>