<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ct22.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ct24.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_133"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 133</font></a></p>
 <h1 align="CENTER">TALES COLLECTED BY HARRY HULL ST. CLAIR, 2d.</h1>
 <h3 align="CENTER">20. THE BATTLE IN THE AIR.</h3>
 <p>Two young men met. One (had a) fisher-dog, one (had) a fur-seal (as) his dog. He had filled (a seal-skin) with gravel, and just sewed it together. He (had) no dog. He just made it that way. Somewhat far away his gravel dog was lying when they two met. The fisher-dog wanted to fight with him. Thus he said to him: "Do you know anything?" Indeed, he jumped at him. The dog jumped. But he did not touch him. The man dodged.</p>
 <p>They two fought for a long time. Thus spoke the man (who had) the stone dog: "You help me (when) I (shall be) out of breath." Now, indeed, he shouted at his dog when he (was) out of breath. Now the dogs met. Now they two stood (up), and they fought. Neither of them fell. The two kept on standing, (even though) they went up slowly. Now they two went up above. Thus one (of the men) said: "My dog (shows) no blood. If your dog (will have) blood, it will drop down from above; (and) if you are wise, the strings will tear where they are sewed on my dog."</p>
 <p>The two dogs struck (against the sky) above. Now they two stopped on the moon. Indeed, (it was) that way. "The last generation shall see you two." The gravel dog chewed up his arms, his thighs. He was placed entirely in the moon. It seems to be a man, (the one who was there) put up.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ct24.htm">Next: 21. The Long Night</a></center>
 </body>