<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ct31.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ct33.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">29. THE WOMEN WHO MARRIED THE BEAVER.</h3>
 <p>Two girls lived in Takimiya, and their relatives told them (to go) to Tsketc. A chief's son was living there. <a name="page_175"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 175</font></a> He (had) lots of money and many sea-otter hides. The young man usually hunted sea-otters. And a Beaver worked (for him), and also a Muskrat worked (for him). They two would skin (the animals) (while) they two were working (for him). They two lived below him.</p>
 <p>So the young girls were going (one after the other). Thus some one told them: "He has no wife. You two go there to the chief's son. Him you two shall take for a husband." Now, they two arrived there. They two arrived at the house of the Beaver and Muskrat. They two found a somewhat good-looking man. Then they two began to think, "It must be here that we two were sent." Then they two married the Beaver, and lived there. In the evening the Beaver spoke thus: "I am going fishing." He was gone one night. When he came back, thus he said to his wives: "There are trout in my canoe. The big trout belongs to you, and the small trout belong to your younger sister." So early in the morning they two went down to the water. They two looked everywhere. They two did not see anything. Not even a canoe did they two see. A snag only was lying at his landing-place. Willow-leaves only were lying (on top) at the end of the snag. Long salmon-berry sticks only were on top, lying crossways in the middle of the log. So they two turned back and said, "We two saw nothing." Thus they two said. "Beaver cuttings only we two saw lying on the top of a log." So that old man yelled. He was angry at his wives. They two saw nothing inside. The Beaver had no food. They two saw only many sea-otter hides, the hides of the chief's son, (for) whom they two were working.</p>
 <p>So the next night he went fishing again a whole night. Now, indeed, the next day he brought home (some) trout. So they two went to get it, and they two cooked it. This <a name="page_177"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 177</font></a> was their (dual) food. And small (quantities of) camas was their (dual) lunch. And they two gave the camas to the old Beaver. He had no teeth, and could not eat the camas. So he did not want the camas. He would throw it into his mouth, and it would again drop out. The people living up the river were watching him. That old man seemed to be getting lively. His cheeks seemed (to be painted with) red paint. Now Beaver went there to the chief's son. He asked Beaver, "Why is your cheek (full of) red paint?" That old man seemed to laugh, and then said, "Perhaps something came from some place." He would not say why his cheeks were (full of) red paint.</p>
 <p>Now, one (day) early in the morning a man was bathing up the river, where (the girls) were living. (He was a) good-looking young man. His clothes had many beads on them. Thus they two were thinking: "This must be the place we two were sent to. We two must have made a mistake." So on that day he changed himself into a sea-otter, and began to swim around. The women saw him. The women were pretty. They pursued him with arrows. Beaver, Muskrat, and the women got into a canoe, and they pursued the sea-otter. Once (when) the sea-otter seemed to come (out) near, Beaver took his bow and shot one arrow. The shot reached only halfway Then Muskrat shot. He almost hit the sea-otter. So the two women became angry. Thus they two said to him, "Your shot fell short close by right here; but your little brother almost hit the sea-otter." So that old man became angry, (and said,) "Why don't you two go (with the) man whose shot (went) far?" So they did not kill the sea-otter. Then they went ashore and returned.</p>
 <p>And that young sea-otter went home instantly. So thus they two said: "We two must have made a mistake. <a name="page_179"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 179</font></a> That young man must have been doing it thus. He always does (it) that way." (It is said that they were heard to say thus.) Then they two began thus to think: "We two will go there." So they two found the house. They two saw a pretty young man inside. So thus they two said to him: "You are our (dual) husband." Then the young man thought thus: "Of course, it is good. I shall (have) both (for) my wives." Then at night they went to bed.</p>
 <p>And the next day he woke up sick. (He was) very sick. Something came out on his skin, and he just became (full of) maggots. The younger girl no longer wanted the young man; but the older one took care of him, and washed him. Then one (day) the older woman thus said to him: "I will take you home to my folks." So the young man was thinking thus: "Of course, I will go with you." Then they went on the beach. He became very sick. He was (covered) entirely with maggots. He could hardly walk. And the young girl carried (packed) him frequently. The younger girl no longer wanted the young man. Whenever they would sit down to rest, the younger girl would sit a little ways off. So they very nearly got back. The young man began thus to think: "It will look bad if I get there that way." So he said thus to his wife: "You two go (ahead), I will come somewhat later. I won't turn back. You shall wait for me there." And he went away. He washed himself, changed his clothes, and again looked just as they two had seen him first. Both of the women had baskets (as) packs. When he overtook the women, they two just turned over their baskets, and they are still there. The baskets turned into stone there. Again his beauty was such (as) when they two saw him first. And the younger girl again seemed to like him. But he did not want her: he wanted only the older girl. Then they got back.</p>
 <p><a name="page_181"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 181</font></a></p>
 <p>At the same time Beaver got angry. He came to know (that) the young man had carried off his wives. So he assembled many people. He was going to kill the chief's son, (because) he had taken away his wives. Now they almost arrived there. Thus he said to his suite: "You must stay here. I will go first. I want to see him." Thus he said to his suite: "If I get killed, you will scent swamp-roots."</p>
 <p>So the people that came with him were waiting. Now he went and came to the house. Now he struck the door four times with a big knife. So then he asked, "Where is Tsane<font face="Times Roman,Times New Roman" size="1">L</font>?" He opened the door and looked inside. So thus they told him: "Come in! Your wives are here below." When he entered, they beat him, and (then) killed him; and they took his knife and made a tail (out of it). Then they threw him into the lake. "You shall be nothing. You shall be a beaver. The last people shall usually see you." And the people that were waiting for him surely scented swamp-roots, and so they all went back. They were going home (severally).</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ct33.htm">Next: 30. The Woman Who Became a Bear</a></center>
 </body>