<body><p align="center"><font size="-2"><a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> <a href="../index.htm">Inuit</a><br><a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="tte2-132.htm">Previous</a> <a href="tte2-134.htm">Next</a></font></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 465------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_465"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 465</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p class="indent">133. A<small>N</small> O<small>LD</small> B<small>ACHELOR</small>, being a very successful hunter, was always worried by his place-fellows about taking to himself a wife. At last he consented; but when about to make a choice, none of the women at the place appeared good enough for him. Starting in his boat for the neighbouring hamlet, he declared he was going to fetch the only sister of some men living there. On his way thither he met with another kayaker, and addressed him, "Art not thou one of the many brothers?" "Yes, I am the middle one of them." "I come to demand thy only sister in marriage, and if I may have her I will give thee my boat and a new tent." "We will allow no one to get her, because she is the only woman in our house." Having got this information the old bachelor instantly made about, went home, and gave up all thoughts of marrying. Being once in his kayak, and suffering from thirst, he observed a small stream of water running down a rock. Remaining in his kayak, he merely turned his face upwards, so as to let the water run into his open mouth. When his thirst had been quenched, and he wanted to push off, his mouth clung to the rock, being at the same time gradually prolonged, because the tide was falling; and thus he had to remain hanging until the next tide should float him off again.</p>
 
 <p class="indent"><small>N<small>OTE</small>.—A number of stories are found ridiculing bachelors, and all more or less trifling, like this one. Generally their passions are represented as being excited at the sight of a fine woman; but on approaching her, and perhaps even getting hold of her, she proves to be a gull, or perhaps a stone. Others will marry none but a dwarf, or a woman without breasts. One of them out of a piece of ice makes a little island to live upon by himself.</small></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="tte2-134.htm">Next</a></p><p>
 
 </p><p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>