<body><p align="center"><font size="-2"><a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> <a href="../index.htm">Inuit</a><br><a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="tte2-089.htm">Previous</a> <a href="tte2-091.htm">Next</a></font></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p class="indent">90. T<small>HE</small> A<small>NGHIAK</small>.—A company of brothers had a single sister, and would not allow her to marry. Nevertheless, having many suitors, she finally came to be with child; and because of her brothers' reproaches, she secretly had a miscarriage; but the child got intellect, and became an anghiak. It picked up the skull of a dog, using it as a kayak, and the bone of a man's arm for a paddle. Every night it used to creep into the house and lie down to suckle its mother's breasts, but during the day-time it was about pursuing her brothers when they were kayaking, and made them capsize and perish one after another. Having accomplighed its revenge, it repented its deeds, and fled to the north, where it slipped down in the doorway of a house in which a conjuration was going on. The
 
 <!------------------------page 440------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_440"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 440</font></a>
 
 angakok (by means of his second-sight) at once observed its approach; and when the people of the house had got a light, and went to look for it, they were all <i>frightened to death</i>. It then became still more powerful, but went back again to its mother's abode, and found a refuge in a heap of rubbish. It now happened that the angakok of the place was about to perform a conjuration for the purpose of finding out what had caused the brothers' destruction. The sister, on being examined, first denied, but finally she confessed her sin, saying, "What I brought forth was no real child." No sooner had she pronounced these words than the anghiak felt a pain in its head, and while she continued her tale, it lost its senses and died.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="tte2-091.htm">Next</a></p><p>
 
 </p><p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>