<body><p align="center"><font size="-2"><a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> <a href="../index.htm">Inuit</a><br><a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="tte2-143.htm">Previous</a> <a href="tte2-145.htm">Next</a></font></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p class="indent">144. T<small>HE</small> N<small>ATIVES OF</small> L<small>ABRADOR</small> tell how our ancestors and the <i>tunneks</i> (or <i>tunnit</i>, in Greenlandish <b>tornit</b>, plural of <b>tuneĸ</b>) in days of yore lived together; but the tunneks fled from fear of our people, who used to drill holes in their foreheads while yet alive. With this view they removed from here to the north, crossing over to Killinek (Cape Chudleigh). While dwelling among us they had sealskins with the blubber attached for bedrobes. Their clothes were made in the same way. Their weapons were formed of slate and hornstone, and their drills of crystal. They were strong and formidable, especially one of them, called by the name of Jauranat, from which is formed <i>javianarpok</i> (Greenlandish, <b>navianarpoĸ</b>). Huge blocks of stone are still to be seen which they were able to move. Some ruins of their houses are also to be found here and there in our country,
 
 <!------------------------page 470------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_470"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 470</font></a>
 
 chiefly upon the islands, having been built of stones, and differing from the abodes of our people. One of our ancestors when kayaking had a tunnek for his companion, who had a bird-spear, the points of which were made of walrus-tooth,</p>
 
 <p class="indent"><small>N<small>OTE</small>.—This tradition is compiled from several manuscripts in German from the missionaries in Labrador, in which the alien nation, expelled by the present inhabitants, are called partly "Die Tunnit," and partly "Die Grönlaender." Very probably these denominations have arisen from a misunderstanding, induced by inquiries put to the natives as to their knowing anything about the Greenlanders. The tunnit are almost certainly identical with the tornit or inlanders of the Greenland tales. The Eskimo of Cumberland Inlet speak about the <i>tunudlermiut</i>, which signifies people living in the inland. The present Indians of Labrador are called by the Eskimo of the same country <i>aullak;</i> but it is possible they distinguish between these and the traditional or fabulous inlanders. However, the most striking incongruity is that of the tunnit having had their abodes on the islands, which looks as if ancient settlers of European race are hinted at. Be this as it may, the tradition of the Labradorans should be more closely examined.</small></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="tte2-145.htm">Next</a></p><p>
 
 </p><p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>