<body><p align="center"><font size="-2"><a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> <a href="../index.htm">Inuit</a><br><a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="tte2-039.htm">Previous</a> <a href="tte2-041.htm">Next</a></font></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">40.<br>
 THE KIVIGTOK.</h3>
 
 <p class="hanging"><small>[This story, taken from an old manuscript, is only a sample of the many narratives treating about this very popular subject, which will be found more or less intermixed in various other tales of this collection.]</small></p>
 
 <p><font size="7">T</font>HERE was once a man who had several sons; of these, the second son turned <i>kivigtok</i> (viz., fled the society of mankind). This happened in the winter-time; but next summer the father, as well as his other
 
 <!------------------------page 261------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_261"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 261</font></a>
 
 sons, went away from home in order to search for the fugitive. In this manner summer went by and winter came round, but still they had not found him. When summer was again approaching, they made all preparations for another search, this time to other places, along another firth. Late in autumn they at length chanced to find out his solitary abode, in an out-of-the-way place, after having traversed the country in every direction for ever so long. His habitation was a cave or hollow in a rock, the inside being covered with reindeer-skin, and the entrance of which had been carefully closed up. At the time of their arrival the kivigtok was still out hunting; but a little later they saw him advance towards the place from the inland, dragging a whole deer along with him. The brothers were lying in ambush for him; and when he came close to them they seized hold of him. He recognised them at once, and gave a loud cry like that of a reindeer, and said, "Do let me off; I shan't flee." The father now asked him to return with them, adding, "This is the second summer in which we have given up our hunt in order to find thee out, and, now we have succeeded, thou really must come home with us;" and he answered, "Yes, that I will." They remained in the cave during the night, enjoying each other's company. Next day they had much to do with the things that had to be taken back with them, the store-room, besides his dwelling-place, being filled with dry meat and skins. They tied up bundles to be taken down one by one to the tent of his relatives, which was pitched at some distance near the firth by which they were to travel home. When they were about to set off with the first loads, they wanted him to follow them; he excused himself, however, saying, "When ye go down the last time I shall follow; but I must stay and take care of these things." They went without him; but on their return the kivigtok had disappeared, and taken the remainder
 
 <!------------------------page 262------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_262"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 262</font></a>
 
 of the provisions with him, and the brothers grew exceedingly vexed with themselves, that they had thus relied on his word, without leaving any one in charge of him. But all too late. Some time afterwards, when they had gone out again to look for him, he terrified them by yelling and howling at them from the summit of a steep and altogether inaccessible rock. How he had got there they could not make out, but finding it impossible to follow him, they were obliged to give him up for lost.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="tte2-041.htm">Next</a></p><p>
 
 </p><p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>