<body><p align="center"><font size="-2"><a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> <a href="../index.htm">Inuit</a><br><a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="tte2-085.htm">Previous</a> <a href="tte2-087.htm">Next</a></font></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">86.<br>
 THE DREAM AND CONVERSION OF AKAMALIK.</h3>
 
 <p class="hanging"><small>[This tradition appears to rest upon an event mentioned by Crantz in his 'Historie von Gronland,' p. 561, as having taken place in the year 1743; but it is given here in a very much abridged form, from two manuscripts, a great portion of which was merely copied out from the New Testament, and some other religious books.]</small></p>
 
 <p><font size="7">I</font>N the days when missionaries had come to Nook (Goothaab with New-Herrnhut), but people in other places were still heathens, there lived in the south a clever and skilful seal-hunter, named Akamalik, who had a cousin of whom he was very fond. However, it chanced that this friend of his fell ill and died, which caused him much grief, and sorely depressed his spirits. As chance would have it, the women of the place at that time brought forth no sons, and his own wife being childless, he could get no namesake for his deceased friend. He henceforth fell into the habit of ill-treating his wife, kicking her and piercing her skin with an awl. After some time it was rumoured that a woman of a neighbouring place had borne a child and named it after his friend. On hearing this, Akamalik at once hastened thither, and was so glad at seeing the babe that he was quite unable to sleep for five succeeding nights. Having returned home, sleep at length was again restored to him, and then he dreamt as follows: Some one peeped
 
 <!------------------------page 435------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_435"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 435</font></a>
 
 in at the window, and calling out for him, said that he was to come and get his piece of blubber from a young whale which was just being caught. He at once went out and followed the voice, the owner of which he now perceived was a woman. In running after her he came across a vast plain, stretching forth like the surface of the ocean, and gradually rising. It became brighter and always brighter; he passed over heaps of sand, rolling dreadfully like a mountain-river, and saw a crowd of people playing at ball with a walrus-head. Akamalik would fain have stopped and joined the players, but the woman hurried him on, and, almost against his will, he constantly followed her. However, he wondered greatly; for in those people, on close view, he plainly recognised men who had died a number of years ago. He then came to three high steps, which it appeared impossible to ascend; but merely looking at his guide, he gave a leap and almost unwillingly mounted them. From the top he again saw before him a great plain, and a crowd or people in beautiful clothing; among them he recognised a man in the murder of whom he himself had taken an active part many years ago, and could not but be astonished at hearing people talk in answer to what he was thinking of but had not yet spoken out. Voices were then heard calling the crowd to divine service: the people all sallied forth, and he followed their steps, passing over a dreadful abyss with fires burning down in the depths; then they ascended still higher to a place so dazzlingly bright and beautiful as he never had seen before. Here the Saviour Himself was preaching and leading the song of innumerable people. The Saviour spoke to Akamalik, reproaching him with his sins, at the same time pointing out to him the abyss, where He told him that tornarsuk resided in the depths, and advised him, saying, "Next summer thou must repair thee to Nook for the purpose of getting instructed." The Saviour guided him on his way back across the abyss,
 
 <!------------------------page 436------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_436"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 436</font></a>
 
 <font size="1"><a name="p436"></a>{see <a href="p436.htm">picture</a> on page 436}</font>
 
 <!------------------------page 437------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_437"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 437</font></a>
 
 and thus going downwards, on approaching the earth again he (viz., his soul) beheld his own poor body, walking backwards and forwards all void of intellect, people believing him to be mad. It appeared very uncouth in his sight, all covered with maggots; but though he greatly abhorred it, he nevertheless entered into it, having no other abode. Having thus put on the garb of his body, he became like dead and lay in a swoon. By-and-by he recovered his reason, and was awake. He then repented his profligate life, went to Nook in the spring, and was baptised by the Moravian missionaries. He not only became a Christian by name, but also a good man and a loving husband.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="tte2-087.htm">Next</a></p><p>
 
 </p><p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>