<body>
 
 
 <center><small><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Christianity Index</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Divine Comedy Index</a> 
 <a href="pu12.htm">Previous: Purgatory Canto 12</a> 
 <a href="pu14.htm">Next: Purgatory Canto 14</a> 
 </small></center><hr><pre>
 
 
 Canto XIII
 
 
 Argument
 
 
      They gain the second cornice, where the sin of envy is purged; and having
 proceeded a little to the right, they hear voices uttered by invisible spirits
 recounting famous examples of charity, and next behold the shades, or souls,
 of the envious clad in sackcloth, and having their eyes sewed up with an iron
 thread. Amongst these Dante finds Sapia, a Siennese lady, from whom he learns
 the cause of her being there.
 
 
 We reach'd the summit of the scale, and stood
 Upon the second buttress of that mount
 Which healeth him who climbs. A cornice there
 Like to the former, girdles round the hill;
 Save that its arch, with sweep less ample, bends.
 
 
 Shadow, nor image there, is seen: all smooth
 The rampart and the path, reflecting naught
 But the rock's sullen hue. "If here we wait,
 For some to question," said the bard, "I fear
 Our choice may haply meet too long delay."
 
 
 Then fixedly upon the sun his eyes
 He fasten'd; made his right the central point
 From whence to move; and turn'd the left aside.
 "O pleasant light, my confidence and hope!
 Conduct us thou," he cried, "on this new way,
 Where now I venture; leading to the bourn
 We seek. The universal world to thee
 Owes warmth and lustre. If no other cause
 Forbid, thy beams should ever be our guide."
 
 
 Far, as in measured for a mile on earth,
 In brief space had we journey'd; such prompt will
 Impell'd; and toward us flying, now were heard
 Spirits invisible, who courteously
 Unto love's table bade the welcome guest.
 The voice, that first flew by, call'd forth aloud,
 "They have no wine," so on behind us past,
 Those sounds reiterating, nor yet lost
 In the faint distance, when another came
 Crying, "I am Orestes,"[1] and alike
 Wing'd its fleet way. "O father!" I exclaim'd,
 "What tongues are these?" and as I question'd, lo!
 A third exclaiming, "Love ye those have wrong'd you."
 
 
 [1: "Orestes." Alluding to his friendship with Pylades.]
 
 
 "This circuit," said my teacher, "knots the scourge
 For envy; and the cords are therefore drawn
 By charity's correcting hand. The curb
 Is of a harsher sound; as thou shalt hear
 (If I deem rightly) ere thou reach the pass,
 Where pardon sets them free. But fix thine eyes
 Intently through the air; and thou shalt see
 A multitude before thee seated, each
 Along the shelving grot." Then more than erst
 I oped mine eyes; before me view'd; and saw
 Shadows with garments dark as was the rock;
 And when we pass'd a little forth, I heard
 
 
 A crying, "Blessed Mary! pray for us,
 Michael and Peter! all ye saintly host!"
 
 
 I do not think there walks on earth this day
 Man so remorseless, that he had not yearn'd
 With pity at the sight that next I saw.
 Mine eyes a load of sorrow teem'd, when now
 I stood so near them, that their semblances
 Came clearly to my view. Of sackcloth vile
 Their covering seem'd; and, on his shoulder, one
 Did stay another, leaning; and all lean'd
 Against the cliff. E'en thus the blind and poor,
 Near the confessionals, to crave an alms,
 Stand, each his head upon his fellow's sunk;
 So most to stir compassion, not by sound
 Of words alone, but that which moves not less,
 The sight of misery. And as never beam
 Of noon - day visiteth the eyeless man,
 E'en so was heaven a niggard unto these
 Of his fair light: for, through the orbs of all,
 A thread of wire, impiercing, knits them up,
 As for the taming of a haggard hawk.
 It were a wrong, methought, to pass and look
 On others, yet myself the while unseen.
 To my sage counsel therefore did I turn.
 He knew the meaning of the mute appeal,
 Nor waited for my questioning, but said:
 "Speak; and be brief, be subtile in thy words."
 
 
 On that part of the cornice, whence no rim
 Engarlands its steep fall, did Virgil come;
 On the other side me were the spirits, their cheeks
 Bathing devout with penitential tears,
 That through the dread impalement forced a way.
 
 
 I turn'd me to them, and "O shades!" said I,
 "Assured that to your eyes unveil'd shall shine
 The lofty light, sole object of your wish,
 So may Heaven's grace clear whatsoe'er of foam
 Floats turbid on the conscience, that thenceforth
 The stream of mind roll limpid from its source;
 As ye declare (for so shall ye impart
 A boon I dearly prize) if any soul
 Of Latium dwell among ye: and perchance
 That soul may profit, if I learn so much."
 
 
 "My brother! we are, each one, citizens
 Of one true city.[2] Any, thou wouldst say,
 Who lived a stranger in Italia's land."
 
 
 [2: "_____ Citizens of one true city!" "For here we have no
 continuing city, but we seek one to come." - Heb. xiii. 14.]
 
 
 So heard I answering, as appear'd, a voice
 That onward came some space from whence I stood.
 
 
 A spirit I noted, in whose look was mark'd
 Expectance. Ask ye how? The chin was raised
 As in one reft of sight. "Spirit," said I,
 "Who for thy rise art tutoring, (if thou be
 That which didst answer to me), or by place,
 Or name, disclose thyself, thy I may know thee."
 
 
 "I was," it answer'd, "of Sienna: here
 I cleanse away with these the evil life,
 Soliciting with tears that He, who is,
 Vouchsafe Him to us. Though Sapia[3] named,
 In sapience I excell'd not; gladder far
 Of other's hurt, than of the good befell me.
 That thou mayst own I now deceive thee not,
 Hear, if my folly were not as I speak it.
 When now my tears sloped waning down the arch,
 It so bechanced, my fellow - citizens
 Near Colle met their enemies in the field;
 And I pray'd God to grant what He had will'd.[4]
 There were they vanquish'd, and betook themselves
 Unto the bitter passages of flight.
 I mark'd the hunt; and waxing out of bounds
 In gladness, lifted up my shameless brow,
 And, like the merlin[5] cheated by a gleam,
 Cried: 'Itcis over. Heaven! I fear thee not.'
 Upon my verge of life I wish'd for peace
 With God; nor yet repentance had supplied
 What I did lack of duty, were it not
 
 
 [3: "Sapia." A lady of Sienna, living in exile at Colle, so overjoyed
 at a defeat which her countrymen sustained near that place, that she declared
 nothing more was wanting to make her die contended.]
 
 
 [4: "_____ What He had will'd." That her countrymen should be
 defeated in battle.]
 
 
 [5: Induced by a gleam of fine weather in the winter to escape from
 his master, the merlin was soon oppressed by the rigor of the season.]
 
 
 The hermit Piero,[6] touch'd with charity,
 In his devout orisons though on me.
 But who art thou that question'st of our state,
 Who go'st, as I believe, with lids unclosed,
 And breathest in thy talk?" - "Mine eyes," said I,
 "May yet be here ta'en from me; but not long;
 For they have not offended grievously
 With envious glances. But the woe beneath[7]
 Urges my soul with more exceeding dread.
 That nether load already weighs me down."
 
 
 [6: "The hermit Piero." Piero Pettinagno, a holy hermit of Florence.]
 
 
 [7: Dante felt that he was much more subject to the sin of pride,
 than to that of envy.]
 
 
 She thus: "Who then, amongst us here aloft,
 Hath brought thee, if thou weenest to return?"
 
 
 "He," answered I, "who standeth mute beside me.
 I live: of me ask therefore, chosen spirit!
 If thou desire I yonder yet should move
 For thee my mortal feet." - "Oh!" she replied,
 "This is so strange a thing, it is great sign
 That God doth love thee. Therefore with thy prayer
 Sometime assist me: and, by that I crave,
 Which most thou covetest, that if thy feet
 E'er tread on Tuscan soil, thou save my fame
 Amongst my kindred. Them shalt thou behold
 With that vain multitude,[8] who set their hope
 On Telamone's haven; there to fail
 Confounded, more than when the fancied stream
 They sought, of Dian call'd: but they, who lead
 Their navies, more than ruin'd hopes shall mourn."
 
 
 [8: The Sienese.]
 
 
 </pre>
 </body>