<body>
 
 
 <center><small><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Christianity Index</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Divine Comedy Index</a> 
 <a href="pu13.htm">Previous: Purgatory Canto 13</a> 
 <a href="pu15.htm">Next: Purgatory Canto 15</a> 
 </small></center><hr><pre>
 
 
 Canto XIV
 
 
 Argument
 
 
      Our Poet on this second cornice finds also the souls of Guido del Duca of
 Brettinoro, and Rinieri da Calboli of Romagna; the latter of whom, hearing
 that he comes from the banks of the Arno, inveighs against the degeneracy of
 all those who dwell in the cities visited by that stream; and the former, in
 like manner, against the inhabitants of Romagna. On leaving these, our Poets
 hear voices recording noted instances of envy.
 
 
 "Say,[1] who is he around our mountain winds,
 Or ever death has pruned his wing to flight;
 That opens his eyes, and covers them at will?"
 "I know not who he is, but know thus much;
 He comes not singly. Do thou ask of him,
 For thou art nearer to him; and take heed,
 Accost him gently, so that he may speak."
 
 
 [1: "Say." The two spirits who thus speak to each other are Guido del
 Duca, of Brettinoro, and Rinieri da Calboli, of Romagna.]
 
 
 Thus on the right two spirits, bending each
 Toward the other, talk'd of me; then both
 Addressing me, their faces backward lean'd,
 And thus the one[2] began: "O soul, who yet
 Pent in the body, tendest towards the sky!
 For charity, we pray thee, comfort us;
 Recounting whence thou comest, and who thou art:
 For thou dost make us, at the favor shown thee,
 Marvel, as at a thing that ne'er hath been."
 
 
 [2: "The one." Guido del Duca.]
 
 
 "There stretches through the midst of Tuscany,"
 I straight began, "a brooklet,[3] whose well - head
 Springs up in Falterona; with his race
 Not satisfied, when he some hundred miles
 Hath measured. From his banks bring I this frame.
 To tell you who I am were words mis - spent:
 For yet my name scarce sounds on rumour's lip."
 
 
 [3: The Arno, that rises in Falterona, a mountain in the Apennines.
 Its course is 120 miles.]
 
 
 "If well I do incorporate with my thought
 The meaning of thy speech," said he, who first
 Address'd me, "thou dost speak of Arno's wave."
 
 
 To whom the other:[4] "Why hath he conceal'd
 The title of that river, as a man
 Doth of some horrible thing?" The spirit, who
 
 
 [4: Rinieri da Calboli.]
 
 
 Thereof was question'd, did acquit him thus:
 "I know not: but 'tis fitting well the name
 Should perish of that vale; for from the source,[5]
 Where teems so plenteously the Alpine steep
 Maim'd of Pelorus, (that doth scarcely pass
 Beyond that limit), even to the point
 Where unto ocean is restored what heaven
 Drains from the exhaustless store for all earth's streams,
 Throughout the space is virtue worried down,
 As't were a snake, by all, for mortal foe;
 Or through disastrous influence on the place,
 Or else distortion of misguided wills
 That custom goads to evil: whence in those,
 The dwellers in that miserable vale,
 Nature is so transform'd, it seems as they
 Had shared of Circe's feeding. 'Midst brute swine,[6]
 Worthier of acorns than of other food
 Created for man's use, he shapeth first
 His obscure way; then, sloping onward, finds
 Curs,[7] snarlers more in spite than power, from whom
 He turns with scorn aside: still journeying down,
 By how much more the curst and luckless foss[8]
 Swells out to largeness, e'en so much it finds
 Dogs turning into wolves.[9] Descending still
 Through yet more hollow eddies, next he meets
 A race of foxes,[10] so replete with craft,
 They do not fear that skill can master it.
 Nor will I cease because my words are heard[11]
 By other ears than thine. It shall be well
 For this man,[12] if he keep in memory
 What from no erring spirit I reveal.
 Lo! I behold thy grandson,[13] that becomes
 
 
 [5: From the rise of the Arno in the Apennines, whence Pelorus in
 Sicily was torn by a convulsion of the earth, even to the point where the same
 river unites with the ocean, Virtue is persecuted by all.]
 
 
 [6: The people of Casentino.]
 
 
 [7: "Curs." The Arno leaves Arezzo about four miles to the left.]
 
 
 [8: "Foss." So in his anger he terms the Arno.]
 
 
 [9: "Wolves." The Florentines.]
 
 
 [10: "Foxes." The Pisans.]
 
 
 [11: Guido still addresses Rinieri.]
 
 
 [12: For Dante, who has told us that he comes from the banks of
 Arno.]
 
 
 [13: "Thy grandson." Fulcieri da Calboli, grandson of Rinieri da
 Calboli, who is here spoken to. The atrocities predicted came to pass in
 1302.]
 
 
 A hunter of those wolves, upon the shore
 Of the fierce stream; and cows them all with dread.
 Their flesh, yet living, sets he up to sale,
 Then, like an aged beast, to slaughter dooms.
 Many of life he reaves, himself of worth
 And goodly estimation. Smear'd with gore,
 Mark how he issues from the rueful wood;
 Leaving such havoc, that in thousand years
 It spreads not to prime lustihood again."
 
 
 As one, who tidings hears of woe to come,
 Changes his looks perturb'd, from whate'er part
 The peril grasp him; so beheld I change
 That spirit, who had turn'd to listen; struck
 With sadness, soon as he had caught the word.
 
 
 His visage, and the other's speech, did raise
 Desire in me to know the names of both;
 Whereof, with meek entreaty, I inquired.
 
 
 The shade, who late address'd me, thus resumed:
 "Thy wish imports, that I vouchsafe to do
 For thy sake what thou wilt not do for mine.
 But, since God's will is that so largely shine
 His grace in thee, I will be liberal too.
 Guido of Duca know then that I am.
 Envy so parch'd my blood, that had I seen
 A fellow man made joyous, thou had'st mark'd
 A livid paleness overspread my cheek.
 Such harvest reap I of the seed I sow'd.
 O man! why place thy heart where there doth need
 Exclusion of participants in good?
 This is Rinieri's spirit; this, the boast
 And honour of the house of Calboli;
 Where of his worth no heritage remains.
 Nor his the only blood, that hath been stript
 ('Twixt Po, the mount, the Reno, and the shore[14])
 Of all that truth or fancy asks for bliss:
 But, in those limits, such a growth has sprung
 Of rank and venom'd roots, as long would mock
 Slow culture's toil. Where is good Lizio?[15] where
 
 
 [14: The boundaries of Romagna.]
 
 
 [15: "Lizio." Lizio da Valbona introduced into Boccaccio's Decameron,
 G. v. N. 4.]
 
 
 Mainardi, Traversaro, and Carpigna?[16]
 O bastard slips of old Romagna's line!
 When in Bologna the low artisan,[17]
 And in Faenza yon Bernardin[18] sprouts,
 A gentle cyon from ignoble stem.
 Wonder not, Tuscan, if thou see me weep,
 When I recall to mind those once loved names,
 Guido of Prata,[19] and of Azzo him[20]
 That dwelt with us; Tignoso[21] and his troop,
 With Traversaro's house and Anastagio's,[22]
 (Each race disherited); and beside these,
 The ladies and the knights, the toils and ease,
 That witch'd us into love and courtesy;
 Where now such malice reigns in recreant hearts
 O Brettinoro![23] wherefore tarriest still,
 Since forth of thee thy family hath gone,
 And many, hating evil, join'd their steps?
 Well doeth he, that bids his lineage cease,
 Bagnacavallo;[24] Castrocaro ill,
 And Conio worse,[25] who care to propagate
 A race of Counties[26] from such blood as theirs.
 Well shall ye also do, Pagani,[27] then
 When from amongst you hies your demon child;
 Not so, howe'er, that thenceforth there remain
 
 
 [16: Arrigo Manardi, of Faenza, or, as some say, of Brettinoro; Pier
 Traversaro, Lord of Ravenna; and Guido di Carpigna, of Montefeltro.]
 
 
 [17: One who had been a mechanic, named Lambertaccio, arrived at
 almost supreme power in Bologna.]
 
 
 [18: Benardin di Fosco, a man of low origin, but great talents, who
 governed at Faenza.]
 
 
 [19: "Prata." A place between Faenza and Ravenna.]
 
 
 [20: "Of Azzo him." Ugolino, of the Ubaldini family in Tuscany.]
 
 
 [21: Federigo Tignoso of Rimini.]
 
 
 [22: Two noble families of Ravenna.]
 
 
 [23: "O Brettinoro." A beautifully situated castle in Romagna, the
 hospitable residence of Guido del Duca, who is here speaking. Landino relates
 that there were several of this family who, when a stranger arrived among them
 contended with one another by whom he should be entertained; and that in order
 to end this dispute, they set up a pillar with as many rings as there were
 father of families among them, a ring being assigned to each, and that
 accordingly as a stranger on his arrival hung his horse's bridle on one or
 other of these, he became his guest to whom the ring belonged.]
 
 
 [24: "Bagnacavallo." A castle between Imola and Ravenna.]
 
 
 [25: "- Castrocaro ill, and Conio worse." Both in Romagna.]
 
 
 [26: "Counties." I have used this word here for "counts," as it is in
 Shakespeare.]
 
 
 [27: "Pagani." The Pagani were lords of Faenza and Imola. One of
 them, Machinardo, was named "the Demon," from his treachery. See Hell, Canto
 xxvii. 47 and note.]
 
 
 True proof of what ye were. O Hugolin,[28]
 Thou sprung of Fantolini's line! thy name
 Is safe; since none is look'd for after thee
 To cloud its lustre, warping from thy stock.
 But, Tuscan! go thy ways; for now I take
 Far more delight in weeping, than in words.
 Such pity for your sakes hath wrung my heart."
 
 
 [28: "Hugolin." Ugolino Ubaldini, a noble and virtuous person in
 Faenza, who, on account of his age probably, was not likely to leave any
 offspring behind him.]
 
 
 We knew those gentle spirits, at parting, heard
 Our steps. Their silence therefore, of our way,
 Assured us. Soon as we had quitted them,
 Advancing onward, lo! a voice, that seem'd
 Like volley'd lightning, when it rives the air,
 Met us, and shouted, "Whosoever finds
 Will slay me"; then fled from us, as the bolt
 Lanced sudden from a downward - rushing cloud.
 When it had given short truce unto our hearing,
 Behold the other with a crash as loud
 As the quick - following thunder: "Mark in me
 Aglauros, turn'd to rock." I, at the sound
 Retreating, drew more closely to my guide.
 
 
 Now in mute stillness rested all the air;
 And thus he spake: "There was the galling bit,
 Which should keep man within his boundary.
 But your old enemy so baits the hook,
 He drags you eager to him. Hence nor curb
 Avails you, nor reclaiming call. Heaven calls,
 And, round about you wheeling, courts your gaze
 With everlasting beauties. Yet your eye
 Turns with fond doting still upon the earth.
 Therefore He smites you who discerneth all."
 
 
 </pre>
 </body>