<body>
 
 
 <center><small><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Christianity Index</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Divine Comedy Index</a> 
 <a href="pu29.htm">Previous: Purgatory Canto 29</a> 
 <a href="pu31.htm">Next: Purgatory Canto 31</a> 
 </small></center><hr><pre>
 
 
 Canto XXX
 
 
 Argument
 
 
      Beatrice descends from Heaven, and rebukes the Poet.
 
 
 Soon as that polar light,[1] fair ornament
 Of the first Heaven, which hath never known
 Setting nor rising, nor the shadowy veil
 Of other cloud than sin, to duty there
 Each one convoying, as that lower doth
 The steersman to his port, stood firmly fix'd;
 Forthwith the saintly tribe, who in the van
 Between the Gryphon and its radiance came,
 Did turn them to the car, as to their rest:
 And one, as if commission'd from above,
 In holy chant thrice shouted forth aloud;
 "Come,[2] spouse! from Libanus:" and all the rest
 Took up the song. - At the last audit, so
 The blest shall rise, from forth his cavern each
 Uplifting lightly his new - vested flesh;
 As, on the sacred litter, at the voice
 Authoritative of that elder, sprang
 A hundred ministers and messengers
 Of life eternal. "Blessed[3] thou, who comest!"
 And, "Oh!" they cried, "from full hands scatter ye
 Unwithering lilies": and, so saying, cast
 Flowers overhead and round them on all sides.
 
 
 [1: The seven candlesticks of gold, which he calls the polar light of
 Heaven itself, because they perform the same office for Christians that the
 polar star does for mariners, in guiding them to their port.]
 
 
 [2: "Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me, from Lebanon." -
 Song of Solomon, iv. 8.]
 
 
 [3: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." - Matt. xxi.
 9.]
 
 
 I have beheld, ere now, at break of day,
 The eastern clime all roseate; and the sky
 Opposed, one deep and beautiful serene;
 And the sun's face so shaded, and with mists
 Attemper'd, at his rising, that the eye
 Long while endured the sight: thus, in a cloud
 Of flowers, that from those hands angelic rose,
 And down within and outside of the car
 Fell showering, in white veil with olive wreathed,
 A virgin in my view appear'd, beneath
 
 
 Green mantle, robed in hue of living flame:
 And o'er my spirit, that so long a time
 Had from her presence felt no shuddering dread,
 Albeit mine eyes discern'd her not, there moved
 A hidden virtue from her, at whose touch
 The power of ancient love was strong within me.
 
 
 No sooner on my vision streaming, smote
 The heavenly influence, which, years past, and e'en
 In childhood, thrill'd me, than towards Virgil I
 Turn'd me to leftward; panting, like a babe,
 That flees for refuge to his mother's breast,
 If aught have terrified or work'd him woe:
 And would have cried, "There is no dram of blood,
 That doth not quiver in me. The old flame
 Throws out clear tokens of reviving fire."
 But Virgil had bereaved us of himself;
 Virgil, my best - loved father, Virgil, he
 To whom I gave me up for safety: nor
 All, our prime mother lost, avail'd to save
 My undew'd cheeks from blur of soiling tears.
 
 
 "Dante! weep not that Virgil leaves thee; nay,
 Weep thou not yet: behoves thee feel the edge
 Of other sword; and thou shalt weep for that."
 
 
 As to the prow or stern, some admiral
 Paces the deck, inspiriting his crew,
 When 'mid the sail - yards all hands ply aloof;
 Thus, on the left side of the car, I saw
 (Turning me at the sound of mine own name,
 Which here I am compell'd to register)
 The virgin station'd, who before appear'd
 Veil'd in that festive shower angelical.
 
 
 Towards me, across the stream, she bent her eyes;
 Though from her brow the veil descending, bound
 With foliage of Minerva, suffer'd not
 That I beheld her clearly: then with act
 Full royal, still insulting o'er her thrall,
 Added, as one who, speaking, keepeth back
 The bitterest saying, to conclude the speech:
 "Observe me well. I am, in sooth, I am
 Beatrice. What! and hast thou deign'd at last
 Approach the mountain? Knewest not, O man!
 Thy happiness is here?" Down fell mine eyes
 On the clear fount; but there, myself espying,
 Recoil'd, and sought the greensward; such a weight
 Of shame was on my forehead. With a mien
 Of that stern majesty, which doth surround
 A mother's presence to her awe - struck child,
 She look'd; a flavor of such bitterness
 Was mingled in her pity. There her words
 Brake off; and suddenly the angels sang,
 "In thee, O gracious Lord! my hope hath been":
 But[4] went no further than, "Thou, Lord! hast set
 My feet in ample room" As snow, that lies,
 Amidst the living rafters on the back
 Of Italy, congeal'd, when drifted high
 And closely piled by rough Sclavonian blasts;
 Breathe but the land whereon no shadow falls,
 And straightway melting it distills away,
 Like a fire - wasted taper: thus was I,
 Without a sigh or tear, or everithese
 Did sing, that, with the chiming of Heaven's sphere,
 Still in their warbling chime: but when the strain
 Of dulcet symphony express'd for me
 Their soft compassion, more than could the words,
 "Virgin! why so consumest him?" then, the ice
 Congeal'd about my bosom, turn'd itself
 To spirit and water; and with anguish forth
 Gush'd, through the lips and eyelids, from the heart.
 
 
 [4: "But." They sang the thirty - first Psalm, to the end of the
 eighth verse. What follows would not have suited the place or the occasion.]
 
 
 Upon the chariot's same edge still she stood,
 Immovable; and thus address'd her words
 To those bright semblances with pity touch'd:
 "Ye in the eternal day your vigils keep;
 So that nor night nor slumber, with close stealth,
 Conveys from you a single step, in all
 The goings on of time: thence, with more heed
 I shape mine answer, for his ear intended,
 Who there stands weeping; that the sorrow now
 May equal the transgression. Not alone
 
 
 Through operation of the mighty orbs,
 That mark each seed to some predestined aim,
 As with aspect or fortunate or ill
 The constellations meet; but through benign
 Largess of heavenly graces, which rain down
 From such a height as mocks our vision, this man
 Was, in the freshness of his being, such,
 So gifted virtually, that in him
 All better habits wondrously had thrived
 The more of kindly strength is in the soil,
 So much doth evil seed and lack of culture
 Mar it the more, and make it run to wildness.
 These looks sometime upheld him; for I show'd
 My youthful eyes, and led him by their light
 In upright walking. Soon as I had reach'd
 Tee threshold of my second age, and changed
 My mortal for immortal; then he left me,
 And gave himself to others. When from flesh
 To spirit I had risen, and increase
 Of beauty and of virtue circled me,
 I was less dear to him, and valued less.
 His steps were turn'd into deceitful ways,
 Following false images of good, that make
 No promise perfect. Nor avail'd me aught
 To sue for inspirations, with the which,
 I, both in dreams of night, and otherwise,
 Did call him back; of them, so little reck'd him.
 Such depth he fell, that all device was short
 Of his preserving, save that he should view
 The children of perdition. To this end
 I visited the purlieus of the dead:
 And one, who hath conducted him thus high,
 Received my supplications urged with weeping.
 It were a breaking of God's high decree,
 If Lethe should be pass'd, and such food[5] tasted,
 Without the cost of some repentant tear."
 
 
 [5: The oblivion of sins.]
 
 
 </pre>
 </body>