<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr01.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr03.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: So Dar</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 02 - So Dar - Part 001</h2></center>
  So Dar ~ That Door. Raag Aasaa, First Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Where is That Door of Yours, and where is That Home, in which You sit and take care of all?<br>
  The Sound-current of the Naad vibrates there for You, and countless musicians play all sorts of instruments there for You.<br>
  There are so many Ragas and musical harmonies to You; so many minstrels sing hymns of You.<br>
  Wind, water and fire sing of You. The Righteous Judge of Dharma sings at Your Door.<br>
  Chitr and Gupt, the angels of the conscious and the subconscious who keep the record of actions, and the Righteous Judge of Dharma who reads this record, sing of You.<br>
  Shiva, Brahma and the Goddess of Beauty, ever adorned by You, sing of You.<br>
  Indra, seated on His Throne, sings of You, with the deities at Your Door.<br>
  The Siddhas in Samaadhi sing of You; the Saadhus sing of You in contemplation.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 02 - So Dar - Part 002</h2></center>
  The celibates, the fanatics, and the peacefully accepting sing of You; the fearless warriors sing of You.<br>
  The Pandits, the religious scholars who recite the Vedas, with the supreme sages of all the ages, sing of You.<br>
  The Mohinis, the enchanting heavenly beauties who entice hearts in paradise, in this world, and in the underworld of the subconscious, sing of You.<br>
  The celestial jewels created by You, and the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, sing of You.<br>
  The brave and mighty warriors sing of You. The spiritual heroes and the four sources of creation sing of You.<br>
  The worlds, solar systems and galaxies, created and arranged by Your Hand, sing of You.<br>
  They alone sing of You, who are pleasing to Your Will. Your devotees are imbued with Your Sublime Essence.<br>
  So many others sing of You, they do not come to mind. O Nanak, how can I think of them all?<br>
  That True Lord is True, forever True, and True is His Name.<br>
  He is, and shall always be. He shall not depart, even when this Universe which He has created departs.<br>
  He created the world, with its various colors, species of beings, and the variety of Maya.<br>
  Having created the creation, He watches over it Himself, by His Greatness.<br>
  He does whatever He pleases. No one can issue any order to Him.<br>
  He is the King, the King of kings, the Supreme Lord and Master of kings. Nanak remains subject to His Will. ||1||<br>
  Aasaa, First Mehl:<br>
  Hearing of His Greatness, everyone calls Him Great.<br>
  But just how Great His Greatness is-this is known only to those who have seen Him.<br>
  His Value cannot be estimated; He cannot be described.<br>
  Those who describe You, Lord, remain immersed and absorbed in You. ||1||<br>
  O my Great Lord and Master of Unfathomable Depth, You are the Ocean of Excellence.<br>
  No one knows the extent or the vastness of Your Expanse. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All the intuitives met and practiced intuitive meditation.<br>
  All the appraisers met and made the appraisal.<br>
  The spiritual teachers, the teachers of meditation, and the teachers of teachers<br>
  -they cannot describe even an iota of Your Greatness. ||2||<br>
  All Truth, all austere discipline, all goodness,<br>
  all the great miraculous spiritual powers of the Siddhas<br>
  -without You, no one has attained such powers.<br>
  They are received only by Your Grace. No one can block them or stop their flow. ||3||<br>
  What can the poor helpless creatures do?<br>
  Your Praises are overflowing with Your Treasures.<br>
  Those, unto whom You give-how can they think of any other?<br>
  O Nanak, the True One embellishes and exalts. ||4||2||<br>
  Aasaa, First Mehl:<br>
  Chanting it, I live; forgetting it, I die.<br>
  It is so difficult to chant the True Name.<br>
  If someone feels hunger for the True Name,<br>
  that hunger shall consume his pain. ||1||<br>
  How can I forget Him, O my mother?<br>
  True is the Master, True is His Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Trying to describe even an iota of the Greatness of the True Name,<br>
  people have grown weary, but they have not been able to evaluate it.<br>
  Even if everyone were to gather together and speak of Him,<br>
  He would not become any greater or any lesser. ||2||<br>
  That Lord does not die; there is no reason to mourn.<br>
  He continues to give, and His Provisions never run short.<br>
  This Virtue is His alone; there is no other like Him.<br>
  There never has been, and there never will be. ||3||<br>
  As Great as You Yourself are, O Lord, so Great are Your Gifts.<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr03.htm">Next: So Purakh</a></center>
 </body>