<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr02.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr04.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: So Purakh</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 03 - So Purakh - Part 001</h2></center>
  The One who created the day also created the night.<br>
  Those who forget their Lord and Master are vile and despicable.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Name, they are wretched outcasts. ||4||3||<br>
  Raag Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O humble servant of the Lord, O True Guru, O True Primal Being: I offer my humble prayer to You, O Guru.<br>
  I am a mere insect, a worm. O True Guru, I seek Your Sanctuary. Please be merciful, and bless me with the Light of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O my Best Friend, O Divine Guru, please enlighten me with the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, the Naam is my breath of life. The Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is my life's occupation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The servants of the Lord have the greatest good fortune; they have faith in the Lord, and a longing for the Lord.<br>
  Obtaining the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, they are satisfied; joining the Sangat, the Blessed Congregation, their virtues shine forth. ||2||<br>
  Those who have not obtained the Sublime Essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, are most unfortunate; they are led away by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  Those who have not sought the Sanctuary of the True Guru and the Sangat, the Holy Congregation-cursed are their lives, and cursed are their hopes of life. ||3||<br>
  Those humble servants of the Lord who have attained the Company of the True Guru, have such pre-ordained destiny inscribed on their foreheads.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, where the Lord's Essence is obtained. Meeting with His humble servant, O Nanak, the Light of the Naam shines forth. ||4||4||<br>
  Raag Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Why, O mind, do you plot and plan, when the Dear Lord Himself provides for your care?<br>
  From rocks and stones He created living beings; He places their nourishment before them. ||1||<br>
  O my Dear Lord of souls, one who joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is saved.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the supreme status is obtained, and the dry wood blossoms forth again in lush greenery. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Mothers, fathers, friends, children and spouses-no one is the support of anyone else.<br>
  For each and every person, our Lord and Master provides sustenance. Why are you so afraid, O mind? ||2||<br>
  The flamingoes fly hundreds of miles, leaving their young ones behind.<br>
  Who feeds them, and who teaches them to feed themselves? Have you ever thought of this in your mind? ||3||<br>
  All the nine treasures, and the eighteen supernatural powers are held by our Lord and Master in the Palm of His Hand.<br>
  Servant Nanak is devoted, dedicated, forever a sacrifice to You, Lord. Your Expanse has no limit, no boundary. ||4||5||<br>
  Raag Aasaa, Fourth Mehl, So Purakh ~ That Primal Being:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  That Primal Being is Immaculate and Pure. The Lord, the Primal Being, is Immaculate and Pure. The Lord is Inaccessible, Unreachable and Unrivalled.<br>
  All meditate, all meditate on You, Dear Lord, O True Creator Lord.<br>
  All living beings are Yours-You are the Giver of all souls.<br>
  Meditate on the Lord, O Saints; He is the Dispeller of all sorrow.<br>
  The Lord Himself is the Master, the Lord Himself is the Servant. O Nanak, the poor beings are wretched and miserable! ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 03 - So Purakh - Part 002</h2></center>
  You are constant in each and every heart, and in all things. O Dear Lord, you are the One.<br>
  Some are givers, and some are beggars. This is all Your Wondrous Play.<br>
  You Yourself are the Giver, and You Yourself are the Enjoyer. I know no other than You.<br>
  You are the Supreme Lord God, Limitless and Infinite. What Virtues of Yours can I speak of and describe?<br>
  Unto those who serve You, unto those who serve You, Dear Lord, servant Nanak is a sacrifice. ||2||<br>
  Those who meditate on You, Lord, those who meditate on You-those humble beings dwell in peace in this world.<br>
  They are liberated, they are liberated-those who meditate on the Lord. For them, the noose of death is cut away.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Fearless One, on the Fearless Lord-all their fears are dispelled.<br>
  Those who serve, those who serve my Dear Lord, are absorbed into the Being of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Blessed are they, blessed are they, who meditate on their Dear Lord. Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to them. ||3||<br>
  Devotion to You, devotion to You, is a treasure overflowing, infinite and beyond measure.<br>
  Your devotees, Your devotees praise You, Dear Lord, in many and various and countless ways.<br>
  For You, many, for You, so very many perform worship services, O Dear Infinite Lord; they practice disciplined meditation and chant endlessly.<br>
  For You, many, for You, so very many read the various Simritees and Shaastras. They perform rituals and religious rites.<br>
  Those devotees, those devotees are sublime, O servant Nanak, who are pleasing to my Dear Lord God. ||4||<br>
  You are the Primal Being, the Most Wonderful Creator. There is no other as Great as You.<br>
  Age after age, You are the One. Forever and ever, You are the One. You never change, O Creator Lord.<br>
  Everything happens according to Your Will. You Yourself accomplish all that occurs.<br>
  You Yourself created the entire universe, and having fashioned it, You Yourself shall destroy it all.<br>
  Servant Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Dear Creator, the Knower of all. ||5||1||<br>
  Aasaa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  You are the True Creator, my Lord and Master.<br>
  Whatever pleases You comes to pass. As You give, so do we receive. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All belong to You, all meditate on you.<br>
  Those who are blessed with Your Mercy obtain the Jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Gurmukhs obtain it, and the self-willed manmukhs lose it.<br>
  You Yourself separate them from Yourself, and You Yourself reunite with them again. ||1||<br>
  You are the River of Life; all are within You.<br>
  There is no one except You.<br>
  All living beings are Your playthings.<br>
  The separated ones meet, and by great good fortune, those suffering in separation are reunited once again. ||2||<br>
  They alone understand, whom You inspire to understand;<br>
  they continually chant and repeat the Lord's Praises.<br>
  Those who serve You find peace.<br>
  They are intuitively absorbed into the Lord's Name. ||3||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr04.htm">Next: Sohila</a></center>
 </body>