<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr09.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr11.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Dayv</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 001</h2></center>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fourth Mehl, First House:<br>
  Those who become the humble servants of the Lord and Master, lovingly focus their minds on Him.<br>
  Those who chant Your Praises, through the Guru's Teachings, have great good fortune recorded upon their foreheads. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The bonds and shackles of Maya are shattered, by lovingly focusing their minds on the Name of the Lord.<br>
  My mind is enticed by the Guru, the Enticer; beholding Him, I am wonder-struck. ||1||<br>
  I slept through the entire dark night of my life, but through the tiniest bit of the Guru's Grace, I have been awakened.<br>
  O Beautiful Lord God, Master of servant Nanak, there is none comparable to You. ||2||1||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  Tell me - on what path will I find my Beauteous Lord?<br>
  O Saints of the Lord, show me the Way, and I shall follow. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I cherish in my heart the Words of my Beloved; this is the best way.<br>
  The bride may be hunch-backed and short, but if she is loved by her Lord Master, she becomes beautiful, and she melts in the Lord's embrace. ||1||<br>
  There is only the One Beloved - we are all soul-brides of our Husband Lord. She who is pleasing to her Husband Lord is good.<br>
  What can poor, helpless Nanak do? As it pleases the Lord, so does he walk. ||2||2||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.<br>
  The Gurmukh is imbued with the deep red color of the poppy. His shawl is saturated with the Lord's Love. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I wander around here and there, like a madman, bewildered, seeking out my Darling Lord.<br>
  I shall be the slave of the slave of whoever unites me with my Darling Beloved. ||1||<br>
  So align yourself with the Almighty True Guru; drink in and savor the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, servant Nanak has obtained the wealth of the Lord within. ||2||3||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  Now, I have come, exhausted, to my Lord and Master.<br>
  Now that I have come seeking Your Sanctuary, God, please, either save me, or kill me. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 002</h2></center>
  I have burnt in the fire the clever devices and praises of the world.<br>
  Some speak good of me, and some speak ill of me, but I have surrendered my body to You. ||1||<br>
  Whoever comes to Your Sanctuary, O God, Lord and Master, You save by Your Merciful Grace.<br>
  Servant Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary, Dear Lord; O Lord, please, protect his honor! ||2||4||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to one who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  I live by continuously beholding the Blessed Vision of the Holy Guru's Darshan; within His Mind is the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are pure and immaculate, O God, Almighty Lord and Master; how can I, the impure one, meet You?<br>
  I have one thing in my mind, and another thing on my lips; I am such a poor, unfortunate liar! ||1||<br>
  I appear to chant the Lord's Name, but within my heart, I am the most wicked of the wicked.<br>
  As it pleases You, save me, O Lord and Master; servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. ||2||5||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  Without the Name of the Lord, the beautiful are just like the noseless ones.<br>
  Like the son, born into the house of a prostitute, his name is cursed. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who do not have the Name of their Lord and Master within their hearts, are the most wretched, deformed lepers.<br>
  Like the person who has no Guru, they may know many things, but they are cursed in the Court of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Those, unto whom my Lord Master becomes Merciful, long for the feet of the Holy.<br>
  O Nanak, the sinners become pure, joining the Company of the Holy; following the Guru, the True Guru, they are emancipated. ||2||6|| First Set of Six||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O mother, I focus my consciousness on the Guru's feet.<br>
  As God shows His Mercy, the lotus of my heart blossoms, and forever and ever, I meditate on the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The One Lord is within, and the One Lord is outside; the One Lord is contained in all.<br>
  Within the heart, beyond the heart, and in all places, God, the Perfect One, is seen to be permeating. ||1||<br>
  So many of Your servants and silent sages sing Your Praises, but no one has found Your limits.<br>
  O Giver of peace, Destroyer of pain, Lord and Master - servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||2||1||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  O mother, whatever is to be, shall be.<br>
  God pervades His pervading creation; one gains, while another loses. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Sometimes he blossoms in bliss, while at other times, he suffers in mourning. Sometimes he laughs, and sometimes he weeps.<br>
  Sometimes he is filled with the filth of ego, while at other times, he washes it off in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||<br>
  No one can erase the actions of God; I cannot see any other like Him.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru; by His Grace, I sleep in peace. ||2||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 003</h2></center>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  O mother, I hear of death, and think of it, and I am filled with fear.<br>
  Renouncing 'mine and yours' and egotism, I have sought the Sanctuary of the Lord and Master. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whatever He says, I accept that as good. I do not say "No" to what He says.<br>
  Let me not forget Him, even for an instant; forgetting Him, I die. ||1||<br>
  The Giver of peace, God, the Perfect Creator, endures my great ignorance.<br>
  I am worthless, ugly and of low birth, O Nanak, but my Husband Lord is the embodiment of bliss. ||2||3||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  O my mind, chant forever the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.<br>
  By singing, hearing and meditating on Him, all, whether of high or low status, are saved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is absorbed into the One from which he originated, when he understands the Way.<br>
  Wherever this body was fashioned, it was not allowed to remain there. ||1||<br>
  Peace comes, and fear and doubt are dispelled, when God becomes Merciful.<br>
  Says Nanak, my hopes have been fulfilled, renouncing my greed in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||4||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  O my mind, act as it pleases God.<br>
  Become the lowest of the low, the very least of the tiny, and speak in utmost humility. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The many ostentatious shows of Maya are useless; I withhold my love from these.<br>
  As something pleases my Lord and Master, in that I find my glory. ||1||<br>
  I am the slave of His slaves; becoming the dust of the feet of his slaves, I serve His humble servants.<br>
  I obtain all peace and greatness, O Nanak, living to chant His Name with my mouth. ||2||5||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  Dear God, by Your Grace, my doubts have been dispelled.<br>
  By Your Mercy, all are mine; I reflect upon this in my mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Millions of sins are erased, by serving You; the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan drives away sorrow.<br>
  Chanting Your Name, I have obtained supreme peace, and my anxieties and diseases have been cast out. ||1||<br>
  Sexual desire, anger, greed, falsehood and slander are forgotten, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  The ocean of mercy has cut away the bonds of Maya; O Nanak, He has saved me. ||2||6||<br>
  DAYV-GANDHAAREE:<br>
  All the cleverness of my mind is gone.<br>
  The Lord and Master is the Doer, the Cause of causes; Nanak holds tight to His Support. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Erasing my self-conceit, I have entered His Sanctuary; these are the Teachings spoken by the Holy Guru.<br>
  Surrendering to the Will of God, I attain peace, and the darkness of doubt is dispelled. ||1||<br>
  I know that You are all-wise, O God, my Lord and Master; I seek Your Sanctuary.<br>
  In an instant, You establish and disestablish; the value of Your Almighty Creative Power cannot be estimated. ||2||7||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord God is my praanaa, my breath of life; He is the Giver of peace.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, only a few know Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your Saints are Your Beloveds; death does not consume them.<br>
  They are dyed in the deep crimson color of Your Love, and they are intoxicated with the sublime essence of the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 004</h2></center>
  The greatest sins, and millions of pains and diseases are destroyed by Your Gracious Glance, O God.<br>
  While sleeping and waking, Nanak sings the Lord's Name, Har, Har, Har; he falls at the Guru's feet. ||2||8||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have seen that God with my eyes everywhere.<br>
  The Giver of peace, the Giver of souls, His Speech is Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Saints dispel the darkness of ignorance; the Guru is the Giver of the gift of life.<br>
  Granting His Grace, the Lord has made me His own; I was on fire, but now I am cooled. ||1||<br>
  The karma of good deeds, and the Dharma of righteous faith, have not been produced in me, in the least; nor has pure conduct welled up in me.<br>
  Renouncing cleverness and self-mortification, O Nanak, I fall at the Guru's feet. ||2||9||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Chant the Lord's Name, and earn the profit.<br>
  You shall attain salvation, peace, poise and bliss, and the noose of Death shall be cut away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Searching, searching, searching and reflecting, I have found that the Lord's Name is with the Saints.<br>
  They alone obtain this treasure, who have such pre-ordained destiny. ||1||<br>
  They are very fortunate and honorable; they are the perfect bankers.<br>
  They are beautiful, so very wise and handsome; O Nanak, purchase the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2||10||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, why are you so puffed up with egotism?<br>
  Whatever is seen in this foul, impure and filthy world, is only ashes. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Remember the One who created you, O mortal; He is the Support of your soul, and the breath of life.<br>
  One who forsakes Him, and attaches himself to another, dies to be reborn; he is such an ignorant fool! ||1||<br>
  I am blind, mute, crippled and totally lacking in understanding; O God, Preserver of all, please preserve me!<br>
  The Creator, the Cause of causes is all-powerful; O Nanak, how helpless are His beings! ||2||11||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  God is the nearest of the near.<br>
  Remember Him, meditate on Him, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, day and night, evening and morning. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Redeem your body in the invaluable Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Do not delay for an instant, even for a moment. Death is keeping you constantly in his vision. ||1||<br>
  Lift me up out of the dark dungeon, O Creator Lord; what is there which is not in Your home?<br>
  Bless Nanak with the Support of Your Name, that he may find great happiness and peace. ||2||12||<br>
  Second Set of Six||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, meet with the Guru, and worship the Naam in adoration.<br>
  You shall obtain peace, poise, bliss, joy and pleasure, and lay the foundation of eternal life. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Showing His Mercy, the Lord has made me His slave, and shattered the bonds of Maya.<br>
  Through loving devotion, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, I have escaped the Path of Death. ||1||<br>
  When he became Merciful, the rust was removed, and I found the priceless treasure.<br>
  O Nanak, I am a sacrifice, a hundred thousand times, to my unapproachable, unfathomable Lord and Master. ||2||13||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 005</h2></center>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, how fruitful is the birth of one who sings the Glories of God, and enshrines love for the Supreme Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Beautiful, wise, brave and divine is one who obtains the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  He chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, with his tongue, and does not have to wander in reincarnation again. ||1||<br>
  The Perfect Lord God pervades his mind and body; he does not look upon any other.<br>
  Hell and disease do not afflict one who joins the Company of the Lord's humble servants, O Nanak; the Lord attaches him to the hem of His robe. ||2||14||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  His fickle mind is entangled in a dream.<br>
  He does not even understand this much, that someday he shall have to depart; he has gone crazy with Maya. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is engrossed in the delight of the flower's color; he strives only to indulge in corruption.<br>
  Hearing about greed, he feels happy in his mind, and he runs after it. ||1||<br>
  Wandering and roaming all around, I have endured great pain, but now, I have come to the door of the Saint.<br>
  Granting His Grace, the Supreme Lord Master has blended Nanak with Himself. ||2||15||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  All peace is found in the Guru's feet.<br>
  They drive away my sins and purify my mind; their Support carries me across. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This is the labor which I perform: worship, flower-offerings, service and devotion.<br>
  My mind blossoms forth and is enlightened, and I am not cast into the womb again. ||1||<br>
  I behold the fruitful vision of the Saint; this is the meditation I have taken.<br>
  The Lord Master has become Merciful to Nanak, and he has entered the Sanctuary of the Holy. ||2||16||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Offer your prayer to your Lord.<br>
  You shall obtain the four blessings, and the treasures of bliss, pleasure, peace, poise and the spiritual powers of the Siddhas. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Renounce your self-conceit, and grasp hold of the Guru's feet; hold tight to the hem of God's robe.<br>
  The heat of the ocean of fire does not affect one who longs for the Lord and Master's Sanctuary. ||1||<br>
  Again and again, God puts up with the millions of sins of the supremely ungrateful ones.<br>
  The embodiment of mercy, the Perfect Transcendent Lord - Nanak longs for His Sanctuary. ||2||17||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Place the Guru's feet within your heart,<br>
  and all illness, sorrow and pain shall be dispelled; all suffering shall come to an end. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The sins of countless incarnations are erased, as if one has taken purifying baths at millions of sacred shrines.<br>
  The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and centering one's mind in meditation on Him. ||1||<br>
  Showing His Mercy, the Lord has made me His slave; breaking my bonds, He has saved me.<br>
  I live by chanting and meditating on the Naam, and the Bani of Your Word; slave Nanak is a sacrifice to You. ||2||18||<br>
  Third Set of Six||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, I long to see the Feet of God.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 006</h2></center>
  Be Merciful to me, O my Lord and Master, that I might never forsake them from my mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Applying the dust of the feet of the Holy to my face and forehead, I burn away the poison of sexual desire and anger.<br>
  I judge myself to be the lowest of all; in this way, I instill peace within my mind. ||1||<br>
  I sing the Glorious Praises of the Imperishable Lord and Master, and I shake off all my sins.<br>
  I have found the gift of the treasure of the Naam, O Nanak; I hug it close, and enshrine it in my heart. ||2||19||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Dear God, I long to behold the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.<br>
  I cherish this beautiful meditation day and night; You are dearer to me than my soul, dearer than life itself. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have studied and contemplated the essence of the Shaastras, the Vedas and the Puraanas.<br>
  Protector of the meek, Lord of the breath of life, O Perfect One, carry us across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||<br>
  Since the very beginning, and throughout the ages, the humble devotees have been Your servants; in the midst of the world of corruption, You are their Support.<br>
  Nanak longs for the dust of the feet of such humble beings; the Transcendent Lord is the Giver of all. ||2||20||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Your humble servant, O Lord, is intoxicated with Your sublime essence.<br>
  One who obtains the treasure of the Nectar of Your Love, does not renounce it to go somewhere else. ||1||Pause||<br>
  While sitting, he repeats the Lord's Name, Har, Har; while sleeping, he repeats the Lord's Name, Har, Har; he eats the Nectar of the Lord's Name as his food.<br>
  Bathing in the dust of the feet of the Holy is equal to taking cleansing baths at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||1||<br>
  How fruitful is the birth of the Lord's humble servant; the Creator is his Father.<br>
  O Nanak, one who recognizes the Perfect Lord God, takes all with him, and saves everyone. ||2||21||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, without the Guru, spiritual wisdom is not obtained.<br>
  They wander around, weeping and crying out in various ways, but the Lord of the World does not meet them. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The body is tied up with emotional attachment, disease and sorrow, and so it is lured into countless reincarnations.<br>
  He finds no place of rest without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; to whom should he go and cry? ||1||<br>
  When my Lord and Master shows His Mercy, we lovingly focus our consciousness on the feet of the Holy.<br>
  The most horrible agonies are dispelled in an instant, O Nanak, and we merge in the Blessed Vision of the Lord. ||2||22||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord and Master Himself has become Merciful.<br>
  I have been emancipated, and I have become the embodiment of bliss; I am the Lord's child - He has saved me. ||Pause||<br>
  With my palms pressed together, I offer my prayer; within my mind, I meditate on the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  Giving me His hand, the Transcendent Lord has eradicated all my sins. ||1||<br>
  Husband and wife join together in rejoicing, celebrating the Victory of the Lord Master.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the humble servant of the Lord, who emancipates everyone. ||2||23||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 007</h2></center>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I offer my prayer to my True Guru.<br>
  The Destroyer of distress has become kind and merciful, and all my anxiety is over. ||Pause||<br>
  I am a sinner, hypocritical and greedy, but still, He puts up with all of my merits and demerits.<br>
  Placing His hand on my forehead, He has exalted me. The wicked ones who wanted to destroy me have been killed. ||1||<br>
  He is generous and benevolent, the beautifier of all, the embodiment of peace; the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is so fruitful!<br>
  Says Nanak, He is the Giver to the unworthy; I enshrine His Lotus Feet within my heart. ||2||24||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My God is the Master of the masterless.<br>
  I have come to the Sanctuary of the Savior Lord. ||Pause||<br>
  Protect me on all sides, O Lord;<br>
  protect me in the future, in the past, and at the very last moment. ||1||<br>
  Whenever something comes to mind, it is You.<br>
  Contemplating Your virtues, my mind is sanctified. ||2||<br>
  I hear and sing the Hymns of the Guru's Word.<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Holy. ||3||<br>
  Within my mind, I have the Support of the One Lord alone.<br>
  O Nanak, my God is the Creator of all. ||4||25||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  God, this is my heart's desire:<br>
  O treasure of kindness, O Merciful Lord, please make me the slave of your Saints. ||Pause||<br>
  In the early hours of the morning, I fall at the feet of Your humble servants; night and day, I obtain the Blessed Vision of their Darshan.<br>
  Dedicating my body and mind, I serve the humble servant of the Lord; with my tongue, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  With each and every breath, I meditate in remembrance on my God; I live continually in the Society of the Saints.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my only support and wealth; O Nanak, from this, I obtain bliss. ||2||26||<br>
  Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O friend, such is the Dear Lord whom I have obtained.<br>
  He does not leave me, and He always keeps me company. Meeting the Guru, night and day, I sing His Praises. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I met the Fascinating Lord, who has blessed me with all comforts; He does not leave me to go anywhere else.<br>
  I have seen the mortals of many and various types, but they are not equal to even a hair of my Beloved. ||1||<br>
  His palace is so beautiful! His gate is so wonderful! The celestial melody of the sound current resounds there.<br>
  Says Nanak, I enjoy eternal bliss; I have obtained a permanent place in the home of my Beloved. ||2||1||27||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind longs for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, and His Name.<br>
  I have wandered everywhere, and now I have come to follow the Saint. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whom should I serve? Whom should I worship in adoration? Whoever I see shall pass away.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 008</h2></center>
  I have sought the Sanctuary of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; my mind longs for the dust of their Feet. ||1||<br>
  I do not know the way, and I have no virtue. It is so difficult to escape from Maya!<br>
  Nanak has come and fallen at the Guru's feet; all of his evil inclinations have vanished. ||2||2||28||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Beloved, Your Words are Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  O supremely beautiful Enticer, O Beloved, You are among all, and yet distinct from all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I do not seek power, and I do not seek liberation. My mind is in love with Your Lotus Feet.<br>
  Brahma, Shiva, the Siddhas, the silent sages and Indra - I seek only the Blessed Vision of my Lord and Master's Darshan. ||1||<br>
  I have come, helpless, to Your Door, O Lord Master; I am exhausted - I seek the Sanctuary of the Saints.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have met my Enticing Lord God; my mind is cooled and soothed - it blossoms forth in joy. ||2||3||29||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, His servant swims across to salvation.<br>
  When God becomes merciful to the meek, then one does not have to suffer reincarnation, only to die again. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and he does not lose the jewel of this human life.<br>
  Singing the Glories of God, he crosses over the ocean of poison, and saves all his generations as well. ||1||<br>
  The Lotus Feet of the Lord abide within his heart, and with every breath and morsel of food, he chants the Lord's Name.<br>
  Nanak has grasped the Support of the Lord of the Universe; again and again, he is a sacrifice to Him. ||2||4||30||<br>
  Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Some wander around the forests, wearing religious robes, but the Fascinating Lord remains distant from them. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They talk, preach, and sing their lovely songs, but within their minds, the filth of their sins remains. ||1||<br>
  They may be very beautiful, extremely clever, wise and educated, and they may speak very sweetly. ||2||<br>
  To forsake pride, emotional attachment, and the sense of 'mine and yours', is the path of the double-edged sword. ||3||<br>
  Says Nanak, they alone swim across the terrifying world-ocean, who, by God's Grace, join the Society of the Saints. ||4||1||31||<br>
  Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I have seen the Lord to be on high; the Fascinating Lord is the highest of all.<br>
  No one else is equal to Him - I have made the most extensive search on this. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Utterly infinite, exceedingly great, deep and unfathomable - He is lofty, beyond reach.<br>
  His weight cannot be weighed, His value cannot be estimated. How can the Enticer of the mind be obtained? ||1||<br>
  Millions search for Him, on various paths, but without the Guru, none find Him.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Lord Master has become Merciful. Meeting the Holy Saint, I drink in the sublime essence. ||2||1||32||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 009</h2></center>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have looked in so many ways, but there is no other like the Lord.<br>
  On all the continents and islands, He is permeating and fully pervading; He is in all worlds. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is the most unfathomable of the unfathomable; who can chant His Praises? My mind lives by hearing news of Him.<br>
  People in the four stages of life, and in the four social classes are liberated, by serving You, Lord. ||1||<br>
  The Guru has implanted the Word of His Shabad within me; I have attained the supreme status. My sense of duality has been dispelled, and now, I am at peace.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have easily crossed over the terrifying world-ocean, obtaining the treasure of the Lord's Name. ||2||2||33||<br>
  Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Know that there is One and only One Lord.<br>
  O Gurmukh, know that He is One. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Why are you wandering around? O Siblings of Destiny, don't wander around; He is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||1||<br>
  As the fire in the forest, without control, cannot serve any purpose<br>
  - just so, without the Guru, one cannot attain the Gate of the Lord.<br>
  Joining the Society of the Saints, renounce your ego; says Nanak, in this way, the supreme treasure is obtained. ||2||1||34||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  His state cannot be known. ||1||Pause||<br>
  How can I behold Him through clever tricks? Those who tell this story are wonder-struck and amazed. ||1||<br>
  The servants of God, the celestial singers, the Siddhas and the seekers,<br>
  the angelic and divine beings, Brahma and those like Brahma,<br>
  and the four Vedas proclaim, day and night,<br>
  that the Lord and Master is inaccessible, unapproachable and unfathomable.<br>
  Endless, endless are His Glories, says Nanak; they cannot be described - they are beyond our reach. ||2||2||35||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I meditate, and sing of the Creator Lord.<br>
  I have become fearless, and I have found peace, poise and bliss, remembering the infinite Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Guru, of the most fruitful image, has placed His hand upon my forehead.<br>
  Wherever I look, there, I find Him with me.<br>
  The Lotus Feet of the Lord are the Support of my very breath of life. ||1||<br>
  My God is all-powerful, unfathomable and utterly vast.<br>
  The Lord and Master is close at hand - He dwells in each and every heart.<br>
  Nanak seeks the Sanctuary and the Support of God, who has no end or limitation. ||2||3||36||<br>
  Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Turn away, O my mind, turn away.<br>
  Turn away from the faithless cynic.<br>
  False is the love of the false one; break the ties, O my mind, and your ties shall be broken. Break your ties with the faithless cynic. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One who enters a house filled with soot is blackened.<br>
  Run far away from such people! One who meets the Guru escapes from the bondage of the three dispositions. ||1||<br>
  I beg this blessing of You, O Merciful Lord, ocean of mercy - please, don't bring me face to face with the faithless cyincs.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 10 - Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree - Part 010</h2></center>
  Make servant Nanak the slave of Your slave; let his head roll in the dust under the feet of the Holy. ||2||4||37||<br>
  Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Fifth Mehl, Seventh House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  You are all-powerful, at all times; You show me the Way; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You.<br>
  Your Saints sing to You with love; I fall at their feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Praiseworthy Lord, Enjoyer of celestial peace, Embodiment of mercy, One Infinite Lord, Your place is so beautiful. ||1||<br>
  Riches, supernatural spiritual powers and wealth are in the palm of Your hand. O Lord, Life of the World, Master of all, infinite is Your Name.<br>
  Show Kindness, Mercy and Compassion to Nanak; hearing Your Praises, I live. ||2||1||38||6||44||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  This mind does not follow my advice one tiny bit.<br>
  I am so tired of giving it instructions - it will not refrain from its evil-mindedness. ||1||Pause||<br>
  It has gone insane with the intoxication of Maya; it does not chant the Lord's Praise.<br>
  Practicing deception, it tries to cheat the world, and so it fills its belly. ||1||<br>
  Like a dog's tail, it cannot be straightened; it will not listen to what I tell it.<br>
  Says Nanak, vibrate forever the Name of the Lord, and all your affairs shall be adjusted. ||2||1||<br>
  Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  All things are mere diversions of life:<br>
  mother, father, siblings, children, relatives and the wife of your home. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When the soul is separated from the body, then they will cry out, calling you a ghost.<br>
  No one will let you stay, for even half an hour; they drive you out of the house. ||1||<br>
  The created world is like an illusion, a mirage - see this, and reflect upon it in your mind.<br>
  Says Nanak, vibrate forever the Name of the Lord, which shall deliver you. ||2||2||<br>
  Raag Dayv-Gandhaaree, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  In this world, I have seen love to be false.<br>
  Whether they are spouses or friends, all are concerned only with their own happiness. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All say, "Mine, mine", and attach their consciousness to you with love.<br>
  But at the very last moment, none shall go along with you. How strange are the ways of the world! ||1||<br>
  The foolish mind has not yet reformed itself, although I have grown weary of continually instructing it.<br>
  O Nanak, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean, singing the Songs of God. ||2||3||6||38||47||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr11.htm">Next: Raag Bihaagra</a></center>
 </body>