<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr11.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr13.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Wadahans</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 001</h2></center>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Raag Wadahans, First Mehl, First House:<br>
  To the addict, there is nothing like the drug; to the fish, there is nothing else like water.<br>
  Those who are attuned to their Lord - everyone is pleasing to them. ||1||<br>
  I am a sacrifice, cut apart into pieces, a sacrifice to Your Name, O Lord Master. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord is the fruitful tree; His Name is ambrosial nectar.<br>
  Those who drink it in are satisfied; I am a sacrifice to them. ||2||<br>
  You are not visible to me, although You dwell with everyone.<br>
  How can the thirst of the thirsty be quenched, with that wall between me and the pond? ||3||<br>
  Nanak is Your merchant; You, O Lord Master, are my merchandise.<br>
  My mind is cleansed of doubt, only when I praise You, and pray to You. ||4||1||<br>
  Wadahans, First Mehl:<br>
  The virtuous bride enjoys her Husband Lord; why does the unworthy one cry out?<br>
  If she were to become virtuous, then she too could enjoy her Husband Lord. ||1||<br>
  My Husband Lord is loving and playful; why should the soul-bride enjoy anyone else? ||1||Pause||<br>
  If the soul-bride does good deeds, and strings them on the thread of her mind,<br>
  she obtains the jewel, which cannot be purchased for any price, strung upon the thread of her consciousness. ||2||<br>
  I ask, but do not follow the way shown to me; still, I claim to have reached my destination.<br>
  I do not speak with You, O my Husband Lord; how then can I come to have a place in Your home? ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, without the One Lord, there is no other at all.<br>
  If the soul-bride remains attached to You, then she shall enjoy her Husband Lord. ||4||2||<br>
  Wadahans, First Mehl, Second House:<br>
  The peacocks are singing so sweetly, O sister; the rainy season of Saawan has come.<br>
  Your beauteous eyes are like a string of charms, fascinating and enticing the soul-bride.<br>
  I would cut myself into pieces for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; I am a sacrifice to Your Name.<br>
  I take pride in You; without You, what could I be proud of?<br>
  So smash your bracelets along with your bed, O soul-bride, and break your arms, along with the arms of your couch.<br>
  In spite of all the decorations which you have made, O soul-bride, your Husband Lord is enjoying someone else.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 002</h2></center>
  You don't have the bracelets of gold, nor the good crystal jewelry; you haven't dealt with the true jeweller.<br>
  Those arms, which do not embrace the neck of the Husband Lord, burn in anguish.<br>
  All my companions have gone to enjoy their Husband Lord; which door should I, the wretched one, go to?<br>
  O friend, I may look very attractive, but I am not pleasing to my Husband Lord at all.<br>
  I have woven my hair into lovely braids, and saturated their partings with vermillion;<br>
  but when I go before Him, I am not accepted, and I die, suffering in anguish.<br>
  I weep; the whole world weeps; even the birds of the forest weep with me.<br>
  The only thing which doesn't weep is my body's sense of separateness, which has separated me from my Lord.<br>
  In a dream, He came, and went away again; I cried so many tears.<br>
  I can't come to You, O my Beloved, and I can't send anyone to You.<br>
  Come to me, O blessed sleep - perhaps I will see my Husband Lord again.<br>
  One who brings me a message from my Lord and Master - says Nanak, what shall I give to Him?<br>
  Cutting off my head, I give it to Him to sit upon; without my head, I shall still serve Him.<br>
  Why haven't I died? Why hasn't my life just ended? My Husband Lord has become a stranger to me. ||1||3||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  When the mind is filthy, everything is filthy; by washing the body, the mind is not cleaned.<br>
  This world is deluded by doubt; how rare are those who understand this. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, chant the One Name.<br>
  The True Guru has given me this treasure. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Even if one learns the Yogic postures of the Siddhas, and holds his sexual energy in check,<br>
  still, the filth of the mind is not removed, and the filth of egotism is not eliminated. ||2||<br>
  This mind is not controlled by any other discipline, except the Sanctuary of the True Guru.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, one is transformed beyond description. ||3||<br>
  Prays Nanak, one who dies upon meeting the True Guru, shall be rejuvenated through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  The filth of his attachment and possessiveness shall depart, and his mind shall become pure. ||4||1||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  By His Grace, one serves the True Guru; by His Grace, service is performed.<br>
  By His grace, this mind is controlled, and by His Grace, it becomes pure. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, think of the True Lord.<br>
  Think of the One Lord, and you shall obtain peace; you shall never suffer in sorrow again. ||1||Pause||<br>
  By His Grace, one dies while yet alive, and by His Grace, the Word of the Shabad is enshrined in the mind.<br>
  By His Grace, one understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and by His Command, one merges into the Lord. ||2||<br>
  That tongue, which does not savor the sublime essence of the Lord - may that tongue be burned off!<br>
  It remains attached to other pleasures, and through the love of duality, it suffers in pain. ||3||<br>
  The One Lord grants His Grace to all; He Himself makes distinctions.<br>
  O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, the fruits are obtained, and one is blessed with the Glorious Greatness of the Naam. ||4||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 003</h2></center>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  Emotional attachment to Maya is darkness; without the Guru, there is no wisdom.<br>
  Those who are attached to the Word of the Shabad understand; duality has ruined the people. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, under Guru's Instruction, do good deeds.<br>
  Dwell forever and ever upon the Lord God, and you shall find the gate of salvation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord alone is the treasure of virtue; He Himself gives, and then one receives.<br>
  Without the Name, all are separated from the Lord; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one meets the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Acting in ego, they lose, and nothing comes into their hands.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, they find Truth, and merge into the True Name. ||3||<br>
  Hope and desire abide in this body, but the Lord's Light shines within as well.<br>
  O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs remain in bondage; the Gurmukhs are liberated. ||4||3||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  The faces of the happy soul-brides are radiant forever; through the Guru, they are peacefully poised.<br>
  They enjoy their Husband Lord constantly, eradicating their ego from within. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  The True Guru has led me to understand the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The abandoned brides cry out in their suffering; they do not attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.<br>
  In the love of duality, they appear so ugly; they suffer in pain as they go to the world beyond. ||2||<br>
  The virtuous soul-bride constantly chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord; she enshrines the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within her heart.<br>
  The unvirtuous woman suffers, and cries out in pain. ||3||<br>
  The One Lord and Master is the Husband Lord of all; His Praises cannot be expressed.<br>
  O Nanak, He has separated some from Himself, while others are to His Name. ||4||4||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam is always sweet to me; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I come to taste it.<br>
  Through the True Word of the Guru's Bani, I am merged in peace and poise; the Dear Lord is enshrined in the mind. ||1||<br>
  The Lord, showing His Mercy, has caused me to meet the True Guru.<br>
  Through the Perfect True Guru, I meditate on the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Through Brahma, the hymns of the Vedas were revealed, but the love of Maya spread.<br>
  The wise one, Shiva, remains absorbed in himself, but he is engrossed in dark passions and excessive egotism. ||2||<br>
  Vishnu is always busy reincarnating himself - who will save the world?<br>
  The Gurmukhs are imbued with spiritual wisdom in this age; they are rid of the darkness of emotional attachment. ||3||<br>
  Serving the True Guru, one is emancipated; the Gurmukh crosses over the world-ocean.<br>
  The detached renunciates are imbued with the True Name; they attain the gate of salvation. ||4||<br>
  The One True Lord is pervading and permeating everywhere; He cherishes everyone.<br>
  O Nanak, without the One Lord, I do not know any other; He is the Merciful Master of all. ||5||5||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Gurmukh practices true self-discipline, and attains the essence of wisdom.<br>
  The Gurmukh meditates on the True Lord. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 004</h2></center>
  As Gurmukh, O my mind, remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  It shall stand by you always, and go with you. ||Pause||<br>
  The True Lord is the social status and honor of the Gurmukh.<br>
  Within the Gurmukh, is God, his friend and helper. ||2||<br>
  He alone becomes Gurmukh, whom the Lord so blesses.<br>
  He Himself blesses the Gurmukh with greatness. ||3||<br>
  The Gurmukh lives the True Word of the Shabad, and practices good deeds.<br>
  The Gurmukh, O Nanak, emancipates his family and relations. ||4||6||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  My tongue is intuitively attracted to the taste of the Lord.<br>
  My mind is satisfied, meditating on the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Lasting peace is obtained, contemplating the Shabad, the True Word of God.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to my True Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My eyes are content, lovingly focused on the One Lord.<br>
  My mind is content, having forsaken the love of duality. ||2||<br>
  The frame of my body is at peace, through the Shabad, and the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The fragrance of the Naam permeates my heart. ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, one who has such great destiny written upon his forehead,<br>
  through the Bani of the Guru's Word, easily and intuitively becomes free of desire. ||4||7||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  From the Perfect Guru, the Naam is obtained.<br>
  Through the Shabad, the True Word of God, one merges in the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  O my soul, obtain the treasure of the Naam,<br>
  by submitting to the Will of your Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, filth is washed away from within.<br>
  The Immaculate Naam comes to abide within the mind. ||2||<br>
  Deluded by doubt, the world wanders around.<br>
  It dies, and is born again, and is ruined by the Messenger of Death. ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, very fortunate are those who meditate on the Name of the Lord.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, they enshrine the Name within their minds. ||4||8||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  Ego is opposed to the Name of the Lord; the two do not dwell in the same place.<br>
  In egotism, selfless service cannot be performed, and so the soul goes unfulfilled. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, think of the Lord, and practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  If you submit to the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then you shall meet with the Lord; only then will your ego depart from within. ||Pause||<br>
  Egotism is within all bodies; through egotism, we come to be born.<br>
  Egotism is total darkness; in egotism, no one can understand anything. ||2||<br>
  In egotism, devotional worship cannot be performed, and the Hukam of the Lord's Command cannot be understood.<br>
  In egotism, the soul is in bondage, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, does not come to abide in the mind. ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, meeting with the True Guru, egotism is eliminated, and then, the True Lord comes to dwell in the mind||<br>
  One starts practicing truth, abides in truth and by serving the True One gets absorbed in Him. ||4||9||12||<br>
  Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  There is one bed, and One Lord God.<br>
  The Gurmukh enjoys the Lord, the ocean of peace. ||1||<br>
  My mind longs to meet my Beloved Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 005</h2></center>
  The Perfect Guru leads me to meet my Beloved; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to my Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My body is over-flowing with corruption;<br>
  how can I meet my Perfect Beloved? ||2||<br>
  The virtuous ones obtain my Beloved;<br>
  I do not have these virtues. How can I meet Him, O my mother? ||3||<br>
  I am so tired of making all these efforts.<br>
  Please protect Nanak, the meek one, O my Lord. ||4||1||<br>
  Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  My Lord God is so beautiful. I do not know His worth.<br>
  Abandoning my Lord God, I have become entangled in duality. ||1||<br>
  How can I meet with my Husband? I don't know.<br>
  She who pleases her Husband Lord is a happy soul-bride. She meets with her Husband Lord - she is so wise. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am filled with faults; how can I attain my Husband Lord?<br>
  You have many loves, but I am not in Your thoughts, O my Husband Lord. ||2||<br>
  She who enjoys her Husband Lord, is the good soul-bride.<br>
  I don't have these virtues; what can I, the discarded bride, do? ||3||<br>
  The soul-bride continually, constantly enjoys her Husband Lord.<br>
  I have no good fortune; will He ever hold me close in His embrace? ||4||<br>
  You, O Husband Lord, are meritorious, while I am without merit.<br>
  I am worthless; please forgive Nanak, the meek. ||5||2||<br>
  Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Within my mind there is such a great yearning; how will I attain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan?<br>
  I go and ask my True Guru; with the Guru's advice, I shall teach my foolish mind.<br>
  The foolish mind is instructed in the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and meditates forever on the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  O Nanak, one who is blessed with the Mercy of my Beloved, focuses his consciousness on the Lord's Feet. ||1||<br>
  I dress myself in all sorts of robes for my Husband, so that my True Lord God will be pleased.<br>
  But my Beloved Husband Lord does not even cast a glance in my direction; how can I be consoled?<br>
  For His sake, I adorn myself with adornments, but my Husband is imbued with the love of another.<br>
  O Nanak, blessed, blessed, blessed is that soul-bride, who enjoys her True, Sublime Husband Lord. ||2||<br>
  I go and ask the fortunate, happy soul-bride, "How did you attain Him - your Husband Lord, my God?"<br>
  She answers, "My True Husband blessed me with His Mercy; I abandoned the distinction between mine and yours.<br>
  Dedicate everything, mind, body and soul, to the Lord God; this is the Path to meet Him, O sister."<br>
  If her God gazes upon her with favor, O Nanak, her light merges into the Light. ||3||<br>
  I dedicate my mind and body to the one who brings me a message from my Lord God.<br>
  I wave the fan over him every day, serve him and carry water for him.<br>
  Constantly and continuously, I serve the Lord's humble servant, who recites to me the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 006</h2></center>
  Hail, hail unto the Guru, the Guru, the Perfect True Guru, who fulfills Nanak's heart's desires. ||4||<br>
  O Lord, let me meet the Guru, my best friend; meeting Him, I meditate on the Lord's Name.<br>
  I seek the Lord's sermon from the Guru, the True Guru; joining with Him, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Each and every day, forever, I sing the Lord's Praises; my mind lives by hearing Your Name.<br>
  O Nanak, that moment when I forget my Lord and Master - at that moment, my soul dies. ||5||<br>
  Everyone longs to see the Lord, but he alone sees Him, whom the Lord causes to see Him.<br>
  One upon whom my Beloved bestows His Glance of Grace, cherishes the Lord, Har, Har forever.<br>
  He alone cherishes the Lord, Har, Har, forever and ever, who meets my Perfect True Guru.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord's humble servant and the Lord become One; meditating on the Lord, he blends with the Lord. ||6||1||3||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  His Darbaar, His Court, is the most lofty and exalted.<br>
  It has no end or limitations.<br>
  Millions, millions, tens of millions seek,<br>
  but they cannot find even a tiny bit of His Mansion. ||1||<br>
  What is that auspicious moment, when God is met? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Tens of thousands of devotees worship Him in adoration.<br>
  Tens of thousands of ascetics practice austere discipline.<br>
  Tens of thousands of Yogis practice Yoga.<br>
  Tens of thousands of pleasure seekers seek pleasure. ||2||<br>
  He dwells in each and every heart, but only a few know this.<br>
  Is there any friend who can rip apart the screen of separation?<br>
  I can only make the effort, if the Lord is merciful to me.<br>
  I sacrifice my body and soul to Him. ||3||<br>
  After wandering around for so long, I have finally come to the Saints;<br>
  all of my pains and doubts have been eradicated.<br>
  God summoned me to the Mansion of His Presence, and blessed me with the Ambrosial Nectar of His Name.<br>
  Says Nanak, my God is lofty and exalted. ||4||1||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Blessed is that time, when the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is given;<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the feet of the True Guru. ||1||<br>
  You are the Giver of souls, O my Beloved God.<br>
  My soul lives by reflecting upon the Name of God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  True is Your Mantra, Ambrosial is the Bani of Your Word.<br>
  Cooling and soothing is Your Presence, all-knowing is Your gaze. ||2||<br>
  True is Your Command; You sit upon the eternal throne.<br>
  My eternal God does not come or go. ||3||<br>
  You are the Merciful Master; I am Your humble servant.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord and Master is totally permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4||2||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You are infinite - only a few know this.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, some come to understand You through the Word of the Shabad. ||1||<br>
  Your servant offers this prayer, O Beloved:<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 007</h2></center>
  I live by meditating on Your Feet, God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O my Merciful and Almighty God, O Great Giver,<br>
  he alone knows You, whom You so bless. ||2||<br>
  Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to You.<br>
  Here and hereafter, I seek Your Protection. ||3||<br>
  I am without virtue; I know none of Your Glorious Virtues.<br>
  O Nanak, seeing the Holy Saint, my mind is imbued with You. ||4||3||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  God is perfect - He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  He blesses us with the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||1||<br>
  Bless me with Your Grace, God, O Merciful to the meek.<br>
  I seek Your Protection, O Perfect Lord, Sustainer of the World. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is totally pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky.<br>
  God is near at hand, not far away. ||2||<br>
  One whom He blesses with His Grace, meditates on Him.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  He cherishes and sustains all beings and creatures.<br>
  Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's Door. ||4||4||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You are the Great Giver, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  God, the Perfect Lord and Master, is permeating and pervading in all. ||1||<br>
  The Name of my Beloved God is my only support.<br>
  I live by hearing, continually hearing Your Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary, O my Perfect True Guru.<br>
  My mind is purified by the dust of the Saints. ||2||<br>
  I have enshrined His Lotus Feet within my heart.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||3||<br>
  Show mercy unto me, that I may sing Your Glorious Praises.<br>
  O Nanak, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I obtain peace. ||4||5||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord.<br>
  The soul does not die, nor does it ever waste away. ||1||<br>
  By great good fortune, one meets the Perfect Guru.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, one meditates on God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord is the jewel, the pearl, the gem, the diamond.<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, I am in ecstasy. ||2||<br>
  Wherever I look, I see the Sanctuary of the Holy.<br>
  Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, my soul becomes immaculately pure. ||3||<br>
  Within each and every heart, dwells my Lord and Master.<br>
  O Nanak, one obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord, when God bestows His Mercy. ||4||6||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Do not forget me, O God, Merciful to the meek.<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary, O Perfect, Compassionate Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Wherever You come to mind, that place is blessed.<br>
  The moment I forget You, I am stricken with regret. ||1||<br>
  All beings are Yours; You are their constant companion.<br>
  Please, give me Your hand, and pull me up out of this world-ocean. ||2||<br>
  Coming and going are by Your Will.<br>
  One whom You save is not afflicted by suffering. ||3||<br>
  You are the One and only Lord and Master; there is no other.<br>
  Nanak offers this prayer with his palms pressed together. ||4||7||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  When You allow Yourself to be known, then we know You.<br>
  We chant Your Name, which You have given to us. ||1||<br>
  You are wonderful! Your creative potency is amazing! ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 008</h2></center>
  You Yourself are the Cause of causes, You Yourself are the Creator.<br>
  By Your Will, we are born, and by Your Will, we die. ||2||<br>
  Your Name is the Support of our mind and body.<br>
  This is Your blessing to Nanak, Your slave. ||3||8||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Deep within me, there is a longing to meet my Beloved; how can I attain my Perfect Guru?<br>
  Even though a baby may play hundreds of games, he cannot survive without milk.<br>
  The hunger within me is not satisfied, O my friend, even though I am served hundreds of dishes.<br>
  My mind and body are filled with love for my Beloved; how can my soul find relief, without the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan? ||1||<br>
  Listen, O my dear friends and siblings - lead me to my True Friend, the Giver of peace.<br>
  He knows all the troubles of my soul; every day, he tells me stories of the Lord.<br>
  I cannot live without Him, even for an instant. I cry out for Him, just as the song-bird cries for the drop of water.<br>
  Which of Your Glorious Virtues should I sing? You save even worthless beings like me. ||2||<br>
  I have become depressed, waiting for my Husband Lord, O my friend; when shall my eyes behold my Husband?<br>
  I have forgotten how to enjoy all pleasures; without my Husband Lord, they are of no use at all.<br>
  These clothes do not please my body; I cannot dress myself.<br>
  I bow to those friends of mine, who have enjoyed their Beloved Husband Lord. ||3||<br>
  I have adorned myself with all sorts of decorations, O my friend, but without my Husband Lord, they are of no use at all.<br>
  When my Husband does not care for me, O my friend, then my youth passes, totally useless.<br>
  Blessed, blessed are the happy soul-brides, O my friend, who are blended with their Husband Lord.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those happy soul-brides; I wash their feet again and again. ||4||<br>
  As long as I suffered from duality and doubt, O my friend, I thought God was far away.<br>
  But when I met the Perfect True Guru, O my friend, then all my hopes and desires were fulfilled.<br>
  I have obtained all pleasures and comforts, O my friend; my Husband Lord is all-pervading everywhere.<br>
  Servant Nanak enjoys the Lord's Love, O my friend; I fall at the feet of the Guru, the True Guru. ||5||1||9||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  True is the Bani of His Word, and True is the melody; True is contemplative meditation on the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Night and day, I praise the True Lord. Blessed, blessed is my great good fortune. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, let yourself be a sacrifice to the True Name.<br>
  If you become the slave of the Lord's slaves, you shall obtain the True Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 009</h2></center>
  True is the tongue which is imbued with Truth, and true are the mind and body.<br>
  By praising any other than the True Lord, one's whole life is wasted. ||2||<br>
  Let Truth be the farm, Truth the seed, and Truth the merchandise you trade.<br>
  Night and day, you shall earn the profit of the Lord's Name; you shall have the treasure overflowing with the wealth of devotional worship. ||3||<br>
  Let Truth be your food, and let Truth be your clothes; let your True Support be the Name of the Lord.<br>
  One who is so blessed by the Lord, obtains a seat in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||4||<br>
  In Truth we come, and in Truth we go, and then, we are not consigned to reincarnation again.<br>
  The Gurmukhs are hailed as True in the True Court; they merge in the True Lord. ||5||<br>
  Deep within they are True, and their minds are True; they sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.<br>
  In the true place, they praise the True Lord; I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||6||<br>
  True is the time, and true is the moment, when one falls in love with the True Lord.<br>
  Then, he sees Truth, and speaks the Truth; he realizes the True Lord pervading the entire Universe. ||7||<br>
  O Nanak, one merges with the True Lord, when He merges with Himself.<br>
  As it pleases Him, He preserves us; He Himself ordains His Will. ||8||1||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  His mind wanders in the ten directions - how can he sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord?<br>
  The sensory organs are totally engrossed in sensuality; sexual desire and anger constantly afflict him. ||1||<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Hail! Hail! Chant His Glorious Praises.<br>
  The Lord's Name is so difficult to obtain in this age; under Guru's Instruction, drink in the subtle essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Remembering the Word of the Shabad, the mind becomes immaculately pure, and then, one sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Under Guru's Instruction, one comes to understand his own self, and then, he comes to dwell in the home of his inner self. ||2||<br>
  O my mind, be imbued forever with the Lord's Love, and sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  The Immaculate Lord is forever the Giver of peace; from Him, one receives the fruits of his heart's desires. ||3||<br>
  I am lowly, but I have been exalted, entering the Sanctuary of the Lord.<br>
  He has lifted up the sinking stone; True is His glorious greatness. ||4||<br>
  From poison, I have been transformed into Ambrosial Nectar; under Guru's Instruction, I have obtained wisdom.<br>
  From bitter herbs, I have been transformed into sandalwood; this fragrance permeates me deep within. ||5||<br>
  This human birth is so precious; one must earn the right to come into the world.<br>
  By perfect destiny, I met the True Guru, and I meditate on the Lord's Name. ||6||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are deluded; attached to corruption, they waste away their lives in vain.<br>
  The Name of the Lord is forever an ocean of peace, but the manmukhs do not love the Word of the Shabad. ||7||<br>
  Everyone can chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har with their mouths, but only a few enshrine it within their hearts.<br>
  O Nanak, those who enshrine the Lord within their hearts, attain liberation and emancipation. ||8||2||<br>
  Wadahans, First Mehl, Chhant:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Why bother to wash the body, polluted by falsehood?<br>
  One's cleansing bath is only approved, if he practices Truth.<br>
  When there is Truth within the heart, then one becomes True, and obtains the True Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 010</h2></center>
  Without pre-ordained destiny, understanding is not attained; talking and babbling, one wastes his life away.<br>
  Wherever you go and sit, speak well, and write the Word of the Shabad in your consciousness.<br>
  Why bother to wash the body which is polluted by falsehood? ||1||<br>
  When I have spoken, I spoke as You made me speak.<br>
  The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is pleasing to my mind.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, seems so sweet to my mind; it has destroyed the dwelling of pain.<br>
  Peace came to dwell in my mind, when You gave the Order.<br>
  It is Yours to bestow Your Grace, and it is mine to speak this prayer; You created Yourself.<br>
  When I have spoken, I spoke as You made me speak. ||2||<br>
  The Lord and Master gives them their turn, according to the deeds they have done.<br>
  Do not speak ill of others, or get involved in arguments.<br>
  Do not get into arguments with the Lord, or you shall ruin yourself.<br>
  If you challenge the One, with whom you must abide, you will cry in the end.<br>
  Be satisfied with what God gives you; tell your mind not to complain uselessly.<br>
  The Lord and Master gives them their turn, according to the deeds they have done. ||3||<br>
  He Himself created all, and He blesses then with His Glance of Grace.<br>
  No one asks for that which is bitter; everyone asks for sweets.<br>
  Let everyone ask for sweets, and behold, it is as the Lord wills.<br>
  Giving donations to charity, and performing various religious rituals are not equal to the contemplation of the Naam.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are blessed with the Naam have had such good karma pre-ordained.<br>
  He Himself created all, and He blesses them with His Glance of Grace. ||4||1||<br>
  Wadahans, First Mehl:<br>
  Show mercy to me, that I may chant Your Name.<br>
  You Yourself created all, and You are pervading among all.<br>
  You Yourself are pervading among all, and You link them to their tasks.<br>
  Some, You have made kings, while others go about begging.<br>
  You have made greed and emotional attachment seem sweet; they are deluded by this delusion.<br>
  Be ever merciful to me; only then can I chant Your Name. ||1||<br>
  Your Name is True, and ever pleasing to my mind.<br>
  My pains are dispelled, and I am permeated with peace.<br>
  The angels, the mortals and the silent sages sing of You.<br>
  The angels, the mortals and the silent sages sing of You; they are pleasing to Your Mind.<br>
  Enticed by Maya, they do not remember the Lord, and they waste away their lives in vain.<br>
  Some fools and idiots never think of the Lord; whoever has come, shall have to go.<br>
  Your Name is True, and ever pleasing to my mind. ||2||<br>
  Beauteous is Your time, O Lord; the Bani of Your Word is Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  Your servants serve You with love; these mortals are attached to Your essence.<br>
  Those mortals are attached to Your essence, who are blessed with the Ambrosial Name.<br>
  Those who are imbued with Your Name, prosper more and more, day by day.<br>
  Some do not practice good deeds, or live righteously; nor do they practice self-restraint. They do not realize the One Lord.<br>
  Ever beauteous is Your time, O Lord; the Bani of Your Word is Ambrosial Nectar. ||3||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the True Name.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 011</h2></center>
  Your rule shall never end.<br>
  Your rule is eternal and unchanging; it shall never come to an end.<br>
  He alone becomes Your servant, who contemplates You in peaceful ease.<br>
  Enemies and pains shall never touch him, and sin shall never draw near him.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to the One Lord, and Your Name. ||4||<br>
  Throughout the ages, Your devotees sing the Kirtan of Your Praises, O Lord Master, at Your Door.<br>
  They meditate on the One True Lord.<br>
  Only then do they meditate on the True Lord, when they enshrine Him in their minds.<br>
  Doubt and delusion are Your making; when these are dispelled,<br>
  then, by Guru's Grace, You grant Your Grace, and save them from the noose of Death.<br>
  Throughout the ages, they are Your devotees. ||5||<br>
  O my Great Lord and Master, You are unfathomable and infinite.<br>
  How should I make and offer my prayer? I do not know what to say.<br>
  If You bless me with Your Glance of Grace, I realize the Truth.<br>
  Only then do I come to realize the Truth, when You Yourself instruct me.<br>
  The pain and hunger of the world are Your making; dispel this doubt.<br>
  Prays Nanak, ones skepticism is taken away, when he understands the Guru's wisdom.<br>
  The Great Lord Master is unfathomable and infinite. ||6||<br>
  Your eyes are so beautiful, and Your teeth are delightful.<br>
  Your nose is so graceful, and Your hair is so long.<br>
  Your body is so precious, cast in gold.<br>
  His body is cast in gold, and He wears Krishna's mala; meditate on Him, O sisters.<br>
  You shall not have to stand at Death's door, O sisters, if you listen to these teachings.<br>
  From a crane, you shall be transformed into a swan, and the filth of your mind shall be removed.<br>
  Your eyes are so beautiful, and Your teeth are delightful. ||7||<br>
  Your walk is so graceful, and Your speech is so sweet.<br>
  You coo like a songbird, and your youthful beauty is alluring.<br>
  Your youthful beauty is so alluring; it pleases You, and it fulfills the heart's desires.<br>
  Like an elephant, You step with Your Feet so carefully; You are satisfied with Yourself.<br>
  She who is imbued with the Love of such a Great Lord, flows intoxicated, like the waters of the Ganges.<br>
  Prays Nanak, I am Your slave, O Lord; Your walk is so graceful, and Your speech is so sweet. ||8||2||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl, Chhant:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Let yourself be imbued with the Love of your Husband Lord, O beautiful, mortal bride.<br>
  Let yourself remain merged in the True Word of the Shabad, O mortal bride; savor and enjoy the Love of your Beloved Husband Lord.<br>
  The Husband Lord embellishes His beloved bride with His True Love; she is in love with the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Renouncing her self-centeredness, she attains her Husband Lord, and remains merged in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  That soul bride is adorned, who is attracted by His Love, and who treasures the Love of her Beloved within her heart.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord blends that soul bride with Himself; the True King adorns her. ||1||<br>
  O worthless bride, see your Husband Lord ever-present.<br>
  One who, as Gurmukh, enjoys her Husband Lord, O mortal bride, knows Him to be all-pervading everywhere.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 012</h2></center>
  The Lord is all-pervading everywhere; behold Him ever-present. Throughout the ages, know Him as the One.<br>
  The young, innocent bride enjoys her Husband Lord; she meets Him, the Architect of karma.<br>
  One who tastes the sublime essence of the Lord, and utters the sublime Word of the Shabad, remains immersed in the Lord's Ambrosial Pool.<br>
  O Nanak, that soul bride is pleasing to her Husband Lord, who, through the Shabad, remains in His Presence. ||2||<br>
  Go and ask the happy soul-brides, O mortal bride, who have eradicated their self-conceit from within.<br>
  Those who have not eradicated their self-conceit, O mortal bride, do not realize the Hukam of their Husband Lord's Command.<br>
  Those who eradicate their self-conceit, obtain their Husband Lord; they delight in His Love.<br>
  Ever imbued with His Love, in perfect poise and grace, she repeats His Name, night and day.<br>
  Very fortunate is that bride, who focuses her consciousness on Him; her Lord's Love is so sweet to her.<br>
  O Nanak, that soul-bride who is adorned with Truth, is imbued with her Lord's Love, in the state of perfect poise. ||3||<br>
  Overcome your egotism, O mortal bride, and walk in the Guru's Way.<br>
  Thus you shall ever enjoy your Husband Lord, O mortal bride, and obtain an abode in the home of your own inner being.<br>
  Obtaining an abode in the home of her inner being, she vibrates the Word of the Shabad, and is a happy soul-bride forever.<br>
  The Husband Lord is delightful, and forever young; night and day, He embellishes His bride.<br>
  Her Husband Lord activates the destiny written on her forehead, and she is adorned with the True Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, the soul-bride is imbued with the Love of the Lord, when she walks according to the Will of the True Guru. ||4||1||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  All dealings of the Gurmukh are good, if they are accomplished with poise and grace.<br>
  Night and day, he repeats the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and he earns his profits, drinking in the subtle essence of the Lord.<br>
  He earns the profit of the subtle essence of the Lord, meditating on the Lord, and repeating the Naam, night and day.<br>
  He gathers in merits, and eliminates demerits, and realizes his own self.<br>
  Under Guru's Instruction, he is blessed with glorious greatness; he drinks in the essence of the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, devotional worship of the Lord is wonderful, but only a few Gurmukhs perform it. ||1||<br>
  As Gurmukh, plant the crop of the Lord within the field of your body, and let it grow.<br>
  Within the home of your own being, enjoy the Lord's subtle essence, and earn profits in the world hereafter.<br>
  This profit is earned by enshrining the Lord within your mind; blessed is this farming and trade.<br>
  Meditating on the Lord's Name, and enshrining Him within your mind, you shall come to understand the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs have grown weary of this farming and trade; their hunger and thirst will not go away.<br>
  O Nanak, plant the seed of the Name within your mind, and adorn yourself with the True Word of the Shabad. ||2||<br>
  Those humble beings engage in the Lord's Trade, who have the jewel of such pre-ordained destiny upon their foreheads.<br>
  Under Guru's Instruction, the soul dwells in the home of the self; through the True Word of the Shabad, she becomes unattached.<br>
  By the destiny written upon their foreheads, they become truly unattached, and by reflective meditation, they are imbued with Truth.<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the whole world is insane; through the Shabad, the ego is conquered.<br>
  Attached to the True Word of the Shabad, wisdom comes forth. The Gurmukh obtains the Naam, the Name of the Husband Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 013</h2></center>
  O Nanak, through the Shabad, one meets the Lord, the Destroyer of fear, and by the destiny written on her forehead, she enjoys Him. ||3||<br>
  All farming and trading is by Hukam of His Will; surrendering to the Lord's Will, glorious greatness is obtained.<br>
  Under Guru's Instruction, one comes to understand the Lord's Will, and by His Will, he is united in His Union.<br>
  By His Will, one merges and easily blends with Him. The Shabads of the Guru are incomparable.<br>
  Through the Guru, true greatness is obtained, and one is embellished with Truth.<br>
  He finds the Destroyer of fear, and eradicates his self-conceit; as Gurmukh, he is united in His Union.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Name of the immaculate, inaccessible, unfathomable Commander is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4||2||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, contemplate the True Lord forever.<br>
  Dwell in peace in the home of your own self, and the Messenger of Death shall not touch you.<br>
  The noose of the Messenger of Death shall not touch you, when you embrace love for the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Ever imbued with the True Lord, the mind becomes immaculate, and its coming and going is ended.<br>
  The love of duality and doubt have ruined the self-willed manmukh, who is lured away by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  Says Nanak, listen, O my mind: contemplate the True Lord forever. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, the treasure is within you; do not search for it on the outside.<br>
  Eat only that which is pleasing to the Lord, and as Gurmukh, receive the blessing of His Glance of Grace.<br>
  As Gurmukh, receive the blessing of His Glance of Grace, O my mind; the Name of the Lord, your help and support, is within you.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are blind, and devoid of wisdom; they are ruined by the love of duality.<br>
  Without the Name, no one is emancipated. All are bound by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  O Nanak, the treasure is within you; do not search for it on the outside. ||2||<br>
  O my mind, obtaining the blessing of this human birth, some are engaged in the trade of Truth.<br>
  They serve their True Guru, and the Infinite Word of the Shabad resounds within them.<br>
  Within them is the Infinite Shabad, and the Beloved Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Naam, the nine treasures are obtained.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in emotional attachment to Maya; they suffer in pain, and through duality, they lose their honor.<br>
  But those who conquer their ego, and merge in the True Shabad, are totally imbued with Truth.<br>
  O Nanak, it is so difficult to obtain this human life; the True Guru imparts this understanding. ||3||<br>
  O my mind, those who serve their True Guru are the most fortunate beings.<br>
  Those who conquer their minds are beings of renunciation and detachment.<br>
  They are beings of renunciation and detachment, who lovingly focus their consciousness on the True Lord; they realize and understand their own selves.<br>
  Their intellect is steady, deep and profound; as Gurmukh, they naturally chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Some are lovers of beautiful young women; emotional attachment to Maya is very dear to them. The unfortunate self-willed manmukhs remain asleep.<br>
  O Nanak, those who intuitively serve their Guru, have perfect destiny. ||4||3||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  Purchase the jewel, the invaluable treasure; the True Guru has given this understanding.<br>
  The profit of profits is the devotional worship of the Lord; one's virtues merge into the virtues of the Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 014</h2></center>
  One's virtues merge into the virtues of the Lord; he comes to understand his own self. He earns the profit of devotional worship in this world.<br>
  Without devotion, there is no peace; through duality, one's honor is lost, but under Guru's Instruction, he is blessed with the Support of the Naam.<br>
  He ever earns the profit of the merchandise of the Naam, whom the Lord employs in this Trade.<br>
  He purchases the jewel, the invaluable treasure, unto whom the True Guru has given this understanding. ||1||<br>
  The love of Maya is totally painful; this is a bad deal.<br>
  Speaking falsehood, one eats poison, and the evil within increases greatly.<br>
  The evil within increases greatly, in this world of doubt; without the Name, one's honor is lost.<br>
  Reading and studying, the religious scholars argue and debate; but without understanding, there is no peace.<br>
  Their comings and goings never end; emotional attachment to Maya is dear to them.<br>
  The love of Maya is totally painful; this is a bad deal. ||2||<br>
  The counterfeit and the genuine are all assayed in the Court of the True Lord.<br>
  The counterfeit are cast out of the Court, and they stand there, crying out in misery.<br>
  They stand there, crying out in misery; the foolish, idiotic, self-willed manmukhs have wasted their lives.<br>
  Maya is the poison which has deluded the world; it does not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are resentful toward the Saints; they harvest only pain in this world.<br>
  The counterfeit and the genuine are assayed in that True Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  He Himself acts; who else should I ask? No one else can do anything.<br>
  As He pleases, He engages us; such is His glorious greatness.<br>
  Such is His glorious greatness - He Himself causes all to act; no one is a warrior or a coward.<br>
  The Life of the World, the Great Giver, the Architect of karma - He Himself grants forgiveness.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, self-conceit is eradicated, O Nanak, and through the Naam, honor is obtained.<br>
  He Himself acts; who else should I ask? No one else can do anything. ||4||4||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  The True merchandise is the Lord's Name. This is the true trade.<br>
  Under Guru's Instruction, we trade in the Lord's Name; its value is very great.<br>
  The value of this true trade is very great; those who are engaged in the true trade are very fortunate.<br>
  Inwardly and outwardly, they are imbued with devotion, and they enshrine love for the True Name.<br>
  One who is blessed with the Lord's Favor, obtains Truth, and reflects upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Name find peace; they deal only in the True Name. ||1||<br>
  Egotistical involvement in Maya is filth; Maya is overflowing with filth.<br>
  Under Guru's Instruction, the mind is made pure and the tongue tastes the subtle essence of the Lord.<br>
  The tongue tastes the subtle essence of the Lord, and deep within, the heart is drenched with His Love, contemplating the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Deep within, the well of the heart is overflowing with the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar; the water-carrier draws and drinks in the water of the Shabad.<br>
  One who is blessed with the Lord's favor is attuned to the Truth; with his tongue, he chants the Lord's Name.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are immaculate. The others are full of the filth of egotism. ||2||<br>
  All the religious scholars and astrologers read and study, and argue and shout. Who are they trying to teach?<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 015</h2></center>
  The filth of attachment to Maya clings to their hearts; they deal in Maya alone.<br>
  They love to deal in Maya in this world; coming and going, they suffer in pain.<br>
  The worm of poison is addicted to poison; it is immersed in manure.<br>
  He does what is pre-ordained for him; no one can erase his destiny.<br>
  O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, lasting peace is found; the ignorant fools die screaming. ||3||<br>
  Their minds are colored by emotional attachment to Maya; because of this emotional attachment, they do not understand.<br>
  The soul of the Gurmukh is imbued with the Lord's Love; the love of duality departs.<br>
  The love of duality departs, and the soul merges in Truth; the warehouse is overflowing with Truth.<br>
  One who becomes Gurmukh, comes to understand; the Lord embellishes him with Truth.<br>
  He alone merges with the Lord, whom the Lord causes to merge; nothing else can be said or done.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Name, one is deluded by doubt; but some, imbued with the Name, enshrine love for the Lord. ||4||5||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, the world comes and goes in birth and death; only the True Name shall emancipate you in the end.<br>
  When the True Lord Himself grants forgiveness, then one does not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again.<br>
  He does not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again, and he is emancipated in the end; as Gurmukh, he obtains glorious greatness.<br>
  Imbued with love for the True Lord, he is intoxicated with celestial bliss, and he remains absorbed in the Celestial Lord.<br>
  The True Lord is pleasing to his mind; he enshrines the True Lord in his mind; attuned to the Word of the Shabad, he is emancipated in the end.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam, merge in the True Lord; they are not cast into the terrifying world-ocean again. ||1||<br>
  Emotional attachment to Maya is total madness; through the love of duality, one is ruined.<br>
  Mother and father - all are subject to this love; in this love, they are entangled.<br>
  They are entangled in this love, on account of their past actions, which no one can erase.<br>
  The One who created the Universe, beholds it; no other is as great as He.<br>
  The blind, self-willed manmukh is consumed by his burning rage; without the Word of the Shabad, peace is not obtained.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Name, everyone is deluded, ruined by emotional attachment to Maya. ||2||<br>
  Seeing that this world on fire, I have hurried to the Sanctuary of the Lord.<br>
  I offer my prayer to the Perfect Guru: please save me, and bless me with Your glorious greatness.<br>
  Preserve me in Your Sanctuary, and bless me with the glorious greatness of the Name of the Lord; there is no other Giver as great as You.<br>
  Those who are engaged in serving You are very fortunate; throughout the ages, they know the One Lord.<br>
  You may practice celibacy, truth, austere self-discipline and rituals, but without the Guru, you shall not be emancipated.<br>
  O Nanak, he alone understands the Word of the Shabad, who goes and seeks the Lord's Sanctuary. ||3||<br>
  That understanding, imparted by the Lord, wells up; there is no other understanding.<br>
  Deep within, and beyond as well, You alone are, O Lord; You Yourself impart this understanding.<br>
  One whom He Himself blesses with this understanding, does not love any other. As Gurmukh, he tastes the subtle essence of the Lord.<br>
  In the True Court, he is forever True; with love, he chants the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 016</h2></center>
  Within his home, he finds the home of his own being; the True Guru blesses him with glorious greatness.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; their understanding is true, and approved. ||4||6||<br>
  Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, Chhant:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  My mind, my mind - the True Guru has blessed it with the Lord's Love.<br>
  He has enshrined the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, within my mind.<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, dwells within my mind; He is the Destroyer of all pain.<br>
  By great good fortune, I have obtained the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan; blessed, blessed is my True Guru.<br>
  While standing up and sitting down, I serve the True Guru; serving Him, I have found peace.<br>
  My mind, my mind - the True Guru has blessed it with the Lord's Love. ||1||<br>
  I live, I live, and I blossom forth, beholding the True Guru.<br>
  The Name of the Lord, the Name of the Lord, He has implanted within me; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I blossom forth.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the heart-lotus blossoms forth, and through the Name of the Lord, I have obtained the nine treasures.<br>
  The disease of egotism has been eradicated, suffering has been eliminated, and I have entered the Lord's state of celestial Samaadhi.<br>
  I have obtained the glorious greatness of Name of the Lord from the True Guru; beholding the Divine True Guru, my mind is at peace.<br>
  I live, I live, and I blossom forth, beholding the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  If only someone would come, if only someone would come, and lead me to meet my Perfect True Guru.<br>
  My mind and body, my mind and body - I cut my body into pieces, and I dedicate these to Him.<br>
  Cutting my mind and body apart, cutting them into pieces, I offer these to the one, who recites to me the Words of the True Guru.<br>
  My unattached mind has renounced the world; obtaining the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, it has found peace.<br>
  O Lord, Har, Har, O Giver of Peace, please, grant Your Grace, and bless me with the dust of the feet of the True Guru.<br>
  If only someone would come, if only someone would come, and lead me to meet my Perfect True Guru. ||3||<br>
  A Giver as great as the Guru, as great as the Guru - I cannot see any other.<br>
  He blesses me with the gift of the Lord's Name, the gift of the Lord's Name; He is the Immaculate Lord God.<br>
  Those who worship in adoration the Name of the Lord, Har, Har - their pain, doubts and fears are dispelled.<br>
  Through their loving service, those very fortunate ones, whose minds are attached to the Guru's Feet, meet Him.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Lord Himself causes us to meet the Guru; meeting the Almighty True Guru, peace is obtained.<br>
  A Giver as great as the Guru, as great as the Guru - I cannot see any other. ||4||1||<br>
  Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Without the Guru, I am - without the Guru, I am totally dishonored.<br>
  The Life of the World, the Life of the World, the Great Giver has led me to meet and merge with the Guru.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, I have merged into the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and meditate on it.<br>
  I was seeking and searching for Him, the Lord, my best friend, and I have found Him within the home of my own being.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 017</h2></center>
  I see the One Lord, and I know the One Lord; I realize Him within my soul.<br>
  Without the Guru, I am - without the Guru, I am totally dishonored. ||1||<br>
  Those who have found the True Guru, the True Guru, the Lord God unites them in His Union.<br>
  Their feet, their feet, I adore; I fall at their feet.<br>
  O Lord, Har, Har, I adore the feet of those who meditate on the True Guru, and the Almighty Lord God.<br>
  You are the Greatest Giver, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; please, reward my faith, O Lord King.<br>
  Meeting the Gursikh, my faith is rewarded; night and day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Those who have found the True Guru, the True Guru, the Lord God unites them in His Union. ||2||<br>
  I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to the Gursikhs, my dear friends.<br>
  They chant the Lord's Name, the Lord's Name; the Beloved Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my only Support.<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the companion of my breath of life; without it, I cannot live for an instant or a moment.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, the Giver of peace, shows His Mercy, and the Gurmukh drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  The Lord blesses him with faith, and unites him in His Union; He Himself adorns him.<br>
  I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to the Gursikhs, my dear friends. ||3||<br>
  The Lord Himself, the Lord Himself, is the Immaculate Almighty Lord God.<br>
  The Lord Himself, the Lord Himself, unites us with Himself; that which He does, comes to pass.<br>
  Whatever is pleasing to the Lord God, that alone comes to pass; nothing else can be done.<br>
  Even by very clever tricks, He cannot be obtained; all have grown weary of practicing cleverness.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, servant Nanak beholds the Lord; without the Lord, I have no other at all.<br>
  The Lord Himself, the Lord Himself, is the Immaculate Almighty Lord God. ||4||2||<br>
  Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord, the True Guru, the Lord, the True Guru - if only I could meet the Lord, the True Guru; His Lotus Feet are so pleasing to me.<br>
  The darkness of my ignorance was dispelled, when the Guru applied the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes.<br>
  The True Guru has applied the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes, and the darkness of ignorance has been dispelled.<br>
  Serving the Guru, I have obtained the supreme status; I meditate on the Lord with every breath, and every morsel of food.<br>
  Those, upon whom the Lord God has bestowed His Grace, are committed to the service of the True Guru.<br>
  The Lord, the True Guru, the Lord, the True Guru - if only I could meet the Lord, the True Guru; His Lotus Feet are so pleasing to me. ||1||<br>
  My True Guru, my True Guru is my Beloved; without the Guru, I cannot live.<br>
  He gives me the Name of the Lord, the Name of the Lord, my only companion in the end.<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is my only companion in the end; the Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me.<br>
  There, where neither child nor spouse shall accompany you, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har shall emancipate you.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, the Immaculate, Almighty Lord God; meeting Him, I meditate on the Name of the Lord.<br>
  My True Guru, my True Guru is my Beloved; without the Guru, I cannot live. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 018</h2></center>
  Those who have not obtained the Blessed Vision, the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the True Guru, the Almighty Lord God,<br>
  they have fruitlessly, fruitlessly wasted their whole lives in vain.<br>
  They have wasted away their whole lives in vain; those faithless cynics die a regretful death.<br>
  They have the jewel-treasure in their own homes, but still, they are hungry; those unlucky wretches are far away from the Lord.<br>
  O Lord, please, let me not see those who do not meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,<br>
  and who have not obtained the Blessed Vision, the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the True Guru, the Almighty Lord God. ||3||<br>
  I am a song-bird, I am a meek song-bird; I offer my prayer to the Lord.<br>
  If only I could meet the Guru, meet the Guru, O my Beloved; I dedicate myself to the devotional worship of the True Guru.<br>
  I worship the Lord, Har, Har, and the True Guru; the Lord God has granted His Grace.<br>
  Without the Guru, I have no other friend. The Guru, the True Guru, is my very breath of life.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru has implanted the Naam within me; the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the True Name.<br>
  I am a song-bird, I am a meek song-bird; I offer my prayer to the Lord. ||4||3||<br>
  Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O Lord, show Your Mercy, show Your Mercy, and let me meet the True Guru, the Giver of peace.<br>
  I go and ask, I go and ask from the True Guru, about the sermon of the Lord.<br>
  I ask about the sermon of the Lord from the True Guru, who has obtained the treasure of the Naam.<br>
  I bow at His Feet constantly, and pray to Him; the Guru, the True Guru, has shown me the Way.<br>
  He alone is a devotee, who looks alike upon pleasure and pain; he is imbued with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  O Lord, show Your Mercy, show Your Mercy, and let me meet the True Guru, the Giver of peace. ||1||<br>
  Listen as Gurmukh, listen as Gurmukh, to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; all egotism and sins are eradicated.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the troubles of the world vanish.<br>
  Those who contemplate the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are rid of their suffering and sins.<br>
  The True Guru has placed the sword of spiritual wisdom in my hands; I have overcome and slain the Messenger of Death.<br>
  The Lord God, the Giver of peace, has granted His Grace, and I am rid of pain, sin and disease.<br>
  Listen as Gurmukh, listen as Gurmukh, to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; all egotism and sins are eradicated. ||2||<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is so pleasing to my mind.<br>
  Speaking as Gurmukh, speaking as Gurmukh, chanting the Naam, all disease is eradicated.<br>
  As Gurmukh, chanting the Naam, all disease is eradicated, and the body becomes free of disease.<br>
  Night and day, one remains absorbed in the Perfect Poise of Samaadhi; meditate on the Name of the Lord, the inaccessible and unfathomable Lord.<br>
  Whether of high or low social status, one who meditates on the Naam obtains the supreme treasure.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 019</h2></center>
  Grant Your Grace, grant Your Grace, O Lord, and save me.<br>
  I am a sinner, I am a worthless sinner, I am meek, but I am Yours, O Lord.<br>
  I am a worthless sinner, and I am meek, but I am Yours; I seek Your Sanctuary, O Merciful Lord.<br>
  You are the Destroyer of pain, the Giver of absolute peace; I am a stone - carry me across and save me.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, servant Nanak has obtained the subtle essence of the Lord; through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he is saved.<br>
  Grant Your Grace, grant Your Grace, Lord, and save me. ||4||4||<br>
  Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, Ghorees ~ The Wedding Procession Songs:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  This body-horse was created by the Lord.<br>
  Blessed is human life, which is obtained by virtuous actions.<br>
  Human life is obtained only by the most virtuous actions; this body is radiant and golden.<br>
  The Gurmukh is imbued with the deep red color of the poppy; he is imbued with the new color of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, Har.<br>
  This body is so very beautiful; it chants the Name of the Lord, and it is adorned with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  By great good fortune, the body is obtained; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is its companion; O servant Nanak, the Lord has created it. ||1||<br>
  I place the saddle on the body-horse, the saddle of realization of the Good Lord.<br>
  Riding this horse, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  The terrifying world-ocean is rocked by countless waves, but the Gurmukh is carried across.<br>
  Embarking upon the boat of the Lord, the very fortunate ones cross over; the Guru, the Boatman, carries them across through the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Night and day, imbued with the Lord's Love, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Lord's lover loves the Lord.<br>
  Servant Nanak has obtained the state of Nirvaanaa, the state of ultimate goodness, the state of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  For a bridle in my mouth, the Guru has implanted spiritual wisdom within me.<br>
  He has applied the whip of the Lord's Love to my body.<br>
  Applying the whip of the Lord's Love to his body, the Gurmukh conquers his mind, and wins the battle of life.<br>
  He trains his untrained mind with the Word of the Shabad, and drinks in the rejuvenating essence of the Lord's Nectar.<br>
  Listen with your ears to the Word, uttered by the Guru, and attune your body-horse to the Lord's Love.<br>
  Servant Nanak has crossed over the long and treacherous path. ||3||<br>
  The transitory body-horse was created by the Lord.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is that body-horse which meditates on the Lord God.<br>
  Blessed and acclaimed is that body-horse which meditates on the Lord God; it is obtained by the merits of past actions.<br>
  Riding the body-horse, one crosses over the terrifying world ocean; the Gurmukh meets the Lord, the embodiment of supreme bliss.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, has perfectly arranged this wedding; the Saints have come together as a marriage party.<br>
  Servant Nanak has obtained the Lord as his Spouse; joining together, the Saints sing the songs of joy and congratulations. ||4||1||5||<br>
  Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The body is the Lord's horse; the Lord imbues it with the fresh and new color.<br>
  From the Guru, I ask for the Lord's spiritual wisdom.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 020</h2></center>
  I ask for the Lord's spiritual wisdom, and the Lord's sublime sermon; through the Name of the Lord, I have come to know His value and His state.<br>
  The Creator has made my life totally fruitful; I chant the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Lord's humble servant begs for the Lord's Name, for the Lord's Praises, and for devotional worship of the Lord God.<br>
  Says servant Nanak, listen, O Saints: devotional worship of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, is sublime and good. ||1||<br>
  The golden body is saddled with the saddle of gold.<br>
  It is adorned with the jewel of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Adorned with the jewel of the Naam, one obtains the Lord of the Universe; he meets the Lord, sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and obtains all sorts of comforts.<br>
  He obtains the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and he meditates on the Name of the Lord; by great good fortune, he assumes the color of the Lord's Love.<br>
  He meets his Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; His body is ever-new, and His color is ever-fresh.<br>
  Nanak chants and realizes the Naam; he begs for the Name of the Lord, the Lord God. ||2||<br>
  The Guru has placed the reins in the mouth of the body-horse.<br>
  The mind-elephant is overpowered by the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  The bride obtains the supreme status, as her mind is brought under control; she is the beloved of her Husband Lord.<br>
  Deep within her inner self, she is in love with her Lord; in His home, she is beautiful - she is the bride of her Lord God.<br>
  Imbued with the Lord's Love, she is intuitively absorbed in bliss; she obtains the Lord God, Har, Har.<br>
  Servant Nanak, the Lord's slave, says that only the very fortunate meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||<br>
  The body is the horse, upon which one rides to the Lord.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, one sings the songs of joy.<br>
  Sing the songs of joy to the Lord, serve the Name of the Lord, and become the servant of His servants.<br>
  You shall go and enter the Mansion of the Beloved Lord's Presence, and lovingly enjoy His Love.<br>
  I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, so pleasing to my mind; following the Guru's Teachings, I meditate on the Lord within my mind.<br>
  The Lord has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak; mounting the body-horse, he has found the Lord. ||4||2||6||<br>
  Raag Wadahans, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, Fourth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, I have found my Beloved Lord God.<br>
  I have made this body and mind a sacrifice, a sacrificial offering to my Lord.<br>
  Dedicating my body and mind, I have crossed over the terrifying world-ocean, and shaken off the fear of death.<br>
  Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, I have become immortal; my comings and goings have ceased.<br>
  I have found that home, of celestial Samaadhi; the Name of the Lord is my only Support.<br>
  Says Nanak, I enjoy peace and pleasure; I bow in reverence to the Perfect Guru. ||1||<br>
  Listen, O my friend and companion<br>
  - the Guru has given the Mantra of the Shabad, the True Word of God.<br>
  Meditating on this True Shabad, I sing the songs of joy, and my mind is rid of anxiety.<br>
  I have found God, who never leaves; forever and ever, He sits with me.<br>
  One who is pleasing to God receives true honor. The Lord God blesses him with wealth.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 021</h2></center>
  Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to such a humble being. O Lord, You bless all with Your bountiful blessings. ||2||<br>
  When it pleases You, then I am satisfied and satiated.<br>
  My mind is soothed and calmed, and all my thirst is quenched.<br>
  My mind is soothed and calmed, the burning has ceased, and I have found so many treasures.<br>
  All the Sikhs and servants partake of them; I am a sacrifice to my True Guru.<br>
  I have become fearless, imbued with the Love of my Lord Master, and I have shaken off the fear of death.<br>
  Slave Nanak, Your humble servant, lovingly embraces Your meditation; O Lord, be with me always. ||3||<br>
  My hopes and desires have been fulfilled, O my Lord.<br>
  I am worthless, without virtue; all virtues are Yours, O Lord.<br>
  All virtues are Yours, O my Lord and Master; with what mouth should I praise You?<br>
  You did not consider my merits and demerits; you forgave me in an instant.<br>
  I have obtained the nine treasures, congratulations are pouring in, and the unstruck melody resounds.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have found my Husband Lord within my own home, and all my anxiety is forgotten. ||4||1||<br>
  Shalok:<br>
  Why do you listen to falsehood? It shall vanish like a gust of wind.<br>
  O Nanak, those ears are acceptable, which listen to the True Master. ||1||<br>
  Chhant:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those who listen with their ears to the Lord God.<br>
  Blissful and comfortable are those, who with their tongues chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  They are naturally embellished, with priceless virtues; they have come to save the world.<br>
  God's Feet are the boat, which carries so many across the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Those who are blessed with the favor of my Lord and Master, are not asked to render their account.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who listen to God with their ears. ||1||<br>
  Shalok:<br>
  With my eyes, I have seen the Light of the Lord, but my great thirst is not quenched.<br>
  O Nanak, those eyes are different, which behold my Husband Lord. ||1||<br>
  Chhant:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those who have seen the Lord God.<br>
  In the True Court of the Lord, they are approved.<br>
  They are approved by their Lord and Master, and acclaimed as supreme; they are imbued with the Lord's Love.<br>
  They are satiated with the sublime essence of the Lord, and they merge in celestial peace; in each and every heart, they see the all-pervading Lord.<br>
  They alone are the friendly Saints, and they alone are happy, who are pleasing to their Lord and Master.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice to those who have seen the Lord God. ||2||<br>
  Shalok:<br>
  The body is blind, totally blind and desolate, without the Naam.<br>
  O Nanak, fruitful is the life of that being, within whose heart the True Lord and Master abides. ||1||<br>
  Chhant:<br>
  I am cut into pieces as a sacrifice, to those who have seen my Lord God.<br>
  His humble servants partake of the Sweet Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord, Har, Har, and are satiated.<br>
  The Lord seems sweet to their minds; God is merciful to them, His Ambrosial Nectar rains down upon them, and they are at peace.<br>
  Pain is eliminated and doubt is dispelled from the body; chanting the Name of the Lord of the World, their victory is celebrated.<br>
  They are rid of emotional attachment, their sins are erased, and their association with the five passions is broken off.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 022</h2></center>
  Says Nanak, I am every bit a sacrifice to those, within whose hearts my Lord God abides. ||3||<br>
  Shalok:<br>
  Those who long for the Lord, are said to be His servants.<br>
  Nanak knows this Truth, that the Lord is not different from His Saint. ||1||<br>
  Chhant:<br>
  As water mixes and blends with water,<br>
  so does one's light mix and blend with the Lord's Light.<br>
  Merging with the perfect, all-powerful Creator, one comes to know his own self.<br>
  Then, he enters the celestial state of absolute Samaadhi, and speaks of the One and Only Lord.<br>
  He Himself is unmanifest, and He Himself is liberated; He Himself speaks of Himself.<br>
  O Nanak, doubt, fear and the limitations of the three qualities are dispelled, as one merges into the Lord, like water blending with water. ||4||2||<br>
  Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  God is the all-powerful Creator, the Cause of causes.<br>
  He preserves the whole world, reaching out with His hand.<br>
  He is the all-powerful, safe Sanctuary, Lord and Master, Treasure of mercy, Giver of peace.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to Your slaves, who recognize only the One Lord.<br>
  His color and shape cannot be seen; His description is indescribable.<br>
  Prays Nanak, hear my prayer, O God, Almighty Creator, Cause of causes. ||1||<br>
  These beings are Yours; You are their Creator.<br>
  God is the Destroyer of pain, suffering and doubt.<br>
  Eliminate my doubt, pain and suffering in an instant, and preserve me, O Lord, Merciful to the meek.<br>
  You are mother, father and friend, O Lord and Master; the whole world is Your child, O Lord of the World.<br>
  One who comes seeking Your Sanctuary, obtains the treasure of virtue, and does not have to enter the cycle of birth and death again.<br>
  Prays Nanak, I am Your slave. All beings are Yours; You are their Creator. ||2||<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, twenty-four hours a day,<br>
  the fruits of the heart's desires are obtained.<br>
  Your heart's desires are obtained, meditating on God, and the fear of death is dispelled.<br>
  I sing of the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and my hopes are fulfilled.<br>
  Renouncing egotism, emotional attachment and all corruption, we become pleasing to the Mind of God.<br>
  Prays Nanak, day and night, meditate forever on the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||<br>
  At the Lord's Door, the unstruck melody resounds.<br>
  In each and every heart, the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, sings.<br>
  The Lord of the Universe sings, and abides forever; He is unfathomable, profoundly deep, lofty and exalted.<br>
  His virtues are infinite - none of them can be described. No one can reach Him.<br>
  He Himself creates, and He Himself sustains; all beings and creatures are fashioned by Him.<br>
  Prays Nanak, happiness comes from devotional worship of the Naam; at His Door, the unstruck melody resounds. ||4||3||<br>
  Raag Wadahans, First Mehl, Fifth House, Alaahanees ~ Songs Of Mourning:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Blessed is the Creator, the True King, who has linked the whole world to its tasks.<br>
  When one's time is up, and the measure is full, this dear soul is caught, and driven off.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 023</h2></center>
  This dear soul is driven off, when the pre-ordained Order is received, and all the relatives cry out in mourning.<br>
  The body and the swan-soul are separated, when one's days are past and done, O my mother.<br>
  As is one's pre-ordained Destiny, so does one receive, according to one's past actions.<br>
  Blessed is the Creator, the True King, who has linked the whole world to its tasks. ||1||<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on the Lord and Master, O my Siblings of Destiny; everyone has to pass this way.<br>
  These false entanglements last for only a few days; then, one must surely move on to the world hereafter.<br>
  He must surely move on to the world hereafter, like a guest; so why does he indulge in ego?<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord; serving Him, you shall obtain peace in His Court.<br>
  In the world hereafter, no one's commands will be obeyed. According to their actions, each and every person proceeds.<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on the Lord and Master, O my Siblings of Destiny; everyone has to pass this way. ||2||<br>
  Whatever pleases the Almighty Lord, that alone comes to pass; this world is an opportunity to please Him.<br>
  The True Creator Lord is pervading and permeating the water, the land and the air.<br>
  The True Creator Lord is invisible and infinite; His limits cannot be found.<br>
  Fruitful is the coming of those, who meditate single-mindedly on Him.<br>
  He destroys, and having destroyed, He creates; by His Order, He adorns us.<br>
  Whatever pleases the Almighty Lord, that alone comes to pass; this world is an opportunity to please Him. ||3||<br>
  Nanak: he alone truly weeps, O Baba, who weeps in the Lord's Love.<br>
  One who weeps for the sake of worldly objects, O Baba, weeps totally in vain.<br>
  This weeping is all in vain; the world forgets the Lord, and weeps for the sake of Maya.<br>
  He does not distinguish between good and evil, and wastes away this life in vain.<br>
  Everyone who comes here, shall have to leave; to act in ego is false.<br>
  Nanak: he alone truly weeps, O Baba, who weeps in the Lord's Love. ||4||1||<br>
  Wadahans, First Mehl:<br>
  Come, O my companions - let us meet together and dwell upon the True Name.<br>
  Let us weep over the body's separation from the Lord and Master; let us remember Him in contemplation.<br>
  Let us remember the Lord and Master in contemplation, and keep a watchful eye on the Path. We shall have to go there as well.<br>
  He who has created, also destroys; whatever happens is by His Will.<br>
  Whatever He has done, has come to pass; how can we command Him?<br>
  Come, O my companions - let us meet together and dwell upon the True Name. ||1||<br>
  Death would not be called bad, O people, if one knew how to truly die.<br>
  Serve your Almighty Lord and Master, and your path in the world hereafter will be easy.<br>
  Take this easy path, and you shall obtain the fruits of your rewards, and receive honor in the world hereafter.<br>
  Go there with your offering, and you shall merge in the True Lord; your honor shall be confirmed.<br>
  You shall obtain a place in the Mansion of the Lord Master's Presence; being pleasing to Him, you shall enjoy the pleasures of His Love.<br>
  Death would not be called bad, O people, if one knew how to truly die. ||2||<br>
  The death of brave heroes is blessed, if it is approved by God.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 024</h2></center>
  They alone are acclaimed as brave warriors in the world hereafter, who receive true honor in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  They are honored in the Court of the Lord; they depart with honor, and they do not suffer pain in the world hereafter.<br>
  They meditate on the One Lord, and obtain the fruits of their rewards. Serving the Lord, their fear is dispelled.<br>
  Do not indulge in egotism, and dwell within your own mind; the Knower Himself knows everything.<br>
  The death of brave heroes is blessed, if it is approved by God. ||3||<br>
  Nanak: for whom should we mourn, O Baba? This world is merely a play.<br>
  The Lord Master beholds His work, and contemplates His creative potency.<br>
  He contemplates His creative potency, having established the Universe. He who created it, He alone knows.<br>
  He Himself beholds it, and He Himself understands it. He Himself realizes the Hukam of His Command.<br>
  He who created these things, He alone knows. His subtle form is infinite.<br>
  Nanak: for whom should we mourn, O Baba? This world is merely a play. ||4||2||<br>
  Wadahans, First Mehl, Dakhanee:<br>
  The True Creator Lord is True - know this well; He is the True Sustainer.<br>
  He Himself fashioned His Own Self; the True Lord is invisible and infinite.<br>
  He brought together, and then separated, the two grinding stones of the earth and the sky; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.<br>
  He created the sun and the moon; night and day, they move according to His Thought. ||1||<br>
  O True Lord and Master, You are True. O True Lord, bless me with Your Love. ||Pause||<br>
  You created the Universe; You are the Giver of pain and pleasure.<br>
  You created woman and man, the love of poison, and emotional attachment to Maya.<br>
  The four sources of creation, and the power of the Word, are also of Your making. You give Support to all beings.<br>
  You have made the Creation as Your Throne; You are the True Judge. ||2||<br>
  You created comings and goings, but You are ever-stable, O Creator Lord.<br>
  In birth and death, in coming and going, this soul is held in bondage by corruption.<br>
  The evil person has forgotten the Naam; he has drowned - what can he do now?<br>
  Forsaking merit, he has loaded the poisonous cargo of demerits; he is a trader of sins. ||3||<br>
  The beloved soul has received the Call, the Command of the True Creator Lord.<br>
  The soul, the husband, has become separated from the body, the bride. The Lord is the Re-uniter of the separated ones.<br>
  No one cares for your beauty, O beautiful bride.; the Messenger of Death is bound only by the Lord Commander's Command.<br>
  He does not distinguish between young children and old people; he tears apart love and affection. ||4||<br>
  The nine doors are closed by the True Lord's Command, and the swan-soul takes flight into the skies.<br>
  The body-bride is separated, and defrauded by falsehood; she is now a widow - her husband's body lies dead in the courtyard.<br>
  The widow cries out at the door, "The light of my mind has gone out, O my mother, with his death."<br>
  So cry out, O soul-brides of the Husband Lord, and dwell on the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. ||5||<br>
  Her loved one is cleansed, bathed in water, and dressed in silken robes.<br>
  The musicians play, and the Bani of the True Lord's Words are sung; the five relatives feel as if they too are dead, so deadened are their minds.<br>
  "Separation from my beloved is like death to me!" cries the widow. "My life in this world is cursed and worthless!"<br>
  But she alone is approved, who dies, while yet still alive; she lives for the sake of the Love of her Beloved. ||6||<br>
  So cry out in mourning, you who have come to mourn; this world is false and fraudulent.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 025</h2></center>
  I too have been defrauded, chasing after worldly entanglements; my Husband Lord has forsaken me - I practice the evil deeds of a wife without a spouse.<br>
  In each and every home, are the brides of the Husband Lord; they gaze upon their Handsome Lord with love and affection.<br>
  I sing the Praises of my True Husband Lord, and through the Naam, the Name of my Husband Lord, I blossom forth. ||7||<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, the soul-bride's dress is transformed, and she is adorned with Truth.<br>
  Come and meet with me, O brides of the Lord; let's meditate in remembrance on the Creator Lord.<br>
  Through the Naam, the soul-bride becomes the Lord's favorite; she is adorned with Truth.<br>
  Do not sing the songs of separation, O Nanak; reflect upon God. ||8||3||<br>
  Wadahans, First Mehl:<br>
  The One who creates and dissolves the world - that Lord and Master alone knows His creative power.<br>
  Do not search for the True Lord far away; recognize the Word of the Shabad in each and every heart.<br>
  Recognize the Shabad, and do not think that the Lord is far away; He created this creation.<br>
  Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one obtains peace; without the Naam, he plays a losing game.<br>
  The One who established the Universe, He alone knows the Way; what can anyone say?<br>
  The One who established the world cast the net of Maya over it; accept Him as your Lord and Master. ||1||<br>
  O Baba, he has come, and now he must get up and depart; this world is only a way-station.<br>
  Upon each and every head, the True Lord writes their destiny of pain and pleasure, according to their past actions.<br>
  He bestows pain and pleasure, according to the deeds done; the record of these deeds stays with the soul.<br>
  He does those deeds which the Creator Lord causes him to do; he attempts no other actions.<br>
  The Lord Himself is detached, while the world is entangled in conflict; by His Command, He emancipates it.<br>
  He may put this off today, but tomorrow he is seized by death; in love with duality, he practices corruption. ||2||<br>
  The path of death is dark and dismal; the way cannot be seen.<br>
  There is no water, no quilt or mattress, and no food there.<br>
  He receives no food there, no honor or water, no clothes or decorations.<br>
  The chain is put around his neck, and the Messenger of Death standing over his head strikes him; he cannot see the door of his home.<br>
  The seeds planted on this path do not sprout; bearing the weight of his sins upon his head, he regrets and repents.<br>
  Without the True Lord, no one is his friend; reflect upon this as true. ||3||<br>
  O Baba, they alone are known to truly weep and wail, who meet together and weep, chanting the Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Defrauded by Maya and worldly affairs, the weepers weep.<br>
  They weep for the sake of worldly affairs, and they do not wash off their own filth; the world is merely a dream.<br>
  Like the juggler, deceiving by his tricks, one is deluded by egotism, falsehood and illusion.<br>
  The Lord Himself reveals the Path; He Himself is the Doer of deeds.<br>
  Those who are imbued with the Naam, are protected by the Perfect Guru, O Nanak; they merge in celestial bliss. ||4||4||<br>
  Wadahans, First Mehl:<br>
  O Baba, whoever has come, will rise up and leave; this world is merely a false show.<br>
  One's true home is obtained by serving the True Lord; real Truth is obtained by being truthful.<br>
  By falsehood and greed, no place of rest is found, and no place in the world hereafter is obtained.<br>
  No one invites him to come in and sit down. He is like a crow in a deserted home.<br>
  Trapped by birth and death, he is separated from the Lord for such a long time; the whole world is wasting away.<br>
  Greed, worldly entanglements and Maya deceive the world. Death hovers over its head, and causes it to weep. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 026</h2></center>
  Come, O Baba, and Siblings of Destiny - let's join together; take me in your arms, and bless me with your prayers.<br>
  O Baba, union with the True Lord cannot be broken; bless me with your prayers for union with my Beloved.<br>
  Bless me with your prayers, that I may perform devotional worship service to my Lord; for those already united with Him, what is there to unite?<br>
  Some have wandered away from the Name of the Lord, and lost the Path. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is the true game.<br>
  Do not go on Death's path; remain merged in the Word of the Shabad, the true form throughout the ages.<br>
  Through good fortune, we meet such friends and relatives, who meet with the Guru, and escape the noose of Death. ||2||<br>
  O Baba, we come into the world naked, into pain and pleasure, according to the record of our account.<br>
  The call of our pre-ordained destiny cannot be altered; it follows from our past actions.<br>
  The True Lord sits and writes of ambrosial nectar, and bitter poison; as the Lord attaches us, so are we attached.<br>
  The Charmer, Maya, has worked her charms, and the multi-colored thread is around everyone's neck.<br>
  Through shallow intellect, the mind becomes shallow, and one eats the fly, along with the sweets.<br>
  Contrary to custom, he comes into the Dark Age of Kali Yuga naked, and naked he is bound down and sent away again. ||3||<br>
  O Baba, weep and mourn if you must; the beloved soul is bound and driven off.<br>
  The pre-ordained record of destiny cannot be erased; the summons has come from the Lord's Court.<br>
  The messenger comes, when it pleases the Lord, and the mourners begin to mourn.<br>
  Sons, brothers, nephews and very dear friends weep and wail.<br>
  Let him weep, who weeps in the Fear of God, cherishing the virtues of God. No one dies with the dead.<br>
  O Nanak, throughout the ages, they are known as wise, who weep, remembering the True Lord. ||4||5||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Praise God, the True Lord; He is all-powerful to do all things.<br>
  The soul-bride shall never be a widow, and she shall never have to endure suffering.<br>
  She shall never suffer - night and day, she enjoys pleasures; that soul-bride merges in the Mansion of her Lord's Presence.<br>
  She knows her Beloved, the Architect of karma, and she speaks words of ambrosial sweetness.<br>
  The virtuous soul-brides dwell on the Lord's virtues; they keep their Husband Lord in their remembrance, and so they never suffer separation from Him.<br>
  So praise your True Husband Lord, who is all-powerful to do all things. ||1||<br>
  The True Lord and Master is realized through the Word of His Shabad; He blends all with Himself.<br>
  That soul-bride is imbued with the Love of her Husband Lord, who banishes her self-conceit from within.<br>
  Eradicating her ego from within herself, death shall not consume her again; as Gurmukh, she knows the One Lord God.<br>
  The desire of the soul-bride is fulfilled; deep within herself, she is drenched in His Love. She meets the Great Giver, the Life of the World.<br>
  Imbued with love for the Shabad, she is like a youth intoxicated; she merges into the very being of her Husband Lord.<br>
  The True Lord Master is realized through the Word of His Shabad. He blends all with Himself. ||2||<br>
  Those who have realized their Husband Lord - I go and ask those Saints about Him.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 027</h2></center>
  Renouncing ego, I serve them; thus I meet my True Husband Lord, with intuitive ease.<br>
  The True Husband Lord comes to meet the soul-bride who practices Truth, and is imbued with the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
  She shall never become a widow; she shall always be a happy bride. Deep within herself, she dwells in the celestial bliss of Samaadhi.<br>
  Her Husband Lord is fully pervading everywhere; beholding Him ever-present, she enjoys His Love, with intuitive ease.<br>
  Those who have realized their Husband Lord - I go and ask those Saints about Him. ||3||<br>
  The separated ones also meet with their Husband Lord, if they fall at the Feet of the True Guru.<br>
  The True Guru is forever merciful; through the Word of His Shabad, demerits are burnt away.<br>
  Burning away her demerits through the Shabad, the soul-bride eradicates her love of duality, and remains absorbed in the True, True Lord.<br>
  Through the True Shabad, everlasting peace is obtained, and egotism and doubt are dispelled.<br>
  The Immaculate Husband Lord is forever the Giver of peace; O Nanak, through the Word of His Shabad, He is met.<br>
  The separated ones also meet with their Husband Lord, if they fall at the feet of the True Guru. ||4||1||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  Listen, O brides of the Lord: serve your Beloved Husband Lord, and contemplate the Word of His Shabad.<br>
  The worthless bride does not know her Husband Lord - she is deluded; forgetting her Husband Lord, she weeps and wails.<br>
  She weeps, thinking of her Husband Lord, and she cherishes His virtues; her Husband Lord does not die, and does not leave.<br>
  As Gurmukh, she knows the Lord; through the Word of His Shabad, He is realized; through True Love, she merges with Him.<br>
  She who does not know her Husband Lord, the Architect of karma, is deluded by falsehood - she herself is false.<br>
  Listen, O brides of the Lord: serve your Beloved Husband Lord, and contemplate the Word of His Shabad. ||1||<br>
  He Himself created the whole world; the world comes and goes.<br>
  The love of Maya has ruined the world; people die, to be re-born, over and over again.<br>
  People die to be re-born, over and over again, while their sins increase; without spiritual wisdom, they are deluded.<br>
  Without the Word of the Shabad, the Husband Lord is not found; the worthless, false bride wastes her life away, weeping and wailing.<br>
  He is my Beloved Husband Lord, the Life of the World - for whom should I weep? They alone weep, who forget their Husband Lord.<br>
  He Himself created the whole world; the world comes and goes. ||2||<br>
  That Husband Lord is True, forever True; He does not die, and He does not leave.<br>
  The ignorant soul-bride wanders in delusion; in the love of duality, she sits like a widow.<br>
  She sits like a widow, in the love of duality; through emotional attachment to Maya, she suffers in pain. She is growing old, and her body is withering away.<br>
  Whatever has come, all that shall pass away; through the love of duality, they suffer in pain.<br>
  They do not see the Messenger of Death; they long for Maya, and their consciousness is attached to greed.<br>
  That Husband Lord is True, forever True; He does not die, and He does not leave. ||3||<br>
  Some weep and wail, separated from their Husband Lord; the blind ones do not know that their Husband is with them.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, they may meet with their True Husband, and cherish Him always deep within.<br>
  She cherishes her Husband deep within herself - He is always with her; the self-willed manmukhs think that He is far away.<br>
  This body rolls in the dust, and is totally useless; it does not realize the Presence of the Lord and Master.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 028</h2></center>
  O Nanak, that soul-bride is united in Union; she cherishes her Beloved Husband forever, deep within herself.<br>
  Some weep and wail, separated from their Husband Lord; the blind ones do not know that their Husband is with them. ||4||2||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who are separated from their Beloved Husband Lord weep and wail, but my True Husband Lord is always with me.<br>
  Those who know that they must depart, serve the True Guru, and dwell upon the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  They dwell constantly upon the Naam, and the True Guru is with them; they serve the True Guru, and so obtain peace.<br>
  Through the Shabad, they kill death, and enshrine the True Lord within their hearts; they shall not have to come and go again.<br>
  True is the Lord and Master, and True is His Name; bestowing His Gracious Glance, one is enraptured.<br>
  Those who are separated from their Beloved Husband Lord weep and wail, but my True Husband Lord is always with me. ||1||<br>
  God, my Lord and Master, is the highest of all; how can I meet my Dear Beloved?<br>
  When the True Guru united me, then I was naturally united with my Husband Lord, and now, I keep Him clasped to my heart.<br>
  I constantly, lovingly cherish my Beloved within my heart; through the True Guru, I see my Beloved.<br>
  The cloak of Maya's love is false; wearing it, one slips and loses his footing.<br>
  That cloak is true, which is dyed in the color of the Love of my Beloved; wearing it, my inner thirst is quenched.<br>
  God, my Lord and Master, is the highest of all; how can I meet my Dear Beloved? ||2||<br>
  I have realized my True Lord God, while the other worthless ones have gone astray.<br>
  I dwell constantly upon my Beloved Husband Lord, and reflect upon the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
  The bride reflects upon the True Shabad, and is imbued with His Love; she meets with the True Guru, and finds her Beloved.<br>
  Deep within, she is imbued with His Love, and intoxicated with delight; her enemies and sufferings are all taken away.<br>
  Surrender body and soul to your Guru, and then you shall become happy; your thirst and pain shall be taken away.<br>
  I have realized my True Lord God, while the other worthless ones have gone astray. ||3||<br>
  The True Lord Himself created the world; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.<br>
  He Himself unites, and causes us to unite with Him; He Himself blesses us with His Love.<br>
  He Himself blesses us with His Love, and deals in celestial peace; the life of the Gurmukh is reformed.<br>
  Blessed is his coming into the world; he banishes his self-conceit, and is acclaimed as true in the Court of the True Lord.<br>
  The light of the jewel of spiritual wisdom shines within his heart, O Nanak, and he loves the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The True Lord Himself created the world; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness. ||4||3||<br>
  Wadahans, Third Mehl:<br>
  This body is frail; old age is overtaking it.<br>
  Those who are protected by the Guru are saved, while others die, to be reincarnated; they continue coming and going.<br>
  Others die, to be reincarnated; they continue coming and going, and in the end, they depart regretfully. Without the Name, there is no peace.<br>
  As one acts here, so does he obtain his rewards; the self-willed manmukh loses his honor.<br>
  In the City of Death, there is pitch darkness, and huge clouds of dust; neither sister nor brother is there.<br>
  This body is frail; old age is overtaking it. ||1||<br>
  The body becomes like gold, when the True Guru unites one with Himself.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 029</h2></center>
  Doubt and Maya have been removed from within me, and I am merged in the Naam, the True Name of the Lord.<br>
  Merged in the True Name of the Lord, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; meeting my Beloved, I have found peace.<br>
  I am in constant bliss, day and night; egotism has been dispelled from within me.<br>
  I fall at the feet of those who enshrine the Naam within their consciousness.<br>
  The body becomes like gold, when the True Guru unites one with Himself. ||2||<br>
  We truly praise the True Lord, when the True Guru imparts understanding.<br>
  Without the True Guru, they are deluded by doubt; going to the world hereafter, what face will they display?<br>
  What face will they show, when they go there? They will regret and repent for their sins; their actions will bring them only pain and suffering.<br>
  Those who are imbued with the Naam are dyed in the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love; they merge into the Being of their Husband Lord.<br>
  I can conceive of no other as great as the Lord; unto whom should I go and speak?<br>
  We truly praise the True Lord, when the True Guru imparts understanding. ||3||<br>
  I fall at the feet of those who praise the Truest of the True.<br>
  Those humble beings are true, and immaculately pure; meeting them, all filth is washed off.<br>
  Meeting them, all filth is washed off; bathing in the Pool of Truth, one becomes truthful, with intuitive ease.<br>
  The True Guru has given me the realization of the Naam, the Immaculate Name of the Lord, the unfathomable, the imperceptible.<br>
  Those who perform devotional worship to the Lord night and day, are imbued with His Love; O Nanak, they are absorbed in the True Lord.<br>
  I fall at the feet of those who meditate on the Truest of the True. ||4||4||<br>
  Vaar Of Wadahans, Fourth Mehl: To Be Sung In The Tune Of Lalaa-Behleemaa:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The great swans are imbued with the Word of the Shabad; they enshrine the True Name within their hearts.<br>
  They gather Truth, remain always in Truth, and love the True Name.<br>
  They are always pure and immaculate - filth does not touch them; they are blessed with the Grace of the Creator Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who, night and day, meditate on the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  I thought that he was a great swan, so I associated with him.<br>
  If I had known that he was only a wretched heron from birth, I would not have touched him. ||2||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Seeing the swans swimming, the herons became envious.<br>
  But the poor herons drowned and died, and floated with their heads down, and their feet above. ||3||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You Yourself are Yourself, all by Yourself; You Yourself created the creation.<br>
  You Yourself are Yourself the Formless Lord; there is no other than You.<br>
  You are the all-powerful Cause of causes; what You do, comes to be.<br>
  You give gifts to all beings, without their asking.<br>
  Everyone proclaims, "Waaho! Waaho! Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, who has given the supreme gift of the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 030</h2></center>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The entire universe is in fear; only the Dear Lord is fearless.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and then, fear cannot stay there.<br>
  Enemies and pain cannot come close, and no one can touch him.<br>
  The Gurmukh reflects upon the Lord in his mind; whatever pleases the Lord - that alone comes to pass.<br>
  O Nanak, He Himself preserves one's honor; He alone resolves our affairs. ||1||-<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Some friends are leaving, some have already left, and those remaining will eventually leave.<br>
  Those who do not serve the True Guru, come and go regretting.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are attuned to Truth are not separated; serving the True Guru, they merge into the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Meet with that True Guru, the True Friend, within whose mind the Lord, the virtuous One, abides.<br>
  Meet with that Beloved True Guru, who has subdued ego from within himself.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the Perfect True Guru, who has given the Lord's Teachings to reform the whole world.<br>
  O Saints, meditate constantly on the Lord's Name, and cross over the terrifying, poisonous world-ocean.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has taught me about the Lord; I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru. ||2||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Service to, and obedience to the True Guru, is the essence of comfort and peace.<br>
  Doing so, one obtains honor here, and the door of salvation in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  In this way, perform the tasks of Truth, wear Truth, and take the Support of the True Name.<br>
  Associating with Truth, obtain Truth, and love the True Name.<br>
  Through the True Word of the Shabad, be always happy, and you shall be acclaimed as True in the True Court.<br>
  O Nanak, he alone serves the True Guru, whom the Creator has blessed with His Glance of Grace. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Cursed is the life, and cursed is the dwelling, of those who serve another.<br>
  Abandoning the Ambrosial Nectar, they turn to poison; they earn poison, and poison is their only wealth.<br>
  Poison is their food, and poison is their dress; they fill their mouths with morsels of poison.<br>
  In this world, they earn only pain and suffering, and dying, they go to abide in hell.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs have filthy faces; they do not know the Word of the Shabad; in sexual desire and anger they waste away.<br>
  They forsake the Fear of the True Guru, and because of their stubborn ego, their efforts do not come to fruition.<br>
  In the City of Death, they are bound and beaten, and no one hears their prayers.<br>
  O Nanak, they act according to their pre-ordained destiny; the Gurmukh abides in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Serve the True Guru, O Holy people; He implants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in our minds.<br>
  Worship the True Guru day and night; He leads us the meditate on the Lord of the Universe, the Master of the Universe.<br>
  Behold the True Guru, each and every moment; He shows us the Divine Path of the Lord.<br>
  Let everyone fall at the feet of the True Guru; He has dispelled the darkness of emotional attachment.<br>
  Let everyone hail and praise the True Guru, who has led us to find the treasure of the Lord's devotional worship. ||3||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, hunger departs; by wearing the robes of a beggar, hunger does not depart.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 031</h2></center>
  Afflicted with pain, he wanders from house to house, and in the world hereafter, he receives double punishment.<br>
  Peace does not come to his heart - he is not content to eat what comes his way.<br>
  With his stubborn mind, he begs, and grabs, and annoys those who give.<br>
  Instead of wearing these beggar's robes, it is better to be a householder, and give to others.<br>
  Those who are attuned to the Word of the Shabad, acquire understanding; the others wander, deluded by doubt.<br>
  They act according to their past actions; it is useless to talk to them.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are pleasing unto the Lord are good; He upholds their honor. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Serving the True Guru, one finds a lasting peace; the pains of birth and death are removed.<br>
  He is not troubled by anxiety, and the carefree Lord comes to dwell in the mind.<br>
  Deep within himself, is the sacred shrine of spiritual wisdom, revealed by the True Guru.<br>
  His filth is removed, and his soul becomes immaculately pure, bathing in the sacred shrine, the pool of Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  The friend meets with the True Friend, the Lord, through the love of the Shabad.<br>
  Within the home of his own being, he finds the Divine Self, and his light blends with the Light.<br>
  The Messenger of Death does not leave the hypocrite; he is led away in dishonor.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam are saved; they are in love with the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Go, and sit in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, where the Name of the Lord is churned.<br>
  In peace and poise, contemplate the Lord's Name - don't lose the essence of the Lord.<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, constantly, day and night, and you shall be accepted in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  He alone finds the Perfect True Guru, on whose forehead such a pre-ordained destiny is written.<br>
  Let everyone bow in worship to the Guru, who utters the sermon of the Lord. ||4||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The friends who love the True Guru, meet with the Lord, the True Friend.<br>
  Meeting their Beloved, they meditate on the True Lord with love and affection.<br>
  Their minds are appeased by their own minds, through the incomparable Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  These friends are united, and will not be separated again; they have been united by the Creator Lord Himself.<br>
  Some do not believe in the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan; they do not contemplate the Shabad.<br>
  The separated ones are in love with duality - what more separation can they suffer?<br>
  Friendship with the self-willed manmukhs lasts for only a few short days.<br>
  This friendship is broken in an instant; this friendship leads to corruption.<br>
  They do not fear the True Lord within their hearts, and they do not love the Naam.<br>
  O Nanak, why become friends with those whom the Creator Lord Himself has misled? ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Some remain constantly imbued with the Lord's Love; I am forever a sacrifice to them.<br>
  I dedicate my mind, soul and wealth to them; bowing low, I fall at their feet.<br>
  Meeting them, the soul is satisfied, and one's hunger and thirst all depart.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are happy forever; they lovingly focus their minds on the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who recites the sermon of the Lord's Teachings.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 032</h2></center>
  I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru, who has led me to serve the Lord.<br>
  That Beloved True Guru is always with me; wherever I may be, He will save me.<br>
  Most blessed is that Guru, who imparts understanding of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who has given me the Lord's Name, and fulfilled the desires of my mind. ||5||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Consumed by desires, the world is burning and dying; burning and burning, it cries out.<br>
  But if it meets with the cooling and soothing True Guru, it does not burn any longer.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Name, and without contemplating the Word of the Shabad, no one becomes fearless. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Wearing ceremonial robes, the fire is not quenched, and the mind is filled with anxiety.<br>
  Destroying the snake's hole, the snake is not killed; it is just like doing deeds without a Guru.<br>
  Serving the Giver, the True Guru, the Shabad comes to abide in the mind.<br>
  The mind and body are cooled and soothed; peace ensues, and the fire of desire is quenched.<br>
  The supreme comforts and lasting peace are obtained, when one eradicates ego from within.<br>
  He alone becomes a detached Gurmukh, who lovingly focuses his consciousness on the True Lord.<br>
  Anxiety does not affect him at all; he is satisfied and satiated with the Name of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Naam, no one is saved; they are utterly ruined by egotism. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Those who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, obtain all peace and comforts.<br>
  Fruitful is the entire life of those, who hunger for the Name of the Lord in their minds.<br>
  Those who worship the Lord in adoration, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, forget all their pains and suffering.<br>
  Those Gursikhs are good Saints, who care for nothing other than the Lord.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is their Guru, whose mouth tastes the Ambrosial Fruit of the Lord's Name. ||6||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Messenger of Death is the enemy of life, but he acts according to the Lord's Command.<br>
  Those who are protected by the Guru are saved, while the self-willed manmukhs receive their punishment.<br>
  The world is under the control, and in the bondage of the Messenger of Death; no one can hold him back.<br>
  So serve the One who created Death; as Gurmukh, no pain shall touch you.<br>
  O Nanak, Death serves the Gurmukhs; the True Lord abides in their minds. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  This body is filled with disease; without the Word of the Shabad, the pain of the disease of ego does not depart.<br>
  When one meets the True Guru, then he becomes immaculately pure, and he enshrines the Lord's Name within his mind.<br>
  O Nanak, meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Peace-Giving Lord, his pains are automatically forgotten. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru, who has taught me about the Lord, the Life of the World.<br>
  I am every bit a sacrifice to the Guru, the Lover of Nectar, who has revealed the Name of the Lord.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who has totally cured me of the fatal disease of egotism.<br>
  Glorious and great are the virtues of the Guru, who has eradicated evil, and instructed me in virtue.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 033</h2></center>
  The True Guru meets with those upon whose foreheads such blessed destiny is recorded. ||7||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  They alone worship the Lord, who remain dead while yet alive; the Gurmukhs worship the Lord continually.<br>
  The Lord blesses them with the treasure of devotional worship, which no one can destroy.<br>
  They obtain the treasure of virtue, the One True Lord, within their minds.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs remain united with the Lord; they shall never be separated again. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  He does not serve the True Guru; how can he reflect upon the Lord?<br>
  He does not appreciate the value of the Shabad; the fool wanders in corruption and sin.<br>
  The blind and ignorant perform all sorts of ritualistic actions; they are in love with duality.<br>
  Those who take unjustified pride in themselves, are punished and humiliated by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  O Nanak, who else is there to ask? The Lord Himself is the Forgiver. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You, O Creator, know all things; all beings belong to You.<br>
  Those who are pleasing to You, You unite with Yourself; what can the poor creatures do?<br>
  You are all-powerful, the Cause of causes, the True Creator Lord.<br>
  Only those unite with you, Beloved Lord, whom you approve and who meditate on Guru's Word.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to my True Guru, who has allowed me to see my unseen Lord. ||8||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  He is the Assayer of jewels; He contemplates the jewel.<br>
  He is ignorant and totally blind - he does not appreciate the value of the jewel.<br>
  The Jewel is the Word of the Guru's Shabad; the Knower alone knows it.<br>
  The fools take pride in themselves, and are ruined in birth and death.<br>
  O Nanak, he alone obtains the jewel, who, as Gurmukh, enshrines love for it.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, forever and ever, make the Name of the Lord your daily occupation.<br>
  If the Lord shows His Mercy, then I keep Him enshrined within my heart. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  They do not serve the True Guru, and they do not embrace love for the Lord's Name.<br>
  Do not even think that they are alive - the Creator Lord Himself has killed them.<br>
  Egotism is such a terrible disease; in the love of duality, they do their deeds.<br>
  O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs are in a living death; forgetting the Lord, they suffer in pain. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Let all bow in reverence, to that humble being whose heart is pure within.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to that humble being whose mind is filled with the treasure of the Naam.<br>
  He has a discriminating intellect; he meditates on the Name of the Lord.<br>
  That True Guru is a friend to all; everyone is dear to Him.<br>
  The Lord, the Supreme Soul, is pervading everywhere; reflect upon the wisdom of the Guru's Teachings. ||9||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Without serving the True Guru, the soul is in the bondage of deeds done in ego.<br>
  Without serving the True Guru, one finds no place of rest; he dies, and is reincarnated, and continues coming and going.<br>
  Without serving the True Guru, one's speech is vapid and insipid; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, does not abide in his mind.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 034</h2></center>
  O Nanak, without serving the True Guru, they are bound and beaten in the City of Death; they arise and depart with blackened faces. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  Burn away those rituals which lead you to forget the Beloved Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, sublime is that love, which preserves my honor with my Lord Master. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Serve the One Lord, the Great Giver; meditate on the One Lord.<br>
  Beg from the One Lord, the Great Giver, and you shall obtain your heart's desires.<br>
  But if you beg from another, then you shall be shamed and destroyed.<br>
  One who serves the Lord obtains the fruits of his rewards; all of his hunger is satisfied.<br>
  Nanak is a sacrifice to those, who night and day, meditate within their hearts on the Name of the Lord. ||10||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  He Himself is pleased with His humble devotees; my Beloved Lord attaches them to Himself.<br>
  The Lord blesses His humble devotees with royalty; He fashions the true crown upon their heads.<br>
  They are always at peace, and immaculately pure; they perform service for the True Guru.<br>
  They are not said to be kings, who die in conflict, and then enter again the cycle of reincarnation.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Name of the Lord, they wander about with their noses cut off in disgrace; they get no respect at all. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Hearing the teachings, he does not appreciate them, as long as he is not Gurmukh, attached to the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, the Naam comes to abide in the mind, and doubts and fears run away.<br>
  As he knows the True Guru, so he is transformed, and then, he lovingly focuses his consciousness on the Naam.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, greatness is obtained; he shall be resplendent in the Court of the Lord hereafter. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The minds of the Gursikhs are filled with the love of the Lord; they come and worship the Guru.<br>
  They trade lovingly in the Lord's Name, and depart after earning the profit of the Lord's Name.<br>
  The faces of the Gursikhs are radiant; in the Court of the Lord, they are approved.<br>
  The Guru, the True Guru, is the treasure of the Lord's Name; how very fortunate are the Sikhs who share in this treasure of virtue.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those Gursikhs who, sitting and standing, meditate on the Lord's Name. ||11||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the treasure, which the Gurmukhs obtain.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are blind; they do not realize that it is within their own home. They die barking and crying. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  That body is golden and immaculate, which is attached to the True Name of the True Lord.<br>
  The Gurmukh obtains the Pure Light of the Luminous Lord, and his doubts and fears run away.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs find lasting peace; night and day, they remain detached, while in the Love of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Blessed, blessed are those Gursikhs, who, with their ears, listen to the Guru's Teachings about the Lord.<br>
  The Guru, the True Guru, implants the Naam within them, and their egotism and duality are silenced.<br>
  There is no friend, other than the Name of the Lord; the Lord's humble servants reflect upon this and see.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 035</h2></center>
  Those Gursikhs, with whom the Lord is pleased, accept the Word of the True Guru.<br>
  Those Gurmukhs who meditate on the Naam are imbued with the four-fold color of the Lord's Love. ||12||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The self-willed manmukh is cowardly and ugly; lacking the Name of the Lord, his nose is cut off in disgrace.<br>
  Night and day, he is engrossed in worldly affairs, and even in his dreams, he finds no peace.<br>
  O Nanak, if he becomes Gurmukh, then he shall be saved; otherwise, he is held in bondage, and suffers in pain. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The Gurmukhs always look beautiful in the Court of the Lord; they practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  There is a lasting peace and happiness deep within them; at the Court of the True Lord, they receive honor.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are blessed with the Name of the Lord; they merge imperceptibly into the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  As Gurmukh, Prahlaad meditated on the Lord, and was saved.<br>
  As Gurmukh, Janak lovingly centered his consciousness on the Lord's Name.<br>
  As Gurmukh, Vashisht taught the Teachings of the Lord.<br>
  Without the Guru, no one has found the Lord's Name, O my Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  The Lord blesses the Gurmukh with devotion. ||13||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  One who has no faith in the True Guru, and who does not love the Word of the Shabad,<br>
  shall find no peace, even though he may come and go hundreds of times.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh meets the True Lord with natural ease; he is in love with the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  O mind, search for such a True Guru, by serving whom the pains of birth and death are dispelled.<br>
  Doubt shall never afflict you, and your ego shall be burnt away through the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  The veil of falsehood shall be torn down from within you, and Truth shall come to dwell in the mind.<br>
  Peace and happiness shall fill your mind deep within, if you act according to truth and self-discipline.<br>
  O Nanak, by perfect good karma, you shall meet the True Guru, and then the Dear Lord, by His Sweet Will, shall bless you with His Mercy. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The whole world comes under the control of one whose home is filled with the Lord, the King.<br>
  He is subject to no one else's rule, and the Lord, the King, causes everyone to fall at his feet.<br>
  One may run away from the courts of other men, but where can one go to escape the Lord's Kingdom?<br>
  The Lord is such a King, who abides in the hearts of His devotees; He brings the others, and makes them stand before His devotees.<br>
  The glorious greatness of the Lord's Name is obtained only by His Grace; how few are the Gurmukhs who meditate on Him. ||14||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Without serving the True Guru, the people of the world are dead; they waste their lives away in vain.<br>
  In love with duality, they suffer terrible pain; they die, and are reincarnated, and continue coming and going.<br>
  They live in manure, and are reincarnated again and again.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Name, the Messenger of Death punishes them; in the end, they depart regretting and repenting. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  In this world, there is one Husband Lord; all other beings are His brides.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 036</h2></center>
  He enjoys the hearts of all, and yet He remains detached; He is unseen; He cannot be described.<br>
  The Perfect Guru reveals Him, and through the Word of His Shabad, we come to understand Him.<br>
  Those who serve their Husband Lord, become like Him; their egos are burnt away by His Shabad.<br>
  He has no rival, no attacker, no enemy.<br>
  His rule is unchanging and eternal; He does not come or go.<br>
  Night and day, His servant serves Him, singing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.<br>
  Beholding the Glorious Greatness of the True Lord, Nanak blossoms forth. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Those whose hearts are forever filled with the Name of the Lord, have the Name of the Lord as their Protector.<br>
  The Lord's Name is my father, the Lord's Name is my mother; the Lord's Name is my helper and friend.<br>
  My conversation is with the Lord's Name, and my counseling is with the Lord's Name; the Lord's Name always takes care of me.<br>
  The Lord's Name is my most beloved society, the Lord's Name is my ancestry, and the Lord's Name is my family.<br>
  The Guru, the Lord Incarnate, has bestowed upon servant Nanak the Name of the Lord; in this world, and in the next, the Lord ever saves me. ||15||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who meet the True Guru, ever sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.<br>
  The Lord's Name naturally fills their minds, and they are absorbed in the Shabad, the Word of the True Lord.<br>
  They redeem their generations, and they themselves obtain the state of liberation.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God is pleased with those who fall at the Guru's Feet.<br>
  Servant Nanak is the Lord's slave; by His Grace, the Lord preserves his honor. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  In egotism, one is assailed by fear; he passes his life totally troubled by fear.<br>
  Egotism is such a terrible disease; he dies, to be reincarnated - he continues coming and going.<br>
  Those who have such pre-ordained destiny meet with the True Guru, God Incarnate.<br>
  O Nanak, by Guru's Grace, they are redeemed; their egos are burnt away through the Word of the Shabad. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Lord's Name is my immortal, unfathomable, imperishable Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny.<br>
  I serve the Lord's Name, I worship the Lord's Name, and my soul is imbued with the Lord's Name.<br>
  I know of no other as great as the Lord's Name; the Lord's Name shall deliver me in the end.<br>
  The Generous Guru has given me the Lord's Name; blessed, blessed are the Guru's mother and father.<br>
  I ever bow in humble reverence to my True Guru; meeting Him, I have come to know the Lord's Name. ||16||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  One who does not serve the Guru as Gurmukh, who does not love the Lord's Name,<br>
  and who does not savor the taste of the Shabad, shall die, and be reborn, over and over again.<br>
  The blind, self-willed manmukh does not think of the Lord; why did he even come into the world?<br>
  O Nanak, that Gurmukh, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, crosses over the world-ocean. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Only the Guru is awake; the rest of the world is asleep in emotional attachment and desire.<br>
  Those who serve the True Guru and remain wakeful, are imbued with the True Name, the treasure of virtue.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 037</h2></center>
  The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not think of the Lord; they are ruined through birth and death.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; this is their destiny, pre-ordained by the Primal Lord God. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Lord's Name is my food; eating the thirty-six varieties of it, I am satisfied and satiated.<br>
  The Lord's Name is my clothing; wearing it, I shall never be naked again, and my desire to wear other clothing is gone.<br>
  The Lord's Name is my business, the Lord's Name is my commerce; the True Guru has blessed me with its use.<br>
  I record the account of the Lord's Name, and I shall not be subject to death again.<br>
  Only a few, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Lord's Name; they are blessed by the Lord, and receive their pre-ordained destiny. ||17||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The world is blind and ignorant; in the love of duality, it engages in actions.<br>
  But those actions which are performed in the love of duality, cause only pain to the body.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, peace wells up, when one acts according to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  He acts according to the True Word of the Guru's Bani; night and day, he meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, as the Lord Himself engages him, so is he engaged; no one has any say in this matter. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Within the home of my own being, is the everlasting treasure of the Naam; it is a treasure house, overflowing with devotion.<br>
  The True Guru is the Giver of the life of the soul; the Great Giver lives forever.<br>
  Night and day, I continually sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise, through the Infinite Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  I recite continually the Guru's Shabads, which have been effective throughout the ages.<br>
  This mind ever abides in peace, dealing in peace and poise.<br>
  Deep within me is the Guru's Wisdom, the Lord's jewel, the Bringer of liberation.<br>
  O Nanak, one who is blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace obtains this, and is judged to be True in the Court of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, who goes and falls at the Feet of the True Guru.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, who with his mouth, utters the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, whose mind, upon hearing the Lord's Name, becomes blissful.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, who serves the True Guru, and so obtains the Lord's Name.<br>
  I bow forever in deepest respect to that Sikh of the Guru, who walks in the Way of the Guru. ||18||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  No one has ever found the Lord through stubborn-mindedness. All have grown weary of performing such actions.<br>
  Through their stubborn-mindedness, and by wearing their disguises, they are deluded; they suffer in pain from the love of duality.<br>
  Riches and the supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas are all emotional attachments; through them, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, does not come to dwell in the mind.<br>
  Serving the Guru, the mind becomes immaculately pure, and the darkness of spiritual ignorance is dispelled.<br>
  The jewel of the Naam is revealed in the home of one's own being; O Nanak, one merges in celestial bliss. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
 <center><h2>Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 038</h2></center>
  One who does not savor the taste of the Shabad, who does not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord,<br>
  and who speaks insipid words with his tongue, is ruined, again and again.<br>
  O Nanak, he acts according to the karma of his past actions, which no one can erase. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the True Being, my True Guru; meeting Him, I have found peace.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the True Being, my True Guru; meeting Him, I have attained the Lord's devotional worship.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the Lord's devotee, my True Guru; serving Him, I have come to enshrine love for the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the Knower of the Lord, my True Guru; He has taught me to look upon friend and foe alike.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, my best friend; He has led me to embrace love for the Name of the Lord. ||19||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  The soul-bride is at home, while the Husband Lord is away; she cherishes His memory, and mourns His absence.<br>
  She shall meet Him without delay, if she rids herself of duality. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, false is the speech of one who acts without loving the Lord.<br>
  He judges things to be good, only as long as the Lord gives and he receives. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Lord, who created the creatures, also protects them.<br>
  I have tasted the food of Ambrosial Nectar, the True Name.<br>
  I am satisfied and satiated, and my hunger is appeased.<br>
  The One Lord is pervading in all, but rare are those who realize this.<br>
  Servant Nanak is enraptured, in the Protection of God. ||20||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  All the living beings of the world behold the True Guru.<br>
  One is not liberated by merely seeing Him, unless one contemplates the Word of His Shabad.<br>
  The filth of ego is not removed, and he does not enshrine love for the Naam.<br>
  The Lord forgives some, and unites them with Himself; they forsake their duality and sinful ways.<br>
  O Nanak, some behold the Blessed Vision of the True Guru's Darshan, with love and affection; conquering their ego, they meet with the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The foolish, blind clown does not serve the True Guru.<br>
  In love with duality, he endures terrible suffering, and burning, he cries out in pain.<br>
  He forgets the Guru, for the sake of mere objects, but they will not come to his rescue in the end.<br>
  Through the Guru's Instructions, Nanak has found peace; the Forgiving Lord has forgiven him. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You Yourself, all by Yourself, are the Creator of all. If there were any other, then I would speak of another.<br>
  The Lord Himself speaks, and causes us to speak; He Himself is pervading the water and the land.<br>
  The Lord Himself destroys, and the Lord Himself saves. O mind, seek and remain in the Lord's Sanctuary.<br>
  Other than the Lord, no one can kill or rejuvenate. O mind, do not be anxious - remain fearless.<br>
  While standing, sitting, and sleeping, forever and ever, meditate on the Lord's Name; O servant Nanak, as Gurmukh, you shall attain the Lord. ||21||1||SUDH||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr13.htm">Next: Raag Sorat'h</a></center>
 </body>