<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr13.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr15.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Dhanaasaree</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 001</h2></center>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  My soul is afraid; to whom should I complain?<br>
  I serve Him, who makes me forget my pains; He is the Giver, forever and ever. ||1||<br>
  My Lord and Master is forever new; He is the Giver, forever and ever. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Night and day, I serve my Lord and Master; He shall save me in the end.<br>
  Hearing and listening, O my dear sister, I have crossed over. ||2||<br>
  O Merciful Lord, Your Name carries me across.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In all the world, there is only the One True Lord; there is no other at all.<br>
  He alone serves the Lord, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace. ||3||<br>
  Without You, O Beloved, how could I even live?<br>
  Bless me with such greatness, that I may remain attached to Your Name.<br>
  There is no other, O Beloved, to whom I can go and speak. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I serve my Lord and Master; I ask for no other.<br>
  Nanak is His slave; moment by moment, bit by bit, he is a sacrifice to Him. ||4||<br>
  O Lord Master, I am a sacrifice to Your Name, moment by moment, bit by bit. ||1||Pause||4||1||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:<br>
  We are human beings of the briefest moment; we do not know the appointed time of our departure.<br>
  Prays Nanak, serve the One, to whom our soul and breath of life belong. ||1||<br>
  You are blind - see and consider, how many days your life shall last. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My breath, my flesh and my soul are all Yours, Lord; You are so very dear to me.<br>
  Nanak, the poet, says this, O True Lord Cherisher. ||2||<br>
  If you gave nothing, O my Lord and Master, what could anyone pledge to You?<br>
  Nanak prays, we receive that which we are pre-destined to receive. ||3||<br>
  The deceitful person does not remember the Lord's Name; he practices only deceit.<br>
  When he is marched in chains to Death's door, then, he regrets his actions. ||4||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 002</h2></center>
  As long as we are in this world, O Nanak, we should listen, and speak of the Lord.<br>
  I have searched, but I have found no way to remain here; so, remain dead while yet alive. ||5||2||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  How can I remember the Lord in meditation? I cannot meditate on Him in remembrance.<br>
  My heart is burning, and my soul is crying out in pain.<br>
  The True Lord creates and adorns.<br>
  Forgetting Him, how can one be good? ||1||<br>
  By clever tricks and commands, He cannot be found.<br>
  How am I to meet my True Lord, O my mother? ||1||Pause||<br>
  How rare is the one who goes out, and searches for the merchandise of the Naam.<br>
  No one tastes it, and no one eats it.<br>
  Honor is not obtained by trying to please other people.<br>
  One's honor is preserved, only if the Lord preserves it. ||2||<br>
  Wherever I look, there I see Him, pervading and permeating.<br>
  Without You, I have no other place of rest.<br>
  He may try, but what can anyone do by his own doing?<br>
  He alone is blessed, whom the True Lord forgives. ||3||<br>
  Now, I shall have to get up and depart, in an instant, in the clapping of hands.<br>
  What face will I show the Lord? I have no virtue at all.<br>
  As is the Lord's Glance of Grace, so it is.<br>
  Without His Glance of Grace, O Nanak, no one is blessed. ||4||1||3||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:<br>
  If the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, then one remembers Him in meditation.<br>
  The soul is softened, and he remains absorbed in the Lord's Love.<br>
  His soul and the Supreme Soul become one.<br>
  The duality of the inner mind is overcome. ||1||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, God is found.<br>
  One's consciousness is attached to the Lord, and so Death does not devour him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Remembering the True Lord in meditation, one is enlightened.<br>
  Then, in the midst of Maya, he remains detached.<br>
  Such is the Glory of the True Guru;<br>
  in the midst of children and spouses, they attain emancipation. ||2||<br>
  Such is the service which the Lord's servant performs,<br>
  that he dedicates his soul to the Lord, to whom it belongs.<br>
  One who is pleasing to the Lord and Master is acceptable.<br>
  Such a servant obtains honor in the Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  He enshrines the image of the True Guru in his heart.<br>
  He obtains the rewards which he desires.<br>
  The True Lord and Master grants His Grace;<br>
  how can such a servant be afraid of death? ||4||<br>
  Prays Nanak, practice contemplation,<br>
  and enshrine love for the True Word of His Bani.<br>
  Then, you shall find the Gate of Salvation.<br>
  This Shabad is the most excellent of all chanting and austere meditations. ||5||2||4||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:<br>
  My soul burns, over and over again.<br>
  Burning and burning, it is ruined, and it falls into evil.<br>
  That body, which forgets the Word of the Guru's Bani,<br>
  cries out in pain, like a chronic patient. ||1||<br>
  To speak too much and babble is useless.<br>
  Even without our speaking, He knows everything. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He created our ears, eyes and nose.<br>
  He gave us our tongue to speak so fluently.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 003</h2></center>
  He preserved the mind in the fire of the womb;<br>
  at His Command, the wind blows everywhere. ||2||<br>
  These worldly attachments, loves and pleasurable tastes,<br>
  all are just black stains.<br>
  One who departs, with these black stains of sin on his face<br>
  shall find no place to sit in the Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  By Your Grace, we chant Your Name.<br>
  Becoming attached to it, one is saved; there is no other way.<br>
  Even if one is drowning, still, he may be saved.<br>
  O Nanak, the True Lord is the Giver of all. ||4||3||5||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:<br>
  If a thief praises someone, his mind is not pleased.<br>
  If a thief curses him, no damage is done.<br>
  No one will take responsibility for a thief.<br>
  How can a thief's actions be good? ||1||<br>
  Listen, O mind, you blind, false dog!<br>
  Even without your speaking, the Lord knows and understands. ||1||Pause||<br>
  A thief may be handsome, and a thief may be wise,<br>
  but he is still just a counterfeit coin, worth only a shell.<br>
  If it is kept and mixed with other coins,<br>
  it will be found to be false, when the coins are inspected. ||2||<br>
  As one acts, so does he receive.<br>
  As he plants, so does he eat.<br>
  He may praise himself gloriously,<br>
  but still, according to his understanding, so is the path he must follow. ||3||<br>
  He may tell hundreds of lies to conceal his falsehood,<br>
  and all the world may call him good.<br>
  If it pleases You, Lord, even the foolish are approved.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord is wise, knowing, all-knowing. ||4||4||6||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:<br>
  The body is the paper, and the mind is the inscription written upon it.<br>
  The ignorant fool does not read what is written on his forehead.<br>
  In the Court of the Lord, three inscriptions are recorded.<br>
  Behold, the counterfeit coin is worthless there. ||1||<br>
  O Nanak, if there is silver in it,<br>
  then everyone proclaims, "It is genuine, it is genuine."||1||Pause||<br>
  The Qazi tells lies and eats filth;<br>
  the Brahmin kills and then takes cleansing baths.<br>
  The Yogi is blind, and does not know the Way.<br>
  The three of them devise their own destruction. ||2||<br>
  He alone is a Yogi, who understands the Way.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, he knows the One Lord.<br>
  He alone is a Qazi, who turns away from the world,<br>
  and who, by Guru's Grace, remains dead while yet alive.<br>
  He alone is a Brahmin, who contemplates God.<br>
  He saves himself, and saves all his generations as well. ||3||<br>
  One who cleanses his own mind is wise.<br>
  One who cleanses himself of impurity is a Muslim.<br>
  One who reads and understands is acceptable.<br>
  Upon his forehead is the Insignia of the Court of the Lord. ||4||5||7||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  No, no, this is not the time, when people know the way to Yoga and Truth.<br>
  The holy places of worship in the world are polluted, and so the world is drowning. ||1||<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the most sublime.<br>
  Some people try to deceive the world by closing their eyes and holding their nostrils closed. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They close off their nostrils with their fingers, and claim to see the three worlds.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 004</h2></center>
  But they cannot even see what is behind them. What a strange lotus pose this is! ||2||<br>
  The K'shatriyas have abandoned their religion, and have adopted a foreign language.<br>
  The whole world has been reduced to the same social status; the state of righteousness and Dharma has been lost. ||3||<br>
  They analyze eight chapters of (Panini's) grammar and the Puraanas. They study the Vedas,<br>
  but without the Lord's Name, no one is liberated; so says Nanak, the Lord's slave. ||4||1||6||8||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Aartee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  In the bowl of the sky, the sun and moon are the lamps; the stars in the constellations are the pearls.<br>
  The fragrance of sandalwood is the incense, the wind is the fan, and all the vegetation are flowers in offering to You, O Luminous Lord. ||1||<br>
  What a beautiful lamp-lit worship service this is! O Destroyer of fear, this is Your Aartee, Your worship service.<br>
  The sound current of the Shabad is the sounding of the temple drums. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Thousands are Your eyes, and yet You have no eyes. Thousands are Your forms, and yet You have not even one form.<br>
  Thousands are Your lotus feet, and yet You have no feet. Without a nose, thousands are Your noses. I am enchanted with Your play! ||2||<br>
  The Divine Light is within everyone; You are that Light.<br>
  Yours is that Light which shines within everyone.<br>
  By the Guru's Teachings, this Divine Light is revealed.<br>
  That which pleases the Lord is the true worship service. ||3||<br>
  My soul is enticed by the honey-sweet lotus feet of the Lord; night and day, I thirst for them.<br>
  Bless Nanak, the thirsty song-bird, with the water of Your Mercy, that he may come to dwell in Your Name. ||4||1||7||9||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl, Second House, Chau-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  This wealth is inexhaustible. It shall never be exhausted, and it shall never be lost.<br>
  The Perfect True Guru has revealed it to me.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to my True Guru.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I have enshrined the Lord within my mind. ||1||<br>
  They alone are wealthy, who lovingly attune themselves to the Lord's Name.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has revealed to me the Lord's treasure; by the Lord's Grace, it has come to abide in my mind. ||Pause||<br>
  He is rid of his demerits, and his heart is permeated with merit and virtue.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, he naturally dwells in celestial peace.<br>
  True is the Word of the Perfect Guru's Bani.<br>
  They bring peace to the mind, and celestial peace is absorbed within. ||2||<br>
  O my humble Siblings of Destiny, behold this strange and wonderful thing:<br>
  duality is overcome, and the Lord dwells within his mind.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is priceless; it cannot be taken.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, it comes to abide in the mind. ||3||<br>
  He is the One God, abiding within all.<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, He is revealed in the heart.<br>
  One who intuitively knows and realizes God,<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 005</h2></center>
  O Nanak, obtains the Naam; his mind is pleased and appeased. ||4||1||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  The wealth of the Lord's Name is immaculate, and absolutely infinite.<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad is over-flowing with treasure.<br>
  Know that, except for the wealth of the Name, all other wealth is poison.<br>
  The egotistical people are burning in their attachment to Maya. ||1||<br>
  How rare is that Gurmukh who tastes the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  He is always in bliss, day and night; through perfect good destiny, he obtains the Name. ||Pause||<br>
  The Word of the Shabad is a lamp, illuminating the three worlds.<br>
  One who tastes it, becomes immaculate.<br>
  The immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord, washes off the filth of ego.<br>
  True devotional worship brings lasting peace. ||2||<br>
  One who tastes the sublime essence of the Lord is the Lord's humble servant.<br>
  He is forever happy; he is never sad.<br>
  He himself is liberated, and he liberates others as well.<br>
  He chants the Lord's Name, and through the Lord, he finds peace. ||3||<br>
  Without the True Guru, everyone dies, crying out in pain.<br>
  Night and day, they burn, and find no peace.<br>
  But meeting the True Guru, all thirst is quenched.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Naam, one finds peace and tranquility. ||4||2||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  Gather in and cherish forever the wealth of the Lord's Name, deep within;<br>
  He cherishes and nurtures all beings and creatures.<br>
  They alone obtain the treasure of Liberation,<br>
  who are lovingly imbued with, and focused on the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
  Serving the Guru, one obtains the wealth of the Lord's Name.<br>
  He is illumined and enlightened within, and he meditates on the Lord's Name. ||Pause||<br>
  This love for the Lord is like the love of the bride for her husband.<br>
  God ravishes and enjoys the soul-bride who is adorned with peace and tranquility.<br>
  No one finds God through egotism.<br>
  Wandering away from the Primal Lord, the root of all, one wastes his life in vain. ||2||<br>
  Tranquility, celestial peace, pleasure and the Word of His Bani come from the Guru.<br>
  True is that service, which leads one to merge in the Naam.<br>
  Blessed with the Word of the Shabad, he meditates forever on the Lord, the Beloved.<br>
  Through the True Name, glorious greatness is obtained. ||3||<br>
  The Creator Himself abides throughout the ages.<br>
  If He casts His Glance of Grace, then we meet Him.<br>
  Through the Word of Gurbani, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind.<br>
  O Nanak, God unites with Himself those who are imbued with Truth. ||4||3||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  The world is polluted, and those in the world become polluted as well.<br>
  In attachment to duality, it comes and goes.<br>
  This love of duality has ruined the entire world.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh suffers punishment, and forfeits his honor. ||1||<br>
  Serving the Guru, one becomes immaculate.<br>
  He enshrines the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within, and his state becomes exalted. ||Pause||<br>
  The Gurmukhs are saved, taking to the Lord's Sanctuary.<br>
  Attuned to the Lord's Name, they commit themselves to devotional worship.<br>
  The Lord's humble servant performs devotional worship, and is blessed with greatness.<br>
  Attuned to Truth, he is absorbed in celestial peace. ||2||<br>
  Know that one who purchases the True Name is very rare.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he comes to understand himself.<br>
  True is his capital, and true is his trade.<br>
  Blessed is that person, who loves the Naam. ||3||<br>
  God, the True Lord, has attached some to His True Name.<br>
  They listen to the most sublime Word of His Bani, and the Word of His Shabad.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 006</h2></center>
  True is service to the True Lord God.<br>
  O Nanak, the Naam is the Embellisher. ||4||4||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those who serve the Lord.<br>
  The Truth is in their hearts, and the True Name is on their lips.<br>
  Dwelling upon the Truest of the True, their pains are dispelled.<br>
  Through the True Word of the Shabad, the Lord comes to dwell in their minds. ||1||<br>
  Listening to the Word of Gurbani, filth is washed off,<br>
  and they naturally enshrine the Lord's Name in their minds. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One who conquers fraud, deceit and the fire of desire<br>
  finds tranquility, peace and pleasure within.<br>
  If one walks in harmony with the Guru's Will, he eliminates his self-conceit.<br>
  He finds the True Mansion of the Lord's Presence, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  The blind, self-willed manmukh does not understand the Shabad; he does not know the Word of the Guru's Bani,<br>
  and so he passes his life in misery.<br>
  But if he meets the True Guru, then he finds peace,<br>
  and the ego within is silenced. ||3||<br>
  Who else should I speak to? The One Lord is the Giver of all.<br>
  When He grants His Grace, then we obtain the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Meeting with my Beloved, I sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, becoming truthful, I have become pleasing to the True Lord. ||4||5||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  When the mind is conquered, its turbulent wanderings are stopped.<br>
  Without conquering the mind, how can the Lord be found?<br>
  Rare is the one who knows the medicine to conquer the mind.<br>
  The mind is conquered through the Word of the Shabad; this is known to the Lord's humble servant. ||1||<br>
  The Lord forgives him, and blesses him with glory.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind. ||Pause||<br>
  The Gurmukh does good deeds,<br>
  and so, he comes to understand this mind.<br>
  The mind is intoxicated, like the elephant with wine.<br>
  The Guru places the harness upon it, and rejuvenates it. ||2||<br>
  The mind is undisciplined; only a rare few can discipline it.<br>
  If someone eats the uneatable, then he becomes immaculate.<br>
  As Gurmukh, his mind is embellished.<br>
  Egotism and corruption are eradicated from within. ||3||<br>
  Those whom the Primal Lord keeps united in His Union,<br>
  shall never be separated from Him; they are merged in the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Only God Himself knows His own power.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh realizes the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||6||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  The ignorant fools amass false wealth.<br>
  The blind, foolish, self-willed manmukhs have gone astray.<br>
  Poisonous wealth brings constant pain.<br>
  It will not go with you, and it will not yield any profit. ||1||<br>
  True wealth is obtained through the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  False wealth continues coming and going. ||Pause||<br>
  The foolish self-willed manmukhs all go astray and die.<br>
  They drown in the terrifying world-ocean, and they cannot reach either this shore, or the one beyond.<br>
  But by perfect destiny, they meet the True Guru;<br>
  imbued with the True Name, day and night, they remain detached from the world. ||2||<br>
  Throughout the four ages, the True Bani of His Word is Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  By perfect destiny, one is absorbed in the True Name.<br>
  The Siddhas, the seekers and all men long for the Name.<br>
  It is obtained only by perfect destiny. ||3||<br>
  The True Lord is everything; He is True.<br>
  Only a few realize the exalted Lord God.<br>
  He is the Truest of the True; He Himself implants the True Name within.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 007</h2></center>
  O Nanak, the Lord Himself sees all; He Himself links us to the Truth. ||4||7||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  The value and worth of the Lord's Name cannot be described.<br>
  Blessed are those humble beings, who lovingly focus their minds on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  True are the Guru's Teachings, and True is contemplative meditation.<br>
  God Himself forgives, and bestows contemplative meditation. ||1||<br>
  The Lord's Name is wonderful! God Himself imparts it.<br>
  In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Gurmukhs obtain it. ||1||Pause||<br>
  We are ignorant; ignorance fills our minds.<br>
  We do all our deeds in ego.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, egotism is eradicated.<br>
  Forgiving us, the Lord blends us with Himself. ||2||<br>
  Poisonous wealth gives rise to great arrogance.<br>
  Drowning in egotism, no one is honored.<br>
  Forsaking self-conceit, one finds lasting peace.<br>
  Under Guru's Instruction, he praises the True Lord. ||3||<br>
  The Creator Lord Himself fashions all.<br>
  Without Him, there is no other at all.<br>
  He alone is attached to Truth, whom the Lord Himself so attaches.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Naam, lasting peace is attained in the hereafter. ||4||8||<br>
  Raag Dhanaasaree, Third Mehl, Fourth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I am just a poor beggar of Yours; You are Your Own Lord Master, You are the Great Giver.<br>
  Be Merciful, and bless me, a humble beggar, with Your Name, so that I may forever remain imbued with Your Love. ||1||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to Your Name, O True Lord.<br>
  The One Lord is the Cause of causes; there is no other at all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I was wretched; I wandered through so many cycles of reincarnation. Now, Lord, please bless me with Your Grace.<br>
  Be merciful, and grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; please grant me such a gift. ||2||<br>
  Prays Nanak, the shutters of doubt have been opened wide; by Guru's Grace, I have come to know the Lord.<br>
  I am filled to overflowing with true love; my mind is pleased and appeased by the True Guru. ||3||1||9||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Those Saints and devotees who serve the Lord have all their sins washed away.<br>
  Have Mercy on me, O Lord and Master, and keep me in the Sangat, the Congregation that You love. ||1||<br>
  I cannot even speak the Praises of the Lord, the Gardener of the world.<br>
  We are sinners, sinking like stones in water; grant Your Grace, and carry us stones across. ||Pause||<br>
  The rust of poison and corruption from countless incarnations sticks to us; joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, it is cleaned away.<br>
  It is just like gold, which is heated in the fire, to remove the impurities from it. ||2||<br>
  I chant the chant of the Name of the Lord, day and night; I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, and enshrine it within my heart.<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, is the most perfect medicine in this world; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have conquered my ego. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 008</h2></center>
  The Lord, Har, Har, is unapproachable, of unfathomable wisdom, unlimited, all-powerful and infinite.<br>
  Show Mercy to Your humble servant, O Life of the world, and save the honor of servant Nanak. ||4||1||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The humble Saints of the Lord meditate on the Lord; their pain, doubt and fear have run away.<br>
  The Lord Himself inspires them to serve Him; they are awakened within to the Guru's Teachings. ||1||<br>
  Imbued with the Lord's Name, they are unattached to the world.<br>
  Listening to the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, their minds are pleased; through Guru's Instruction, they enshrine love for the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  God, the Lord and Master, is the caste and social status of His humble Saints. You are the Lord and Master; I am just Your puppet.<br>
  As is the understanding You bless us with, so are the words we speak. ||2||<br>
  What are we? Tiny worms, and microscopic germs. You are our great and glorious Lord and Master.<br>
  I cannot describe Your state and extent. O God, how can we unfortunate ones meet with You? ||3||<br>
  O God, my Lord and Master, shower me with Your Mercy, and commit me to Your service.<br>
  Make Nanak the slave of Your slaves, God; I speak the speech of the Lord's sermon. ||4||2||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The True Guru is the Lord's Saint, the True Being, who chants the Bani of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Whoever chants it, and listens to it, is liberated; I am forever a sacrifice to him. ||1||<br>
  O Saints of the Lord, listen to the Lord's Praises with your ears.<br>
  Listen to the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, for a moment, for even an instant, and all your sins and mistakes shall be erased. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who find such humble, Holy Saints, are the greatest of the great persons.<br>
  I beg for the dust of their feet; I long for the longing for God, my Lord and Master. ||2||<br>
  The Name of God, the Lord and Master, Har, Har, is the fruit-bearing tree; those who meditate on it are satisfied.<br>
  Drinking in the ambrosia of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I am satisfied; all my hunger and thirst is quenched. ||3||<br>
  Those who are blessed with the highest, loftiest destiny, chant and meditate on the Lord.<br>
  Let me join their congregation, O God, my Lord and Master; Nanak is the slave of their slaves. ||4||3||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  I am blind, totally blind, entangled in corruption and poison. How can I walk on the Guru's Path?<br>
  If the True Guru, the Giver of peace, shows His kindness, He attaches us to the hem of His robe. ||1||<br>
  O Sikhs of the Guru, O friends, walk on the Guru's Path.<br>
  Whatever the Guru says, accept that as good; the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, is unique and wonderful. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Saints of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny, listen: serve the Guru, quickly now!<br>
  Let your service to the True Guru be your supplies on the Lord's Path; pack them up, and don't think of today or tomorrow. ||2||<br>
  O Saints of the Lord, chant the chant of the Lord's Name; the Lord's Saints walk with the Lord.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Lord, become the Lord; the playful, wondrous Lord meets them. ||3||<br>
  To chant the chant of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, is the longing I long for; have Mercy upon me, O Lord of the world-forest.<br>
  O Lord, unite servant Nanak with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; make me the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||4||4||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 009</h2></center>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, is the rain-drop; I am the song-bird, crying, crying out for it.<br>
  O Lord God, please bless me with Your Mercy, and pour Your Name into my mouth, even if for only an instant. ||1||<br>
  Without the Lord, I cannot live for even a second.<br>
  Like the addict who dies without his drug, I die without the Lord. ||Pause||<br>
  You, Lord, are the deepest, most unfathomable ocean; I cannot find even a trace of Your limits.<br>
  You are the most remote of the remote, limitless and transcendent; O Lord Master, You alone know Your state and extent. ||2||<br>
  The Lord's humble Saints meditate on the Lord; they are imbued with the deep crimson color of the Guru's Love.<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, they attain great glory, and the most sublime honor. ||3||<br>
  He Himself is the Lord and Master, and He Himself is the servant; He Himself creates His environments.<br>
  Servant Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary, O Lord; protect and preserve the honor of Your devotee. ||4||5||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Tell me, O Siblings of Destiny, the religion for this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. I seek emancipation - how can I be emancipated?<br>
  Meditation on the Lord, Har, Har, is the boat, the raft; meditating on the Lord, the swimmer swims across. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord, protect and preserve the honor of Your humble servant.<br>
  O Lord, Har, Har, please make me chant the chant of Your Name; I beg only for Your devotional worship. ||Pause||<br>
  The Lord's servants are very dear to the Lord; they chant the Word of the Lord's Bani.<br>
  The account of the recording angels, Chitr and Gupt, and the account with the Messenger of Death is totally erased. ||2||<br>
  The Saints of the Lord meditate on the Lord in their minds; they join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  The piercing sun of desires has set, and the cool moon has risen. ||3||<br>
  You are the Greatest Being, absolutely unapproachable and unfathomable; You created the Universe from Your Own Being.<br>
  O God, take pity on servant Nanak, and make him the slave of the slave of Your slaves. ||4||6||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl, Fifth House, Du-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Enshrine the Lord within your heart, and contemplate Him. Dwell upon Him, reflect upon Him, and chant the Name of the Lord, the Enticer of hearts.<br>
  The Lord Master is unseen, unfathomable and unreachable; through the Perfect Guru, He is revealed. ||1||<br>
  The Lord is the philosopher's stone, which transforms lead into gold, and sandalwood, while I am just dry wood and iron.<br>
  Associating with the Lord, and the Sat Sangat, the Lord's True Congregation, the Lord has transformed me into gold and sandalwood. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One may repeat, verbatim, the nine grammars and the six Shaastras, but my Lord God is not pleased by this.<br>
  O servant Nanak, meditate forever on the Lord in your heart; this is what pleases my Lord God. ||2||1||7||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 010</h2></center>
  Chant His Praises, learn of the Lord, and serve the True Guru; in this way, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  In the Court of the Lord, He shall be pleased with you, and you shall not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again; you shall merge in the Divine Light of the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, O my mind, and you shall be totally at peace.<br>
  The Lord's Praises are the most sublime, the most exalted; serving the Lord, Har, Har, Har, you shall be emancipated. ||Pause||<br>
  The Lord, the treasure of mercy, blessed me, and so the Guru blessed me with the Lord's devotional worship; I have come to be in love with the Lord.<br>
  I have forgotten my cares and anxieties, and enshrined the Lord's Name in my heart; O Nanak, the Lord has become my friend and companion. ||2||2||8||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Read about the Lord, write about the Lord, chant the Lord's Name, and sing the Lord's Praises; the Lord will carry you across the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  In your mind, by your words, and within your heart, meditate on the Lord, and He will be pleased. In this way, repeat the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O mind, meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the World.<br>
  Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O friend.<br>
  You shall be happy forever, day and night; sing the Praises of the Lord, the Lord of the world-forest. ||Pause||<br>
  When the Lord, Har, Har, casts His Glance of Grace, then I made the effort in my mind; meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have been emancipated.<br>
  Preserve the honor of servant Nanak, O my Lord and Master; I have come seeking Your Sanctuary. ||2||3||9||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The eighty-four Siddhas, the spiritual masters, the Buddhas, the three hundred thirty million gods and the silent sages, all long for Your Name, O Dear Lord.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, a rare few obtain it; upon their foreheads, the pre-ordained destiny of loving devotion is written. ||1||<br>
  O mind, chant the Name of the Lord; singing the Lord's Praises is the most exalted activity.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to those who sing, and hear Your Praises, O Lord and Master. ||Pause||<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary, O Cherisher God, my Lord and Master; whatever You give me, I accept.<br>
  O Lord, Merciful to the meek, give me this blessing; Nanak longs for the Lord's meditative remembrance. ||2||4||10||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  All the Sikhs and servants come to worship and adore You; they sing the sublime Bani of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Their singing and listening is approved by the Lord; they accept the Order of the True Guru as True, totally True. ||1||<br>
  Chant the Lord's Praises, O Siblings of Destiny; the Lord is the sacred shrine of pilgrimage in the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  They alone are praised in the Court of the Lord, O Saints, who know and understand the Lord's sermon. ||Pause||<br>
  He Himself is the Guru, and He Himself is the disciple; the Lord God Himself plays His wondrous games.<br>
  O servant Nanak, he alone merges with the Lord, whom the Lord Himself merges; all the others are forsaken, but the Lord loves him. ||2||5||11||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord is the Fulfiller of desires, the Giver of total peace; the Kaamadhaynaa, the wish-fulfilling cow, is in His power.<br>
  So meditate on such a Lord, O my soul. Then, you shall obtain total peace, O my mind. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 011</h2></center>
  Chant, O my mind, the True Name, Sat Naam, the True Name.<br>
  In this world, and in the world beyond, your face shall be radiant, by meditating continually on the immaculate Lord God. ||Pause||<br>
  Wherever anyone remembers the Lord in meditation, disaster runs away from that place. By great good fortune, we meditate on the Lord.<br>
  The Guru has blessed servant Nanak with this understanding, that by meditating on the Lord, we cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||6||12||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my King, beholding the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, I am at peace.<br>
  You alone know my inner pain, O King; what can anyone else know? ||Pause||<br>
  O True Lord and Master, You are truly my King; whatever You do, all that is True.<br>
  Who should I call a liar? There is no other than You, O King. ||1||<br>
  You are pervading and permeating in all; O King, everyone meditates on You, day and night.<br>
  Everyone begs of You, O my King; You alone give gifts to all. ||2||<br>
  All are under Your Power, O my King; none at all are beyond You.<br>
  All beings are Yours-You belong to all, O my King. All shall merge and be absorbed in You. ||3||<br>
  You are the hope of all, O my Beloved; all meditate on You, O my King.<br>
  As it pleases You, protect and preserve me, O my Beloved; You are the True King of Nanak. ||4||7||13||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O Destroyer of fear, Remover of suffering, Lord and Master, Lover of Your devotees, Formless Lord.<br>
  Millions of sins are eradicated in an instant when, as Gurmukh, one contemplates the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  My mind is attached to my Beloved Lord.<br>
  God, Merciful to the meek, granted His Grace, and placed the five enemies under my control. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your place is so beautiful; Your form is so beautiful; Your devotees look so beautiful in Your Court.<br>
  O Lord and Master, Giver of all beings, please, grant Your Grace, and save me. ||2||<br>
  Your color is not known, and Your form is not seen; who can contemplate Your Almighty Creative Power?<br>
  You are contained in the water, the land and the sky, everywhere, O Lord of unfathomable form, Holder of the mountain. ||3||<br>
  All beings sing Your Praises; You are the imperishable Primal Being, the Destroyer of ego.<br>
  As it pleases You, please protect and preserve me; servant Nanak seeks Sanctuary at Your Door. ||4||1||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The fish out of water loses its life; it is deeply in love with the water.<br>
  The bumble bee, totally in love with the lotus flower, is lost in it; it cannot find the way to escape from it. ||1||<br>
  Now, my mind has nurtured love for the One Lord.<br>
  He does not die, and is not born; He is always with me. Through the Word of the True Guru's Shabad, I know Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 012</h2></center>
  Lured by sexual desire, the elephant is trapped; the poor beast falls into the power of another.<br>
  Lured by the sound of the hunter's bell, the deer offers its head; because of this enticement, it is killed. ||2||<br>
  Gazing upon his family, the mortal is enticed by greed; he clings in attachment to Maya.<br>
  Totally engrossed in worldly things, he considers them to be his own; but in the end, he shall surely have to leave them behind. ||3||<br>
  Know it well, that anyone who loves any other than God, shall be miserable forever.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru has explained this to me, that love for God brings lasting bliss. ||4||2||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Granting His Grace, God has blessed me with His Name, and released me of my bonds.<br>
  I have forgotten all worldly entanglements, and I am attached to the Guru's feet. ||1||<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have renounced my other cares and anxieties.<br>
  I dug a deep pit, and buried my egotistical pride, emotional attachment and the desires of my mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  No one is my enemy, and I am no one's enemy.<br>
  God, who expanded His expanse, is within all; I learned this from the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  I am a friend to all; I am everyone's friend.<br>
  When the sense of separation was removed from my mind, then I was united with the Lord, my King. ||3||<br>
  My stubbornness is gone, Ambrosial Nectar rains down, and the Word of the Guru's Shabad seems so sweet to me.<br>
  He is pervading everywhere, in the water, on the land and in the sky; Nanak beholds the all-pervading Lord. ||4||3||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Ever since I obtained the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Holy, my days have been blessed and prosperous.<br>
  I have found lasting bliss, singing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Primal Lord, the Architect of destiny. ||1||<br>
  Now, I sing the Praises of the Lord within my mind.<br>
  My mind has been illumined and enlightened, and it is always at peace; I have found the Perfect True Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord, the treasure of virtue, abides deep within the heart, and so pain, doubt and fear have been dispelled.<br>
  I have obtained the most incomprehensible thing, enshrining love for the Name of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  I was anxious, and now I am free of anxiety; I was worried, and now I am free of worry; my grief, greed and emotional attachments are gone.<br>
  By His Grace, I am cured of the disease of egotism, and the Messenger of Death no longer terrifies me. ||3||<br>
  Working for the Guru, serving the Guru and the Guru's Command, all are pleasing to me.<br>
  Says Nanak, He has released me from the clutches of Death; I am a sacrifice to that Guru. ||4||4||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Body, mind, wealth and everything belong to Him; He alone is all-wise and all-knowing.<br>
  He listens to my pains and pleasures, and then my condition improves. ||1||<br>
  My soul is satisfied with the One Lord alone.<br>
  People make all sorts of other efforts, but they have no value at all. ||Pause||<br>
  The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is a priceless jewel. The Guru has given me this advice.<br>
  It cannot be lost, and it cannot be shaken off; it remains steady, and I am perfectly satisfied with it. ||2||<br>
  Those things which tore me away from You, Lord, are now gone.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 013</h2></center>
  When golden ornaments are melted down into a lump, they are still said to be gold. ||3||<br>
  The Divine Light has illuminated me, and I am filled with celestial peace and glory; the unstruck melody of the Lord's Bani resounds within me.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have built my eternal home; the Guru has constructed it for me. ||4||5||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The desires of the greatest of the great kings and landlords cannot be satisfied.<br>
  They remain engrossed in Maya, intoxicated with the pleasures of their wealth; their eyes see nothing else at all. ||1||<br>
  No one has ever found satisfaction in sin and corruption.<br>
  The flame is not satisfied by more fuel; how can one be satisfied without the Lord? ||Pause||<br>
  Day after day, he eats his meals with many different foods, but his hunger is not eradicated.<br>
  He runs around like a dog, searching in the four directions. ||2||<br>
  The lustful, lecherous man desires many women, and he never stops peeking into the homes of others.<br>
  Day after day, he commits adultery again and again, and then he regrets his actions; he wastes away in misery and greed. ||3||<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is incomparable and priceless; it is the treasure of Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  The Saints abide in peace, poise and bliss; O Nanak, through the Guru, this is known. ||4||6||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Nothing which this mortal being runs after, can compare to it.<br>
  He alone comes to have it, whom the Guru blesses with this Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||<br>
  The desire to eat, to wear new clothes, and all other desires, do not abide in the mind of one who comes to know the subtle essence of the One Lord. ||Pause||<br>
  The mind and body blossom forth in abundance, when one receives even a drop of this Nectar.<br>
  I cannot express His glory; I cannot describe His worth. ||2||<br>
  We cannot meet the Lord by our own efforts, nor can we meet Him through service; He comes and meets us spontaneously.<br>
  One who is blessed by my Lord Master's Grace, practices the Teachings of the Guru's Mantra. ||3||<br>
  He is merciful to the meek, always kind and compassionate; He cherishes and nurtures all beings.<br>
  The Lord is mingled with Nanak, through and through; He cherishes him, like the mother her child. ||4||7||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to my Guru, who has implanted the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within me.<br>
  In the utter darkness of the wilderness, He showed me the straight path. ||1||<br>
  The Lord of the universe, the Cherisher of the world, He is my breath of life.<br>
  Here and hereafter, he takes care of everything for me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditating on Him in remembrance, I have found all treasures, respect, greatness and perfect honor.<br>
  Remembering His Name, millions of sins are erased; all His devotees long for the dust of His feet. ||2||<br>
  If someone wishes for the fulfillment of all his hopes and desires, he should serve the one supreme treasure.<br>
  He is the Supreme Lord God, infinite Lord and Master; meditating on Him in remembrance, one is carried across. ||3||<br>
  I have found total peace and tranquility in the Society of the Saints; my honor has been preserved.<br>
  To gather in the Lord's wealth, and to taste the food of the Lord's Name - Nanak has made this his feast. ||4||8||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 014</h2></center>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You have made it your habit to practice those deeds which will bring you shame.<br>
  You slander the Saints, and you worship the faithless cynics; such are the corrupt ways you have adopted. ||1||<br>
  Deluded by your emotional attachment to Maya, you love other things,<br>
  like the enchanted city of Hari-chandauree, or the green leaves of the forest - such is your way of life. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Its body may be anointed with sandalwood oil, but the donkey still loves to roll in the mud.<br>
  He is not fond of the Ambrosial Nectar; instead, he loves the poisonous drug of corruption. ||2||<br>
  The Saints are noble and sublime; they are blessed with good fortune. They alone are pure and holy in this world.<br>
  The jewel of this human life is passing away uselessly, lost in exchange for mere glass. ||3||<br>
  The sins and sorrows of uncounted incarnations run away, when the Guru applies the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to the eyes.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have escaped from these troubles; Nanak loves the One Lord. ||4||9||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I carry the water, wave the fan, and grind the corn for the Saints; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  With each and every breath, my mind remembers the Naam, the Name of the Lord; in this way, it finds the treasure of peace. ||1||<br>
  Have pity on me, O my Lord and Master.<br>
  Bless me with such understanding, O my Lord and Master, that I may forever and ever meditate on You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  By Your Grace, emotional attachment and egotism are eradicated, and doubt is dispelled.<br>
  The Lord, the embodiment of bliss, is pervading and permeating in all; wherever I go, there I see Him. ||2||<br>
  You are kind and compassionate, the treasure of mercy, the Purifier of sinners, Lord of the world.<br>
  I obtain millions of joys, comforts and kingdoms, if You inspire me to chant Your Name with my mouth, even for an instant. ||3||<br>
  That alone is perfect chanting, meditation, penance and devotional worship service, which is pleasing to God's Mind.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, all thirst and desire is satisfied; Nanak is satisfied and fulfilled. ||4||10||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  She controls the three qualities and the four directions of the world.<br>
  She destroys sacrificial feasts, cleansing baths, penances and sacred places of pilgrimage; what is this poor person to do? ||1||<br>
  I grasped God's Support and Protection, and then I was emancipated.<br>
  By the Grace of the Holy Saints, I sang the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, and my sins and afflictions were taken away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  She is not heard - she does not speak with a mouth; she is not seen enticing mortals.<br>
  She administers her intoxicating drug, and so confuses them; thus she seems sweet to everyone's mind. ||2||<br>
  In each and every home, she has implanted the sense of duality in mother, father, children, friends and siblings.<br>
  Some have more, and some have less; they fight and fight, to the death. ||3||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to my True Guru, who has shown me this wondrous play.<br>
  The world is being consumed by this hidden fire, but Maya does not cling to the Lord's devotees. ||4||<br>
  By the Grace of the Saints, I have obtained supreme bliss, and all my bonds have been broken.<br>
  Nanak has obtained the wealth of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; having earned his profits, he has now returned home. ||5||11||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You are the Giver, O Lord, O Cherisher, my Master, my Husband Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 015</h2></center>
  Each and every moment, You cherish and nurture me; I am Your child, and I rely upon You alone. ||1||<br>
  I have only one tongue - which of Your Glorious Virtues can I describe?<br>
  Unlimited, infinite Lord and Master - no one knows Your limits. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You destroy millions of my sins, and teach me in so many ways.<br>
  I am so ignorant - I understand nothing at all. Please honor Your innate nature, and save me! ||2||<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary - You are my only hope. You are my companion, and my best friend.<br>
  Save me, O Merciful Saviour Lord; Nanak is the slave of Your home. ||3||12||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Worship, fasting, ceremonial marks on one's forehead, cleansing baths, generous donations to charities and self-mortification<br>
  - the Lord Master is not pleased with any of these rituals, no matter how sweetly one may speak. ||1||<br>
  Chanting the Name of God, the mind is soothed and pacified.<br>
  Everyone searches for Him in different ways, but the search is so difficult, and He cannot be found. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Chanting, deep meditation and penance, wandering over the face of the earth, the performance of austerities with the arms stretched up to the sky<br>
  - the Lord is not pleased by any of these means, though one may follow the path of Yogis and Jains. ||2||<br>
  The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, and the Praises of the Lord are priceless; he alone obtains them, whom the Lord blesses with His Mercy.<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak lives in the Love of God; his life-night passes in peace. ||3||13||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Is there anyone who can release me from my bondage, unite me with God, recite the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,<br>
  and make this mind steady and stable, so that it no longer wanders around? ||1||<br>
  Do I have any such friend?<br>
  I would give him all my property, my soul and my heart; I would devote my consciousness to him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Others' wealth, others' bodies, and the slander of others - do not attach your love to them.<br>
  Associate with the Saints, speak with the Saints, and keep your mind awake to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||2||<br>
  God is the treasure of virtue, kind and compassionate, the source of all comfort.<br>
  Nanak begs for the gift of Your Name; O Lord of the world, love him, like the mother loves her child. ||3||14||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord saves His Saints.<br>
  One who wishes misfortune upon the Lord's slaves, shall be destroyed by the Lord eventually. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He Himself is the help and support of His humble servants; He defeats the slanderers, and chases them away.<br>
  Wandering around aimlessly, they die out there; they never return to their homes again. ||1||<br>
  Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Destroyer of pain; he sings the Glorious Praises of the infinite Lord forever.<br>
  The faces of the slanderers are blackened in the courts of this world, and the world beyond. ||2||15||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now, I contemplate and meditate on the Lord, the Saviour Lord.<br>
  He purifies sinners in an instant, and cures all diseases. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Talking with the Holy Saints, my sexual desire, anger and greed have been eradicated.<br>
  Remembering, remembering the Perfect Lord in meditation, I have saved all my companions. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 016</h2></center>
  The Mul Mantra, the Root Mantra, is the only cure for the mind; I have installed faith in God in my mind.<br>
  Nanak ever longs for the dust of the Lord's feet; again and again, he is a sacrifice to the Lord. ||2||16||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have fallen in love with the Lord.<br>
  My True Guru is always my help and support; He has torn down the banner of pain. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Giving me His hand, He has protected me as His own, and removed all my troubles.<br>
  He has blackened the faces of the slanderers, and He Himself has become the help and support of His humble servant. ||1||<br>
  The True Lord and Master has become my Saviour; hugging me close in His embrace, He has saved me.<br>
  Nanak has become fearless, and he enjoys eternal peace, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||17||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Your Name is the medicine, O Merciful Lord.<br>
  I am so miserable, I do not know Your state; You Yourself cherish me, Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Take pity on me, O my Lord and Master, and remove the love of duality from within me.<br>
  Break my bonds, and take me as Your own, so that I may never come to lose. ||1||<br>
  Seeking Your Sanctuary, I live, almighty and merciful Lord and Master.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I worship God; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||18||<br>
  Raag Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O God, please save me!<br>
  By myself, I cannot do anything, O my Lord and Master; by Your Grace, please bless me with Your Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Family and worldly affairs are an ocean of fire.<br>
  Through doubt, emotional attachment and ignorance, we are enveloped in darkness. ||1||<br>
  High and low, pleasure and pain.<br>
  Hunger and thirst are not satisfied. ||2||<br>
  The mind is engrossed in passion, and the disease of corruption.<br>
  The five thieves, the companions, are totally incorrigible. ||3||<br>
  The beings and souls and wealth of the world are all Yours.<br>
  O Nanak, know that the Lord is always near at hand. ||4||1||19||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord and Master destroys the pain of the poor; He preserves and protects the honor of His servants.<br>
  The Lord is the ship to carry us across; He is the treasure of virtue - pain cannot touch Him. ||1||<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord of the world.<br>
  I cannot think of any other way; make this effort, and make it in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||Pause||<br>
  In the beginning, and in the end, there is none other than the perfect, merciful Lord.<br>
  The cycle of birth and death is ended, chanting the Lord's Name, and remembering the Lord Master in meditation. ||2||<br>
  The Vedas, the Simritees, the Shaastras and the Lord's devotees contemplate Him;<br>
  liberation is attained in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and the darkness of ignorance is dispelled. ||3||<br>
  The lotus feet of the Lord are the support of His humble servants. They are his only capital and investment.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 017</h2></center>
  The True Lord is Nanak's strength, honor and support; He alone is his protection. ||4||2||20||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Wandering and roaming around, I met the Holy Perfect Guru, who has taught me.<br>
  All other devices did not work, so I meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  For this reason, I sought the Protection and Support of my Lord, the Cherisher of the Universe.<br>
  I sought the Sanctuary of the Perfect Transcendent Lord, and all my entanglements were dissolved. ||Pause||<br>
  Paradise, the earth, the nether regions of the underworld, and the globe of the world - all are engrossed in Maya.<br>
  To save your soul, and liberate all your ancestors, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2||<br>
  O Nanak, singing the Naam, the Name of the Immaculate Lord, all treasures are obtained.<br>
  Only that rare person, whom the Lord and Master blesses with His Grace, comes to know this. ||3||3||21||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Chau-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  You shall have to abandon the straw which you have collected.<br>
  These entanglements shall be of no use to you.<br>
  You are in love with those things that will not go with you.<br>
  You think that your enemies are friends. ||1||<br>
  In such confusion, the world has gone astray.<br>
  The foolish mortal wastes this precious human life. ||Pause||<br>
  He does not like to see Truth and righteousness.<br>
  He is attached to falsehood and deception; they seem sweet to him.<br>
  He loves gifts, but he forgets the Giver.<br>
  The wretched creature does not even think of death. ||2||<br>
  He cries for the possessions of others.<br>
  He forfeits all the merits of his good deeds and religion.<br>
  He does not understand the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and so he continues coming and going in reincarnation.<br>
  He sins, and then regrets and repents. ||3||<br>
  Whatever pleases You, Lord, that alone is acceptable.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to Your Will.<br>
  Poor Nanak is Your slave, Your humble servant.<br>
  Save me, O my Lord God Master! ||4||1||22||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am meek and poor; the Name of God is my only Support.<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is my occupation and earnings.<br>
  I gather only the Lord's Name.<br>
  It is useful in both this world and the next. ||1||<br>
  Imbued with the Love of the Lord God's Infinite Name,<br>
  the Holy Saints sing the Glorious Praises of the One Lord, the Formless Lord. ||Pause||<br>
  The Glory of the Holy Saints comes from their total humility.<br>
  The Saints realize that their greatness rests in the Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Meditating on the Lord of the Universe, the Saints are in bliss.<br>
  The Saints find peace, and their anxieties are dispelled. ||2||<br>
  Wherever the Holy Saints gather,<br>
  there they sing the Praises of the Lord, in music and poetry.<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, there is bliss and peace.<br>
  They alone obtain this Society, upon whose foreheads such destiny is written. ||3||<br>
  With my palms pressed together, I offer my prayer.<br>
  I wash their feet, and chant the Praises of the Lord, the treasure of virtue.<br>
  O God, merciful and compassionate, let me remain in Your Presence.<br>
  Nanak lives, in the dust of the Saints. ||4||2||23||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 018</h2></center>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who contemplates his Lord and Master - why should he be afraid?<br>
  The wretched self-willed manmukhs are ruined through fear and dread. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Divine Guru, my mother and father, is over my head.<br>
  His image brings prosperity; serving Him, we become pure.<br>
  The One Lord, the Immaculate Lord, is our capital.<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, we are illumined and enlightened. ||1||<br>
  The Giver of all beings is totally pervading everywhere.<br>
  Millions of pains are removed by the Lord's Name.<br>
  All the pains of birth and death are taken away<br>
  from the Gurmukh, within whose mind and body the Lord dwells. ||2||<br>
  He alone, whom the Lord has attached to the hem of His robe,<br>
  obtains a place in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  They alone are devotees, who are pleasing to the True Lord.<br>
  They are freed from the Messenger of Death. ||3||<br>
  True is the Lord, and True is His Court.<br>
  Who can contemplate and describe His value?<br>
  He is within each and every heart, the Support of all.<br>
  Nanak begs for the dust of the Saints. ||4||3||24||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  At home, and outside, I place my trust in You; You are always with Your humble servant.<br>
  Bestow Your Mercy, O my Beloved God, that I may chant the Lord's Name with love. ||1||<br>
  God is the strength of His humble servants.<br>
  Whatever You do, or cause to be done, O Lord and Master, that outcome is acceptable to me. ||Pause||<br>
  The Transcendent Lord is my honor; the Lord is my emancipation; the glorious sermon of the Lord is my wealth.<br>
  Slave Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's feet; from the Saints, he has learned this way of life. ||2||1||25||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  God has fulfilled all my desires. Holding me close in His embrace, the Guru has saved me.<br>
  He has saved me from burning in the ocean of fire, and now, no one calls it impassible. ||1||<br>
  Those who have true faith in their minds,<br>
  continually behold the Glory of the Lord; they are forever happy and blissful. ||Pause||<br>
  I seek the Sanctuary of the feet of the Perfect Transcendent Lord, the Searcher of hearts; I behold Him ever-present.<br>
  In His wisdom, the Lord has made Nanak His own; He has preserved the roots of His devotees. ||2||2||26||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Wherever I look, there I see Him present; He is never far away.<br>
  He is all-pervading, everywhere; O my mind, meditate on Him forever. ||1||<br>
  He alone is called your companion, who will not be separated from you, here or hereafter.<br>
  That pleasure, which passes away in an instant, is trivial. ||Pause||<br>
  He cherishes us, and gives us sustenance; He does not lack anything.<br>
  With each and every breath, my God takes care of His creatures. ||2||<br>
  God is undeceiveable, impenetrable and infinite; His form is lofty and exalted.<br>
  Chanting and meditating on the embodiment of wonder and beauty, His humble servants are in bliss. ||3||<br>
  Bless me with such understanding, O Merciful Lord God, that I might remember You.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 019</h2></center>
  Nanak begs God for the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||4||3||27||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The One who sent you, has now recalled you; return to your home now in peace and pleasure.<br>
  In bliss and ecstasy, sing His Glorious Praises; by this celestial tune, you shall acquire your everlasting kingdom. ||1||<br>
  Come back to your home, O my friend.<br>
  The Lord Himself has eliminated your enemies, and your misfortunes are past. ||Pause||<br>
  God, the Creator Lord, has glorified you, and your running and rushing around has ended.<br>
  In your home, there is rejoicing; the musical instruments continually play, and your Husband Lord has exalted you. ||2||<br>
  Remain firm and steady, and do not ever waver; take the Guru's Word as your Support.<br>
  You shall be applauded and congratulated all over the world, and your face shall be radiant in the Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  All beings belong to Him; He Himself transforms them, and He Himself becomes their help and support.<br>
  The Creator Lord has worked a wondrous miracle; O Nanak, His glorious greatness is true. ||4||4||28||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Listen, O Dear Beloved Saints, to my prayer.<br>
  Without the Lord, no one is liberated. ||Pause||<br>
  O mind, do only deeds of purity; the Lord is the only boat to carry you across. Other entanglements shall be of no use to you.<br>
  True living is serving the Divine, Supreme Lord God; the Guru has imparted this teaching to me. ||1||<br>
  Do not fall in love with trivial things; in the end, they shall not go along with you.<br>
  Worship and adore the Lord with your mind and body, O Beloved Saint of the Lord; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall be released from bondage. ||2||<br>
  In your heart, hold fast to the Sanctuary of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord God; do not place your hopes in any other support.<br>
  He alone is a devotee, spiritually wise, a meditator, and a penitent, O Nanak, who is blessed by the Lord's Mercy. ||3||1||29||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my dear beloved, it is good, it is better, it is best, to ask for the Lord's Name.<br>
  Behold, with your eyes wide-open, and listen to the Words of the Holy Saints; enshrine in your consciousness the Lord of Life - remember that all must die. ||Pause||<br>
  The application of sandalwood oil, the enjoyment of pleasures and the practice of many corrupt sins - look upon all of these as insipid and worthless. The Name of the Lord of the Universe alone is sublime; so say the Holy Saints.<br>
  You claim that your body and wealth are your own; you do not chant the Lord's Name even for an instant. Look and see, that none of your possessions or riches shall go along with you. ||1||<br>
  One who has good karma, grasps the Protection of the hem of the Saint's robe; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Messenger of Death cannot threaten him.<br>
  I have obtained the supreme treasure, and my egotism has been eradicated; Nanak's mind is attached to the One Formless Lord. ||2||2||30||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 020</h2></center>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Seventh House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on the One Lord; meditate in remembrance on the One Lord; meditate in remembrance on the One Lord, O my Beloved.<br>
  He shall save you from strife, suffering, greed, attachment, and the most terrifying world-ocean. ||Pause||<br>
  With each and every breath, each and every instant, day and night, dwell upon Him.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate on Him fearlessly, and enshrine the treasure of His Name in your mind. ||1||<br>
  Worship His lotus feet, and contemplate the glorious virtues of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  O Nanak, the dust of the feet of the Holy shall bless you with pleasure and peace. ||2||1||31||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Eighth House, Du-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Remembering, remembering, remembering Him in meditation, I find peace; with each and every breath, I dwell upon Him.<br>
  In this world, and in the world beyond, He is with me, as my help and support; wherever I go, He protects me. ||1||<br>
  The Guru's Word abides with my soul.<br>
  It does not sink in water; thieves cannot steal it, and fire cannot burn it. ||1||Pause||<br>
  It is like wealth to the poor, a cane for the blind, and mother's milk for the infant.<br>
  In the ocean of the world, I have found the boat of the Lord; the Merciful Lord has bestowed His Mercy upon Nanak. ||2||1||32||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord of the Universe has become kind and merciful; His Ambrosial Nectar permeates my heart.<br>
  The nine treasures, riches and the miraculous spiritual powers of the Siddhas cling to the feet of the Lord's humble servant. ||1||<br>
  The Saints are in ecstasy everywhere.<br>
  Within the home, and outside as well, the Lord and Master of His devotees is totally pervading and permeating everywhere. ||1||Pause||<br>
  No one can equal one who has the Lord of the Universe on his side.<br>
  The fear of the Messenger of Death is eradicated, remembering Him in meditation; Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||2||33||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The rich man gazes upon his riches, and is proud of himself; the landlord takes pride in his lands.<br>
  The king believes that the whole kingdom belongs to him; in the same way, the humble servant of the Lord looks upon the support of his Lord and Master. ||1||<br>
  When one considers the Lord to be his only support,<br>
  then the Lord uses His power to help him; this power cannot be defeated. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Renouncing all others, I have sought the Support of the One Lord; I have come to Him, pleading, "Save me, save me!"<br>
  By the kindness and the Grace of the Saints, my mind has been purified; Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||3||34||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He alone is called a warrior, who is attached to the Lord's Love in this age.<br>
  Through the Perfect True Guru, he conquers his own soul, and then everything comes under his control. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 021</h2></center>
  Sing the Praises of the Lord and Master, with the love of your soul.<br>
  Those who seek His Sanctuary, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are blended with the Lord in celestial peace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The feet of the Lord's humble servant abide in my heart; with them, my body is made pure.<br>
  O treasure of mercy, please bless Nanak with the dust of the feet of Your humble servants; this alone brings peace. ||2||4||35||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  People try to deceive others, but the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, knows everything.<br>
  They commit sins, and then deny them, while they pretend to be in Nirvaanaa. ||1||<br>
  They believe that You are far away, but You, O God, are near at hand.<br>
  Looking around, this way and that, the greedy people come and go. ||Pause||<br>
  As long as the doubts of the mind are not removed, liberation is not found.<br>
  Says Nanak, he alone is a Saint, a devotee, and a humble servant of the Lord, to whom the Lord and Master is merciful. ||2||5||36||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My Guru gives the Naam, the Name of the Lord, to those who have such karma written on their foreheads.<br>
  He implants the Naam, and inspires us to chant the Naam; this is Dharma, true religion, in this world. ||1||<br>
  The Naam is the glory and greatness of the Lord's humble servant.<br>
  The Naam is his salvation, and the Naam is his honor; he accepts whatever comes to pass. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That humble servant, who has the Naam as his wealth, is the perfect banker.<br>
  The Naam is his occupation, O Nanak, and his only support; the Naam is the profit he earns. ||2||6||37||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My eyes have been purified, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, and touching my forehead to the dust of His feet.<br>
  With joy and happiness, I sing the Glorious Praises of my Lord and Master; the Lord of the World abides within my heart. ||1||<br>
  You are my Merciful Protector, Lord.<br>
  O beautiful, wise, infinite Father God, be Merciful to me, God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Lord of supreme ecstasy and blissful form, Your Word is so beautiful, so drenched with Nectar.<br>
  With the Lord's lotus feet enshrined in his heart, Nanak has tied the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, to the hem of his robe. ||2||7||38||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In His own way, He provides us with our food; in His own way, He plays with us.<br>
  He blesses us with all comforts, enjoyments and delicacies, and he permeates our minds. ||1||<br>
  Our Father is the Lord of the World, the Merciful Lord.<br>
  Just as the mother protects her children, God nurtures and cares for us. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are my friend and companion, the Master of all excellences, O eternal and permanent Divine Lord.<br>
  Here, there and everywhere, You are pervading; please, bless Nanak to serve the Saints. ||2||8||39||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Saints are kind and compassionate; they burn away their sexual desire, anger and corruption.<br>
  My power, wealth, youth, body and soul are a sacrifice to them. ||1||<br>
  With my mind and body, I love the Lord's Name.<br>
  With peace, poise, pleasure and joy, He has carried me across the terrifying world-ocean. ||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 022</h2></center>
  Blessed is that place, and blessed is that house, in which the Saints dwell.<br>
  Fulfill this desire of servant Nanak, O Lord Master, that he may bow in reverence to Your devotees. ||2||9||40||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He has saved me from the awful power of Maya, by attaching me to His feet.<br>
  He gave my mind the Mantra of the Naam, the Name of the One Lord, which shall never perish or leave me. ||1||<br>
  The Perfect True Guru has given this gift.<br>
  He has blessed me with the Kirtan of the Praises of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and I am emancipated. ||Pause||<br>
  My God has made me His own, and saved the honor of His devotee.<br>
  Nanak has grasped the feet of his God, and has found peace, day and night. ||2||10||41||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Stealing the property of others, acting in greed, lying and slandering - in these ways, he passes his life.<br>
  He places his hopes in false mirages, believing them to be sweet; this is the support he installs in his mind. ||1||<br>
  The faithless cynic passes his life uselessly.<br>
  He is like the mouse, gnawing away at the pile of paper, making it useless to the poor wretch. ||Pause||<br>
  Have mercy on me, O Supreme Lord God, and release me from these bonds.<br>
  The blind are sinking, O Nanak; God saves them, uniting them with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||11||42||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Remembering, remembering God, the Lord Master in meditation, my body, mind and heart are cooled and soothed.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God is my beauty, pleasure, peace, wealth, soul and social status. ||1||<br>
  My tongue is intoxicated with the Lord, the source of nectar.<br>
  I am in love, in love with the Lord's lotus feet, the treasure of riches. ||Pause||<br>
  I am His - He has saved me; this is God's perfect way.<br>
  The Giver of peace has blended Nanak with Himself; the Lord has preserved his honor. ||2||12||43||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  All demons and enemies are eradicated by You, Lord; Your glory is manifest and radiant.<br>
  Whoever harms Your devotees, You destroy in an instant. ||1||<br>
  I look to You continually, Lord.<br>
  O Lord, Destroyer of ego, please, be the helper and companion of Your slaves; take my hand, and save me, O my Friend! ||Pause||<br>
  My Lord and Master has heard my prayer, and given me His protection.<br>
  Nanak is in ecstasy, and his pains are gone; he meditates on the Lord, forever and ever. ||2||13||44||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He has extended His power in all four directions, and placed His hand upon my head.<br>
  Gazing upon me with his Eye of Mercy, He has dispelled the pains of His slave. ||1||<br>
  The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, has saved the Lord's humble servant.<br>
  Hugging me close in His embrace, the merciful, forgiving Lord has erased all my sins. ||Pause||<br>
  Whatever I ask for from my Lord and Master, he gives that to me.<br>
  Whatever the Lord's slave Nanak utters with his mouth, proves to be true, here and hereafter. ||2||14||45||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 023</h2></center>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He does not let His devotees see the difficult times; this is His innate nature.<br>
  Giving His hand, He protects His devotee; with each and every breath, He cherishes him. ||1||<br>
  My consciousness remains attached to God.<br>
  In the beginning, and in the end, God is always my helper and companion; blessed is my friend. ||Pause||<br>
  My mind is delighted, gazing upon the marvellous, glorious greatness of the Lord and Master.<br>
  Remembering, remembering the Lord in meditation, Nanak is in ecstasy; God, in His perfection, has protected and preserved his honor. ||2||15||46||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who forgets the Lord of life, the Great Giver - know that he is most unfortunate.<br>
  One whose mind is in love with the Lord's lotus feet, obtains the pool of ambrosial nectar. ||1||<br>
  Your humble servant awakes in the Love of the Lord's Name.<br>
  All laziness has departed from his body, and his mind is attached to the Beloved Lord. ||Pause||<br>
  Wherever I look, the Lord is there; He is the string, upon which all hearts are strung.<br>
  Drinking in the water of the Naam, servant Nanak has renounced all other loves. ||2||16||47||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  All the affairs of the Lord's humble servant are perfectly resolved.<br>
  In the utterly poisonous Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord preserves and protects his honor. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Remembering, remembering God, his Lord and Master in meditation, the Messenger of Death does not approach him.<br>
  Liberation and heaven are found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; his humble servant finds the home of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  The Lord's lotus feet are the treasure of His humble servant; in them, he finds millions of pleasures and comforts.<br>
  He remembers the Lord God in meditation, day and night; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to him. ||2||17||48||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I beg for one gift only from the Lord.<br>
  May all my desires be fulfilled, meditating on, and remembering Your Name, O Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  May Your feet abide within my heart, and may I find the Society of the Saints.<br>
  May my mind not be afflicted by the fire of sorrow; may I sing Your Glorious Praises, twenty-four hours a day. ||1||<br>
  May I serve the Lord in my childhood and youth, and meditate on God in my middle and old age.<br>
  O Nanak, one who is imbued with the Love of the Transcendent Lord, is not reincarnated again to die. ||2||18||49||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I beg only from the Lord for all things.<br>
  I would hesitate to beg from other people. Remembering God in meditation, liberation is obtained. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have studied with the silent sages, and carefully read the Simritees, the Puraanas and the Vedas; they all proclaim that,<br>
  by serving the Lord, the ocean of mercy, Truth is obtained, and both this world and the next are embellished. ||1||<br>
  All other rituals and customs are useless, without remembering the Lord in meditation.<br>
  O Nanak, the fear of birth and death has been removed; meeting the Holy Saint, sorrow is dispelled. ||2||19||50||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Desire is quenched, through the Lord's Name.<br>
  Great peace and contentment come through the Guru's Word, and one's meditation is perfectly focused upon God. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 024</h2></center>
  Please shower Your Mercy upon me, and permit me to ignore the great enticements of Maya, O Lord, Merciful to the meek.<br>
  Give me Your Name - chanting it, I live; please bring the efforts of Your slave to fruition. ||1||<br>
  All desires, power, pleasure, joy and lasting bliss, are found by chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and singing the Kirtan of His Praises.<br>
  That humble servant of the Lord, who has such karma pre-ordained by the Creator Lord, O Nanak - his efforts are brought to perfect fruition. ||2||20||51||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Supreme Lord God takes care of His humble servant.<br>
  The slanderers are not allowed to stay; they are pulled out by their roots, like useless weeds. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Wherever I look, there I see my Lord and Master; no one can harm me.<br>
  Whoever shows disrespect to the Lord's humble servant, is instantly reduced to ashes. ||1||<br>
  The Creator Lord has become my protector; He has no end or limitation.<br>
  O Nanak, God has protected and saved His slaves; He has driven out and destroyed the slanderers. ||2||21||52||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Ninth House, Partaal:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O Lord, I seek the Sanctuary of Your feet; Lord of the Universe, Destroyer of pain, please bless Your slave with Your Name.<br>
  Be Merciful, God, and bless me with Your Glance of Grace; take my arm and save me - pull me up out of this pit! ||Pause||<br>
  He is blinded by sexual desire and anger, bound by Maya; his body and clothes are filled with countless sins.<br>
  Without God, there is no other protector; help me to chant Your Name, Almighty Warrior, Sheltering Lord. ||1||<br>
  Redeemer of sinners, Saving Grace of all beings and creatures, even those who recite the Vedas have not found Your limit.<br>
  God is the ocean of virtue and peace, the source of jewels; Nanak sings the Praises of the Lover of His devotees. ||2||1||53||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Peace in this world, peace in the next world and peace forever, remembering Him in meditation. Chant forever the Name of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  The sins of past lives are erased, by joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; new life is infused into the dead. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In power, youth and Maya, the Lord is forgotten; this is the greatest tragedy - so say the spiritual sages.<br>
  Hope and desire to sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises - this is the treasure of the most fortunate devotees. ||1||<br>
  O Lord of Sanctuary, all-powerful, imperceptible and unfathomable - Your Name is the Purifier of sinners.<br>
  The Inner-knower, the Lord and Master of Nanak is totally pervading and permeating everywhere; He is my Lord and Master. ||2||2||54||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Twelfth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I bow in reverence to the Lord, I bow in reverence. I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, my King. ||Pause||<br>
  By great good fortune, one meets the Divine Guru.<br>
  Millions of sins are erased by serving the Lord. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 025</h2></center>
  One whose mind is imbued with the Lord's lotus feet<br>
  is not afflicted by the fire of sorrow. ||2||<br>
  He crosses over the world-ocean in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  He chants the Name of the Fearless Lord, and is imbued with the Lord's Love. ||3||<br>
  One who does not steal the wealth of others, who does not commit evil deeds or sinful acts<br>
  - the Messenger of Death does not even approach him. ||4||<br>
  God Himself quenches the fires of desire.<br>
  O Nanak, in God's Sanctuary, one is saved. ||5||1||55||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am satisfied and satiated, eating the food of Truth.<br>
  With my mind, body and tongue, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Life, spiritual life, is in the Lord.<br>
  Spiritual life consists of chanting the Lord's Name in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is dressed in robes of all sorts,<br>
  if he sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Glorious Praises, day and night. ||2||<br>
  He rides upon elephants, chariots and horses,<br>
  if he sees the Lord's Path within his own heart. ||3||<br>
  Meditating on the Lord's Feet, deep within his mind and body,<br>
  slave Nanak has found the Lord, the treasure of peace. ||4||2||56||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Guru's feet emancipate the soul.<br>
  They carry it across the world-ocean in an instant. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Some love rituals, and some bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.<br>
  The Lord's slaves meditate on His Name. ||1||<br>
  The Lord Master is the Breaker of bonds.<br>
  Servant Nanak meditates in remembrance on the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||2||3||57||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The lifestyle of Your slave is so pure, that nothing can break his love for You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is more dear to me than my soul, my breath of life, my mind and my wealth.<br>
  The Lord is the Giver, the Restrainer of the ego. ||1||<br>
  I am in love with the Lord's lotus feet.<br>
  This alone is Nanak's prayer. ||2||4||58||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  Why do you go looking for Him in the forest?<br>
  Although he is unattached, he dwells everywhere. He is always with you as your companion. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Like the fragrance which remains in the flower, and like the reflection in the mirror,<br>
  the Lord dwells deep within; search for Him within your own heart, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1||<br>
  Outside and inside, know that there is only the One Lord; the Guru has imparted this wisdom to me.<br>
  O servant Nanak, without knowing one's own self, the moss of doubt is not removed. ||2||1||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  O Holy people, this world is deluded by doubt.<br>
  It has forsaken the meditative remembrance of the Lord's Name, and sold itself out to Maya. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Mother, father, siblings, children and spouse - he is entangled in their love.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 026</h2></center>
  In the pride of youth, wealth and glory, day and night, he remains intoxicated. ||1||<br>
  God is merciful to the meek, and forever the Destroyer of pain, but the mortal does not center his mind on Him.<br>
  O servant Nanak, among millions, only a rare few, as Gurmukh, realize God. ||2||2||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  That Yogi does not know the way.<br>
  Understand that his heart is filled with greed, emotional attachment, Maya and egotism. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One who does not slander or praise others, who looks upon gold and iron alike,<br>
  who is free from pleasure and pain - he alone is called a true Yogi. ||1||<br>
  The restless mind wanders in the ten directions - it needs to be pacified and restrained.<br>
  Says Nanak, whoever knows this technique is judged to be liberated. ||2||3||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  Now, what efforts should I make?<br>
  How can I dispel the anxieties of my mind? How can I cross over the terrifying world-ocean? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Obtaining this human incarnation, I have done no good deeds; this makes me very afraid!<br>
  In thought, word and deed, I have not sung the Lord's Praises; this thought worries my mind. ||1||<br>
  I listened to the Guru's Teachings, but spiritual wisdom did not well up within me; like a beast, I fill my belly.<br>
  Says Nanak, O God, please confirm Your Law of Grace; for only then can I, the sinner, be saved. ||2||4||9||9||13||58||4||93||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Second House, Ashtapadees:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Guru is the ocean, filled with pearls.<br>
  The Saints gather in the Ambrosial Nectar; they do not go far away from there.<br>
  They taste the subtle essence of the Lord; they are loved by God.<br>
  Within this pool, the swans find their Lord, the Lord of their souls. ||1||<br>
  What can the poor crane accomplish by bathing in the mud puddle?<br>
  It sinks into the mire, and its filth is not washed away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  After careful deliberation, the thoughtful person takes a step.<br>
  Forsaking duality, he becomes a devotee of the Formless Lord.<br>
  He obtains the treasure of liberation, and enjoys the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  His comings and goings end, and the Guru protects him. ||2||<br>
  The swan do not leave this pool.<br>
  In loving devotional worship, they merge in the Celestial Lord.<br>
  The swans are in the pool, and the pool is in the swans.<br>
  They speak the Unspoken Speech, and they honor and revere the Guru's Word. ||3||<br>
  The Yogi, the Primal Lord, sits within the celestial sphere of deepest Samaadhi.<br>
  He is not male, and He is not female; how can anyone describe Him?<br>
  The three worlds continue to center their attention on His Light.<br>
  The silent sages and the Yogic masters seek the Sanctuary of the True Lord. ||4||<br>
  The Lord is the source of bliss, the support of the helpless.<br>
  The Gurmukhs worship and contemplate the Celestial Lord.<br>
  God is the Lover of His devotees, the Destroyer of fear.<br>
  Subduing ego, one meets the Lord, and places his feet on the Path. ||5||<br>
  He makes many efforts, but still, the Messenger of Death tortures him.<br>
  Destined only to die, he comes into the world.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 027</h2></center>
  He wastes this precious human life through duality.<br>
  He does not know his own self, and trapped by doubts, he cries out in pain. ||6||<br>
  Speak, read and hear of the One Lord.<br>
  The Support of the earth shall bless you with courage, righteousness and protection.<br>
  Chastity, purity and self-restraint are infused into the heart,<br>
  when one centers his mind in the fourth state. ||7||<br>
  They are immaculate and true, and filth does not stick to them.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, their doubt and fear depart.<br>
  The form and personality of the Primal Lord are incomparably beautiful.<br>
  Nanak begs for the Lord, the Embodiment of Truth. ||8||1||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:<br>
  That union with the Lord is acceptable, which is united in intuitive poise.<br>
  Thereafter, one does not die, and does not come and go in reincarnation.<br>
  The Lord's slave is in the Lord, and the Lord is in His slave.<br>
  Wherever I look, I see none other than the Lord. ||1||<br>
  The Gurmukhs worship the Lord, and find His celestial home.<br>
  Without meeting the Guru, they die, and come and go in reincarnation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  So make Him your Guru, who implants the Truth within you,<br>
  who leads you to speak the Unspoken Speech, and who merges you in the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  God's people have no other work to do;<br>
  they love the True Lord and Master, and they love the Truth. ||2||<br>
  The mind is in the body, and the True Lord is in the mind.<br>
  Merging into the True Lord, one is absorbed into Truth.<br>
  God's servant bows at His feet.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, one meets with the Lord. ||3||<br>
  He Himself watches over us, and He Himself makes us see.<br>
  He is not pleased by stubborn-mindedness, nor by various religious robes.<br>
  He fashioned the body-vessels, and infused the Ambrosial Nectar into them;<br>
  God's Mind is pleased only by loving devotional worship. ||4||<br>
  Reading and studying, one becomes confused, and suffers punishment.<br>
  By great cleverness, one is consigned to coming and going in reincarnation.<br>
  One who chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and eats the food of the Fear of God<br>
  becomes Gurmukh, the Lord's servant, and remains absorbed in the Lord. ||5||<br>
  He worships stones, dwells at sacred shrines of pilgrimage and in the jungles,<br>
  wanders, roams around and becomes a renunciate.<br>
  But his mind is still filthy - how can he become pure?<br>
  One who meets the True Lord obtains honor. ||6||<br>
  One who embodies good conduct and contemplative meditation,<br>
  his mind abides in intuitive poise and contentment, since the beginning of time, and throughout the ages.<br>
  In the twinkling of an eye, he saves millions.<br>
  Have mercy on me, O my Beloved, and let me meet the Guru. ||7||<br>
  Unto whom, O God, should I praise You?<br>
  Without You, there is no other at all.<br>
  As it pleases You, keep me under Your Will.<br>
  Nanak, with intuitive poise and natural love, sings Your Glorious Praises. ||8||2||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House, Ashtapadee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Whoever is born into the world, is entangled in it; human birth is obtained only by good destiny.<br>
  I look to Your support, O Holy Saint; give me Your hand, and protect me. By Your Grace, let me meet the Lord, my King. ||1||<br>
  I wandered through countless incarnations, but I did not find stability anywhere.<br>
  I serve the Guru, and I fall at His feet, praying, "O Dear Lord of the Universe, please, show me the way."||1||Pause||<br>
  I have tried so many things to acquire the wealth of Maya, and to cherish it in my mind; I have passed my life constantly crying out, "Mine, mine!"<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 028</h2></center>
  Is there any such Saint, who would meet with me, take away my anxiety, and lead me to enshrine love for my Lord and Master. ||2||<br>
  I have read all the Vedas, and yet the sense of separation in my mind still has not been removed; the five thieves of my house are not quieted, even for an instant.<br>
  Is there any devotee, who is unattached to Maya, who may irrigate my mind with the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the One Lord? ||3||<br>
  In spite of the many places of pilgrimage for people to bathe in, their minds are still stained by their stubborn ego; the Lord Master is not pleased by this at all.<br>
  When will I find the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy? There, I shall be always in the ecstasy of the Lord, Har, Har, and my mind shall take its cleansing bath in the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom. ||4||<br>
  I have followed the four stages of life, but my mind is not satisfied; I wash my body, but it is totally lacking in understanding.<br>
  If only I could meet some devotee of the Supreme Lord God, imbued with the Lord's Love, who could eradicate the filthy evil-mindedness from my mind. ||5||<br>
  One who is attached to religious rituals, does not love the Lord, even for an instant; he is filled with pride, and he is of no account.<br>
  One who meets with the rewarding personality of the Guru, continually sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. By Guru's Grace, such a rare one beholds the Lord with his eyes. ||6||<br>
  One who acts through stubbornness is of no account at all; like a crane, he pretends to meditate, but he is still stuck in Maya.<br>
  Is there any such Giver of peace, who can recite to me the sermon of God? Meeting him, I would be emancipated. ||7||<br>
  When the Lord, my King, is totally pleased with me, He will break the bonds of Maya for me; my mind is imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  I am in ecstasy, forever and ever, meeting the Fearless Lord, the Lord of the Universe. Falling at the Lord's Feet, Nanak has found peace. ||8||<br>
  My Yatra, my life pilgrimage, has become fruitful, fruitful, fruitful.<br>
  My comings and goings have ended, since I met the Holy Saint. ||1||Second Pause||1||3||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl, Chhant:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Why should I bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage? The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the sacred shrine of pilgrimage.<br>
  My sacred shrine of pilgrimage is spiritual wisdom within, and contemplation on the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  The spiritual wisdom given by the Guru is the True sacred shrine of pilgrimage, where the ten festivals are always observed.<br>
  I constantly beg for the Name of the Lord; grant it to me, O God, Sustainer of the world.<br>
  The world is sick, and the Naam is the medicine to cure it; without the True Lord, filth sticks to it.<br>
  The Guru's Word is immaculate and pure; it radiates a steady Light. Constantly bathe in such a true shrine of pilgrimage. ||1||<br>
  Filth does not stick to the true ones; what filth do they have to wash off?<br>
  If one strings a garland of virtues for oneself, what is there to cry for?<br>
  One who conquers his own self through contemplation is saved, and saves others as well; he does not come to be born again.<br>
  The supreme meditator is Himself the philosopher's stone, which transforms lead into gold. The true man is pleasing to the True Lord.<br>
  He is in ecstasy, truly happy, night and day; his sorrows and sins are taken away.<br>
  He finds the True Name, and beholds the Guru; with the True Name in his mind, no filth sticks to him. ||2||<br>
  O friend, association with the Holy is the perfect cleansing bath.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 029</h2></center>
  The singer who sings the Lord's Praises is adorned with the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Worship the True Lord, and believe in the True Guru; this brings the merit of making donations to charity, kindness and compassion.<br>
  The soul-bride who loves to be with her Husband Lord bathes at the Triveni, the sacred place where the Ganges, Jamuna and Saraswaati Rivers converge, the Truest of the True.<br>
  Worship and adore the One Creator, the True Lord, who constantly gives, whose gifts continually increase.<br>
  Salvation is attained by associating with the Society of the Saints, O friend; granting His Grace, God unites us in His Union. ||3||<br>
  Everyone speaks and talks; how great should I say He is?<br>
  I am foolish, lowly and ignorant; it is only through the Guru's Teachings that I understand.<br>
  True are the Teachings of the Guru. His Words are Ambrosial Nectar; my mind is pleased and appeased by them.<br>
  Loaded down with corruption and sin, people depart, and then come back again; the True Shabad is found through my Guru.<br>
  There is no end to the treasure of devotion; the Lord is pervading everywhere.<br>
  Nanak utters this true prayer; one who purifies his mind is True. ||4||1||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, First Mehl:<br>
  I live by Your Name; my mind is in ecstasy, Lord.<br>
  True is the Name of the True Lord. Glorious are the Praises of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Infinite is the spiritual wisdom imparted by the Guru. The Creator Lord who created, shall also destroy.<br>
  The call of death is sent out by the Lord's Command; no one can challenge it.<br>
  He Himself creates, and watches; His written command is above each and every head. He Himself imparts understanding and awareness.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord Master is inaccessible and unfathomable; I live by His True Name. ||1||<br>
  No one can compare to You, Lord; all come and go.<br>
  By Your Command, the account is settled, and doubt is dispelled.<br>
  The Guru dispels doubt, and makes us speak the Unspoken Speech; the true ones are absorbed into Truth.<br>
  He Himself creates, and He Himself destroys; I accept the Command of the Commander Lord.<br>
  True greatness comes from the Guru; You alone are the mind's companion in the end.<br>
  O Nanak, there is no other than the Lord and Master; greatness comes from Your Name. ||2||<br>
  You are the True Creator Lord, the unknowable Maker.<br>
  There is only the One Lord and Master, but there are two paths, by which conflict increases.<br>
  All follow these two paths, by the Hukam of the Lord's Command; the world is born, only to die.<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal has no friend at all; he carries loads of sin on his head.<br>
  By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, he comes, but he does not understand this Hukam; the Lord's Hukam is the Embellisher.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Shabad, the Word of the Lord and Master, the True Creator Lord is realized. ||3||<br>
  Your devotees look beautiful in Your Court, embellished with the Shabad.<br>
  They chant the Ambrosial Word of His Bani, savoring it with their tongues.<br>
  Savoring it with their tongues, they thirst for the Naam; they are a sacrifice to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Touching the philosopher's stone, they become the philosopher's stone, which transforms lead into gold; O Lord, they become pleasing to your mind.<br>
  They attain the immortal status and eradicate their self-conceit; how rare is that person, who contemplates spiritual wisdom.<br>
  O Nanak, the devotees look beautiful in the Court of the True Lord; they are dealers in the Truth. ||4||<br>
  I am hungry and thirsty for wealth; how will I be able to go to the Lord's Court?<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 030</h2></center>
  I shall go and ask the True Guru, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  I meditate on the True Name, chant the True Name, and as Gurmukh, I realize the True Name.<br>
  Night and day, I chant the Name of the merciful, immaculate Lord, the Master of the poor.<br>
  The Primal Lord has ordained the tasks to be done; self-conceit is overcome, and the mind is subdued.<br>
  O Nanak, the Naam is the sweetest essence; through the Naam, thirst and desire are stilled. ||5||2||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Chhant, First Mehl:<br>
  Your Husband Lord is with you, O deluded soul-bride, but you do are not aware of Him.<br>
  Your destiny is written on your forehead, according to your past actions.<br>
  This inscription of past deeds cannot be erased; what do I know about what will happen?<br>
  You have not adopted a virtuous lifestyle, and you are not attuned to the Lord's Love; you sit there, crying over your past misdeeds.<br>
  Wealth and youth are like the shade of the bitter swallow-wort plant; you are growing old, and your days are coming to their end.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you shall end up as a discarded, divorced bride; your own falsehood shall separate you from the Lord. ||1||<br>
  You have drowned, and your house is ruined; walk in the Way of the Guru's Will.<br>
  Meditate on the True Name, and you shall find peace in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.<br>
  Meditate on the Lord's Name, and you shall find peace; your stay in this world shall last only four days.<br>
  Sit in the home of your own being, and you shall find Truth; night and day, be with your Beloved.<br>
  Without loving devotion, you cannot dwell in your own home - listen, everyone!<br>
  O Nanak, she is happy, and she obtains her Husband Lord, if she is attuned to the True Name. ||2||<br>
  If the soul-bride is pleasing to her Husband Lord, then the Husband Lord will love His bride.<br>
  Imbued with the love of her Beloved, she contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  She contemplates the Guru's Shabads, and her Husband Lord loves her; in deep humility, she worships Him in loving devotion.<br>
  She burns away her emotional attachment to Maya, and in love, she loves her Beloved.<br>
  She is imbued and drenched with the Love of the True Lord; she has become beautiful, by conquering her mind.<br>
  O Nanak, the happy soul-bride abides in Truth; she loves to love her Husband Lord. ||3||<br>
  The soul-bride looks so beautiful in the home of her Husband Lord, if she is pleasing to Him.<br>
  It is of no use at all to speak false words.<br>
  If she speaks false, it is of no use to her, and she does not see her Husband Lord with her eyes.<br>
  Worthless, forgotten and abandoned by her Husband Lord, she passes her life-night without her Lord and Master.<br>
  Such a wife does not believe in the Word of the Guru's Shabad; she is caught in the net of the world, and does not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.<br>
  O Nanak, if she understands her own self, then, as Gurmukh, she merges in celestial peace. ||4||<br>
  Blessed is that soul-bride, who knows her Husband Lord.<br>
  Without the Naam, she is false, and her actions are false as well.<br>
  Devotional worship of the Lord is beautiful; the True Lord loves it. So immerse yourself in loving devotional worship of God.<br>
  My Husband Lord is playful and innocent; imbued with His Love, I enjoy Him.<br>
  She blossoms forth through the Word of the Guru's Shabad; she ravishes her Husband Lord, and obtains the most noble reward.<br>
  O Nanak, in Truth, she obtains glory; in her Husband's home, the soul-bride looks beautiful. ||5||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 031</h2></center>
  Dhanaasaree, Chhant, Fourth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  When the Dear Lord grants His Grace, one meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, through loving faith and devotion, one intuitively sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Singing His Glorious Praises continually, night and day, one blossoms forth, when it is pleasing to the True Lord.<br>
  Egotism, self-conceit and Maya are forsaken, and he is intuitively absorbed into the Naam.<br>
  The Creator Himself acts; when He gives, then we receive.<br>
  When the Dear Lord grants His Grace, we meditate on the Naam. ||1||<br>
  Deep within, I feel true love for the Perfect True Guru.<br>
  I serve Him day and night; I never forget Him.<br>
  I never forget Him; I remember Him night and day. When I chant the Naam, then I live.<br>
  With my ears, I hear about Him, and my mind is satisfied. As Gurmukh, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  If He bestows His Glance of Grace, then I shall meet the True Guru; my discriminating intellect would contemplate Him, night and day.<br>
  Deep within, I feel true love for the Perfect True Guru. ||2||<br>
  By great good fortune, one joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; then, one comes to savor the subtle essence of the Lord.<br>
  Night and day, he remains lovingly focused on the Lord; he merges in celestial peace.<br>
  Merging in celestial peace, he becomes pleasing to the Lord's Mind; he remains forever unattached and untouched.<br>
  He receives honor in this world and the next, lovingly focused on the Lord's Name.<br>
  He is liberated from both pleasure and pain; he is pleased by whatever God does.<br>
  By great good fortune, one joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and then, one comes to savor the subtle essence of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  In the love of duality, there is pain and suffering; the Messenger of Death eyes the self-willed manmukhs.<br>
  They cry and howl, day and night, caught by the pain of Maya.<br>
  Caught by the pain of Maya, provoked by his ego, he passes his life crying out, "Mine, mine!".<br>
  He does not remember God, the Giver, and in the end, he departs regretting and repenting.<br>
  Without the Name, nothing shall go along with him; not his children, spouse or the enticements of Maya.<br>
  In the love of duality, there is pain and suffering; the Messenger of Death eyes the self-willed manmukhs. ||4||<br>
  Granting His Grace, the Lord has merged me with Himself; I have found the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.<br>
  I remain standing with my palms pressed together; I have become pleasing to God's Mind.<br>
  When one is pleasing to God's Mind, then he merges in the Hukam of the Lord's Command; surrendering to His Hukam, he finds peace.<br>
  Night and day, he chants the Lord's Name, day and night; intuitively, naturally, he meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Through the Naam, the glorious greatness of the Naam is obtained; the Naam is pleasing to Nanak's mind.<br>
  Granting His Grace, the Lord has merged me with Himself; I have found the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||5||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 032</h2></center>
  Dhanaasaree, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The True Guru is merciful to the meek; in His Presence, the Lord's Praises are sung.<br>
  The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is chanted in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Vibrating, and worshipping the One Lord in the Company of the Holy, the pains of birth and death are removed.<br>
  Those who have such karma pre-ordained, study and learn the Truth; the noose of Death is removed from their necks.<br>
  Their fears and doubts are dispelled, the knot of death is untied, and they never have to walk on Death's path.<br>
  Prays Nanak, shower me with Your Mercy, Lord; let me sing Your Glorious Praises forever. ||1||<br>
  The Name of the One, Immaculate Lord is the Support of the unsupported.<br>
  You are the Giver, the Great Giver, the Dispeller of all sorrow.<br>
  O Destroyer of pain, Creator Lord, Master of peace and bliss, I have come seeking the Sanctuary of the Holy;<br>
  please, help me to cross over the terrifying and difficult world-ocean in an instant.<br>
  I saw the Lord pervading and permeating everywhere, when the healing ointment of the Guru's wisdom was applied to my eyes.<br>
  Prays Nanak, remember Him forever in meditation, the Destroyer of all sorrow and fear. ||2||<br>
  He Himself has attached me to the hem of His robe; He has showered me with His Mercy.<br>
  I am worthless, lowly and helpless; God is unfathomable and infinite.<br>
  My Lord and Master is always merciful, kind and compassionate; He uplifts and establishes the lowly.<br>
  All beings and creatures are under Your power; You take care of all.<br>
  He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer; He Himself is the Contemplator of all.<br>
  Prays Nanak, singing Your Glorious Praises, I live, chanting the Chant of the Lord, the Lord of the world-forest. ||3||<br>
  The Blessed Vision of Your Darshan is incomparable; Your Name is utterly priceless.<br>
  O my Incomputable Lord, Your humble servants ever meditate on You.<br>
  You dwell on the tongues of the Saints, by Your own pleasure; they are intoxicated with Your sublime essence, O Lord.<br>
  Those who are attached to Your feet are very blessed; night and day, they remain always awake and aware.<br>
  Forever and ever, meditate in remembrance on the Lord and Master; with each and every breath, speak His Glorious Praises.<br>
  Prays Nanak, let me become the dust of the feet of the Saints. God's Name is invaluable. ||4||1||<br>
  Raag Dhanaasaree, The Word Of Devotee Kabeer Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Beings like Sanak, Sanand, Shiva and Shaysh-naaga - none of them know Your mystery, Lord. ||1||<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, the Lord dwells within the heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Beings like Hanumaan, Garura, Indra the King of the gods and the rulers of humans - none of them know Your Glories, Lord. ||2||<br>
  The four Vedas, the Simritees and the Puraanas, Vishnu the Lord of Lakshmi and Lakshmi herself - none of them know the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, one who falls at the Lord's feet, and remains in His Sanctuary, does not wander around lost. ||4||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 033</h2></center>
  Day by day, hour by hour, life runs its course, and the body withers away.<br>
  Death, like a hunter, a butcher, is on the prowl; tell me, what can we do? ||1||<br>
  That day is rapidly approaching.<br>
  Mother, father, siblings, children and spouse - tell me, who belongs to whom? ||1||Pause||<br>
  As long as the light remains in the body, the beast does not understand himself.<br>
  He acts in greed to maintain his life and status, and sees nothing with his eyes. ||2||<br>
  Says Kabeer, listen, O mortal: Renounce the doubts of your mind.<br>
  Chant only the One Naam, the Name of the Lord, O mortal, and seek the Sanctuary of the One Lord. ||3||2||<br>
  That humble being, who knows even a little about loving devotional worship - what surprises are there for him?<br>
  Like water, dripping into water, which cannot be separated out again, so is the weaver Kabeer, with softened heart, merged into the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O people of the Lord, I am just a simple-minded fool.<br>
  If Kabeer were to leave his body at Benares, and so liberate himself, what obligation would he have to the Lord? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Says Kabeer, listen, O people - do not be deluded by doubt.<br>
  What is the difference between Benares and the barren land of Maghar, if the Lord is within one's heart? ||2||3||<br>
  Mortals may go to the Realm of Indra, or the Realm of Shiva,<br>
  but because of their hypocrisy and false prayers, they must leave again. ||1||<br>
  What should I ask for? Nothing lasts forever.<br>
  Enshrine the Lord's Name within your mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Fame and glory, power, wealth and glorious greatness<br>
  - none of these will go with you or help you in the end. ||2||<br>
  Children, spouse, wealth and Maya<br>
  - who has ever obtained peace from these? ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, nothing else is of any use.<br>
  Within my mind is the wealth of the Lord's Name. ||4||4||<br>
  Remember the Lord, remember the Lord, remember the Lord in meditation, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  Without remembering the Lord's Name in meditation, a great many are drowned. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your spouse, children, body, house and possessions - you think these will give you peace.<br>
  But none of these shall be yours, when the time of death comes. ||1||<br>
  Ajaamal, the elephant, and the prostitute committed many sins,<br>
  but still, they crossed over the world-ocean, by chanting the Lord's Name. ||2||<br>
  You have wandered in reincarnation, as pigs and dogs - did you feel no shame?<br>
  Forsaking the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, why do you eat poison? ||3||<br>
  Abandon your doubts about do's and dont's, and take to the Lord's Name.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, O servant Kabeer, love the Lord. ||4||5||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, The Word Of Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  They dig deep foundations, and build lofty palaces.<br>
  Can anyone live longer than Markanda, who passed his days with only a handful of straw upon his head? ||1||<br>
  The Creator Lord is our only friend.<br>
  O man, why are you so proud? This body is only temporary - it shall pass away. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 034</h2></center>
  The Kaurvas, who had brothers like Duryodhan, used to proclaim, "This is ours! This is ours!"<br>
  Their royal procession extended over sixty miles, and yet their bodies were eaten by vultures. ||2||<br>
  Sri Lanka was totally rich with gold; was anyone greater than its ruler Raavan?<br>
  What happened to the elephants, tethered at his gate? In an instant, it all belonged to someone else. ||3||<br>
  The Yaadvas deceived Durbaasaa, and received their rewards.<br>
  The Lord has shown mercy to His humble servant, and now Naam Dayv sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4||1||<br>
  I have brought the ten sensory organs under my control, and erased every trace of the five thieves.<br>
  I have filled the seventy-two thousand nerve channels with Ambrosial Nectar, and drained out the poison. ||1||<br>
  I shall not come into the world again.<br>
  I chant the Ambrosial Bani of the Word from the depths of my heart, and I have instructed my soul. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I fell at the Guru's feet and begged of Him; with the mighty axe, I have chopped off emotional attachment.<br>
  Turning away from the world, I have become the servant of the Saints; I fear no one except the Lord's devotees. ||2||<br>
  I shall be released from this world, when I stop clinging to Maya.<br>
  Maya is the name of the power which causes us to be born; renouncing it, we obtain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||3||<br>
  That humble being, who performs devotional worship in this way, is rid of all fear.<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, why are you wandering around out there? This is the way to find the Lord. ||4||2||<br>
  As water is very precious in the desert, and the creeper weeds are dear to the camel,<br>
  and the tune of the hunter's bell at night is enticing to the deer, so is the Lord to my mind. ||1||<br>
  Your Name is so beautiful! Your form is so beautiful! Your Love is so very beautiful, O my Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  As rain is dear to the earth, and the flower's fragrance is dear to the bumble bee,<br>
  and the mango is dear to the cuckoo, so is the Lord to my mind. ||2||<br>
  As the sun is dear to the chakvi duck, and the lake of Man Sarovar is dear to the swan,<br>
  and the husband is dear to his wife, so is the Lord to my mind. ||3||<br>
  As milk is dear to the baby, and the raindrop is dear to the mouth of the rainbird,<br>
  and as water is dear to the fish, so is the Lord to my mind. ||4||<br>
  All the seekers, Siddhas and silent sages seek Him, but only a rare few behold Him.<br>
  Just as Your Name is dear to all the Universe, so is the Lord dear to Naam Dayv's mind. ||5||3||<br>
  First of all, the lotuses bloomed in the woods;<br>
  from them, all the swan-souls came into being.<br>
  Know that, through Krishna, the Lord, Har, Har, the dance of creation dances. ||1||<br>
  First of all, there was only the Primal Being.<br>
  From that Primal Being, Maya was produced.<br>
  All that is, is His.<br>
  In this Garden of the Lord, we all dance, like water in the pots of the Persian wheel. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Women and men both dance.<br>
  There is no other than the Lord.<br>
  Don't dispute this,<br>
  and don't doubt this.<br>
  The Lord says, "This creation and I are one and the same."||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 035</h2></center>
  Like the pots on the Persian wheel, sometimes the world is high, and sometimes it is low.<br>
  Wandering and roaming around, I have come at last to Your Door.<br>
  "Who are you?"<br>
  "I am Naam Dayv, Sir."<br>
  O Lord, please save me from Maya, the cause of death. ||3||4||<br>
  O Lord, You are the Purifier of sinners - this is Your innate nature.<br>
  Blessed are those silent sages and humble beings, who meditate on my Lord God. ||1||<br>
  I have applied to my forehead the dust of the feet of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  This is something which is far away from the gods, mortal men and silent sages. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Lord, Merciful to the meek, Destroyer of pride<br>
  - Naam Dayv seeks the Sanctuary of Your feet; he is a sacrifice to You. ||2||5||<br>
  Dhanaasaree, Devotee Ravi Daas Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  There is none as forlorn as I am, and none as Compassionate as You; what need is there to test us now?<br>
  May my mind surrender to Your Word; please, bless Your humble servant with this perfection. ||1||<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Lord.<br>
  O Lord, why are You silent? ||Pause||<br>
  For so many incarnations, I have been separated from You, Lord; I dedicate this life to You.<br>
  Says Ravi Daas: placing my hopes in You, I live; it is so long since I have gazed upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||2||1||<br>
  In my consciousness, I remember You in meditation; with my eyes, I behold You; I fill my ears with the Word of Your Bani, and Your Sublime Praise.<br>
  My mind is the bumble bee; I enshrine Your feet within my heart, and with my tongue, I chant the Ambrosial Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  My love for the Lord of the Universe does not decrease.<br>
  I paid for it dearly, in exchange for my soul. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, love for the Lord does not well up; without this love, Your devotional worship cannot be performed.<br>
  Ravi Daas offers this one prayer unto the Lord: please preserve and protect my honor, O Lord, my King. ||2||2||<br>
  Your Name, Lord, is my adoration and cleansing bath.<br>
  Without the Name of the Lord, all ostentatious displays are useless. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your Name is my prayer mat, and Your Name is the stone to grind the sandalwood. Your Name is the saffron which I take and sprinkle in offering to You.<br>
  Your Name is the water, and Your Name is the sandalwood. The chanting of Your Name is the grinding of the sandalwood. I take it and offer all this to You. ||1||<br>
  Your Name is the lamp, and Your Name is the wick. Your Name is the oil I pour into it.<br>
  Your Name is the light applied to this lamp, which enlightens and illuminates the entire world. ||2||<br>
  Your Name is the thread, and Your Name is the garland of flowers. The eighteen loads of vegetation are all too impure to offer to You.<br>
  Why should I offer to You, that which You Yourself created? Your Name is the fan, which I wave over You. ||3||<br>
  The whole world is engrossed in the eighteen Puraanas, the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, and the four sources of creation.<br>
  Says Ravi Daas, Your Name is my Aartee, my lamp-lit worship-service. The True Name, Sat Naam, is the food which I offer to You. ||4||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 14 - Raag Dhanaasaree - Part 036</h2></center>
  Dhanaasaree, The Word Of Devotee Trilochan Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Why do you slander the Lord? You are ignorant and deluded.<br>
  Pain and pleasure are the result of your own actions. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The moon dwells in Shiva's forehead; it takes its cleansing bath in the Ganges.<br>
  Among the men of the moon's family, Krishna was born;<br>
  even so, the stains from its past actions remain on the moon's face. ||1||<br>
  Aruna was a charioteer; his master was the sun, the lamp of the world. His brother was Garuda, the king of birds;<br>
  and yet, Aruna was made a cripple, because of the karma of his past actions. ||2||<br>
  Shiva, the destroyer of countless sins, the Lord and Master of the three worlds, wandered from sacred shrine to sacred shrine; he never found an end to them.<br>
  And yet, he could not erase the karma of cutting off Brahma's head. ||3||<br>
  Through the nectar, the moon, the wish-fulfilling cow, Lakshmi, the miraculous tree of life, Sikhar the sun's horse, and Dhanavantar the wise physician - all arose from the ocean, the lord of rivers;<br>
  and yet, because of its karma, its saltiness has not left it. ||4||<br>
  Hanuman burnt the fortress of Sri Lanka, uprooted the garden of Raawan, and brought healing herbs for the wounds of Lachhman, pleasing Lord Raamaa;<br>
  and yet, because of his karma, he could not be rid of his loin cloth. ||5||<br>
  The karma of past actions cannot be erased, O wife of my house; this is why I chant the Name of the Lord.<br>
  So prays Trilochan, Dear Lord. ||6||1||<br>
  Sri Sain:<br>
  With incense, lamps and ghee, I offer this lamp-lit worship service.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Lord of Lakshmi. ||1||<br>
  Hail to You, Lord, hail to You! Again and again, hail to You, Lord King, Ruler of all! ||1||Pause||<br>
  Sublime is the lamp, and pure is the wick.<br>
  You are immaculate and pure, O Brilliant Lord of Wealth! ||2||<br>
  Raamaanand knows the devotional worship of the Lord.<br>
  He says that the Lord is all-pervading, the embodiment of supreme joy. ||3||<br>
  The Lord of the world, of wondrous form, has carried me across the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Says Sain, remember the Lord, the embodiment of supreme joy! ||4||2||<br>
  Peepaa:<br>
  Within the body, the Divine Lord is embodied. The body is the temple, the place of pilgrimage, and the pilgrim.<br>
  Within the body are incense, lamps and offerings. Within the body are the flower offerings. ||1||<br>
  I searched throughout many realms, but I found the nine treasures within the body.<br>
  Nothing comes, and nothing goes; I pray to the Lord for Mercy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The One who pervades the Universe also dwells in the body; whoever seeks Him, finds Him there.<br>
  Peepaa prays, the Lord is the supreme essence; He reveals Himself through the True Guru. ||2||3||<br>
  Dhannaa:<br>
  O Lord of the world, this is Your lamp-lit worship service.<br>
  You are the Arranger of the affairs of those humble beings who perform Your devotional worship service. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Lentils, flour and ghee - these things, I beg of You.<br>
  My mind shall ever be pleased.<br>
  Shoes, fine clothes, and grain of seven kinds - I beg of You. ||1||<br>
  A milk cow, and a water buffalo, I beg of You,<br>
  and a fine Turkestani horse.<br>
  A good wife to care for my home<br>
  - Your humble servant Dhanna begs for these things, Lord. ||2||4||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr15.htm">Next: Raag Jaitsree</a></center>
 </body>