<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr16.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr18.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Bairaaree</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 17 - Raag Bairaaree - Part 001</h2></center>
  Raag Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl, First House, Du-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Listen, O mind, to the Unspoken Speech of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Riches, wisdom, supernatural spiritual powers and peace are obtained, by vibrating, meditating on the Lord God, under Guru's Instruction. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Numerous legends, the Puraanas, and the six Shaastras, sing the sublime Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Shiva and the three hundred thirty million gods meditate on the Lord, but they do not know the secret of His mystery. ||1||<br>
  The angelic and divine beings, and the celestial singers sing His Praises; all Creation sings of Him.<br>
  O Nanak, those whom the Lord blesses with His Kind Mercy, become the good Saints of the Lord God. ||2||1||<br>
  Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, those who meet the Lord's humble servants, sing His Praises.<br>
  They are blessed with the gift of the jewel of the Lord, Har, Har, the sublime jewel of the Lord, by the Guru, the True Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I offer my mind, body and everything to that humble being who recites the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  I offer my wealth, the riches of Maya and my property to that one who leads me to meet the Lord, my friend. ||1||<br>
  When the Lord of the world bestowed just a tiny bit of His Mercy, for just an instant, then I meditated on the Praise of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.<br>
  The Lord and Master has met servant Nanak, and the pain of the sickness of egotism has been eliminated. ||2||2||<br>
  Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord's humble servant sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Even if someone slanders the Lord's humble servant, he does not give up his own goodness. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whatever the Lord and Master does, He does by Himself; the Lord Himself does the deeds.<br>
  The Lord and Master Himself imparts understanding; the Lord Himself inspires us to speak. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 17 - Raag Bairaaree - Part 002</h2></center>
  The Lord Himself directs the evolution of the world of the five elements; He Himself infuses the five senses into it.<br>
  O servant Nanak, the Lord Himself unites us with the True Guru; He Himself resolves the conflicts. ||2||3||<br>
  Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, O mind, and you shall be emancipated.<br>
  The Lord shall destroy all the sins of millions upon millions of incarnations, and carry you across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the body-village, the Lord Master abides; the Lord is without fear, without vengeance, and without form.<br>
  The Lord is dwelling near at hand, but He cannot be seen. By the Guru's Teachings, the Lord is obtained. ||1||<br>
  The Lord Himself is the banker, the jeweller, the jewel, the gem; the Lord Himself created the entire expanse of the creation.<br>
  O Nanak, one who is blessed by the Lord's Kind Mercy, trades in the Lord's Name; He alone is the true banker, the true trader. ||2||4||<br>
  Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Meditate, O mind, on the immaculate, formless Lord.<br>
  Forever and ever, meditate on the Lord, the Giver of peace; He has no end or limitation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the fiery pit of the womb, when you were hanging upside-down, the Lord absorbed You in His Love, and preserved You.<br>
  So serve such a Lord, O my mind; the Lord shall deliver you in the end. ||1||<br>
  Bow down in reverence to that humble being, within whose heart the Lord, Har, Har, abides.<br>
  By the Lord's Kind Mercy, O Nanak, one obtains the Lord's meditation, and the support of the Naam. ||2||5||<br>
  Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; meditate on it continually.<br>
  You shall obtain the fruits of your heart's desires, and pain shall never touch you again. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That is chanting, that is deep meditation and austerity, that is fasting and worship, which inspires love for the Lord.<br>
  Without the Lord's Love, every other love is false; in an instant, it is all forgotten. ||1||<br>
  You are infinite, the Master of all power; Your value cannot be described at all.<br>
  Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary, O Dear Lord; as it pleases You, save him. ||2||6||<br>
  Raag Bairaaree, Fifth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meeting with the humble Saints, sing the Praises of the Lord.<br>
  The pains of millions of incarnations shall be eradicated. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whatever your mind desires, that you shall obtain.<br>
  By His Kind Mercy, the Lord blesses us with His Name. ||1||<br>
  All happiness and greatness are in the Lord's Name.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, Nanak has gained this understanding. ||2||1||7||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr18.htm">Next: Raag Tilang</a></center>
 </body>