<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr17.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr19.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Tilang</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 18 - Raag Tilang - Part 001</h2></center>
  Raag Tilang, First Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  I offer this one prayer to You; please listen to it, O Creator Lord.<br>
  You are true, great, merciful and spotless, O Cherisher Lord. ||1||<br>
  The world is a transitory place of mortality - know this for certain in your mind.<br>
  Azraa-eel, the Messenger of Death, has caught me by the hair on my head, and yet, I do not know it at all in my mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Spouse, children, parents and siblings - none of them will be there to hold your hand.<br>
  And when at last I fall, and the time of my last prayer has come, there shall be no one to rescue me. ||2||<br>
  Night and day, I wandered around in greed, contemplating evil schemes.<br>
  I never did good deeds; this is my condition. ||3||<br>
  I am unfortunate, miserly, negligent, shameless and without the Fear of God.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am Your humble servant, the dust of the feet of Your slaves. ||4||1||<br>
  Tilang, First Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Fear of You, O Lord God, is my marijuana; my consciousness is the pouch which holds it.<br>
  I have become an intoxicated hermit.<br>
  My hands are my begging bowl; I am so hungry for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.<br>
  I beg at Your Door, day after day. ||1||<br>
  I long for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.<br>
  I am a beggar at Your Door - please bless me with Your charity. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Saffron, flowers, musk oil and gold embellish the bodies of all.<br>
  The Lord's devotees are like sandalwood, which imparts its fragrance to everyone. ||2||<br>
  No one says that ghee or silk are polluted.<br>
  Such is the Lord's devotee, no matter what his social status is.<br>
  Those who bow in reverence to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, remain absorbed in Your Love.<br>
  Nanak begs for charity at their door. ||3||1||2||<br>
  Tilang, First Mehl, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  This body fabric is conditioned by Maya, O beloved; this cloth is dyed in greed.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 18 - Raag Tilang - Part 002</h2></center>
  My Husband Lord is not pleased by these clothes, O Beloved; how can the soul-bride go to His bed? ||1||<br>
  I am a sacrifice, O Dear Merciful Lord; I am a sacrifice to You.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those who take to Your Name.<br>
  Unto those who take to Your Name, I am forever a sacrifice. ||1||Pause||<br>
  If the body becomes the dyer's vat, O Beloved, and the Name is placed within it as the dye,<br>
  and if the Dyer who dyes this cloth is the Lord Master - O, such a color has never been seen before! ||2||<br>
  Those whose shawls are so dyed, O Beloved, their Husband Lord is always with them.<br>
  Bless me with the dust of those humble beings, O Dear Lord. Says Nanak, this is my prayer. ||3||<br>
  He Himself creates, and He Himself imbues us. He Himself bestows His Glance of Grace.<br>
  O Nanak, if the soul-bride becomes pleasing to her Husband Lord, He Himself enjoys her. ||4||1||3||<br>
  Tilang, First Mehl:<br>
  O foolish and ignorant soul-bride, why are you so proud?<br>
  Within the home of your own self, why do you not enjoy the Love of your Lord?<br>
  Your Husband Lord is so very near, O foolish bride; why do you search for Him outside?<br>
  Apply the Fear of God as the maascara to adorn your eyes, and make the Love of the Lord your ornament.<br>
  Then, you shall be known as a devoted and committed soul-bride, when you enshrine love for your Husband Lord. ||1||<br>
  What can the silly young bride do, if she is not pleasing to her Husband Lord?<br>
  She may plead and implore so many times, but still, such a bride shall not obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.<br>
  Without the karma of good deeds, nothing is obtained, although she may run around frantically.<br>
  She is intoxicated with greed, pride and egotism, and engrossed in Maya.<br>
  She cannot obtain her Husband Lord in these ways; the young bride is so foolish! ||2||<br>
  Go and ask the happy, pure soul-brides, how did they obtain their Husband Lord?<br>
  Whatever the Lord does, accept that as good; do away with your own cleverness and self-will.<br>
  By His Love, true wealth is obtained; link your consciousness to His lotus feet.<br>
  As your Husband Lord directs, so you must act; surrender your body and mind to Him, and apply this perfume to yourself.<br>
  So speaks the happy soul-bride, O sister; in this way, the Husband Lord is obtained. ||3||<br>
  Give up your selfhood, and so obtain your Husband Lord; what other clever tricks are of any use?<br>
  When the Husband Lord looks upon the soul-bride with His Gracious Glance, that day is historic - the bride obtains the nine treasures.<br>
  She who is loved by her Husband Lord, is the true soul-bride; O Nanak, she is the queen of all.<br>
  Thus she is imbued with His Love, intoxicated with delight; day and night, she is absorbed in His Love.<br>
  She is beautiful, glorious and brilliant; she is known as truly wise. ||4||2||4||<br>
  Tilang, First Mehl:<br>
  As the Word of the Forgiving Lord comes to me, so do I express it, O Lalo.<br>
  Bringing the marriage party of sin, Babar has invaded from Kaabul, demanding our land as his wedding gift, O Lalo.<br>
  Modesty and righteousness both have vanished, and falsehood struts around like a leader, O Lalo.<br>
  The Qazis and the Brahmins have lost their roles, and Satan now conducts the marriage rites, O Lalo.<br>
  The Muslim women read the Koran, and in their misery, they call upon God, O Lalo.<br>
  The Hindu women of high social status, and others of lowly status as well, are put into the same category, O Lalo.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 18 - Raag Tilang - Part 003</h2></center>
  The wedding songs of murder are sung, O Nanak, and blood is sprinkled instead of saffron, O Lalo. ||1||<br>
  Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord and Master in the city of corpses, and voices this account.<br>
  The One who created, and attached the mortals to pleasures, sits alone, and watches this.<br>
  The Lord and Master is True, and True is His justice. He issues His Commands according to His judgement.<br>
  The body-fabric will be torn apart into shreds, and then India will remember these words.<br>
  Coming in seventy-eight (1521 A.D.), they will depart in ninety-seven (1540 A.D.), and then another disciple of man will rise up.<br>
  Nanak speaks the Word of Truth; he proclaims the Truth at this, the right time. ||2||3||5||<br>
  Tilang, Fourth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Everyone comes by Command of the Lord and Master. The Hukam of His Command extends to all.<br>
  True is the Lord and Master, and True is His play. The Lord is the Master of all. ||1||<br>
  So praise the True Lord; the Lord is the Master over all.<br>
  No one is equal to Him; am I of any account? ||Pause||<br>
  Air, water, earth and sky - the Lord has made these His home and temple.<br>
  He Himself is pervading everywhere, O Nanak. Tell me: what can be counted as false? ||2||1||<br>
  Tilang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The evil-minded person continually does fruitless deeds, all puffed up with pride.<br>
  When he brings home what he has acquired, by practicing deception and falsehood, he thinks that he has conquered the world. ||1||<br>
  Such is the drama of the world, that he does not contemplate the Lord's Name.<br>
  In an instant, all this false play shall perish; O my mind, meditate on the Lord. ||Pause||<br>
  He does not think of that time, when Death, the Torturer, shall come and seize him.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord saves that one, within whose heart the Lord, in His Kind Mercy, dwells. ||2||2||<br>
  Tilang, Fifth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Lord infused His Light into the dust, and created the world, the universe.<br>
  The sky, the earth, the trees, and the water - all are the Creation of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O human being, whatever you can see with your eyes, shall perish.<br>
  The world eats dead carcasses, living by neglect and greed. ||Pause||<br>
  Like a goblin, or a beast, they kill and eat the forbidden carcasses of meat.<br>
  So control your urges, or else you will be seized by the Lord, and thrown into the tortures of hell. ||2||<br>
  Your benefactors, presents, companions, courts, lands and homes<br>
  - when Azraa-eel, the Messenger of Death seizes you, what good will these be to you then? ||3||<br>
  The Pure Lord God knows your condition.<br>
  O Nanak, recite your prayer to the holy people. ||4||1||<br>
  Tilang, Second House, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  There is no other than You, Lord.<br>
  You are the Creator; whatever You do, that alone happens.<br>
  You are the strength, and You are the support of the mind.<br>
  Forever and ever, meditate, O Nanak, on the One. ||1||<br>
  The Great Giver is the Supreme Lord God over all.<br>
  You are our support, You are our sustainer. ||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 18 - Raag Tilang - Part 004</h2></center>
  You are, You are, and You shall ever be, O inaccessible, unfathomable, lofty and infinite Lord.<br>
  Those who serve You, are not touched by fear or suffering.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Whatever is seen, is Your form, O treasure of virtue, O Lord of the Universe, O Lord of incomparable beauty.<br>
  Remembering, remembering, remembering the Lord in meditation, His humble servant becomes like Him.<br>
  O Nanak, by His Grace, we obtain Him. ||3||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those who meditate on the Lord.<br>
  Associating with them, the whole world is saved.<br>
  Says Nanak, God fulfills our hopes and aspirations.<br>
  I long for the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||4||2||<br>
  Tilang, Fifth Mehl, Third House:<br>
  Merciful, the Lord Master is Merciful.<br>
  My Lord Master is Merciful.<br>
  He gives His gifts to all beings. ||Pause||<br>
  Why do you waver, O mortal being? The Creator Lord Himself shall protect you.<br>
  He who created you, will also give you nourishment. ||1||<br>
  The One who created the world, takes care of it.<br>
  In each and every heart and mind, the Lord is the True Cherisher. ||2||<br>
  His creative potency and His value cannot be known; He is the Great and carefree Lord.<br>
  O human being, meditate on the Lord, as long as there is breath in your body. ||3||<br>
  O God, You are all-powerful, inexpressible and imperceptible; my soul and body are Your capital.<br>
  By Your Mercy, may I find peace; this is Nanak's lasting prayer. ||4||3||<br>
  Tilang, Fifth Mehl, Third House:<br>
  O Creator, through Your creative potency, I am in love with You.<br>
  You alone are my spiritual and temporal Lord; and yet, You are detached from all Your creation. ||Pause||<br>
  In an instant, You establish and disestablish. Wondrous is Your form!<br>
  Who can know Your play? You are the Light in the darkness. ||1||<br>
  You are the Master of Your creation, the Lord of all the world, O Merciful Lord God.<br>
  One who worships You day and night - why should he have to go to hell? ||2||<br>
  Azraa-eel, the Messenger of Death, is the friend of the human being who has Your support, Lord.<br>
  His sins are all forgiven; Your humble servant gazes upon Your Vision. ||3||<br>
  All worldly considerations are for the present only. True peace comes only from Your Name.<br>
  Meeting the Guru, Nanak understands; He sings only Your Praises forever, O Lord. ||4||4||<br>
  Tilang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Think of the Lord in your mind, O wise one.<br>
  Enshrine love for the True Lord in your mind and body; He is the Liberator from bondage. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The value of seeing the Vision of the Lord Master cannot be estimated.<br>
  You are the Pure Cherisher; You Yourself are the great and immeasurable Lord and Master. ||1||<br>
  Give me Your help, O brave and generous Lord; You are the One, You are the Only Lord.<br>
  O Creator Lord, by Your creative potency, You created the world; Nanak holds tight to Your support. ||2||5||<br>
  Tilang, First Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The One who created the world watches over it; what more can we say, O Siblings of Destiny?<br>
 <center><h2>Section 18 - Raag Tilang - Part 005</h2></center>
  He Himself knows, and He Himself acts; He laid out the garden of the world. ||1||<br>
  Savor the story, the story of the Beloved Lord, which brings a lasting peace. ||Pause||<br>
  She who does not enjoy the Love of her Husband Lord, shall come to regret and repent in the end.<br>
  She wrings her hands, and bangs her head, when the night of her life has passed away. ||2||<br>
  Nothing comes from repentance, when the game is already finished.<br>
  She shall have the opportunity to enjoy her Beloved, only when her turn comes again. ||3||<br>
  The happy soul-bride attains her Husband Lord - she is so much better than I am.<br>
  I have none of her merits or virtues; whom should I blame? ||4||<br>
  I shall go and ask those sisters who have enjoyed their Husband Lord.<br>
  I touch their feet, and ask them to show me the Path. ||5||<br>
  She who understands the Hukam of His Command, O Nanak, applies the Fear of God as her sandalwood oil;<br>
  she charms her Beloved with her virtue, and so obtains Him. ||6||<br>
  She who meets her Beloved in her heart, remains united with Him; this is truly called union.<br>
  As much as she may long for Him, she shall not meet Him through mere words. ||7||<br>
  As metal melts into metal again, so does love melt into love.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, this understanding is obtained, and then, one obtains the Fearless Lord. ||8||<br>
  There may be an orchard of betel nut trees in the garden, but the donkey does not appreciate its value.<br>
  If someone savors a fragrance, then he can truly appreciate its flower. ||9||<br>
  One who drinks in the ambrosia, O Nanak, abandons his doubts and wanderings.<br>
  Easily and intuitively, he remains blended with the Lord, and obtains the immortal status. ||10||1||<br>
  Tilang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Guru, my friend, has told me the stories and the sermon of the Lord.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to my Guru; to the Guru, I am a sacrifice. ||1||<br>
  Come, join with me, O Sikh of the Guru, come and join with me. You are my Guru's Beloved. ||Pause||<br>
  The Glorious Praises of the Lord are pleasing to the Lord; I have obtained them from the Guru.<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to those who surrender to, and obey the Guru's Will. ||2||<br>
  I am dedicated and devoted to those who gaze upon the Beloved True Guru.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to those who perform service for the Guru. ||3||<br>
  Your Name, O Lord, Har, Har, is the Destroyer of sorrow.<br>
  Serving the Guru, it is obtained, and as Gurmukh, one is emancipated. ||4||<br>
  Those humble beings who meditate on the Lord's Name, are celebrated and acclaimed.<br>
  Nanak is a sacrifice to them, forever and ever a devoted sacrifice. ||5||<br>
  O Lord, that alone is Praise to You, which is pleasing to Your Will, O Lord God.<br>
  Those Gurmukhs, who serve their Beloved Lord, obtain Him as their reward. ||6||<br>
  Those who cherish love for the Lord, their souls are always with God.<br>
  Chanting and meditating on their Beloved, they live in, and gather in, the Lord's Name. ||7||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those Gurmukhs who serve their Beloved Lord.<br>
  They themselves are saved, along with their families, and through them, all the world is saved. ||8||<br>
  My Beloved Guru serves the Lord. Blessed is the Guru, Blessed is the Guru.<br>
  The Guru has shown me the Lord's Path; the Guru has done the greatest good deed. ||9||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 18 - Raag Tilang - Part 006</h2></center>
  Those Sikhs of the Guru, who serve the Guru, are the most blessed beings.<br>
  Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to them; He is forever and ever a sacrifice. ||10||<br>
  The Lord Himself is pleased with the Gurmukhs, the fellowship of the companions.<br>
  In the Lord's Court, they are given robes of honor, and the Lord Himself hugs them close in His embrace. ||11||<br>
  Please bless me with the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of those Gurmukhs, who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  I wash their feet, and drink in the dust of their feet, dissolved in the wash water. ||12||<br>
  Those who eat betel nuts and betel leaf and apply lipstick,<br>
  but do not contemplate the Lord, Har, Har - the Messenger of Death will seize them and take them away. ||13||<br>
  The Messenger of Death does not even approach those who contemplate the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and keep Him enshrined in their hearts. The Guru's Sikhs are the Guru's Beloveds. ||14||<br>
  The Name of the Lord is a treasure, known only to the few Gurmukhs.<br>
  O Nanak, those who meet with the True Guru, enjoy peace and pleasure. ||15||<br>
  The True Guru is called the Giver; in His Mercy, He grants His Grace.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru, who has blessed me with the Lord's Name. ||16||<br>
  Blessed, very blessed is the Guru, who brings the Lord's message.<br>
  I gaze upon the Guru, the Guru, the True Guru embodied, and I blossom forth in bliss. ||17||<br>
  The Guru's tongue recites Words of Ambrosial Nectar; He is adorned with the Lord's Name.<br>
  Those Sikhs who hear and obey the Guru - all their desires depart. ||18||<br>
  Some speak of the Lord's Path; tell me, how can I walk on it?<br>
  O Lord, Har, Har, Your Name is my supplies; I will take it with me and set out. ||19||<br>
  Those Gurmukhs who worship and adore the Lord, are wealthy and very wise.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru; I am absorbed in the Words of the Guru's Teachings. ||20||<br>
  You are the Master, my Lord and Master; You are my Ruler and King.<br>
  If it is pleasing to Your Will, then I worship and serve You; You are the treasure of virtue. ||21||<br>
  The Lord Himself is absolute; He is The One and Only; but He Himself is also manifested in many forms.<br>
  Whatever pleases Him, O Nanak, that alone is good. ||22||2||<br>
  Tilang, Ninth Mehl, Kaafee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  If you are conscious, then be conscious of Him night and day, O mortal.<br>
  Each and every moment, your life is passing away, like water from a cracked pitcher. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Why do you not sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, you ignorant fool?<br>
  You are attached to false greed, and you do not even consider death. ||1||<br>
  Even now, no harm has been done, if you will only sing God's Praises.<br>
  Says Nanak, by meditating and vibrating upon Him, you shall obtain the state of fearlessness. ||2||1||<br>
  Tilang, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  Wake up, O mind! Wake up! Why are you sleeping unaware?<br>
  That body, which you were born with, shall not go along with you in the end. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Mother, father, children and relatives whom you love,<br>
  will throw your body into the fire, when your soul departs from it. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 18 - Raag Tilang - Part 007</h2></center>
  Your worldly affairs exist only as long as you are alive; know this well.<br>
  O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; everything is like a dream. ||2||2||<br>
  Tilang, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  Sing the Lord's Praises, O mind; He is your only true companion.<br>
  Your time is passing away; listen carefully to what I say. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are so in love with property, chariots, wealth and power.<br>
  When the noose of death tightens around your neck, they will all belong to others. ||1||<br>
  Know this well, O madman - you have ruined your affairs.<br>
  You did not restrain yourself from committing sins, and you did not eradicate your ego. ||2||<br>
  So listen to the Teachings imparted by the Guru, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  Nanak proclaims: hold tight to the Protection and the Sanctuary of God. ||3||3||<br>
  Tilang, The Word Of Devotee Kabeer Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Vedas and the Scriptures are only make-believe, O Siblings of Destiny; they do not relieve the anxiety of the heart.<br>
  If you will only center yourself on the Lord, even for just a breath, then you shall see the Lord face-to-face, present before you. ||1||<br>
  O human being, search your own heart every day, and do not wander around in confusion.<br>
  This world is just a magic-show; no one will be holding your hand. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Reading and studying falsehood, people are happy; in their ignorance, they speak nonsense.<br>
  The True Creator Lord is diffused into His creation; He is not just the dark-skinned Krishna of legends. ||2||<br>
  Through the Tenth Gate, the stream of nectar flows; take your bath in this.<br>
  Serve the Lord forever; use your eyes, and see Him ever-present everywhere. ||3||<br>
  The Lord is the purest of the pure; only through doubt could there be another.<br>
  O Kabeer, mercy flows from the Merciful Lord; He alone knows who acts. ||4||1||<br>
  Naam Dayv Jee:<br>
  I am blind; Your Name, O Creator Lord, is my only anchor and support.<br>
  I am poor, and I am meek. Your Name is my only support. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O beautiful Lord, benevolent and merciful Lord, You are so wealthy and generous.<br>
  You are ever-present in every presence, within and before me. ||1||<br>
  You are the river of life, You are the Giver of all; You are so very wealthy.<br>
  You alone give, and You alone take away; there is no other at all. ||2||<br>
  You are wise, You are the supreme seer; how could I make You an object of thought?<br>
  O Lord and Master of Naam Dayv, You are the merciful Lord of forgiveness. ||3||1||2||<br>
  Hello, my friend, hello my friend. Is there any good news?<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a devoted sacrifice, a dedicated and devoted sacrifice, to You.<br>
  Slavery to You is so sublime; Your Name is noble and exalted. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Where did you come from? Where have You been? And where are You going?<br>
  Tell me the truth, in the holy city of Dwaarikaa. ||1||<br>
  How handsome is your turban! And how sweet is your speech.<br>
  Why are there Moghals in the holy city of Dwaarikaa? ||2||<br>
  You alone are the Lord of so many thousands of worlds.<br>
  You are my Lord King, like the dark-skinned Krishna. ||3||<br>
  You are the Lord of the sun, Lord Indra and Lord Brahma, the King of men.<br>
  You are the Lord and Master of Naam Dayv, the King, the Liberator of all. ||4||2||3||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr19.htm">Next: Raag Soohee</a></center>
 </body>