<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr20.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr22.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Gond</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 001</h2></center>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Raag Gond, Chau-Padas, Fourth Mehl, First House:<br>
  If, in his conscious mind, he places his hopes in the Lord, then he shall obtain the fruits of all the many desires of his mind.<br>
  The Lord knows everything which happens to the soul. Not even an iota of one's effort goes to waste.<br>
  Place your hopes in the Lord, O my mind; the Lord and Master is pervading and permeating all. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, place your hopes in the Lord of the World, the Master of the Universe.<br>
  That hope which is placed in any other than the Lord - that hope is fruitless, and totally useless. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That which you can see, Maya, and all attachment to family - don't place your hopes in them, or your life will be wasted and lost.<br>
  Nothing is in their hands; what can these poor creatures do? By their actions, nothing can be done.<br>
  O my mind, place your hopes in the Lord, your Beloved, who shall carry you across, and save your whole family as well. ||2||<br>
  If you place your hopes in any other, in any friend other than the Lord, then you shall come to know that it is of no use at all.<br>
  This hope placed in other friends comes from the love of duality. In an instant, it is gone; it is totally false.<br>
  O my mind, place your hopes in the Lord, your True Beloved, who shall approve and reward you for all your efforts. ||3||<br>
  Hope and desire are all Yours, O my Lord and Master. As You inspire hope, so are the hopes held.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 002</h2></center>
  Nothing is in the hands of anyone, O my Lord and Master; such is the understanding the True Guru has given me to understand.<br>
  You alone know the hope of servant Nanak, O Lord; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, he is satisfied. ||4||1||<br>
  Gond, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Serve such a Lord, and ever meditate on Him, who in an instant erases all sins and mistakes.<br>
  If someone forsakes the Lord and places his hopes in another, then all his service to the Lord is rendered fruitless.<br>
  O my mind, serve the Lord, the Giver of peace; serving Him, all your hunger shall depart. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, place your faith in the Lord.<br>
  Wherever I go, my Lord and Master is there with me. The Lord saves the honor of His humble servants and slaves. ||1||Pause||<br>
  If you tell your sorrows to another, then he, in return, will tell you of his greater sorrows.<br>
  So tell your sorrows to the Lord, your Lord and Master, who shall instantly dispel your pain.<br>
  Forsaking such a Lord God, if you tell your sorrows to another, then you shall die of shame. ||2||<br>
  The relatives, friends and siblings of the world that you see, O my mind, all meet with you for their own purposes.<br>
  And that day, when their self-interests are not served, on that day, they shall not come near you.<br>
  O my mind, serve your Lord, day and night; He shall help you in good times and bad. ||3||<br>
  Why place your faith in anyone, O my mind, who cannot come to your rescue at the last instant?<br>
  Chant the Lord's Mantra, take the Guru's Teachings, and meditate on Him. In the end, the Lord saves those who love Him in their consciousness.<br>
  Servant Nanak speaks: night and day, chant the Lord's Name, O Saints; this is the only true hope for emancipation. ||4||2||<br>
  Gond, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Remembering the Lord in meditation, you shall find bliss and peace forever deep within, and your mind will become tranquil and cool.<br>
  It is like the harsh sun of Maya, with its burning heat; seeing the moon, the Guru, its heat totally vanishes. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, night and day, meditate, and chant the Lord's Name.<br>
  Here and hereafter, He shall protect you, everywhere; serve such a God forever. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditate on the Lord, who contains all treasures, O my mind; as Gurmukh, search for the jewel, the Lord.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Lord, find the Lord, my Lord and Master; I wash the feet of those slaves of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  One who realizes the Word of the Shabad, obtains the sublime essence of the Lord; such a Saint is lofty and sublime, the greatest of the great.<br>
  The Lord Himself magnifies the glory of that humble servant. No one can lessen or decrease that glory, not even a bit. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 003</h2></center>
  He shall give you peace, O my mind; meditate forever, every day on Him, with your palms pressed together.<br>
  Please bless servant Nanak with this one gift, O Lord, that Your feet may dwell within my heart forever. ||4||3||<br>
  Gond, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  All the kings, emperors, nobles, lords and chiefs are false and transitory, engrossed in duality - know this well.<br>
  The eternal Lord is permanent and unchanging; meditate on Him, O my mind, and you shall be approved. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, vibrate, and meditate on the Lord's Name, which shall be your defender forever.<br>
  One who obtains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, through the Word of the Guru's Teachings - no one else's power is as great as his. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All the wealthy, high class property owners which you see, O my mind, shall vanish, like the fading color of the safflower.<br>
  Serve the True, Immaculate Lord forever, O my mind, and you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  There are four castes: Brahmin, Kh'shaatriya, Soodra and Vaishya, and there are four stages of life. One who meditates on the Lord, is the most distinguished and renowned.<br>
  The poor castor oil plant, growing near the sandalwood tree, becomes fragrant; in the same way, the sinner, associating with the Saints, becomes acceptable and approved. ||3||<br>
  He, within whose heart the Lord abides, is the highest of all, and the purest of all.<br>
  Servant Nanak washes the feet of thM at humble servant of the Lord; he may be from a low class family, but he is now the Lord's servant. ||4||4||<br>
  Gond, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is all-pervading. As the Lord causes them to act, so do they act.<br>
  So serve forever such a Lord, O my mind, who will protect you from everything. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Lord, and read about the Lord every day.<br>
  Other than the Lord, no one can kill you or save you; so why do you worry, O my mind? ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Creator created the entire universe, and infused His Light into it.<br>
  The One Lord speaks, and the One Lord causes all to speak.The Perfect Guru has revealed the One Lord. ||2||<br>
  The Lord is with you, inside and out; tell me, O mind, how can You hide anything from Him?<br>
  Serve the Lord open-heartedly, and then, O my mind, you shall find total peace. ||3||<br>
  Everything is under His control; He is the greatest of all. O my mind, meditate forever on Him.<br>
  O Servant Nanak, that Lord is always with you. Meditate forever on your Lord, and He shall emancipate you. ||4||5||<br>
  Gond, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  My mind yearns so deeply for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, like the thirsty man without water. ||1||<br>
  My mind is pierced through by the arrow of the Lord's Love.<br>
  The Lord God knows my anguish, and the pain deep within my mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whoever tells me the Stories of my Beloved Lord is my Sibling of Destiny, and my friend. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 004</h2></center>
  Come, and join together, O my companions; let's sing the Glorious Praises of my God, and follow the comforting advice of the True Guru.. ||3||<br>
  Please fulfill the hopes of servant Nanak, O Lord; his body finds peace and tranquility in the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||4||6||<br>
  First set of six. ||<br>
  Raag Gond, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  He is the Creator of all, He is the Enjoyer of all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Creator listens, and the Creator sees.<br>
  The Creator is unseen, and the Creator is seen.<br>
  The Creator forms, and the Creator destroys.<br>
  The Creator touches, and the Creator is detached. ||1||<br>
  The Creator is the One who speaks, and the Creator is the One who understands.<br>
  The Creator comes, and the Creator also goes.<br>
  The Creator is absolute and without qualities; the Creator is related, with the most excellent qualities.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, Nanak looks upon all the same. ||2||1||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You are caught, like the fish and the monkey; you are entangled in the transitory world.<br>
  Your foot-steps and your breaths are numbered; only by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord will you be saved. ||1||<br>
  O mind, reform yourself, and forsake your aimless wandering.<br>
  You have found no place of rest for yourself; so why do you try to teach others? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Like the elephant, driven by sexual desire, you are attached to your family.<br>
  People are like birds that come together, and fly apart again; you shall become stable and steady, only when you meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, in the Company of the Holy. ||2||<br>
  Like the fish, which perishes because of its desire to taste, the fool is ruined by his greed.<br>
  You have fallen under the power of the five thieves; escape is only possible in the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Be Merciful to me, O Destroyer of the pains of the meek; all beings and creatures belong to You.<br>
  May I obtain the gift of always seeing the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; meeting with You, Nanak is the slave of Your slaves. ||4||2||<br>
  Raag Gond, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  He fashioned the soul and the breath of life,<br>
  and infused His Light into the dust;<br>
  He exalted you and gave you everything to use, and food to eat and enjoy<br>
  - how can you forsake that God, you fool! Where else will you go? ||1||<br>
  Commit yourself to the service of the Transcendent Lord.<br>
  Through the Guru, one understands the Immaculate, Divine Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He created plays and dramas of all sorts;<br>
  He creates and destroys in an instant;<br>
  His state and condition cannot be described.<br>
  Meditate forever on that God, O my mind. ||2||<br>
  The unchanging Lord does not come or go.<br>
  His Glorious Virtues are infinite; how many of them can I count?<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 005</h2></center>
  His treasure is overflowing with the rubies of the Name.<br>
  He gives Support to all hearts. ||3||<br>
  The Name is the True Primal Being;<br>
  millions of sins are washed away in an instant, singing His Praises.<br>
  The Lord God is your best friend, your playmate from earliest childhood.<br>
  He is the Support of the breath of life; O Nanak, He is love, He is consciousness. ||4||1||3||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I trade in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Naam is the Support of the mind.<br>
  My consciousness takes to the Shelter of the Naam.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, millions of sins are erased. ||1||<br>
  The Lord has blessed me with the wealth of the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.<br>
  The wish of my mind is to meditate on the Naam, in association with the Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Naam is the wealth of my soul.<br>
  Wherever I go, the Naam is with me.<br>
  The Naam is sweet to my mind.<br>
  In the water, on the land, and everywhere, I see the Naam. ||2||<br>
  Through the Naam, one's face becomes radiant in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Through the Naam, all one's generations are saved.<br>
  Through the Naam, my affairs are resolved.<br>
  My mind is accustomed to the Naam. ||3||<br>
  Through the Naam, I have become fearless.<br>
  Through the Naam, my comings and goings have ceased.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has united me with the Lord, the treasure of virtue.<br>
  Says Nanak, I dwell in celestial peace. ||4||2||4||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He grants honor to the dishonored,<br>
  and gives gifts to all the hungry;<br>
  he protects those in the terrible womb.<br>
  So humbly bow forever to that Lord and Master. ||1||<br>
  Meditate on such a God in your mind.<br>
  He shall be your help and support everywhere, in good times and bad. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The beggar and the king are all the same to Him.<br>
  He sustains and fulfills both the ant and the elephant.<br>
  He does not consult or seek anyone's advice.<br>
  Whatever He does, He does Himself. ||2||<br>
  No one knows His limit.<br>
  He Himself is the Immaculate Lord.<br>
  He Himself is formed, and He Himself is formless.<br>
  In the heart, in each and every heart, He is the Support of all hearts. ||3||<br>
  Through the Love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the devotees become His Beloveds.<br>
  Singing the Praises of the Creator, the Saints are forever in bliss.<br>
  Through the Love of the Naam, the Lord's humble servants remain satisfied.<br>
  Nanak falls at the feet of those humble servants of the Lord. ||4||3||5||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Associating with them, this mind becomes immaculate and pure.<br>
  Associating with them, one meditates in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Associating with them, all the sins are erased.<br>
  Associating with them, the heart is illumined. ||1||<br>
  Those Saints of the Lord are my friends.<br>
  It is their custom to sing only the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  By their mantra, the Lord, Har, Har, dwells in the mind.<br>
  By their teachings, doubt and fear are dispelled.<br>
  By their kirtan, they become immaculate and sublime.<br>
  The world longs for the dust of their feet. ||2||<br>
  Millions of sinners are saved by associating with them.<br>
  They have the Support of the Name of the One Formless Lord.<br>
  He knows the secrets of all beings;<br>
  He is the treasure of mercy, the divine immaculate Lord. ||3||<br>
  When the Supreme Lord God becomes merciful,<br>
  then one meets the Merciful Holy Guru.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 006</h2></center>
  Day and night, Nanak meditates on the Naam.<br>
  Through the Lord's Name, he is blessed with peace, poise and bliss. ||4||4||6||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditate on the image of the Guru within your mind;<br>
  let your mind accept the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and His Mantra.<br>
  Enshrine the Guru's feet within your heart.<br>
  Bow in humility forever before the Guru, the Supreme Lord God. ||1||<br>
  Let no one wander in doubt in the world.<br>
  Without the Guru, no one can cross over. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Guru shows the Path to those who have wandered off.<br>
  He leads them to renounce others, and attaches them to devotional worship of the Lord.<br>
  He obliterates the fear of birth and death.<br>
  The glorious greatness of the Perfect Guru is endless. ||2||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the inverted heart-lotus blossoms forth,<br>
  and the Light shines forth in the darkness.<br>
  Through the Guru, know the One who created you.<br>
  By the Guru's Mercy, the foolish mind comes to believe. ||3||<br>
  The Guru is the Creator; the Guru has the power to do everything.<br>
  The Guru is the Transcendent Lord; He is, and always shall be.<br>
  Says Nanak, God has inspired me to know this.<br>
  Without the Guru, liberation is not obtained, O Siblings of Destiny. ||4||5||7||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, O my mind.<br>
  I have no other than the Guru.<br>
  I lean upon the Support of the Guru, day and night.<br>
  No one can decrease His bounty. ||1||<br>
  Know that the Guru and the Transcendent Lord are One.<br>
  Whatever pleases Him is acceptable and approved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One whose mind is attached to the Guru's feet<br>
  - his pains, sufferings and doubts run away.<br>
  Serving the Guru, honor is obtained.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru. ||2||<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, I am exalted.<br>
  The work of the Guru's servant is perfect.<br>
  Pain does not afflict the Guru's servant.<br>
  The Guru's servant is famous in the ten directions. ||3||<br>
  The Guru's glory cannot be described.<br>
  The Guru remains absorbed in the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  Says Nanak, one who is blessed with perfect destiny<br>
  - his mind is attached to the Guru's feet. ||4||6||8||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I worship and adore my Guru; the Guru is the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  My Guru is the Supreme Lord God; the Guru is the Lord God.<br>
  My Guru is divine, invisible and mysterious.<br>
  I serve at the Guru's feet, which are worshipped by all. ||1||<br>
  Without the Guru, I have no other place at all.<br>
  Night and day, I chant the Name of Guru, Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Guru is my spiritual wisdom, the Guru is the meditation within my heart.<br>
  The Guru is the Lord of the World, the Primal Being, the Lord God.<br>
  With my palms pressed together, I remain in the Guru's Sanctuary.<br>
  Without the Guru, I have no other at all. ||2||<br>
  The Guru is the boat to cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Serving the Guru, one is released from the Messenger of Death.<br>
  In the darkness, the Guru's Mantra shines forth.<br>
  With the Guru, all are saved. ||3||<br>
  The Perfect Guru is found, by great good fortune.<br>
  Serving the Guru, pain does not afflict anyone.<br>
  No one can erase the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Nanak is the Guru; Nanak is the Lord Himself. ||4||7||9||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 007</h2></center>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Deal and trade only with the Lord, Raam, Raam.<br>
  The Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, is the Support of the breath of life.<br>
  Sing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.<br>
  The Lord is ever-present, all-pervading. ||1||<br>
  Joining the humble Saints, chant the Lord's Name.<br>
  This is the most immaculate and perfect occupation of all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Gather the treasure, the wealth of the Lord, Raam, Raam.<br>
  Let your sustenance be the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.<br>
  Never forget the Lord, Raam, Raam.<br>
  In His Mercy, the Guru has revealed this to me. ||2||<br>
  The Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, is always our help and support.<br>
  Embrace love for the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.<br>
  Through the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, I have become immaculate.<br>
  The sins of countless incarnations have been taken away. ||3||<br>
  Uttering the Lord's Name, birth and death are finished.<br>
  Repeating the Lord's Name, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  The Luminous Lord is the highest of all.<br>
  Night and day, servant Nanak meditates on Him. ||4||8||10||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My Lord and Master has held back the five demons.<br>
  He conquered them, and scared them away from the Lord's slave.<br>
  They cannot find the mansion of the Lord's devotee.<br>
  Joining together, the Lord's humble servants sing the songs of joy. ||1||<br>
  The five demons are the rulers of the whole world,<br>
  but they are just water-carriers for the Lord's devotee. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They collect taxes from the world,<br>
  but they bow in subservience to God's devotees.<br>
  They plunder and dishonor the faithless cynics,<br>
  but they massage and wash the feet of the Holy. ||2||<br>
  The One Mother gave birth to the five sons,<br>
  and began the play of the created world.<br>
  With the three qualities joined together, they celebrate.<br>
  Renouncing these three qualities, the Lord's humble servants rise above them. ||3||<br>
  In His Mercy, He saves His humble servants.<br>
  They belong to Him, and so He saves them by driving out the five.<br>
  Says Nanak, devotion to God is noble and sublime.<br>
  Without devotion, all just waste away uselessly. ||4||9||11||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Suffering and troubles are eradicated by the Lord's Name.<br>
  Pain is dispelled, and peace takes its place.<br>
  Meditating, chanting the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am satisfied.<br>
  By the Grace of the Saints, I have received all fruitful rewards. ||1||<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, His humble servant is carried across,<br>
  and the sins of countless incarnations are taken away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have enshrined the Guru's feet within my heart,<br>
  and crossed over the ocean of fire.<br>
  All the painful diseases of birth and death have been eradicated.<br>
  I am attached to God in celestial Samaadhi. ||2||<br>
  In all places and interspaces, the One, our Lord and Master is contained.<br>
  He is the Inner-knower of all hearts.<br>
  One whom the Lord blesses with understanding,<br>
  chants the Name of God, twenty-four hours a day. ||3||<br>
  Deep within, God Himself abides;<br>
  within his heart, the Divine Light shines forth.<br>
  With loving devotion, sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.<br>
  Meditate on the Supreme Lord God, O Nanak, and you shall be saved. ||4||10||12||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 008</h2></center>
  Bow in humility to the lotus feet of the Guru.<br>
  Eliminate sexual desire and anger from this body.<br>
  Be the dust of all,<br>
  and see the Lord in each and every heart, in all. ||1||<br>
  In this way, dwell upon the Lord of the World, the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  My body and wealth belong to God; my soul belongs to God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  This is the purpose of human life.<br>
  Renounce your egotistical pride, and know that God is with you.<br>
  By the Grace of the Holy, let your mind be imbued with the Lord's Love. ||2||<br>
  Know the One who created you,<br>
  and in the world hereafter you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Your mind and body will be immaculate and blissful;<br>
  chant the Name of the Lord of the Universe with your tongue. ||3||<br>
  Grant Your Kind Mercy, O my Lord, Merciful to the meek.<br>
  My mind begs for the dust of the feet of the Holy.<br>
  Be merciful, and bless me with this gift,<br>
  that Nanak may live, chanting God's Name. ||4||11||13||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My incense and lamps are my service to the Lord.<br>
  Time and time again, I humbly bow to the Creator.<br>
  I have renounced everything, and grasped the Sanctuary of God.<br>
  By great good fortune, the Guru has become pleased and satisfied with me. ||1||<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I sing of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  My body and wealth belong to God; my soul belongs to God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I am in bliss.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God is the Perfect Forgiver.<br>
  Granting His Mercy, He has linked His humble servants to His service.<br>
  He has rid me of the pains of birth and death, and merged me with Himself. ||2||<br>
  This is the essence of karma, righteous conduct and spiritual wisdom,<br>
  to chant the Lord's Name in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  God's Feet are the boat to cross over the world-ocean.<br>
  God, the Inner-knower, is the Cause of causes. ||3||<br>
  Showering His Mercy, He Himself has saved me.<br>
  The five hideous demons have run away.<br>
  Do not lose your life in the gamble.<br>
  The Creator Lord has taken Nanak's side. ||4||12||14||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In His Mercy, He has blessed me with peace and bliss.<br>
  The Divine Guru has saved His child.<br>
  God is kind and compassionate; He is the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  He forgives all beings and creatures. ||1||<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary, O God, O Merciful to the meek.<br>
  Meditating on the Supreme Lord God, I am forever in ecstasy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  There is no other like the Merciful Lord God.<br>
  He is contained deep within each and every heart.<br>
  He embellishes His slave, here and hereafter.<br>
  It is Your nature, God, to purify sinners. ||2||<br>
  Meditation on the Lord of the Universe is the medicine to cure millions of illnesses.<br>
  My Tantra and Mantra is to meditate, to vibrate upon the Lord God.<br>
  Illnesses and pains are dispelled, meditating on God.<br>
  The fruits of the mind's desires are fulfilled. ||3||<br>
  He is the Cause of causes, the All-powerful Merciful Lord.<br>
  Contemplating Him is the greatest of all treasures.<br>
  God Himself has forgiven Nanak;<br>
  forever and ever, he chants the Name of the One Lord. ||4||13||15||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my friend.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 009</h2></center>
  Your consciousness shall become immaculate and pure.<br>
  All the misfortunes of your mind and body shall be taken away,<br>
  and all your pain and darkness will be dispelled. ||1||<br>
  Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, cross over the world-ocean.<br>
  By great good fortune, one attains the Infinite Lord, the Primal Being. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Messenger of Death cannot even touch that humble being, who sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.<br>
  The Gurmukh realizes his Lord and Master; his coming into this world is approved. ||2||<br>
  He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, by the Grace of the Saints;<br>
  his sexual desire, anger and madness are eradicated.<br>
  He knows the Lord God to be ever-present.<br>
  This is the Perfect Teaching of the Perfect Guru. ||3||<br>
  He earns the treasure of the Lord's wealth.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, all his affairs are resolved.<br>
  He is awake and aware in the Love of the Lord's Name;<br>
  O Nanak, his mind is attached to the Lord's Feet. ||4||14||16||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord's Feet are the boat to cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he does not die again.<br>
  Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, he does not have to walk on the Path of Death.<br>
  Contemplating the Supreme Lord, the five demons are conquered. ||1||<br>
  I have entered Your Sanctuary, O Perfect Lord and Master.<br>
  Please give Your hand to Your creatures. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Simritees, Shaastras, Vedas and Puraanas<br>
  expound upon the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  The Yogis, celibates, Vaishnavs and followers of Ram Das<br>
  cannot find the limits of the Eternal Lord God. ||2||<br>
  Shiva and the gods lament and moan,<br>
  but they do not understand even a tiny bit of the unseen and unknown Lord.<br>
  One whom the Lord Himself blesses with loving devotional worship,<br>
  is very rare in this world. ||3||<br>
  I am worthless, with absolutely no virtue at all;<br>
  all treasures are in Your Glance of Grace.<br>
  Nanak, the meek, desires only to serve You.<br>
  Please be merciful, and grant him this blessing, O Divine Guru. ||4||15||17||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who is cursed by the Saints, is thrown down on the ground.<br>
  The slanderer of the Saints is thrown down from the skies.<br>
  I hold the Saints close to my soul.<br>
  The Saints are saved instantaneously. ||1||<br>
  He alone is a Saint, who is pleasing to the Lord.<br>
  The Saints, and God, have only one job to do. ||1||Pause||<br>
  God gives His hand to shelter the Saints.<br>
  He dwells with His Saints, day and night.<br>
  With each and every breath, He cherishes His Saints.<br>
  He takes the power away from the enemies of the Saints. ||2||<br>
  Let no one slander the Saints.<br>
  Whoever slanders them, will be destroyed.<br>
  One who is protected by the Creator Lord,<br>
  cannot be harmed, no matter how much the whole world may try. ||3||<br>
  I place my faith in my God.<br>
  My soul and body all belong to Him.<br>
  This is the faith which inspires Nanak:<br>
  the self-willed manmukhs will fail, while the Gurmukhs will always win. ||4||16||18||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Name of the Immaculate Lord is the Ambrosial Water.<br>
  Chanting it with the tongue, sins are washed away. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 010</h2></center>
  The Lord abides in everyone.<br>
  The Lord illumines each and every heart.<br>
  Chanting the Lord's Name, one does not fall into hell.<br>
  Serving the Lord, all fruitful rewards are obtained. ||1||<br>
  Within my mind is the Support of the Lord.<br>
  The Lord is the boat to cross over the world-ocean.<br>
  Chant the Lord's Name, and the Messenger of Death will run away.<br>
  The Lord breaks the teeth of Maya, the witch. ||2||<br>
  The Lord is forever and ever the Forgiver.<br>
  The Lord blesses us with peace and bliss.<br>
  The Lord has revealed His glory.<br>
  The Lord is the mother and father of His Saint. ||3||<br>
  The Lord, the Lord, is in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Time and time again, I sing the Lord's Praises.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, I have attained the incomprehensible object.<br>
  Slave Nanak has grasped the Support of the Lord. ||4||17||19||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who is protected by the Protector Lord<br>
  - the Formless Lord is on his side. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the mother's womb, the fire does not touch him.<br>
  Sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment do not affect him.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he meditates on the Formless Lord.<br>
  Dust is thrown into the faces of the slanderers. ||1||<br>
  The Lord's protective spell is the armor of His slave.<br>
  The wicked, evil demons cannot even touch him.<br>
  Whoever indulges in egotistical pride, shall waste away to ruin.<br>
  God is the Sanctuary of His humble slave. ||2||<br>
  Whoever enters the Sanctuary of the Sovereign Lord<br>
  - He saves that slave, hugging him close in His embrace.<br>
  Whoever takes great pride in himself,<br>
  in an instant, shall be like dust mixing with dust. ||3||<br>
  The True Lord is, and shall always be.<br>
  Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him.<br>
  Granting His Mercy, He saves His slaves.<br>
  God is the Support of Nanak's breath of life. ||4||18||20||<br>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Wondrous and beautiful is the description of the beauty of the Supreme Soul, the Supreme Lord God. ||Pause||<br>
  He is not old; He is not young.<br>
  He is not in pain; He is not caught in Death's noose.<br>
  He does not die; He does not go away.<br>
  In the beginning, and throughout the ages, He is permeating everywhere. ||1||<br>
  He is not hot; He is not cold.<br>
  He has no enemy; He has no friend.<br>
  He is not happy; He is not sad.<br>
  Everything belongs to Him; He can do anything. ||2||<br>
  He has no father; He has no mother.<br>
  He is beyond the beyond, and has always been so.<br>
  He is not affected by virtue or vice.<br>
  Deep within each and every heart, He is always awake and aware. ||3||<br>
  From the three qualities, the one mechanism of Maya was produced.<br>
  The great Maya is only His shadow.<br>
  He is undeceivable, impenetrable, unfathomable and merciful.<br>
  He is merciful to the meek, forever compassionate.<br>
  His state and limits cannot ever be known.<br>
  Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Him. ||4||19||21||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 011</h2></center>
  Gond, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Saints.<br>
  Associating with the Saints, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  By the Grace of the Saints, all the sins are taken away.<br>
  By great good fortune, one finds the Sanctuary of the Saints. ||1||<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, no obstacles will block your way.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, meditate on God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When the Supreme Lord God becomes merciful,<br>
  he makes me the dust of the feet of the Holy.<br>
  Sexual desire and anger leave his body,<br>
  and the Lord, the jewel, comes to dwell in his mind. ||2||<br>
  Fruitful and approved is the life of one<br>
  who knows the Supreme Lord God to be close.<br>
  One who is committed to loving devotional worship of God, and the Kirtan of His Praises,<br>
  awakens from the sleep of countless incarnations. ||3||<br>
  The Lord's Lotus Feet are the Support of His humble servant.<br>
  To chant the Praises of the Lord of the Universe is the true trade.<br>
  Please fulfill the hopes of Your humble slave.<br>
  Nanak finds peace in the dust of the feet of the humble. ||4||20||22||6||28||<br>
  Raag Gond, Ashtapadees, Fifth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Humbly bow to the Perfect Divine Guru.<br>
  Fruitful is His image, and fruitful is service to Him.<br>
  He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, the Architect of Destiny.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, he remains imbued with the love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  The Guru is the Lord of the Universe, the Guru is the Lord of the World.<br>
  He is the Saving Grace of His slaves. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He satisfies the kings, emperors and nobles.<br>
  He destroys the egotistical villains.<br>
  He puts illness into the mouths of the slanderers.<br>
  All the people celebrate His victory. ||2||<br>
  Supreme bliss fills the minds of the Saints.<br>
  The Saints meditate on the Divine Guru, the Lord God.<br>
  The faces of His companions become radiant and bright.<br>
  The slanderers lose all places of rest. ||3||<br>
  With each and every breath, the Lord's humble slaves praise Him.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God and the Guru are care-free.<br>
  All fears are eradicated, in His Sanctuary.<br>
  Smashing all the slanderers, the Lord knocks them to the ground. ||4||<br>
  Let no one slander the Lord's humble servants.<br>
  Whoever does so, will be miserable.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, the Lord's humble servant meditates on Him alone.<br>
  The Messenger of Death does not even approach him. ||5||<br>
  The Lord's humble servant has no vengeance. The slanderer is egotistical.<br>
  The Lord's humble servant wishes well, while the slanderer dwells on evil.<br>
  The Sikh of the Guru meditates on the True Guru.<br>
  The Lord's humble servants are saved, while the slanderer is cast into hell. ||6||<br>
  Listen, O my beloved friends and companions:<br>
  these words shall be true in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  As you plant, so shall you harvest.<br>
  The proud, egotistical person will surely be uprooted. ||7||<br>
  O True Guru, You are the Support of the unsupported.<br>
  Be merciful, and save Your humble servant.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru;<br>
  remembering Him in meditation, my honor has been saved. ||8||1||29||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 012</h2></center>
  Raag Gond, The Word Of The Devotees.<br>
  Kabeer Jee, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  When you meet a Saint, talk to him and listen.<br>
  Meeting with an unsaintly person, just remain silent. ||1||<br>
  O father, if I speak, what words should I utter?<br>
  Speak such words, by which you may remain absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Speaking with the Saints, one becomes generous.<br>
  To speak with a fool is to babble uselessly. ||2||<br>
  By speaking and only speaking, corruption only increases.<br>
  If I do not speak, what can the poor wretch do? ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, the empty pitcher makes noise,<br>
  but that which is full makes no sound. ||4||1||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  When a man dies, he is of no use to anyone.<br>
  But when an animal dies, it is used in ten ways. ||1||<br>
  What do I know, about the state of my karma?<br>
  What do I know, O Baba? ||1||Pause||<br>
  His bones burn, like a bundle of logs;<br>
  his hair burns like a bale of hay. ||2||<br>
  Says Kabeer, the man wakes up,<br>
  only when the Messenger of Death hits him over the head with his club. ||3||2||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  The Celestial Lord is in the Akaashic ethers of the skies, the Celestial Lord is in the nether regions of the underworld; in the four directions, the Celestial Lord is pervading.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God is forever the source of bliss. When the vessel of the body perishes, the Celestial Lord does not perish. ||1||<br>
  I have become sad,<br>
  wondering where the soul comes from, and where it goes. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The body is formed from the union of the five tatvas; but where were the five tatvas created?<br>
  You say that the soul is tied to its karma, but who gave karma to the body? ||2||<br>
  The body is contained in the Lord, and the Lord is contained in the body. He is permeating within all.<br>
  Says Kabeer, I shall not renounce the Lord's Name. I shall accept whatever happens. ||3||3||<br>
  Raag Gond, The Word Of Kabeer Jee, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  They tied my arms, bundled me up, and threw me before an elephant.<br>
  The elephant driver struck him on the head, and infuriated him.<br>
  But the elephant ran away, trumpeting,<br>
  "I am a sacrifice to this image of the Lord."||1||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, You are my strength.<br>
  The Qazi shouted at the driver to drive the elephant on. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He yelled out, "O driver, I shall cut you into pieces.<br>
  Hit him, and drive him on!"<br>
  But the elephant did not move; instead, he began to meditate.<br>
  The Lord God abides within his mind. ||2||<br>
  What sin has this Saint committed,<br>
  that you have made him into a bundle and thrown him before the elephant?<br>
  Lifting up the bundle, the elephant bows down before it.<br>
  The Qazi could not understand it; he was blind. ||3||<br>
  Three times, he tried to do it.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 013</h2></center>
  Even then, his hardened mind was not satisfied.<br>
  Says Kabeer, such is my Lord and Master.<br>
  The soul of His humble servant dwells in the fourth state. ||4||1||4||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  It is not human, and it is not a god.<br>
  It is not called celibate, or a worshipper of Shiva.<br>
  It is not a Yogi, and it is not a hermit.<br>
  It is not a mother, or anyone's son. ||1||<br>
  Then what is it, which dwells in this temple of the body?<br>
  No one can find its limits. ||1||Pause||<br>
  It is not a house-holder, and it is not a renouncer of the world.<br>
  It is not a king, and it is not a beggar.<br>
  It has no body, no drop of blood.<br>
  It is not a Brahmin, and it is not a Kh'shaatriya. ||2||<br>
  It is not called a man of austere self-discipline, or a Shaykh.<br>
  It does not live, and it is not seen to die.<br>
  If someone cries over its death,<br>
  that person loses his honor. ||3||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I have found the Path.<br>
  Birth and death have both been erased.<br>
  Says Kabeer, this is formed of the same essence as the Lord.<br>
  It is like the ink on the paper which cannot be erased. ||4||2||5||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  The threads are broken, and the starch has run out.<br>
  Bare reeds glisten at the front door.<br>
  The poor brushes are scattered in pieces.<br>
  Death has entered this shaven head. ||1||<br>
  This shaven-headed mendicant has wasted all his wealth.<br>
  All this coming and going has irritated him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He has given up all talk of his weaving equipment.<br>
  His mind is attuned to the Lord's Name.<br>
  His daughters and sons have nothing to eat,<br>
  while the shaven-headed mendicants night and day eat their fill. ||2||<br>
  One or two are in the house, and one or two more are on the way.<br>
  We sleep on the floor, while they sleep in the beds.<br>
  They rub their bare heads, and carry prayer-books in their waist-bands.<br>
  We get dry grains, while they get loaves of bread. ||3||<br>
  He will become one of these shaven-headed mendicants.<br>
  They are the support of the drowning.<br>
  Listen, O blind and unguided Loi:<br>
  Kabeer has taken shelter with these shaven-headed mendicants. ||4||3||6||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  When her husband dies, the woman does not cry.<br>
  Someone else becomes her protector.<br>
  When this protector dies,<br>
  he falls into the world of hell hereafter, for the sexual pleasures he enjoyed in this world. ||1||<br>
  The world loves only the one bride, Maya.<br>
  She is the wife of all beings and creatures. ||1||Pause||<br>
  With her necklace around her neck, this bride looks beautiful.<br>
  She is poison to the Saint, but the world is delighted with her.<br>
  Adorning herself, she sits like a prostitute.<br>
  Cursed by the Saints, she wanders around like a wretch. ||2||<br>
  She runs around, chasing after the Saints.<br>
  She is afraid of being beaten by those blessed with the Guru's Grace.<br>
  She is the body, the breath of life, of the faithless cynics.<br>
  She appears to me like a blood-thirsty witch. ||3||<br>
  I know her secrets well<br>
  - in His Mercy, the Divine Guru met me.<br>
  Says Kabeer, now I have thrown her out.<br>
  She clings to the skirt of the world. ||4||4||7||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 014</h2></center>
  GOND:<br>
  When someone's household has no glory,<br>
  the guests who come there depart still hungry.<br>
  Deep within, there is no contentment.<br>
  Without his bride, the wealth of Maya, he suffers in pain. ||1||<br>
  So praise this bride, which can shake the consciousness of even the most dedicated ascetics and sages. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This bride is the daughter of a wretched miser.<br>
  Abandoning the Lord's servant, she sleeps with the world.<br>
  Standing at the door of the holy man,<br>
  she says, "I have come to your sanctuary; now save me!"||2||<br>
  This bride is so beautiful.<br>
  The bells on her ankles make soft music.<br>
  As long as there is the breath of life in the man, she remains attached to him.<br>
  But when it is no more, she quickly gets up and departs, bare-footed. ||3||<br>
  This bride has conquered the three worlds.<br>
  The eighteen Puraanas and the sacred shrines of pilgrimage love her as well.<br>
  She pierced the hearts of Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu.<br>
  She destroyed the great emperors and kings of the world. ||4||<br>
  This bride has no restraint or limits.<br>
  She is in collusion with the five thieving passions.<br>
  When the clay pot of these five passions bursts,<br>
  then, says Kabeer, by Guru's Mercy, one is released. ||5||5||8||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  As the house will not stand when the supporting beams are removed from within it,<br>
  just so, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, how can anyone be carried across?<br>
  Without the pitcher, the water is not contained;<br>
  just so, without the Holy Saint, the mortal departs in misery. ||1||<br>
  One who does not remember the Lord - let him burn;<br>
  his body and mind have remained absorbed in this field of the world. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Without a farmer, the land is not planted;<br>
  without a thread, how can the beads be strung?<br>
  Without a loop, how can the knot be tied?<br>
  Just so, without the Holy Saint, the mortal departs in misery. ||2||<br>
  Without a mother or father there is no child;<br>
  just so, without water, how can the clothes be washed?<br>
  Without a horse, how can there be a rider?<br>
  Without the Holy Saint, one cannot reach the Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Just as without music, there is no dancing,<br>
  the bride rejected by her husband is dishonored.<br>
  Says Kabeer, do this one thing:<br>
  become Gurmukh, and you shall never die again. ||4||6||9||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  He alone is a pimp, who pounds down his mind.<br>
  Pounding down his mind, he escapes from the Messenger of Death.<br>
  Pounding and beating his mind, he puts it to the test;<br>
  such a pimp attains total liberation. ||1||<br>
  Who is called a pimp in this world?<br>
  In all speech, one must carefully consider. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He alone is a dancer, who dances with his mind.<br>
  The Lord is not satisfied with falsehood; He is pleased only with Truth.<br>
  So play the beat of the drum in the mind.<br>
  The Lord is the Protector of the dancer with such a mind. ||2||<br>
  She alone is a street-dancer, who cleanses her body-street,<br>
  and educates the five passions.<br>
  She who embraces devotional worship for the Lord<br>
  - I accept such a street-dancer as my Guru. ||3||<br>
  He alone is a thief, who is above envy,<br>
  and who uses his sense organs to chant the Lord's Name.<br>
  Says Kabeer, these are the qualities of the one<br>
  I know as my Blessed Divine Guru, who is the most beautiful and wise. ||4||7||10||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 015</h2></center>
  GOND:<br>
  Blessed is the Lord of the World. Blessed is the Divine Guru.<br>
  Blessed is that grain, by which the heart-lotus of the hungry blossoms forth.<br>
  Blessed are those Saints, who know this.<br>
  Meeting with them, one meets the Lord, the Sustainer of the World. ||1||<br>
  This grain comes from the Primal Lord God.<br>
  One chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, only when he tastes this grain. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditate on the Naam, and meditate on this grain.<br>
  Mixed with water, its taste becomes sublime.<br>
  One who abstains from this grain,<br>
  loses his honor in the three worlds. ||2||<br>
  One who discards this grain, is practicing hypocrisy.<br>
  She is neither a happy soul-bride, nor a widow.<br>
  Those who claim in this world that they live on milk alone,<br>
  secretly eat whole loads of food. ||3||<br>
  Without this grain, time does not pass in peace.<br>
  Forsaking this grain, one does not meet the Lord of the World.<br>
  Says Kabeer, this I know:<br>
  blessed is that grain, which brings faith in the Lord and Master to the mind. ||4||8||11||<br>
  Raag Gond, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The ritual sacrifice of horses,<br>
  giving one's weight in gold to charities,<br>
  and ceremonial cleansing baths -||1||<br>
  These are not equal to singing the Praises of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Meditate on your Lord, you lazy man! ||1||Pause||<br>
  Offering sweet rice at Gaya,<br>
  living on the river banks at Benares,<br>
  reciting the four Vedas by heart;||2||<br>
  Completing all religious rituals,<br>
  restraining sexual passion by the spiritual wisdom given by the Guru,<br>
  and performing the six rituals;||3||<br>
  Expounding on Shiva and Shakti<br>
  - O man, renounce and abandon all these things.<br>
  Meditate, meditate in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Meditate, O Naam Dayv, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||4||1||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  The deer is lured by the sound of the hunter's bell;<br>
  it loses its life, but it cannot stop thinking about it. ||1||<br>
  In the same way, I look upon my Lord.<br>
  I will not abandon my Lord, and turn my thoughts to another. ||1||Pause||<br>
  As the fisherman looks upon the fish,<br>
  and the goldsmith looks upon the gold he fashions;||2||<br>
  As the man driven by sex looks upon another man's wife,<br>
  and the gambler looks upon the throwing of the dice -||3||<br>
  In the same way, wherever Naam Dayv looks, he sees the Lord.<br>
  Naam Dayv meditates continuously on the Feet of the Lord. ||4||2||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  Carry me across, O Lord, carry me across.<br>
  I am ignorant, and I do not know how to swim. O my Beloved Father, please give me Your arm. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have been transformed from a mortal being into an angel, in an instant; the True Guru has taught me this.<br>
  Born of human flesh, I have conquered the heavens; such is the medicine I was given. ||1||<br>
  Please place me where You placed Dhroo and Naarad, O my Master.<br>
  With the Support of Your Name, so many have been saved; this is Naam Dayv's understanding. ||2||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 016</h2></center>
  GOND:<br>
  I am restless and unhappy.<br>
  Without her calf, the cow is lonely. ||1||<br>
  Without water, the fish writhes in pain.<br>
  So is poor Naam Dayv without the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Like the cow's calf, which, when let loose,<br>
  sucks at her udders and drinks her milk -||2||<br>
  So has Naam Dayv found the Lord.<br>
  Meeting the Guru, I have seen the Unseen Lord. ||3||<br>
  As the man driven by sex wants another man's wife,<br>
  so does Naam Dayv love the Lord. ||4||<br>
  As the earth burns in the dazzling sunlight,<br>
  so does poor Naam Dayv burn without the Lord's Name. ||5||4||<br>
  Raag Gond, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, all doubts are dispelled.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord is the highest religion.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, erases social classes and ancestral pedigrees.<br>
  The Lord is the walking stick of the blind. ||1||<br>
  I bow to the Lord, I humbly bow to the Lord.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, you will not be tormented by the Messenger of Death. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord took the life of Harnaakhash,<br>
  and gave Ajaamal a place in heaven.<br>
  Teaching a parrot to speak the Lord's Name, Ganika the prostitute was saved.<br>
  That Lord is the light of my eyes. ||2||<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Pootna was saved,<br>
  even though she was a deceitful child-killer.<br>
  Contemplating the Lord, Dropadi was saved.<br>
  Gautam's wife, turned to stone, was saved. ||3||<br>
  The Lord, who killed Kaysee and Kans,<br>
  gave the gift of life to Kali.<br>
  Prays Naam Dayv, such is my Lord;<br>
  meditating on Him, fear and suffering are dispelled. ||4||1||5||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  One who chases after the god Bhairau, evil spirits and the goddess of smallpox,<br>
  is riding on a donkey, kicking up the dust. ||1||<br>
  I take only the Name of the One Lord.<br>
  I have given away all other gods in exchange for Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That man who chants "Shiva, Shiva", and meditates on him,<br>
  is riding on a bull, shaking a tambourine. ||2||<br>
  One who worships the Great Goddess Maya<br>
  will be reincarnated as a woman, and not a man. ||3||<br>
  You are called the Primal Goddess.<br>
  At the time of liberation, where will you hide then? ||4||<br>
  Follow the Guru's Teachings, and hold tight to the Lord's Name, O friend.<br>
  Thus prays Naam Dayv, and so says the Gita as well. ||5||2||6||<br>
  BILAAVAL GOND:<br>
  Today, Naam Dayv saw the Lord, and so I will instruct the ignorant. ||Pause||<br>
  O Pandit, O religious scholar, your Gayatri was grazing in the fields.<br>
  Taking a stick, the farmer broke its leg, and now it walks with a limp. ||1||<br>
  O Pandit, I saw your great god Shiva, riding along on a white bull.<br>
  In the merchant's house, a banquet was prepared for him - he killed the merchant's son. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 21 - Raag Gond - Part 017</h2></center>
  O Pandit, I saw your Raam Chand coming too<br>
  ; he lost his wife, fighting a war against Raawan. ||3||<br>
  The Hindu is sightless; the Muslim has only one eye.<br>
  The spiritual teacher is wiser than both of them.<br>
  The Hindu worships at the temple, the Muslim at the mosque.<br>
  Naam Dayv serves that Lord, who is not limited to either the temple or the mosque. ||4||3||7||<br>
  Raag Gond, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meditate on the Lord Mukanday, the Liberator, O people of the world.<br>
  Without Mukanday, the body shall be reduced to ashes.<br>
  Mukanday is the Giver of liberation.<br>
  Mukanday is my father and mother. ||1||<br>
  Meditate on Mukanday in life, and meditate on Mukanday in death.<br>
  His servant is blissful forever. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord, Mukanday, is my breath of life.<br>
  Meditating on Mukanday, one's forehead will bear the Lord's insignia of approval.<br>
  The renunciate serves Mukanday.<br>
  Mukanday is the wealth of the poor and forlorn. ||2||<br>
  When the One Liberator does me a favor,<br>
  then what can the world do to me?<br>
  Erasing my social status, I have entered His Court.<br>
  You, Mukanday, are potent throughout the four ages. ||3||<br>
  Spiritual wisdom has welled up, and I have been enlightened.<br>
  In His Mercy, the Lord has made this worm His slave.<br>
  Says Ravi Daas, now my thirst is quenched;<br>
  I meditate on Mukanday the Liberator, and I serve Him. ||4||1||<br>
  GOND:<br>
  Someone may bathe at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage,<br>
  and worship the twelve Shiva-lingam stones,<br>
  and dig wells and pools,<br>
  but if he indulges in slander, then all of this is useless. ||1||<br>
  How can the slanderer of the Holy Saints be saved?<br>
  Know for certain, that he shall go to hell. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Someone may bathe at Kuruk-shaytra during a solar eclipse,<br>
  and give his decorated wife in offering,<br>
  and listen to all the Simritees,<br>
  but if he indulges in slander, these are of no account. ||2||<br>
  Someone may give countless feasts,<br>
  and donate land, and build splendid buildings;<br>
  he may neglect his own affairs to work for others,<br>
  but if he indulges in slander, he shall wander in countless incarnations. ||3||<br>
  Why do you indulge in slander, O people of the world?<br>
  The emptiness of the slanderer is soon exposed.<br>
  I have thought, and determined the fate of the slanderer.<br>
  Says Ravi Daas, he is a sinner; he shall go to hell. ||4||2||11||7||2||49|| Total||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr22.htm">Next: Raag Raamkalee</a></center>
 </body>