<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr25.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr27.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Tukhaari</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 001</h2></center>
  Tukhaari Chhant, First Mehl, Baarah Maahaa ~ The Twelve Months:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Listen: according to the karma of their past actions, each and every person experiences happiness or sorrow; whatever You give, Lord, is good.<br>
  O Lord, the Created Universe is Yours; what is my condition? Without the Lord, I cannot survive, even for an instant.<br>
  Without my Beloved, I am miserable; I have no friend at all. As Gurmukh, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  The Formless Lord is contained in His Creation. To obey God is the best course of action.<br>
  O Nanak, the soul-bride is gazing upon Your Path; please listen, O Supreme Soul. ||1||<br>
  The rainbird cries out, "Pri-o! Beloved!", and the song-bird sings the Lord's Bani.<br>
  The soul-bride enjoys all the pleasures, and merges in the Being of her Beloved.<br>
  She merges into the Being of her Beloved, when she becomes pleasing to God; she is the happy, blessed soul-bride.<br>
  Establishing the nine houses, and the Royal Mansion of the Tenth Gate above them, the Lord dwells in that home deep within the self.<br>
  All are Yours, You are my Beloved; night and day, I celebrate Your Love.<br>
  O Nanak, the rainbird cries out, "Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!" The song-bird is embellished with the Word of the Shabad. ||2||<br>
  Please listen, O my Beloved Lord - I am drenched with Your Love.<br>
  My mind and body are absorbed in dwelling on You; I cannot forget You, even for an instant.<br>
  How could I forget You, even for an instant? I am a sacrifice to You; singing Your Glorious Praises, I live.<br>
  No one is mine; unto whom do I belong? Without the Lord, I cannot survive.<br>
  I have grasped the Support of the Lord's Feet; dwelling there, my body has become immaculate.<br>
  O Nanak, I have obtained profound insight, and found peace; my mind is comforted by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||3||<br>
  The Ambrosial Nectar rains down on us! Its drops are so delightful!<br>
  Meeting the Guru, the Best Friend, with intuitive ease, the mortal falls in love with the Lord.<br>
  The Lord comes into the temple of the body, when it pleases God's Will; the soul-bride rises up, and sings His Glorious Praises.<br>
  In each and every home, the Husband Lord ravishes and enjoys the happy soul-brides; so why has He forgotten me?<br>
  The sky is overcast with heavy, low-hanging clouds; the rain is delightful, and my Beloved's Love is pleasing to my mind and body.<br>
  O Nanak, the Ambrosial Nectar of Gurbani rains down; the Lord, in His Grace, has come into the home of my heart. ||4||<br>
  In the month of Chayt, the lovely spring has come, and the bumble bees hum with joy.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 002</h2></center>
  The forest is blossoming in front of my door; if only my Beloved would return to my home!<br>
  If her Husband Lord does not return home, how can the soul-bride find peace? Her body is wasting away with the sorrow of separation.<br>
  The beautiful song-bird sings, perched on the mango tree; but how can I endure the pain in the depths of my being?<br>
  The bumble bee is buzzing around the flowering branches; but how can I survive? I am dying, O my mother!<br>
  O Nanak, in Chayt, peace is easily obtained, if the soul-bride obtains the Lord as her Husband, within the home of her own heart. ||5||<br>
  Baisakhi is so pleasant; the branches blossom with new leaves.<br>
  The soul-bride yearns to see the Lord at her door. Come, O Lord, and take pity on me!<br>
  Please come home, O my Beloved; carry me across the treacherous world-ocean. Without You, I am not worth even a shell.<br>
  Who can estimate my worth, if I am pleasing to You? I see You, and inspire others to see You, O my Love.<br>
  I know that You are not far away; I believe that You are deep within me, and I realize Your Presence.<br>
  O Nanak, finding God in Baisakhi, the consciousness is filled with the Word of the Shabad, and the mind comes to believe. ||6||<br>
  The month of Jayt'h is so sublime. How could I forget my Beloved?<br>
  The earth burns like a furnace, and the soul-bride offers her prayer.<br>
  The bride offers her prayer, and sings His Glorious Praises; singing His Praises, she becomes pleasing to God.<br>
  The Unattached Lord dwells in His true mansion. If He allows me, then I will come to Him.<br>
  The bride is dishonored and powerless; how will she find peace without her Lord?<br>
  O Nanak, in Jayt'h, she who knows her Lord becomes just like Him; grasping virtue, she meets with the Merciful Lord. ||7||<br>
  The month of Aasaarh is good; the sun blazes in the sky.<br>
  The earth suffers in pain, parched and roasted in the fire.<br>
  The fire dries up the moisture, and she dies in agony. But even then, the sun does not grow tired.<br>
  His chariot moves on, and the soul-bride seeks shade; the crickets are chirping in the forest.<br>
  She ties up her bundle of faults and demerits, and suffers in the world hereafter. But dwelling on the True Lord, she finds peace.<br>
  O Nanak, I have given this mind to Him; death and life rest with God. ||8||<br>
  In Saawan, be happy, O my mind. The rainy season has come, and the clouds have burst into showers.<br>
  My mind and body are pleased by my Lord, but my Beloved has gone away.<br>
  My Beloved has not come home, and I am dying of the sorrow of separation. The lightning flashes, and I am scared.<br>
  My bed is lonely, and I am suffering in agony. I am dying in pain, O my mother!<br>
  Tell me - without the Lord, how can I sleep, or feel hungry? My clothes give no comfort to my body.<br>
  O Nanak, she alone is a happy soul-bride, who merges in the Being of her Beloved Husband Lord. ||9||<br>
  In Bhaadon, the young woman is confused by doubt; later, she regrets and repents.<br>
  The lakes and fields are overflowing with water; the rainy season has come - the time to celebrate!<br>
  In the dark of night it rains; how can the young bride find peace? The frogs and peacocks send out their noisy calls.<br>
  "Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!" cries the rainbird, while the snakes slither around, biting.<br>
  The mosquitoes bite and sting, and the ponds are filled to overflowing; without the Lord, how can she find peace?<br>
  O Nanak, I will go and ask my Guru; wherever God is, there I will go. ||10||<br>
  In Assu, come, my Beloved; the soul-bride is grieving to death.<br>
  She can only meet Him, when God leads her to meet Him; she is ruined by the love of duality.<br>
  If she is plundered by falsehood, then her Beloved forsakes her. Then, the white flowers of old age blossom in my hair.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 003</h2></center>
  Summer is now behind us, and the winter season is ahead. Gazing upon this play, my shaky mind wavers.<br>
  In all ten directions, the branches are green and alive. That which ripens slowly, is sweet.<br>
  O Nanak, in Assu, please meet me, my Beloved. The True Guru has become my Advocate and Friend. ||11||<br>
  In Katak, that alone comes to pass, which is pleasing to the Will of God.<br>
  The lamp of intuition burns, lit by the essence of reality.<br>
  Love is the oil in the lamp, which unites the soul-bride with her Lord. The bride is delighted, in ecstasy.<br>
  One who dies in faults and demerits - her death is not successful. But one who dies in glorious virtue, really truly dies.<br>
  Those who are blessed with devotional worship of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, sit in the home of their own inner being. They place their hopes in You.<br>
  Nanak: please open the shutters of Your Door, O Lord, and meet me. A single moment is like six months to me. ||12||<br>
  The month of Maghar is good, for those who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and merge in His Being.<br>
  The virtuous wife utters His Glorious Praises; my Beloved Husband Lord is Eternal and Unchanging.<br>
  The Primal Lord is Unmoving and Unchanging, Clever and Wise; all the world is fickle.<br>
  By virtue of spiritual wisdom and meditation, she merges in His Being; she is pleasing to God, and He is pleasing to her.<br>
  I have heard the songs and the music, and the poems of the poets; but only the Name of the Lord takes away my pain.<br>
  O Nanak, that soul-bride is pleasing to her Husband Lord, who performs loving devotional worship before her Beloved. ||13||<br>
  In Poh, the snow falls, and the sap of the trees and the fields dries up.<br>
  Why have You not come? I keep You in my mind, body and mouth.<br>
  He is permeating and pervading my mind and body; He is the Life of the World. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I enjoy His Love.<br>
  His Light fills all those born of eggs, born from the womb, born of sweat and born of the earth, each and every heart.<br>
  Grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Lord of Mercy and Compassion. O Great Giver, grant me understanding, that I might find salvation.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord enjoys, savors and ravishes the bride who is in love with Him. ||14||<br>
  In Maagh, I become pure; I know that the sacred shrine of pilgrimage is within me.<br>
  I have met my Friend with intuitive ease; I grasp His Glorious Virtues, and merge in His Being.<br>
  O my Beloved, Beauteous Lord God, please listen: I sing Your Glories, and merge in Your Being. If it is pleasing to Your Will, I bathe in the sacred pool within.<br>
  The Ganges, Jamunaa, the sacred meeting place of the three rivers, the seven seas, charity, donations, adoration and worship all rest in the Transcendent Lord God; throughout the ages, I realize the One.<br>
  O Nanak, in Maagh, the most sublime essence is meditation on the Lord; this is the cleansing bath of the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||15||<br>
  In Phalgun, her mind is enraptured, pleased by the Love of her Beloved.<br>
  Night and day, she is enraptured, and her selfishness is gone.<br>
  Emotional attachment is eradicated from her mind, when it pleases Him; in His Mercy, He comes to my home.<br>
  I dress in various clothes, but without my Beloved, I shall not find a place in the Mansion of His Presence.<br>
  I have adorned myself with garlands of flowers, pearl necklaces, scented oils and silk robes.<br>
  O Nanak, the Guru has united me with Him. The soul-bride has found her Husband Lord, within the home of her own heart. ||16||<br>
  The twelve months, the seasons, the weeks, the days, the hours, the minutes and the seconds are all sublime, when the True Lord comes and meets her with natural ease.<br>
  God, my Beloved, has met me, and my affairs are all resolved. The Creator Lord knows all ways and means.<br>
  I am loved by the One who has embellished and exalted me; I have met Him, and I savor His Love.<br>
  The bed of my heart becomes beautiful, when my Husband Lord ravishes me. As Gurmukh, the destiny on my forehead has been awakened and activated.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 004</h2></center>
  O Nanak, day and night, my Beloved enjoys me; with the Lord as my Husband, my Marriage is Eternal. ||17||1||<br>
  Tukhaari, First Mehl:<br>
  In the first watch of the dark night, O bride of splendored eyes,<br>
  protect your riches; your turn is coming soon.<br>
  When your turn comes, who will wake you? While you sleep, your juice shall be sucked out by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  The night is so dark; what will become of your honor? The thieves will break into your home and rob you.<br>
  O Saviour Lord, Inaccessible and Infinite, please hear my prayer.<br>
  O Nanak, the fool never remembers Him; what can he see in the dark of night? ||1||<br>
  The second watch has begun; wake up, you unconscious being!<br>
  Protect your riches, O mortal; your farm is being eaten.<br>
  Protect your crops, and love the Lord, the Guru. Stay awake and aware, and the thieves shall not rob you.<br>
  You shall not have to go on the path of Death, and you shall not suffer in pain; your fear and terror of death shall run away.<br>
  The lamps of the sun and the moon are lit by the Guru's Teachings, through His Door, meditating on the True Lord, in the mind and with the mouth.<br>
  O Nanak, the fool still does not remember the Lord. How can he find peace in duality? ||2||<br>
  The third watch has begun, and sleep has set in.<br>
  The mortal suffers in pain, from attachment to Maya, children and spouse.<br>
  Maya, his children, his wife and the world are so dear to him; he bites the bait, and is caught.<br>
  Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he shall find peace; following the Guru's Teachings, he shall not be seized by death.<br>
  He cannot escape from birth, dying and death; without the Name, he suffers.<br>
  O Nanak, in the third watch of the three-phased Maya, the world is engrossed in attachment to Maya. ||3||<br>
  The fourth watch has begun, and the day is about to dawn.<br>
  Those who remain awake and aware, night and day, preserve and protect their homes.<br>
  The night is pleasant and peaceful, for those who remain awake; following the Guru's advice, they focus on the Naam.<br>
  Those who practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad are not reincarnated again; the Lord God is their Best Friend.<br>
  The hands shake, the feet and body totter, the vision goes dark, and the body turns to dust.<br>
  O Nanak, people are miserable throughout the four ages, if the Name of the Lord does not abide in the mind. ||4||<br>
  The knot has been untied; rise up - the order has come!<br>
  Pleasures and comforts are gone; like a prisoner, you are driven on.<br>
  You shall be bound and gagged, when it pleases God; you will not see or hear it coming.<br>
  Everyone will have their turn; the crop ripens, and then it is cut down.<br>
  The account is kept for every second, every instant; the soul suffers for the bad and the good.<br>
  O Nanak, the angelic beings are united with the Word of the Shabad; this is the way God made it. ||5||2||<br>
  Tukhaari, First Mehl:<br>
  The meteor shoots across the sky. How can it be seen with the eyes?<br>
  The True Guru reveals the Word of the Shabad to His servant who has such perfect karma.<br>
  The Guru reveals the Shabad; dwelling on the True Lord, day and night, he beholds and reflects on God.<br>
  The five restless desires are restrained, and he knows the home of his own heart. He conquers sexual desire, anger and corruption.<br>
  His inner being is illuminated, by the Guru's Teachings; He beholds the Lord's play of karma.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 005</h2></center>
  O Nanak, killing his ego, he is satisfied; the meteor has shot across the sky. ||1||<br>
  The Gurmukhs remain awake and aware; their egotistical pride is eradicated.<br>
  Night and day, it is dawn for them; they merge in the True Lord.<br>
  The Gurmukhs are merged in the True Lord; they are pleasing to His Mind. The Gurmukhs are intact, safe and sound, awake and awake.<br>
  The Guru blesses them with the Ambrosial Nectar of the True Name; they are lovingly attuned to the Lord's Feet.<br>
  The Divine Light is revealed, and in that Light, they achieve realization; the self-willed manmukhs wander in doubt and confusion.<br>
  O Nanak, when the dawn breaks, their minds are satisfied; they pass their life-night awake and aware. ||2||<br>
  Forgetting faults and demerits, virtue and merit enter one's home.<br>
  The One Lord is permeating everywhere; there is no other at all.<br>
  He is All-pervading; there is no other. The mind comes to believe, from the mind.<br>
  The One who established the water, the land, the three worlds, each and every heart - that God is known by the Gurmukh.<br>
  The Infinite, All-powerful Lord is the Creator, the Cause of causes; erasing the three-phased Maya, we merge in Him.<br>
  O Nanak, then, demerits are dissolved by merits; such are the Guru's Teachings. ||3||<br>
  My coming and going in reincarnation have ended; doubt and hesitation are gone.<br>
  Conquering my ego, I have met the True Lord, and now I wear the robe of Truth.<br>
  The Guru has rid me of egotism; my sorrow and suffering are dispelled.<br>
  My might merges into the Light; I realize and understand my own self.<br>
  In this world of my parents' home, I am satisfied with the Shabad; at my in-laws' home, in the world beyond, I shall be pleasing to my Husband Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the True Guru has united me in His Union; my dependence on people has ended. ||4||3||<br>
  Tukhaari, First Mehl:<br>
  Deluded by doubt, misled and confused, the soul-bride later regrets and repents.<br>
  Abandoning her Husband Lord, she sleeps, and does not appreciate His Worth.<br>
  Leaving her Husband Lord, she sleeps, and is plundered by her faults and demerits. The night is so painful for this bride.<br>
  Sexual desire, anger and egotism destroy her. She burns in egotism.<br>
  When the soul-swan flies away, by the Command of the Lord, her dust mingles with dust.<br>
  O Nanak, without the True Name, she is confused and deluded, and so she regrets and repents. ||1||<br>
  Please listen, O my Beloved Husband Lord, to my one prayer.<br>
  You dwell in the home of the self deep within, while I roll around like a dust-ball.<br>
  Without my Husband Lord, no one likes me at all; what can I say or do now?<br>
  The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the sweetest nectar of nectars. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, with my tongue, I drink in this nectar.<br>
  Without the Name, no one has any friend or companion; millions come and go in reincarnation.<br>
  Nanak: the profit is earned and the soul returns home. True, true are Your Teachings. ||2||<br>
  O Friend, You have travelled so far from Your homeland; I send my message of love to You.<br>
  I cherish and remember that Friend; the eyes of this soul-bride are filled with tears.<br>
  The eyes of the soul-bride are filled with tears; I dwell upon Your Glorious Virtues. How can I meet my Beloved Lord God?<br>
  I do not know the treacherous path, the way to You. How can I find You and cross over, O my Husband Lord?<br>
  Through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, the separated soul-bride meets with the Lord; I place my body and mind before You.<br>
  O Nanak, the ambrosial tree bears the most delicious fruits; meeting with my Beloved, I taste the sweet essence. ||3||<br>
  The Lord has called you to the Mansion of His Presence - do not delay!<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 006</h2></center>
  Night and day, imbued with His Love, you shall meet with Him with intuitive ease.<br>
  In celestial peace and poise, you shall meet Him; do not harbor anger - subdue your proud self!<br>
  Imbued with Truth, I am united in His Union, while the self-willed manmukhs continue coming and going.<br>
  When you dance, what veil covers you? Break the water pot, and be unattached.<br>
  O Nanak, realize your own self; as Gurmukh, contemplate the essence of reality. ||4||4||<br>
  Tukhaari, First Mehl:<br>
  O my Dear Beloved, I am the slave of Your slaves.<br>
  The Guru has shown me the Invisible Lord, and now, I do not seek any other.<br>
  The Guru showed me the Invisible Lord, when it pleased Him, and when God showered His Blessings.<br>
  The Life of the World, the Great Giver, the Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, the Lord of the woods - I have met Him with intuitive ease.<br>
  Bestow Your Glance of Grace and carry me across, to save me. Please bless me with the Truth, O Lord, Merciful to the meek.<br>
  Prays Nanak, I am the slave of Your slaves. You are the Cherisher of all souls. ||1||<br>
  My Dear Beloved is enshrined throughout the Universe.<br>
  The Shabad is pervading, through the Guru, the Embodiment of the Lord.<br>
  The Guru, the Embodiment of the Lord, is enshrined throughout the three worlds; His limits cannot be found.<br>
  He created the beings of various colors and kinds; His Blessings increase day by day.<br>
  The Infinite Lord Himself establishes and disestablishes; whatever pleases Him, happens.<br>
  O Nanak, the diamond of the mind is pierced through by the diamond of spiritual wisdom. The garland of virtue is strung. ||2||<br>
  The virtuous person merges in the Virtuous Lord; his forehead bears the insignia of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The true person merges in the True Lord; his comings and goings are over.<br>
  The true person realizes the True Lord, and is imbued with Truth. He meets the True Lord, and is pleasing to the Lord's Mind.<br>
  No one else is seen to be above the True Lord; the true person merges in the True Lord.<br>
  The Fascinating Lord has fascinated my mind; releasing me from bondage, He has set me free.<br>
  O Nanak, my light merged into the Light, when I met my most Darling Beloved. ||3||<br>
  By searching, the true home, the place of the True Guru is found.<br>
  The Gurmukh obtains spiritual wisdom, while the self-willed manmukh does not.<br>
  Whoever the Lord has blessed with the gift of Truth is accepted; the Supremely Wise Lord is forever the Great Giver.<br>
  He is known to be Immortal, Unborn and Permanent; the True Mansion of His Presence is everlasting.<br>
  The day-to-day account of deeds is not recorded for that person, who manifests the radiance of the Divine Light of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the true person is absorbed in the True Lord; the Gurmukh crosses over to the other side. ||4||5||<br>
  Tukhaari, First Mehl:<br>
  O my ignorant, unconscious mind, reform yourself.<br>
  O my mind, leave behind your faults and demerits, and be absorbed in virtue.<br>
  You are deluded by so many flavors and pleasures, and you act in such confusion. You are separated, and you will not meet your Lord.<br>
  How can the impassible world-ocean be crossed? The fear of the Messenger of Death is deadly. The path of Death is agonizingly painful.<br>
  The mortal does not know the Lord in the evening, or in the morning; trapped on the treacherous path, what will he do then?<br>
  Bound in bondage, he is released only by this method: as Gurmukh, serve the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, abandon your household entanglements.<br>
  O my mind, serve the Lord, the Primal, Detached Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 007</h2></center>
  Meditate in remembrance on the One Universal Creator; the True Lord created the entire Universe.<br>
  The Guru controls the air, water and fire; He has staged the drama of the world.<br>
  Reflect on your own self, and so practice good conduct; chant the Name of the Lord as your self-discipline and meditation.<br>
  The Name of the Lord is your Companion, Friend and Dear Beloved; chant it, and meditate on it. ||2||<br>
  O my mind, remain steady and stable, and you will not have to endure beatings.<br>
  O my mind, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, you shall merge into Him with intuitive ease.<br>
  Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, be happy. Apply the ointment of spiritual wisdom to your eyes.<br>
  The Word of the Shabad is the lamp which illuminates the three worlds; it slaughters the five demons.<br>
  Quieting your fears, become fearless, and you shall cross over the impassible world ocean. Meeting the Guru, your affairs shall be resolved.<br>
  You shall find the joy and the beauty of the Lord's Love and Affection; the Lord Himself shall shower you with His Grace. ||3||<br>
  O my mind, why did you come into the world? What will you take with you when you go?<br>
  O my mind, you shall be emancipated, when you eliminate your doubts.<br>
  So gather the wealth and capital of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you shall realize its value.<br>
  Filth shall be taken away, through the Immaculate Word of the Shabad; you shall know the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, your true home.<br>
  Through the Naam, you shall obtain honor, and come home. Eagerly drink in the Ambrosial Amrit.<br>
  Meditate on the Lord's Name, and you shall obtain the sublime essence of the Shabad; by great good fortune, chant the Praises of the Lord. ||4||<br>
  O my mind, without a ladder, how will you climb up to the Temple of the Lord?<br>
  O my mind, without a boat, you shall not reach the other shore.<br>
  On that far shore is Your Beloved, Infinite Friend. Only your awareness of the Guru's Shabad will carry you across.<br>
  Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and you shall enjoy ecstasy; you shall not regret or repent later on.<br>
  Be Merciful, O Merciful True Lord God: please give me the Blessing of the Lord's Name, and the Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Nanak prays: please hear me, O my Beloved; instruct my mind through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||5||6||<br>
  Tukhaari Chhant, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  My inner being is filled with love for my Beloved Husband Lord. How can I live without Him?<br>
  As long as I do not have the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, how can I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar?<br>
  How can I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar without the Lord? I cannot survive without Him.<br>
  Night and day, I cry out, "Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!", day and night. Without my Husband Lord, my thirst is not quenched.<br>
  Please, bless me with Your Grace, O my Beloved Lord, that I may dwell on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, forever.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have met my Beloved; I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||1||<br>
  When I see my Beloved Husband Lord, I chant the Lord's Glorious Praises with love.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 008</h2></center>
  My inner being blossoms forth; I continually utter, "Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!"<br>
  I speak of my Dear Beloved, and through the Shabad, I am saved. Unless I can see Him, I am not satisfied.<br>
  That soul-bride who is ever adorned with the Shabad, meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Please bless this beggar, Your humble servant, with the Gift of Mercy; please unite me with my Beloved.<br>
  Night and day, I meditate on the Guru, the Lord of the World; I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  I am a stone in the Boat of the Guru. Please carry me across the terrifying ocean of poison.<br>
  O Guru, please, lovingly bless me with the Word of the Shabad. I am such a fool - please save me!<br>
  I am a fool and an idiot; I know nothing of Your extent. You are known as Inaccessible and Great.<br>
  You Yourself are Merciful; please, mercifully bless me. I am unworthy and dishonored - please, unite me with Yourself!<br>
  Through countless lifetimes, I wandered in sin; now, I have come seeking Your Sanctuary.<br>
  Take pity on me and save me, Dear Lord; I have grasped the Feet of the True Guru. ||3||<br>
  The Guru is the Philosopher's Stone; by His touch, iron is transformed into gold.<br>
  My light merges into the Light, and my body-fortress is so beautiful.<br>
  My body-fortress is so beautiful; I am fascinated by my God. How could I forget Him, for even a breath, or a morsel of food?<br>
  I have seized the Unseen and Unfathomable Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. I am a sacrifice to the True Guru.<br>
  I place my head in offering before the True Guru, if it truly pleases the True Guru.<br>
  Take pity on me, O God, Great Giver, that Nanak may merge in Your Being. ||4||1||<br>
  Tukhaari, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, is Inaccessible, Unfathomable, Infinite, the Farthest of the Far.<br>
  Those who meditate on You, O Lord of the Universe - those humble beings cross over the terrifying, treacherous world-ocean.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, easily cross over the terrifying, treacherous world-ocean.<br>
  Those who lovingly walk in harmony with the Word of the Guru, the True Guru - the Lord, Har, Har, unites them with Himself.<br>
  The mortal's light meets the Light of God, and blends with that Divine Light when the Lord, the Support of the Earth, grants His Grace.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, is Inaccessible, Unfathomable, Infinite, the Farthest of the Far. ||1||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, You are Inaccessible and Unfathomable. You are totally pervading and permeating each and every heart.<br>
  You are Unseen, Unknowable and Unfathomable; You are found through the Word of the Guru, the True Guru.<br>
  Blessed, blessed are those humble, powerful and perfect people, who join the Guru's Sangat, the Society of the Saints, and chant His Glorious Praises.<br>
  With clear and precise understanding, the Gurmukhs contemplate the Guru's Shabad; each and every instant, they continually speak of the Lord.<br>
  When the Gurmukh sits down, he chants the Lord's Name. When the Gurmukh stands up, he chants the Lord's Name, Har, Har.<br>
  O my Lord and Master, You are Inaccessible and Unfathomable. You are totally pervading and permeating each and every heart. ||2||<br>
  Those humble servants who serve are accepted. They serve the Lord, and follow the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  All their millions of sins are taken away in an instant; the Lord takes them far away.<br>
  All their sin and blame is washed away. They worship and adore the One Lord with their conscious minds.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 009</h2></center>
  The Creator makes fruitful the lives of all those who, through the Guru's Word, chant the True Name.<br>
  Blessed are those humble beings, those great and perfect people, who follow the Guru's Teachings and meditate on the Lord; they cross over the terrifying and treacherous world-ocean.<br>
  Those humble servants who serve are accepted. They follow the Guru's Teachings, and serve the Lord. ||3||<br>
  You Yourself, Lord, are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; as You make me walk, O my Beloved, so do I walk.<br>
  Nothing is in my hands; when You unite me, then I come to be united.<br>
  Those whom You unite with Yourself, O my Lord and Master - all their accounts are settled.<br>
  No one can go through the accounts of those, O Siblings of Destiny, who through the Word of the Guru's Teachings are united with the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord shows Mercy to those who accept the Guru's Will as good.<br>
  You Yourself, Lord, are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; as You make me walk, O my Beloved, so do I walk. ||4||2||<br>
  Tukhaari, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  You are the Life of the World, the Lord of the Universe, our Lord and Master, the Creator of all the Universe.<br>
  They alone meditate on You, O my Lord, who have such destiny recorded on their foreheads.<br>
  Those who are so pre-destined by their Lord and Master, worship and adore the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  All sins are erased in an instant, for those who meditate on the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  Blessed, blessed are those humble beings who meditate on the Lord's Name. Seeing them, I am uplifted.<br>
  You are the Life of the World, the Lord of the Universe, our Lord and Master, the Creator of all the Universe. ||1||<br>
  You are totally pervading the water, the land and the sky. O True Lord, You are the Master of all.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Lord in their conscious minds - all those who chant and meditate on the Lord are liberated.<br>
  Those mortal beings who meditate on the Lord are liberated; their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Those humble beings are exalted in this world and the next; the Savior Lord saves them.<br>
  Listen to the Lord's Name in the Society of the Saints, O humble Siblings of Destiny. The Gurmukh's service to the Lord is fruitful.<br>
  You are totally pervading the water, the land and the sky. O True Lord, You are the Master of all. ||2||<br>
  You are the One Lord, the One and Only Lord, pervading all places and interspaces.<br>
  The forests and fields, the three worlds and the entire Universe, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  All chant the Name of the Creator Lord, Har, Har; countless, uncountable beings meditate on the Lord.<br>
  Blessed, blessed are those Saints and Holy People of the Lord, who are pleasing to the Creator Lord God.<br>
  O Creator, please bless me with the Fruitful Vision, the Darshan, of those who chant the Lord's Name in their hearts forever.<br>
  You are the One Lord, the One and Only Lord, pervading all places and interspaces. ||3||<br>
  The treasures of devotional worship to You are countless; he alone is blessed with them, O my Lord and Master, whom You bless.<br>
  The Lord's Glorious Virtues abide within the heart of that person, whose forehead the Guru has touched.<br>
  The Glorious Virtues of the Lord dwell in the heart of that person, whose inner being is filled with the Fear of God, and His Love.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 010</h2></center>
  Without the Fear of God, His Love is not obtained. Without the Fear of God, no one is carried across to the other side.<br>
  O Nanak, he alone is blessed with the Fear of God, and God's Love and Affection, whom You, Lord, bless with Your Mercy.<br>
  The treasures of devotional worship to You are countless; he alone is blessed with Them, O my Lord and Master, whom You bless. ||4||3||<br>
  Tukhaari, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  To receive the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Guru, the True Guru, is to truly bathe at the Abhaijit festival.<br>
  The filth of evil-mindedness is washed off, and the darkness of ignorance is dispelled.<br>
  Blessed by the Guru's Darshan, spiritual ignorance is dispelled, and the Divine Light illuminates the inner being.<br>
  The pains of birth and death vanish in an instant, and the Eternal, Imperishable Lord God is found.<br>
  The Creator Lord God Himself created the festival, when the True Guru went to bathe at the festival in Kuruk-shaytra.<br>
  To receive the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the Guru, the True Guru, is to truly bathe at the Abhaijit festival. ||1||<br>
  The Sikhs travelled with the Guru, the True Guru, on the path, along the road.<br>
  Night and day, devotional worship services were held, each and every instant, with each step.<br>
  Devotional worship services to the Lord God were held, and all the people came to see the Guru.<br>
  Whoever was blessed with the Darshan of the Guru, the True Guru, the Lord united with Himself.<br>
  The True Guru made the pilgrimage to the sacred shrines, for the sake of saving all the people.<br>
  The Sikhs travelled with the Guru, the True Guru, on the path, along the road. ||2||<br>
  When the Guru, the True Guru, first arrived at Kuruk-shaytra, it was a very auspicious time.<br>
  The news spread throughout the world, and the beings of the three worlds came.<br>
  The angelic beings and silent sages from all the three worlds came to see Him.<br>
  Those who are touched by the Guru, the True Guru - all their sins and mistakes were erased and dispelled.<br>
  The Yogis, the nudists, the Sannyaasees and those of the six schools of philosophy spoke with Him, and then bowed and departed.<br>
  When the Guru, the True Guru, first arrived at Kuruk-shaytra, it was a very auspicious time. ||3||<br>
  Second, the Guru went to the river Jamunaa, where He chanted the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  The tax collectors met the Guru and gave Him offerings; they did not impose the tax on His followers.<br>
  All the True Guru's followers were excused from the tax; they meditated on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  The Messenger of Death does not even approach those who have walked on the path, and followed the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  All the world said, "Guru! Guru! Guru!" Uttering the Guru's Name, they were all emancipated.<br>
  Second, the Guru went to the river Jamunaa, where He chanted the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||<br>
  Third, He went to the Ganges, and a wonderful drama was played out there.<br>
  All were fascinated, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Saintly Guru's Darshan; no tax at all was imposed upon anyone.<br>
  No tax at all was collected, and the mouths of the tax collectors were sealed.<br>
  They said, "O brothers, what should we do? Who should we ask? Everyone is running after the True Guru."<br>
 <center><h2>Section 26 - Raag Tukhaari - Part 011</h2></center>
  The tax collectors were smart; they thought about it, and saw. They broke their cash-boxes and left.<br>
  Third, He went to the Ganges, and a wonderful drama was played out there. ||5||<br>
  The important men of the city met together, and sought the Protection of the Guru, the True Guru.<br>
  The Guru, the True Guru, the Guru is the Lord of the Universe. Go ahead and consult the Simritees - they will confirm this.<br>
  The Simritees and the Shaastras all confirm that Suk Dayv and Prahlaad meditated on the Guru, the Lord of the Universe, and knew Him as the Supreme Lord.<br>
  The five thieves and the highway robbers dwell in the fortress of the body-village; the Guru has destroyed their home and place.<br>
  The Puraanas continually praise the giving of charity, but devotional worship of the Lord is only obtained through the Word of Guru Nanak.<br>
  The important men of the city met together, and sought the Protection of the Guru, the True Guru. ||6||4||10||<br>
  Tukhaari Chhant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O my Beloved, I am a sacrifice to You. Through the Guru, I have dedicated my mind to You.<br>
  Hearing the Word of Your Shabad, my mind is enraptured.<br>
  This mind is enraptured, like the fish in the water; it is lovingly attached to the Lord.<br>
  Your Worth cannot be described, O my Lord and Master; Your Mansion is Incomparable and Unrivalled.<br>
  O Giver of all Virtue, O my Lord and Master, please hear the prayer of this humble person.<br>
  Please bless Nanak with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You. ||1||<br>
  This body and mind are Yours; all virtues are Yours.<br>
  I am a sacrifice, every little bit, to Your Darshan.<br>
  Please hear me, O my Lord God; I live only by seeing Your Vision, even if only for an instant.<br>
  I have heard that Your Name is the most Ambrosial Nectar; please bless me with Your Mercy, that I may drink it in.<br>
  My hopes and desires rest in You, O my Husband Lord; like the rainbird, I long for the rain-drop.<br>
  Says Nanak, my soul is a sacrifice to You; please bless me with Your Darshan, O my Lord God. ||2||<br>
  You are my True Lord and Master, O Infinite King.<br>
  You are my Dear Beloved, so dear to my life and consciousness.<br>
  You bring peace to my soul; You are known to the Gurmukh. All are blessed by Your Love.<br>
  The mortal does only those deeds which You ordain, Lord.<br>
  One who is blessed by Your Grace, O Lord of the Universe, conquers his mind in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Says Nanak, my soul is a sacrifice to You; You gave me my soul and body. ||3||<br>
  I am unworthy, but He has saved me, for the sake of the Saints.<br>
  The True Guru has covered by faults; I am such a sinner.<br>
  God has covered for me; He is the Giver of the soul, life and peace.<br>
  My Lord and Master is Eternal and Unchanging, Ever-present; He is the Perfect Creator, the Architect of Destiny.<br>
  Your Praise cannot be described; who can say where You are?<br>
  Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to the one who blesses him with the Lord's Name, even for an instant. ||4||1||11||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr27.htm">Next: Raag Kaydaaraa</a></center>
 </body>