<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr27.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr29.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Bhairao</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 001</h2></center>
  Raag Bhairao, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Without You, nothing happens.<br>
  You create the creatures, and gazing on them, you know them. ||1||<br>
  What can I say? I cannot say anything.<br>
  Whatever exists, is by Your Will. ||Pause||<br>
  Whatever is to be done, rests with You.<br>
  Unto whom should I offer my prayer? ||2||<br>
  I speak and hear the Bani of Your Word.<br>
  You Yourself know all Your Wondrous Play. ||3||<br>
  You Yourself act, and inspire all to act; only You Yourself know.<br>
  Says Nanak, You, Lord, see, establish and disestablish. ||4||1||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Raag Bhairao, First Mehl, Second House:<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, so many silent sages have been saved; Indra and Brahma have also been saved.<br>
  Sanak, Sanandan and many humble men of austerity, by Guru's Grace, have been carried across to the other side. ||1||<br>
  Without the Word of the Shabad, how can anyone cross over the terrifying world-ocean?<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the world is entangled in the disease of duality, and is drowned, drowned, and dies. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Guru is Divine; the Guru is Inscrutable and Mysterious. Serving the Guru, the three worlds are known and understood.<br>
  The Guru, the Giver, has Himself given me the Gift; I have obtained the Inscrutable, Mysterious Lord. ||2||<br>
  The mind is the king; the mind is appeased and satisfied through the mind itself, and desire is stilled in the mind.<br>
  The mind is the Yogi, the mind wastes away in separation from the Lord; singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the mind is instructed and reformed. ||3||<br>
  How very rare are those in this world who, through the Guru, subdue their minds, and contemplate the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, our Lord and Master is All-pervading; through the True Word of the Shabad, we are emancipated. ||4||1||2||<br>
  Bhairao, First Mehl:<br>
  The eyes lose their sight, and the body withers away; old age overtakes the mortal, and death hangs over his head.<br>
  Beauty, loving attachment and the pleasures of life are not permanent. How can anyone escape from the noose of death? ||1||<br>
  O mortal, meditate on the Lord - your life is passing away!<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 002</h2></center>
  Without the True Word of the Shabad, you shall never be released, and your life shall be totally useless. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Within the body are sexual desire, anger, egotism and attachment. This pain is so great, and so difficult to endure.<br>
  As Gurmukh, chant the Lord's Name, and savor it with your tongue; in this way, you shall cross over to the other side. ||2||<br>
  Your ears are deaf, and your intellect is worthless, and still, you do not intuitively understand the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh wastes this priceless human life and loses it. Without the Guru, the blind person cannot see. ||3||<br>
  Whoever remains detached and free of desire in the midst of desire - and whoever, unattached, intuitively meditates on the Celestial Lord<br>
  - prays Nanak, as Gurmukh, he is released. He is lovingly attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||||2||3||<br>
  Bhairao, First Mehl:<br>
  His walk becomes weak and clumsy, his feet and hands shake, and the skin of his body is withered and wrinkled.<br>
  His eyes are dim, his ears are deaf, and yet, the self-willed manmukh does not know the Naam. ||1||<br>
  O blind man, what have you obtained by coming into the world?<br>
  The Lord is not in your heart, and you do not serve the Guru. After wasting your capital, you shall have to depart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your tongue is not imbued with the Love of the Lord; whatever you say is tasteless and insipid.<br>
  You indulge in slander of the Saints; becoming a beast, you shall never be noble. ||2||<br>
  Only a few obtain the sublime essence of the Ambrosial Amrit, united in Union with the True Guru.<br>
  As long as the mortal does not come to understand the mystery of the Shabad, the Word of God, he shall continue to be tormented by death. ||3||<br>
  Whoever finds the door of the One True Lord, does not know any other house or door.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status; so says poor Nanak. ||4||3||4||<br>
  Bhairao, First Mehl:<br>
  He spends the entire night in sleep; the noose is tied around his neck. His day is wasted in worldly entanglements.<br>
  He does not know God, who created this world, for a moment, for even an instant. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, how will you escape this terrible disaster?<br>
  What did you bring with you, and what will you take away? Meditate on the Lord, the Most Worthy and Generous Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The heart-lotus of the self-willed manmukh is upside-down; his intellect is shallow; his mind is blind, and his head is entangled in worldly affairs.<br>
  Death and re-birth constantly hang over your head; without the Name, your neck shall be caught in the noose. ||2||<br>
  Your steps are unsteady, and your eyes are blind; you are not aware of the Word of the Shabad, O Sibling of Destiny.<br>
  The Shaastras and the Vedas keep the mortal bound to the three modes of Maya, and so he performs his deeds blindly. ||3||<br>
  He loses his capital - how can he earn any profit? The evil-minded person has no spiritual wisdom at all.<br>
  Contemplating the Shabad, he drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord; O Nanak, his faith is confirmed in the Truth. ||4||4||5||<br>
  Bhairao, First Mehl:<br>
  He remains with the Guru, day and night, and his tongue savors the savory taste of the Lord's Love.<br>
  He does not know any other; he realizes the Word of the Shabad. He knows and realizes the Lord deep within his own being. ||1||<br>
  Such a humble person is pleasing to my mind.<br>
  He conquers his self-conceit, and is imbued with the Infinite Lord. He serves the Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Deep within my being, and outside as well, is the Immaculate Lord God. I bow humbly before that Primal Lord God.<br>
  Deep within each and every heart, and amidst all, the Embodiment of Truth is permeating and pervading. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 003</h2></center>
  Those who are imbued with Truth - their tongues are tinged with Truth; they do not have even an iota of the filth of falsehood.<br>
  They taste the sweet Ambrosial Nectar of the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord; imbued with the Shabad, they are blessed with honor. ||3||<br>
  The virtuous meet with the virtuous, and earn the profit; as Gurmukh, they obtain the glorious greatness of the Naam.<br>
  All sorrows are erased, by serving the Guru; O Nanak, the Naam is our only Friend and Companion. ||4||5||6||<br>
  Bhairao, First Mehl:<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the wealth and support of all; It is enshrined in the heart, by Guru's Grace.<br>
  One who gathers this imperishable wealth is fulfilled, and through intuitive meditation, is lovingly focused on the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, focus your consciousness on devotional worship of the Lord.<br>
  As Gurmukh, meditate on the Name of the Lord in your heart, and you shall return to your home with intuitive ease. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Doubt, separation and fear are never eradicated, and the mortal continues coming and going in reincarnation, as long as he does not know the Lord.<br>
  Without the Name of the Lord, no one is liberated; they drown and die without water. ||2||<br>
  Busy with his worldly affairs, all honor is lost; the ignorant one is not rid of his doubts.<br>
  Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mortal is never liberated; he remains blindly entangled in the expanse of worldly affairs. ||3||<br>
  My mind is pleased and appeased with the Immaculate Lord, who has no ancestry. Through the mind itself, the mind is subdued.<br>
  Deep within my being, and outside as well, I know only the One Lord. O Nanak, there is no other at all. ||4||6||7||<br>
  Bhairao, First Mehl:<br>
  You may give feasts, make burnt offerings, donate to charity, perform austere penance and worship, and endure pain and suffering in the body.<br>
  But without the Lord's Name, liberation is not obtained. As Gurmukh, obtain the Naam and liberation. ||1||<br>
  Without the Lord's Name, birth into the world is useless.<br>
  Without the Name, the mortal eats poison and speaks poisonous words; he dies fruitlessly, and wanders in reincarnation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The mortal may read scriptures, study grammar and say his prayers three times a day.<br>
  Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, where is liberation, O mortal? Without the Lord's Name, the mortal is entangled and dies. ||2||<br>
  Walking sticks, begging bowls, hair tufts, sacred threads, loin cloths, pilgrimages to sacred shrines and wandering all around<br>
  - without the Lord's Name, peace and tranquility are not obtained. One who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, crosses over to the other side. ||3||<br>
  The mortal's hair may be matted and tangled upon his head, and he may smear his body with ashes; he may take off his clothes and go naked.<br>
  But without the Lord's Name, he is not satisfied; he wears religious robes, but he is bound by the karma of the actions he committed in past lives. ||4||<br>
  As many beings and creatures as there are in the water, on the land and in the sky - wherever they are, You are with them all, O Lord.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, please preserve Your humble servant; O Lord, Nanak stirs up this juice, and drinks it in. ||5||7||8||<br>
  Raag Bhairao, Third Mehl, Chaupadas, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  No one should be proud of his social class and status.<br>
  He alone is a Brahmin, who knows God. ||1||<br>
  Do not be proud of your social class and status, you ignorant fool!<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 004</h2></center>
  So much sin and corruption comes from this pride. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Everyone says that there are four castes, four social classes.<br>
  They all emanate from the drop of God's Seed. ||2||<br>
  The entire universe is made of the same clay.<br>
  The Potter has shaped it into all sorts of vessels. ||3||<br>
  The five elements join together, to make up the form of the human body.<br>
  Who can say which is less, and which is more? ||4||<br>
  Says Nanak, this soul is bound by its actions.<br>
  Without meeting the True Guru, it is not liberated. ||5||1||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Yogis, the householders, the Pandits, the religious scholars, and the beggars in religious robes<br>
  - they are all asleep in egotism. ||1||<br>
  They are asleep, intoxicated with the wine of Maya.<br>
  Only those who remain awake and aware are not robbed. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One who has met the True Guru, remains awake and aware.<br>
  Such a person overpowers the five thieves. ||2||<br>
  One who contemplates the essence of reality remains awake and aware.<br>
  He kills his self-conceit, and does not kill anyone else. ||3||<br>
  One who knows the One Lord remains awake and aware.<br>
  He abandons the service of others, and realizes the essence of reality. ||4||<br>
  Of the four castes, whoever remains awake and aware<br>
  is released from birth and death. ||5||<br>
  Says Nanak, that humble being remains awake and aware,<br>
  who applies the ointment of spiritual wisdom to his eyes. ||6||2||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  Whoever the Lord keeps in His Sanctuary,<br>
  is attached to the Truth, and receives the fruit of Truth. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, unto whom will you complain?<br>
  The Hukam of the Lord's Command is pervasive; by the Hukam of His Command, all things happen. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This Creation was established by You.<br>
  In an instant You destroy it, and You create it again without a moment's delay. ||2||<br>
  By His Grace, He has staged this Play.<br>
  By the Guru's Merciful Grace, I have obtained the supreme status. ||3||<br>
  Says Nanak, He alone kills and revives.<br>
  Understand this well - do not be confused by doubt. ||4||3||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  I am the bride; the Creator is my Husband Lord.<br>
  As He inspires me, I adorn myself. ||1||<br>
  When it pleases Him, He enjoys me.<br>
  I am joined, body and mind, to my True Lord and Master. ||1||Pause||<br>
  How can anyone praise or slander anyone else?<br>
  The One Lord Himself is pervading and permeating all. ||2||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I am attracted by His Love.<br>
  I shall meet with my Merciful Lord, and vibrate the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds. ||3||<br>
  Prays Nanak, what can anyone do?<br>
  He alone meets with the Lord, whom the Lord Himself meets. ||4||4||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  He alone is a silent sage, who subdues his mind's duality.<br>
  Subduing his duality, he contemplates God. ||1||<br>
  Let each person examine his own mind, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  Examine your mind, and you shall obtain the nine treasures of the Naam. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Creator created the world, upon the foundation of worldly love and attachment.<br>
  Attaching it to possessiveness, He has led it into confusion with doubt. ||2||<br>
  From this Mind come all bodies, and the breath of life.<br>
  By mental contemplation, the mortal realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and merges in Him. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 005</h2></center>
  When the mortal has good karma, the Guru grants His Grace.<br>
  Then this mind is awakened, and the duality of this mind is subdued. ||4||<br>
  It is the innate nature of the mind to remain forever detached.<br>
  The Detached, Dispassionate Lord dwells within all. ||5||<br>
  Says Nanak, one who understands this mystery,<br>
  becomes the embodiment of the Primal, Immaculate, Divine Lord God. ||6||5||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  The world is saved through Name of the Lord.<br>
  It carries the mortal across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, dwell upon the Lord's Name.<br>
  It shall stand by you forever. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The foolish self-willed manmukhs do not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Without the Name, how will they cross over? ||2||<br>
  The Lord, the Great Giver, Himself gives His Gifts.<br>
  Celebrate and praise the Great Giver! ||3||<br>
  Granting His Grace, the Lord unites the mortals with the True Guru.<br>
  O Nanak, the Naam is enshrined within the heart. ||4||6||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  All people are saved through the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Those who become Gurmukh are blessed to receive It. ||1||<br>
  When the Dear Lord showers His Mercy,<br>
  He blesses the Gurmukh with the glorious greatness of the Naam. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who love the Beloved Name of the Lord<br>
  save themselves, and save all their ancestors. ||2||<br>
  Without the Name, the self-willed manmukhs go to the City of Death.<br>
  They suffer in pain and endure beatings. ||3||<br>
  When the Creator Himself gives,<br>
  O Nanak, then the mortals receive the Naam. ||4||7||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  Love of the Lord of the Universe saved Sanak and his brother, the sons of Brahma.<br>
  They contemplated the Word of the Shabad, and the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord, please shower me with Your Mercy,<br>
  that as Gurmukh, I may embrace love for Your Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whoever has true loving devotional worship deep within his being<br>
  meets the Lord, through the Perfect Guru. ||2||<br>
  He naturally, intuitively dwells within the home of his own inner being.<br>
  The Naam abides within the mind of the Gurmukh. ||3||<br>
  The Lord, the Seer, Himself sees.<br>
  O Nanak, enshrine the Naam within your heart. ||4||8||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, enshrine the Lord's Name within your heart.<br>
  Without the Name, ashes will be blown in your face. ||1||<br>
  The Lord's Name is so difficult to obtain, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, it comes to dwell in the mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That humble being who seeks the Lord's Name,<br>
  receives it from the Perfect Guru. ||2||<br>
  Those humble beings who accept the Will of the Lord, are approved and accepted.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they bear the insignia of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  So serve the One, whose power supports the Universe.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh loves the Naam. ||4||9||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, many rituals are performed.<br>
  But it is not the time for them, and so they are of no use. ||1||<br>
  In Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the most sublime.<br>
  As Gurmukh, be lovingly attached to Truth. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Searching my body and mind, I found Him within the home of my own heart.<br>
  The Gurmukh centers his consciousness on the Lord's Name. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 006</h2></center>
  The ointment of spiritual wisdom is obtained from the True Guru.<br>
  The Lord's Name is pervading the three worlds. ||3||<br>
  In Kali Yuga, it is the time for the One Dear Lord; it is not the time for anything else.<br>
  O Nanak, as Gurmukh, let the Lord's Name grow within your heart. ||4||10||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are afflicted with the disease of duality; they are burnt by the intense fire of desire.<br>
  They die and die again, and are reborn; they find no place of rest. They waste their lives uselessly. ||1||<br>
  O my Beloved, grant Your Grace, and give me understanding.<br>
  The world was created in the disease of egotism; without the Word of the Shabad, the disease is not cured. ||1||Pause||<br>
  There are so many silent sages, who read the Simritees and the Shaastras; without the Shabad, they have no clear awareness.<br>
  All those under the influence of the three qualities are afflicted with the disease; through possessiveness, they lose their awareness. ||2||<br>
  O God, you save some, and you enjoin others to serve the Guru.<br>
  They obtain the treasure of the Name of the Lord; peace comes to abide within their minds. ||3||<br>
  The Gurmukhs dwell in the fourth state; they obtain a dwelling in the home of their own inner being.<br>
  The Perfect True Guru shows His Mercy to them; they eradicate their self-conceit from within. ||4||<br>
  Everyone must serve the One Lord, who created Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.<br>
  O Nanak, the One True Lord is permanent and stable. He does not die, and He is not born. ||5||1||11||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  The self-willed manmukh is afflicted with the disease of duality forever; the entire universe is diseased.<br>
  The Gurmukh understands, and is cured of the disease, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord, please let me join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord blesses with glorious greatness, those who focus their consciousness on the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Death takes all those who are afflicted with the disease of possessiveness. They are subject to the Messenger of Death.<br>
  The Messenger of Death does not even approach that mortal who, as Gurmukh, enshrines the Lord within his heart. ||2||<br>
  One who does not know the Lord's Name, and who does not become Gurmukh - why did he even come into the world?<br>
  He never serves the Guru; he wastes his life uselessly. ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, those whom the True Guru enjoins to His service, have perfect good fortune.<br>
  They obtain the fruits of their desires, and find peace in the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||4||2||12||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  In pain he is born, in pain he dies, and in pain he does his deeds.<br>
  He is never released from the womb of reincarnation; he rots away in manure. ||1||<br>
  Cursed, cursed is the self-willed manmukh, who wastes his life away.<br>
  He does not serve the Perfect Guru; he does not love the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad cures all diseases; he alone is attached to it, whom the Dear Lord attaches.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 007</h2></center>
  Through the Naam, glorious greatness is obtained; he alone obtains it, whose mind is filled with the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, the fruitful rewards are obtained. This true lifestyle beings sublime peace.<br>
  Those humble beings who are attached to the Lord are immaculate; they enshrine love for the Lord's Name. ||3||<br>
  If I obtain the dust of their feet, I apply it to my forehead. They meditate on the Perfect True Guru.<br>
  O Nanak, this dust is obtained only by perfect destiny. They focus their consciousness on the Lord's Name. ||4||3||13||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  That humble being who contemplates the Word of the Shabad is true; the True Lord is within his heart.<br>
  If someone performs true devotional worship day and night, then his body will not feel pain. ||1||<br>
  Everyone calls him, "Devotee, devotee."<br>
  But without serving the True Guru, devotional worship is not obtained. Only through perfect destiny does one meet God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs lose their capital, and still, they demand profits. How can they earn any profit?<br>
  The Messenger of Death is always hovering above their heads. In the love of duality, they lose their honor. ||2||<br>
  Trying on all sorts of religious robes, they wander around day and night, but the disease of their egotism is not cured.<br>
  Reading and studying, they argue and debate; attached to Maya, they lose their awareness. ||3||<br>
  Those who serve the True Guru are blessed with the supreme status; through the Naam, they are blessed with glorious greatness.<br>
  O Nanak, those whose minds are filled with the Naam, are honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||4||4||14||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  The self-willed manmukh cannot escape false hope. In the love of duality, he is ruined.<br>
  His belly is like a river - it is never filled up. He is consumed by the fire of desire. ||1||<br>
  Eternally blissful are those who are imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, fills their hearts, and duality runs away from their minds. Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord, Har, Har, they are satisfied. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God Himself created the Universe; He links each and every person to their tasks.<br>
  He Himself created love and attachment to Maya; He Himself attaches the mortals to duality. ||2||<br>
  If there were any other, then I would speak to him; all will be merged in You.<br>
  The Gurmukh contemplates the essence of spiritual wisdom; his light merges into the Light. ||3||<br>
  God is True, Forever True, and all His Creation is True.<br>
  O Nanak, the True Guru has given me this understanding; the True Name brings emancipation. ||4||5||15||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, those who do not realize the Lord are goblins. In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, the supreme soul-swans contemplated the Lord.<br>
  In the Silver Age of Dwaapur Yuga, and the Brass Age of Traytaa Yuga, mankind prevailed, but only a rare few subdued their egos. ||1||<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, glorious greatness is obtained through the Lord's Name.<br>
  In each and every age, the Gurmukhs know the One Lord; without the Name, liberation is not attained. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is revealed in the heart of the True Lord's humble servant. It dwells in the mind of the Gurmukh.<br>
  Those who are lovingly focused on the Lord's Name save themselves; they save all their ancestors as well. ||2||<br>
  My Lord God is the Giver of virtue. The Word of the Shabad burns away all faults and demerits.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 008</h2></center>
  Those whose minds are filled with the Naam are beautiful; they enshrine the Naam within their hearts. ||3||<br>
  The True Guru has revealed to me the Lord's Home and His Court, and the Mansion of His Presence. I joyfully enjoy His Love.<br>
  Whatever He says, I accept as good; Nanak chants the Naam. ||4||6||16||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  The desires of the mind are absorbed in the mind, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Understanding is obtained from the Perfect Guru, and then the mortal does not die over and over again. ||1||<br>
  My mind takes the Support of the Lord's Name.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status; the Lord is the Fulfiller of all desires. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The One Lord is permeating and pervading amongst all; without the Guru, this understanding is not obtained.<br>
  My Lord God has been revealed to me, and I have become Gurmukh. Night and day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  The One Lord is the Giver of peace; peace is not found anywhere else.<br>
  Those who do not serve the Giver, the True Guru, depart regretfully in the end. ||3||<br>
  Serving the True Guru, lasting peace is obtained, and the mortal does not suffer in pain any longer.<br>
  Nanak has been blessed with devotional worship of the Lord; his light has merged into the Light. ||4||7||17||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  Without the Guru, the world is insane; confused and deluded, it is beaten, and it suffers.<br>
  It dies and dies again, and is reborn, always in pain, but it is unaware of the Lord's Gate. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, remain always in the Protection of the True Guru's Sanctuary.<br>
  Those people, to whose hearts the Lord's Name seems sweet, are carried across the terrifying world-ocean by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The mortal wears various religious robes, but his consciousness is unsteady; deep within, he is filled with sexual desire, anger and egotism.<br>
  Deep within is the great thirst and immense hunger; he wanders from door to door. ||2||<br>
  Those who die in the Word of the Guru's Shabad are reborn; they find the door of liberation.<br>
  With constant peace and tranquility deep within, they enshrine the Lord within their hearts. ||3||<br>
  As it pleases Him, He inspires us to act. Nothing else can be done.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh contemplates the Word of the Shabad, and is blessed with the glorious greatness of the Lord's Name. ||4||8||18||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  Lost in egotism, Maya and attachment, the mortal earns pain, and eats pain.<br>
  The great disease, the rabid disease of greed, is deep within him; he wanders around indiscriminately. ||1||<br>
  The life of the self-willed manmukh in this world is cursed.<br>
  He does not remember the Lord's Name, even in his dreams. He is never in love with the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He acts like a beast, and does not understand anything. Practicing falsehood, he becomes false.<br>
  But when the mortal meets the True Guru, his way of looking at the world changes. How rare are those humble beings who seek and find the Lord. ||2||<br>
  That person, whose heart is forever filled with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, obtains the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, he finds the Perfect Lord; the egotistical pride of his mind is eradicated. ||3||<br>
  The Creator Himself acts, and causes all to act. He Himself places us on the path.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 009</h2></center>
  He Himself blesses the Gurmukh with glorious greatness; O Nanak, he merges in the Naam. ||4||9||19||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  Upon my writing tablet, I write the Name of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, the Lord of the World.<br>
  In the love of duality, the mortals are caught in the noose of the Messenger of Death.<br>
  The True Guru nurtures and sustains me.<br>
  The Lord, the Giver of peace, is always with me. ||1||<br>
  Following his Guru's instructions, Prahlaad chanted the Lord's Name;<br>
  he was a child, but he was not afraid when his teacher yelled at him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Prahlaad's mother gave her beloved son some advice:<br>
  "My son, you must abandon the Lord's Name, and save your life!"<br>
  Prahlaad said: "Listen, O my mother;<br>
  I shall never give up the Lord's Name. My Guru has taught me this."||2||<br>
  Sandaa and Markaa, his teachers, went to his father the king, and complained:<br>
  "Prahlaad himself has gone astray, and he leads all the other pupils astray."<br>
  In the court of the wicked king, a plan was hatched.<br>
  God is the Savior of Prahlaad. ||3||<br>
  With sword in hand, and with great egotistical pride, Prahlaad's father ran up to him.<br>
  "Where is your Lord, who will save you?"<br>
  In an instant, the Lord appeared in a dreadful form, and shattered the pillar.<br>
  Harnaakhash was torn apart by His claws, and Prahlaad was saved. ||4||<br>
  The Dear Lord completes the tasks of the Saints.<br>
  He saved twenty-one generations of Prahlaad's descendents.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the poison of egotism is neutralized.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Name of the Lord, the Saints are emancipated. ||5||10||20||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Lord Himself makes demons pursue the Saints, and He Himself saves them.<br>
  Those who remain forever in Your Sanctuary, O Lord - their minds are never touched by sorrow. ||1||<br>
  In each and every age, the Lord saves the honor of His devotees.<br>
  Prahlaad, the demon's son, knew nothing of the Hindu morning prayer, the Gayatri, and nothing about ceremonial water-offerings to his ancestors; but through the Word of the Shabad, he was united in the Lord's Union. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Night and day, he performed devotional worship service, day and night, and through the Shabad, his duality was eradicated.<br>
  Those who are imbued with Truth are immaculate and pure; the True Lord abides within their minds. ||2||<br>
  The fools in duality read, but they do not understand anything; they waste their lives uselessly.<br>
  The wicked demon slandered the Saint, and stirred up trouble. ||3||<br>
  Prahlaad did not read in duality, and he did not abandon the Lord's Name; he was not afraid of any fear.<br>
  The Dear Lord became the Savior of the Saint, and the demonic Death could not even approach him. ||4||<br>
  The Lord Himself saved his honor, and blessed his devotee with glorious greatness.<br>
  O Nanak, Harnaakhash was torn apart by the Lord with His claws; the blind demon knew nothing of the Lord's Court. ||5||11||21||<br>
  Raag Bhairao, Fourth Mehl, Chaupadas, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Lord, in His Mercy, attaches mortals to the feet of the Saints.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 010</h2></center>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, vibrate and meditate on the Lord; let your awareness be absorbed in Him. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, vibrate and meditate on the Lord and the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, the Giver of Peace, grants His Grace; the Gurmukh crosses over the terrifying world-ocean through the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, sing of the Lord.<br>
  Follow the Guru's Teachings, and you shall obtain the Lord, the Source of Nectar. ||2||<br>
  Bathe in the pool of ambrosial nectar, the spiritual wisdom of the Holy Guru.<br>
  All sins will be eliminated and eradicated. ||3||<br>
  You Yourself are the Creator, the Support of the Universe.<br>
  Please unite servant Nanak with Yourself; he is the slave of Your slaves. ||4||1||<br>
  Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Fruitful is that moment when the Lord's Name is spoken.<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, all pains are taken away. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, vibrate the Name of the Lord.<br>
  O Lord, be merciful, and unite me with the Perfect Guru. Joining with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditate on the Life of the World; remember the Lord in your mind.<br>
  Millions upon millions of your sins shall be taken away. ||2||<br>
  In the Sat Sangat, apply the dust of the feet of the holy to your face;<br>
  this is how to bathe in the sixty-eight sacred shrines, and the Ganges. ||3||<br>
  I am a fool; the Lord has shown mercy to me.<br>
  The Savior Lord has saved servant Nanak. ||4||2||<br>
  Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  To do good deeds is the best rosary.<br>
  Chant on the beads within your heart, and it shall go along with you. ||1||<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Lord of the forest.<br>
  Have mercy on me, Lord, and unite me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, so that I may be released from Maya's noose of death. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whoever, as Gurmukh, serves and works hard,<br>
  is molded and shaped in the true mint of the Shabad, the Word of God. ||2||<br>
  The Guru has revealed to me the Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord.<br>
  Searching within the body-village, I have found the Lord. ||3||<br>
  I am just a child; the Lord is my Father, who nurtures and cherishes me.<br>
  Please save servant Nanak, Lord; bless him with Your Glance of Grace. ||4||3||<br>
  Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  All hearts are Yours, Lord; You are in all.<br>
  There is nothing at all except You. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Lord, the Giver of peace.<br>
  I praise You, O Lord God, You are my Father. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Wherever I look, I see only the Lord God.<br>
  All are under Your control; there is no other at all. ||2||<br>
  O Lord, when it is Your Will to save someone,<br>
  then nothing can threaten him. ||3||<br>
  You are totally pervading and permeating the waters, the lands, the skies and all places.<br>
  Servant Nanak meditates on the Ever-present Lord. ||4||4||<br>
  Bhairao, Fourth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Lord's Saint is the embodiment of the Lord; within his heart is the Name of the Lord.<br>
  One who has such destiny inscribed on his forehead, follows the Guru's Teachings, and contemplates the Name of the Lord within his heart. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 011</h2></center>
  Enshrine Him in your heart, and meditate on the Lord.<br>
  The five plundering thieves are in the body-village; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord has beaten them and driven them out. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those whose minds are satisfied with the Lord - the Lord Himself resolves their affairs.<br>
  Their subservience and their dependence on other people is ended; the Creator Lord is on their side. ||2||<br>
  If something were beyond the realm of the Lord's Power, only then would we have recourse to consult someone else.<br>
  Whatever the Lord does is good. Meditate on the Name of the Lord, night and day. ||3||<br>
  Whatever the Lord does, He does by Himself. He does not ask or consult anyone else.<br>
  O Nanak, meditate forever on God; granting His Grace, He unites us with the True Guru. ||4||1||5||<br>
  Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my Lord and Master, please unite me with the Holy people; meditating on You, I am saved.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, my mind blossoms forth. Each and every moment, I am a sacrifice to them. ||1||<br>
  Meditate within your heart on the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Show Mercy, Mercy to me, O Father of the World, O my Lord and Master; make me the water-carrier of the slave of Your slaves. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Their intellect is sublime and exalted, and so is their honor; the Lord, the Lord of the forest, abides within their hearts.<br>
  O my Lord and Master, please link me to the service of those who meditate in remembrance on You, and are saved. ||2||<br>
  Those who do not find such a Holy True Guru are beaten, and driven out of the Court of the Lord.<br>
  These slanderous people have no honor or reputation; their noses are cut by the Creator Lord. ||3||<br>
  The Lord Himself speaks, and the Lord Himself inspires all to speak; He is Immaculate and Formless, and needs no sustenance.<br>
  O Lord, he alone meets You, whom You cause to meet. Says servant Nanak, I am a wretched creature. What can I do? ||4||2||6||<br>
  Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  That is Your True Congregation, Lord, where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are heard.<br>
  The minds of those who listen to the Lord's Name are drenched with bliss; I worship their feet continually. ||1||<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, the Life of the World, the mortals cross over.<br>
  Your Names are so many, they are countless, O Lord. This tongue of mine cannot even count them. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Gursikhs, chant the Lord's Name, and sing the Praises of the Lord. Take the Guru's Teachings, and meditate on the Lord.<br>
  Whoever listens to the Guru's Teachings - that humble being receives countless comforts and pleasures from the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Blessed is the ancestry, blessed is the father, and blessed is that mother who gave birth to this humble servant.<br>
  Those who meditate on my Lord, Har, Har, with every breath and morsel of food - those humble servants of the Lord look beautiful in the True Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  O Lord, Har, Har, Your Names are profound and infinite; Your devotees cherish them deep within.<br>
  Servant Nanak has obained the wisdom of the Guru's Teachings; meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, he crosses over to the other side. ||4||3||7||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 012</h2></center>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Setting aside all other days, it is said that the Lord was born on the eighth lunar day. ||1||<br>
  Deluded and confused by doubt, the mortal practices falsehood.<br>
  The Lord is beyond birth and death. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You prepare sweet treats and feed them to your stone god.<br>
  God is not born, and He does not die, you foolish, faithless cynic! ||2||<br>
  You sing lullabyes to your stone god - this is the source of all your mistakes.<br>
  Let that mouth be burnt, which says that our Lord and Master is subject to birth. ||3||<br>
  He is not born, and He does not die; He does not come and go in reincarnation.<br>
  The God of Nanak is pervading and permeating everywhere. ||4||1||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Standing up, I am at peace; sitting down, I am at peace.<br>
  I feel no fear, because this is what I understand. ||1||<br>
  The One Lord, my Lord and Master, is my Protector.<br>
  He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of Hearts. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I sleep without worry, and I awake without worry.<br>
  You, O God, are pervading everywhere. ||2||<br>
  I dwell in peace in my home, and I am at peace outside.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru has implanted His Mantra within me. ||3||2||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I do not keep fasts, nor do I observe the month of Ramadaan.<br>
  I serve only the One, who will protect me in the end. ||1||<br>
  The One Lord, the Lord of the World, is my God Allah.<br>
  He adminsters justice to both Hindus and Muslims. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I do not make pilgrimages to Mecca, nor do I worship at Hindu sacred shrines.<br>
  I serve the One Lord, and not any other. ||2||<br>
  I do not perform Hindu worship services, nor do I offer the Muslim prayers.<br>
  I have taken the One Formless Lord into my heart; I humbly worship Him there. ||3||<br>
  I am not a Hindu, nor am I a Muslim.<br>
  My body and breath of life belong to Allah - to Raam - the God of both. ||4||<br>
  Says Kabeer, this is what I say:<br>
  meeting with the Guru, my Spiritual Teacher, I realize God, my Lord and Master. ||5||3||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I easily tied up the deer - the ten sensory organs.<br>
  I shot five of the desires with the Word of the Lord's Bani. ||1||<br>
  I go out hunting with the Saints,<br>
  and we capture the deer without horses or weapons. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My mind used to run around outside hunting.<br>
  But now, I have found the game within the home of my body-village. ||2||<br>
  I caught the deer and brought them home.<br>
  Dividing them up, I shared them, bit by bit. ||3||<br>
  God has given this gift.<br>
  Nanak's home is filled with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||4||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Even though he may be fed with hundreds of longings and yearnings,<br>
  still the faithless cynic does not remember the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  Take in the teachings of the humble Saints.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall obtain the supreme status. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Stones may be kept under water for a long time.<br>
  Even so, they do not absorb the water; they remain hard and dry. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 013</h2></center>
  The six Shaastras may be read to a fool,<br>
  but it is like the wind blowing in the ten directions. ||3||<br>
  It is like threshing a crop without any corn - nothing is gained.<br>
  In the same way, no benefit comes from the faithless cynic. ||4||<br>
  As the Lord attaches them, so are all attached.<br>
  Says Nanak, God has formed such a form. ||5||5||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He created the soul, the breath of life and the body.<br>
  He created all beings, and knows their pains. ||1||<br>
  The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, is the Helper of the soul.<br>
  Here and herafter, He always provides shade. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Worship and adoration of God is the pure way of life.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the love of duality vanishes. ||2||<br>
  Friends, well-wishers and wealth will not support you.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is my Lord. ||3||<br>
  Nanak utters the Ambrosial Bani of the Lord.<br>
  Except the One Lord, he does not know any other at all. ||4||6||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord is in front of me, and the Lord is behind me.<br>
  My Beloved Lord, the Source of Nectar, is in the middle as well. ||1||<br>
  God is my Shaastra and my favorable omen.<br>
  In His Home and Mansion, I find peace, poise and bliss. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, with my tongue, and hearing it with my ears, I live.<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, I have become eternal, permanent and stable. ||2||<br>
  The pains of countless lifetimes have been erased.<br>
  The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, the Word of God, vibrates in the Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Granting His Grace, God has blended me with Himself.<br>
  Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God. ||4||7||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  It brings millions of desires to fulfillment.<br>
  On the Path of Death, It will go with you and help you. ||1||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe, is the holy water of the Ganges.<br>
  Whoever meditates on it, is saved; drinking it in, the mortal does not wander in reincarnation again. ||1||Pause||<br>
  It is my worship, meditation, austerity and cleansing bath.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, I have become free of desire. ||2||<br>
  It is my domain and empire, wealth, mansion and court.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Naam brings perfect conduct. ||3||<br>
  Slave Nanak has deliberated, and has come to this conclusion:<br>
  Without the Lord's Name, everything is false and worthless, like ashes. ||4||8||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The poison had absolutely no harmful effect.<br>
  But the wicked Brahmin died in pain. ||1||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God Himself has saved His humble servant.<br>
  The sinner died through the Power of the Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord and Master meditates on Him.<br>
  He Himself has destroyed the ignorant sinner. ||2||<br>
  God is the Mother, the Father and the Protector of His slave.<br>
  The face of the slanderer, here and hereafter, is blackened. ||3||<br>
  The Transcendent Lord has heard the prayer of servant Nanak.<br>
  The filthy sinner lost hope and died. ||4||9||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Excellent, excellent, excellent, excellent, excellent is Your Name.<br>
  False, false, false, false is pride in the world. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The glorious vision of Your slaves, O Infinite Lord, is wonderful and beauteous.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 014</h2></center>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the whole world is just ashes. ||1||<br>
  Your Creative Power is marvellous, and Your Lotus Feet are admirable.<br>
  Your Praise is priceless, O True King. ||2||<br>
  God is the Support of the unsupported.<br>
  Meditate day and night on the Cherisher of the meek and humble. ||3||<br>
  God has been merciful to Nanak.<br>
  May I never forget God; He is my heart, my soul, my breath of life. ||4||10||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  As Gurmukh, obtain the true wealth.<br>
  Accept the Will of God as True. ||1||<br>
  Live, live, live forever.<br>
  Rise early each day, and drink in the Nectar of the Lord.<br>
  With your tongue, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the One Name alone shall save you.<br>
  Nanak speaks the wisdom of God. ||2||11||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Serving the True Guru, all fruits and rewards are obtained.<br>
  The filth of so many lifetimes is washed away. ||1||<br>
  Your Name, God, is the Purifier of sinners.<br>
  Because of the karma of my past deeds, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I am saved.<br>
  I am blessed with honor in God's Court. ||2||<br>
  Serving at God's Feet, all comforts are obtained.<br>
  All the angels and demi-gods long for the dust of the feet of such beings. ||3||<br>
  Nanak has obtained the treasure of the Naam.<br>
  Chanting and meditating on the Lord, the whole world is saved. ||4||12||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  God hugs His slave close in His Embrace.<br>
  He throws the slanderer into the fire. ||1||<br>
  The Lord saves His servants from the sinners.<br>
  No one can save the sinner. The sinner is destroyed by his own actions. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord's slave is in love with the Dear Lord.<br>
  The slanderer loves something else. ||2||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God has revealed His Innate Nature.<br>
  The evil-doer obtains the fruits of his own actions. ||3||<br>
  God does not come or go; He is All-pervading and permeating.<br>
  Slave Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||4||13||<br>
  Raag Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, Chaupadas, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Fascinating Lord, the Creator of all, the Formless Lord, is the Giver of Peace.<br>
  You have abandoned this Lord, and you serve another. Why are you intoxicated with the pleasures of corruption? ||1||<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  I have seen all other sorts of efforts; whatever you can think of, will only bring failure. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The blind, ignorant, self-willed manmukhs forsake their Lord and Master, and dwell on His slave Maya.<br>
  They slander those who worship their Lord; they are like beasts, without a Guru. ||2||<br>
  Soul, life, body and wealth all belong to God, but the faithless cynics claim that they own them.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 015</h2></center>
  They are proud and arrogant, evil-minded and filthy; without the Guru, they are reincarnated into the terrifying world-ocean. ||3||<br>
  Through burnt offerings, charitable feasts, ritualistic chants, penance, all sorts of austere self-discipline and pilgrimages to sacred shrines and rivers, they do not find God.<br>
  Self-conceit is only erased when one seeks the Lord's Sanctuary and becomes Gurmukh; O Nanak, he crosses over the world-ocean. ||4||1||14||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have seen Him in the woods, and I have seen Him in the fields. I have seen Him in the household, and in renunciation.<br>
  I have seen Him as a Yogi carrying His staff, as a Yogi with matted hair, fasting, making vows, and visiting sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||1||<br>
  I have seen Him in the Society of the Saints, and within my own mind.<br>
  In the sky, in the nether regions of the underworld, and in everything, He is pervading and permeating. With love and joy, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have seen Him among the Yogis, the Sannyaasees, the celibates, the wandering hermits and the wearers of patched coats.<br>
  I have seen Him among the men of severe self-discipline, the silent sages, the actors, dramas and dances. ||2||<br>
  I have seen Him in the four Vedas, I have seen Him in the six Shaastras, in the eighteen Puraanas and the Simritees as well.<br>
  All together, they declare that there is only the One Lord. So tell me, from whom is He hidden? ||3||<br>
  Unfathomable and Inaccessible, He is our Infinite Lord and Master; His Value is beyond valuation.<br>
  Servant Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to those, within whose heart He is revealed. ||4||2||15||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  How can anyone do evil, if he realizes that the Lord is near?<br>
  One who gathers corruption, constantly feels fear.<br>
  He is near, but this mystery is not understood.<br>
  Without the True Guru, all are enticed by Maya. ||1||<br>
  Everyone says that He is near, near at hand.<br>
  But rare is that person, who, as Gurmukh, understands this mystery. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The mortal does not see the Lord near at hand; instead, he goes to the homes of others.<br>
  He steals their wealth and lives in falsehood.<br>
  Under the influence of the drug of illusion, he does not know that the Lord is with him.<br>
  Without the Guru, he is confused and deluded by doubt. ||2||<br>
  Not understanding that the Lord is near, he tells lies.<br>
  In love and attachment to Maya, the fool is plundered.<br>
  That which he seeks is within his own self, but he looks for it outside.<br>
  Without the Guru, he is confused and deluded by doubt. ||3||<br>
  One whose good karma is recorded on his forehead<br>
  serves the True Guru; thus the hard and heavy shutters of his mind are opened wide.<br>
  Within his own being and beyond, he sees the Lord near at hand.<br>
  O servant Nanak, he does not come and go in reincarnation. ||4||3||16||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Who can kill that person whom You protect, O Lord?<br>
  All beings, and the entire universe, is within You.<br>
  The mortal thinks up millions of plans,<br>
  but that alone happens, which the Lord of wondrous plays does. ||1||<br>
  Save me, save me, O Lord; shower me with Your Mercy.<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary, and Your Court. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whoever serves the Fearless Lord, the Giver of Peace,<br>
  is rid of all his fears; he knows the One Lord.<br>
  Whatever You do, that alone comes to pass in the end.<br>
  There is no other who can kill or protect us. ||2||<br>
  What do you think, with your human understanding?<br>
  The All-knowing Lord is the Searcher of Hearts.<br>
  The One and only Lord is my Support and Protection.<br>
  The Creator Lord knows everything. ||3||<br>
  That person who is blessed by the Creator's Glance of Grace<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 016</h2></center>
  - all his affairs are resolved.<br>
  The One Lord is his Protector.<br>
  O servant Nanak, no one can equal him. ||4||4||17||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  We should feel sad, if God were beyond us.<br>
  We should feel sad, if we forget the Lord.<br>
  We should feel sad, if we are in love with duality.<br>
  But why should we feel sad? The Lord is pervading everywhere. ||1||<br>
  In love and attachment to Maya, the mortals are sad, and are consumed by sadness.<br>
  Without the Name, they wander and wander and wander, and waste away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  We should feel sad, if there were another Creator Lord.<br>
  We should feel sad, if someone dies by injustice.<br>
  We should feel sad, if something were not known to the Lord.<br>
  But why should we feel sad? The Lord is totally permeating everywhere. ||2||<br>
  We should feel sad, if God were a tyrant.<br>
  We should feel sad, if He made us suffer by mistake.<br>
  The Guru says that whatever happens is all by God's Will.<br>
  So I have abandoned sadness, and I now sleep without anxiety. ||3||<br>
  O God, You alone are my Lord and Master; all belong to You.<br>
  According to Your Will, You pass judgement.<br>
  There is no other at all; the One Lord is permeating and pervading everywhere.<br>
  Please save Nanak's honor; I have come to Your Sanctuary. ||4||5||18||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Without music, how is one to dance?<br>
  Without a voice, how is one to sing?<br>
  Without strings, how is a guitar to be played?<br>
  Without the Naam, all affairs are useless. ||1||<br>
  Without the Naam - tell me: who has ever been saved?<br>
  Without the True Guru, how can anyone cross over to the other side? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Without a tongue, how can anyone speak?<br>
  Without ears, how can anyone hear?<br>
  Without eyes, how can anyone see?<br>
  Without the Naam, the mortal is of no account at all. ||2||<br>
  Without learning, how can one be a Pandit - a religious scholar?<br>
  Without power, what is the glory of an empire?<br>
  Without understanding, how can the mind become steady?<br>
  Without the Naam, the whole world is insane. ||3||<br>
  Without detachment, how can one be a detached hermit?<br>
  Without renouncing egotism, how can anyone be a renunciate?<br>
  Without overcoming the five thieves, how can the mind be subdued?<br>
  Without the Naam, the mortal regrets and repents forever and ever. ||4||<br>
  Without the Guru's Teachings, how can anyone obtain spiritual wisdom?<br>
  Without seeing - tell me: how can anyone visualize in meditation?<br>
  Without the Fear of God, all speech in useless.<br>
  Says Nanak, this is the wisdom of the Lord's Court. ||5||6||19||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Mankind is afflicted with the disease of egotism.<br>
  The disease of sexual desire overwhelms the elephant.<br>
  Because of the disease of vision, the moth is burnt to death.<br>
  Because of the disease of the sound of the bell, the deer is lured to its death. ||1||<br>
  Whoever I see is diseased.<br>
  Only my True Guru, the True Yogi, is free of disease. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Because of the disease of taste, the fish is caught.<br>
  Because of the disease of smell, the bumble bee is destroyed.<br>
  The whole world is caught in the disease of attachment.<br>
  In the disease of the three qualities, corruption is multiplied. ||2||<br>
  In disease the mortals die, and in disease they are born.<br>
  In disease they wander in reincarnation again and again.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 017</h2></center>
  Entangled in disease, they cannot stay still, even for an instant.<br>
  Without the True Guru, the disease is never cured. ||3||<br>
  When the Supreme Lord God grants His Mercy,<br>
  He grabs hold of the mortal's arm, and pulls him up and out of the disease.<br>
  Reaching the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the mortal's bonds are broken.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru cures him of the disease. ||4||7||20||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  When He comes to mind, then I am in supreme bliss.<br>
  When He comes to mind, then all my pains are shattered.<br>
  When He comes to mind, my hopes are fulfilled.<br>
  When He comes to mind, I never feel sadness. ||1||<br>
  Deep within my being, my Sovereign Lord King has revealed Himself to me.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has inspired me to love Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When He comes to mind, I am the king of all.<br>
  When He comes to mind, all my affairs are completed.<br>
  When He comes to mind, I am dyed in the deep crimson of His Love.<br>
  When He comes to mind, I am ecstatic forever. ||2||<br>
  When He comes to mind, I am wealthy forever.<br>
  When He comes to mind, I am free of doubt forever.<br>
  When He comes to mind, then I enjoy all pleasures.<br>
  When He comes to mind, I am rid of fear. ||3||<br>
  When He comes to mind, I find the home of peace and poise.<br>
  When He comes to mind, I am absorbed in the Primal Void of God.<br>
  When He comes to mind, I continually sing the Kirtan of His Praises.<br>
  Nanak's mind is pleased and satisfied with the Lord God. ||4||8||21||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My Father is Eternal, forever alive.<br>
  My brothers live forever as well.<br>
  My friends are permanent and imperishable.<br>
  My family abides in the home of the self within. ||1||<br>
  I have found peace, and so all are at peace.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has united me with my Father. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My mansions are the highest of all.<br>
  My countries are infinite and uncountable.<br>
  My kingdom is eternally stable.<br>
  My wealth is inexhaustible and permanent. ||2||<br>
  My glorious reputation resounds throughout the ages.<br>
  My fame has spread in all places and interspaces.<br>
  My praises echo in each and every house.<br>
  My devotional worship is known to all people. ||3||<br>
  My Father has revealed Himself within me.<br>
  The Father and son have joined together in partnership.<br>
  Says Nanak, when my Father is pleased,<br>
  then the Father and son are joined together in love, and become one. ||4||9||22||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The True Guru, the Primal Being, is free of revenge and hate; He is God, the Great Giver.<br>
  I am a sinner; You are my Forgiver.<br>
  That sinner, who finds no protection anywhere<br>
  - if he comes seeking Your Sanctuary, then he becomes immaculate and pure. ||1||<br>
  Pleasing the True Guru, I have found peace.<br>
  Meditating on the Guru, I have obtained all fruits and rewards. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I humbly bow to the Supreme Lord God, the True Guru.<br>
  My mind and body are Yours; all the world is Yours.<br>
  When the veil of illusion is removed, then I come to see You.<br>
  You are my Lord and Master; You are the King of all. ||2||<br>
  When it pleases Him, even dry wood becomes green.<br>
  When it pleases Him, rivers flow across the desert sands.<br>
  When it pleases Him, all fruits and rewards are obtained.<br>
  Grasping hold of the Guru's feet, my anxiety is dispelled. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 018</h2></center>
  I am unworthy and ungrateful, but He has been merciful to me.<br>
  My mind and body have been cooled and soothed; the Ambrosial Nectar rains down in my mind.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God, the Guru, has become kind and compassionate to me.<br>
  Slave Nanak beholds the Lord, enraptured. ||4||10||23||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My True Guru is totally independent.<br>
  My True Guru is adorned with Truth.<br>
  My True Guru is the Giver of all.<br>
  My True Guru is the Primal Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny. ||1||<br>
  There is no deity equal to the Guru.<br>
  Whoever has good destiny inscribed on his forehead, applies himself to seva - selfless service. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My True Guru is the Sustainer and Cherisher of all.<br>
  My True Guru kills and revives.<br>
  The glorious greatness of my True Guru has become manifest everywhere. ||2||<br>
  My True Guru is the power of the powerless.<br>
  My True Guru is my home and court.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru.<br>
  He has shown me the path. ||3||<br>
  One who serves the Guru is not afflicted with fear.<br>
  One who serves the Guru does not suffer in pain.<br>
  Nanak has studied the Simritees and the Vedas.<br>
  There is no difference between the Supreme Lord God and the Guru. ||4||11||24||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Repeating the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal is exalted and glorified.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, sin is banished from the body.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, all festivals are celebrated.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, one is cleansed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines. ||1||<br>
  My sacred shrine of pilgrimage is the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Guru has instructed me in the true essence of spiritual wisdom. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Repeating the Naam, the mortal's pains are taken away.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, the most ignorant people become spiritual teachers.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, the Divine Light blazes forth.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, one's bonds are broken. ||2||<br>
  Repeating the Naam, the Messenger of Death does not draw near.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, one finds peace in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, God gives His Approval.<br>
  The Naam is my true wealth. ||3||<br>
  The Guru has instructed me in these sublime teachings.<br>
  The Kirtan of the Lord's Praises and the Naam are the Support of the mind.<br>
  Nanak is saved through the atonement of the Naam.<br>
  Other actions are just to please and appease the people. ||4||12||25||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I bow in humble worship, tens of thousands of times.<br>
  I offer this mind as a sacrifice.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on Him, sufferings are erased.<br>
  Bliss wells up, and no disease is contracted. ||1||<br>
  Such is the diamond, the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Chanting it, all works are perfectly completed. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Beholding Him, the house of pain is demolished.<br>
  The mind seizes the cooling, soothing, Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.<br>
  Millions of devotees worship His Feet.<br>
  He is the Fulfiller of all the mind's desires. ||2||<br>
  In an instant, He fills the empty to over-flowing.<br>
  In an instant, He transforms the dry into green.<br>
  In an instant, He gives the homeless a home.<br>
  In an instant, He bestows honor on the dishonored. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 019</h2></center>
  The One Lord is totally pervading and permeating all.<br>
  He alone meditates on the Lord, whose True Guru is Perfect.<br>
  Such a person has the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises for his Support.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Lord Himself is merciful to him. ||4||13||26||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I was discarded and abandoned, but He has embellished me.<br>
  He has blessed me with beauty and His Love; through His Name, I am exalted.<br>
  All my pains and sorrows have been eradicated.<br>
  The Guru has become my Mother and Father. ||1||<br>
  O my friends and companions, my household is in bliss.<br>
  Granting His Grace, my Husband Lord has met me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The fire of desire has been extinguished, and all my desires have been fulfilled.<br>
  The darkness has been dispelled, and the Divine Light blazes forth.<br>
  The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, the Word of God, is wondrous and amazing!<br>
  Perfect is the Grace of the Perfect Guru. ||2||<br>
  That person, unto whom the Lord reveals Himself<br>
  - by the Blessed Vision of his Darshan, I am forever enraptured.<br>
  He obtains all virtues and so many treasures.<br>
  The True Guru blesses him with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  That person who meets with his Lord and Master<br>
  - his mind and body are cooled and soothed, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Says Nanak, such a humble being is pleasing to God;<br>
  only a rare few are blessed with the dust of his feet. ||4||14||27||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The mortal does not hesitate to think about sin.<br>
  He is not ashamed to spend time with prostitutes.<br>
  He works all day long,<br>
  but when it is time to remember the Lord, then a heavy stone falls on his head. ||1||<br>
  Attached to Maya, the world is deluded and confused.<br>
  The Deluder Himself has deluded the mortal, and now he is engrossed in worthless worldly affairs. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Gazing on Maya's illusion, its pleasures pass away.<br>
  He loves the shell, and ruins his life.<br>
  Bound to blind worldly affairs, his mind wavers and wanders.<br>
  The Creator Lord does not come into his mind. ||2||<br>
  Working and working like this, he only obtains pain,<br>
  and his affairs of Maya are never completed.<br>
  His mind is saturated with sexual desire, anger and greed.<br>
  Wiggling like a fish out of water, he dies. ||3||<br>
  One who has the Lord Himself as his Protector,<br>
  chants and meditates forever on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, he has found the Perfect True Guru. ||4||15||28||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He alone obtains it, unto whom the Lord shows Mercy.<br>
  He enshrines the Name of the Lord in his mind.<br>
  With the True Word of the Shabad in his heart and mind,<br>
  the sins of countless incarnations vanish. ||1||<br>
  The Lord's Name is the Support of the soul.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, chant the Name continually, O Siblings of Destiny; It shall carry you across the world-ocean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who have this treasure of the Lord's Name written in their destiny,<br>
  those humble beings are honored in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Singing His Glorious Praises with peace, poise and bliss,<br>
  even the homeless obtain a home hereafter. ||2||<br>
  Throughout the ages, this has been the essence of reality.<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on the Lord, and contemplate the Truth.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 020</h2></center>
  He alone is attached to the hem of the Lord's robe, whom the Lord Himself attaches.<br>
  Asleep for countless incarnations, he now awakens. ||3||<br>
  Your devotees belong to You, and You belong to Your devotees.<br>
  You Yourself inspire them to chant Your Praises.<br>
  All beings and creatures are in Your Hands.<br>
  Nanak's God is always with him. ||4||16||29||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Inner-knower of my heart.<br>
  The Naam is so useful to me.<br>
  The Lord's Name permeates each and every hair of mine.<br>
  The Perfect True Guru has given me this gift. ||1||<br>
  The Jewel of the Naam is my treasure.<br>
  It is inaccessible, priceless, infinite and incomparable. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Naam is my unmoving, unchanging Lord and Master.<br>
  The glory of the Naam spreads over the whole world.<br>
  The Naam is my perfect master of wealth.<br>
  The Naam is my independence. ||2||<br>
  The Naam is my food and love.<br>
  The Naam is the objective of my mind.<br>
  By the Grace of the Saints, I never forget the Naam.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, the Unstruck Sound-current of the Naad resounds. ||3||<br>
  By God's Grace, I have obtained the nine treasures of the Naam.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I am tuned in to the Naam.<br>
  They alone are wealthy and supreme,<br>
  O Nanak, who have the treasure of the Naam. ||4||17||30||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You are my Father, and You are my Mother.<br>
  You are my Soul, my Breath of Life, the Giver of Peace.<br>
  You are my Lord and Master; I am Your slave.<br>
  Without You, I have no one at all. ||1||<br>
  Please bless me with Your Mercy, God, and give me this gift,<br>
  that I may sing Your Praises, day and night. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am Your musical instrument, and You are the Musician.<br>
  I am Your beggar; please bless me with Your charity, O Great Giver.<br>
  By Your Grace, I enjoy love and pleasures.<br>
  You are deep within each and every heart. ||2||<br>
  By Your Grace, I chant the Name.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing Your Glorious Praises.<br>
  In Your Mercy, You take away our pains.<br>
  By Your Mercy, the heart-lotus blossoms forth. ||3||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Divine Guru.<br>
  The Blessed Vision of His Darshan is fruitful and rewarding; His service is immaculate and pure.<br>
  Be Merciful to me, O my Lord God and Master,<br>
  that Nanak may continually sing Your Glorious Praises. ||4||18||31||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  His Regal Court is the highest of all.<br>
  I humbly bow to Him, forever and ever.<br>
  His place is the highest of the high.<br>
  Millions of sins are erased by the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  In His Sanctuary, we find eternal peace.<br>
  He Mercifully unites us with Himself. ||1||Pause||<br>
  His wondrous actions cannot even be described.<br>
  All hearts rest their faith and hope in Him.<br>
  He is manifest in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  The devotees lovingly worship and adore Him night and day. ||2||<br>
  He gives, but His treasures are never exhausted.<br>
  In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes.<br>
  No one can erase the Hukam of His Command.<br>
  The True Lord is above the heads of kings. ||3||<br>
  He is my Anchor and Support; I place my hopes in Him.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 021</h2></center>
  I place my pain and pleasure before Him.<br>
  He covers the faults of His humble servant.<br>
  Nanak sings His Praises. ||4||19||32||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The whiner whines every day.<br>
  His attachment to his household and entanglements cloud his mind.<br>
  If someone becomes detached through understanding,<br>
  he will not have to suffer in birth and death again. ||1||<br>
  All of his conflicts are extensions of his corruption.<br>
  How rare is that person who takes the Naam as his Support. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The three-phased Maya infects all.<br>
  Whoever clings to it suffers pain and sorrow.<br>
  There is no peace without meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  By great good fortune, the treasure of the Naam is received. ||2||<br>
  One who loves the actor in his mind,<br>
  later regrets it when the actor takes off his costume.<br>
  The shade from a cloud is transitory,<br>
  like the worldly paraphernalia of attachment and corruption. ||3||<br>
  If someone is blessed with the singular substance,<br>
  then all of his tasks are accomplished to perfection.<br>
  One who obtains the Naam, by Guru's Grace<br>
  - O Nanak, his coming into the world is certified and approved. ||4||20||33||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Slandering the Saints, the mortal wanders in reincarnation.<br>
  Slandering the Saints, he is diseased.<br>
  Slandering the Saints, he suffers in pain.<br>
  The slanderer is punished by the Messenger of Death. ||1||<br>
  Those who argue and fight with the Saints<br>
  - those slanderers find no happiness at all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Slandering the devotees, the wall of the mortal's body is shattered.<br>
  Slandering the devotees, he suffers in hell.<br>
  Slandering the devotees, he rots in the womb.<br>
  Slandering the devotees, he loses his realm and power. ||2||<br>
  The slanderer finds no salvation at all.<br>
  He eats only that which he himself has planted.<br>
  He is worse than a thief, a lecher, or a gambler.<br>
  The slanderer places an unbearable burden upon his head. ||3||<br>
  The devotees of the Supreme Lord God are beyond hate and vengeance.<br>
  Whoever worships their feet is emancipated.<br>
  The Primal Lord God has deluded and confused the slanderer.<br>
  O Nanak, the record of one's past actions cannot be erased. ||4||21||34||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is for me the Vedas and the Sound-current of the Naad.<br>
  Through the Naam, my tasks are perfectly accomplished.<br>
  The Naam is my worship of deities.<br>
  The Naam is my service to the Guru. ||1||<br>
  The Perfect Guru has implanted the Naam within me.<br>
  The highest task of all is the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Naam is my cleansing bath and purification.<br>
  The Naam is my perfect donation of charity.<br>
  Those who repeat the Naam are totally purified.<br>
  Those who chant the Naam are my friends and Siblings of Destiny. ||2||<br>
  The Naam is my auspicious omen and good fortune.<br>
  The Naam is the sublime food which satisfies me.<br>
  The Naam is my good conduct.<br>
  The Naam is my immaculate occupation. ||3||<br>
  All those humble beings whose minds are filled with the One God<br>
  have the Support of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with your mind and body.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord bestows His Name. ||4||22||35||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 022</h2></center>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You bless the poor with wealth, O Lord.<br>
  Countless sins are taken away, and the mind becomes immaculate and pure.<br>
  All the mind's desires are fulfilled, and one's tasks are perfectly accomplished.<br>
  You bestow Your Name upon Your devotee. ||1||<br>
  Service to the Lord, our Sovereign King, is fruitful and rewarding.<br>
  Our Lord and Master is the Creator, the Cause of causes; no one is turned away from His Door empty-handed. ||1||Pause||<br>
  God eradicates the disease from the diseased person.<br>
  God takes away the sorrows of the suffering.<br>
  And those who have no place at all - You seat them upon the place.<br>
  You link Your slave to devotional worship. ||2||<br>
  God bestows honor on the dishonored.<br>
  He makes the foolish and ignorant become clever and wise.<br>
  The fear of all fear disappears.<br>
  The Lord dwells within the mind of His humble servant. ||3||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God is the Treasure of Peace.<br>
  The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is the essence of reality.<br>
  Granting His Grace, He enjoins the mortals to serve the Saints.<br>
  O Nanak, such a person merges in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||4||23||36||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In the Realm of the Saints, the Lord dwells in the mind.<br>
  In the Realm of the Saints, all sins run away.<br>
  In the Realm of the Saints, one's lifestyle is immaculate.<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, one comes to love the One Lord. ||1||<br>
  That alone is called the Realm of the Saints,<br>
  where only the Glorious Praises of the Supreme Lord God are sung. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the Realm of the Saints, birth and death are ended.<br>
  In the Realm of the Saints, the Messenger of Death cannot touch the mortal.<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, one's speech becomes immaculate<br>
  In the realm of the saints, the Lord's Name is chanted. ||2||<br>
  The Realm of the Saints is the eternal, ever-stable place.<br>
  In the Realm of the Saints, sins are destroyed.<br>
  In the Realm of the Saints, the immaculate sermon is spoken.<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, the pain of egotism runs away. ||3||<br>
  The Realm of the Saints cannot be destroyed.<br>
  In the Realm of the Saints, is the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.<br>
  The Realm of the Saints is the resting place of our Lord and Master.<br>
  O Nanak, He is woven into the fabric of His devotees, through and through. ||4||24||37||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Why worry about disease, when the Lord Himself protects us?<br>
  That person whom the Lord protects, does not suffer pain and sorrow.<br>
  That person, upon whom God showers His Mercy<br>
  - Death hovering above him is turned away. ||1||<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is forever our Help and Support.<br>
  When He comes to mind, the mortal finds lasting peace, and the Messenger of Death cannot even approach him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When this being did not exist, who created him then?<br>
  What has been produced from the source?<br>
  He Himself kills, and He Himself rejuvenates.<br>
  He cherishes His devotees forever. ||2||<br>
  Know that everything is in His Hands.<br>
  My God is the Master of the masterless.<br>
  His Name is the Destroyer of pain.<br>
  Singing His Glorious Praises, you shall find peace. ||3||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, please listen to the prayer of Your Saint.<br>
  I place my soul, my breath of life and wealth before You.<br>
  All this world is Yours; it meditates on You.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 023</h2></center>
  Please shower Nanak with Your Mercy and bless him with peace. ||4||25||38||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  With Your Support, I survive in the Dark Age of Kali Yuga.<br>
  With Your Support, I sing Your Glorious Praises.<br>
  With Your Support, death cannot even touch me.<br>
  With Your Support, my entanglements vanish. ||1||<br>
  In this world and the next, I have Your Support.<br>
  The One Lord, our Lord and Master, is all-pervading. ||1||Pause||<br>
  With Your Support, I celebrate blissfully.<br>
  With Your Support, I chant the Guru's Mantra.<br>
  With Your Support, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  The Perfect Lord, our Protector and Savior, is the Ocean of Peace. ||2||<br>
  With Your Support, I have no fear.<br>
  The True Lord is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  With Your Support, my mind is filled with Your Power.<br>
  Here and there, You are my Court of Appeal. ||3||<br>
  I take Your Support, and place my faith in You.<br>
  All meditate on God, the Treasure of Virtue.<br>
  Chanting and meditating on You, Your slaves celebrate in bliss.<br>
  Nanak meditates in remembrance on the True Lord, the Treasure of Virtue. ||4||26||39||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  First, I gave up slandering others.<br>
  All the anxiety of my mind was dispelled.<br>
  Greed and attachment were totally banished.<br>
  I see God ever-present, close at hand; I have become a great devotee. ||1||<br>
  Such a renunciate is very rare.<br>
  Such a humble servant chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have forsaken my egotistical intellect.<br>
  The love of sexual desire and anger has vanished.<br>
  I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  In the Company of the Holy, I am emancipated. ||2||<br>
  Enemy and friend are all the same to me.<br>
  The Perfect Lord God is permeating all.<br>
  Accepting the Will of God, I have found peace.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has implanted the Name of the Lord within me. ||3||<br>
  That person, whom the Lord, in His Mercy, saves<br>
  - that devotee chants and meditates on the Naam.<br>
  That person, whose mind is illumined, and who obtains understanding through the Guru<br>
  - says Nanak, he is totally fulfilled. ||4||27||40||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  There is no peace in earning lots of money.<br>
  There is no peace in watching dances and plays.<br>
  There is no peace in conquering lots of countries.<br>
  All peace comes from singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  You shall obtain peace, poise and bliss,<br>
  when you find the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, by great good fortune. As Gurmukh, utter the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Mother, father, children and spouse - all place the mortal in bondage.<br>
  Religious rituals and actions done in ego place the mortal in bondage.<br>
  If the Lord, the Shatterer of bonds, abides in the mind,<br>
  then peace is obtained, dwelling in the home of the self deep within. ||2||<br>
  Everyone is a beggar; God is the Great Giver.<br>
  The Treasure of Virtue is the Infinite, Endless Lord.<br>
  That person, unto whom God grants His Mercy<br>
  - that humble being chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||<br>
  I offer my prayer to my Guru.<br>
  O Primal Lord God, Treasure of Virtue, please bless me with Your Grace.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have come to Your Sanctuary.<br>
  If it pleases You, please protect me, O Lord of the World. ||4||28||41||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, I have forsaken the love of duality.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 024</h2></center>
  As Gurmukh, I chant the Name of the Lord.<br>
  My anxiety is gone, and I am in love with the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  I was asleep for countless lifetimes, but I have now awakened. ||1||<br>
  Granting His Grace, He has linked me to His service.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all pleasures are found. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad has eradicated disease and evil.<br>
  My mind has absorbed the medicine of the Naam.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, my mind is in bliss.<br>
  All treasures are in the Name of the Lord God. ||2||<br>
  My fear of birth and death and the Messenger of Death has been dispelled.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the inverted lotus of my heart has blossomed forth.<br>
  Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I have found eternal, abiding peace.<br>
  All my tasks are perfectly accomplished. ||3||<br>
  This human body, so difficult to obtain, is approved by the Lord.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, it has become fruitful.<br>
  Says Nanak, God has blessed me with His Mercy.<br>
  With every breath and morsel of food, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||29||42||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  His Name is the Highest of all.<br>
  Sing His Glorious Praises, forever and ever.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on Him, all pain is dispelled.<br>
  All pleasures come to dwell in the mind. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, meditate in remembrance on the True Lord.<br>
  In this world and the next, you shall be saved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Immaculate Lord God is the Creator of all.<br>
  He gives sustenance to all beings and creatures.<br>
  He forgives millions of sins and mistakes in an instant.<br>
  Through loving devotional worship, one is emancipated forever. ||2||<br>
  True wealth and true glorious greatness,<br>
  and eternal, unchanging wisdom, are obtained from the Perfect Guru.<br>
  When the Protector, the Savior Lord, bestows His Mercy,<br>
  all spiritual darkness is dispelled. ||3||<br>
  I focus my meditation on the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  The Lord of Nirvaanaa is totally pervading and permeating all.<br>
  Eradicating doubt and fear, I have met the Lord of the World.<br>
  The Guru has become merciful to Nanak. ||4||30||43||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on Him, the mind is illumined.<br>
  Suffering is eradicated, and one comes to dwell in peace and poise.<br>
  They alone receive it, unto whom God gives it.<br>
  They are blessed to serve the Perfect Guru. ||1||<br>
  All peace and comfort are in Your Name, God.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, O my mind, sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You shall receive the fruits of your desires,<br>
  when the Name of the Lord comes to dwell in the mind.<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, your comings and goings cease.<br>
  Through loving devotional worship, lovingly focus your attention on God. ||2||<br>
  Sexual desire, anger and egotism are dispelled.<br>
  Love and attachment to Maya are broken.<br>
  Lean on God's Support, day and night.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God has given this gift. ||3||<br>
  Our Lord and Master is the Creator, the Cause of causes.<br>
  He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of all hearts.<br>
  Bless me with Your Grace, Lord, and link me to Your service.<br>
  Slave Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary. ||4||31||44||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who does not repeat the Naam, the Name of the Lord, shall die of shame.<br>
  Without the Name, how can he ever sleep in peace?<br>
  The mortal abandons meditative remembrance of the Lord, and then wishes for the state of supreme salvation;<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 025</h2></center>
  but without roots, how can there be any branches? ||1||<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Guru, the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  The filth of countless incarnations shall be washed away. Breaking your bonds, you shall be united with the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  How can a stone be purified by bathing at a sacred shrine of pilgrimage?<br>
  The filth of egotism clings to the mind.<br>
  Millions of rituals and actions taken are the root of entanglements.<br>
  Without meditating and vibrating on the Lord, the mortal gathers only worthless bundles of straw. ||2||<br>
  Without eating, hunger is not satisfied.<br>
  When the disease is cured, then the pain goes away.<br>
  The mortal is engrossed in sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment.<br>
  He does not meditate on God, that God who created him. ||3||<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the Holy Saint, and blessed is the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, sing the Kirtan, the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Blessed is the devotee of the Lord, and blessed is the Creator Lord.<br>
  Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, the Primal, the Infinite. ||4||32||45||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  When the Guru was totally pleased, my fear was taken away.<br>
  I enshrine the Name of the Immaculate Lord within my mind.<br>
  He is Merciful to the meek, forever Compassionate.<br>
  All my entanglements are finished. ||1||<br>
  I have found peace, poise, and myriads of pleasures.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, fear and doubt are dispelled. My tongue chants the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have fallen in love with the Lord's Lotus Feet.<br>
  In an instant, the terrible demons are destroyed.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate and chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  The Guru is Himself the Savior Lord, the Lord of the Universe. ||2||<br>
  He Himself cherishes His servant forever.<br>
  He watches over every breath of His humble devotee.<br>
  Tell me, what is the nature of human beings?<br>
  The Lord extends His Hand, and saves them from the Messenger of Death. ||3||<br>
  Immaculate is the Glory, and Immaculate is the way of life,<br>
  of those who remember the Supreme Lord God in their minds.<br>
  The Guru, in His Mercy, has granted this Gift.<br>
  Nanak has obtained the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||33||46||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My Guru is the All-powerful Lord, the Creator, the Cause of causes.<br>
  He is the Soul, the Breath of Life, the Giver of Peace, always near.<br>
  He is the Destroyer of fear, the Eternal, Unchanging, Sovereign Lord King.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all fear is dispelled. ||1||<br>
  Wherever I look, is the Protection of Your Sanctuary.<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Feet of the True Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My tasks are perfectly accomplished, meeting the Divine Guru.<br>
  He is the Giver of all rewards. Serving Him, I am immaculate.<br>
  He reaches out with His Hand to His slaves.<br>
  The Name of the Lord abides in their hearts. ||2||<br>
  They are forever in bliss, and do not suffer at all.<br>
  No pain, sorrow or disease afflicts them.<br>
  Everything is Yours, O Creator Lord.<br>
  The Guru is the Supreme Lord God, the Inaccessible and Infinite. ||3||<br>
  His Glorious Grandeur is immaculate, and the Bani of His Word is wonderful!<br>
  The Perfect Supreme Lord God is pleasing to my mind.<br>
  He is permeating the waters, the lands and the skies.<br>
  O Nanak, everything comes from God. ||4||34||47||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind and body are imbued with the Love of the Lord's Feet.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 026</h2></center>
  All the desires of my mind have been perfectly fulfilled.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I sing of the Lord God.<br>
  The True Guru has imparted this perfect wisdom. ||1||<br>
  Very fortunate are those who love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Associating with them, we cross over the world-ocean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They are spiritual teachers, who meditate in remembrance on the One Lord.<br>
  Wealthy are those who have a discriminating intellect.<br>
  Noble are those who remember their Lord and Master in meditation.<br>
  Honorable are those who understand their own selves. ||2||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status.<br>
  Day and night I meditate on the Glories of God.<br>
  My bonds are broken, and my hopes are fulfilled.<br>
  The Feet of the Lord now abide in my heart. ||3||<br>
  Says Nanak, one whose karma is perfect<br>
  - that humble being enters the Sanctuary of God.<br>
  He himself is pure, and he sanctifies all.<br>
  His tongue chants the Name of the Lord, the Source of Nectar. ||4||35||48||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Repeating the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no obstacles block the way.<br>
  Listening to the Naam, the Messenger of Death runs far away.<br>
  Repeating the Naam, all pains vanish.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, the Lord's Lotus Feet dwell within. ||1||<br>
  Meditating, vibrating the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is unobstructed devotional worship.<br>
  Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with loving affection and energy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the Eye of Death cannot see you.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, demons and ghosts shall not touch you.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, attachment and pride shall not bind you.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, you shall not be consigned to the womb of reincarnation. ||2||<br>
  Any time is a good time to meditate in remembrance on the Lord.<br>
  Among the masses, only a few meditate in remembrance on the Lord.<br>
  Social class or no social class, anyone may meditate on the Lord.<br>
  Whoever meditates on Him is emancipated. ||3||<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Perfect is the Love of the Lord's Name.<br>
  O God, shower Your Mercy on Nanak,<br>
  that he may think of you with each and every breath. ||4||36||49||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He Himself is the Shaastras, and He Himself is the Vedas.<br>
  He knows the secrets of each and every heart.<br>
  He is the Embodiment of Light; all beings belong to Him.<br>
  The Creator, the Cause of causes, the Perfect All-powerful Lord. ||1||<br>
  Grab hold of the Support of God, O my mind.<br>
  As Gurmukh, worship and adore His Lotus Feet; enemies and pains shall not even approach you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He Himself is the Essence of the forests and fields, and all the three worlds.<br>
  The universe is strung on His Thread.<br>
  He is the Uniter of Shiva and Shakti - mind and matter.<br>
  He Himself is in the detachment of Nirvaanaa, and He Himself is the Enjoyer. ||2||<br>
  Wherever I look, there He is.<br>
  Without Him, there is no one at all.<br>
  In the Love of the Naam, the world-ocean is crossed.<br>
  Nanak sings His Glorious Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||3||<br>
  Liberation, the ways and means of enjoyment and union are under His Control.<br>
  His humble servant lacks nothing.<br>
  That person, with whom the Lord, in His Mercy, is pleased<br>
  - O slave Nanak, that humble servant is blessed. ||4||37||50||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The minds of the Lord's devotee are filled with bliss.<br>
  They become stable and permanent, and all their anxiety is gone.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 027</h2></center>
  Their fears and doubts are dispelled in an instant.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God comes to dwell in their minds. ||1||<br>
  The Lord is forever the Help and Support of the Saints.<br>
  Inside the home of the heart, and outside as well, the Transcendent Lord is always with us, permeating and pervading all places. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord of the World is my wealth, property, youth and ways and means.<br>
  He continually cherishes and brings peace to my soul and breath of life.<br>
  He reaches out with His Hand and saves His slave.<br>
  He does not abandon us, even for an instant; He is always with us. ||2||<br>
  There is no other Beloved like the Lord.<br>
  The True Lord takes care of all.<br>
  The Lord is our Mother, Father, Son and Relation.<br>
  Since the beginning of time, and throughout the ages, His devotees sing His Glorious Praises. ||3||<br>
  My mind is filled with the Support and the Power of the Lord.<br>
  Without the Lord, there is no other at all.<br>
  Nanak's mind is encouraged by this hope,<br>
  that God will accomplish my objectives in life. ||4||38||51||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Fear itself becomes afraid, when the mortal remembers the Lord's Name in meditation.<br>
  All the diseases of the three gunas - the three qualities - are cured, and tasks of the Lord's slaves are perfectly accomplished. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The people of the Lord always sing His Glorious Praises; they attain His Perfect Mansion.<br>
  Even the Righteous Judge of Dharma and the Messenger of Death yearn, day and night, to be sanctified by the Blessed Vision of the Lord's humble servant. ||1||<br>
  Sexual desire, anger, intoxication, egotism, slander and egotistical pride are eradicted in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  By great good fortune, such Saints are met. Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. ||2||39||52||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who harbors the five thieves, becomes the embodiment of these five.<br>
  He gets up each day and tells lies.<br>
  He applies ceremonial religious marks to his body, but practices hypocrisy.<br>
  He wastes away in sadness and pain, like a lonely widow. ||1||<br>
  Without the Name of the Lord, everything is false.<br>
  Without the Perfect Guru, liberation is not obtained. In the Court of the True Lord, the faithless cynic is plundered. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One who does not know the Lord's Creative Power is polluted.<br>
  Ritualistically plastering one's kitchen square does not make it pure in the Eyes of the Lord.<br>
  If a person is polluted within, he may wash himself everyday on the outside,<br>
  but in the Court of the True Lord, he forfeits his honor. ||2||<br>
  He works for the sake of Maya,<br>
  but he never places his feet on the right path.<br>
  He never even remembers the One who created him.<br>
  He speaks falsehood, only falsehood, with his mouth. ||3||<br>
  That person, unto whom the Creator Lord shows Mercy,<br>
  deals with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  One who lovingly worships the Lord's Name,<br>
  says Nanak - no obstacles ever block his way. ||4||40||53||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The entire universe curses the slanderer.<br>
  False are the dealings of the slanderer.<br>
  The slanderer's lifestyle is filthy and polluted.<br>
  The Lord is the Saving Grace and the Protector of His slave. ||1||<br>
  The slanderer dies with the rest of the slanderers.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, protects and saves His humble servant. Death roars and thunders over the head of the slanderer. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 028</h2></center>
  No one belives what the slanderer says.<br>
  The slanderer tells lies, and later regrets and repents.<br>
  He wrings his hands, and hits his head against the ground.<br>
  The Lord does not forgive the slanderer. ||2||<br>
  The Lord's slave does not wish anyone ill.<br>
  The slanderer suffers, as if stabbed by a spear.<br>
  Like a crane, he spreads his feathers, to look like a swan.<br>
  When he speaks with his mouth, then he is exposed and driven out. ||3||<br>
  The Creator is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  That person, whom the Lord makes His Own, becomes stable and steady.<br>
  The Lord's slave is true in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Servant Nanak speaks, after contemplating the essence of reality. ||4||41||54||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  With my palms pressed together, I offer this prayer.<br>
  My soul, body and wealth are His property.<br>
  He is the Creator, my Lord and Master.<br>
  Millions of times, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||1||<br>
  The dust of the feet of the Holy brings purity.<br>
  Remembering God in meditation, the mind's corruption is eradicated, and the filth of countless incarnations is washed away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All treasures are in His household.<br>
  Serving Him, the mortal attains honor.<br>
  He is the Fulfiller of the mind's desires.<br>
  He is the Support of the soul and the breath of life of His devotees. ||2||<br>
  His Light shines in each and every heart.<br>
  Chanting and meditating on God, the Treasure of Virtue, His devotees live.<br>
  Service to Him does not go in vain.<br>
  Deep within your mind and body, meditate on the One Lord. ||3||<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, compassion and contentment are found.<br>
  This Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the immaculate object.<br>
  Please grant Your Grace, O Lord, and attach me to the hem of Your robe.<br>
  Nanak meditates continually on the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||4||42||55||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The True Guru has listened to my prayer.<br>
  All my affairs have been resolved.<br>
  Deep within my mind and body, I meditate on God.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has dispelled all my fears. ||1||<br>
  The All-powerful Divine Guru is the Greatest of all.<br>
  Serving Him, I obtain all comforts. ||Pause||<br>
  Everything is done by Him.<br>
  No one can erase His Eternal Decree.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, is incomparably beautiful.<br>
  The Guru is the Image of Fulfillment, the Embodiment of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  The Name of the Lord abides deep within him.<br>
  Wherever he looks, he sees the Wisdom of God.<br>
  His mind is totally enlightened and illuminated.<br>
  Within that person, the Supreme Lord God abides. ||3||<br>
  I humbly bow to that Guru forever.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru.<br>
  I wash the feet of the Guru, and drink in this water.<br>
  Chanting and meditating forever on Guru Nanak, I live. ||4||43||56||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 029</h2></center>
  Raag Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  God is the Compassionate Cherisher. Who can count His Glorious Virtues?<br>
  Countless colors, and countless waves of joy; He is the Master of all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Endless spiritual wisdom, endless meditations, endless chants, intense meditations and austere self-disciplines.<br>
  Countless virtues, musical notes and playful sports; countless silent sages enshrine Him in their hearts. ||1||<br>
  Countless melodies, countless instruments, countless tastes, each and every instant. Countless mistakes and countless diseases are removed by hearing His Praise.<br>
  O Nanak, serving the Infinite, Divine Lord, one earns all the rewards and merits of performing the six rituals, fasts, worship services, pilgrimages to sacred rivers, and journeys to sacred shrines. ||2||1||57||8||21||7||57||93||<br>
  Bhairao, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Lord is in the soul, and the soul is in the Lord. This is realized through the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  The Ambrosial Word of the Guru's Bani is realized through the Word of the Shabad. Sorrow is dispelled, and egotism is eliminated. ||1||<br>
  O Nanak, the disease of egotism is so very deadly.<br>
  Wherever I look, I see the pain of the same disease. The Primal Lord Himself bestows the Shabad of His Word. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When the Appraiser Himself appraises the mortal, then he is not tested again.<br>
  Those who are blessed with His Grace meet with the Guru. They alone are true, who are pleasing to God. ||2||<br>
  Air, water and fire are diseased; the world with its enjoyments is diseased.<br>
  Mother, father, Maya and the body are diseased; those united with their relatives are diseased. ||3||<br>
  Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are diseased; the whole world is diseased.<br>
  Those who remember the Lord's Feet and contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad are liberated. ||4||<br>
  The seven seas are diseased, along with the rivers; the continents and the nether regions of the underworlds are full of disease.<br>
  The people of the Lord dwell in Truth and peace; He blesses them with His Grace everywhere. ||5||<br>
  The six Shaastras are diseased, as are the many who follow the different religious orders.<br>
  What can the poor Vedas and Bibles do? People do not understand the One and Only Lord. ||6||<br>
  Eating sweet treats, the mortal is filled with disease; he finds no peace at all.<br>
  Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they walk on other paths, and at the very last moment, they regret and repent. ||7||<br>
  Wandering around at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, the mortal is not cured of his disease. Reading scripture, he gets involved in useless arguments.<br>
  The disease of duality is so very deadly; it causes dependence on Maya. ||8||<br>
  One who becomes Gurmukh and praises the True Shabad with the True Lord in his mind is cured of his disease.<br>
  O Nanak, the humble servant of the Lord is immaculate, night and day; he bears the insignia of the Lord's Grace. ||9||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 030</h2></center>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Creator has staged His Wondrous Play.<br>
  I listen to the Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, and the Bani of His Word.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are deluded and confused, while the Gurmukhs understand.<br>
  The Creator creates the Cause that causes. ||1||<br>
  Deep within my being, I meditate on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  I shall never forsake the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Prahlaad's father sent him to school, to learn to read.<br>
  He took his writing tablet and went to the teacher.<br>
  He said, "I shall not read anything except the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Write the Lord's Name on my tablet."||2||<br>
  Prahlaad's mother said to her son,<br>
  "I advise you not to read anything except what you are taught."<br>
  He answered, "The Great Giver, my Fearless Lord God is always with me.<br>
  If I were to forsake the Lord, then my family would be disgraced."||3||<br>
  "Prahlaad has corrupted all the other students.<br>
  He does not listen to what I say, and he does his own thing.<br>
  He instigated devotional worship in the townspeople."<br>
  The gathering of the wicked people could not do anything against him. ||4||<br>
  Sanda and Marka, his teachers, made the complaint.<br>
  All the demons kept trying in vain.<br>
  The Lord protected His humble devotee, and preserved his honor.<br>
  What can be done by mere created beings? ||5||<br>
  Because of his past karma, the demon ruled over his kingdom.<br>
  He did not realize the Lord; the Lord Himself confused him.<br>
  He started an argument with his son Prahlaad.<br>
  The blind one did not understand that his death was approaching. ||6||<br>
  Prahlaad was placed in a cell, and the door was locked.<br>
  The fearless child was not afraid at all. He said, "Within my being, is the Guru, the Lord of the World."<br>
  The created being tried to compete with his Creator, but he assumed this name in vain.<br>
  That which was predestined for him has come to pass; he started an argument with the Lord's humble servant. ||7||<br>
  The father raised the club to strike down Prahlaad, saying,<br>
  "Where is your God, the Lord of the Universe, now?"<br>
  He replied, "The Life of the World, the Great Giver, is my Help and Support in the end.<br>
  Wherever I look, I see Him permeating and prevailing."||8||<br>
  Tearing down the pillars, the Lord Himself appeared.<br>
  The egotistical demon was killed and destroyed.<br>
  The minds of the devotees were filled with bliss, and congratulations poured in.<br>
  He blessed His servant with glorious greatness. ||9||<br>
  He created birth, death and attachment.<br>
  The Creator has ordained coming and going in reincarnation.<br>
  For the sake of Prahlaad, the Lord Himself appeared.<br>
  The word of the devotee came true. ||10||<br>
  The gods proclaimed the victory of Lakshmi, and said,<br>
  "O mother, make this form of the Man-lion disappear!"<br>
  Lakshmi was afraid, and did not approach.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 031</h2></center>
  The humble servant Prahlaad came and fell at the Lord's Feet. ||11||<br>
  The True Guru implanted the treasure of the Naam within.<br>
  Power, property and all Maya is false.<br>
  But still, the greedy people continue clinging to them.<br>
  Without the Name of the Lord, the mortals are punished in His Court. ||12||<br>
  Says Nanak, everyone acts as the Lord makes them act.<br>
  They alone are approved and accepted, who focus their consciousness on the Lord.<br>
  He has made His devotees His Own.<br>
  The Creator has appeared in His Own Form. ||13||1||2||<br>
  Bhairao, Third Mehl:<br>
  Serving the Guru, I obtain the Ambrosial Fruit; my egotism and desire have been quenched.<br>
  The Name of the Lord dwells within my heart and mind, and the desires of my mind are quieted. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord, my Beloved, please bless me with Your Mercy.<br>
  Night and day, Your humble servant begs for Your Glorious Praises; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is saved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Messenger of Death cannot even touch the humble Saints; it does not cause them even an iota of suffering or pain.<br>
  Those who enter Your Sanctuary, Lord, save themselves, and save all their ancestors as well. ||2||<br>
  You Yourself save the honor of Your devotees; this is Your Glory, O Lord.<br>
  You cleanse them of the sins and the pains of countless incarnations; You love them without even an iota of duality. ||3||<br>
  I am foolish and ignorant, and understand nothing. You Yourself bless me with understanding.<br>
  You do whatever You please; nothing else can be done at all. ||4||<br>
  Creating the world, You have linked all to their tasks - even the evil deeds which men do.<br>
  They lose this precious human life in the gamble, and do not understand the Word of the Shabad. ||5||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs die, understanding nothing; they are enveloped by the darkness of evil-mindedness and ignorance.<br>
  They do not cross over the terrible world-ocean; without the Guru, they drown and die. ||6||<br>
  True are those humble beings who are imbued with the True Shabad; the Lord God unites them with Himself.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Bani, they come to understand the Shabad. They remain lovingly focused on the True Lord. ||7||<br>
  You Yourself are Immaculate and Pure, and pure are Your humble servants who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those, who enshrine the Lord's Name within their hearts. ||8||2||3||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  He alone is a great king, who keeps the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within his heart.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart - his tasks are perfectly accomplished.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart, obtains millions of treasures.<br>
  Without the Naam, life is useless. ||1||<br>
  I praise that person, who has the capital of the Lord's Wealth.<br>
  He is very fortunate, on whose forehead the Guru has placed His Hand. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart, has many millions of armies on his side.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart, enjoys peace and poise.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 032</h2></center>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart becomes cool and calm.<br>
  Without the Naam, both life and death are cursed. ||2||<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart is Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart knows all ways and means.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart obtains the nine treasures.<br>
  Without the Naam, the mortal wanders, coming and going in reincarnation. ||3||<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart is carefree and independent.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart always earns a profit.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart has a large family.<br>
  Without the Naam, the mortal is just an ignorant, self-willed manmukh. ||4||<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart has a permanent position.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart is seated on the throne.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart is the true king.<br>
  Without the Naam, no one has any honor or respect. ||5||<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart is famous everywhere.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart is the Embodiment of the Creator Lord.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart is the highest of all.<br>
  Without the Naam, the mortal wanders in reincarnation. ||6||<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart sees the Lord manifested in His Creation.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart - his darkness is dispelled.<br>
  One who keeps the Naam in his heart is approved and accepted.<br>
  Without the Naam, the mortal continues coming and going in reincarnation. ||7||<br>
  He alone receives the Naam, who is blessed by the Lord's Mercy.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord of the World is understood.<br>
  Coming and going in reincarnation ends, and peace is found.<br>
  Says Nanak, my essence has merged in the Essence of the Lord. ||8||1||4||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He created millions of incarnations of Vishnu.<br>
  He created millions of universes as places to practice righteousness.<br>
  He created and destroyed millions of Shivas.<br>
  He employed millions of Brahmas to create the worlds. ||1||<br>
  Such is my Lord and Master, the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  I cannot even describe His Many Virtues. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Millions of Mayas are His maid-servants.<br>
  Millions of souls are His beds.<br>
  Millions of universes are the limbs of His Being.<br>
  Millions of devotees abide with the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Millions of kings with their crowns and canopies bow before Him.<br>
  Millions of Indras stand at His Door.<br>
  Millions of heavenly paradises are within the scope of His Vision.<br>
  Millions of His Names cannot even be appraised. ||3||<br>
  Millions of celestial sounds resound for Him.<br>
  His Wondrous Plays are enacted on millions of stages.<br>
  Millions of Shaktis and Shivas are obedient to Him.<br>
  He gives sustenance and support to millions of beings. ||4||<br>
  In His Feet are millions of sacred shrines of pilgrimage.<br>
  Millions chant His Sacred and Beautiful Name.<br>
  Millions of worshippers worship Him.<br>
  Millions of expanses are His; there is no other at all. ||5||<br>
  Millions of swan-souls sing His Immaculate Praises.<br>
  Millions of Brahma's sons sing His Praises.<br>
  He creates and destroys millions, in an instant.<br>
  Millions are Your Virtues, Lord - they cannot even be counted. ||6||<br>
  Millions of spiritual teachers teach His spiritual wisdom.<br>
  Millions of meditators focus on His meditation.<br>
  Millions of austere penitents practice austerities.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 033</h2></center>
  Millions of silent sages dwell in silence. ||7||<br>
  Our Eternal, Imperishable, Incomprehensible Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is permeating all hearts.<br>
  Wherever I look, I see Your Dwelling, O Lord.<br>
  The Guru has blessed Nanak with enlightenment. ||8||2||5||<br>
  Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The True Guru has blessed me with this gift.<br>
  He has given me the Priceless Jewel of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Now, I intuitively enjoy endless pleasures and wondrous play.<br>
  God has spontaneously met with Nanak. ||1||<br>
  Says Nanak, True is the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise.<br>
  Again and again, my mind remains immersed in it. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Spontaneously, I feed on the Love of God.<br>
  Spontaneously, I take God's Name.<br>
  Spontaneously, I am saved by the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Spontaneously, my treasures are filled to overflowing. ||2||<br>
  Spontaneously, my works are perfectly accomplished.<br>
  Spontaneously, I am rid of sorrow.<br>
  Spontaneously, my enemies have become friends.<br>
  Spontaneously, I have brought my mind under control. ||3||<br>
  Spontaneously, God has comforted me.<br>
  Spontaneously, my hopes have been fulfilled.<br>
  Spontaneously, I have totally realized the essence of reality.<br>
  Spontaneously, I have been blessed with the Guru's Mantra. ||4||<br>
  Spontaneously, I am rid of hatred.<br>
  Spontaneously, my darkness has been dispelled.<br>
  Spontaneously, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise seems so sweet to my mind.<br>
  Spontaneously, I behold God in each and every heart. ||5||<br>
  Spontaneously, all my doubts have been dispelled.<br>
  Spontaneously, peace and celestial harmony fill my mind.<br>
  Spontaneously, the Unstruck Melody of the Sound-current resounds within me.<br>
  Spontaneously, the Lord of the Universe has revealed Himself to me. ||6||<br>
  Spontaneously, my mind has been pleased and appeased.<br>
  I have spontaneously realized the Eternal, Unchanging Lord.<br>
  Spontaneously, all wisdom and knowledge has welled up within me.<br>
  Spontaneously, the Support of the Lord, Har, Har, has come into my hands. ||7||<br>
  Spontaneously, God has recorded my pre-ordained destiny.<br>
  Spontaneously, the One Lord and Master God has met me.<br>
  Spontaneously, all my cares and worries have been taken away.<br>
  Nanak, Nanak, Nanak, has merged into the Image of God. ||8||3||6||<br>
  Bhairao, The Word Of The Devotees, Kabeer Jee, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Name of the Lord - this alone is my wealth.<br>
  I do not tie it up to hide it, nor do I sell it to make my living. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Name is my crop, and the Name is my field.<br>
  As Your humble servant, I perform devotional worship to You; I seek Your Sanctuary. ||1||<br>
  The Name is Maya and wealth for me; the Name is my capital.<br>
  I do not forsake You; I do not know any other at all. ||2||<br>
  The Name is my family, the Name is my brother.<br>
  The Name is my companion, who will help me in the end. ||3||<br>
  One whom the Lord keeps detached from Maya<br>
  - says Kabeer, I am his slave. ||4||1||<br>
  Naked we come, and naked we go.<br>
  No one, not even the kings and queens, shall remain. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 034</h2></center>
  The Sovereign Lord is the nine treasures for me.<br>
  The possessions and the spouse to which the mortal is lovingly attached, are Your wealth, O Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They do not come with the mortal, and they do not go with him.<br>
  What good does it do him, if he has elephants tied up at his doorway? ||2||<br>
  The fortress of Sri Lanka was made out of gold,<br>
  but what could the foolish Raawan take with him when he left? ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, think of doing some good deeds.<br>
  In the end, the gambler shall depart empty-handed. ||4||2||<br>
  Brahma is polluted, and Indra is polluted.<br>
  The sun is polluted, and the moon is polluted. ||1||<br>
  This world is polluted with pollution.<br>
  Only the One Lord is Immaculate; He has no end or limitation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The rulers of kingdoms are polluted.<br>
  Nights and days, and the days of the month are polluted. ||2||<br>
  The pearl is polluted, the diamond is polluted.<br>
  Wind, fire and water are polluted. ||3||<br>
  Shiva, Shankara and Mahaysh are polluted.<br>
  The Siddhas, seekers and strivers, and those who wear religious robes, are polluted. ||4||<br>
  The Yogis and wandering hermits with their matted hair are polluted.<br>
  The body, along with the swan-soul, is polluted. ||5||<br>
  Says Kabeer, those humble beings are approved and pure, who know the Lord. ||6||3||<br>
  Let your mind be Mecca, and your body the temple of worship.<br>
  Let the Supreme Guru be the One who speaks. ||1||<br>
  O Mullah, utter the call to prayer.<br>
  The one mosque has ten doors. ||1||Pause||<br>
  So slaughter your evil nature, doubt and cruelty;<br>
  consume the five demons and you shall be blessed with contentment. ||2||<br>
  Hindus and Muslims have the same One Lord and Master.<br>
  What can the Mullah do, and what can the Shaykh do? ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, I have gone insane.<br>
  Slaughtering, slaughtering my mind, I have merged into the Celestial Lord. ||4||4||<br>
  When the stream flows into the Ganges, then it becomes the Ganges. ||1||<br>
  Just so, Kabeer has changed.<br>
  He has become the Embodiment of Truth, and he does not go anywhere else. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Associating with the sandalwood tree, the tree nearby is changed;<br>
  that tree begins to smell just like the sandalwood tree. ||2||<br>
  Coming into contact with the philosophers' stone, copper is transformed;<br>
  that copper is transformed into gold. ||3||<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, Kabeer is transformed;<br>
  that Kabeer is transformed into the Lord. ||4||5||<br>
  Some apply ceremonial marks to their foreheads, hold malas in their hands, and wear religious robes.<br>
  Some people think that the Lord is a play-thing. ||1||<br>
  If I am insane, then I am Yours, O Lord.<br>
  How can people know my secret? ||1||Pause||<br>
  I do not pick leaves as offerings, and I do not worship idols.<br>
  Without devotional worship of the Lord, service is useless. ||2||<br>
  I worship the True Guru; forever and ever, I surrender to Him.<br>
  By such service, I find peace in the Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  People say that Kabeer has gone insane.<br>
  Only the Lord realizes the secret of Kabeer. ||4||6||<br>
  Turning away from the world, I have forgotten both my social class and ancestry.<br>
  My weaving now is in the most profound celestial stillness. ||1||<br>
  I have no quarrel with anyone.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 035</h2></center>
  I have abandoned both the Pandits, the Hindu religious scholars, and the Mullahs, the Muslim priests. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I weave and weave, and wear what I weave.<br>
  Where egotism does not exist, there I sing God's Praises. ||2||<br>
  Whatever the Pandits and Mullahs have written,<br>
  I reject; I do not accept any of it. ||3||<br>
  My heart is pure, and so I have seen the Lord within.<br>
  Searching, searching within the self, Kabeer has met the Lord. ||4||7||<br>
  No one respects the poor man.<br>
  He may make thousands of efforts, but no one pays any attention to him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When the poor man goes to the rich man,<br>
  and sits right in front of him, the rich man turns his back on him. ||1||<br>
  But when the rich man goes to the poor man,<br>
  the poor man welcomes him with respect. ||2||<br>
  The poor man and the rich man are both brothers.<br>
  God's pre-ordained plan cannot be erased. ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, he alone is poor,<br>
  who does not have the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in his heart. ||4||8||<br>
  Serving the Guru, devotional worship is practiced.<br>
  Then, this human body is obtained.<br>
  Even the gods long for this human body.<br>
  So vibrate that human body, and think of serving the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Vibrate, and meditate on the Lord of the Universe, and never forget Him.<br>
  This is the blessed opportunity of this human incarnation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  As long as the disease of old age has not come to the body,<br>
  and as long as death has not come and seized the body,<br>
  and as long as your voice has not lost its power,<br>
  O mortal being, vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the World. ||2||<br>
  If you do not vibrate and meditate on Him now, when will you, O Sibing of Destiny?<br>
  When the end comes, you will not be able to vibrate and meditate on Him.<br>
  Whatever you have to do - now is the best time to do it.<br>
  Otherwise, you shall regret and repent afterwards, and you shall not be carried across to the other side. ||3||<br>
  He alone is a servant, whom the Lord enjoins to His service.<br>
  He alone attains the Immaculate Divine Lord.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, his doors are opened wide,<br>
  and he does not have to journey again on the path of reincarnation. ||4||<br>
  This is your chance, and this is your time.<br>
  Look deep into your own heart, and reflect on this.<br>
  Says Kabeer, you can win or lose.<br>
  In so many ways, I have proclaimed this out loud. ||5||1||9||<br>
  In the City of God, sublime understanding prevails.<br>
  There, you shall meet with the Lord, and reflect on Him.<br>
  Thus, you shall understand this world and the next.<br>
  What is the use of claiming that you own everything, if you only die in the end? ||1||<br>
  I focus my meditation on my inner self, deep within.<br>
  The Name of the Sovereign Lord is my spiritual wisdom. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the first chakra, the root chakra, I have grasped the reins and tied them.<br>
  I have firmly placed the moon above the sun.<br>
  The sun blazes forth at the western gate.<br>
  Through the central channel of the Shushmanaa, it rises up above my head. ||2||<br>
  There is a stone at that western gate,<br>
  and above that stone, is another window.<br>
  Above that window is the Tenth Gate.<br>
  Says Kabeer, it has no end or limitation. ||3||2||10||<br>
  He alone is a Mullah, who struggles with his mind,<br>
  and through the Guru's Teachings, fights with death.<br>
  He crushes the pride of the Messenger of Death.<br>
  Unto that Mullah, I ever offer greetings of respect. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 036</h2></center>
  God is present, right here at hand; why do you say that He is far away?<br>
  Tie up your disturbing passions, and find the Beauteous Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He alone is a Qazi, who contemplates the human body,<br>
  and through the fire of the body, is illumined by God.<br>
  He does not lose his semen, even in his dreams;<br>
  for such a Qazi, there is no old age or death. ||2||<br>
  He alone is a sultan and a king, who shoots the two arrows,<br>
  gathers in his outgoing mind,<br>
  and assembles his army in the realm of the mind's sky, the Tenth Gate.<br>
  The canopy of royalty waves over such a sultan. ||3||<br>
  The Yogi cries out, "Gorakh, Gorakh".<br>
  The Hindu utters the Name of Raam.<br>
  The Muslim has only One God.<br>
  The Lord and Master of Kabeer is all-pervading. ||4||3||11||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Those who call a stone their god<br>
  - their service is useless.<br>
  Those who fall at the feet of a stone god<br>
  - their work is wasted in vain. ||1||<br>
  My Lord and Master speaks forever.<br>
  God gives His gifts to all living beings. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Divine Lord is within the self, but the spiritually blind one does not know this.<br>
  Deluded by doubt, he is caught in the noose.<br>
  The stone does not speak; it does not give anything to anyone.<br>
  Such religious rituals are useless; such service is fruitless. ||2||<br>
  If a corpse is anointed with sandalwood oil,<br>
  what good does it do?<br>
  If a corpse is rolled in manure,<br>
  what does it lose from this? ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, I proclaim this out loud<br>
  - behold, and understand, you ignorant, faithless cynic.<br>
  The love of duality has ruined countless homes.<br>
  The Lord's devotees are forever in bliss. ||4||4||12||<br>
  The fish in the water is attached to Maya.<br>
  The moth fluttering around the lamp is pierced through by Maya.<br>
  The sexual desire of Maya afflicts the elephant.<br>
  The snakes and bumble bees are destroyed through Maya. ||1||<br>
  Such are the enticements of Maya, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  As many living beings are there are, have been deceived. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The birds and the deer are imbued with Maya.<br>
  Sugar is a deadly trap for the flies.<br>
  Horses and camels are absorbed in Maya.<br>
  The eighty-four Siddhas, the beings of miraculous spiritual powers, play in Maya. ||2||<br>
  The six celibates are slaves of Maya.<br>
  So are the nine masters of Yoga, and the sun and the moon.<br>
  The austere disciplinarians and the Rishis are asleep in Maya.<br>
  Death and the five demons are in Maya. ||3||<br>
  Dogs and jackals are imbued with Maya.<br>
  Monkeys, leopards and lions,<br>
  cats, sheep, foxes,<br>
  trees and roots are planted in Maya. ||4||<br>
  Even the gods are drenched with Maya,<br>
  as are the oceans, the sky and the earth.<br>
  Says Kabeer, whoever has a belly to fill, is under the spell of Maya.<br>
  The mortal is emancipated only when he meets the Holy Saint. ||5||5||13||<br>
  As long as he cries out, "Mine! Mine!",<br>
  none of his tasks is accomplished.<br>
  When such possessiveness is erased and removed,<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 037</h2></center>
  then God comes and resolves his affairs. ||1||<br>
  Contemplate such spiritual wisdom, O mortal man.<br>
  Why not meditate in remembrance on the Lord, the Destroyer of pain? ||1||Pause||<br>
  As long as the tiger lives in the forest,<br>
  the forest does not flower.<br>
  But when the jackal eats the tiger,<br>
  then the entire forest flowers. ||2||<br>
  The victorious are drowned, while the defeated swim across.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, one crosses over and is saved.<br>
  Slave Kabeer speaks and teaches:<br>
  remain lovingly absorbed, attuned to the Lord alone. ||3||6||14||<br>
  He has 7,000 commanders,<br>
  and hundreds of thousands of prophets;<br>
  He is said to have 88,000,000 shaykhs,<br>
  and 56,000,000 attendants. ||1||<br>
  I am meek and poor - what chance do I have of being heard there?<br>
  His Court is so far away; only a rare few attain the Mansion of His Presence. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He has 33,000,000 play-houses.<br>
  His beings wander insanely through 8.4 million incarnations.<br>
  He bestowed His Grace on Adam, the father of mankind,<br>
  who then lived in paradise for a long time. ||2||<br>
  Pale are the faces of those whose hearts are disturbed.<br>
  They have forsaken their Bible, and practice Satanic evil.<br>
  One who blames the world, and is angry with people,<br>
  shall receive the fruits of his own actions. ||3||<br>
  You are the Great Giver, O Lord; I am forever a beggar at Your Door.<br>
  If I were to deny You, then I would be a wretched sinner.<br>
  Slave Kabeer has entered Your Shelter.<br>
  Keep me near You, O Merciful Lord God - that is heaven for me. ||4||7||15||<br>
  Everyone speaks of going there,<br>
  but I do not even know where heaven is. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One who does not even know the mystery of his own self,<br>
  speaks of heaven, but it is only talk. ||1||<br>
  As long as the mortal hopes for heaven,<br>
  he will not dwell at the Lord's Feet. ||2||<br>
  Heaven is not a fort with moats and ramparts, and walls plastered with mud;<br>
  I do not know what heaven's gate is like. ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, now what more can I say?<br>
  The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is heaven itself. ||4||8||16||<br>
  How can the beautiful fortress be conquered, O Siblings of Destiny?<br>
  It has double walls and triple moats. ||1||Pause||<br>
  It is defended by the five elements, the twenty-five categories, attachment, pride, jealousy and the awesomely powerful Maya.<br>
  The poor mortal being does not have the strength to conquer it; what should I do now, O Lord? ||1||<br>
  Sexual desire is the window, pain and pleasure are the gate-keepers, virtue and sin are the gates.<br>
  Anger is the great supreme commander, full of argument and strife, and the mind is the rebel king there. ||2||<br>
  Their armor is the pleasure of tastes and flavors, their helmets are worldly attachments; they take aim with their bows of corrupt intellect.<br>
  The greed that fills their hearts is the arrow; with these things, their fortress is impregnable. ||3||<br>
  But I have made divine love the fuse, and deep meditation the bomb; I have launched the rocket of spiritual wisdom.<br>
  The fire of God is lit by intuition, and with one shot, the fortress is taken. ||4||<br>
  Taking truth and contentment with me, I begin the battle and storm both the gates.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and by Guru's Grace, I have captured the king of the fortress. ||5||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 038</h2></center>
  With the army of God's devotees, and Shakti, the power of meditation, I have snapped the noose of the fear of death.<br>
  Slave Kabeer has climbed to the top of the fortress; I have obtained the eternal, imperishable domain. ||6||9||17||<br>
  The mother Ganges is deep and profound.<br>
  Tied up in chains, they took Kabeer there. ||1||<br>
  My mind was not shaken; why should my body be afraid?<br>
  My consciousness remained immersed in the Lotus Feet of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The waves of the Ganges broke the chains,<br>
  and Kabeer was seated on a deer skin. ||2||<br>
  Says Kabeer, I have no friend or companion.<br>
  On the water, and on the land, the Lord is my Protector. ||3||10||18||<br>
  Bhairao, Kabeer Jee, Ashtapadees, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  God constructed a fortress, inaccessible and unreachable, in which He dwells.<br>
  There, His Divine Light radiates forth.<br>
  Lightning blazes, and bliss prevails there,<br>
  where the Eternally Young Lord God abides. ||1||<br>
  This soul is lovingly attuned to the Lord's Name.<br>
  It is saved from old age and death, and its doubt runs away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who believe in high and low social classes,<br>
  only sing songs and chants of egotism.<br>
  The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, the Word of God, resounds in that place,<br>
  where the Supreme Lord God abides. ||2||<br>
  He creates planets, solar systems and galaxies;<br>
  He destroys the three worlds, the three gods and the three qualities.<br>
  The Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord God dwells in the heart.<br>
  No one can find the limits or the secrets of the Lord of the World. ||3||<br>
  The Lord shines forth in the plantain flower and the sunshine.<br>
  He dwells in the pollen of the lotus flower.<br>
  The Lord's secret is within the twelve petals of the heart-lotus.<br>
  The Supreme Lord, the Lord of Lakshmi dwells there. ||4||<br>
  He is like the sky, stretching across the lower, upper and middle realms.<br>
  In the profoundly silent celestial realm, He radiates forth.<br>
  Neither the sun nor the moon are there,<br>
  but the Primal Immaculate Lord celebrates there. ||5||<br>
  Know that He is in the universe, and in the body as well.<br>
  Take your cleansing bath in the Mansarovar Lake.<br>
  Chant "Sohang" - "He is me."<br>
  He is not affected by either virtue or vice. ||6||<br>
  He is not affected by either high or low social class, sunshine or shade.<br>
  He is in the Guru's Sanctuary, and nowhere else.<br>
  He is not diverted by diversions, comings or goings.<br>
  Remain intuitively absorbed in the celestial void. ||7||<br>
  One who knows the Lord in the mind<br>
  - whatever he says, comes to pass.<br>
  One who firmly implants the Lord's Divine Light, and His Mantra within the mind<br>
  - says Kabeer, such a mortal crosses over to the other side. ||8||1||<br>
  Millions of suns shine for Him,<br>
  millions of Shivas and Kailash mountains.<br>
  Millions of Durga goddesses massage His Feet.<br>
  Millions of Brahmas chant the Vedas for Him. ||1||<br>
  When I beg, I beg only from the Lord.<br>
  I have nothing to do with any other deities. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Millions of moons twinkle in the sky.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 039</h2></center>
  Three hundred thirty million gods eat the Lord's offerings.<br>
  The nine stars, a million times over, stand at His Door.<br>
  Millions of Righteous Judges of Dharma are His gate-keepers. ||2||<br>
  Millions of winds blow around Him in the four directions.<br>
  Millions of serpents prepare His bed.<br>
  Millions of oceans are His water-carriers.<br>
  The eighteen million loads of vegetation are His Hair. ||3||<br>
  Millions of treasurers fill His Treasury.<br>
  Millions of Lakshmis adorn themselves for Him.<br>
  Many millions of vices and virtues look up to Him.<br>
  Millions of Indras serve Him. ||4||<br>
  Fifty-six million clouds are His.<br>
  In each and every village, His infinite fame has spread.<br>
  Wild demons with dishevelled hair move about.<br>
  The Lord plays in countless ways. ||5||<br>
  Millions of charitable feasts are held in His Court,<br>
  and millions of celestial singers celebrate His victory.<br>
  Millions of sciences all sing His Praises.<br>
  Even so, the limits of the Supreme Lord God cannot be found. ||6||<br>
  Rama, with millions of monkeys, conquered Raawan's army.<br>
  Billions of Puraanas greatly praise Him;<br>
  He humbled the pride of Duyodhan. ||7||<br>
  Millions of gods of love cannot compete with Him.<br>
  He steals the hearts of mortal beings.<br>
  Says Kabeer, please hear me, O Lord of the World.<br>
  I beg for the blessing of fearless dignity. ||8||2||18||20||<br>
  Bhairao, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O my tongue, I will cut you into a hundred pieces,<br>
  if you do not chant the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O my tongue, be imbued with the Lord's Name.<br>
  Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and imbue yourself with this most excellent color. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O my tongue, other occupations are false.<br>
  The state of Nirvaanaa comes only through the Lord's Name. ||2||<br>
  The performance of countless millions of other devotions<br>
  is not equal to even one devotion to the Name of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Prays Naam Dayv, this is my occupation.<br>
  O Lord, Your Forms are endless. ||4||1||<br>
  One who stays away from others' wealth and others' spouses<br>
  - the Lord abides near that person. ||1||<br>
  Those who do not meditate and vibrate on the Lord<br>
  - I do not even want to see them. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those whose inner beings are not in harmony with the Lord,<br>
  are nothing more than beasts. ||2||<br>
  Prays Naam Dayv, a man without a nose<br>
  does not look handsome, even if he has the thirty-two beauty marks. ||3||2||<br>
  Naam Dayv milked the brown cow, and brought a cup of milk and a jug of water to his family god. ||1||<br>
  "Please drink this milk, O my Sovereign Lord God.<br>
  Drink this milk and my mind will be happy.<br>
  Otherwise, my father will be angry with me."||1||Pause||<br>
  Taking the golden cup, Naam Dayv filled it with the ambrosial milk,<br>
  and placed it before the Lord. ||2||<br>
  The Lord looked upon Naam Dayv and smiled. "This one devotee abides within my heart."||3||<br>
  The Lord drank the milk, and the devotee returned home.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 040</h2></center>
  Thus did Naam Dayv come to receive the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||4||3||<br>
  I am crazy - the Lord is my Husband.<br>
  I decorate and adorn myself for Him. ||1||<br>
  Slander me well, slander me well, slander me well, O people.<br>
  My body and mind are united with my Beloved Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Do not engage in any arguments or debates with anyone.<br>
  With your tongue, savor the Lord's sublime essence. ||2||<br>
  Now, I know within my soul, that such an arrangement has been made;<br>
  I will meet with my Lord by the beat of the drum. ||3||<br>
  Anyone can praise or slander me.<br>
  Naam Dayv has met the Lord. ||4||4||<br>
  Sometimes, people do not appreciate milk, sugar and ghee.<br>
  Sometimes, they have to beg for bread from door to door.<br>
  Sometimes, they have to pick out the grain from the chaff. ||1||<br>
  As the Lord keeps us, so do we live, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  The Lord's Glory cannot even be described. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Sometimes, people prance around on horses.<br>
  Sometimes, they do not even have shoes for their feet. ||2||<br>
  Sometimes, people sleep on cozy beds with white sheets.<br>
  Sometimes, they do not even have straw to put down on the ground. ||3||<br>
  Naam Dayv prays, only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, can save us.<br>
  One who meets the Guru, is carried across to the other side. ||4||5||<br>
  Laughing and playing, I came to Your Temple, O Lord.<br>
  While Naam Dayv was worshipping, he was grabbed and driven out. ||1||<br>
  I am of a low social class, O Lord;<br>
  why was I born into a family of fabric dyers? ||1||Pause||<br>
  I picked up my blanket and went back,<br>
  to sit behind the temple. ||2||<br>
  As Naam Dayv uttered the Glorious Praises of the Lord,<br>
  the temple turned around to face the Lord's humble devotee. ||3||6||<br>
  Bhairao, Naam Dayv Jee, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  As the hungry person loves food,<br>
  and the thirsty person is obsessed with water,<br>
  and as the fool is attached to his family<br>
  - just so, the Lord is very dear to Naam Dayv. ||1||<br>
  Naam Dayv is in love with the Lord.<br>
  He has naturally and intuitively become detached from the world. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Like the woman who falls in love with another man,<br>
  and the greedy man who loves only wealth,<br>
  and the sexually promiscuous man who loves women and sex,<br>
  just so, Naam Dayv is in love with the Lord. ||2||<br>
  But that alone is real love, which the Lord Himself inspires;<br>
  by Guru's Grace, duality is eradicated.<br>
  Such love never breaks; through it, the mortal remains merged in the Lord.<br>
  Naam Dayv has focused his consciousness on the True Name. ||3||<br>
  Like the love between the child and its mother,<br>
  so is my mind imbued with the Lord.<br>
  Prays Naam Dayv, I am in love with the Lord.<br>
  The Lord of the Universe abides within my consciousness. ||4||1||7||<br>
  The blind fool abandons the wife of his own home,<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 041</h2></center>
  and has an affair with another woman.<br>
  He is like the parrot, who is pleased to see the simbal tree;<br>
  but in the end, he dies, stuck to it. ||1||<br>
  The home of the sinner is on fire.<br>
  It keeps burning, and the fire cannot be extinguished. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He does not go to see where the Lord is being worshipped.<br>
  He abandons the Lord's Path, and takes the wrong path.<br>
  He forgets the Primal Lord God, and is caught in the cycle of reincarnation.<br>
  He throws away the Ambrosial Nectar, and gathers poison to eat. ||2||<br>
  He is like the prostitute, who comes to dance,<br>
  wearing beautiful clothes, decorated and adorned.<br>
  She dances to the beat, exciting the breath of those who watch her.<br>
  But the noose of the Messenger of Death is around her neck. ||3||<br>
  One who has good karma recorded on his forehead,<br>
  hurries to enter the Guru's Sanctuary.<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, consider this:<br>
  O Saints, this is the way to cross over to the other side. ||4||2||8||<br>
  Sanda and Marka went and complained to Harnaakhash,<br>
  "Your son does not read his lessons. We are tired of trying to teach him.<br>
  He chants the Lord's Name, clapping his hands to keep the beat; he has spoiled all the other students. ||1||<br>
  He chants the Lord's Name,<br>
  and he has enshrined meditative remembrance of the Lord within his heart."||1||Pause||<br>
  "Your father the king has conquered the whole world", said his mother the queen.<br>
  "O Prahlad my son, you do not obey him, so he has decided to deal with you in another way."||2||<br>
  The council of villians met and resolved to send Prahlaad into the life hereafter.<br>
  Prahlaad was thrown off a mountain, into the water, and into a fire, but the Sovereign Lord God saved him, by changing the laws of nature. ||3||<br>
  Harnaakhash thundered with rage and threatened to kill Prahlaad. "Tell me, who can save you?"<br>
  Prahlaad answered, "The Lord, the Master of the three worlds, is contained even in this pillar to which I am tied."||4||<br>
  The Lord who tore Harnaakhash apart with His nails proclaimed Himself the Lord of gods and men.<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, I meditate on the Lord, the Man-lion, the Giver of fearless dignity. ||5||3||9||<br>
  The Sultan said, "Listen, Naam Dayv:<br>
  let me see the actions of your Lord."||1||<br>
  The Sultan arrested Naam Dayv,<br>
  and said, "Let me see your Beloved Lord."||1||Pause||<br>
  "Bring this dead cow back to life.<br>
  Otherwise, I shall cut off your head here and now."||2||<br>
  Naam Dayv answered, "O king, how can this happen?<br>
  No one can bring the dead back to life. ||3||<br>
  I cannot do anything by my own actions.<br>
  Whatever the Lord does, that alone happens."||4||<br>
  The arrogant king was enraged at this reply.<br>
  He incited an elephant to attack. ||5||<br>
  Naam Dayv's mother began to cry,<br>
  and she said, "Why don't you abandon your Lord Raam, and worship his Lord Allah?"||6||<br>
  Naam Dayv answered, "I am not your son, and you are not my mother.<br>
  Even if my body dies, I will still sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord."||7||<br>
  The elephant attacked him with his trunk,<br>
  but Naam Dayv was saved, protected by the Lord. ||8||<br>
  The king said, "The Qazis and the Mullahs bow down to me,<br>
  but this Hindu has trampled my honor."||9||<br>
  The people pleaded with the king, "Hear our prayer, O king.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 042</h2></center>
  Here, take Naam Dayv's weight in gold, and release him."||10||<br>
  The king replied, "If I take the gold, then I will be consigned to hell,<br>
  by forsaking my faith and gathering worldly wealth."||11||<br>
  With his feet in chains, Naam Dayv kept the beat with his hands,<br>
  singing the Praises of the Lord. ||12||<br>
  "Even if the Ganges and the Jamunaa rivers flow backwards,<br>
  I will still continue singing the Praises of the Lord."||13||<br>
  Three hours passed,<br>
  and even then, the Lord of the three worlds had not come. ||14||<br>
  Playing on the instrument of the feathered wings,<br>
  the Lord of the Universe came, mounted on the eagle garura. ||15||<br>
  He cherished His devotee,<br>
  and the Lord came, mounted on the eagle garura. ||16||<br>
  The Lord said to him, "If you wish, I shall turn the earth sideways.<br>
  If you wish, I shall turn it upside down. ||17||<br>
  If you wish, I shall bring the dead cow back to life.<br>
  Everyone will see and be convinced."||18||<br>
  Naam Dayv prayed, and milked the cow.<br>
  He brought the calf to the cow, and milked her. ||19||<br>
  When the pitcher was filled with milk,<br>
  Naam Dayv took it and placed it before the king. ||20||<br>
  The king went into his palace,<br>
  and his heart was troubled. ||21||<br>
  Through the Qazis and the Mullahs, the king offered his prayer,<br>
  "Forgive me, please, O Hindu; I am just a cow before you."||22||<br>
  Naam Dayv said, "Listen, O king:<br>
  have I done this miracle? ||23||<br>
  The purpose of this miracle is<br>
  that you, O king, should walk on the path of truth and humility."||24||<br>
  Naam Dayv became famous everywhere for this.<br>
  The Hindus all went together to Naam Dayv. ||25||<br>
  If the cow had not been revived,<br>
  people would have lost faith in Naam Dayv. ||26||<br>
  The fame of Naam Dayv spread throughout the world.<br>
  The humble devotees were saved and carried across with him. ||27||<br>
  All sorts of troubles and pains afflicted the slanderer.<br>
  There is no difference between Naam Dayv and the Lord. ||28||1||10||<br>
  SECOND HOUSE:<br>
  By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one meets the Lord.<br>
  By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one is carried across to the other side.<br>
  By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one swims across to heaven.<br>
  By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one remains dead while yet alive. ||1||<br>
  True, True, True True, True is the Divine Guru.<br>
  False, false, false, false is all other service. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is implanted within.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one does not wander in the ten directions.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the five demons are kept far away.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one does not die regretting. ||2||<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one is blessed with the Ambrosial Bani of the Word.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one speaks the Unspoken Speech.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's body becomes like ambrosial nectar.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one utters and chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one sees the three worlds.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one understands the state of supreme dignity.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's head is in the Akaashic ethers.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one is always congratulated everywhere. ||4||<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one remains detached forever.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one forsakes the slander of others.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 043</h2></center>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one looks upon good and bad as the same.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one has good destiny written on his forehead. ||5||<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the wall of the body is not eroded.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the temple turns itself towards the mortal.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's home is constructed.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's bed is lifted up out of the water. ||6||<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one has bathed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's body is stamped with the sacred mark of Vishnu.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one has performed the twelve devotional services.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, all poison is transformed into fruit. ||7||<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, skepticism is shattered.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one escapes from the Messenger of Death.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one is not subject to the cycle of reincarnation. ||8||<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one understands the rituals of the eighteen Puraanas.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, it is as if one has made an offering of the eighten loads of vegetation.<br>
  When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one needs no other place of rest.<br>
  Naam Dayv has entered the Sanctuary of the Guru. ||9||1||2||11||<br>
  Bhairao, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Without seeing something, the yearning for it does not arise.<br>
  Whatever is seen, shall pass away.<br>
  Whoever chants and praises the Naam, the Name of the Lord,<br>
  is the true Yogi, free of desire. ||1||<br>
  When someone utters the Name of the Lord with love,<br>
  it is as if he has touched the philosopher's stone; his sense of duality is eradicated. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He alone is a silent sage, who destroys the duality of his mind.<br>
  Keeping the doors of his body closed, he merges in the Lord of the three worlds.<br>
  Everyone acts according to the inclinations of the mind.<br>
  Attuned to the Creator Lord, one remains free of fear. ||2||<br>
  Plants blossom forth to produce fruit.<br>
  When the fruit is produced, the flowers wither away.<br>
  For the sake of spiritual wisdom, people act and practice rituals.<br>
  When spiritual wisdom wells up, then actions are left behind. ||3||<br>
  For the sake of ghee, wise people churn milk.<br>
  Those who are Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive - are forever in the state of Nirvaanaa.<br>
  Says Ravi Daas, O you unfortunate people,<br>
  why not meditate on the Lord with love in your heart? ||4||1||<br>
  NAAM DAYV:<br>
  Come, O Lord of beautiful hair,<br>
  wearing the robes of a Sufi Saint. ||Pause||<br>
  Your cap is the realm of the Akaashic ethers; the seven nether worlds are Your sandals.<br>
  The body covered with skin is Your temple; You are so beautiful, O Lord of the World. ||1||<br>
  The fifty-six million clouds are Your gowns, the 16,000 milkmaids are your skirts.<br>
  The eighteen loads of vegetation is Your stick, and all the world is Your plate. ||2||<br>
  The human body is the mosque, and the mind is the priest, who peacefully leads the prayer.<br>
  You are married to Maya, O Formless Lord, and so You have taken form. ||3||<br>
  Performing devotional worship services to You, my cymbals were taken away; unto whom should I complain?<br>
  Naam Dayv's Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, wanders everywhere; He has no specific home. ||4||1||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr29.htm">Next: Raag Basant</a></center>
 </body>