<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr28.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr30.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Basant</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 001</h2></center>
  Raag Basant, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas, Du-Tukas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Among the months, blessed is this month, when spring always comes.<br>
  Blossom forth, O my consciousness, contemplating the Lord of the Universe, forever and ever. ||1||<br>
  O ignorant one, forget your egotistical intellect.<br>
  Subdue your ego, and contemplate Him in your mind; gather in the virtues of the Sublime, Virtuous Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Karma is the tree, the Lord's Name the branches, Dharmic faith the flowers, and spiritual wisdom the fruit.<br>
  Realization of the Lord are the leaves, and eradication of the pride of the mind is the shade. ||2||<br>
  Whoever sees the Lord's Creative Power with his eyes, and hears the Guru's Bani with his ears, and utters the True Name with his mouth,<br>
  attains the perfect wealth of honor, and intuitively focuses his meditation on the Lord. ||3||<br>
  The months and the seasons come; see, and do your deeds.<br>
  O Nanak, those Gurmukhs who remain merged in the Lord do not wither away; they remain green forever. ||4||1||<br>
  First Mehl, Basant:<br>
  The season of spring, so delightful, has come.<br>
  Those who are imbued with love for You, O Lord, chant Your Name with joy.<br>
  Whom else should I worship? At whose feet should I bow? ||1||<br>
  I am the slave of Your slaves, O my Sovereign Lord King.<br>
  O Life of the Universe, there is no other way to meet You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You have only One Form, and yet You have countless forms.<br>
  Which one should I worship? Before which one should I burn incense?<br>
  Your limits cannot be found. How can anyone find them?<br>
  I am the slave of Your slaves, O my Sovereign Lord King. ||2||<br>
  The cycles of years and the places of pilgrimage are Yours, O Lord.<br>
  Your Name is True, O Transcendent Lord God.<br>
  Your State cannot be known, O Eternal, Unchanging Lord God.<br>
  Although You are unknown, still we chant Your Name. ||3||<br>
  What can poor Nanak say?<br>
  All people praise the One Lord.<br>
  Nanak places his head on the feet of such people.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to Your Names, as many as there are, O Lord. ||4||2||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl:<br>
  The kitchen is golden, and the cooking pots are golden.<br>
  The lines marking the cooking square are silver.<br>
  The water is from the Ganges, and the firewood is sanctified.<br>
  The food is soft rice, cooked in milk. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, these things are worthless,<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 002</h2></center>
  if you are not drenched with the True Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One may have the eighteen Puraanas written in his own hand;<br>
  he may recite the four Vedas by heart,<br>
  and take ritual baths at holy festivals and give charitable donations;<br>
  he may observe the ritual fasts, and perform religious ceremonies day and night. ||2||<br>
  He may be a Qazi, a Mullah or a Shaykh,<br>
  a Yogi or a wandering hermit wearing saffron-colored robes;<br>
  he may be a householder, working at his job;<br>
  but without understanding the essence of devotional worship, all people are eventually bound and gagged, and driven along by the Messenger of Death. ||3||<br>
  Each person's karma is written on his forehead.<br>
  According to their deeds, they shall be judged.<br>
  Only the foolish and the ignorant issue commands.<br>
  O Nanak, the treasure of praise belongs to the True Lord alone. ||4||3||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  A person may take off his clothes and be naked.<br>
  What Yoga does he practice by having matted and tangled hair?<br>
  If the mind is not pure, what use is it to hold the breath at the Tenth Gate?<br>
  The fool wanders and wanders, entering the cycle of reincarnation again and again. ||1||<br>
  Meditate on the One Lord, O my foolish mind,<br>
  and you shall cross over to the other side in an instant. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Some recite and expound on the Simritees and the Shaastras;<br>
  some sing the Vedas and read the Puraanas;<br>
  but they practice hypocrisy and deception with their eyes and minds.<br>
  The Lord does not even come near them. ||2||<br>
  Even if someone practices such self-discipline,<br>
  compassion and devotional worship<br>
  - if he is filled with greed, and his mind is engrossed in corruption,<br>
  how can he find the Immaculate Lord? ||3||<br>
  What can the created being do?<br>
  The Lord Himself moves him.<br>
  If the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, then his doubts are dispelled.<br>
  If the mortal realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, he obtains the True Lord. ||4||<br>
  If someone's soul is polluted within,<br>
  what is the use of his traveling to sacred shrines of pilgrimage all over the world?<br>
  O Nanak, when one joins the Society of the True Guru,<br>
  then the bonds of the terrifying world-ocean are broken. ||5||4||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl:<br>
  All the worlds have been fascinated and enchanted by Your Maya, O Lord.<br>
  I do not see any other at all - You are everywhere.<br>
  You are the Master of Yogis, the Divinity of the divine.<br>
  Serving at the Guru's Feet, the Name of the Lord is received. ||1||<br>
  O my Beauteous, Deep and Profound Beloved Lord.<br>
  As Gurmukh, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name. You are Infinite, the Cherisher of all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Without the Holy Saint, association with the Lord is not obtained.<br>
  Without the Guru, one's very fiber is stained with filth.<br>
  Without the Lord's Name, one cannot become pure.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, sing the Praises of the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  O Savior Lord, that person whom You have saved<br>
  - You lead him to meet the True Guru, and so take care of him.<br>
  You take away his poisonous egotism and attachment.<br>
  You dispel all his sufferings, O Sovereign Lord God. ||3||<br>
  His state and condition are sublime; the Lord's Glorious Virtues permeate his body.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, the diamond of the Lord's Name is revealed.<br>
  He is lovingly attuned to the Naam; he is rid of the love of duality.<br>
  O Lord, let servant Nanak meet the Guru. ||4||5||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl:<br>
  O my friends and companions, listen with love in your heart.<br>
  My Husband Lord is Incomparably Beautiful; He is always with me.<br>
  He is Unseen - He cannot be seen. How can I describe Him?<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 003</h2></center>
  The Guru has shown me that my Sovereign Lord God is with me. ||1||<br>
  Joining together with my friends and companions, I am adorned with the Lord's Glorious Virtues.<br>
  The sublime soul-brides play with their Lord God. The Gurmukhs look within themselves; their minds are filled with faith. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs, suffering in separation, do not understand this mystery.<br>
  The Beloved Lord of all celebrates in each and every heart.<br>
  The Gurmukh is stable, knowing that God is always with him.<br>
  The Guru has implanted the Naam within me; I chant it, and meditate on it. ||2||<br>
  Without the Guru, devotional love does not well up within.<br>
  Without the Guru, one is not blessed with the Society of the Saints.<br>
  Without the Guru, the blind cry out, entangled in worldly affairs.<br>
  That mortal who becomes Gurmukh becomes immaculate; the Word of the Shabad washes away his filth. ||3||<br>
  Uniting with the Guru, the mortal conquers and subdues his mind.<br>
  Day and night, he savors the Yoga of devotional worship.<br>
  Associating with the Saint Guru, suffering and sickness are ended.<br>
  Servant Nanak merges with his Husband Lord, in the Yoga of intuitive ease. ||4||6||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl:<br>
  By His Creative Power, God fashioned the creation.<br>
  The King of kings Himself adminsters true justice.<br>
  The most sublime Word of the Guru's Teachings is always with us.<br>
  The wealth of the Lord's Name, the source of nectar, is easily acquired. ||1||<br>
  So chant the Name of the Lord; do not forget it, O my mind.<br>
  The Lord is Infinite, Inaccessible and Incomprehensible; His weight cannot be weighed, but He Himself allows the Gurmukh to weigh Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your GurSikhs serve at the Guru's Feet.<br>
  Serving the Guru, they are carried across; they have abandoned any distinction between 'mine' and 'yours'.<br>
  The slanderous and greedy people are hard-hearted.<br>
  Those who do not love to serve the Guru are the most thieving of thieves. ||2||<br>
  When the Guru is pleased, He blesses the mortals with loving devotional worship of the Lord.<br>
  When the Guru is pleased, the mortal obtains a place in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.<br>
  So renounce slander, and awaken in devotional worship of the Lord.<br>
  Devotion to the Lord is wonderful; it comes through good karma and destiny. ||3||<br>
  The Guru unites in union with the Lord, and grants the gift of the Name.<br>
  The Guru loves His Sikhs, day and night.<br>
  They obtain the fruit of the Naam, when the Guru's favor is bestowed.<br>
  Says Nanak, those who receive it are very rare indeed. ||4||7||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl, Ik-Tukas:<br>
  When it pleases our Lord and Master, His servant serves Him.<br>
  He remains dead while yet alive, and redeems all his ancestors. ||1||<br>
  I shall not renounce Your devotional worship, O Lord; what does it matter if people laugh at me?<br>
  The True Name abides within my heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Just as the mortal remains engrossed in attachment to Maya,<br>
  so does the Lord's humble Saint remain absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||2||<br>
  I am foolish and ignorant, O Lord; please be merciful to me.<br>
  May I remain in Your Sanctuary. ||3||<br>
  Says Nanak, worldly affairs are fruitless.<br>
  Only by Guru's Grace does one receive the Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||8||<br>
  First Mehl, Basant Hindol, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O Brahmin, you worship and believe in your stone-god, and wear your ceremonial rosary beads.<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord. Build your boat, and pray, "O Merciful Lord, please be merciful to me."||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 004</h2></center>
  Why do you irrigate the barren, alkaline soil? You are wasting your life away!<br>
  This wall of mud is crumbling. Why bother to patch it with plaster? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Let your hands be the buckets, strung on the chain, and yoke the mind as the ox to pull it; draw the water up from the well.<br>
  Irrigate your fields with the Ambrosial Nectar, and you shall be owned by God the Gardener. ||2||<br>
  Let sexual desire and anger be your two shovels, to dig up the dirt of your farm, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  The more you dig, the more peace you shall find. Your past actions cannot be erased. ||3||<br>
  The crane is again transformed into a swan, if You so will, O Merciful Lord.<br>
  Prays Nanak, the slave of Your slaves: O Merciful Lord, have mercy on me. ||4||1||9||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl, Hindol:<br>
  In the House of the Husband Lord - in the world hereafter, everything is jointly owned; but in this world - in the house of the soul-bride's parents, the soul-bride owns them separately.<br>
  She herself is ill-mannered; how can she blame anyone else? She does not know how to take care of these things. ||1||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, I am deluded by doubt.<br>
  I sing the Word which You have written; I do not know any other Word. ||1||Pause||<br>
  She alone is known as the Lord's bride, who embroiders her gown in the Name.<br>
  She who preserves and protects the home of her own heart and does not taste of evil, shall be the Beloved of her Husband Lord. ||2||<br>
  If you are a learned and wise religious scholar, then make a boat of the letters of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Prays Nanak, the One Lord shall carry you across, if you merge in the True Lord. ||3||2||10||<br>
  Basant Hindol, First Mehl:<br>
  The king is just a boy, and his city is vulnerable. He is in love with his wicked enemies.<br>
  He reads of his two mothers and his two fathers; O Pandit, reflect on this. ||1||<br>
  O Master Pandit, teach me about this.<br>
  How can I obtain the Lord of life? ||1||Pause||<br>
  There is fire within the plants which bloom; the ocean is tied into a bundle.<br>
  The sun and the moon dwell in the same home in the sky. You have not obtained this knowledge. ||2||<br>
  One who knows the All-pervading Lord, eats up the one mother - Maya.<br>
  Know that the sign of such a person is that he gathers the wealth of compassion. ||3||<br>
  The mind lives with those who do not listen, and do not admit what they eat.<br>
  Prays Nanak, the slave of the Lord's slave: one instant the mind is huge, and the next instant, it is tiny. ||4||3||11||<br>
  Basant Hindol, First Mehl:<br>
  The Guru is the True Banker, the Giver of peace; He unites the mortal with the Lord, and satisfies his hunger.<br>
  Granting His Grace, He implants devotional worship of the Lord within; and then night and day, we sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, do not forget the Lord; keep Him in your consciousness.<br>
  Without the Guru, no one is liberated anywhere in the three worlds. The Gurmukh obtains the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Without devotional worship, the True Guru is not obtained. Without good destiny, devotional worship of the Lord is not obtained.<br>
  Without good destiny, the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is not obtained. By the grace of one's good karma, the Lord's Name is received. ||2||<br>
  In each and every heart, the Lord is hidden; He creates and watches over all. He reveals Himself in the humble, Saintly Gurmukhs.<br>
  Those who chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are drenched with the Lord's Love. Their minds are drenched with the Ambrosial Water of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 005</h2></center>
  Those who are blessed with the glory of the Lord's Throne - those Gurmukhs are renowned as supreme.<br>
  Touching the philosopher's stone, they themselves becomes the philosopher's stone; they become the companions of the Lord, the Guru. ||4||4||12||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl, First House, Du-Tukas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Throughout the months and the seasons, the Lord is always in bloom.<br>
  He rejuvenates all beings and creatures.<br>
  What can I say? I am just a worm.<br>
  No one has found Your beginning or Your end, O Lord. ||1||<br>
  Those who serve You, Lord,<br>
  obtain the greatest peace; their souls are so divine. ||1||Pause||<br>
  If the Lord is merciful, then the mortal is allowed to serve Him.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, he remains dead while yet alive.<br>
  Night and day, he chants the True Name;<br>
  in this way, he crosses over the treacherous world-ocean. ||2||<br>
  The Creator created both poison and nectar.<br>
  He attached these two fruits to the world-plant.<br>
  The Creator Himself is the Doer, the Cause of all.<br>
  He feeds all as He pleases. ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, when He casts His Glance of Grace,<br>
  He Himself bestows His Ambrosial Naam.<br>
  Thus, the desire for sin and corruption is ended.<br>
  The Lord Himself carries out His Own Will. ||4||1||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who are attuned to the True Lord's Name are happy and exalted.<br>
  Take pity on me, O God, Merciful to the meek.<br>
  Without Him, I have no other at all.<br>
  As it pleases His Will, He keeps me. ||1||<br>
  The Guru, the Lord, is pleasing to my mind.<br>
  I cannot even survive, without the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. But I shall easily unite with the Guru, if He unites me in His Union. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The greedy mind is enticed by greed.<br>
  Forgetting the Lord, it regrets and repents in the end.<br>
  The separated ones are reunited, when they are inspired to serve the Guru.<br>
  They are blessed with the Lord's Name - such is the destiny written on their foreheads. ||2||<br>
  This body is built of air and water.<br>
  The body is afflicted with the terribly painful illness of egotism.<br>
  The Gurmukh has the Medicine: singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Granting His Grace, the Guru has cured the illness. ||3||<br>
  The four evils are the four rivers of fire flowing through the body.<br>
  It is burning in desire, and burning in egotism.<br>
  Those whom the Guru protects and saves are very fortunate.<br>
  Servant Nanak enshrines the Ambrosial Name of the Lord in his heart. ||4||2||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  One who serves the Lord is the Lord's person.<br>
  He dwells in intuitive peace, and never suffers in sorrow.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are dead; the Lord is not within their minds.<br>
  They die and die again and again, and are reincarnated, only to die once more. ||1||<br>
  They alone are alive, whose minds are filled with the Lord.<br>
  They contemplate the True Lord, and are absorbed in the True Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who do not serve the Lord are far away from the Lord.<br>
  They wander in foreign lands, with dust thrown on their heads.<br>
  The Lord Himself enjoins His humble servants to serve Him.<br>
  They live in peace forever, and have no greed at all. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 006</h2></center>
  When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, egotism is eradicated.<br>
  Then, the mortal is honored in the Court of the True Lord.<br>
  He sees the Dear Lord always close at hand, ever-present.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he sees the Lord pervading and permeating all. ||3||<br>
  The Lord cherishes all beings and creatures.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, contemplate Him forever.<br>
  You shall go to your true home in the Lord's Court with honor.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you shall be blessed with glorious greatness. ||4||3||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  One who worships the Lord within his mind,<br>
  sees the One and Only Lord, and no other.<br>
  People in duality suffer terrible pain.<br>
  The True Guru has shown me the One Lord. ||1||<br>
  My God is in bloom, forever in spring.<br>
  This mind blossoms forth, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause||<br>
  So consult the Guru, and reflect upon His wisdom;<br>
  then, you shall be in love with the True Lord God.<br>
  Abandon your self-conceit, and be His loving servant.<br>
  Then, the Life of the World shall come to dwell in your mind. ||2||<br>
  Worship Him with devotion, and see Him always ever-present, close at hand.<br>
  My God is forever permeating and pervading all.<br>
  Only a rare few know the mystery of this devotional worship.<br>
  My God is the Enlightener of all souls. ||3||<br>
  The True Guru Himself unites us in His Union.<br>
  He Himself links our consciousness to the Lord, the Life of the World.<br>
  Thus, our minds and bodies are rejuvenated with intuitive ease.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, we remain attuned to the String of His Love. ||4||4||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Lord is the Lover of His devotees; He dwells within their minds,<br>
  by Guru's Grace, with intuitive ease.<br>
  Through devotional worship, self-conceit is eradicated from within,<br>
  and then, one meets the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  His devotees are forever beauteous at the Door of the Lord God.<br>
  Loving the Guru, they have love and affection for the True Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That humble being who worships the Lord with devotion becomes immaculate and pure.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, egotism is eradicated from within.<br>
  The Dear Lord Himself comes to dwell within the mind,<br>
  and the mortal remains immersed in peace, tranquility and intuitive ease. ||2||<br>
  Those who are imbued with Truth, are forever in the bloom of spring.<br>
  Their minds and bodies are rejuvenated, uttering the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Without the Lord's Name, the world is dry and parched.<br>
  It burns in the fire of desire, over and over again. ||3||<br>
  One who does only that which is pleasing to the Dear Lord<br>
  - his body is forever at peace, and his consciousness is attached to the Lord's Will.<br>
  He serves His God with intuitive ease.<br>
  O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to abide in his mind. ||4||5||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  Attachment to Maya is burnt away by the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  The mind and body are rejuvenated by the Love of the True Guru.<br>
  The tree bears fruit at the Lord's Door,<br>
  in love with the True Bani of the Guru's Word, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  This mind is rejuvenated, with intuitive ease;<br>
  loving the True Guru, it bears the fruit of truth. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He Himself is near, and He Himself is far away.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is seen to be ever-present, close at hand.<br>
  The plants have blossomed forth, giving a dense shade.<br>
  The Gurmukh blossoms forth, with intuitive ease. ||2||<br>
  Night and day, he sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, day and night.<br>
  The True Guru drives out sin and doubt from within.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 007</h2></center>
  Gazing upon the wonder of God's Creation, I am wonder-struck and amazed.<br>
  The Gurmukh obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord, by His Grace. ||3||<br>
  The Creator Himself enjoys all delights.<br>
  Whatever He does, surely comes to pass.<br>
  He is the Great Giver; He has no greed at all.<br>
  O Nanak, living the Word of the Shabad, the mortal meets with God. ||4||6||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  By perfect destiny, one acts in truth.<br>
  Remembering the One Lord, one does not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation.<br>
  Fruitful is the coming into the world, and the life of one<br>
  who remains intuitively absorbed in the True Name. ||1||<br>
  The Gurmukh acts, lovingly attuned to the Lord.<br>
  Be dedicated to the Lord's Name, and eradicate self-conceit from within. ||1||Pause||<br>
  True is the speech of that humble being;<br>
  through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is spread throughout the world.<br>
  Throughout the four ages, his fame and glory spread.<br>
  Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Lord's humble servant is recognized and renowned. ||2||<br>
  Some remain lovingly attuned to the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
  True are those humble beings who love the True Lord.<br>
  They meditate on the True Lord, and behold Him near at hand, ever-present.<br>
  They are the dust of the lotus feet of the humble Saints. ||3||<br>
  There is only One Creator Lord; there is no other at all.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, comes Union with the Lord.<br>
  Whoever serves the True Lord finds joy.<br>
  O Nanak, he is intuitively absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||7||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Lord's humble servant worships Him, and beholds Him ever-present, near at hand.<br>
  He is the dust of the lotus feet of the humble Saints.<br>
  Those who remain lovingly attuned to the Lord forever<br>
  are blessed with understanding by the Perfect True Guru. ||1||<br>
  How rare are those who become the slave of the Lord's slaves.<br>
  They attain the supreme status. ||1||Pause||<br>
  So serve the One Lord, and no other.<br>
  Serving Him, eternal peace is obtained.<br>
  He does not die; He does not come and go in reincarnation.<br>
  Why should I serve any other than Him, O my mother? ||2||<br>
  True are those humble beings who realize the True Lord.<br>
  Conquering their self-conceit, they merge intuitively into the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Gurmukhs gather in the Naam.<br>
  Their minds are immaculate, and their reputations are immaculate. ||3||<br>
  Know the Lord, who gave you spiritual wisdom,<br>
  and realize the One God, through the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
  When the mortal tastes the sublime essence of the Lord, he becomes pure and holy.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam - their reputations are true. ||4||8||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who are imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord - their generations are redeemed and saved.<br>
  True is their speech; they love the Naam.<br>
  Why have the wandering self-willed manmukhs even come into the world?<br>
  Forgetting the Naam, the mortals waste their lives away. ||1||<br>
  One who dies while yet alive, truly dies, and embellishes his death.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he enshrines the True Lord within his heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Truth is the food of the Gurmukh; his body is sanctified and pure.<br>
  His mind is immaculate; he is forever the ocean of virtue.<br>
  He is not forced to come and go in the cycle of birth and death.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, he merges in the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Serving the True Lord, one realizes Truth.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he goes to the Lord's Court with his banners flying proudly.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 008</h2></center>
  In the Court of the True Lord, he obtains true glory.<br>
  He comes to dwell in the home of his own inner being. ||3||<br>
  He cannot be fooled; He is the Truest of the True.<br>
  All others are deluded; in duality, they lose their honor.<br>
  So serve the True Lord, through the True Bani of His Word.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Naam, merge in the True Lord. ||4||9||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  Without the grace of good karma, all are deluded by doubt.<br>
  In attachment to Maya, they suffer in terrible pain.<br>
  The blind, self-willed manmukhs find no place of rest.<br>
  They are like maggots in manure, rotting away in manure. ||1||<br>
  That humble being who obeys the Hukam of the Lord's Command is accepted.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is blessed with the insignia and the banner of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who have such pre-ordained destiny are imbued with the Naam.<br>
  The Name of the Lord is forever pleasing to their minds.<br>
  Through the Bani, the Word of the True Guru, eternal peace is found.<br>
  Through it, one's light merges into the Light. ||2||<br>
  Only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, can save the world.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, one comes to love the Naam.<br>
  Without the Naam, no one obtains liberation.<br>
  Through the Perfect Guru, the Naam is obtained. ||3||<br>
  He alone understands, whom the Lord Himself causes to understand.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, the Naam is implanted within.<br>
  Those humble beings who know the One Lord are approved and accepted.<br>
  O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, they go to the Lord's Court with His banner and insignia. ||4||10||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  Granting His Grace, the Lord leads the mortal to meet the True Guru.<br>
  The Lord Himself comes to abide in his mind.<br>
  His intellect becomes steady and stable, and his mind is strengthened forever.<br>
  He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Ocean of Virtue. ||1||<br>
  Those who forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord - those mortals die eating poison.<br>
  Their lives are wasted uselessly, and they continue coming and going in reincarnation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They wear all sorts of religious robes, but their minds are not at peace.<br>
  In great egotism, they lose their honor.<br>
  But those who realize the Word of the Shabad, are blessed by great good fortune.<br>
  They bring their distractible minds back home. ||2||<br>
  Within the home of the inner self is the inaccessible and infinite substance.<br>
  Those who find it, by following the Guru's Teachings, contemplate the Shabad.<br>
  Those who obtain the nine treasures of the Naam within the home of their own inner being,<br>
  are forever dyed in the color of the Lord's Love; they are absorbed in the Truth. ||3||<br>
  God Himself does everything; no one can do anything at all by himself.<br>
  When God so wills, He merges the mortal into Himself.<br>
  All are near Him; no one is far away from Him.<br>
  O Nanak, the Naam is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4||11||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, remember the Lord with love,<br>
  and you shall remain satisfied by the sublime essence of the Lord's Name.<br>
  The sins of millions upon millions of lifetimes shall be burnt away.<br>
  Remaining dead while yet alive, you shall be absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
  The Dear Lord Himself knows His own bountiful blessings.<br>
  This mind blossoms forth in the Guru's Shabad, chanting the Name of the Lord, the Giver of virtue. ||1||Pause||<br>
  No one is liberated by wandering around in saffron-colored robes.<br>
  Tranquility is not found by strict self-discipline.<br>
  But by following the Guru's Teachings, one is blessed to receive the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  By great good fortune, one finds the Lord. ||2||<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, glorious greatness comes through the Lord's Name.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 009</h2></center>
  Through the Perfect Guru, it is obtained.<br>
  Those who are imbued with the Naam find everlasting peace.<br>
  But without the Naam, mortals burn in egotism. ||3||<br>
  By great good furtune, some contemplate the Lord's Name.<br>
  Through the Lord's Name, all sorrows are eradicated.<br>
  He dwells within the heart, and pervades the external universe as well.<br>
  O Nanak, the Creator Lord knows all. ||4||12||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl, Ik-Tukas:<br>
  I am just a worm, created by You, O Lord.<br>
  If you bless me, then I chant Your Primal Mantra. ||1||<br>
  I chant and reflect on His Glorious Virtues, O my mother.<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, I fall at the Lord's Feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I am addicted to the favor of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Why waste your life in hatred, vengeance and conflict? ||2||<br>
  When the Guru granted His Grace, my egotism was eradicated,<br>
  and then, I obtained the Lord's Name with intuitive ease. ||3||<br>
  The most lofty and exalted occupation is to contemplate the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Nanak chants the True Name. ||4||1||13||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  The season of spring has come, and all the plants have blossomed forth.<br>
  This mind blossoms forth, in association with the True Guru. ||1||<br>
  So meditate on the True Lord, O my foolish mind.<br>
  Only then shall you find peace, O my mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This mind blossoms forth, and I am in ecstasy.<br>
  I am blessed with the Ambrosial Fruit of the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe. ||2||<br>
  Everyone speaks and says that the Lord is the One and Only.<br>
  By understanding the Hukam of His Command, we come to know the One Lord. ||3||<br>
  Says Nanak, no one can describe the Lord by speaking through ego.<br>
  All speech and insight comes from our Lord and Master. ||4||2||14||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  All the ages were created by You, O Lord.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, one's intellect is awakened. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord, please blend me with Yourself;<br>
  let me merge in the True Name, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When the mind is in spring, all people are rejuvenated.<br>
  Blossoming forth and flowering through the Lord's Name, peace is obtained. ||2||<br>
  Contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one is in spring forever,<br>
  with the Lord's Name enshrined in the heart. ||3||<br>
  When the mind is in spring, the body and mind are rejuvenated.<br>
  O Nanak, this body is the tree which bears the fruit of the Lord's Name. ||4||3||15||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  They alone are in the spring season, who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  They come to worship the Lord with devotion, through their perfect destiny. ||1||<br>
  This mind is not even touched by spring.<br>
  This mind is burnt by duality and double-mindedness. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This mind is entangled in worldly affairs, creating more and more karma.<br>
  Enchanted by Maya, it cries out in suffering forever. ||2||<br>
  This mind is released, only when it meets with the True Guru.<br>
  Then, it does not suffer beatings by the Messenger of Death. ||3||<br>
  This mind is released, when the Guru emancipates it.<br>
  O Nanak, attachment to Maya is burnt away through the Word of the Shabad. ||4||4||16||<br>
  Basant, Third Mehl:<br>
  Spring has come, and all the plants are flowering.<br>
  These beings and creatures blossom forth when they focus their consciousness on the Lord. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 010</h2></center>
  In this way, this mind is rejuvenated.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, day and night, egotism is removed and washed away from the Gurmukhs. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The True Guru speaks the Bani of the Word, and the Shabad, the Word of God.<br>
  This world blossoms forth in its greenery, through the love of the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  The mortal blossoms forth in flower and fruit, when the Lord Himself so wills.<br>
  He is attached to the Lord, the Primal Root of all, when he finds the True Guru. ||3||<br>
  The Lord Himself is the season of spring; the whole world is His Garden.<br>
  O Nanak, this most unique devotional worship comes only by perfect destiny. ||4||5||17||<br>
  Basant Hindol, Third Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Word of the Guru's Bani, O Siblings of Destiny. I am devoted and dedicated to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  I praise my Guru forever, O Siblings of Destiny. I focus my consciousness on the Guru's Feet. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, focus your consciousness on the Lord's Name.<br>
  Your mind and body shall blossom forth in lush greenery, and you shall obtain the fruit of the Name of the One Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who are protected by the Guru are saved, O Siblings of Destiny. They drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's sublime essence.<br>
  The pain of egotism within is eradicated and banished, O Siblings of Destiny, and peace comes to dwell in their minds. ||2||<br>
  Those whom the Primal Lord Himself forgives, O Siblings of Destiny, are united with the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  The dust of their feet brings emancipation; in the company of Sadh Sangat, the True Congregation, we are united with the Lord. ||3||<br>
  He Himself does, and causes all to be done, O Siblings of Destiny; He makes everything blossom forth in green abundance.<br>
  O Nanak, peace fills their minds and bodies forever, O Siblings of Destiny; they are united with the Shabad. ||4||1||18||12||18||30||<br>
  Raag Basant, Fourth Mehl, First House, Ik-Tukay:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Just as the light of the sun's rays spread out,<br>
  the Lord permeates each and every heart, through and through. ||1||<br>
  The One Lord is permeating and pervading all places.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we merge with Him, O my mother. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The One Lord is deep within each and every heart.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, the One Lord becomes manifest, radiating forth. ||2||<br>
  The One and Only Lord is present and prevailing everywhere.<br>
  The greedy, faithless cynic thinks that God is far away. ||3||<br>
  The One and Only Lord permeates and pervades the world.<br>
  O Nanak, whatever the One Lord does comes to pass. ||4||1||<br>
  Basant, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Day and night, the two calls are sent out.<br>
  O mortal, meditate in remembrance on the Lord, who protects you forever, and saves you in the end. ||1||<br>
  Concentrate forever on the Lord, Har, Har, O my mind.<br>
  God the Destroyer of all depression and suffering is found, through the Guru's Teachings, singing the Glorious Praises of God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs die of their egotism, over and over again.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 011</h2></center>
  They are destroyed by Death's demons, and they must go to the City of Death. ||2||<br>
  The Gurmukhs are lovingly attached to the Lord, Har, Har, Har.<br>
  Their pains of both birth and death are taken away. ||3||<br>
  The Lord showers His Mercy on His humble devotees.<br>
  Guru Nanak has shown mercy to me; I have met the Lord, the Lord of the forest. ||4||2||<br>
  Basant Hindol, Fourth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Lord's Name is a jewel, hidden in a chamber of the palace of the body-fortress.<br>
  When one meets the True Guru, then he searches and finds it, and his light merges with the Divine Light. ||1||<br>
  O Lord, lead me to meet with the Holy Person, the Guru.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all my sins are erased, and I obtain the supreme, sublime, sanctified status. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The five thieves join together and plunder the body-village, stealing the wealth of the Lord's Name.<br>
  But through the Guru's Teachings, they are traced and caught, and this wealth is recovered intact. ||2||<br>
  Practicing hypocrisy and superstition, people have grown weary of the effort, but still, deep within their hearts, they yearn for Maya, Maya.<br>
  By the Grace of the Holy Person, I have met with the Lord, the Primal Being, and the darkness of ignorance is dispelled. ||3||<br>
  The Lord, the Lord of the Earth, the Lord of the Universe, in His Mercy, leads me to meet the Holy Person, the Guru.<br>
  O Nanak, peace then comes to abide deep within my mind, and I constantly sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord within my heart. ||4||1||3||<br>
  Basant, Fourth Mehl, Hindol:<br>
  You are the Great Supreme Being, the Vast and Inaccessible Lord of the World; I am a mere insect, a worm created by You.<br>
  O Lord, Merciful to the meek, please grant Your Grace; O God, I long for the feet of the Guru, the True Guru. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord of the Universe, please be merciful and unite me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.<br>
  I was overflowing with the filthy sins of countless past lives. But joining the Sangat, God made me pure again. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your humble servant, whether of high class or low class, O Lord - by meditating on You, the sinner becomes pure.<br>
  The Lord exalts and elevates him above the whole world, and the Lord God blesses him with the Lord's Glory. ||2||<br>
  Anyone who meditates on God, whether of high class or low class, will have all of his hopes and desires fulfilled.<br>
  Those humble servants of the Lord who enshrine the Lord within their hearts, are blessed, and are made great and totally perfect. ||3||<br>
  I am so low, I am an utterly heavy lump of clay. Please shower Your Mercy on me, Lord, and unite me with Yourself.<br>
  The Lord, in His Mercy, has led servant Nanak to find the Guru; I was a sinner, and now I have become immaculate and pure. ||||4||2||4||<br>
  Basant Hindol, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  My mind cannot survive, even for an instant, without the Lord. I drink in continually the sublime essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  It is like a baby, who joyfully sucks at his mother's breast; when the breast is withdrawn, he weeps and cries. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord of the Universe, my mind and body are pierced through by the Name of the Lord.<br>
  By great good fortune, I have found the Guru, the True Guru, and in the body-village, the Lord has revealed Himself. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 012</h2></center>
  Each and every breath of the Lord's humble servant is pierced through with love of the Lord God.<br>
  As the lotus is totally in love with the water and withers away without seeing the water, so am I in love with the Lord. ||2||<br>
  The Lord's humble servant chants the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Guru's Teachings, the Lord reveals Himself.<br>
  The filth of egotism which stained me for countless lifetimes has been washed away, by the Ambrosial Water of the Ocean of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Please, do not take my karma into account, O my Lord and Master; please save the honor of Your slave.<br>
  O Lord, if it pleases You, hear my prayer; servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. ||4||3||5||<br>
  Basant Hindol, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Each and every moment, my mind roams and rambles, and runs all over the place. It does not stay in its own home, even for an instant.<br>
  But when the bridle of the Shabad, the Word of God, is placed over its head, it returns to dwell in its own home. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord of the Universe, lead me to join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, so that I may meditate on You, Lord.<br>
  I am cured of the disease of egotism, and I have found peace; I have intuitively entered into the state of Samaadhi. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This house is loaded with countless gems, jewels, rubies and emeralds, but the wandering mind cannot find them.<br>
  As the water-diviner finds the hidden water, and the well is then dug in an instant, so do we find the object of the Name through the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  Those who do not find such a Holy True Guru - cursed, cursed are the lives of those people.<br>
  The treasure of this human life is obtained when one's virtues bear fruit, but it is lost in exchange for a mere shell. ||3||<br>
  O Lord God, please be merciful to me; be merciful, and lead me to meet the Guru.<br>
  Servant Nanak has attained the state of Nirvaanaa; meeting with the Holy people, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4||4||6||<br>
  Basant Hindol, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Coming and going, he suffers the pains of vice and corruption; the body of the self-willed manmukh is desolate and vacant.<br>
  He does not dwell on the Lord's Name, even for an instant, and so the Messenger of Death seizes him by his hair. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord of the Universe, please rid me of the poison of egotism and attachment.<br>
  The Sat Sangat, Guru's True Congregation is so dear to the Lord. So join the Sangat, and taste the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Please be kind to me, and unite me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation of the Holy; I seek the Sanctuary of the Holy.<br>
  I am a heavy stone, sinking down - please lift me up and pull me out! O God, Merciful to the meek, You are the Destroyer of sorrow. ||2||<br>
  I enshrine the Praises of my Lord and Master within my heart; joining the Sat Sangat, my intellect is enlightened.<br>
  I have fallen in love with the Lord's Name; I am a sacrifice to the Lord. ||3||<br>
  O Lord God, please fulfill the desires of Your humble servant; please bless me with Your Name, O Lord.<br>
  Servant Nanak's mind and body are filled with ecstasy; the Guru has blessed him with the Mantra of the Lord's Name. ||4||5||7||12||18||7||37||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 013</h2></center>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl, First House, Du-Tukay:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I serve the Guru, and humbly bow to Him.<br>
  Today is a day of celebration for me.<br>
  Today I am in supreme bliss.<br>
  My anxiety is dispelled, and I have met the Lord of the Universe. ||1||<br>
  Today, it is springtime in my household.<br>
  I sing Your Glorious Praises, O Infinite Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Today, I am celebrating the festival of Phalgun.<br>
  Joining with God's companions, I have begun to play.<br>
  I celebrate the festival of Holi by serving the Saints.<br>
  I am imbued with the deep crimson color of the Lord's Divine Love. ||2||<br>
  My mind and body have blossomed forth, in utter, incomparable beauty.<br>
  They do not dry out in either sunshine or shade;<br>
  they flourish in all seasons.<br>
  It is always springtime, when I meet with the Divine Guru. ||3||<br>
  The wish-fulfilling Elysian Tree has sprouted and grown.<br>
  It bears flowers and fruits, jewels of all sorts.<br>
  I am satisfied and fulfilled, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Servant Nanak meditates on the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||4||1||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The shopkeeper deals in merchandise for profit.<br>
  The gambler's consciousness is focused on gambling.<br>
  The opium addict lives by consuming opium.<br>
  In the same way, the humble servant of the Lord lives by meditating on the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Everyone is absorbed in his own pleasures.<br>
  He is attached to whatever God attaches him to. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When the clouds and the rain come, the peacocks dance.<br>
  Seeing the moon, the lotus blossoms.<br>
  When the mother sees her infant, she is happy.<br>
  In the same way, the humble servant of the Lord lives by meditating on the Lord of the Universe. ||2||<br>
  The tiger always wants to eat meat.<br>
  Gazing upon the battlefield, the warrior's mind is exalted.<br>
  The miser is totally in love with his wealth.<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord leans on the Support of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||<br>
  All love is contained in the Love of the One Lord.<br>
  All comforts are contained in the Comfort of the Lord's Name.<br>
  He alone receives this treasure,<br>
  O Nanak, unto whom the Guru gives His gift. ||4||2||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He alone experiences this springtime of the soul, unto whom God grants His Grace.<br>
  He alone experiences this springtime of the soul, unto whom the Guru is merciful.<br>
  He alone is joyful, who works for the One Lord.<br>
  He alone experiences this eternal springtime of the soul, within whose heart the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides. ||1||<br>
  This spring comes only to those homes,<br>
  in which the melody of the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises resounds. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O mortal, let your love for the Supreme Lord God blossom forth.<br>
  Practice spiritual wisdom, and consult the humble servants of the Lord.<br>
  He alone is an ascetic, who joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  He alone dwells in deep, continual meditation, who loves his Guru. ||2||<br>
  He alone is fearless, who has the Fear of God.<br>
  He alone is peaceful, whose doubts are dispelled.<br>
  He alone is a hermit, who heart is steady and stable.<br>
  He alone is steady and unmoving, who has found the true place. ||3||<br>
  He seeks the One Lord, and loves the One Lord.<br>
  He loves to gaze upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.<br>
  He intuitively enjoys the Love of the Lord.<br>
  Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to that humble being. ||4||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 014</h2></center>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You gave us our soul, breath of life and body.<br>
  I am a fool, but You have made me beautiful, enshrining Your Light within me.<br>
  We are all beggars, O God; You are merciful to us.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, we are uplifted and exalted. ||1||<br>
  O my Beloved, only You have the potency to act,<br>
  and cause all to be done. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Chanting the Naam, the mortal is saved.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, sublime peace and poise are found.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, honor and glory are received.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, no obstacles shall block your way. ||2||<br>
  For this reason, you have been blessed with this body, so difficult to obtain.<br>
  O my Dear God, please bless me to speak the Naam.<br>
  This tranquil peace is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  May I always chant and meditate within my heart on Your Name, O God. ||3||<br>
  Other than You, there is no one at all.<br>
  Everything is Your play; it all merges again into You.<br>
  As it pleases Your Will, save me, Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, peace is obtained by meeting with the Perfect Guru. ||4||4||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My Beloved God, my King is with me.<br>
  Gazing upon Him, I live, O my mother.<br>
  Remembering Him in meditation, there is no pain or suffering.<br>
  Please, take pity on me, and lead me on to meet Him. ||1||<br>
  My Beloved is the Support of my breath of life and mind.<br>
  This soul, breath of life, and wealth are all Yours, O Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is sought by the angels, mortals and divine beings.<br>
  The silent sages, the humble, and the religious teachers do not understand His mystery.<br>
  His state and extent cannot be described.<br>
  In each and every home of each and every heart, He is permeating and pervading. ||2||<br>
  His devotees are totally in bliss.<br>
  His devotees cannot be destroyed.<br>
  His devotees are not afraid.<br>
  His devotees are victorious forever. ||3||<br>
  What Praises of Yours can I utter?<br>
  God, the Giver of peace, is all-pervading, permeating everywhere.<br>
  Nanak begs for this one gift.<br>
  Be merciful, and bless me with Your Name. ||4||5||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  As the plant turns green upon receiving water,<br>
  just so, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, egotism is eradicated.<br>
  Just as the servant is encouraged by his ruler,<br>
  we are saved by the Guru. ||1||<br>
  You are the Great Giver, O Generous Lord God.<br>
  Each and every instant, I humbly bow to You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whoever enters the Saadh Sangat<br>
  - that humble being is imbued with the Love of the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  He is liberated from bondage.<br>
  His devotees worship Him in adoration; they are united in His Union. ||2||<br>
  My eyes are content, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.<br>
  My tongue sings the Infinite Praises of God.<br>
  My thirst is quenched, by Guru's Grace.<br>
  My mind is satisfied, with the sublime taste of the Lord's subtle essence. ||3||<br>
  Your servant is committed to the service of Your Feet,<br>
  O Primal Infinite Divine Being.<br>
  Your Name is the Saving Grace of all.<br>
  Nanak has received this teasure. ||4||6||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You are the Great Giver; You continue to give.<br>
  You permeate and pervade my soul, and my breath of life.<br>
  You have given me all sorts of foods and dishes.<br>
  I am unworthy; I know none of Your Virtues at all. ||1||<br>
  I do not understand anything of Your Worth.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 015</h2></center>
  Save me, O my Merciful Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have not practiced meditation, austerities or good actions.<br>
  I do not know the way to meet You.<br>
  Within my mind, I have placed my hopes in the One Lord alone.<br>
  The Support of Your Name shall carry me across. ||2||<br>
  You are the Expert, O God, in all powers.<br>
  The fish cannot find the limits of the water.<br>
  You are Inaccessible and Unfathomable, the Highest of the High.<br>
  I am small, and You are so very Great. ||3||<br>
  Those who meditate on You are wealthy.<br>
  Those who attain You are rich.<br>
  Those who serve You are peaceful.<br>
  Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Saints. ||4||7||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Serve the One who created You.<br>
  Worship the One who gave you life.<br>
  Become His servant, and you shall never again be punished.<br>
  Become His trustee, and you shall never again suffer sorrow. ||1||<br>
  That mortal who is blessed with such great good fortune,<br>
  attains this state of Nirvaanaa. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Life is wasted uselessly in the service of duality.<br>
  No efforts shall be rewarded, and no works brought to fruition.<br>
  It is so painful to serve only mortal beings.<br>
  Service to the Holy brings lasting peace and bliss. ||2||<br>
  If you long for eternal peace, O Siblings of Destiny,<br>
  then join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; this is the Guru's advice.<br>
  There, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is meditated on.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, you shall be emancipated. ||3||<br>
  Among all essences, this is the essence of spiritual wisdom.<br>
  Among all meditations, meditation on the One Lord is the most sublime.<br>
  The Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is the ultimate melody.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4||8||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Chanting His Name, one's mouth becomes pure.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on Him, one's reputation becomes stainless.<br>
  Worshipping Him in adoration, one is not tortured by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  Serving Him, everything is obtained. ||1||<br>
  The Lord's Name - chant the Lord's Name.<br>
  Abandon all the desires of your mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is the Support of the earth and the sky.<br>
  His Light illuminates each and every heart.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on Him, even fallen sinners are sanctified;<br>
  in the end, they will not weep and wail over and over again. ||2||<br>
  Among all religions, this is the ultimate religion.<br>
  Among all rituals and codes of conduct, this is above all.<br>
  The angels, mortals and divine beings long for Him.<br>
  To find Him, commit yourself to the service of the Society of the Saints. ||3||<br>
  One whom the Primal Lord God blesses with His bounties,<br>
  obtains the treasure of the Lord.<br>
  His state and extent cannot be described.<br>
  Servant Nanak meditates on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||9||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind and body are gripped by thirst and desire.<br>
  The Merciful Guru has fulfilled my hopes.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all my sins have been taken away.<br>
  I chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord; I am in love with the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, this spring of the soul has come.<br>
  I enshrine the Lord's Lotus Feet within my heart; I listen to the Lord's Praise, forever and ever. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 016</h2></center>
  Our All-powerful Lord and Master is the Doer of all, the Cause of all causes.<br>
  I am an orphan - I seek Your Sanctuary, God.<br>
  All beings and creatures take Your Support.<br>
  Be merciful, God, and save me. ||2||<br>
  God is the Destroyer of fear, the Remover of pain and suffering.<br>
  The angelic beings and silent sages serve Him.<br>
  The earth and the sky are in His Power.<br>
  All beings eat what You give them. ||3||<br>
  O Merciful God, O Searcher of hearts,<br>
  please bless Your slave with Your Glance of Grace.<br>
  Please be kind and bless me with this gift,<br>
  that Nanak may live in Your Name. ||4||10||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Loving the Lord, one's sins are taken away.<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, one does not suffer at all.<br>
  Meditating on the Lord of the Universe, all darkness is dispelled.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the cycle of reincarnation comes to an end. ||1||<br>
  The love of the Lord is springtime for me.<br>
  I am always with the humble Saints. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Saints have shared the Teachings with me.<br>
  Blessed is that country where the devotees of the Lord of the Universe dwell.<br>
  But that place where the Lord's devotees are not, is wilderness.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, realize the Lord in each and every heart. ||2||<br>
  Sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, and enjoy the nectar of His Love.<br>
  O mortal, you must always restrain yourself from committing sins.<br>
  Behold the Creator Lord God near at hand.<br>
  Here and hereafter, God shall resolve your affairs. ||3||<br>
  I focus my meditation on the Lord's Lotus Feet.<br>
  Granting His Grace, God has blessed me with this Gift.<br>
  I yearn for the dust of the feet of Your Saints.<br>
  Nanak meditates on his Lord and Master, who is ever-present, near at hand. ||4||11||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The True Transcendent Lord is always new, forever fresh.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I continually chant His Name.<br>
  God is my Protector, my Mother and Father.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on Him, I do not suffer in sorrow. ||1||<br>
  I meditate on my Lord and Master, single-mindedly, with love.<br>
  I seek the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru forever. My True Lord and Master hugs me close in His Embrace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  God Himself protects His humble servants.<br>
  The demons and wicked enemies have grown weary of struggling against Him.<br>
  Without the True Guru, there is no place to go.<br>
  Wandering through the lands and foreign countries, people only grow tired and suffer in pain. ||2||<br>
  The record of their past actions cannot be erased.<br>
  They harvest and eat what they have planted.<br>
  The Lord Himself is the Protector of His humble servants.<br>
  No one can rival the humble servant of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  By His own efforts, God protects His slave.<br>
  God's Glory is perfect and unbroken.<br>
  So sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe with your tongue forever.<br>
  Nanak lives by meditating on the Feet of the Lord. ||4||12||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Dwelling at the Guru's Feet, pain and suffering go away.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God has shown mercy to me.<br>
  All my desires and tasks are fulfilled.<br>
  Chanting the Lord's Name, Nanak lives. ||1||<br>
  How beautiful is that season, when the Lord fills the mind.<br>
  Without the True Guru, the world weeps. The faithless cynic comes and goes in reincarnation, over and over again. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 017</h2></center>
  They alone are rich, who have the Wealth of the Lord God.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, sexual desire and anger are eradicated.<br>
  Their fear is dispelled, and they attain the state of fearlessness.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, Nanak meditates on his Lord and Master. ||2||<br>
  God dwells in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Chanting and meditating on the Lord, one's hopes are fulfilled.<br>
  God permeates and pervades the water, the land and the sky.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, Nanak chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||<br>
  The eight miraculous spiritual powers and the nine treasures are contained in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. This is bestowed when God grants His Grace.<br>
  Your slaves, O God, live by chanting and meditating on Your Name.<br>
  O Nanak, the heart-lotus of the Gurmukh blossoms forth. ||4||13||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl, First House, Ik-Tukay:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, all desires are fulfilled,<br>
  and the mortal is re-united with God, after having been separated for so long. ||1||<br>
  Meditate on the Lord of the Universe, who is worthy of meditation.<br>
  Meditating on Him, enjoy celestial peace and poise. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Bestowing His Mercy, He blesses us with His Glance of Grace.<br>
  God Himself takes care of His slave. ||2||<br>
  My bed has been beautified by His Love.<br>
  God, the Giver of Peace, has come to meet me. ||3||<br>
  He does not consider my merits and demerits.<br>
  Nanak worships at the Feet of God. ||4||1||14||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The sins are erased, singing the Glories of God;<br>
  night and day, celestial joy wells up. ||1||<br>
  My mind has blossomed forth, by the touch of the Lord's Feet.<br>
  By His Grace, He has led me to meet the Holy men, the humble servants of the Lord. I remain continually imbued with the love of the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In His Mercy, the Lord of the World has revealed Himself to me.<br>
  The Lord, Merciful to the meek, has attached me to the hem of His robe and saved me. ||2||<br>
  This mind has become the dust of the Holy;<br>
  I behold my Lord and Master, continually, ever-present. ||3||<br>
  Sexual desire, anger and desire have vanished.<br>
  O Nanak, God has become kind to me. ||4||2||15||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  God Himself has cured the disease.<br>
  He laid on His Hands, and protected His child. ||1||<br>
  Celestial peace and tranquility fill my home forever, in this springtime of the soul.<br>
  I have sought the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru; I chant the Mantra of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Embodiment of emancipation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  God Himself has dispelled my sorrow and suffering.<br>
  I meditate continually, continuously, on my Guru. ||2||<br>
  That humble being who chants Your Name,<br>
  obtains all fruits and rewards; singing the Glories of God, he becomes steady and stable. ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, the way of the devotees is good.<br>
  They meditate continually, continuously, on the Lord, the Giver of peace. ||4||3||16||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  By His Will, He makes us happy.<br>
  He shows Mercy to His servant. ||1||<br>
  The Perfect Guru makes everything perfect.<br>
  He implants the Amrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, in the heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He does not consider the karma of my actions, or my Dharma, my spiritual practice.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 018</h2></center>
  Taking me by the arm, He saves me and carries me across the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||<br>
  God has rid me of my filth, and made me stainless and pure.<br>
  I have sought the Sanctuary of the Perfect Guru. ||3||<br>
  He Himself does, and causes everything to be done.<br>
  By His Grace, O Nanak, He saves us. ||4||4||17||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Behold the flowers flowering, and the blossoms blossoming forth!<br>
  Renounce and abandon your egotism.<br>
  Grasp hold of His Lotus Feet.<br>
  Meet with God, O blessed one.<br>
  O my mind, remain conscious of the Lord. ||Pause||<br>
  The tender young plants smell so good,<br>
  while others remain like dry wood.<br>
  The season of spring has come;<br>
  it blossoms forth luxuriantly. ||1||<br>
  Now, the Dark Age of Kali Yuga has come.<br>
  Plant the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.<br>
  It is not the season to plant other seeds.<br>
  Do not wander lost in doubt and delusion.<br>
  One who has such destiny written on his forehead, shall meet with the Guru and find the Lord.<br>
  O mortal, this is the season of the Naam.<br>
  Nanak utters the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har. ||2||18||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Hindol:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Come and join together, O my Siblings of Destiny; dispel your sense of duality and let yourselves be lovingly absorbed in the Lord.<br>
  Let yourselves be joined to the Name of the Lord; become Gurmukh, spread out your mat, and sit down. ||1||<br>
  In this way, throw the dice, O brothers.<br>
  As Gurmukh, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night. At the very last moment, you shall not have to suffer in pain. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Let righteous actions be your gameboard, and let the truth be your dice.<br>
  Conquer sexual desire, anger, greed and worldly attachment; only such a game as this is dear to the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Rise in the early hours of the morning, and take your cleansing bath. Before you go to bed at night, remember to worship the Lord.<br>
  My True Guru will assist you, even on your most difficult moves; you shall reach your true home in celestial peace and poise. ||3||<br>
  The Lord Himself plays, and He Himself watches; the Lord Himself created the creation.<br>
  O servant Nanak, that person who plays this game as Gurmukh, wins the game of life, and returns to his true home. ||4||1||19||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl, Hindol:<br>
  You alone know Your Creative Power, O Lord; no one else knows it.<br>
  He alone realizes You, O my Beloved, unto whom You show Your Mercy. ||1||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to Your devotees.<br>
  Your place is eternally beautiful, God; Your wonders are infinite. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Only You Yourself can perform Your service. No one else can do it.<br>
  He alone is Your devotee, who is pleasing to You. You bless them with Your Love. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 019</h2></center>
  You are the Great Giver; You are so very Wise. There is no other like You.<br>
  You are my All-powerful Lord and Master; I do not know how to worship You. ||3||<br>
  Your Mansion is imperceptible, O my Beloved; it is so difficult to accept Your Will.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have collapsed at Your Door, Lord. I am foolish and ignorant - please save me! ||4||2||20||<br>
  Basant Hindol, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The mortal does not know the Primal Lord God; he does not understand hmself. He is engrossed in doubt and egotism. ||1||<br>
  My Father is the Supreme Lord God, my Master.<br>
  I am unworthy, but please save me anyway. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Creation and destruction come only from God; this is what the Lord's humble servants believe. ||2||<br>
  Only those who are imbued with God's Name are judged to be peaceful in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||3||<br>
  It is the Guru's Word that carries us across; Nanak cannot think of any other way. ||4||3||21||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Raag Basant Hindol, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  O Holy Saints, know that this body is false.<br>
  The Lord who dwells within it - recognize that He alone is real. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The wealth of this world is only a dream; why are you so proud of it?<br>
  None of it shall go along with you in the end; why do you cling to it? ||1||<br>
  Leave behind both praise and slander; enshrine the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises within your heart.<br>
  O servant Nanak, the One Primal Being, the Lord God, is totally permeating everywhere. ||2||1||<br>
  Basant, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  The heart of the sinner is filled with unfulfilled sexual desire.<br>
  He cannot control his fickle mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Yogis, wandering ascetics and renunciates<br>
  - this net is cast over them all. ||1||<br>
  Those who contemplate the Name of the Lord<br>
  cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||<br>
  Servant Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord.<br>
  Please bestow the blessing of Your Name, that he may continue to sing Your Glorious Praises. ||3||2||<br>
  Basant, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, I have gathered the wealth of the Lord's Name.<br>
  My mind has stopped its wanderings, and now, it has come to rest. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Attachment to Maya has run away from my body, and immaculate spiritual wisdom has welled up within me.<br>
  Greed and attachment cannot even touch me; I have grasped hold of devotional worship of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  The cynicism of countless lifetimes has been eradicated, since I obtained the jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  My mind was rid of all its desires, and I was absorbed in the peace of my own inner being. ||2||<br>
  That person, unto whom the Merciful Lord shows compassion, sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Says Nanak, this wealth is gathered only by the Gurmukh. ||3||3||<br>
  Basant, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, how can you forget the Lord's Name?<br>
  When the body perishes, you shall have to deal with the Messenger of Death. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This world is just a hill of smoke.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 020</h2></center>
  What makes you think that it is real? ||1||<br>
  Wealth, spouse, property and household<br>
  - none of them shall go along with you; you must know that this is true! ||2||<br>
  Only devotion to the Lord shall go with you.<br>
  Says Nanak, vibrate and meditate on the Lord with single-minded love. ||3||4||<br>
  Basant, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  Why do you wander lost, O mortal, attached to falsehood and greed?<br>
  Nothing has been lost yet - there is still time to wake up! ||1||Pause||<br>
  You must realize that this world is nothing more than a dream.<br>
  In an instant, it shall perish; know this as true. ||1||<br>
  The Lord constantly abides with you.<br>
  Night and day, vibrate and meditate on Him, O my friend. ||2||<br>
  At the very last instant, He shall be your Help and Support.<br>
  Says Nanak, sing His Praises. ||3||5||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House, Du-Tukees:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The world is a crow; it does not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Forgetting the Naam, it sees the bait, and pecks at it.<br>
  The mind wavers unsteadily, in guilt and deceit.<br>
  I have shattered my attachment to the false world. ||1||<br>
  The burden of sexual desire, anger and corruption is unbearable.<br>
  Without the Naam, how can the mortal maintain a virtuous lifestyle? ||1||Pause||<br>
  The world is like a house of sand, built on a whirlpool;<br>
  it is like a bubble formed by drops of rain.<br>
  It is formed from a mere drop, when the Lord's wheel turns round.<br>
  The lights of all souls are the servants of the Lord's Name. ||2||<br>
  My Supreme Guru has created everything.<br>
  I perform devotional worship service to You, and fall at Your Feet, O Lord.<br>
  Imbued with Your Name, I long to be Yours.<br>
  Those who do not let the Naam become manifest within themselves, depart like thieves in the end. ||3||<br>
  The mortal loses his honor, gathering sin and corruption.<br>
  But imbued with the Lord's Name, you shall go to your true home with honor.<br>
  God does whatever He wills.<br>
  One who abides in the Fear of God, becomes fearless, O my mother. ||4||<br>
  The woman desires beauty and pleasure.<br>
  But betel leaves, garlands of flowers and sweet tastes lead only to disease.<br>
  The more she plays and enjoys, the more she suffers in sorrow.<br>
  But when she enters into the Sanctuary of God, whatever she wishes comes to pass. ||5||<br>
  She wears beautiful clothes with all sorts of decorations.<br>
  But the flowers turn to dust, and her beauty leads her into evil.<br>
  Hope and desire have blocked the doorway.<br>
  Without the Naam, one's hearth and home are deserted. ||6||<br>
  O princess, my daughter, run away from this place!<br>
  Chant the True Name, and embellish your days.<br>
  Serve your Beloved Lord God, and lean on the Support of His Love.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, abandon your thirst for corruption and poison. ||7||<br>
  My Fascinating Lord has fascinated my mind.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have realized You, Lord.<br>
  Nanak stands longingly at God's Door.<br>
  I am content and satisfied with Your Name; please shower me with Your Mercy. ||8||1||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl:<br>
  The mind is deluded by doubt; it comes and goes in reincarnation.<br>
  It is lured by the poisonous lure of Maya.<br>
  It does not remain stable in the Love of the One Lord.<br>
  Like the fish, its neck is pierced by the hook. ||1||<br>
  The deluded mind is instructed by the True Name.<br>
  It contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad, with intuitive ease. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 021</h2></center>
  The mind, deluded by doubt, buzzes around like a bumble bee.<br>
  The holes of the body are worthless, if the mind is filled with such great desire for corrupt passions.<br>
  It is like the elephant, trapped by its own sexual desire.<br>
  It is caught and held tight by the chains, and beaten on its head. ||2||<br>
  The mind is like a foolish frog, without devotional worship.<br>
  It is cursed and condemned in the Court of the Lord, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  He has no class or honor, and no one even mentions his name.<br>
  That person who lacks virtue - all of his pains and sorrows are his only companions. ||3||<br>
  His mind wanders out, and cannot be brought back or restrained.<br>
  Without being imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord, it has no honor or credit.<br>
  You Yourself are the Listener, Lord, and You Yourself are our Protector.<br>
  You are the Support of the earth; You Yourself behold and understand it. ||4||<br>
  When You Yourself make me wander, unto whom can I complain?<br>
  Meeting the Guru, I will tell Him of my pain, O my mother.<br>
  Abandoning my worthless demerits, now I practice virtue.<br>
  Imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I am absorbed in the True Lord. ||5||<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, the intellect is elevated and exalted.<br>
  The mind becomes immaculate, and egotism is washed away.<br>
  He is liberated forever, and no one can put him in bondage.<br>
  He chants the Naam forever, and nothing else. ||6||<br>
  The mind comes and goes according to the Will of the Lord.<br>
  The One Lord is contained amongst all; nothing else can be said.<br>
  The Hukam of His Command pervades everywhere, and all merge in His Command.<br>
  Pain and pleasure all come by His Will. ||7||<br>
  You are infallible; You never make mistakes.<br>
  Those who listen to the Word of the Guru's Shabad - their intellects become deep and profound.<br>
  You, O my Great Lord and Master, are contained in the Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, my mind is pleased, praising the True Lord. ||8||2||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl:<br>
  That person, who thirsts for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan,<br>
  is absorbed in the One Lord, leaving duality behind.<br>
  His pains are taken away, as he churns and drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  The Gurmukh understands, and merges in the One Lord. ||1||<br>
  So many cry out for Your Darshan, Lord.<br>
  How rare are those who realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad and merge with Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Vedas say that we should chant the Name of the One Lord.<br>
  He is endless; who can find His limits?<br>
  There is only One Creator, who created the world.<br>
  Without any pillars, He supports the earth and the sky. ||2||<br>
  Spiritual wisdom and meditation are contained in the melody of the Bani, the Word of the One Lord.<br>
  The One Lord is Untouched and Unstained; His story is unspoken.<br>
  The Shabad, the Word, is the Insignia of the One True Lord.<br>
  Through the Perfect Guru, the Knowing Lord is known. ||3||<br>
  There is only one religion of Dharma; let everyone grasp this truth.<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, one becomes perfect, all the ages through.<br>
  Imbued with the Unmanifest Celestial Lord, and lovingly absorbed in the One,<br>
  the Gurmukh attains the invisible and infinite. ||4||<br>
  There is one celestial throne, and One Supreme King.<br>
  The Independent Lord God is pervading all places.<br>
  The three worlds are the creation of that Sublime Lord.<br>
  The One Creator of the Creation is Unfathomable and Incomprehensible. ||5||<br>
  His Form is One, and True is His Name.<br>
  True justice is administered there.<br>
  Those who practice Truth are honored and accepted.<br>
  They are honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||6||<br>
  Devotional worship of the One Lord is the expression of love for the One Lord.<br>
  Without the Fear of God and devotional worship of Him, the mortal comes and goes in reincarnation.<br>
  One who obtains this understanding from the Guru dwells like an honored guest in this world.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 022</h2></center>
  That humble being who is imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord is certified and approved. ||7||<br>
  I see Him here and there; I dwell on Him intuitively.<br>
  I do not love any other than You, O Lord and Master.<br>
  O Nanak, my ego has been burnt away by the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  The True Guru has shown me the Blessed Vision of the True Lord. ||8||3||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl:<br>
  The fickle consciousness cannot find the Lord's limits.<br>
  It is caught in non-stop coming and going.<br>
  I am suffering and dying, O my Creator.<br>
  No one cares for me, except my Beloved. ||1||<br>
  All are high and exalted; how can I call anyone low?<br>
  Devotional worship of the Lord and the True Name has satisfied me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have taken all sorts of medicines; I am so tired of them.<br>
  How can this disease be cured, without my Guru?<br>
  Without devotional worship of the Lord, the pain is so great.<br>
  My Lord and Master is the Giver of pain and pleasure. ||2||<br>
  The disease is so deadly; how can I find the courage?<br>
  He knows my disease, and only He can take away the pain.<br>
  My mind and body are filled with faults and demerits.<br>
  I searched and searched, and found the Guru, O my brother! ||3||<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad, and the Lord's Name are the cures.<br>
  As You keep me, so do I remain.<br>
  The world is sick; where should I look?<br>
  The Lord is Pure and Immaculate; Immaculate is His Name. ||4||<br>
  The Guru sees and reveals the Lord's home, deep within the home of the self;<br>
  He ushers the soul-bride into the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.<br>
  When the mind remains in the mind, and the consciousness in the consciousness,<br>
  such people of the Lord remain unattached. ||5||<br>
  They remain free of any desire for happiness or sorrow;<br>
  tasting the Amrit, the Ambrosial Nectar, they abide in the Lord's Name.<br>
  They recognize their own selves, and remain lovingly attuned to the Lord.<br>
  They are victorious on the battlefield of life, following the Guru's Teachings, and their pains run away. ||6||<br>
  The Guru has given me the True Ambrosial Nectar; I drink it in.<br>
  Of course, I have died, and now I am alive to live.<br>
  Please, protect me as Your Own, if it pleases You.<br>
  One who is Yours, merges into You. ||7||<br>
  Painful diseases afflict those who are sexually promiscuous.<br>
  God appears permeating and pervading in each and every heart.<br>
  One who remains unattached, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad<br>
  - O Nanak, his heart and consciousness dwell upon and savor the Lord. ||8||4||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl, Ik-Tukee:<br>
  Do not make such a show of rubbing ashes on your body.<br>
  O naked Yogi, this is not the way of Yoga! ||1||<br>
  You fool! How can you have forgotten the Lord's Name?<br>
  At the very last moment, it and it alone shall be of any use to you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Consult the Guru, reflect and think it over.<br>
  Wherever I look, I see the Lord of the World. ||2||<br>
  What can I say? I am nothing.<br>
  All my status and honor are in Your Name. ||3||<br>
  Why do you take such pride in gazing upon your property and wealth?<br>
  When you must leave, nothing shall go along with you. ||4||<br>
  So subdue the five thieves, and hold your consciousness in its place.<br>
  This is the basis of the way of Yoga. ||5||<br>
  Your mind is tied with the rope of egotism.<br>
  You do not even think of the Lord - you fool! He alone shall liberate you. ||6||<br>
  If you forget the Lord, you will fall into the clutches of the Messenger of Death.<br>
  At that very last moment, you fool, you shall be beaten. ||7||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 023</h2></center>
  Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and be rid of your ego.<br>
  True Yoga shall come to dwell in your mind. ||8||<br>
  He blessed you with body and soul, but you do not even think of Him.<br>
  You fool! Visiting graves and cremation grounds is not Yoga. ||9||<br>
  Nanak chants the sublime, glorious Bani of the Word.<br>
  Understand it, and appreciate it. ||10||5||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl:<br>
  In duality and evil-mindedness, the mortal acts blindly.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh wanders, lost in the darkness. ||1||<br>
  The blind man follows blind advice.<br>
  Unless one takes the Guru's Way, his doubt is not dispelled. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The manmukh is blind; he does not like the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  He has become a beast; he cannot get rid of his egotistical pride. ||2||<br>
  God created 8.4 million species of beings.<br>
  My Lord and Master, by the Pleasure of His Will, creates and destroys them. ||3||<br>
  All are deluded and confused, without the Word of the Shabad and good conduct.<br>
  He alone is instructed in this, who is blessed by the Guru, the Creator. ||4||<br>
  The Guru's servants are pleasing to our Lord and Master.<br>
  The Lord forgives them, and they no longer fear the Messenger of Death. ||5||<br>
  Those who love the One Lord with all their heart<br>
  - He dispels their doubts and unites them with Himself. ||6||<br>
  God is Independent, Endless and Infinite.<br>
  The Creator Lord is pleased with Truth. ||7||<br>
  O Nanak, the Guru instructs the mistaken soul.<br>
  He implants the Truth within him, and shows him the One Lord. ||8||6||<br>
  Basant, First Mehl:<br>
  He Himself is the bumble bee, the fruit and the vine.<br>
  He Himself unites us with the Sangat - the Congregation, and the Guru, our Best Friend. ||1||<br>
  O bumble bee, suck in that fragrance,<br>
  which causes the trees to flower, and the woods to grow lush foliage. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He Himself is Lakshmi, and He Himself is her husband.<br>
  He established the world by Word of His Shabad, and He Himself ravishes it. ||2||<br>
  He Himself is the calf, the cow and the milk.<br>
  He Himself is the Support of the body-mansion. ||3||<br>
  He Himself is the Deed, and He Himself is the Doer.<br>
  As Gurmukh, He contemplates Himself. ||4||<br>
  You create the creation, and gaze upon it, O Creator Lord.<br>
  You give Your Support to the uncounted beings and creatures. ||5||<br>
  You are the Profound, Unfathomable Ocean of Virtue.<br>
  You are the Unknowable, the Immaculate, the most Sublime Jewel. ||6||<br>
  You Yourself are the Creator, with the Potency to create.<br>
  You are the Independent Ruler, whose people are at peace. ||7||<br>
  Nanak is satisfied with the subtle taste of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Without the Beloved Lord and Master, life is meaningless. ||8||7||<br>
  Basant Hindol, First Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The nine regions, the seven continents, the fourteen worlds, the three qualities and the four ages - You established them all through the four sources of creation, and You seated them in Your mansions.<br>
  He placed the four lamps, one by one, into the hands of the four ages. ||1||<br>
  O Merciful Lord, Destroyer of demons, Lord of Lakshmi, such is Your Power - Your Shakti. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your army is the fire in the home of each and every heart. And Dharma - righteous living is the ruling chieftain.<br>
  The earth is Your great cooking pot; Your beings receive their portions only once. Destiny is Your gate-keeper. ||2||<br>
  But the mortal becomes unsatisfied, and begs for more; his fickle mind brings him disgrace.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 024</h2></center>
  Greed is the dark dungeon, and demerits are the shackles on his feet. ||3||<br>
  His wealth constantly batters him, and sin acts as the police officer.<br>
  Whether the mortal is good or bad, he is as You look upon him, O Lord. ||4||<br>
  The Primal Lord God is called Allah. The Shaykh's turn has now come.<br>
  The temples of the gods are subject to taxes; this is what it has come to. ||5||<br>
  The Muslim devotional pots, calls to prayer, prayers and prayer mats are everywhere; the Lord appears in blue robes.<br>
  In each and every home, everyone uses Muslim greetings; your speech has changed, O people. ||6||<br>
  You, O my Lord and Master, are the King of the earth; what power do I have to challenge You?<br>
  In the four directions, people bow in humble adoration to You; Your Praises are sung in each and every heart. ||7||<br>
  Making pilgrimages to sacred shrines, reading the Simritees and giving donations in charity - these do bring any profit.<br>
  O Nanak, glorious greatness is obtained in an instant, remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||8||1||8||<br>
  Basant Hindol, Second House, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Within the body-village there lives a child who cannot hold still, even for an instant.<br>
  It makes so many efforts, and grows weary, but still, it wanders restlessly again and again. ||1||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, Your child has come home, to be one with You.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, he finds the Perfect Lord. Meditating and vibrating on the Name of the Lord, he receives the Insignia of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  These are dead corpses, these bodies of all the people of the world; the Name of the Lord does not dwell in them.<br>
  The Guru leads us to taste the water of the Lord's Name, and then we savor and enjoy it, and our bodies are rejuvenated. ||2||<br>
  I have examined and studied and searched my entire body, and as Gurmukh, I behold a miraculous wonder.<br>
  All the faithless cynics searched outside and died, but following the Guru's Teachings, I have found the Lord within the home of my own heart. ||3||<br>
  God is Merciful to the meekest of the meek; Krishna came to the house of Bidar, a devotee of low social status.<br>
  Sudama loved God, who came to meet him; God sent everything to his home, and ended his poverty. ||4||<br>
  Great is the glory of the Name of the Lord. My Lord and Master Himself has enshrined it within me.<br>
  Even if all the faithless cynics continue slandering me, it is not diminished by even one iota. ||5||<br>
  The Lord's Name is the praise of His humble servant. It brings him honor in the ten directions.<br>
  The slanderers and the faithless cynics cannot endure it at all; they have set fire to their own houses. ||6||<br>
  The humble person meeting with another humble person obtains honor. In the glory of the Lord, their glory shines forth.<br>
  The servants of my Lord and Master are loved by the Beloved. They are the slaves of His slaves. ||7||<br>
  The Creator Himself is the Water; He Himself unites us in His Union.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh is absorbed in celestial peace and poise, like water blending with water. ||8||1||9||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 025</h2></center>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl, First House, Du-Tukee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Listen to the stories of the devotees, O my mind, and meditate with love.<br>
  Ajaamal uttered the Lord's Name once, and was saved.<br>
  Baalmeek found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  The Lord definitely met Dhroo. ||1||<br>
  I beg for the dust of the feet of Your Saints.<br>
  Please bless me with Your Mercy, Lord, that I may apply it to my forehead. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Ganika the prostitute was saved, when her parrot uttered the Lord's Name.<br>
  The elephant meditated on the Lord, and was saved.<br>
  He delivered the poor Brahmin Sudama out of poverty.<br>
  O my mind, you too must meditate and vibrate on the Lord of the Universe. ||2||<br>
  Even the hunter who shot an arrow at Krishna was saved.<br>
  Kubija the hunchback was saved, when God placed His Feet on her thumb.<br>
  Bidar was saved by his attitude of humility.<br>
  O my mind, you too must meditate on the Lord. ||3||<br>
  The Lord Himself saved the honor of Prahlaad.<br>
  Even when she was being disrobed in court, Dropatee's honor was preserved.<br>
  Those who have served the Lord, even at the very last instant of their lives, are saved.<br>
  O my mind, serve Him, and you shall be carried across to the other side. ||4||<br>
  Dhanna served the Lord, with the innocence of a child.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, Trilochan attained the perfection of the Siddhas.<br>
  The Guru blessed Baynee with His Divine Illumination.<br>
  O my mind, you too must be the Lord's slave. ||5||<br>
  Jai Dayv gave up his egotism.<br>
  Sain the barber was saved through his selfless service.<br>
  Do not let your mind waver or wander; do not let it go anywhere.<br>
  O my mind, you too shall cross over; seek the Sanctuary of God. ||6||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, You have shown Your Mercy to them.<br>
  You saved those devotees.<br>
  You do not take their merits and demerits into account.<br>
  Seeing these ways of Yours, I have dedicated my mind to Your service. ||7||<br>
  Kabeer meditated on the One Lord with love.<br>
  Naam Dayv lived with the Dear Lord.<br>
  Ravi Daas meditated on God, the Incomparably Beautiful.<br>
  Guru Nanak Dayv is the Embodiment of the Lord of the Universe. ||8||1||<br>
  Basant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The mortal wanders in reincarnation through countless lifetimes.<br>
  Without meditating in remembrance on the Lord, he falls into hell.<br>
  Without devotional worship, he is cut apart into pieces.<br>
  Without understanding, he is punished by the Messenger of Death. ||1||<br>
  Meditate and vibrate forever on the Lord of the Universe, O my friend.<br>
  Love forever the True Word of the Shabad. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Contentment does not come by any endeavors.<br>
  All the show of Maya is just a cloud of smoke.<br>
  The mortal does not hesitate to commit sins.<br>
  Intoxicated with poison, he comes and goes in reincarnation. ||2||<br>
  Acting in egotism and self-conceit, his corruption only increases.<br>
  The world is drowning in attachment and greed.<br>
  Sexual desire and anger hold the mind in its power.<br>
  Even in his dreams, he does not chant the Lord's Name. ||3||<br>
  Sometimes he is a king, and sometimes he is a beggar.<br>
  The world is bound by pleasure and pain.<br>
  The mortal makes no arrangements to save himself.<br>
  The bondage of sin continues to hold him. ||4||<br>
  He has no beloved friends or companions.<br>
  He himself eats what he himself plants.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 026</h2></center>
  He gathers up that which brings corruption;<br>
  leaving them, the fool must depart in an instant. ||5||<br>
  He wanders in attachment to Maya.<br>
  He acts in accordance with the karma of his past actions.<br>
  Only the Creator Himself remains detached.<br>
  God is not affected by virtue or vice. ||6||<br>
  Please save me, O Merciful Lord of the Universe!<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary, O Perfect Compassionate Lord.<br>
  Without You, I have no other place of rest.<br>
  Please take pity on me, God, and bless me with Your Name. ||7||<br>
  You are the Creator, and You are the Doer.<br>
  You are High and Exalted, and You are totally Infinite.<br>
  Please be merciful, and attach me to the hem of Your robe.<br>
  Slave Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God. ||8||2||<br>
  Basant Kee Vaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meditate on the Lord's Name, and blossom forth in green abundance.<br>
  By your high destiny, you have been blessed with this wondrous spring of the soul.<br>
  See all the three worlds in bloom, and obtain the Fruit of Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  Meeting with the Holy Saints, peace wells up, and all sins are erased.<br>
  O Nanak, remember in meditation the One Name, and you shall never again be consigned to the womb of reincarnation.. ||1||<br>
  The five powerful desires are bound down, when you lean on the True Lord.<br>
  The Lord Himself leads us to dwell at His Feet. He stands right in our midst.<br>
  All sorrows and sicknesses are eradicated, and you become ever-fresh and rejuvenated.<br>
  Night and day, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. You shall never again die.<br>
  And the One, from whom we came, O Nanak, into Him we merge once again. ||2||<br>
  Where do we come from? Where do we live? Where do we go in the end?<br>
  All creatures belong to God, our Lord and Master. Who can place a value on Him?<br>
  Those who meditate, listen and chant, those devotees are blessed and beautified.<br>
  The Lord God is Inaccessible and Unfathomable; there is no other equal to Him.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has taught this Truth. Nanak proclaims it to the world. ||3||1||<br>
  Basant, The Word Of The Devotees,<br>
  Kabeer Jee, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The earth is in bloom, and the sky is in bloom.<br>
  Each and every heart has blossomed forth, and the soul is illumined. ||1||<br>
  My Sovereign Lord King blossoms forth in countless ways.<br>
  Wherever I look, I see Him there pervading. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The four Vedas blossom forth in duality.<br>
  The Simritees blossom forth, along with the Koran and the Bible. ||2||<br>
  Shiva blossoms forth in Yoga and meditation.<br>
  Kabeer's Lord and Master pervades in all alike. ||3||1||<br>
  The Pandits, the Hindu religious scholars, are intoxicated, reading the Puraanas.<br>
  The Yogis are intoxicated in Yoga and meditation.<br>
  The Sannyaasees are intoxicated in egotism.<br>
  The penitents are intoxicated with the mystery of penance. ||1||<br>
  All are intoxicated with the wine of Maya; no one is awake and aware.<br>
  The thieves are with them, plundering their homes. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Suk Dayv and Akrur are awake and aware.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 027</h2></center>
  Hanuman with his tail is awake and aware.<br>
  Shiva is awake, serving at the Lord's Feet.<br>
  Naam Dayv and Jai Dayv are awake in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||2||<br>
  There are many ways of being awake, and sleeping.<br>
  To be awake as Gurmukh is the most excellent way.<br>
  The most sublime of all the actions of this body,<br>
  says Kabeer, is to meditate and vibrate on the Lord's Name. ||3||2||<br>
  The wife gives birth to her husband.<br>
  The son leads his father in play.<br>
  Without breasts, the mother nurses her baby. ||1||<br>
  Behold, people! This is how it is in the Dark Age of Kali Yuga.<br>
  The son marries his mother. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Without feet, the mortal jumps.<br>
  Without a mouth, he bursts into laughter.<br>
  Without feeling sleepy, he lays down and sleeps.<br>
  Without a churn, the milk is churned. ||2||<br>
  Without udders, the cow gives milk.<br>
  Without travelling, a long journey is made.<br>
  Without the True Guru, the path is not found.<br>
  Says Kabeer, see this, and understand. ||3||3||<br>
  Prahlaad was sent to school.<br>
  He took many of his friends along with him.<br>
  He asked his teacher, "Why do you teach me about worldly affairs?<br>
  Write the Name of the Dear Lord on my tablet."||1||<br>
  O Baba, I will not forsake the Name of the Lord.<br>
  I will not bother with any other lessons. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Sanda and Marka went to the king to complain.<br>
  He sent for Prahlaad to come at once.<br>
  He said to him, "Stop uttering the Lord's Name.<br>
  I shall release you at once, if you obey my words."||2||<br>
  Prahlaad answered, "Why do you annoy me, over and over again?<br>
  God created the water, land, hills and mountains.<br>
  I shall not forsake the One Lord; if I did, I would be going against my Guru.<br>
  You might as well throw me into the fire and kill me."||3||<br>
  The king became angry and drew his sword.<br>
  "Show me your protector now!"<br>
  So God emerged out of the pillar, and assumed a mighty form.<br>
  He killed Harnaakhash, tearing him apart with his nails. ||4||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God, the Divinity of the divine,<br>
  for the sake of His devotee, assumed the form of the man-lion.<br>
  Says Kabeer, no one can know the Lord's limits.<br>
  He saves His devotees like Prahlaad over and over again. ||5||4||<br>
  Within the body and mind are thieves like sexual desire,<br>
  which has stolen my jewel of spiritual wisdom.<br>
  I am a poor orphan, O God; unto whom should I complain?<br>
  Who has not been ruined by sexual desire? What am I? ||1||<br>
  O Lord, I cannot endure this agonizing pain.<br>
  What power does my fickle mind have against it? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Sanak, Sanandan, Shiva and Suk Dayv<br>
  were born out of Brahma's naval chakra.<br>
  The poets and the Yogis with their matted hair<br>
  all lived their lives with good behavior. ||2||<br>
  You are Unfathomable; I cannot know Your depth.<br>
  O God, Master of the meek, unto whom should I tell my pains?<br>
  Please rid me of the pains of birth and death, and bless me with peace.<br>
  Kabeer utters the Glorious Praises of God, the Ocean of peace. ||3||5||<br>
  There is one merchant and five traders.<br>
  The twenty-five oxen carry false merchandise.<br>
  There are nine poles which hold the ten bags.<br>
  The body is tied by the seventy-two ropes. ||1||<br>
  I don't care at all about such commerce.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 028</h2></center>
  It depletes my capital, and the interest charges only increase. ||Pause||<br>
  Weaving the seven threads together, they carry on their trade.<br>
  They are led on by the karma of their past actions.<br>
  The three tax-collectors argue with them.<br>
  The traders depart empty-handed. ||2||<br>
  Their capital is exhausted, and their trade is ruined.<br>
  The caravan is scattered in the ten directions.<br>
  Says Kabeer, O mortal, your tasks will be accomplished,<br>
  when you merge in the Celestial Lord; let your doubts run away. ||3||6||<br>
  Basant Hindol, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The mother is impure, and the father is impure. The fruit they produce is impure.<br>
  Impure they come, and impure they go. The unfortunate ones die in impurity. ||1||<br>
  Tell me, O Pandit, O religious scholar, which place is uncontaminated?<br>
  Where should I sit to eat my meal? ||1||Pause||<br>
  The tongue is impure, and its speech is impure. The eyes and ears are totally impure.<br>
  The impurity of the sexual organs does not depart; the Brahmin is burnt by the fire. ||2||<br>
  The fire is impure, and the water is impure. The place where you sit and cook is impure.<br>
  Impure is the ladle which serves the food. Impure is the one who sits down to eat it. ||3||<br>
  Impure is the cow dung, and impure is the kitchen square. Impure are the lines that mark it off.<br>
  Says Kabeer, they alone are pure, who have obtained pure understanding. ||4||1||7||<br>
  Raamaanand Jee, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Where should I go? My home is filled with bliss.<br>
  My consciousness does not go out wandering. My mind has become crippled. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One day, a desire welled up in my mind.<br>
  I ground up sandalwood, along with several fragrant oils.<br>
  I went to God's place, and worshipped Him there.<br>
  That God showed me the Guru, within my own mind. ||1||<br>
  Wherever I go, I find water and stones.<br>
  You are totally pervading and permeating in all.<br>
  I have searched through all the Vedas and the Puraanas.<br>
  I would go there, only if the Lord were not here. ||2||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to You, O my True Guru.<br>
  You have cut through all my confusion and doubt.<br>
  Raamaanand's Lord and Master is the All-pervading Lord God.<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad eradicates the karma of millions of past actions. ||3||1||<br>
  Basant, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  If the servant runs away when his master is in trouble,<br>
  he will not have a long life, and he brings shame to all his family. ||1||<br>
  I shall not abandon devotional worship of You, O Lord, even if the people laugh at me.<br>
  The Lord's Lotus Feet abide within my heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The mortal will even die for the sake of his wealth;<br>
  in the same way, the Saints do not forsake the Lord's Name. ||2||<br>
  Pilgrimages to the Ganges, the Gaya and the Godawari are merely worldly affairs.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 29 - Raag Basant - Part 029</h2></center>
  If the Lord were totally pleased, then He would let Naam Dayv be His servant. ||3||1||<br>
  The tidal waves of greed constantly assault me.<br>
  My body is drowning, O Lord. ||1||<br>
  Please carry me across the world-ocean, O Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Carry me across, O Beloved Father. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I cannot steer my ship in this storm.<br>
  I cannot find the other shore, O Beloved Lord. ||2||<br>
  Please be merciful, and unite me with the True Guru;<br>
  carry me across, O Lord. ||3||<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, I do not know how to swim.<br>
  Give me Your Arm, give me Your Arm, O Beloved Lord. ||4||2||<br>
  Slowly at first, the body-cart loaded with dust starts to move.<br>
  Later, it is driven on by the stick. ||1||<br>
  The body moves along like the ball of dung, driven on by the dung-beetle.<br>
  The beloved soul goes down to the pool to wash itself clean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The washerman washes, imbued with the Lord's Love.<br>
  My mind is imbued with the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||2||<br>
  Prays Naam Dayv, O Lord, You are All-pervading.<br>
  Please be kind to Your devotee. ||3||3||<br>
  Basant, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  You know nothing.<br>
  Seeing your clothes, you are so proud of yourself.<br>
  The proud bride shall not find a place with the Lord.<br>
  Above your head, the crow of death is cawing. ||1||<br>
  Why are you so proud? You are insane.<br>
  Even the mushrooms of summer live longer than you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The deer does not know the secret;<br>
  the musk is within its own body, but it searches for it outside.<br>
  Whoever reflects on his own body<br>
  - the Messenger of Death does not abuse him. ||2||<br>
  The man is so proud of his sons and his wife;<br>
  his Lord and Master shall call for his account.<br>
  The soul suffers in pain for the actions it has committed.<br>
  Afterwards, whom shall you call, "Dear, Dear."||3||<br>
  If you seek the Support of the Holy,<br>
  millions upon millions of your sins shall be totally erased.<br>
  Says Ravi Daas, one who chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord,<br>
  is not concerned with social class, birth and rebirth. ||4||1||<br>
  Basant, Kabeer Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  You walk like a cow.<br>
  The hair on your tail is shiny and lustrous. ||1||<br>
  Look around, and eat anything in this house.<br>
  But do not go out to any other. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You lick the grinding bowl, and eat the flour.<br>
  Where have you taken the kitchen rags? ||2||<br>
  Your gaze is fixed on the basket in the cupboard.<br>
  Watch out - a stick may strike you from behind. ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, you have over-indulged in your pleasures.<br>
  Watch out - someone may throw a brick at you. ||4||1||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr30.htm">Next: Raag Saarang</a></center>
 </body>