<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr30.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr32.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Malaar</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 001</h2></center>
  Raag Malaar, Chau-Padas, First Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Eating, drinking, laughing and sleeping, the mortal forgets about dying.<br>
  Forgetting his Lord and Master, the mortal is ruined, and his life is cursed. He cannot remain forever. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, meditate on the One Lord.<br>
  You shall go to your true home with honor. ||1 Pause||<br>
  Those who serve You - what can they give You? They beg for and receive what cannot remain.<br>
  You are the Great Giver of all souls; You are the Life within all living beings. ||2||<br>
  The Gurmukhs meditate, and receive the Ambrosial Nectar; thus they become pure.<br>
  Day and night, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O mortal. It makes the filthy immacuate. ||3||<br>
  As is the season, so is the comfort of the body, and so is the body itself.<br>
  O Nanak, that season is beautiful; without the Name, what season is it? ||4||1||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl:<br>
  I offer prayers to my Beloved Guru, that He may unite me with my Husband Lord.<br>
  I hear the thunder in the clouds, and my mind is cooled and soothed; imbued with the Love of my Dear Beloved, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||<br>
  The rain pours down, and my mind is drenched with His Love.<br>
  The drop of Ambrosial Nectar pleases my heart; the Guru has fascinated my mind, which is drenched in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  With intuitive peace and poise, the soul-bride is loved by her Husband Lord; her mind is pleased and appeased by the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  She is the happy soul-bride of her Husband Lord; her mind and body are filled with joy by His Love. ||2||<br>
  Discarding her demerits, she becomes detached; with the Lord as her Husband, her marriage is eternal.<br>
  She never suffers separation or sorrow; her Lord God showers her with His Grace. ||3||<br>
  Her mind is steady and stable; she does not come and go in reincarnation.<br>
  She takes the Shelter of the Perfect Guru. O Nanak, as Gurmukh, chant the Naam; you shall be accepted as the true soul-bride of the Lord. ||4||2||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl:<br>
  They pretend to understand the Truth, but they are not satisfied by the Naam; they waste their lives in egotism.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 002</h2></center>
  Caught in slander and attachment to the wealth and women of others, they eat poison and suffer in pain.<br>
  They think about the Shabad, but they are not released from their fear and fraud; the minds and mouths are filled with Maya, Maya.<br>
  Loading the heavy and crushing load, they die, only to be reborn, and waste their lives again. ||1||<br>
  The Word of the Shabad is so very beautiful; it is pleasing to my mind.<br>
  The mortal wanders lost in reincarnation, wearing various robes and clothes; when he is saved and protected by the Guru, then he finds the Truth. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He does not try to wash away his angry passions by bathing at sacred shrines. He does not love the Name of the Lord.<br>
  He abandons and discards the priceless jewel, and he goes back from where he came.<br>
  And so he becomes a maggot in manure, and in that, he is absorbed.<br>
  The more he tastes, the more he is diseased; without the Guru, there is no peace and poise. ||2||<br>
  Focusing my awareness on selfless service, I joyfully sing His Praises. As Gurmukh, I contemplate spiritual wisdom.<br>
  The seeker comes forth, and the debater dies down; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Guru, the Creator Lord.<br>
  I am low and wretched, with shallow and false understanding; You embellish and exalt me through the Word of Your Shabad.<br>
  And wherever there is self-realization, You are there; O True Lord Savior, You save us and carry us across. ||3||<br>
  Where should I sit to chant Your Praises; which of Your Infinite Praises should I chant?<br>
  The Unknown cannot be known; O Inaccessible, Unborn Lord God, You are the Lord and Master of masters.<br>
  How can I compare You to anyone else I see? All are beggars - You are the Great Giver.<br>
  Lacking devotion, Nanak looks to Your Door; please bless him with Your One Name, that he may enshrine it in his heart. ||4||3||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl:<br>
  The soul-bride who has not known delight with her Husband Lord, shall weep and wail with a wretched face.<br>
  She becomes hopeless, caught in the noose of her own karma; without the Guru, she wanders deluded by doubt. ||1||<br>
  So rain down, O clouds. My Husband Lord has come home.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to my Guru, who has led me to meet my Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My love, my Lord and Master is forever fresh; I am embellished with devotional worship night and day.<br>
  I am liberated, gazing on the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. Devotional worship has made me glorious and exalted throughout the ages. ||2||<br>
  I am Yours; the three worlds are Yours as well. You are mine, and I am Yours.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, I have found the Immaculate Lord; I shall not be consigned to this terrifying world-ocean ever again. ||3||<br>
  If the soul-bride is filled with delight on seeing her Husband Lord, then her decorations are true.<br>
  With the Immaculate Celestial Lord, she becomes the truest of the true. Following the Guru's Teachings, she leans on the Support of the Naam. ||4||<br>
  She is liberated; the Guru has untied her bonds. Focusing her awareness on the Shabad, she attains honor.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord's Name is deep within her heart; as Gurmukh, she is united in His Union. ||5||4||<br>
  First Mehl, Malaar:<br>
  Others' wives, others' wealth, greed, egotism, corruption and poison;<br>
  evil passions, slander of others, sexual desire and anger - give up all these. ||1||<br>
  The Inaccessible, Infinite Lord is sitting in His Mansion.<br>
  That humble being, whose conduct is in harmony with the jewel of the Guru's Shabad, obtains the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 003</h2></center>
  He sees pleasure and pain as both the same, along with good and bad in the world.<br>
  Wisdom, understanding and awareness are found in the Name of the Lord. In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, embrace love for the Guru. ||2||<br>
  Day and night, profit is obtained through the Lord's Name. The Guru, the Giver, has given this gift.<br>
  That Sikh who becomes Gurmukh obtains it. The Creator blesses him with His Glance of Grace. ||3||<br>
  The body is a mansion, a temple, the home of the Lord; He has infused His Infinite Light into it.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh is invited to the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; the Lord unites him in His Union. ||4||5||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Know that the creation was formed through air and water;<br>
  have no doubt that the body was made through fire.<br>
  And if you know where the soul comes from,<br>
  you shall be known as a wise religious scholar. ||1||<br>
  Who can know the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, O mother?<br>
  Without seeing Him, we cannot say anything about Him.<br>
  How can anyone speak and describe Him, O mother? ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is high above the sky, and beneath the nether worlds.<br>
  How can I speak of Him? Let me understand.<br>
  Who knows what sort of Name is chanted, in the heart, without the tongue? ||2||<br>
  Undoubtedly, words fail me.<br>
  He alone understands, who is blessed.<br>
  Day and night, deep within, he remains lovingly attuned to the Lord.<br>
  He is the true person, who is merged in the True Lord. ||3||<br>
  If someone of high social standing becomes a selfless servant,<br>
  then his praises cannot even be expressed.<br>
  And if someone from a low social class becomes a selfless servant,<br>
  O Nanak, he shall wear shoes of honor. ||4||1||6||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl:<br>
  The pain of separation - this is the hungry pain I feel.<br>
  Another pain is the attack of the Messenger of Death.<br>
  Another pain is the disease consuming my body.<br>
  O foolish doctor, don't give me medicine. ||1||<br>
  O foolish doctor, don't give me medicine.<br>
  The pain persists, and the body continues to suffer.<br>
  Your medicine has no effect on me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Forgetting his Lord and Master, the mortal enjoys sensual pleasures;<br>
  then, disease rises up in his body.<br>
  The blind mortal receives his punishment.<br>
  O foolish doctor, don't give me medicine. ||2||<br>
  The value of sandalwood lies in its fragrance.<br>
  The value of the human lasts only as long as the breath in the body.<br>
  When the breath is taken away, the body crumbles into dust.<br>
  After that, no one takes any food. ||3||<br>
  The mortal's body is golden, and the soul-swan is immaculate and pure,<br>
  if even a tiny particle of the Immaculate Naam is within.<br>
  All pain and disease are eradicated.<br>
  O Nanak, the mortal is saved through the True Name. ||4||2||7||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl:<br>
  Pain is the poison. The Lord's Name is the antidote.<br>
  Grind it up in the mortar of contentment, with the pestle of charitable giving.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 004</h2></center>
  Take it each and every day, and your body shall not waste away.<br>
  At the very last instant, you shall strike down the Messenger of Death. ||1||<br>
  So take such medicine, O fool,<br>
  by which your corruption shall be taken away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Power, wealth and youth are all just shadows,<br>
  as are the vehicles you see moving around.<br>
  Neither your body, nor your fame, nor your social status shall go along with you.<br>
  In the next world it is day, while here, it is all night. ||2||<br>
  Let your taste for pleasures be the firewood, let your greed be the ghee,<br>
  and your sexual desire and anger the cooking oil; burn them in the fire.<br>
  Some make burnt offerings, hold sacred feasts, and read the Puraanas.<br>
  Whatever pleases God is acceptable. ||3||<br>
  Intense meditation is the paper, and Your Name is the insignia.<br>
  Those for whom this treasure is ordered,<br>
  look wealthy when they reach their true home.<br>
  O Nanak, blessed is that mother who gave birth to them. ||4||3||8||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl:<br>
  You wear white clothes, and speak sweet words.<br>
  Your nose is sharp, and your eyes are black.<br>
  Have you ever seen your Lord and Master, O sister? ||1||<br>
  O my All-powerful Lord and Master, by Your power, I fly and soar, and ascend to the heavens.<br>
  I see Him in the water, on the land, in the mountains, on the river-banks,<br>
  in all places and interspaces, O brother. ||2||<br>
  He fashioned the body, and gave it wings;<br>
  He gave it great thirst and desire to fly.<br>
  When He bestows His Glance of Grace, I am comforted and consoled.<br>
  As He makes me see, so do I see, O brother. ||3||<br>
  Neither this body, nor its wings, shall go to the world hereafter.<br>
  It is a fusion of air, water and fire.<br>
  O Nanak, if it is in the mortal's karma, then he meditates on the Lord, with the Guru as his Spiritual Teacher.<br>
  This body is absorbed in the Truth. ||4||4||9||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Formless Lord is formed by Himself. He Himself deludes in doubt.<br>
  Creating the Creation, the Creator Himself beholds it; He enjoins us as He pleases.<br>
  This is the true greatness of His servant, that he obeys the Hukam of the Lord's Command. ||1||<br>
  Only He Himself knows His Will. By Guru's Grace, it is grasped.<br>
  When this play of Shiva and Shakti comes to his home, he remains dead while yet alive. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They read the Vedas, and read them again, and engage in arguments about Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.<br>
  This three-phased Maya has deluded the whole world into cynicism about death and birth.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, know the One Lord, and the anxiety of your mind will be allayed. ||2||<br>
  I am meek, foolish and thoughtless, but still, You take care of me.<br>
  Please be kind to me, and make me the slave of Your slaves, so that I may serve You.<br>
  Please bless me with the treasure of the One Name, that I may chant it, day and night. ||3||<br>
  Says Nanak, by Guru's Grace, understand. Hardly anyone considers this.<br>
  Like foam bubbling up on the surface of the water, so is this world.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 005</h2></center>
  It shall eventually merge back into that from which it came, and all its expanse shall be gone. ||4||1||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who realize the Hukam of the Lord's Command are united with Him; through the Word of His Shabad, their egotism is burnt away.<br>
  They perform true devotional worship day and night; they remain lovingly attuned to the True Lord.<br>
  They gaze on their True Lord forever, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, with loving ease. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, accept His Will and find peace.<br>
  God is pleased by the Pleasure of His Own Will. Whomever He forgives, meets no obstacles on the way. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Under the influence of the three gunas, the three dispositions, the mind wanders everywhere, without love or devotion to the Lord.<br>
  No one is ever saved or liberated, by doing deeds in ego.<br>
  Whatever our Lord and Master wills, comes to pass. People wander according to their past actions. ||2||<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, the mind is overpowered; the Lord's Name comes to abide in the mind.<br>
  The value of such a person cannot be estimated; nothing at all can be said about him.<br>
  He comes to dwell in the fourth state; he remains merged in the True Lord. ||3||<br>
  My Lord God is Inaccessible and Unfathomable. His value cannot be expressed.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, he comes to understand, and live the Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord. ||4||2||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  Rare is that person who, as Gurmukh, understands; the Lord has bestowed His Glance of Grace.<br>
  There is no Giver except the Guru. He grants His Grace and forgives.<br>
  Meeting the Guru, peace and tranquility well up; chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru and the Primal Being, the Name is obtained, and one remains forever absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are forever separated from the Lord; no one is with them.<br>
  They are stricken with the great disease of egotism; they are hit on the head by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  Those who follow the Guru's Teachings are never separated from the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. They dwell on the Naam, night and day. ||2||<br>
  You are the One and Only Creator of all. You continually create, watch over and contemplate.<br>
  Some are Gurmukh - You unite them with Yourself. You bless then with the treasure of devotion.<br>
  You Yourself know everything. Unto whom should I complain? ||3||<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar. By the Lord's Grace, it is obtained.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, night and day, the intuitive peace and poise of the Guru is obtained.<br>
  O Nanak, the Naam is the greatest treasure. Focus your consciousness on the Naam. ||4||3||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  I praise the Guru, the Giver of peace, forever. He truly is the Lord God.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status. His glorious greatness is glorious!<br>
  One who sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord, merges in the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, contemplate the Guru's Word in your heart.<br>
  Abandon your false family, poisonous egotism and desire; remember in your heart, that you will have to leave. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The True Guru is the Giver of the Lord's Name. There is no other giver at all.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 006</h2></center>
  Bestowing the gift of the soul, He satisfies the mortal beings, and merges them in the True Name.<br>
  Night and day, they ravish and enjoy the Lord within the heart; they are intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi. ||2||<br>
  The Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, has pierced my mind. The True Word of His Bani permeates my heart.<br>
  My God is Unseen; He cannot be seen. The Gurmukh speaks the Unspoken.<br>
  When the Giver of peace grants His Grace, the mortal being meditates on the Lord, the Life of the Universe. ||3||<br>
  He does not come and go in renicarnation any longer; the Gurmukh meditates intuitively.<br>
  From the mind, the mind merges into our Lord and Master; the mind is absorbed into the Mind.<br>
  In truth, the True Lord is pleased with truth; eradicate egotism from within yourself. ||4||<br>
  Our One and Only Lord and Master dwells within the mind; there is no other at all.<br>
  The One Name is Sweet Ambrosial Nectar; it is Immaculate Truth in the world.<br>
  O Nanak, the Name of God is obtained, by those who are so predestined. ||5||4||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  All the heavenly heralds and celestial singers are saved through the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  They contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. Subduing their ego, the Name abides in their minds; they keep the Lord enshrined in their hearts.<br>
  He alone understands, whom the Lord causes to understand; the Lord unites him with Himself.<br>
  Night and day, he sings the Word of the Shabad and the Guru's Bani; he remains lovingly attuned to the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, each and every moment, dwell on the Naam.<br>
  The Shabad is the Guru's Gift. It shall bring you lasting peace deep within; it shall always stand by you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs never give up their hypocrisy; in the love of duality, they suffer in pain.<br>
  Forgetting the Naam, their minds are imbued with corruption. They waste away their lives uselessly.<br>
  This opportunity shall not come into their hands again; night and day, they shall always regret and repent.<br>
  They die and die again and again, only to be reborn, but they never understand. They rot away in manure. ||2||<br>
  The Gurmukhs are imbued with the Naam, and are saved; they contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Meditating on the Name of the Lord, they are Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive. They enshrine the Lord within their hearts.<br>
  Their minds and bodies are immaculate, their intellect is immaculate and sublime. Their speech is sublime as well.<br>
  They realize the One Primal Being, the One Lord God. There is no other at all. ||3||<br>
  God Himself is the Doer, and He Himself is the Cause of causes. He Himself bestows His Glance of Grace.<br>
  My mind and body are imbued with the Word of the Guru's Bani. My consciousness is immersed in His service.<br>
  The Unseen and Inscrutable Lord dwells deep within. He is seen only by the Gurmukh.<br>
  O Nanak, He gives to whomever He pleases. According to the Pleasure of His Will, He leads the mortals on. ||4||5||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl, Du-Tukas:<br>
  Through the True Guru, the mortal obtains the special place, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence in his own home.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, his egotistical pride is dispelled. ||1||<br>
  Those who have the Naam inscribed on their foreheads,<br>
  meditate on the Naam night and day, forever and ever. They are honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  From the True Guru, they learn the ways and means of the mind. Night and day, they focus their meditation on the Lord forever.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 007</h2></center>
  Imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they remain forever detached. They are honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  This mind plays, subject to the Lord's Will; in an instant, it wanders out in the ten directions and returns home again.<br>
  When the True Lord God Himself bestows His Glance of Grace, then this mind is instantly brought under control by the Gurmukh. ||3||<br>
  The mortal comes to know the ways and means of the mind, realizing and contemplating the Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, meditate forever on the Naam, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||4||6||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  Soul, body and breath of life are all His; He is permeating and pervading each and every heart.<br>
  Except the One Lord, I do not know any other at all. The True Guru has revealed this to me. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, remain lovingly attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I meditate on the Lord, the Unseen, Unfathomable and Infinite Creator. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Mind and body are pleased, lovingly attuned to the One Lord, intuitively absorbed in peace and poise.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, doubt and fear are dispelled, being lovingly attuned to the One Name. ||2||<br>
  When the mortal follows the Guru's Teachings, and lives the Truth, then he attains the state of emancipation.<br>
  Among millions, how rare is that one who understands, and is lovingly attuned to the Name of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Wherever I look, there I see the One. This understanding has come through the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  I place my mind, body and breath of life in offering before Him; O Nanak, self-conceit is gone. ||4||7||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  My True Lord God, the Eradicator of suffering, is found through the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Imbued with devotional worship, the mortal remains forever detached. He is honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O mind, remain absorbed in the Mind.<br>
  The mind of the Gurmukh is pleased with the Lord's Name, lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My God is totally Inaccessible and Unfathomable; through the Guru's Teachings, He is understood.<br>
  True self-discipline rests in singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||2||<br>
  He Himself is the Shabad, and He Himself is the True Teachings; He merges our light into the Light.<br>
  The breath vibrates through this frail body; the Gurmukh obtains the ambrosial nectar. ||3||<br>
  He Himself fashions, and He Himself links us to our tasks; the True Lord is pervading everywhere.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no one is anything. Through the Naam,we are blessed with glory. ||4||8||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  The mortal is enticed by the poison of corruption, burdened with such a heavy load.<br>
  The Lord has placed the magic spell of the Shabad into his mouth, and destroyed the poison of ego. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, egotism and attachment are such heavy loads of pain.<br>
  This terrifying world-ocean cannot be crossed; through the Lord's Name, the Gurmukh crosses over to the other side. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Attachment to the three-phased show of Maya pervades all the created forms.<br>
  In the Sat Sangat, the Society of the Saints, the state of supreme awareness is attained. The Merciful Lord carries us across. ||2||<br>
  The smell of sandalwood is so sublime; its fragrance spreads out far and wide.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 008</h2></center>
  The lifestyle of the Lord's humble servant is exalted and sublime. He spreads the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises throughout the world. ||3||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, please be merciful, merciful to me, that I may enshrine the Lord, Har, Har, Har, within my heart.<br>
  Nanak has found the Perfect True Guru; in his mind, he chants the Name of the Lord. ||4||9||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Is this mind a householder, or is this mind a detached renunciate?<br>
  Is this mind beyond social class, eternal and unchanging?<br>
  Is this mind fickle, or is this mind detached?<br>
  How has this mind been gripped by possessiveness? ||1||<br>
  O Pandit, O religious scholar, reflect on this in your mind.<br>
  Why do you read so many other things, and carry such a heavy load? ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Creator has attached it to Maya and possessiveness.<br>
  Enforcing His Order, He created the world.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, understand this, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  Remain forever in the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  He alone is a Pandit, who sheds the load of the three qualities.<br>
  Night and day, he chants the Name of the One Lord.<br>
  He accepts the Teachings of the True Guru.<br>
  He offers his head to the True Guru.<br>
  He remains forever unattached in the state of Nirvaanaa.<br>
  Such a Pandit is accepted in the Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  He preaches that the One Lord is within all beings.<br>
  As he sees the One Lord, he knows the One Lord.<br>
  That person, whom the Lord forgives, is united with Him.<br>
  He finds eternal peace, here and hereafter. ||4||<br>
  Says Nanak, what can anyone do?<br>
  He alone is liberated, whom the Lord blesses with His Grace.<br>
  Night and day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Then, he no longer bothers with the proclamations of the Shaastras or the Vedas. ||5||1||10||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs wander lost in reincarnation, confused and deluded by doubt.<br>
  The Messenger of Death constantly beats them and disgraces them.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, the mortal's subservience to Death is ended.<br>
  He meets the Lord God, and enters the Mansion of His Presence. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  In duality, you are ruining and wasting this priceless human life. You trade it away in exchange for a shell. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Gurmukh falls in love with the Lord, by His Grace.<br>
  He enshrines loving devotion to the Lord, Har, Har, deep within his heart.<br>
  The Word of the Shabad carries him across the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  He appears true in the True Court of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Performing all sorts of rituals, they do not find the True Guru.<br>
  Without the Guru, so many wander lost and confused in Maya.<br>
  Egotism, possessiveness and attachment rise up and increase within them.<br>
  In the love of dualty, the self-willed manmukhs suffer in pain. ||3||<br>
  The Creator Himself is Inaccessible and Infinite.<br>
  Chant the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and earn the true profit.<br>
  The Lord is Independent, Ever-present, here and now.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 009</h2></center>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh merges in the Naam. ||4||2||11||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who are attached to the Guru's Teachings, are Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive.<br>
  They remain forever awake and aware night and day, in devotional worship of the Lord.<br>
  They serve the True Guru, and eradicate their self-conceit.<br>
  I fall at the feet of such humble beings. ||1||<br>
  Constantly singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I live.<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad is such totally sweet elixir. Through the Name of the Lord, I have attained the state of liberation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Attachment to Maya leads to the darkness of ignorance.<br>
  The self-willed manukhs are attached, foolish and ignorant.<br>
  Night and day, their lives pass away in worldly entanglements.<br>
  They die and die again and again, only to be reborn and receive their punishment. ||2||<br>
  The Gurmukh is lovingly attuned to the Name of the Lord.<br>
  He does not cling to false greed.<br>
  Whatever he does, he does with intuitive poise.<br>
  He drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord; his tongue delights in its flavor. ||3||<br>
  Among millions, hardly any understand.<br>
  The Lord Himself forgives, and bestows His glorious greatness.<br>
  Whoever meets with the Primal Lord God, shall never be separated again.<br>
  Nanak is absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||3||12||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  Everyone speaks the Name of the Lord with the tongue.<br>
  But only by serving the True Guru does the mortal receive the Name.<br>
  His bonds are shattered, and he stays in the house of liberation.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he sits in the eternal, unchanging house. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, why are you angry?<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the source of profit. Contemplate and appreciate the Guru's Teachings within your heart, night and day. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Each and every instant, the rainbird cries and calls.<br>
  Without seeing her Beloved, she does not sleep at all.<br>
  She cannot endure this separation.<br>
  When she meets the True Guru, then she intuitively meets her Beloved. ||2||<br>
  Lacking the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal suffers and dies.<br>
  He is burnt in the fire of desire, and his hunger does not depart.<br>
  Without good destiny, he cannot find the Naam.<br>
  He performs all sorts of rituals until he is exhausted. ||3||<br>
  The mortal thinks about the Vedic teachings of the three gunas, the three dispositions.<br>
  He deals in corruption, filth and vice.<br>
  He dies, only to be reborn; he is ruined over and over again.<br>
  The Gurmukh enshrines the glory of the supreme state of celestial peace. ||4||<br>
  One who has faith in the Guru - everyone has faith in him.<br>
  Through the Guru's Word, the mind is cooled and soothed.<br>
  Throughout the four ages, that humble being is known to be pure.<br>
  O Nanak, that Gurmukh is so rare. ||5||4||13||9||13||22||<br>
  Raag Malaar, Fourth Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Night and day, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, within my heart; through the Guru's Teachings, my pain is forgotten.<br>
  The chains of all my hopes and desires have been snapped; my Lord God has showered me with His Mercy. ||1||<br>
  My eyes gaze eternally on the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Gazing on the True Guru, my mind blossoms forth. I have met with the Lord, the Lord of the World. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 010</h2></center>
  One who forgets such a Name of the Lord, Har, Har - his family is dishonored.<br>
  His family is sterile and barren, and his mother is made a widow. ||2||<br>
  O Lord, let me meet the Holy Guru, who night and day keep the Lord enshrined in his heart.<br>
  Seeing the Guru, the GurSikh blossoms forth, like the child seeing his mother. ||3||<br>
  The soul-bride and the Husband Lord live together as one, but the hard wall of egotism has come between them.<br>
  The Perfect Guru demolishes the wall of egotism; servant Nanak has met the Lord, the Lord of the World. ||4||1||<br>
  Malaar, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Ganges, the Jamunaa, the Godaavari and the Saraswati - these rivers strive for the dust of the feet of the Holy.<br>
  Overflowing with their filthy sins, the mortals take cleansing baths in them; the rivers' pollution is washed away by the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||1||<br>
  Instead of bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, take your cleansing bath in the Name.<br>
  When the dust of the feet of the Sat Sangat rises up into the eyes, all filthy evil-mindedness is removed. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Bhaageerat'h the penitent brought the Ganges down, and Shiva established Kaydaar.<br>
  Krishna grazed cows in Kaashi; through the humble servant of the Lord, these places became famous. ||2||<br>
  And all the sacred shrines of pilgrimage established by the gods, long for the dust of the feet of the Holy.<br>
  Meeting with the Lord's Saint, the Holy Guru, I apply the dust of His feet to my face. ||3||<br>
  And all the creatures of Your Universe, O my Lord and Master, long for the dust of the feet of the Holy.<br>
  O Nanak, one who has such destiny inscribed on his forehead, is blessed with the dust of the feet of the Holy; the Lord carries him across. ||4||2||<br>
  Malaar, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord seems sweet to that humble being who is blessed by the Grace of the Lord.<br>
  His hunger and pain are totally taken away; he chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, Har, the mortal is emancipated.<br>
  One who listens to the Guru's Teachings and meditates on them, is carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am the slave of that humble being, who is blessed by the Grace of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Meeting with the Lord's humble servant, peace is obtained; all the pollution and filth of evil-mindedness is washed away. ||2||<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord feels hunger only for the Lord. He is satisfied only when he chants the Lord's Glories.<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord is a fish in the Water of the Lord. Forgetting the Lord, he would dry up and die. ||3||<br>
  He alone knows this love, who enshrines it within his mind.<br>
  Servant Nanak gazes upon the Lord and is at peace; The hunger of his body is totally satisfied. ||4||3||<br>
  Malaar, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  All the beings and creatures which God has created - on their foreheds, He has written their destiny.<br>
  The Lord blesses His humble servant with glorious greatness. The Lord enjoins him to his tasks. ||1||<br>
  The True Guru implants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 011</h2></center>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, O Sikhs of the Guru, O my Siblings of Destiny. Only the Lord will carry you across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That humble being who worships, adores and serves the Guru is pleasing to my Lord God.<br>
  To worship and adore the True Guru is to serve the Lord. In His Mercy, He saves us and carries us across. ||2||<br>
  The ignorant and the blind wander deluded by doubt; deluded and confused, they pick flowers to offer to their idols.<br>
  They worship lifeless stones and serve the tombs of the dead; all their efforts are useless. ||3||<br>
  He alone is said to be the True Guru, who realizes God, and proclaims the Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Offer the Guru sacred foods, clothes, silk and satin robes of all sorts; know that He is True. The merits of this shall never leave you lacking. ||4||<br>
  The Divine True Guru is the Embodiment, the Image of the Lord; He utters the Ambrosial Word.<br>
  O Nanak, blessed and good is the destiny of that humble being, who focuses his consciousness on the Feet of the Lord. ||5||4||<br>
  Malaar, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Those whose hearts are filled with my True Guru - those Saints are good and noble in every way.<br>
  Seeing them, my mind blossoms forth in bliss; I am forever a sacrifice to them. ||1||<br>
  O spiritual teacher, chant the Name of the Lord, day and night.<br>
  All hunger and thirst are satisfied, for those who partake of the sublime essence of the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The slaves of the Lord are our Holy companions. Meeting with them, doubt is taken away.<br>
  As the swan separates the milk from the water, the Holy Saint removes the fire of egotism from the body. ||2||<br>
  Those who do not love the Lord in their hearts are deceitful; they continually practice deception.<br>
  What can anyone give them to eat? Whatever they themselves plant, they must eat. ||3||<br>
  This is the Quality of the Lord, and of the Lord's humble servants as well; the Lord places His Own Essence within them.<br>
  Blessed, blessed, is Guru Nanak, who looks impartially on all; He crosses over and transcends both slander and praise. ||4||5||<br>
  Malaar, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Name of the Lord is inaccessible, unfathomable, exalted and sublime. It is chanted by the Lord's Grace.<br>
  By great good fortune, I have found the True Congregation, and in the Company of the Holy, I am carried across. ||1||<br>
  My mind is in ecstasy, night and day.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I chant the Name of the Lord. Doubt and fear are gone from my mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who chant and meditate on the Lord - O Lord, in Your Mercy, please unite me with them.<br>
  Gazing upon them, I am at peace; the pain and disease of egotism are gone. ||2||<br>
  Those who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord in their hearts - their lives become totally fruitful.<br>
  They themselves swim across, and carry the world across with them. Their ancestors and family cross over as well. ||3||<br>
  You Yourself created the whole world, and You Yourself keep it under Your control.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 012</h2></center>
  God has showered His Mercy on servant Nanak; He has lifted him up, and rescued him from the ocean of poison. ||4||6||<br>
  Malaar, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Those who do not drink in the Ambrosial Nectar by Guru's Grace - their thirst and hunger are not relieved.<br>
  The foolish self-willed manmukh burns in the fire of egotistical pride; he suffers painfully in egotism.<br>
  Coming and going, he wastes his life uselessly; afflicted with pain, he regrets and repents.<br>
  He does not even think of the One, from whom he originated. Cursed is his life, and cursed is his food. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, in His Mercy leads the mortal to meet the Guru; he is absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The life of the self-willed manmukh is useless; he comes and goes in shame.<br>
  In sexual desire and anger, the proud ones are drowned. They are burnt in their egotism.<br>
  They do not attain perfection or understanding; their intellect is dimmed. Tossed by the waves of greed, they suffer in pain.<br>
  Without the Guru, they suffer in terrible pain. Seized by Death, they weep and wail. ||2||<br>
  As Gurmukh, I have attained the Unfathomable Name of the Lord, with intuitive peace and poise.<br>
  The treasure of the Naam abides deep within my heart. My tongue sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  I am forever in bliss, day and night, lovingly attuned to the One Word of the Shabad.<br>
  I have obtained the treasure of the Naam with intuitive ease; this is the glorious greatness of the True Guru. ||3||<br>
  Through the True Guru, the Lord, Har, Har, comes to dwell within my mind. I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru.<br>
  I have dedicated my mind and body to Him, and placed everything before Him in offering. I focus my consciousness on His Feet.<br>
  Please be merciful to me, O my Perfect Guru, and unite me with Yourself.<br>
  I am just iron; the Guru is the boat, to carry me across. ||4||7||<br>
  Malaar, Fourth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord chants the Name of the Supreme Lord; he joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Lord's Holy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Deal only in the wealth of the Lord, and gather only the wealth of the Lord. No thief can ever steal it. ||1||<br>
  The rainbirds and the peacocks sing day and night, hearing the thunder in the clouds. ||2||<br>
  Whatever the deer, the fish and the birds sing, they chant to the Lord, and no other. ||3||<br>
  Servant Nanak sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises; the sound and fury of Death has totally gone away. ||4||1||8||<br>
  Malaar, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  They speak and chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam; the very fortunate ones seek Him.<br>
  Whoever shows me the Way of the Lord - I fall at his feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord is my Friend and Compansion; I am in love with the Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 013</h2></center>
  I sing of the Lord, and I speak of the Lord; I have discarded all other loves. ||1||<br>
  My Beloved is the Enticer of the mind; The Detached Lord God is the Embodiment of Supreme bliss.<br>
  Nanak lives by gazing upon the Lord; may I see Him for a moment, for even just an instant. ||2||2||9||9||13||9||31||<br>
  Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  What are you so worried about? What are you thinking? What have you tried?<br>
  Tell me - the Lord of the Universe - who controls Him? ||1||<br>
  The rain showers down from the clouds, O companion. The Guest has come into my home.<br>
  I am meek; my Lord and Master is the Ocean of Mercy. I am absorbed in the nine treasures of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have prepared all sorts of foods in various ways, and all sorts of sweet deserts.<br>
  I have made my kitchen pure and sacred. Now, O my Sovereign Lord King, please sample my food. ||2||<br>
  The villains have been destroyed, and my friends are delighted. This is Your Own Mansion and Temple, O Lord.<br>
  When my Playful Beloved came into my household, then I found total peace. ||3||<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, I have the Support and Protection of the Perfect Guru; this is the pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon my forehead.<br>
  Servant Nanak has found his Playful Husband Lord. He shall never suffer in sorrow again. ||4||1||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  When the baby's only food is milk, it cannot survive without its milk.<br>
  The mother takes care of it, and pours milk into its mouth; then, it is satisfied and fulfilled. ||1||<br>
  I am just a baby; God, the Great Giver, is my Father.<br>
  The child is so foolish; it makes so many mistakes. But it has nowhere else to go. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The mind of the poor child is fickle; he touches even snakes and fire.<br>
  His mother and father hug him close in their embrace, and so he plays in joy and bliss. ||2||<br>
  What hunger can the child ever have, O my Lord and Master, when You are his Father?<br>
  The treasure of the Naam and the nine treasures are in Your celestial household. You fulfill the desires of the mind. ||3||<br>
  My Merciful Father has issued this Command: whatever the child asks for, is put into his mouth.<br>
  Nanak, the child, longs for the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. May His Feet always dwell within my heart. ||4||2||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I tried everything, and gathered all devices together; I have discarded all my anxieties.<br>
  I have begun to set all my household affairs right; I have placed my faith in my Lord and Master. ||1||<br>
  I listen to the celestial vibrations resonating and resounding.<br>
  Sunrise has come, and I gaze upon the Face of my Beloved. My household is filled with peace and pleasure. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I focus my mind, and embellish and adorn the place within; then I go out to speak with the Saints.<br>
  Seeking and searching, I have found my Husband Lord; I bow at His Feet and worship Him with devotion. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 014</h2></center>
  When my Beloved came to live in my house, I began to sing the songs of bliss.<br>
  My friends and companions are happy; God leads me to meet the Perfect Guru. ||3||<br>
  My friends and companions are in ecstasy; the Guru has completed all my projects.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have met my Husband, the Giver of peace; He shall never leave me and go away. ||4||3||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  From a king to a worm, and from a worm to the lord of gods, they engage in evil to fill their bellies.<br>
  They renounce the Lord, the Ocean of Mercy, and worship some other; they are thieves and killers of the soul. ||1||<br>
  Forgetting the Lord, they suffer in sorrow and die.<br>
  They wander lost in reincarnation through all sorts of species; they do not find shelter anywhere. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who abandon their Lord and Master and think of some other, are foolish, stupid, idiotic donkeys.<br>
  How can they cross over the ocean in a paper boat? Their eogtistical boasts that they will cross over are meaningless. ||2||<br>
  Shiva, Brahma, angels and demons, all burn in the fire of death.<br>
  Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's Lotus Feet; O God, Creator, please do not send me into exile. ||3||4||<br>
  Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  My God is detached and free of desire.<br>
  I cannot survive without Him, even for an instant. I am so in love with Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Associating with the Saints, God has come into my consciousness. By their Grace, I have been awakened.<br>
  Hearing the Teachings, my mind has become immaculate. Imbued with the Lord's Love, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||<br>
  Dedicating this mind, I have made friends with the Saints. They have become merciful to me; I am very fortunate.<br>
  I have found absolute peace - I cannot describe it. Nanak has obtained the dust of the feet of the humble. ||2||1||5||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, please lead me to union with my Beloved.<br>
  All my friends and companions sleep totally in peace; their Beloved Lord has come into the homes of their hearts. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am worthless; God is forever Merciful. I am unworthy; what clever tricks could I try?<br>
  I claim to be on a par with those who are imbued with the Love of their Beloved. This is my stubborn egotism. ||1||<br>
  I am dishonored - I seek the Sanctuary of the One, the Guru, the True Guru, the Primal Being, the Giver of peace.<br>
  In an instant, all my pains have been taken away; Nanak passes the night of his life in peace. ||2||2||6||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Rain down, O cloud; do not delay.<br>
  O beloved cloud, O support of the mind, you bring lasting bliss and joy to the mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I take to Your Support, O my Lord and Master; how could You forget me?<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 015</h2></center>
  I am Your beautiful bride, Your servant and slave. I have no nobility without my Husband Lord. ||1||<br>
  When my Lord and Master listened to my prayer, He hurried to shower me with His Mercy.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have become just like my Husband Lord; I am blessed with honor, nobility and the lifestyle of goodness. ||2||3||7||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditate on the True Name of your Beloved.<br>
  The pains and sorrows of the terrifying world-ocean are dispelled, by enshrining the Image of the Guru within your heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your enemies shall be destroyed, and all the evil-doers shall perish, when you come to the Sanctuary of the Lord.<br>
  The Savior Lord has given me His Hand and saved me; I have obtained the wealth of the Naam. ||1||<br>
  Granting His Grace, He has eradicated all my sins; He has placed the Immaculate Naam within my mind.<br>
  O Nanak, the Treasure of Virtue fills my mind; I shall never again suffer in pain. ||2||4||8||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My Beloved God is the Lover of my breath of life.<br>
  Please bless me with the loving devotional worship of the Naam, O Kind and Compassionate Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I meditate in remembrance on Your Feet, O my Beloved; my heart is filled with hope.<br>
  I offer my prayer to the humble Saints; my mind thirsts for the Blssed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||1||<br>
  Separation is death, and Union with the Lord is life. Please bless Your humble servant with Your Darshan.<br>
  O my God, please be Merciful, and bless Nanak with the support, the life and wealth of the Naam. ||2||5||9||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now, I have become just like my Beloved.<br>
  Dwelling on my Sovereign Lord King, I have found peace. Rain down, O peace-giving cloud. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I cannot forget Him, even for an instant; He is the Ocean of peace. Through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I have obtained the nine treasures.<br>
  My perfect destiny has been activated, meeting with the Saints, my help and support. ||1||<br>
  Peace has welled up, and all pain has been dispelled, lovingly attuned to the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  The arduous and terrifying world-ocean is crossed over, O Nanak, by meditating on the Feet of the Lord. ||2||6||10||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The clouds have rained down all over the world.<br>
  My Beloved Lord God has become merciful to me; I am blessed with ecstasy, bliss and peace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My sorrows are erased, and all my thirsts are quenched, meditating on the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, death and birth come to an end, and the mortal does not wander anywhere, ever again. ||1||<br>
  My mind and body are imbued with the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord; I am lovingly attuned to His Lotus Feet.<br>
  God has made Nanak His Own; slave Nanak seeks His Sanctuary. ||2||7||11||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Separated from the Lord, how can any living being live?<br>
  My consciousness is filled with yearning and hope to meet my Lord, and drink in the sublime essence of His Lotus Feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who are thirsty for You, O my Beloved, are not separated from You.<br>
  Those who forget my Beloved Lord are dead and dying. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 016</h2></center>
  The Lord of the Universe is permeating and pervading my mind and body; I see Him Ever-present, here and now<br>
  . O Nanak, He is permeating the inner being of all; He is all-pervading everywhere. ||2||8||12||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Vibrating and meditating on the Lord, who has not been carried across?<br>
  Those reborn into the body of a bird, the body of a fish, the body of a deer, and the body of a bull - in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, they are saved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The families of gods, the families of demons, titans, celestial singers and human beings are carried across the ocean.<br>
  Whoever meditates and vibrates on the Lord in the Saadh Sangat - his pains are taken away. ||1||<br>
  Sexual desire, anger and the pleasures of terrible corruption - he keeps away from these.<br>
  He meditates on the Lord, Merciful to the meek, the Embodiment of Compassion; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||9||13||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Today, I am seated in the Lord's store.<br>
  With the wealth of the Lord, I have entered into partnership with the humble; I shall not have take the Highway of Death. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Showering me with His Kindness, the Supreme Lord God has saved me; the doors of doubt have been opened wide.<br>
  I have found God, the Banker of Infinity; I have earned the profit of the wealth of His Feet. ||1||<br>
  I have grasped the protection of the Sanctuary of the Unchanging, Unmoving, Imperishable Lord; He has picked up my sins and thrown them out.<br>
  Slave Nanak's sorrow and suffering has ended. He shall never again be squeezed into the mold of reincarnation. ||2||10||14||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In so many ways, attachment to Maya leads to ruin.<br>
  Among millions, it is very rare to find a selfless servant who remains a perfect devotee for very long. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Roaming and wandering here and there, the mortal finds only trouble; his body and wealth become strangers to himself.<br>
  Hiding from people, he practices deception; he does not know the One who is always with him. ||1||<br>
  He wanders through troubled incarnations of low and wretched species as a deer, a bird and a fish.<br>
  Says Nanak, O God, I am a stone - please carry me across, that I may enjoy peace in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||11||15||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The cruel and evil ones died after taking poison, O mother.<br>
  And the One, to whom all creatures belong, has saved us. God has granted His Grace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is contained within all; why should I be afraid, O Siblings of Destiny?<br>
  God, my Help and Support, is always with me. He shall never leave; I see Him everywhere. ||1||<br>
  He is the Master of the masterless, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor; He has attached me to the hem of His robe.<br>
  O Lord, Your slaves live by Your Support; Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of God. ||2||12||16||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, dwell on the Feet of the Lord.<br>
  My mind is enticed by thirst for the Blessed Vision of the Lord; I would take wings and fly out to meet Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Searching and seeking, I have found the Path, and now I serve the Holy.<br>
  O my Lord and Master, please be kind to me, that I may drink in Your most sublime essence. ||1||<br>
  Begging and pleading, I have come to Your Sanctuary; I am on fire - please shower me with Your Mercy!<br>
  Please give me Your Hand - I am Your slave, O Lord. Please make Nanak Your Own. ||2||13||17||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 017</h2></center>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  It is God's Nature to love His devotees.<br>
  He destroys the slanderers, crushing them beneath His Feet. His Glory is manifest everywhere. ||1||Pause||<br>
  His Victory is celebrated all throughout the world. He blesses all creatures with compassion.<br>
  Hugging him close in His Embrace, the Lord saves and protects His slave. The hot winds cannot even touch him. ||1||<br>
  My Lord and Master has made me His Own; dispelling my doubts and fears, He has made me happy.<br>
  The Lord's slaves enjoy ultimate ecstasy; O Nanak, faith has welled up in my mind. ||2||14||18||<br>
  Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Gurmukh sees God pervading everywhere.<br>
  The Gurmukh knows that the universe is the extension of the three gunas, the three dispositions.<br>
  The Gurmukh reflects on the Sound-current of the Naad, and the wisdom of the Vedas.<br>
  Without the Perfect Guru, there is only pitch-black darkness. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, calling on the Guru, eternal peace is found.<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, the Lord comes to dwell within the heart; I meditate on my Lord and Master with every breath and morsel of food. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Guru's Feet.<br>
  Night and day, I continually sing the Glorious Praises of the Guru.<br>
  I take my cleansing bath in the dust of the Guru's Feet.<br>
  I am honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  The Guru is the boat, to carry me across the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, I shall not be reincarnated ever again.<br>
  That humble being serves the Guru,<br>
  who has such karma inscribed on his forehead by the Primal Lord. ||3||<br>
  The Guru is my life; the Guru is my support.<br>
  The Guru is my way of life; the Guru is my family.<br>
  The Guru is my Lord and Master; I seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru.<br>
  O Nanak, the Guru is the Supreme Lord God; His value cannot be estimated. ||4||1||19||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I enshrine the Lord's Feet within my heart;<br>
  in His Mercy, God has united me with Himself.<br>
  God enjoins His servant to his tasks.<br>
  His worth cannot be expressed. ||1||<br>
  Please be merciful to me, O Perfect Giver of peace.<br>
  By Your Grace, You come to mind; I am imbued with Your Love, twenty-four hours a day. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Singing and listening, it is all by Your Will.<br>
  One who understands the Hukam of Your Command is absorbed in Truth.<br>
  Chanting and meditating on Your Name, I live.<br>
  Without You, there is no place at all. ||2||<br>
  Pain and pleasure come by Your Command, O Creator Lord.<br>
  By the Pleasure of Your Will You forgive, and by the Pleasure of Your Will You award punishment.<br>
  You are the Creator of both realms.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to Your Glorious Grandeur. ||3||<br>
  You alone know Your value.<br>
  You alone understand, You Yourself speak and listen.<br>
  They alone are devotees, who are pleasing to Your Will.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 018</h2></center>
  Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. ||4||2||20||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Transcendent Lord God has become merciful;<br>
  Ambrosial Nectar is raining down from the clouds.<br>
  All beings and creatures are satisfied;<br>
  their affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, dwell on the Lord, forever and ever.<br>
  Serving the Perfect Guru, I have obtained it. It shall stay with me both here and hereafter. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is the Destroyer of pain, the Eradicator of fear.<br>
  He takes care of His beings.<br>
  The Savior Lord is kind and compassionate forever.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to Him, forever and ever. ||2||<br>
  The Creator Himself has eliminated death.<br>
  Meditate on Him forever and ever, O my mind.<br>
  He watches all with His Glance of Grace and protects them.<br>
  Continually and continuously, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord God. ||3||<br>
  The One and Only Creator Lord is Himself by Himself.<br>
  The Lord's devotees know His Glorious Grandeur.<br>
  He preserves the Honor of His Name.<br>
  Nanak speaks as the Lord inspires him to speak. ||4||3||21||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  All treasures are found in the Sanctuary of the Guru.<br>
  Honor is obtained in the True Court of the Lord.<br>
  Doubt, fear, pain and suffering are taken away,<br>
  forever singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, praise the Perfect Guru.<br>
  Chant the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night. You shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires. ||1||Pause||<br>
  No one else is as great as the True Guru.<br>
  The Guru is the Supreme Lord, the Transcendent Lord God.<br>
  He saves us from the pains of death and birth,<br>
  and we will not have to taste the poison of Maya ever again. ||2||<br>
  The Guru's glorious grandeur cannot be described.<br>
  The Guru is the Transcendent Lord, in the True Name.<br>
  True is His self-discipline, and True are all His actions.<br>
  Immaculate and pure is that mind, which is imbued with love for the Guru. ||3||<br>
  The Perfect Guru is obtained by great good fortune.<br>
  Drive out sexual desire, anger and greed from your mind.<br>
  By His Grace, the Guru's Feet are enshrined within.<br>
  Nanak offers his prayer to the True Lord God. ||4||4||22||<br>
  Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Pleasing the Guru, I have fallen in love with my Merciful Beloved Lord.<br>
  I have made all my decorations,<br>
  and renounced all corruption;<br>
  my wandering mind has become steady and stable. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O my mind, lose your self-conceit by associating with the Holy, and you shall find Him.<br>
  The unstruck celestial melody vibrates and resounds; like a song-bird, chant the Lord's Name, with words of sweetness and utter beauty. ||1||<br>
  Such is the glory of Your Darshan, so utterly inifinte and fruitful, O my Love; so do we become by associating with the Saints.<br>
  Vibrating, chanting Your Name, we cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  They dwell on the Lord, Raam, Raam, chanting on their malas;<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 019</h2></center>
  their minds are turned towards the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  O servant Nanak, their Beloved Lord seems so sweet to them. ||2||1||23||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind wanders through the dense forest.<br>
  It walks with eagerness and love,<br>
  hoping to meet God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Maya with her three gunas - the three dispositions - has come to entice me; whom can I tell of my pain? ||1||<br>
  I tried everything else, but nothing could rid me of my sorrow.<br>
  So hurry to the Sanctuary of the Holy, O Nanak; joining them, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||2||2||24||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The glory of my Beloved is noble and sublime.<br>
  The celestial singers and angels sing His Sublime Praises in ecstasy, happiness and joy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The most worthy beings sing God's Praises in beautiful harmonies, in all sorts of ways, in myriads of sublime forms. ||1||<br>
  Throughout the mountains, trees, deserts, oceans and galaxies, permeating each and every heart, the sublime grandeur of my Love is totally pervading.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Love of the Lord is found; O Nanak, sublime is that faith. ||2||3||25||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  With love for the Guru, I enshrine the Lotus Feet of my Lord deep within my heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I gaze on the Blessed Vision of His Fruitful Darshan; my sins are erased and taken away.<br>
  My mind is immaculate and enlightened. ||1||<br>
  I am wonderstruck, stunned and amazed.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, millions of sins are destroyed.<br>
  I fall at His Feet, and touch my forehead to them.<br>
  You alone are, You alone are, O God.<br>
  Your devotees take Your Support.<br>
  Servant Nanak has come to the Door of Your Sanctuary. ||2||4||26||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Rain down with happiness in God's Will.<br>
  Bless me with total bliss and good fortune. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My mind blossoms forth in the Society of the Saints; soaking up the rain, the earth is blessed and beautified. ||1||<br>
  The peacock loves the thunder of the rain clouds.<br>
  The rainbird's mind is drawn to the rain-drop<br>
  - so is my mind enticed by the Lord.<br>
  I have renounced Maya, the deceiver.<br>
  Joining with the Saints, Nanak is awakened. ||2||5||27||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World.<br>
  Enshrine the Lord's Name in your consciousness. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Forsake your pride, and abandon your ego; join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Meditate in loving remembrance on the One Lord; your sorrows shall be ended, O friend. ||1||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God has become merciful;<br>
  corrupt entanglements have come to an end.<br>
  Grasping the feet of the Holy,<br>
  Nanak sings forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World. ||2||6||28||<br>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Embodiment of the Lord of the Universe roars like the thunder-cloud.<br>
  Singing His Glorious Praises brings peace and bliss. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet carries us across the world-ocean. His Sublime Word is the unstruck celestial melody. ||1||<br>
  The thirsty traveller's consciousness obtains the water of the soul from the pool of nectar.<br>
  Servant Nanak loves the Blessed Vision of the Lord; in His Mercy, God has blessed him with it. ||2||7||29||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 020</h2></center>
  Malaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Lord of the Universe, O Lord of the World, O Dear Merciful Beloved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are the Master of the breath of life, the Companion of the lost and forsaken, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor. ||1||<br>
  O All-powerful, Inaccessible, Perfect Lord, please shower me with Your Mercy. ||2||<br>
  Please, carry Nanak across the terrible, deep dark pit of the world to the other side. ||3||8||30||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The chakvi bird does not long for sleepy eyes; without her beloved, she does not sleep.<br>
  When the sun rises, she sees her beloved with her eyes; she bows and touches his feet. ||1||<br>
  The Love of my Beloved is pleasing; it is my Companion and Support.<br>
  Without Him, I cannot live in this world even for an instant; such is my hunger and thirst. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The lotus in the pool blossoms forth intuitively and naturally, with the rays of the sun in the sky.<br>
  Such is the love for my Beloved which imbues me; my light has merged into the Light. ||2||<br>
  Without water, the rainbird cries out, "Pri-o! Pri-o! - Beloved! Beloved!" It cries and wails and laments.<br>
  The thundering clouds rain down in the ten directions; its thirst is not quenched until it catches the rain-drop in its mouth. ||3||<br>
  The fish lives in water, from which it was born. It finds peace and pleasure according to its past actions.<br>
  It cannot survive without water for a moment, even for an instant. Life and death depend on it. ||4||<br>
  The soul-bride is separated from her Husband Lord, who lives in His Own Country. He sends the Shabad, His Word, through the True Guru.<br>
  She gathers virtues, and enshrines God within her heart. Imbued with devotion, she is happy. ||5||<br>
  Everyone cries out, "Beloved! Beloved!" But she alone finds her Beloved, who is pleasing to the Guru.<br>
  Our Beloved is always with us; through the Truth, He blesses us with His Grace, and unites us in His Union. ||6||<br>
  He is the life of the soul in each and every soul; He permeates and pervades each and every heart.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, He is revealed within the home of my heart; I am intuitively, naturally, absorbed into Him. ||7||<br>
  He Himself shall resolve all your affairs, when you meet with the Giver of peace, the Lord of the World.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, you shall find your Husband Lord within your own home; then, O Nanak, the fire within you shall be quenched. ||8||1||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl:<br>
  Remain awake and aware, serving the Guru; except for the Lord, no one is mine.<br>
  Even by making all sorts of efforts, you shall not remain here; it shall melt like glass in the fire. ||1||<br>
  Tell me - why are you so proud of your body and wealth?<br>
  They shall vanish in an instant; O madman, this is how the world is wasting away, in egotism and pride. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Hail to the Lord of the Universe, God, our Saving Grace; He judges and saves the mortal beings.<br>
  All that is, belongs to You. No one else is equal to You. ||2||<br>
  Creating all beings and creatures, their ways and means are under Your control; You bless the Gurmukhs with the ointment of spiritual wisdom.<br>
  My Eternal, Unmastered Lord is over the heads of all. He is the Destroyer of death and rebirth, doubt and fear. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 021</h2></center>
  This wretched world is a fortress of paper, of color and form and clever tricks.<br>
  A tiny drop of water or a little puff of wind destroys its glory; in an instant, its life is ended. ||4||<br>
  It is like a tree-house near the bank of a river, with a serpent's den in that house.<br>
  When the river overflows, what happens to the tree house? The snake bites, like duality in the mind. ||5||<br>
  Through the magic spell of the Guru's spiritual wisdom, and meditation on the Word of the Guru's Teachings, vice and corruption are burnt away.<br>
  The mind and body are cooled and soothed and Truth is obtained, through the wondrous and unique devotional worship of the Lord. ||6||<br>
  All that exists begs of You; You are merciful to all beings.<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary; please save my honor, O Lord of the World, and bless me with Truth. ||7||<br>
  Bound in worldly affairs and entanglements, the blind one does not understand; he acts like a murderous butcher.<br>
  But if he meets with the True Guru, then he comprehends and understands, and his mind is imbued with true spiritual wisdom. ||8||<br>
  Without the Truth, this worthless body is false; I have consulted my Guru on this.<br>
  O Nanak, that God has revealed God to me; without the Truth, all the world is just a dream. ||9||2||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl:<br>
  The rainbird and the fish find peace in water; the deer is pleased by the sound of the bell. ||1||<br>
  The rainbird chirps in the night, O my mother. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O my Beloved, my love for You shall never end, if it is Your Will. ||2||<br>
  Sleep is gone, and egotism is exhausted from my body; my heart is permeated with the Teachings of Truth. ||3||<br>
  Flying among the trees and plants, I remain hungry; lovingly drinking in the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am satisfied. ||4||<br>
  I stare at You, and my tongue cries out to You; I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||5||<br>
  Without my Beloved, the more I decorate myself, the more my body burns; these clothes do not look good on my body. ||6||<br>
  Without my Beloved, I cannot survive even for an instant; without meeting Him, I cannot sleep. ||7||<br>
  Her Husband Lord is nearby, but the wretched bride does not know it. The True Guru reveals Him to her. ||8||<br>
  When she meets Him with intuitive ease, she finds peace; the Word of the Shabad quenches the fire of desire. ||9||<br>
  Says Nanak, through You, O Lord, my mind is pleased and appeased; I cannot express Your worth. ||10||3||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The earth bends under the weight of the water,<br>
  the lofty mountains and the caverns of the underworld.<br>
  Contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the oceans become calm.<br>
  The path of liberation is found by subduing the ego. ||1||<br>
  I am blind; I seek the Light of the Name.<br>
  I take the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I walk on the path of mystery of the Guru's Fear. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 022</h2></center>
  Through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, the Path is known.<br>
  With the Guru's Support, one is blessed with the strength of the True Lord.<br>
  Dwell on the Naam, and realize the Beauteous Word of His Bani.<br>
  If it is Your Will, Lord, You lead me to find Your Door. ||2||<br>
  Flying high or sitting down, I am lovingly focused on the One Lord.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I take the Naam as my Suppport.<br>
  There is no ocean of water, no mountain ranges rising up.<br>
  I dwell within the home of my own inner being, where there is no path and no one travelling on it. ||3||<br>
  You alone know the way to that House in which You dwell. No one else knows the Mansion of Your Presence.<br>
  Without the True Guru, there is no understanding. The whole world is buried under its nightmare.<br>
  The mortal tries all sorts of things, and weeps and wails, but without the Guru, he does not know the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  In the twinkling of an eye, the Naam saves him, if he realizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||4||<br>
  Some are foolish, blind, stupid and ignorant.<br>
  Some, through fear of the True Guru, take the Support of the Naam.<br>
  The True Word of His Bani is sweet, the source of ambrosial nectar.<br>
  Whoever drinks it in, finds the Door of Salvation. ||5||<br>
  One who, through the love and fear of God, enshrines the Naam within his heart, acts according to the Guru's Instructions and knows the True Bani.<br>
  When the clouds release their rain, the earth becomes beautiful; God's Light permeates each and every heart.<br>
  The evil-minded ones plant their seed in the barren soil; such is the sign of those who have no Guru.<br>
  Without the True Guru, there is utter darkness; they drown there, even without water. ||6||<br>
  Whatever God does, is by His Own Will.<br>
  That which is pre-ordained cannot be erased.<br>
  Bound to the Hukam of the Lord's Command, the mortal does his deeds.<br>
  Permeated by the One Word of the Shabad, the mortal is immersed in Truth. ||7||<br>
  Your Command, O God, rules in the four directions; Your Name pervades the four corners of the nether regions as well.<br>
  The True Word of the Shabad is pervading amongst all. By His Grace, the Eternal One unites us with Himself.<br>
  Birth and death hang over the heads of all beings, along with hunger, sleep and dying.<br>
  The Naam is pleasing to Nanak's mind; O True Lord, Source of bliss, please bless me with Your Grace. ||8||1||4||<br>
  Malaar, First Mehl:<br>
  You do not understand the nature of death and liberation.<br>
  You are sitting on the river-bank; realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||<br>
  You stork! - how were you caught in the net?<br>
  You do not remember in your heart the Unseen Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  For your one life, you consume many lives.<br>
  You were supposed to swim in the water, but you are drowning in it instead. ||2||<br>
  You have tormented all beings.<br>
  When Death seizes you, then you shall regret and repent. ||3||<br>
  When the heavy noose is placed around your neck,<br>
  you may spread your wings, but you shall not be able to fly. ||4||<br>
  You enjoy the tastes and flavors, you foolish self-willed manmukh.<br>
  You are trapped. You can only be saved by virtuous conduct, spiritual wisdom and contemplation. ||5||<br>
  Serving the True Guru, you will shatter the Messenger of Death.<br>
  In your heart, dwell on the True Word of the Shabad. ||6||<br>
  The Guru's Teachings, the True Word of the Shabad, is excellent and sublime.<br>
  Keep the Name of the Lord enshrined in your heart. ||7||<br>
  One who is obsessed with enjoying pleasures here, shall suffer in pain hereafter.<br>
  O Nanak, there is no liberation without the True Name. ||8||2||5||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 023</h2></center>
  Malaar, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  If it is in his karma, then he finds the True Guru; without such karma, He cannot be found.<br>
  He meets the True Guru, and he is transformed into gold, if it is the Lord's Will. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, focus your consciousness on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  The Lord is found through the True Guru, and then he remains merged with the True Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Spiritual wisdom wells up through the True Guru, and then this cynicism is dispelled.<br>
  Through the True Guru, the Lord is realized, and then, he is not consigned to the womb of reincarnation ever again. ||2||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the mortal dies in life, and by so dying, lives to practice the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  He alone finds the Door of Salvation, who eradicates self-conceit from within himself. ||3||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the mortal is reincarnated into the Home of the Lord, having eradicated Maya from within.<br>
  He eats the uneatable, and is blessed with a discriminating intellect; he meets the Supreme Person, the Primal Lord God. ||4||<br>
  The world is unconscious, like a passing show; the mortal departs, having lost his capital.<br>
  The profit of the Lord is obtained in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; by good karma, it is found. ||5||<br>
  Without the True Guru, no one finds it; see this in your mind, and consider this in your heart.<br>
  By great good fortune, the mortal finds the Guru, and crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||6||<br>
  The Name of the Lord is my Anchor and Support. I take only the Support of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  O Dear Lord, please be kind and lead me to meet the Guru, that I may find the Door of Salvation. ||7||<br>
  The pre-ordained destiny inscribed on the mortal's forehead by our Lord and Master cannot be erased.<br>
  O Nanak, those humble beings are perfect, who are pleased by the Lord's Will. ||8||1||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl:<br>
  The world is involved with the words of the Vedas, thinking about the three gunas - the three dispositions.<br>
  Without the Name, it suffers punishment by the Messenger of Death; it comes and goes in reincarnation, over and over again.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, the world is liberated, and finds the Door of Salvation. ||1||<br>
  O mortal, immerse yourself in service to the True Guru.<br>
  By great good fortune, the mortal finds the Perfect Guru, and meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord, by the Pleasure of His Own Will, created the Universe, and the Lord Himself gives it sustenance and support.<br>
  The Lord, by His Own Will, makes the mortal's mind immaculate, and lovingly attunes him to the Lord.<br>
  The Lord, by His Own Will, leads the mortal to meet the True Guru, the Embellisher of all his lives. ||2||<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Word of His Bani. Only a few, as Gurmukh, understand.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Praise God as Great! No one else is as Great as He.<br>
  When God's Grace is received, He Himself forgives the mortal, and unites him with Himself. ||3||<br>
  The True Guru has revealed our True, Supreme Lord and Master.<br>
  The Ambrosial Nectar rains down and the mind is satisfied, remaining lovingly attuned to the True Lord.<br>
  In the Lord's Name, it is forever rejuvenated; it shall never wither and dry up again. ||4||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 024</h2></center>
  Without the True Guru, no one finds the Lord; anyone can try and see.<br>
  By the Lord's Grace, the True Guru is found, and then the Lord is met with intuitive ease.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh is deluded by doubt; without good destiny, the Lord's wealth is not obtained. ||5||<br>
  The three dispositions are completely distracting; people read and study and contemplate them.<br>
  Those people are never liberated; they do not find the Door of Salvation.<br>
  Without the True Guru, they are never released from bondage; they do not embrace love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||6||<br>
  The Pandits, the religious scholars, and the silent sages, reading and studying the Vedas, have grown weary.<br>
  They do not even think of the Lord's Name; they do not dwell in the home of their own inner being.<br>
  The Messenger of Death hovers over their heads; they are ruined by the deceit within themselves. ||7||<br>
  Everyone longs for the Name of the Lord; without good destiny, it is not obtained.<br>
  When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, the mortal meets the True Guru, and the Lord's Name comes to dwell within the mind.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Name, honor wells up, and the mortal remains immersed in the Lord. ||8||2||<br>
  Malaar, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  When the Lord shows His Mercy, He enjoins the mortal to work for the Guru.<br>
  His pains are taken away, and the Lord's Name comes to dwell within.<br>
  True deliverance comes by focusing one's consciousness on the True Lord.<br>
  Listen to the Shabad, and the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, serve the Lord, Har, Har, the true treasure.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the wealth of the Lord is obtained. Night and day, focus your meditation on the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The soul-bride who adorns herself without her Husband Lord,<br>
  is ill-mannered and vile, wasted away into ruin.<br>
  This is the useless way of life of the self-willed manmukh.<br>
  Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he performs all sorts of empty rituals. ||2||<br>
  The bride who is Gurmukh is beautifully embellished.<br>
  Through the Word of the Shabad, she enshrines her Husband Lord within her heart.<br>
  She realizes the One Lord, and subdues her ego.<br>
  That soul-bride is virtuous and noble. ||3||<br>
  Without the Guru, the Giver, no one finds the Lord.<br>
  The greedy self-willed manmukh is attracted and engrossed in duality.<br>
  Only a few spiritual teachers realize this,<br>
  that without meeting the Guru, liberation is not obtained. ||4||<br>
  Everyone tells the stories told by others.<br>
  Without subduing the mind, devotional worship does not come.<br>
  When the intellect achieves spiritual wisdom, the heart-lotus blossoms forth.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to abide in that heart. ||5||<br>
  In egotism, everyone can pretend to worship God with devotion.<br>
  But this does not soften the mind, and it does not bring peace.<br>
  By speaking and preaching, the mortal only shows off his self-conceit.<br>
  His devotional worship is useless, and his life is a total waste. ||6||<br>
  They alone are devotees, who are pleasing to the Mind of the True Guru.<br>
  Night and day, they remain lovingly attuned to the Name.<br>
  They behold the Naam, the Name of the Lord, ever-present, near at hand.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 025</h2></center>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is pervading and permeating everywhere. ||7||<br>
  God Himself forgives, and bestows His Love.<br>
  The world is suffering from the terrible disease of egotism.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, this disease is cured.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Truth, the mortal remains immersed in the True Lord. ||8||1||3||5||8||<br>
  Raag Malaar, Chhant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  My Beloved Lord is the Giver of loving devotional worship.<br>
  His humble servants are imbued with His Love.<br>
  He is imbued with His servants, day and night; He does not forget them from His Mind, even for an instant.<br>
  He is the Lord of the World, the Treasure of virtue; He is always with me. All glorious virtues belong to the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  With His Feet, He has fascinated my mind; as His humble servant, I am intoxicated with love for His Name.<br>
  O Nanak, my Beloved is forever Merciful; out of millions, hardly anyone realizes Him. ||1||<br>
  O Beloved, Your state is inaccessible and infinite.<br>
  You save even the worst sinners.<br>
  He is the Purifier of sinners, the Lover of His devotees, the Ocean of mercy, our Lord and Master.<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, vibrate and meditate on Him with commitment forever; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  Those who wander in reincarnation through millions of births, are saved and carried across, by meditating in remembrance on the Naam.<br>
  Nanak is thirsty for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Dear Lord; please take care of him. ||2||<br>
  My mind is absorbed in the Lotus Feet of the Lord.<br>
  O God, You are the water; Your humble servants are fish.<br>
  O Dear God, You alone are the water and the fish. I know that there is no difference between the two.<br>
  Please take hold of my arm and bless me with Your Name. I am honored only by Your Grace.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, vibrate and meditate with love on the One Lord of the Universe, who is Merciful to the meek.<br>
  Nanak, the lowly and helpless, seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, who in His Kindness has made him His Own. ||3||<br>
  He unites us with Himself.<br>
  Our Sovereign Lord King is the Destroyer of fear.<br>
  My Wondrous Lord and Master is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. My Beloved, the Treasure of virtue, has met me.<br>
  Supreme happiness and peace well up, as I cherish the Glorious Virtues of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Meeting with Him, I am embellished and exalted; gazing on Him, I am fascinated, and I realize my pre-ordained destiny.<br>
  Prays Nanak, I seek the Sanctuary of those who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||1||<br>
  Vaar Of Malaar, First Mehl, Sung To The Tune Of Rana Kailaash And Malda:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, the mind is delighted, like the earth embellished by the rain.<br>
  Everything becomes green and lush; the pools and ponds are filled to overflowing.<br>
  The inner self is imbued with the deep crimson color of love for the True Lord.<br>
  The heart-lotus blossoms forth and the mind becomes true; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is ecstatic and exalted.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 026</h2></center>
  The self-willed manmukh is on the wrong side. You can see this with your own eyes.<br>
  He is caught in the trap like the deer; the Messenger of Death hovers over his head.<br>
  Hunger, thirst and slander are evil; sexual desire and anger are horrible.<br>
  These cannot be seen with your eyes, until you contemplate the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Whoever is pleasing to You is content; all his entanglements are gone.<br>
  Serving the Guru, his capital is preserved. The Guru is the ladder and the boat.<br>
  O Nanak, whoever is attached to the Lord receives the essence; O True Lord, You are found when the mind is true. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  There is one path and one door. The Guru is the ladder to reach one's own place.<br>
  Our Lord and Master is so beautiful, O Nanak; all comfort and peace are in the Name of the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He Himself created Himself; He Himself understands Himself.<br>
  Separating the sky and the earth, He has spread out His canopy.<br>
  Without any pillars, He supports the sky, through the insignia of His Shabad.<br>
  Creating the sun and the moon, He infused His Light into them.<br>
  He created the night and the day; Wondrous are His miraculous plays.<br>
  He created the sacred shrines of pilgrimage, where people contemplate righteousness and Dharma, and take cleansing baths on special occasions.<br>
  There is no other equal to You; how can we speak and describe You?<br>
  You are seated on the throne of Truth; all others come and go in reincarnation. ||1||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, when it rains in the month of Saawan, four are delighted:<br>
  the snake, the deer, the fish and the wealthy people who seek pleasure. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, when it rains in the month of Saawan, four suffer the pains of separation:<br>
  the cow's calves, the poor, the travellers and the servants. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You are True, O True Lord; You dispense True Justice.<br>
  Like a lotus, You sit in the primal celestial trance; You are hidden from view.<br>
  Brahma is called great, but even he does not know Your limits.<br>
  You have no father or mother; who gave birth to You?<br>
  You have no form or feature; You transcend all social classes.<br>
  You have no hunger or thirst; You are satisfied and satiated.<br>
  You have merged Yourself into the Guru; You are pervading through the Word of Your Shabad.<br>
  When he is pleasing to the True Lord, the mortal merges in Truth. ||2||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  The physician was called in; he touched my arm and felt my pulse.<br>
  The foolish physician did not know that the pain was in the mind. ||1||<br>
  Second Mehl:<br>
  O physician, you are a competent physician, if you first diagnose the disease.<br>
  Prescribe such a remedy, by which all sorts of illnesses may be cured.<br>
  Administer that medicine, which will cure the disease, and allow peace to come and dwell in the body.<br>
  Only when you are rid of your own disease, O Nanak, will you be known as a physician. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva and the deities were created.<br>
  Brahma was given the Vedas, and enjoined to worship God.<br>
  The ten incarnations, and Rama the king, came into being.<br>
  According to His Will, they quickly killed all the demons.<br>
  Shiva serves Him, but cannot find His limits.<br>
  He established His throne on the principles of Truth.<br>
  He enjoined all the world to its tasks, while He keeps Himself hidden from view.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 027</h2></center>
  The Primal Lord has ordained that mortals must practice righteousness. ||3||<br>
  Shalok, Second Mehl:<br>
  The month of Saawan has come, O my companions; think of your Husband Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the discarded bride is in love with another; now she weeps and wails, and dies. ||1||<br>
  Second Mehl:<br>
  The month of Saawan has come, O my companions; the clouds have burst forth with rain.<br>
  O Nanak, the blessed soul-brides sleep in peace; they are in love with their Husband Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He Himself has staged the tournament, and arranged the arena for the wrestlers.<br>
  They have entered the arena with pomp and ceremony; the Gurmukhs are joyful.<br>
  The false and foolish self-willed manmukhs are defeated and overcome.<br>
  The Lord Himself wrestles, and He Himself defeats them. He Himself staged this play.<br>
  The One God is the Lord and Master of all; this is known by the Gurmukhs.<br>
  He writes the inscription of His Hukam on the foreheads of all, without pen or ink.<br>
  In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, Union with Him is obtained; there, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are chanted forever.<br>
  O Nanak, praising the True Word of His Shabad, one comes to realize the Truth. ||4||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Hanging low, low and thick in the sky, the clouds are changing color.<br>
  How do I know whether my love for my Husband Lord shall endure?<br>
  The love of those soul-brides endures, if their minds are filled with the Love and the Fear of God.<br>
  O Nanak, she who has no Love and Fear of God - her body shall never find peace. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Hanging low, low and thick in the sky, the clouds come, and pure water rains down.<br>
  O Nanak, that soul-bride suffers in pain, whose mind is torn away from her Husband Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The One Lord created both sides and pervades the expanse.<br>
  The words of the Vedas became pervasive, with arguments and divisions.<br>
  Attachment and detachment are the two sides of it; Dharma, true religion, is the guide between the two.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are worthless and false. Without a doubt, they lose in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Those who follow the Guru's Teachings are the true spiritual warriors; they have conquered sexual desire and anger.<br>
  They enter into the True Mansion of the Lord's Presence, embellished and exalted by the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Those devotees are pleasing to Your Will, O Lord; they dearly love the True Name.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those who serve their True Guru. ||5||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Hanging low, low and thick in the sky, the clouds come, and water rains down in torrents.<br>
  O Nanak, she walks in harmony with the Will of her Husband Lord; she enjoys peace and pleasure forever. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Why are you standing up, standing up to look? You poor wretch, this cloud has nothing in its hands.<br>
  The One who sent this cloud - cherish Him in your mind.<br>
  He alone enshrines the Lord in his mind, upon whom the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace.<br>
  O Nanak, all those who lack this Grace, cry and weep and wail. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Serve the Lord forever; He acts in no time at all.<br>
  He stretched the sky across the heavens; in an instant, He creates and destroys.<br>
  He Himself created the world; He contemplates His Creative Omnipotence.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh will be called to account hereafter; he will be severely punished.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 028</h2></center>
  The Gurmukh's account is settled with honor; the Lord blesses him with the treasure of His Praise.<br>
  No one's hands can reach there; no one will hear anyone's cries.<br>
  The True Guru will be your best friend there; at the very last instant, He will save you.<br>
  These beings should serve no other than the True Guru or the Creator Lord above the heads of all. ||6||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  O rainbird, the One unto whom you call - everyone longs for that Lord.<br>
  When He grants His Grace, it rains, and the forests and fields blossom forth in their greenery.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, He is found; only a rare few understand this.<br>
  Sitting down and standing up, meditate continually on Him, and be at peace forever and ever.<br>
  O Nanak, the Ambrosial Nectar rains down forever; the Lord gives it to the Gurmukh. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  When the people of the world are suffering in pain, they call upon the Lord in loving prayer.<br>
  The True Lord naturally listens and hears and gives comfort.<br>
  He commands the god of rain, and the rain pours down in torrents.<br>
  Corn and wealth are produced in great abundance and prosperity; their value cannot be estimated.<br>
  O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He reaches out and gives sustenance to all beings.<br>
  Eating this, peace is produced, and the mortal never again suffers in pain. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  O Dear Lord, You are the Truest of the True. You blend those who are truthful into Your Own Being.<br>
  Those caught in duality are on the side of duality; entrenched in falsehood, they cannot merge into the Lord.<br>
  You Yourself unite, and You Yourself separate; You display Your Creative Omnipotence.<br>
  Attachment brings the sorrow of separation; the mortal acts in accordance with pre-ordained destiny.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those who remain lovingly attached to the Lord's Feet.<br>
  They are like the lotus which remains detached, floating upon the water.<br>
  They are peaceful and beautiful forever; they eradicate self-conceit from within.<br>
  They never suffer sorrow or separation; they are merged in the Being of the Lord. ||7||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, praise the Lord; everything is in His power.<br>
  Serve Him, O mortal beings; there is none other than Him.<br>
  The Lord God abides within the mind of the Gurmukh, and then he is at peace, forever and ever.<br>
  He is never cynical; all anxiety has been taken out from within him.<br>
  Whatever happens, happens naturally; no one has any say about it.<br>
  When the True Lord abides in the mind, then the mind's desires are fulfilled.<br>
  O Nanak, He Himself hears the words of those, whose accounts are in His Hands. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The Ambrosial Nectar rains down continually; realize this through realization.<br>
  Those who, as Gurmukh, realize this, keep the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar enshrined within their hearts.<br>
  They drink in the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar, and remain forever imbued with the Lord; they conquer egotism and thirsty desires.<br>
  The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar; the Lord showers His Grace, and it rains down.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh comes to behold the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 029</h2></center>
  Pauree:<br>
  How can the unweighable be weighed? Without weighing Him, He cannot be obtained.<br>
  Reflect on the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and immerse yourself in His Glorious Virtues.<br>
  He Himself weighs Himself; He unites in Union with Himself.<br>
  His value cannot be estimated; nothing can be said about this.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to my Guru; He has made me realize this true realization.<br>
  The world has been deceived, and the Ambrosial Nectar is being plundered. The self-willed manmukh does not realize this.<br>
  Without the Name, nothing will go along with him; he wastes his life, and departs.<br>
  Those who follow the Guru's Teachings and remain awake and aware, preserve and protect the home of their heart; demons have no power against them. ||8||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  O rainbird, do not cry out. Do not let this mind of yours be so thirsty for a drop of water. Obey the Hukam, the Command of your Lord and Master,<br>
  and your thirst shall be quenched. Your love for Him shall increase four-fold. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  O rainbird, your place is in the water; you move around in the water.<br>
  But you do not appreciate the water, and so you cry out.<br>
  In the water and on the land, it rains down in the ten directions. No place is left dry.<br>
  With so much rain, those who are die of thirst are very unfortunate.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs understand; the Lord abides within their minds. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Yogic Masters, celibates, Siddhas and spiritual teachers - none of them has found the limits of the Lord.<br>
  The Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam, and merge in You, O Lord.<br>
  For thirty-six ages, God remained in utter darkness, as He pleased.<br>
  The vast expanse of water swirled around.<br>
  The Creator of all is Infinite, Endless and Inaccessible.<br>
  He formed fire and conflict, hunger and thirst.<br>
  Death hangs over the heads of the people of the world, in the love of duality.<br>
  The Savior Lord saves those who realize the Word of the Shabad. ||9||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  This rain pours down on all; it rains down in accordance with God's Loving Will.<br>
  Those trees become green and lush, which remain immersed in the Guru's Word.<br>
  O Nanak, by His Grace, there is peace; the pain of these creatures is gone. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The night is wet with dew; lightning flashes, and the rain pours down in torrents.<br>
  Food and wealth are produced in abundance when it rains, if it is the Will of God.<br>
  Consuming it, the minds of His creatures are satisfied, and they adopt the lifestyle of the way.<br>
  This wealth is the play of the Creator Lord. Sometimes it comes, and sometimes it goes.<br>
  The Naam is the wealth of the spiritually wise. It is permeating and pervading forever.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are blessed with His Glance of Grace receive this wealth. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He Himself does, and causes all to be done. Unto whom can I complain?<br>
  He Himself calls the mortal beings to account; He Himself causes them to act.<br>
  Whatever pleases Him happens. Only a fool issues commands.<br>
  He Himself saves and redeems; He Himself is the Forgiver.<br>
  He Himself sees, and He Himself hears; He gives His Support to all.<br>
  He alone is pervading and permeating all; He considers each and every one.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 030</h2></center>
  The Gurmukh reflects on the self, lovingly attached to the True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, whom can we ask? He Himself is the Great Giver. ||10||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  This world is a rainbird; let no one be deluded by doubt.<br>
  This rainbird is an animal; it has no understanding at all.<br>
  The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar; drinking it in, thirst is quenched.<br>
  O Nanak, those Gurmukhs who drink it in shall never again be afflicted by thirst. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Malaar is a calming and soothing raga; meditating on the Lord brings peace and tranquility.<br>
  When the Dear Lord grants His Grace, then the rain falls on all the people of the world.<br>
  From this rain, all creatures find the ways and means to live, and the earth is embellished.<br>
  O Nanak, this world is all water; everything came from water.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, a rare few realize the Lord; such humble beings are liberated forever. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  O True and Independent Lord God, You alone are my Lord and Master.<br>
  You Yourself are everything; who else is of any account?<br>
  False is the pride of man. True is Your glorious greatness.<br>
  Coming and going in reincarnation, the beings and species of the world came into being.<br>
  But if the mortal serves his True Guru, his coming into the world is judged to be worthwhile.<br>
  And if he eradicates eogtism from within himself, then how can he be judged?<br>
  The self-willed manmukh is lost in the darkness of emotional attachment, like the man lost in the wilderness.<br>
  Countless sins are erased, by even a tiny particle of the Lord's Name. ||11||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  O rainbird, you do not know the Mansion of your Lord and Master's Presence. Offer your prayers to see this Mansion.<br>
  You speak as you please, but your speech is not accepted.<br>
  Your Lord and Master is the Great Giver; whatever you desire, you shall receive from Him.<br>
  Not only the thirst of the poor rainbird, but the thirst of the whole world is quenched. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The night is wet with dew; the rainbird sings the True Name with intuitive ease.<br>
  This water is my very soul; without water, I cannot survive.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, this water is obtained, and egotism is eradicated from within.<br>
  O Nanak, I cannot live without Him, even for a moment; the True Guru has led me to meet Him. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  There are countless worlds and nether regions; I cannot calculate their number.<br>
  You are the Creator, the Lord of the Universe; You create it, and You destroy it.<br>
  The 8.4 million species of beings issued forth from You.<br>
  Some are called kings, emperors and nobles.<br>
  Some claim to be bankers and accumulate wealth, but in duality they lose their honor.<br>
  Some are givers, and some are beggars; God is above the heads of all.<br>
  Without the Name, they are vulgar, dreadful and wretched.<br>
  Falsehood shall not last, O Nanak; whatever the True Lord does, comes to pass. ||12||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  O rainbird, the virtuous soul-bride attains the Mansion of her Lord's Presence; the unworthy, unvirtuous one is far away.<br>
  Deep within your inner being, the Lord abides. The Gurmukh beholds Him ever-present.<br>
  When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, the mortal no longer weeps and wails.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam intuitively merge with the Lord; they practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 031</h2></center>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The rainbird prays: O Lord, grant Your Grace, and bless me with the gift of the life of the soul.<br>
  Without the water, my thirst is not quenched, and my breath of life is ended and gone.<br>
  You are the Giver of peace, O Infinite Lord God; You are the Giver of the treasure of virtue.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh is forgiven; in the end, the Lord God shall be your only friend. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He created the world; He considers the merits and demerits of the mortals.<br>
  Those who are entangled in the three gunas - the three dispositions - do not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Forsaking virtue, they practice evil; they shall be miserable in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  They lose their life in the gamble; why did they even come into the world?<br>
  But those who conquer and subdue their minds, through the True Word of the Shabad - night and day, they love the Naam.<br>
  Those people enshrine the True, Invisible and Infinite Lord in their hearts.<br>
  You, O Lord, are the Giver, the Treasure of virtue; I am unvirtuous and unworthy.<br>
  He alone finds You, whom You bless and forgive, and inspire to contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||13||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The faithless cynics forget the Name of the Lord; the night of their lives does not pass in peace.<br>
  Their days and nights become comfortable, O Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  All sorts of jewels and gems, diamonds and rubies, shine forth from their foreheads.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are pleasing to God, look beautiful in the Court of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Serving the True Guru, I dwell on the True Lord.<br>
  The work you have done for the True Guru shall be very useful in the end.<br>
  The Messenger of Death cannot even touch that person who is protected by the True Lord.<br>
  Lighting the lamp of the Guru's Teachings, my awareness has been awakened.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are false; without the Name, they wander around like demons.<br>
  They are nothing more than beasts, wrapped up in human skin; they are black-hearted within.<br>
  The True Lord is pervading all; through the True Word of the Shabad, He is seen.<br>
  O Nanak, the Naam is the greatest treasure. The Perfect Guru has revealed it to me. ||14||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The rainbird realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command with intuitive ease through the Guru.<br>
  The clouds mercifully burst forth, and the rain pours down in torrents.<br>
  The cries and wailings of the rainbird have ceased, and peace has come to abide in its mind.<br>
  O Nanak, praise that Lord, who reaches out and gives sustenance to all beings and creatures. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  O rainbird, you do not know what thirst is within you, or what you can drink to quench it.<br>
  You wander in the love of duality, and you do not obtain the Ambrosial Water.<br>
  When God casts His Glance of Grace, then the mortal automatically meets the True Guru.<br>
  O Nanak, the Ambrosial Water is obtained from the True Guru, and then the mortal remains merged in the Lord with intuitive ease. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Some go and sit in the forest realms, and do not answer any calls.<br>
  Some, in the dead of winter, break the ice and immerse themselves in freezing water.<br>
  Some rub ashes on their bodies, and never wash off their dirt.<br>
  Some look hideous, with their uncut hair matted and dishevelled. They bring dishonor to their family and ancestry.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 032</h2></center>
  Some wander naked day and night and never sleep.<br>
  Some burn their limbs in fire, damaging and ruining themselves.<br>
  Without the Name, the body is reduced to ashes; what good is it to speak and cry then?<br>
  Those who serve the True Guru, are embellished and exalted in the Court of their Lord and Master. ||15||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The rainbird chirps in the ambrosial hours of the morning before the dawn; its prayers are heard in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  The order is issued to the clouds, to let the rains of mercy shower down.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those who enshrine the True Lord within their hearts.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Name, all are rejuvenated, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  O rainbird, this is not the way to quench your thirst, even though you may cry out a hundred times.<br>
  By God's Grace, the True Guru is found; by His Grace, love wells up.<br>
  O Nanak, when the Lord and Master abides in the mind, corruption and evil leave from within. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Some are Jains, wasting their time in the wilderness; by their pre-ordained destiny, they are ruined.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is not on their lips; they do not bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.<br>
  They pull out their hair with their hands, instead of shaving.<br>
  They remain unclean day and night; they do not love the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  They have no status, no honor, and no good karma. They waste away their lives in vain.<br>
  Their minds are false and impure; that which they eat is impure and defiled.<br>
  Without the Shabad, no one achieves a lifestyle of good conduct.<br>
  The Gurmukh is absorbed in the True Lord God, the Universal Creator. ||16||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  In the month of Saawan, the bride is happy, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, she is a happy soul-bride forever; her love for the Guru is unlimited. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  In Saawan, she who has no virtue is burned, in attachment and love of duality.<br>
  O Nanak, she does not appreciate the value of her Husband Lord; all her decorations are worthless. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The True, Unseen, Mysterious Lord is not won over by stubbornness.<br>
  Some sing according to traditional ragas, but the Lord is not pleased by these ragas.<br>
  Some dance and dance and keep the beat, but they do not worship Him with devotion.<br>
  Some refuse to eat; what can be done with these fools?<br>
  Thirst and desire have greatly increased; nothing brings satisfaction.<br>
  Some are tied down by rituals; they hassle themselves to death.<br>
  In this world, profit comes by drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.<br>
  The Gurmukhs gather in loving devotional worship of the Lord. ||17||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those Gurmukhs who sing in the Raga of Malaar - their minds and bodies become cool and calm.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they realize the One, the One True Lord.<br>
  Their minds and bodies are true; they obey the True Lord, and they are known as true.<br>
  True devotional worship is deep within them; they are automatically blessed with honor.<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, there is utter darkness; the self-willed manmukh cannot find the way.<br>
  O Nanak, very blessed are those Gurmukhs, unto whom the Lord is revealed. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The clouds rain down mercifully, and joy wells up in the minds of the people.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to the One, by whose Command the clouds burst forth with rain.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 033</h2></center>
  The Gurmukhs dwell on the Word of the Shabad. They sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, those humble beings who are imbued with the Naam are pure and immaculate. They are intuitively merged in the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Serving the Perfect True Guru, I have found the Perfect Lord.<br>
  Meditating on the Perfect Lord, by perfect karma, I have enshrined the Shabad within my mind.<br>
  Through perfect spiritual wisdom and meditation, my filth has been washed away.<br>
  The Lord is my sacred shrine of pilgrimage and pool of purification; I wash my mind in Him.<br>
  One who dies in the Shabad and conquers his mind - blessed is the mother who gave birth to him.<br>
  He is true in the Court of the Lord, and his coming into this world is judged to be true.<br>
  No one can challenge that person, with whom our Lord and Master is pleased.<br>
  O Nanak, praising the True Lord, his pre-ordained destiny is activated. ||18||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who give out ceremonial hats of recognition are fools; those who receive them have no shame.<br>
  The mouse cannot enter its hole with a basket tied around its waist.<br>
  Those who give out blessings shall die, and those that they bless shall also depart.<br>
  O Nanak, no one knows the Lord's Command, by which all must depart.<br>
  The spring harvest is the Name of the One Lord; the harvest of autumn is the True Name.<br>
  I receive a letter of pardon from my Lord and Master, when I reach His Court.<br>
  There are so many courts of the world, and so many who come and go there.<br>
  There are so many beggars begging; so many beg and beg until death. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  The elephant eats a hundred pounds of ghee and molasses, and five hundred pounds of corn.<br>
  He belches and grunts and scatters dust, and when the breath leaves his body, he regrets it.<br>
  The blind and arrogant die insane.<br>
  Submitting to the Lord, one become pleasing to Him.<br>
  The sparrow eats only half a grain, then it flies through the sky and chirps.<br>
  The good sparrow is pleasing to her Lord and Master, if she chirps the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The powerful tiger kills hundreds of deer, and all sorts of other animals eat what it leaves.<br>
  It becomes very strong, and cannot be contained in its den, but when it must go, it regrets.<br>
  So who is impressed by the roar of the blind beast?<br>
  He is not pleasing at all to his Lord and Master.<br>
  The insect loves the milkweed plant; perched on its branch, it eats it.<br>
  It becomes good and pleasing to its Lord and Master, if it chirps the Name of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the world lasts for only a few days; indulging in pleasures, pain is produced.<br>
  There are many who boast and brag, but none of them can remain detached from the world.<br>
  The fly dies for the sake of sweets.<br>
  O Lord, death does not even approach those whom You protect. You carry them across the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You are Inaccessible and Unfathomable, O Invisible and Infinite True Lord Master.<br>
  You are the Giver, all are beggars of You. You alone are the Great Giver.<br>
  Those who serve You find peace, reflecting on the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  Some, according to Your Will, are in love with Maya.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, praise the Lord with love and affection within.<br>
  Without love, there is no devotion. Without the True Guru, love is not enshrined.<br>
  You are the Lord God; everyone serves You. This is the prayer of Your humble minstrel.<br>
  Please bless me with the gift of contentment, that I may receive the True Name as my Support. ||19||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 034</h2></center>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Through the night the time ticks away; through the day the time ticks away.<br>
  The body wears away and turns to straw.<br>
  All are involved and entangled in worldly entanglements.<br>
  The mortal has mistakenly renounced the way of service.<br>
  The blind fool is caught in conflict, bothered and bewildered.<br>
  Those who weep after someone has died - can they bring him back to life?<br>
  Without realization, nothing can be understood.<br>
  The weepers who weep for the dead shall themselves die as well.<br>
  O Nanak, this is the Will of our Lord and Master.<br>
  Those who do not remember the Lord, are dead. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  Love dies, and affection dies; hatred and strife die.<br>
  The color fades, and beauty vanishes; the body suffers and collapses.<br>
  Where did he come from? Where is he going? Did he exist or not?<br>
  The self-willed manmukh made empty boasts, indulging in parties and pleasures.<br>
  O Nanak, without the True Name, his honor is torn away, from head to foot. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is forever the Giver of peace. It shall be your Help and Support in the end.<br>
  Without the Guru, the world is insane. It does not appreciate the worth of the Name.<br>
  Those who serve the True Guru are accepted and approved. Their light merges into the Light.<br>
  That servant who enshrines the Lord's Will within his mind, becomes just like his Lord and Master.<br>
  Tell me, who has ever found peace by following his own will? The blind act in blindness.<br>
  No one is ever satisfied and fulfilled by evil and corruption. The hunger of the fool is not satisfied.<br>
  Attached to duality, all are ruined; without the True Guru, there is no understanding.<br>
  Those who serve the True Guru find peace; they are blessed with Grace by the Will of the Lord. ||20||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Modesty and righteousness both, O Nanak, are qualities of those who are blessed with true wealth.<br>
  Do not refer to that wealth as your friend, which leads you to get your head beaten.<br>
  Those who possess only this worldly wealth are known as paupers.<br>
  But those, within whose hearts You dwell, O Lord - those people are oceans of virtue. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  Worldly possessions are obtained by pain and suffering; when they are gone, they leave pain and suffering.<br>
  O Nanak, without the True Name, hunger is never satisfied.<br>
  Beauty does not satisfy hunger; when the man sees beauty, he hungers even more.<br>
  As many as are the pleasures of the body, so many are the pains which afflict it. ||2||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  Acting blindly, the mind becomes blind. The blind mind makes the body blind.<br>
  Why make a dam with mud and plaster? Even a dam made of stones gives way.<br>
  The dam has burst. There is no boat. There is no raft. The water's depth is unfathomable.<br>
  O Nanak, without the True Name, many multitudes have drowned. ||3||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  Thousands of pounds of gold, and thousands of pounds of silver; the king over the heads of thousands of kings.<br>
  Thousands of armies, thousands of marching bands and spearmen; the emperor of thousands of horsemen.<br>
  The unfathomable ocean of fire and water must be crossed.<br>
  The other shore cannot be seen; only the roar of pitiful cries can be heard.<br>
  O Nanak, there, it shall be known, whether anyone is a king or an emperor. ||4||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Some have chains around their necks, in bondage to the Lord.<br>
  They are released from bondage, realizing the True Lord as True.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 035</h2></center>
  One whose pre-ordained destiny is activated, comes to know the True Lord.<br>
  By God's Command, it is ordained. When the mortal goes, he knows.<br>
  Realize the Word of the Shabad, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Thieves, adulterers and gamblers are pressed like seeds in the mill.<br>
  Slanderers and gossipers are hand-cuffed.<br>
  The Gurmukh is absorbed in the True Lord, and is famous in the Court of the Lord. ||21||<br>
  Shalok, Second Mehl:<br>
  The beggar is known as an emperor, and the fool is known as a religious scholar.<br>
  The blind man is known as a seer; this is how people talk.<br>
  The trouble-maker is called a leader, and the liar is seated with honor.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs know that this is justice in the Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  Deer, falcons and government officials are known to be trained and clever.<br>
  When the trap is set, they trap their own kind; hereafter they will find no place of rest.<br>
  He alone is learned and wise, and he alone is a scholar, who practices the Name.<br>
  First, the tree puts down its roots, and then it spreads out its shade above.<br>
  The kings are tigers, and their officials are dogs;<br>
  they go out and awaken the sleeping people to harass them.<br>
  The public servants inflict wounds with their nails.<br>
  The dogs lick up the blood that is spilled.<br>
  But there, in the Court of the Lord, all beings will be judged.<br>
  Those who have violated the people's trust will be disgraced; their noses will be cut off. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He Himself creates the world, and He himself takes care of it.<br>
  Without the Fear of God, doubt is not dispelled, and love for the Name is not embraced.<br>
  Through the True Guru, the Fear of God wells up, and the Door of Salvation is found.<br>
  Through the Fear of God, intuitive ease is obtained, and one's light merges into the Light of the Infinite.<br>
  Through the Fear of God, the terrifying world-ocean is crossed over, reflecting on the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  Through the Fear of God, the Fearless Lord is found; He has no end or limitation.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs do not appreciate the value of the Fear of God. Burning in desire, they weep and wail.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Name, peace is obtained, by enshrining the Guru's Teachings within the heart. ||22||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Beauty and sexual desire are friends; hunger and tasty food are tied together.<br>
  Greed is bound up in its search for wealth, and sleep will use even a tiny space as a bed.<br>
  Anger barks and brings ruin on itself, blindly pursuing useless conflicts.<br>
  It is good to be silent, O Nanak; without the Name, one's mouth spews forth only filth. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  Royal power, wealth, beauty, social status and youth are the five thieves.<br>
  These thieves have plundered the world; no one's honor has been spared.<br>
  But these thieves themselves are robbed, by those who fall at the Guru's Feet.<br>
  O Nanak, the multitudes who do not have good karma are plundered. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The learned and educated are called to account for their actions.<br>
  Without the Name, they are judged false; they become miserable and suffer hardship.<br>
  Their path becomes treacherous and difficult, and their way is blocked.<br>
  Through the Shabad, the Word of the True and Independent Lord God, one becomes content.<br>
  The Lord is deep and profound and unfathomable; His depth cannot be measured.<br>
  Without the Guru, the mortals are beaten and punched in the face and the mouth, and no one is released.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one returns to his true home with honor.<br>
  Know that the Lord, by the Hukam of His Command, gives sustenance and the breath of life. ||23||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 036</h2></center>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Living beings are formed of air, water and fire. They are subject to pleasure and pain.<br>
  In this world, in the nether regions of the underworld, and in the Akaashic ethers of the heavens, some remain ministers in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Some live long lives, while others suffer and die.<br>
  Some give and consume, and still their wealth is not exhausted, while others remain poor forever.<br>
  In His Will He creates, and in His Will He destroys thousands in an instant.<br>
  He has harnessed everyone with His harness; when He forgives, he breaks the harness.<br>
  He has no color or features; He is invisible and beyond calculation.<br>
  How can He be described? He is known as the Truest of the True.<br>
  All the actions which are done and described, O Nanak, are done by the Indescribable Lord Himself.<br>
  Whoever hears the description of the indescribable,<br>
  is blessed with wealth, intelligence, perfection, spiritual wisdom and eternal peace. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  One who bears the unbearable, controls the nine holes of the body.<br>
  One who worships and adores the Lord with his breath of life, gains stability in his body-wall.<br>
  Where has he come from, and where will he go?<br>
  Remaining dead while yet alive, he is accepted and approved.<br>
  Whoever understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command, realizes the essence of reality.<br>
  This is known by Guru's Grace.<br>
  O Nanak, know this: egotism leads to bondage.<br>
  Only those who have no ego and no self-conceit, are not consigned to reincarnation. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Read the Praise of the Lord's Name; other intellectual pursuits are false.<br>
  Without dealing in Truth, life is worthless.<br>
  No one has ever found the Lord's end or limitation.<br>
  All the world is enveloped by the darkness of egotistical pride. It does not like the Truth.<br>
  Those who depart from this world, forgetting the Naam, shall be roasted in the frying pan.<br>
  They pour the oil of duality within, and burn.<br>
  They come into the world and wander around aimlessly; they depart when the play is finished.<br>
  O Nanak, imbued with Truth, the mortals merge in Truth. ||24||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  First, the mortal is conceived in the flesh, and then he dwells in the flesh.<br>
  When he comes alive, his mouth takes flesh; his bones, skin and body are flesh.<br>
  He comes out of the womb of flesh, and takes a mouthful of flesh at the breast.<br>
  His mouth is flesh, his tongue is flesh; his breath is in the flesh.<br>
  He grows up and is married, and brings his wife of flesh into his home.<br>
  Flesh is produced from flesh; all relatives are made of flesh.<br>
  When the mortal meets the True Guru, and realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then he comes to be reformed.<br>
  Releasing himself, the mortal does not find release; O Nanak, through empty words, one is ruined. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  The fools argue about flesh and meat, but they know nothing about meditation and spiritual wisdom.<br>
  What is called meat, and what is called green vegetables? What leads to sin?<br>
  It was the habit of the gods to kill the rhinoceros, and make a feast of the burnt offering.<br>
  Those who renounce meat, and hold their noses when sitting near it, devour men at night.<br>
  They practice hypocrisy, and make a show before other people, but they do not understand anything about meditation or spiritual wisdom.<br>
  O Nanak, what can be said to the blind people? They cannot answer, or even understand what is said.<br>
  They alone are blind, who act blindly. They have no eyes in their hearts.<br>
  They are produced from the blood of their mothers and fathers, but they do not eat fish or meat.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 037</h2></center>
  But when men and women meet in the night, they come together in the flesh.<br>
  In the flesh we are conceived, and in the flesh we are born; we are vessels of flesh.<br>
  You know nothing of spiritual wisdom and meditation, even though you call yourself clever, O religious scholar.<br>
  O master, you believe that flesh on the outside is bad, but the flesh of those in your own home is good.<br>
  All beings and creatures are flesh; the soul has taken up its home in the flesh.<br>
  They eat the uneatable; they reject and abandon what they could eat. They have a teacher who is blind.<br>
  In the flesh we are conceived, and in the flesh we are born; we are vessels of flesh.<br>
  You know nothing of spiritual wisdom and meditation, even though you call yourself clever, O religious scholar.<br>
  Meat is allowed in the Puraanas, meat is allowed in the Bible and the Koran. Throughout the four ages, meat has been used.<br>
  It is featured in sacred feasts and marriage festivities; meat is used in them.<br>
  Women, men, kings and emperors originate from meat.<br>
  If you see them going to hell, then do not accept charitable gifts from them.<br>
  The giver goes to hell, while the receiver goes to heaven - look at this injustice.<br>
  You do not understand your own self, but you preach to other people. O Pandit, you are very wise indeed.<br>
  O Pandit, you do not know where meat originated.<br>
  Corn, sugar cane and cotton are produced from water. The three worlds came from water.<br>
  Water says, "I am good in many ways." But water takes many forms.<br>
  Forsaking these delicacies, one becomes a true Sannyaasee, a detached hermit. Nanak reflects and speaks. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  What can I say with only one tongue? I cannot find your limits.<br>
  Those who contemplate the True Word of the Shabad are absorbed into You, O Lord.<br>
  Some wander around in saffron robes, but without the True Guru, no one finds the Lord.<br>
  They wander in foreign lands and countries until they grow weary, but You hide Yourself within them.<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad is a jewel, through which the Lord shines forth and reveals Himself.<br>
  Realizing one's own self, following the Guru's Teachings, the mortal is absorbed into Truth.<br>
  Coming and going, the tricksters and magicians put on their magic show.<br>
  But those whose minds are pleased by the True Lord, praise the True One, the Ever-stable Lord. ||25||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, the tree of actions done in Maya yields ambrosial fruit and poisonous fruit.<br>
  The Creator does all deeds; we eat the fruits as He ordains. ||1||<br>
  Second Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, burn worldly greatness and glory in the fire.<br>
  These burnt offerings have caused mortals to forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Not even one of them will go along with you in the end. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He judges each and every being; by the Hukam of His Command, He leads us on.<br>
  Justice is in Your Hands, O Lord; You are pleasing to my mind.<br>
  The mortal is bound and gagged by Death and lead away; no one can rescue him.<br>
  Old age, the tyrant, dances on the mortal's shoulders.<br>
  So climb aboard the boat of the True Guru, and the True Lord will rescue you.<br>
  The fire of desire burns like an oven, consuming mortals night and day.<br>
  Like trapped birds, the mortals peck at the corn; only through the Lord's Command will they find release.<br>
  Whatever the Creator does, comes to pass; falsehood shall fail in the end. ||26||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 038</h2></center>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  The True Guru is the All-knowing Primal Being; He shows us our true home within the home of the self.<br>
  The Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, resonate and resound within; the insignia of the Shabad is revealed there, vibrating gloriously.<br>
  Worlds and realms, nether regions, solar systems and galaxies are wondrously revealed.<br>
  The strings and the harps vibrate and resound; the true throne of the Lord is there.<br>
  Listen to the music of the home of the heart - Sukhmani, peace of mind. Lovingly tune in to His state of celestial ecstasy.<br>
  Contemplate the Unspoken Speech, and the desires of the mind are dissolved.<br>
  The heart-lotus is turned upside-down, and is filled with Ambrosial Nectar. This mind does not go out; it does not get distracted.<br>
  It does not forget the Chant which is chanted without chanting; it is immersed in the Primal Lord God of the ages.<br>
  All the sister-companions are blessed with the five virtues. The Gurmukhs dwell in the home of the self deep within.<br>
  Nanak is the slave of that one who seeks the Shabad and finds this home within. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  The extravagant glamor of the world is a passing show.<br>
  My twisted mind does not believe that it will end up in a grave.<br>
  I am meek and lowly; You are the great river.<br>
  Please, bless me with the one thing; everything else is poison, and does not tempt me.<br>
  You filled this fragile body with the water of life, O Lord, by Your Creative Power.<br>
  By Your Omnipotence, I have become powerful.<br>
  Nanak is a dog in the Court of the Lord, intoxicated more and more, all the time.<br>
  The world is on fire; the Name of the Lord is cooling and soothing. ||2||<br>
  New Pauree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  His wonderful play is all-pervading; it is wonderful and amazing!<br>
  As Gurmukh, I know the the Transcendent Lord, the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  All my sins and corruption are washed away, through the insignia of the Shabad, the Word of God.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one is saved, and becomes free.<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Great Giver, I enjoy all comforts and pleasures.<br>
  I have become famous throughout the world, under the canopy of His kindness and grace.<br>
  He Himself has forgiven me, and united me with Himself; I am forever a sacrifice to Him.<br>
  O Nanak, by the Pleasure of His Will, my Lord and Master has blended me with Himself. ||27||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Blessed is the paper, blessed is the pen, blessed is the inkwell, and blessed is the ink.<br>
  Blessed is the writer, O Nanak, who writes the True Name. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  You Yourself are the writing tablet, and You Yourself are the pen. You are also what is written on it.<br>
  Speak of the One Lord, O Nanak; how could there be any other? ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You Yourself are all-pervading; You Yourself made the making.<br>
  Without You, there is no other at all; You are permeating and pervading everywhere.<br>
  You alone know Your state and extent. Only You can estimate Your worth.<br>
  You are invisible, imperceptible and inaccessible. You are revealed through the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  Deep within, there is ignorance, suffering and doubt; through the spiritual wisdom of the Guru, they are eradicated.<br>
  He alone meditates on the Naam, whom You unite with Yourself, in Your Mercy.<br>
  You are the Creator, the Inaccessible Primal Lord God; You are all-pervading everywhere.<br>
  To whatever You link the mortal, O True Lord, to that he is linked. Nanak sings Your Glorious Praises. ||28||1||<br>
  SUDH||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 039</h2></center>
  Raag Malaar, The Word Of The Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Serve the King, the Sovereign Lord of the World. He has no ancestry; He is immaculate and pure.<br>
  Please bless me with the gift of devotion, which the humble Saints beg for. ||1||Pause||<br>
  His Home is the pavilion seen in all directions; His ornamental heavenly realms fill the seven worlds alike.<br>
  In His Home, the virgin Lakshmi dwells. The moon and the sun are His two lamps; the wretched Messenger of Death stages his dramas, and levies taxes on all.<br>
  Such is my Sovereign Lord King, the Supreme Lord of all. ||1||<br>
  In His House, the four-faced Brahma, the cosmic potter lives. He created the entire universe.<br>
  In His House, the insane Shiva, the Guru of the World, lives; he imparts spiritual wisdom to expain the essence of reality.<br>
  Sin and virtue are the standard-bearers at His Door; Chitr and Gupt are the recording angels of the conscious and subconscious.<br>
  The Righteous Judge of Dharma, the Lord of Destruction, is the door-man.<br>
  Such is the Supreme Sovereign Lord of the World. ||2||<br>
  In His Home are the heavenly heralds, celestial singers, Rishis and poor minstrels, who sing so sweetly.<br>
  All the Shaastras take various forms in His theater, singing beautiful songs.<br>
  The wind waves the fly-brush over Him;<br>
  His hand-maiden is Maya, who has conquered the world.<br>
  The shell of the earth is His fireplace.<br>
  Such is the Sovereign Lord of the three worlds. ||3||<br>
  In His Home, the celestial turtle is the bed-frame, woven with the strings of the thousand-headed snake.<br>
  His flower-girls are the eighteen loads of vegetation; His water-carriers are the nine hundred sixty million clouds.<br>
  His sweat is the Ganges River.<br>
  The seven seas are His water-pitchers.<br>
  The creatures of the world are His household utensils.<br>
  Such is the Sovereign Lord King of the three worlds. ||4||<br>
  In His home are Arjuna, Dhroo, Prahlaad, Ambreek, Naarad, Nayjaa, the Siddhas and Buddhas, the ninety-two heavenly heralds and celestial singers in their wondrous play.<br>
  All the creatures of the world are in His House.<br>
  The Lord is diffused in the inner beings of all.<br>
  Prays Naam Dayv, seek His Protection.<br>
  All the devotees are His banner and insignia. ||5||1||<br>
  MALAAR:<br>
  Please do not forget me; please do not forget me,<br>
  please do not forget me, O Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The temple priests have doubts about this, and everyone is furious with me.<br>
  Calling me low-caste and untouchable, they beat me and drove me out; what should I do now, O Beloved Father Lord? ||1||<br>
  If You liberate me after I am dead, no one will know that I am liberated.<br>
  These Pandits, these religious scholars, call me low-born; when they say this, they tarnish Your honor as well. ||2||<br>
  You are called kind and compassionate; the power of Your Arm is absolutely unrivalled.<br>
  The Lord turned the temple around to face Naam Dayv; He turned His back on the Brahmins. ||3||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 040</h2></center>
  Malaar, The Word Of The Devotee Ravi Daas Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O humble townspeople, I am obviously just a shoemaker.<br>
  In my heart I cherish the Glories of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Even if wine is made from the water of the Ganges, O Saints, do not drink it.<br>
  This wine, and any other polluted water which mixes with the Ganges, is not separate from it. ||1||<br>
  The palmyra palm tree is considered impure, and so its leaves are considered impure as well.<br>
  But if devotional prayers are written on paper made from its leaves, then people bow in reverence and worship before it. ||2||<br>
  It is my occupation to prepare and cut leather; each day, I carry the carcasses out of the city.<br>
  Now, the important Brahmins of the city bow down before me; Ravi Daas, Your slave, seeks the Sanctuary of Your Name. ||3||1||<br>
  MALAAR:<br>
  Those humble beings who meditate on the Lord's Lotus Feet - none are equal to them.<br>
  The Lord is One, but He is diffused in many forms. Bring in, bring in, that All-pervading Lord. ||Pause||<br>
  He who writes the Praises of the Lord God, and sees nothing else at all, is a low-class, untouchable fabric-dyer by trade.<br>
  The Glory of the Name is seen in the writings of Vyaas and Sanak, throughout the seven continents. ||1||<br>
  And he whose family used to kill cows at the festivals of Eed and Bakareed, who worshipped Shayks, martyrs and spiritual teachers,<br>
  whose father used to do such things - his son Kabeer became so successful that he is now famous throughout the three worlds. ||2||<br>
  And all the leather-workers in those families still go around Benares removing the dead cattle<br>
  - the ritualistic Brahmins bow in reverence before their son Ravi Daas, the slave of the Lord's slaves. ||3||2||<br>
  Malaar:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  What sort of devotional worship will lead me to meet my Beloved, the Lord of my breath of life?<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have obtained the supreme status. ||Pause||<br>
  How long shall I wash these dirty clothes?<br>
  How long shall I remain asleep? ||1||<br>
  Whatever I was attached to, has perished.<br>
  The shop of false merchandise has closed down. ||2||<br>
  Says Ravi Daas, when the account is called for and given,<br>
  whatever the mortal has done, he shall see. ||3||1||3||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr32.htm">Next: Raag Kaanraa</a></center>
 </body>