<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr31.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr33.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Kaanraa</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 001</h2></center>
  Raag Kaanraa, Chau-Padas, Fourth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Meeting with the Holy people, my mind blossoms forth.<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to those Holy beings; joining the Sangat, the Congregation, I am carried across to the other side. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Lord, Har, Har, please bless me with Your Mercy, God, that I may fall at the feet of the Holy.<br>
  Blessed, blessed are the Holy, who know the Lord God. Meeting with the Holy, even sinners are saved. ||1||<br>
  The mind roams and rambles all around in all directions. Meeting with the Holy, it is overpowered and brought under control,<br>
  just as when the fisherman spreads his net over the water, he catches and overpowers the fish. ||2||<br>
  The Saints, the Saints of the Lord, are noble and good. Meeting with the humble Saints, filth is washed away.<br>
  All the sins and egotism are washed away, like soap washing dirty clothes. ||3||<br>
  According to that pre-ordained destiny inscribed on my forehead by my Lord and Master, I have enshrined the Feet of the Guru, the True Guru, within my heart.<br>
  I have found God, the Destroyer of all poverty and pain; servant Nanak is saved through the Naam. ||4||1||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  My mind is the dust of the feet of the Saints.<br>
  Joining the Sangat, the Congregation, I listen to the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har. My crude and uncultured mind is drenched with the Love of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am thoughtless and unconscious; I do not know God's state and extent. The Guru has made me thoughtful and conscious.<br>
  God is Merciful to the meek; He has made me His Own. My mind chants and meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  Meeting with the Lord's Saints, the Beloveds of the mind, I would cut out my heart, and offer it to them.<br>
  Meeting with the Lord's Saints, I meet with the Lord; this sinner has been sanctified. ||2||<br>
  The humble servants of the Lord are said to be exalted in this world; meeting with them, even stones are softened.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 002</h2></center>
  I cannot even describe the noble grandeur of such humble beings; the Lord, Har, Har, has made them sublime and exalted. ||3||<br>
  You, Lord are the Great Merchant-Banker; O God, my Lord and Master, I am just a poor peddler; please bless me with the wealth.<br>
  Please bestow Your Kindness and Mercy upon servant Nanak, God, so that he may load up the merchandise of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||2||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, chant the Name of the Lord, and be enlightened.<br>
  Meet with the Saints of the Lord, and focus your love; remain balanced and detached within your own household. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I chant the Name of the Lord, Nar-Har, within my heart; God the Merciful has shown His Mercy.<br>
  Night and day, I am in ecstasy; my mind has blossomed forth, rejuvenated. I am trying - I hope to meet my Lord. ||1||<br>
  I am in love with the Lord, my Lord and Master; I love Him with every breath and morsel of food I take.<br>
  My sins were burnt away in an instant; the noose of the bondage of Maya was loosened. ||2||<br>
  I am such a worm! What karma am I creating? What can I do? I am a fool, a total idiot, but God has saved me.<br>
  I am unworthy, heavy as stone, but joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I am carried across to the other side. ||3||<br>
  The Universe which God created is all above me; I am the lowest, engrossed in corruption.<br>
  With the Guru, my faults and demerits have been erased. Servant Nanak has been united with God Himself. ||4||3||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, through the Guru's Word.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, has shown me His Mercy, and my evil-mindedness, love of duality and sense of alienation are totally gone, thanks to the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause||<br>
  There are so many forms and colors of the Lord. The Lord is pervading each and every heart, and yet He is hidden from view.<br>
  Meeting with the Lord's Saints, the Lord is revealed, and the doors of corruption are shattered. ||1||<br>
  The glory of the Saintly beings is absolutely great; they lovingly enshrine the Lord of Bliss and Delight within their hearts.<br>
  Meeting with the Lord's Saints, I meet with the Lord, just as when the calf is seen - the cow is there as well. ||2||<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, is within the humble Saints of the Lord; they are exalted - they know, and they inspire others to know as well.<br>
  The fragrance of the Lord permeates their hearts; they have abandoned the foul stench. ||3||<br>
  You make those humble beings Your Own, God; You protect Your Own, O Lord.<br>
  The Lord is servant Nanak's companion; the Lord is his sibling, mother, father, relative and relation. ||4||4||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, consciously chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  The commodity of the Lord, Har, Har, is locked in the fortress of Maya; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have conquered the fortress. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In false doubt and superstition, people wander all around, lured by love and emotional attachment to their children and families.<br>
  But just like the passing shade of the tree, your body-wall shall crumble in an instant. ||1||<br>
  The humble beings are exalted; they are my breath of life and my beloveds; meeting them, my mind is filled with faith.<br>
  Deep within the heart, I am happy with the Pervading Lord; with love and joy, I dwell upon the Steady and Stable Lord. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 003</h2></center>
  The humble Saints, the Saints of the Lord, are noble and sublime; meeting them, the mind is tinged with love and joy.<br>
  The Lord's Love never fades away, and it never wears off. Through the Lord's Love, one goes and meets the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||<br>
  I am a sinner; I have committed so many sins. The Guru has cut them, cut them, and hacked them off.<br>
  The Guru has placed the healing remedy of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, into my mouth. Servant Nanak, the sinner, has been purified and sanctified. ||4||5||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Chant, O my mind, the Name of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  I was caught in the whirlpool of poisonous sin and corruption. The True Guru gave me His Hand; He lifted me up and pulled me out. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O my Fearless, Immaculate Lord and Master, please save me - I am a sinner, a sinking stone.<br>
  I am lured and enticed by sexual desire, anger, greed and corruption, but associating with You, I am carried across, like iron in the wooden boat. ||1||<br>
  You are the Great Primal Being, the most Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord God; I search for You, but cannot find Your depth.<br>
  You are the farthest of the far, beyond the beyond, O my Lord and Master; You alone know Yourself, O Lord of the Universe. ||2||<br>
  I meditate on the Name of the Unseen and Unfathomable Lord; joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I have found the Path of the Holy.<br>
  Joining the congregation, I listen to the Gospel of the Lord, Har, Har; I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, and speak the Unspoken Speech. ||3||<br>
  My God is the Lord of the World, the Lord of the Universe; please save me, O Lord of all Creation.<br>
  Servant Nanak is the slave of the slave of Your slaves. O God, please bless me with Your Grace; please protect me and keep me with Your humble servants. ||4||6||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl, Partaal, Fifth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O mind, meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the World.<br>
  The Lord is the Jewel, the Diamond, the Ruby.<br>
  The Lord fashions the Gurmukhs in His Mint.<br>
  O Lord, please, please, be Merciful to me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your Glorious Virtues are inaccessible and unfathomable; how can my one poor tongue describe them? O my Beloved Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, Raam.<br>
  O Dear Lord, You, You, You alone know Your Unspoken Speech. I have become enraptured, enraptured, enraptured, meditating on the Lord. ||1||<br>
  The Lord, my Lord and Master, is my Companion and my Breath of Life; the Lord is my Best Friend. My mind, body and tongue are attuned to the Lord, Har, Haray, Haray. The Lord is my Wealth and Property.<br>
  She alone obtains her Husband Lord, who is so pre-destined. Through the Guru's Teachings, she sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Haray, Haray. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Lord, O servan<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Let my one tongue become two hundred thousand<br>
  - with them all, I will meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, and chant the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  O Lord, please, please, be Merciful to me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Lord, my Lord and Master, please be Merciful to me; please enjoin me to serve You. I chant and meditate on the Lord, I chant and meditate on the Lord, I chant and meditate on the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Your humble servants chant and meditate on You, O Lord; they are sublime and exalted. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to them. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 004</h2></center>
  O Lord, You are the Greatest of the Great, the Greatest of the Great, the most Lofty and High. You do whatever You please.<br>
  Servant Nanak drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar through the Guru's Teachings. Blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed and praised is the Guru. ||2||2||8||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, meditate and vibrate on the Lord, Raam, Raam.<br>
  He has no form or feature - He is Great!<br>
  Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, vibrate and meditate on the Lord.<br>
  This is the high destiny written on your forehead. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That household, that mansion, in which the Lord's Praises are sung - that home is filled with ecstasy and joy; so vibrate and meditate on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.<br>
  Sing the Glorious Praises of the Name of the Lord, the Beloved Lord. Through the Teachings of the Guru, the Guru, the True Guru, you shall find peace. So vibrate and meditate on the Lord, Har, Haray, Har, Haray, Haray, the Lord, Raam, Raam,<br>
  You are the Support of the whole universe, Lord; O Merciful Lord, You, You, You are the Creator of all, Raam, Raam, Raam.<br>
  Servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; please bless him with the Guru's Teachings, that he may vibrate and meditate on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam. ||2||3||9||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  I eagerly kiss the Feet of the True Guru.<br>
  Meeting Him, the Path to the Lord becomes smooth and easy.<br>
  I lovingly vibrate and meditate on the Lord, and gulp down His Sublime Essence.<br>
  The Lord has written this destiny on my forehead. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Some perform the six rituals and rites; the Siddhas, seekers and Yogis put on all sorts of pompous shows, with their hair all tangled and matted.<br>
  Yoga - Union with the Lord God - is not obtained by wearing religious robes; the Lord is found in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and the Guru's Teachings. The humble Saints throw the doors wide open. ||1||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, You are the farthest of the far, utterly unfathomable. You are totally pervading the water and the land. You alone are the One and Only Unique Lord of all creation.<br>
  You alone know all Your ways and means. You alone understand Yourself. Servant Nanak's Lord God is in each heart, in every heart, in the home of each and every heart. ||2||4||10||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, chant and meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, is inaccessible and unfathomable.<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, my intellect attains the Lord God.<br>
  This is the pre-ordained destiny written on my forehead. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Collecting the poison of Maya, people think of all sorts of evil. But peace is found only by vibrating and meditating on the Lord; with the Saints, in the Sangat, the Society of the Saints, meet the True Guru, the Holy Guru.<br>
  Just as when the iron slag is transmuted into gold by touching the Philosopher's Stone - when the sinner joins the Sangat, he becomes pure, through the Guru's Teachings. ||1||<br>
  Just like the heavy iron which is carried across on the wooden raft, sinners are carried across in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and the Guru, the True Guru, the Holy Guru.<br>
  There are four castes, four social classes, and four stages of life. Whoever meets the Guru, Guru Nanak, is himself carried across, and he carries all his ancestors and generations across as well. ||2||5||11||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Sing the Praises of the Lord God.<br>
  Singing His Praises, sins are washed away.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, listen to His Praises with your ears.<br>
  The Lord shall be Merciful to you. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 005</h2></center>
  Your humble servants focus their consciousness and meditate on You with one-pointed mind; those Holy beings find peace, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Treasure of Bliss.<br>
  They sing Your Praises, God, meeting with the Holy, the Holy people, and the Guru, the True Guru, O Lord God. ||1||<br>
  They alone obtain the fruit of peace, within whose hearts You, O my Lord and Master, abide. They cross over the terrifying world-ocean - they are known as the Lord's devotees.<br>
  Please enjoin me to their service, Lord, please enjoin me to their service. O Lord God, You, You, You, You, You are the Lord of servant Nanak. ||2||6||12||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World, the Treasure of Mercy.<br>
  The True Guru is the Destroyer of pain, the Giver of peace; meeting Him, one is totally fulfilled. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on the Naam, the Support of the mind.<br>
  Millions of sinners are carried across in an instant. ||1||<br>
  Whoever remembers his Guru,<br>
  shall not suffer sorrow, even in dreams. ||2||<br>
  Whoever keeps his Guru enshrined within<br>
  - that humble being tastes the sublime essence of the Lord with his tongue. ||3||<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru has been Kind to me;<br>
  here and herafter, my face is radiant. ||4||1||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I worship and adore You, my Lord and Master.<br>
  Standing up and sitting down, while sleeping and awake, with each and every breath, I meditate on the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides within the hearts of those,<br>
  whose Lord and Master blesses them with this gift. ||1||<br>
  Peace and tranquility come into the hearts of those<br>
  who meet their Lord and Master, through the Word of the Guru. ||2||<br>
  Those whom the Guru blesses with the Mantra of the Naam are wise, and blessed with all powers,. ||3||<br>
  Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those<br>
  who are blessed with the Name in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||4||2||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Sing the Praises of God, O my tongue.<br>
  Humbly bow to the Saints, over and over again; through them, the Feet of the Lord of the Universe shall come to abide within you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Door to the Lord cannot be found by any other means.<br>
  When He becomes Merciful, we come to meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  The body is not purified by millions of rituals.<br>
  The mind is awakened and enlightened only in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||<br>
  Thirst and desire are not quenched by enjoying the many pleasures of Maya.<br>
  Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, total peace is found. ||3||<br>
  When the Supreme Lord God becomes Merciful,<br>
  says Nanak, then one is rid of worldly entanglements. ||4||3||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Beg for such blessings from the Lord of the Universe:<br>
  to work for the Saints, and the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Chanting the Name of the Lord, the supreme status is obtained. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Worship the Feet of Your Lord and Master, and seek His Sanctuary.<br>
  Take joy in whatever God does. ||1||<br>
  This precious human body becomes fruitful,<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 006</h2></center>
  when the True Guru shows His Kindness. ||2||<br>
  The house of ignorance, doubt and pain is destroyed,<br>
  for those within whose hearts the Guru's Feet abide. ||3||<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, lovingly meditate on God.<br>
  Says Nanak, you shall obtain the Perfect Lord. ||4||4||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Devotion is the natural quality of God's devotees.<br>
  Their bodies and minds are blended with their Lord and Master; He unites them with Himself. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The singer sings the songs,<br>
  but she alone is saved, within whose consciousness the Lord abides. ||1||<br>
  The one who sets the table sees the food,<br>
  but only one who eats the food is satisfied. ||2||<br>
  People disguise themselves with all sorts of costumes,<br>
  but in the end, they are seen as they truly are. ||3||<br>
  Speaking and talking are all just entanglements.<br>
  O slave Nanak, the true way of life is excellent. ||4||5||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Your humble servant listens to Your Praises with delight. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My mind is enlightened, gazing upon the Glory of God. Wherever I look, there He is. ||1||<br>
  You are the farthest of all, the highest of the far, profound, unfathomable and unreachable. ||2||<br>
  You are united with Your devotees, through and through; You have removed Your veil for Your humble servants. ||3||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, Nanak sings Your Glorious Praises; he is intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi. ||4||6||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have come to the Saints to save myself. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, I am sanctified; they have implanted the Mantra of the Lord, Har, Har, within me. ||1||<br>
  The disease has been eradicated, and my mind has become immaculate. I have taken the healing medicine of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2||<br>
  I have become steady and stable, and I dwell in the home of peace. I shall never again wander anywhere. ||3||<br>
  By the Grace of the Saints, the people and all their generations are saved; O Nanak, they are not engrossed in Maya. ||4||7||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have totally forgotten my jealousy of others,<br>
  since I found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  No one is my enemy, and no one is a stranger. I get along with everyone. ||1||<br>
  Whatever God does, I accept that as good. This is the sublime wisdom I have obtained from the Holy. ||2||<br>
  The One God is pervading in all. Gazing upon Him, beholding Him, Nanak blossoms forth in happiness. ||3||8||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my Dear Lord and Master, You alone are my Support.<br>
  You are my Honor and Glory; I seek Your Support, and Your Sanctuary. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are my Hope, and You are my Faith. I take Your Name and enshrine it within my heart.<br>
  You are my Power; associating with You, I am embellished and exalted. I do whatever You say. ||1||<br>
  Through Your Kindness and Compassion, I find peace; when You are Merciful, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Through the Name of the Lord, I obtain the gift of fearlessness; Nanak places his head on the feet of the Saints. ||2||9||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 007</h2></center>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In the Sanctuary of the Holy, I focus my consciousness on the Lord's Feet.<br>
  When I was dreaming, I heard and saw only dream-objects. The True Guru has implanted the Mantra of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Power, youth and wealth do not bring satisfaction; people chase after them again and again.<br>
  I have found peace and tranquility, and all my thirsty desires have been quenched, singing His Glorious Praises. ||1||<br>
  Without understanding, they are like beasts, engrossed in doubt, emotional attachment and Maya.<br>
  But in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the noose of Death is cut, O Nanak, and one intuitively merges in celestial peace. ||2||10||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Sing of the Lord's Feet within your heart.<br>
  Meditate, meditate in constant remembrance on God, the Embodiment of soothing peace and cooling tranquility. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All your hopes shall be fulfilled, and the pain of millions of deaths and births shall be gone. ||1||<br>
  Immerse yourself in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and you shall obtain the benefits of giving charitable gifts, and all sorts of good deeds.<br>
  Sorrow and suffering shall be erased, O Nanak, and you shall never again be devoured by death. ||2||11||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Speak of God's Wisdom in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Perfect Supreme Divine Light, the Transcendent Lord God, honor and glory are obtained. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One's comings and goings in reincarnation cease, and suffering is dispelled, meditating in remembrance in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Sinners are sanctified in an instant, in the love of the Supreme Lord God. ||1||<br>
  Whoever speaks and listens to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is rid of evil-mindedness.<br>
  All hopes and desires, O Nanak, are fulfilled. ||2||1||12||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  It is the Companion of the soul, its Helper and Support. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Continually bathing in the dust of the feet of the Saints,<br>
  the sins of countless incarnations are washed away. ||1||<br>
  The words of the humble Saints are lofty and exalted.<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance, O Nanak, mortal beings are carried across and saved. ||2||2||13||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Holy people, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Haray.<br>
  Mind, body, wealth and the breath of life - all come from God; remembering Him in meditation, pain is taken away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Why are you entangled in this and that? Let your mind be attuned to the One. ||1||<br>
  The place of the Saints is utterly sacred; meet with them, and meditate on the Lord of the Universe. ||2||<br>
  O Nanak, I have abandoned everything and come to Your Sanctuary. Please let me merge with You. ||3||3||14||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Gazing upon and beholding my Best Friend, I blossom forth in bliss; my God is the One and Only. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is the Image of Ecstasy, Intuitive Peace and Poise. There is no other like Him. ||1||<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har, even once, millions of sins are erased. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 008</h2></center>
  Uttering His Glorious Praises, suffering is eradicated, and the heart becomes tranquil and calm. ||3||<br>
  Drink in the Sweet, Sublime Ambrosial Nectar, O Nanak, and be imbued with the Love of the Lord. ||4||4||15||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O friends, O Saints, come to me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with pleasure and joy, the sins will be erased and thrown away. ||1||<br>
  Touch your forehead to the feet of the Saints, and your dark household shall be illumined. ||2||<br>
  By the Grace of the Saints, the heart-lotus blossoms forth. Vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the Universe, and see Him near at hand. ||3||<br>
  By the Grace of God, I have found the Saints. Over and over again, Nanak is a sacrifice to that moment. ||4||5||16||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I seek the Sanctuary of Your Lotus Feet, O Lord of the World.<br>
  Save me from emotional attachment, pride, deception and doubt; please cut away these ropes which bind me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am drowning in the world-ocean.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the Source of Jewels, I am saved. ||1||<br>
  Your Name, Lord, is cooling and soothing.<br>
  God, my Lord and Master, is Perfect. ||2||<br>
  You are the Deliverer, the Destroyer of the sufferings of the meek and the poor.<br>
  The Lord is the Treasure of Mercy, the Saving Grace of sinners. ||3||<br>
  I have suffered the pains of millions of incarnations.<br>
  Nanak is at peace; the Guru has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me. ||4||6||17||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Blessed is that love, which is attuned to the Lord's Feet.<br>
  The peace which comes from millions of chants and deep meditations is obtained by perfect good fortune and destiny. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am Your helpless servant and slave; I have given up all other support.<br>
  Every trace of doubt has been eradicated, remembering God in meditation. I have applied the ointment of spiritual wisdom, and awakened from my sleep. ||1||<br>
  You are Unfathomably Great and Utterly Vast, O my Lord and Master, Ocean of Mercy, Source of Jewels.<br>
  Nanak, the beggar, begs for the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; he rests his forehead upon God's Feet. ||2||7||18||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am filthy, hard-hearted, deceitful and obsessed with sexual desire.<br>
  Please carry me across, as You wish, O my Lord and Master. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are All-powerful and Potent to grant Sanctuary. Exerting Your Power, You protect us. ||1||<br>
  Chanting and deep meditation, penance and austere self-discipline, fasting and purification - salvation does not come by any of these means.<br>
  Please lift me up and out of this deep, dark ditch; O God, please bless Nanak with Your Glance of Grace. ||2||8||19||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The one who bows in humble reverence to the Primal Lord, the Lord of all beings<br>
  - I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to such a Guru; He Himself is liberated, and He carries me across as well. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Which, which, which of Your Glorious Virtues should I chant? There is no end or limitation to them.<br>
  There are thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, many millions of them, but those who contemplate them are very rare. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 009</h2></center>
  I am wonder-struck, wonder-struck, wonder-struck and amazed, dyed in the deep crimson color of my Beloved.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Saints savor this sublime essence, like the mute, who tastes the sweet candy, but only smiles. ||2||1||20||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Saints do not know any other except God.<br>
  They look upon all equally, the high and the low; they speak of Him with their mouths, and honor Him in their minds. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is pervading and permeating each and every heart; He is the Ocean of Peace, the Destroyer of fear. He is my praanaa - the Breath of Life.<br>
  My mind was enlightened, and my doubt was dispelled, when the Guru whispered His Mantra into my ears. ||1||<br>
  He is All-powerful, the Ocean of Mercy, the All-knowing Searcher of Hearts.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day Nanak sings His Praises, and begs for the Gift of the Lord. ||2||2||21||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Many speak and talk about God.<br>
  But one who understands the essence of Yoga - such a humble servant is very rare||1||Pause||<br>
  He has no pain - he is totally at peace. With his eyes, he sees only the One Lord.<br>
  No one seems evil to him - all are good. There is no defeat - he is totally victorious. ||1||<br>
  He is never in sorrow - he is always happy; but he gives this up, and does not take anything.<br>
  Says Nanak, the humble servant of the Lord is himself the Lord, Har, Har; he does not come and go in reincarnation. ||2||3||22||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I pray that my heart may never forget my Beloved.<br>
  My body and mind are blended with Him, but the Enticer, Maya, is enticing me, O my mother. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those unto whom I tell my pain and frustration - they themselves are caught and stuck.<br>
  In all sorts of ways, Maya has cast the net; the knots cannot be loosened. ||1||<br>
  Wandering and roaming, slave Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of the Saints.<br>
  The bonds of ignorance, doubt, emotional attachment and the love of Maya have been cut; God hugs me close in His Embrace. ||2||4||23||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My home is filled with ecstasy, pleasure and joy.<br>
  I sing the Naam, and I meditate on the Naam. The Naam is the Support of my breath of life. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Naam is spiritual wisdom, the Naam is my purifying bath. The Naam resolves all my affairs.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is glorious grandeur; the Naam is glorious greatness. The Name of the Lord carries me across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||<br>
  The Unfathomable Treasure, the Priceless Gem - I have received it, through the Guru's Feet.<br>
  Says Nanak, God has become Merciful; my heart is intoxicated by the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||2||5||24||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My Friend, my Best Friend, my Lord and Master, is near.<br>
  He sees and hears everything; He is with everyone. You are here for such short time - why do you do evil? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Except for the Naam, whatever you are involved with is nothing - nothing is yours.<br>
  Hereafter, everything is revealed to your gaze; but in this world, all are enticed by the darkness of doubt. ||1||<br>
  People are caught in Maya, attached to their children and spouses. They have forgotten the Great and Generous Giver.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 010</h2></center>
  Says Nanak, I have one article of faith; my Guru is the One who releases me from bondage. ||2||6||25||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Your Saints have overwhelmed the wicked army of corruption.<br>
  They take Your Support and place their faith in You, O my Lord and Master; they seek Your Sanctuary. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, the terrible sins of countless lifetimes are erased.<br>
  I am illumined, enlightened and filled with ecstasy. I am intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi. ||1||<br>
  Who says that You cannot do everything? You are Infinitely All-powerful.<br>
  O Treasure of Mercy, Nanak savors Your Love and Your Blissful Form, earning the Profit of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||7||26||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The drowning mortal is comforted and consoled, meditating on the Lord.<br>
  He is rid of emotional attachment, doubt, pain and suffering. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I meditate in remembrance, day and night, on the Guru's Feet.<br>
  Wherever I look, I see Your Sanctuary. ||1||<br>
  By the Grace of the Saints, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, Nanak has found peace. ||2||8||27||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, peace of mind is found.<br>
  Meeting the Holy Saint, sing the Praises of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Granting His Grace, God has come to dwell within my heart.<br>
  I touch my forehead to the feet of the Saints. ||1||<br>
  Meditate, O my mind, on the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  As Gurmukh, Nanak listens to the Praises of the Lord. ||2||9||28||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind loves to touch the Feet of God.<br>
  My tongue is satisfied with the Food of the Lord, Har, Har. My eyes are contented with the Blessed Vision of God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My ears are filled with the Praise of my Beloved; all my foul sins and faults are erased.<br>
  My feet follow the Path of Peace to my Lord and Master; my body and limbs joyfully blossom forth in the Society of the Saints. ||1||<br>
  I have taken Sanctuary in my Perfect, Eternal, Imperishable Lord. I do not bother trying anything else.<br>
  Taking them by the hand, O Nanak, God saves His humble servants; they shall not perish in the deep, dark world-ocean. ||2||10||29||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Those fools who bellow with rage and destructive deceit, are crushed and killed innumerable times. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Intoxicated with egotism and imbued with other tastes, I am in love with my evil enemies. My Beloved watches over me as I wander through thousands of incarnations. ||1||<br>
  My dealings are false, and my lifestyle is chaotic. Intoxicated with the wine of emotion, I am burning in the fire of anger.<br>
  O Merciful Lord of the World, Embodiment of Compassion, Relative of the meek and the poor, please save Nanak; I seek Your Sanctuary. ||2||11||30||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Giver of the soul, the breath of life and honor<br>
  - forgetting the Lord, all is lost. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You have forsaken the Lord of the Universe, and become attached to another - you are throwing away the Ambrosial Nectar, to take dust.<br>
  What do you expect from corrupt pleasures? You fool! What makes you think that they will bring peace? ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 011</h2></center>
  Engrossed in unfulfilled sexual desire, unresolved anger and greed, you shall be consigned to reincarnation.<br>
  But I have entered the Sanctuary of the Purifier of sinners. O Nanak, I know that I shall be saved. ||2||12||31||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I gaze on the Lotus-like Face of the Lord.<br>
  Searching and seeking, I have found the Jewel. I am totally rid of all anxiety. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Enshrining His Lotus Feet within my heart,<br>
  pain and wickedness have been dispelled. ||1||<br>
  The Lord of all the Universe is my kingdom, wealth and family.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak has earned the Profit; he shall never die again. ||2||13||32||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Worship God, and adore His Name.<br>
  Grasp the Feet of the Guru, the True Guru.<br>
  The Unfathomable Lord shall come into your mind,<br>
  and by Guru's Grace, you shall be victorious in this world. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have studied countless ways of worship in all sorts of ways, but that alone is worship, which is pleasing to the Lord's Will.<br>
  This body-puppet is made of clay - what can it do by itself?<br>
  O God, those humble beings meet You, whom You grasp by the arm, and place on the Path. ||1||<br>
  I do not know of any other support; O Lord, You are my only Hope and Support.<br>
  I am meek and poor - what prayer can I offer?<br>
  God abides in every heart.<br>
  My mind is thirsty for the Feet of God.<br>
  Servant Nanak, Your slave, speaks: I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to You. ||2||1||33||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Your Name, O my Beloved, is the Saving Grace of the world.<br>
  The Lord's Name is the wealth of the nine treasures.<br>
  One who is imbued with the Love of the Incomparably Beautiful Lord is joyful.<br>
  O mind, why do you cling to emotional attachments?<br>
  With your eyes, gaze upon the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of the Holy.<br>
  They alone find it, who have such destiny inscribed upon their foreheads. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I serve at the feet of the Holy Saints.<br>
  I long for the dust of their feet, which purifies and sanctifies.<br>
  Just like the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, it washes away filth and pollution.<br>
  With each and every breath I meditate on Him, and never turn my face away.<br>
  Of your thousands and millions, nothing shall go along with you.<br>
  Only the Name of God will call to you in the end. ||1||<br>
  Let it be your wish to honor and obey the One Formless Lord.<br>
  Abandon the love of everything else.<br>
  What Glorious Praises of Yours can I utter, O my Beloved?<br>
  I cannot describe even one of Your Virtues.<br>
  My mind is so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.<br>
  Please come and meet Nanak, O Divine Guru of the World. ||2||1||34||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 012</h2></center>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  How may I obtain the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan? ||1||Pause||<br>
  I hope and thirst for Your wish-fulfilling image; my heart yearns and longs for You. ||1||<br>
  The meek and humble Saints are like thirsty fish; the Saints of the Lord are absorbed in Him.<br>
  I am the dust of the feet of the Lord's Saints.<br>
  I dedicate my heart to them.<br>
  God has become Merciful to me.<br>
  Renouncing pride and leaving behind emotional attachment, O Nanak, one meets with the Dear Lord. ||2||2||35||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Playful Lord imbues all with the Color of His Love.<br>
  From the ant to the elephant, He is permeating and pervading all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Some go on fasts, make vows, and take pilgrimages to sacred shrines on the Ganges.<br>
  They stand naked in the water, enduring hunger and poverty.<br>
  They sit cross-legged, perform worship services and do good deeds.<br>
  They apply religious symbols to their bodies, and ceremonial marks to their limbs.<br>
  They read through the Shaastras, but they do not join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. ||1||<br>
  They stubbornly practice ritualistic postures, standing on their heads.<br>
  They are afflicted with the disease of egotism, and their faults are not covered up.<br>
  They burn in the fire of sexual frustration, unresolved anger and compulsive desire.<br>
  He alone is liberated, O Nanak, whose True Guru is Good. ||2||3||36||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Seventh House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  My thirst has been quenched, meeting with the Holy.<br>
  The five thieves have run away, and I am in peace and poise; singing, singing, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I obtain the Blessed Vision of my Beloved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That which God has done for me - how can I do that for Him in return?<br>
  I make my heart a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You. ||1||<br>
  First, I fall at the feet of the Saints; I meditate, meditate, lovingly attuned to You.<br>
  O God, where is that Place, where You contemplate all Your beings?<br>
  Countless slaves sing Your Praises.<br>
  He alone meets You, who is pleasing to Your Will. Servant Nanak remains absorbed in his Lord and Master.<br>
  You, You, You alone, Lord. ||2||1||37||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Eighth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Give up your pride and your self-conceit; the Loving, Merciful Lord is watching over all. O mind, become the dust of His Feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Through the Mantra of the Lord's Saints, experience the spiritual wisdom and meditation of the Lord of the World. ||1||<br>
  Within your heart, sing the Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and be lovingly attuned to His Lotus Feet. He is the Fascinating Lord, Merciful to the meek and the humble.<br>
  O Merciful Lord, please bless me with Your Kindness and Compassion.<br>
  Nanak begs for the Gift of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  I have abandoned emotional attachment, doubt and all egotistical pride. ||2||1||38||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Speaking of God, filth and pollution are burnt away; This comes by meeting with the Guru, and not by any other efforts. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 013</h2></center>
  Making pilgrimages to sacred rivers, observing the six rituals, wearing matted and tangled hair, performing fire sacrifices and carrying ceremonial walking sticks - none of these are of any use. ||1||<br>
  All sorts of efforts, austerities, wanderings and various speeches - none of these will lead you to find the Lord's Place.<br>
  I have considered all considerations, O Nanak, but peace comes only by vibrating and meditating on the Name. ||2||2||39||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Ninth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Purifier of sinners, the Lover of His devotees, the Destroyer of fear - He carries us across to the other side. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My eyes are satisfied, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; my ears are satisfied, hearing His Praise. ||1||<br>
  He is the Master of the praanaa, the breath of life; He is the Giver of Support to the unsupported. I am meek and poor - I seek the Sanctuary of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  He is the Fulfiller of hope, the Destroyer of pain. Nanak grasps the Support of the Feet of the Lord. ||2||1||40||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I seek the Sanctuary of the Feet of my Merciful Lord and Master; I do not go anywhere else.<br>
  It is the Inherent Nature of our Lord and Master to purify sinners. Those who meditate on the Lord are saved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The world is a swamp of wickedness and corruption. The blind sinner has fallen into the ocean of emotional attachment and pride,<br>
  bewildered by the entanglements of Maya.<br>
  God Himself has taken me by the hand and lifted me up and out of it; save me, O Sovereign Lord of the Universe. ||1||<br>
  He is the Master of the masterless, the Supporting Lord of the Saints, the Neutralizer of millions of sins.<br>
  My mind thirsts for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.<br>
  God is the Perfect Treasure of Virtue.<br>
  O Nanak, sing and savor the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Kind and Compassionate Lord of the World. ||2||2||41||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Countless times, I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice<br>
  to that moment of peace, on that night when I was joined with my Beloved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Mansions of gold, and beds of silk sheets - O sisters, I have no love for these. ||1||<br>
  Pearls, jewels and countless pleasures, O Nanak, are useless and destructive without the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Even with only dry crusts of bread, and a hard floor on which to sleep, my life passes in peace and pleasure with my Beloved, O sisters. ||2||3||42||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Give up your ego, and turn your face to God.<br>
  Let your yearning mind call out, "Guru, Guru".<br>
  My Beloved is the Lover of Love. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The bed of your household shall be cozy, and your courtyard shall be comfortable; shatter and break the bonds which tie you to the five thieves. ||1||<br>
  You shall not come and go in reincarnation; you shall dwell in your own home deep within, and your inverted heart-lotus shall blossom forth.<br>
  The turmoil of egotism shall be silenced.<br>
  Nanak sings - he sings the Praises of God, the Ocean of Virtue. ||2||4||43||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Ninth House:<br>
  This is why you should chant and meditate on the Lord, O mind.<br>
  The Vedas and the Saints say that the path is treacherous and difficult. You are intoxicated with emotional attachment and the fever of egotism. ||Pause||<br>
  Those who are imbued and intoxicated with the wretched Maya, suffer the pains of emotional attachment. ||1||<br>
  That humble being is saved, who chants the Naam; You Yourself save him.<br>
  Emotional attachment, fear and doubt are dispelled, O Nanak, by the Grace of the Saints. ||2||5||44||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 014</h2></center>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Tenth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Give me that blessing, O Dear Saints, for which my soul would be a sacrifice.<br>
  Enticed by pride, entrapped and plundered by the five thieves, still, you live near them. I have come to the Sanctuary of the Holy, and I have been rescued from my association with those demons. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I wandered through millions of lifetimes and incarnations. I am so very tired - I have fallen at God's Door. ||1||<br>
  The Lord of the Universe has become Kind to me; He has blessed me with the Support of the Naam.<br>
  This precious human life has become fruitful and prosperous; O Nanak, I am carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||1||45||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl, Eleventh House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  He Himself has come to me, in His Natural Way.<br>
  I know nothing, and I show nothing.<br>
  I have met God through innocent faith, and He has blessed me with peace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  By the good fortune of my destiny, I have joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  I do not go out anywhere; I dwell in my own home.<br>
  God, the Treasure of Virtue, has been revealed in this body-robe. ||1||<br>
  I have fallen in love with His Feet; I have abandoned everything else.<br>
  In the places and interspaces, He is All-pervading.<br>
  With loving joy and excitement, Nanak speaks His Praises. ||2||1||46||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  It is so hard to meet the Lord of the Universe, my Lord and Master.<br>
  His Form is Immeasurable, Inaccessible and Unfathomable; He is All-pervading everywhere. ||1||Pause||<br>
  By speaking and wandering, nothing is gained; nothing is obtained by clever tricks and devices. ||1||<br>
  People try all sorts of things, but the Lord is only met when He shows His Mercy.<br>
  God is Kind and Compassionate, the Treasure of Mercy; servant Nanak is the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||2||2||47||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, I meditate on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.<br>
  Without God, there is no other at all.<br>
  I remember His Lotus Feet with every breath, night and day. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He loves me and makes me His Own; my union with Him shall never be broken.<br>
  He is my breath of life, mind, wealth and everything. The Lord is the Treasure of Virtue and Peace. ||1||<br>
  Here and hereafter, the Lord is perfectly pervading; He is seen deep within the heart.<br>
  In the Sanctuary of the Saints, I am carried across; O Nanak, the terrible pain has been taken away. ||2||3||48||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  God's humble servant is in love with Him.<br>
  You are my Friend, my very best Friend; everything is in Your Home. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I beg for honor, I beg for strength; please bless me with wealth, property and children. ||1||<br>
  You are the Technology of liberation, the Way to worldly success, the Perfect Lord of Supreme Bliss, the Transcendent Treasure.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 015</h2></center>
  In the Fear of God and loving devotion, Nanak is exalted and enraptured, forever and ever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||4||49||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The debaters debate and argue their arguments.<br>
  The Yogis and meditators, religious and spiritual teachers roam and ramble, wandering endlessly all over the earth. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They are egotistical, self-centered and conceited, foolish, stupid, idiotic and insane.<br>
  Wherever they go and wander, death is always with them, forever and ever and ever and ever. ||1||<br>
  Give up your pride and stubborn self-conceit; death, yes, death, is always close and near at hand.<br>
  Vibrate and meditate on the Lord, Har, Haray, Haray. Says Nanak, listen you fool: without vibrating, and meditating, and dwelling on Him, your life is uselessly wasting away. ||2||5||50||12||62||<br>
  Kaanraa, Ashtapadees, Fourth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, O mind, and find peace.<br>
  The more you chant and meditate, the more you will be at peace; serve the True Guru, and merge in the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Each and every instant, the humble devotees long for Him; chanting the Naam, they find peace.<br>
  The taste of other pleasures is totally eradicated; nothing pleases them, except the Name. ||1||<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, the Lord seems sweet to them; the Guru inspires them to speak sweet words.<br>
  Through the Word of the True Guru's Bani, the Primal Lord God is revealed; so focus your consciousness on His Bani. ||2||<br>
  Hearing the Word of the Guru's Bani, my mind has been softened and saturated with it; my mind has returned to its own home deep within.<br>
  The Unstruck Melody resonates and resounds there continuously; the stream of nectar trickles down constantly. ||3||<br>
  Singing the Name of the One Lord each and every instant, and following the Guru's Teachings, the mind is absorbed in the Naam.<br>
  Listening to the Naam, the mind is pleased with the Naam, and satisfied with the Naam. ||4||<br>
  People wear lots of bracelets, glittering with gold; they wear all sorts of fine clothes.<br>
  But without the Naam, they are all bland and insipid. They are born, only to die again, in the cycle of reincarnation. ||5||<br>
  The veil of Maya is a thick and heavy veil, a whirlpool which destroys one's home.<br>
  Sins and corrupt vices are totally heavy, like rusted slag. They will not let you cross over the poisonous and treacherous world-ocean. ||6||<br>
  Let the Fear of God and neutral detachment be the boat; the Guru is the Boatman, who carries us across in the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Meeting with the Lord, the Name of the Lord, merge in the Lord, the Name of the Lord. ||7||<br>
  Attached to ignorance, people are falling asleep; attached to the Guru's spiritual wisdom, they awaken.<br>
  O Nanak, by His Will, He makes us walk as He pleases. ||8||1||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and be carried across.<br>
  Whoever chants and meditates on it is emancipated. Like Dhroo and Prahlaad, they merge in the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 016</h2></center>
  Mercy, mercy, mercy - O Dear Lord, please shower Your Mercy on me, and attach me to Your Name.<br>
  Please be Merciful, and lead me to meet the True Guru; meeting the True Guru, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  The filth of egotism from countless incarnations sticks to me; joining the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, this filth is washed away.<br>
  As iron is carried across if it is attached to wood, one who is attached to the Word of the Guru's Shabad finds the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Joining the Society of the Saints, joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, you shall come to receive the Sublime Essence of the Lord.<br>
  But not joining the Sangat, and committing actions in egotistical pride, is like drawing out clean water, and throwing it in the mud. ||3||<br>
  The Lord is the Protector and Saving Grace of His humble devotees. The Lord's Sublime Essence seems so sweet to these humble beings.<br>
  Each and every instant, they are blessed with the Glorious Greatness of the Naam; through the Teachings of the True Guru, they are absorbed in Him. ||4||<br>
  Bow forever in deep respect to the humble devotees; if you bow to those humble beings, you shall obtain the fruit of virtue.<br>
  Those wicked enemies who slander the devotees are destroyed, like Harnaakhash. ||5||<br>
  Brahma, the son of the lotus, and Vyaas, the son of the fish, practiced austere penance and were worshipped.<br>
  Whoever is a devotee - worship and adore that person. Get rid of your doubts and superstitions. ||6||<br>
  Do not be fooled by appearances of high and low social class. Suk Dayv bowed at the feet of Janak, and meditated.<br>
  Even though Janak threw his left-overs and garbage on Suk Dayv's head, his mind did not waver, even for an instant. ||7||<br>
  Janak sat upon his regal throne, and applied the dust of the nine sages to his forehead.<br>
  Please shower Nanak with your Mercy, O my Lord and Master; make him the slave of Your slaves. ||8||2||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, follow the Guru's Teachings, and joyfully sing God's Praises.<br>
  If my one tongue became hundreds of thousands and millions, I would meditate on Him millions and millions of times. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The serpent king chants and meditates on the Lord with his thousands of heads, but even by these chants, he cannot find the Lord's limits.<br>
  You are Utterly Unfathomable, Inaccessible and Infinite. Through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, the mind becomes steady and balanced. ||1||<br>
  Those humble beings who meditate on You are noble and exalted. Meditating on the Lord, they are at peace.<br>
  Bidur, the son of a slave-girl, was an untouchable, but Krishna hugged him close in His Embrace. ||2||<br>
  Wood is produced from water, but by holding onto wood, one is saved from drowning.<br>
  The Lord Himself embellishes and exalts His humble servants; He confirms His Innate Nature. ||3||<br>
  I am like a stone, or a piece of iron, heavy stone and iron; in the Boat of the Guru's Congregation, I am carried across,<br>
  like Kabeer the weaver, who was saved in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. He became pleasing to the minds of the humble Saints. ||4||<br>
  Standing up, sitting down, rising up and walking on the path, I meditate.<br>
  The True Guru is the Word, and the Word is the True Guru, who teaches the Path of Liberation. ||5||<br>
  By His Training, I find strength with each and every breath; now that I am trained and tamed, I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, egotism is extinguished, and then, through the Guru's Teachings, I merge in the Naam. ||6||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 017</h2></center>
  The True Guru is the Giver of the life of the soul, but the unfortunate ones do not love Him.<br>
  This opportunity shall not come into their hands again; in the end, they will suffer in torment and regret. ||7||<br>
  If a good person seeks goodness for himself, he should bow low in humble surrender to the Guru.<br>
  Nanak prays: please show kindness and compassion to me, O my Lord and Master, that I may apply the dust of the True Guru to my forehead. ||8||3||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, be attuned to His Love, and sing.<br>
  The Fear of God makes me fearless and immaculate; I am dyed in the color of the Guru's Teachings. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who are attuned to the Lord's Love remain balanced and detached forever; they live near the Lord, who comes into their house.<br>
  If I am blessed with the dust of their feet, then I live. Granting His Grace, He Himself bestows it. ||1||<br>
  Mortal beings are attached to greed and duality. Their minds are unripe and unfit, and will not accept the Dye of His Love.<br>
  But their lives are transformed through the Word of the Guru's Teachings. Meeting with the Guru, the Primal Being, they are dyed in the color of His Love. ||2||<br>
  There are ten organs of sense and action; the ten wander unrestrained. Under the influence of the three dispositions, they are not stable, even for an instant.<br>
  Coming in contact with the True Guru, they are brought under control; then, salvation and liberation are attained. ||3||<br>
  The One and Only Creator of the Universe is All-pervading everywhere. All shall once again merge into the One.<br>
  His One Form has one, and many colors; He leads all according to His One Word. ||4||<br>
  The Gurmukh realizes the One and Only Lord; He is revealed to the Gurmukh.<br>
  The Gurmukh goes and meets the Lord in His Mansion deep within; the Unstruck Word of the Shabad vibrates there. ||5||<br>
  God created all the beings and creatures of the universe; He blesses the Gurmukh with glory.<br>
  Without meeting the Guru, no one obtains the Mansion of His Presence. They suffer the agony of coming and going in reincarnation. ||6||<br>
  For countless lifetimes, I have been separated from my Beloved; in His Mercy, the Guru has united me with Him.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, I have found absolute peace, and my polluted intellect blossoms forth. ||7||<br>
  O Lord, Har, Har, please grant Your Grace; O Life of the World, instill faith in the Naam within me.<br>
  Nanak is the Guru, the Guru, the True Guru; I am immersed in the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||8||4||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, walk on the Path of the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  Just as the wild elephant is subdued by the prod, the mind is disciplined by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The wandering mind wanders, roams and rambles in the ten directions; but the Guru holds it, and lovingly attunes it to the Lord.<br>
  The True Guru implants the Word of the Shabad deep within the heart; the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, trickles into the mouth. ||1||<br>
  The snakes are filled with poisonous venom; the Word of the Guru's Shabad is the antidote - place it in your mouth.<br>
  Maya, the serpent, does not even approach one who is rid of the poison, and lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||2||<br>
  The dog of greed is very powerful in the village of the body; the Guru strikes it and drives it out in an instant.<br>
  Truth, contentment, righteousness and Dharma have settled there; in the village of the Lord, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 018</h2></center>
  The mortal beings are sinking in the swamp of emotional attachment; the Guru lifts them up, and saves them from sinking.<br>
  Crying, "Save me! Save me!", the humble come to His Sanctuary; the Guru reaches out His Hand, and lifts them up. ||4||<br>
  The whole world is like a game in a dream, all a game. God plays and causes the game to be played.<br>
  So earn the Profit of the Naam by following the Guru's Teachings; you shall go to the Court of the Lord in robes of honor. ||5||<br>
  They act in egotism, and make others act in egotism; they collect and gather up the blackness of sin.<br>
  And when death comes, they suffer in agony; they must eat what they have planted. ||6||<br>
  O Saints, gather the Wealth of the Lord's Name; if you depart after packing these provisions, you shall be honored.<br>
  So eat, spend, consume and give abundantly; the Lord will give - there will be no deficiency. ||7||<br>
  The wealth of the Lord's Name is deep within the heart. In the Sanctuary of the Guru, this wealth is found.<br>
  O Nanak, God has been kind and compassionate; He has blessed me. Removing pain and poverty, He has blended me with Himself. ||8||5||<br>
  Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru, and meditate.<br>
  Iron is transformed into gold by touching the philosopher's stone; it takes on its qualities. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The True Guru, the Great Primal Being, is the philosopher's stone. Whoever is attached to Him receives fruitful rewards.<br>
  Just as Prahlaad was saved by the Guru's Teachings, the Guru protects the honor of His servant. ||1||<br>
  The Word of the True Guru is the most Sublime and Noble Word. Through the Guru's Word, the Ambrosial Nectar is obtained.<br>
  Ambreek the king was blessed with the status of immortality, meditating on the Word of the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  The Sanctuary, the Protection and Sanctuary of the True Guru is pleasing to the mind. It is sacred and pure - meditate on it.<br>
  The True Guru has become Merciful to the meek and the poor; He has shown me the Path, the Way to the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Those who enter the Sanctuary of the True Guru are firmly established; God comes to protect them.<br>
  If someone aims an arrow at the Lord's humble servant, it will turn around and hit him instead. ||4||<br>
  Those who bathe in the Sacred Pool of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, are blessed with honor in His Court.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Guru's Teachings, the Guru's Instructions, the Guru's Wisdom, are united in the Lord's Union; He hugs them close in His Embrace. ||5||<br>
  The Guru's Word is the Sound-current of the Naad, The Guru's Word is the wisdom of the Vedas; coming in contact with the Guru, meditate on the Naam.<br>
  In the Image of the Lord, Har, Har, one becomes the Embodiment of the Lord. The Lord makes His humble servant worthy of worship. ||6||<br>
  The faithless cynic does not submit to the True Guru; the Lord makes the non-believer wander in confusion.<br>
  The waves of greed are like packs of dogs. The poison of Maya sticks to the body-skeleton. ||7||<br>
  The Lord's Name is the Saving Grace of the whole world; join the Sangat, and meditate on the Naam.<br>
  O my God, please protect and preserve Nanak in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; save him, and let him merge in You. ||8||6||<br>
  FIRST SET OF SIX||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 019</h2></center>
  Kaanraa, Chhant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  They alone are saved, who meditate on the Lord.<br>
  Working for Maya is useless.<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, all fruits and rewards are obtained. They are blessed, blessed and very fortunate.<br>
  They are awake and aware in the True Congregation; attached to the Naam, they are lovingly attuned to the One.<br>
  I have renounced pride, emotional attachment, wickedness and corruption; attached to the Holy, I am carried across at their feet.<br>
  Prays Nanak, I have come to the Sanctuary of my Lord and Master; by great good fortune, I obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1||<br>
  The Holy meet together, and continually vibrate and meditate on the Lord.<br>
  With love and excitement, they sing the Glorious Praises of their Lord and Master.<br>
  Singing His Praises they live, drinking in the Lord's Nectar; the cycle of birth and death is over for them.<br>
  Finding the True Congregation and meditating on the Lord, one is never again afflicted with pain.<br>
  By the Grace of the Great Giver, the Architect of Destiny, we work to serve the Saints.<br>
  Prays Nanak, I long for the dust of the feet of the humble; I am intuitively absorbed in the Blessed Vision of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  All beings vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the World.<br>
  This brings the merits of chanting and meditation, austere self-discipline and perfect service.<br>
  Vibrating and meditating continuously on our Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, one's life becomes totally fruitful.<br>
  Those who sing and meditate continually on the Lord of the Universe - their coming into the world is blessed and approved.<br>
  The Immaculate Lord, Har, Har, is meditation and chanting, and austere self-discipline; only the Wealth of the Lord of the Universe shall go along with you in the end.<br>
  Prays Nanak, please grant Your Grace, O Lord, and bless me with the Jewel, that I may carry it in my pocket. ||3||<br>
  His Wondrous and Amazing Plays are blissful<br>
  - granting His Grace, He bestows supreme ecstasy.<br>
  God, my Lord and Master, the Bringer of peace, has met me, and the desires of my mind are fulfilled.<br>
  Congratulations pour in; I am intuitively absorbed in the Lord. I shall never again cry out in pain.<br>
  He hugs me close in His Embrace, and blesses me with peace; the evil of sin and corruption is gone.<br>
  Prays Nanak, I have met my Lord and Master, the Primal Lord, the Embodiment of Bliss. ||4||1||<br>
  Vaar Of Kaanraa, Fourth Mehl, Sung To The Tune Of The Ballad Of Musa:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Follow the Guru's Teachings, and enshrine the Treasure of the Lord's Name within your heart.<br>
  Become the slave of the Lord's slaves, and conquer egotism and corruption.<br>
  You shall win this treasure of life; you shall never lose.<br>
  Blessed, blessed and very fortunate are those, O Nanak, who savor the Sublime Essence of the Lord through the Guru's Teachings. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Govind, Govind, Govind - the Lord God, the Lord of the Universe is the Treasure of Virtue.<br>
  Meditating on Govind, Govind, the Lord of the Universe, through the Guru's Teachings, you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 020</h2></center>
  Meditating on God, chanting Govind, Govind, Govind, your face shall be radiant; you shall be famous and exalted.<br>
  O Nanak, the Guru is the Lord God, the Lord of the Universe; meeting Him, you shall obtain the Name of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You Yourself are the Siddha and the seeker; You Yourself are the Yoga and the Yogi.<br>
  You Yourself are the Taster of tastes; You Yourself are the Enjoyer of pleasures.<br>
  You Yourself are All-pervading; whatever You do comes to pass.<br>
  Blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed, blessed is the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation of the True Guru. Join them - speak and chant the Lord's Name.<br>
  Let everyone chant together the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Haray, Har, Har, Haray; chanting Har, all sins are washed away. ||1||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Har, Har, Har, Har is the Name of the Lord; rare are those who, as Gurmukh, obtain it.<br>
  Egotism and possessiveness are eradicated, and evil-mindedness is washed away.<br>
  O Nanak, one who is blessed with such pre-ordained destiny chants the Lord's Praises, night and day. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord Himself is Merciful; whatever the Lord Himself does, comes to pass.<br>
  The Lord Himself is All-pervading. There is no other as Great as the Lord.<br>
  Whatever pleases the Lord God's Will comes to pass; whatever the Lord God does is done.<br>
  No one can appraise His Value; the Lord God is Endless.<br>
  O Nanak, as Gurmukh, praise the Lord; your body and mind shall be cooled and soothed. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You are the Light of all, the Life of the World; You imbue each and every heart with Your Love.<br>
  All meditate on You, O my Beloved; You are the True, True Primal Being, the Immaculate Lord.<br>
  The One is the Giver; the whole world is the beggar. All the beggars beg for His Gifts.<br>
  You are the servant, and You are the Lord and Master of all. Through the Guru's Teachings, we are ennobled and uplifted.<br>
  Let everyone say that the Lord is the Master of the senses, the Master of all faculties; through Him, we obtain all fruits and rewards. ||2||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  You shall obtain the fruits that you desire, focusing your meditation on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  All your sins and mistakes shall be wiped away, and you shall be rid of egotism and pride.<br>
  The heart-lotus of the Gurmukh blossoms forth, recognizing God within every soul.<br>
  O Lord God, please shower Your Mercy upon servant Nanak, that he may chant the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Sacred and Immaculate. Chanting the Naam, pain is dispelled.<br>
  God comes to abide in the minds of those who have such pre-ordained destiny.<br>
  Those who walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru are rid of pain and poverty.<br>
  No one finds the Lord by his own will; see this, and satisfy your mind.<br>
  Servant Nanak is the slave of the slave of those who fall at the Feet of the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 021</h2></center>
  You are pervading and permeating all places and interspaces, O Creator. You made all that has been made.<br>
  You created the entire universe, with all its colors and shades; in so many ways and means and forms You formed it.<br>
  O Lord of Light, Your Light is infused within all; You link us to the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  They alone meet the True Guru, unto whom You are Merciful; O Lord, You instruct them in the Guru's Word.<br>
  Let everyone chant the Name of the Lord, chant the Name of the Great Lord; all poverty, pain and hunger shall be taken away. ||3||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Ambrosial Nectar of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is sweet; enshrine this Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord within your heart.<br>
  The Lord God prevails in the Sangat, the Holy Congregation; reflect upon the Shabad and understand.<br>
  Meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within the mind, the poison of egotism is eradicated.<br>
  One who does not remember the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, shall totally lose this life in the gamble.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, one remembers the Lord, and enshrines the Lord's Name within the heart.<br>
  O servant Nanak, his face shall be radiant in the Court of the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  To chant the Lord's Praise and His Name is sublime and exalted. This is the most excellent deed in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.<br>
  His Praises come through the Guru's Teachings and Instructions; wear the Necklace of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Lord are very fortunate. They are entrusted with the Treasure of the Lord.<br>
  Without the Name, no matter what people may do, they continue to waste away in egotism.<br>
  Elephants can be washed and bathed in water, but they only throw dust on their heads again.<br>
  O Kind and Compassionate True Guru, please unite me with the Lord, that the One Creator of the Universe may abide within my mind.<br>
  Those Gurmukhs who listen to the Lord and believe in Him - servant Nanak salutes them. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Lord's Name is the most sublime and precious merchandise. The Primal Lord God is my Lord and Master.<br>
  The Lord has staged His Play, and He Himself permeates it. The whole world deals in this merchandise.<br>
  Your Light is the light in all beings, O Creator. All Your Expanse is True.<br>
  All those who meditate on You become prosperous; through the Guru's Teachings, they sing Your Praises, O Formless Lord.<br>
  Let everyone chant the Lord, the Lord of the World, the Lord of the Universe, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||4||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  I have only one tongue, and the Glorious Virtues of the Lord God are Unapproachable and Unfathomable.<br>
  I am ignorant - how can I meditate on You, Lord? You are Great, Unapproachable and Immeasurable.<br>
  O Lord God, please bless me with that sublime wisdom, that I may fall at the Feet of the Guru, the True Guru.<br>
  O Lord God, please lead me to the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, where even a sinner like myself may be saved.<br>
  O Lord, please bless and forgive servant Nanak; please unite him in Your Union.<br>
  O Lord, please be merciful and hear my prayer; I am a sinner and a worm - please save me! ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O Lord, Life of the World, please bless me with Your Grace, and lead me to meet the Guru, the Merciful True Guru.<br>
  I am happy to serve the Guru; the Lord has become merciful to me.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 022</h2></center>
  All my hopes and desires have been forgotten; my mind is rid of its worldly entanglements.<br>
  The Guru, in His Mercy, implanted the Naam within me; I am enraptured with the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Servant Nanak has obtained the inexhaustible wealth; the Lord's Name is his wealth and property. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  O Lord, You are the Greatest of the Great, the Greatest of the Great, the Most Lofty and Exalted of all, the Greatest of the Great.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Infinite Lord, who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, Har, are rejuvenated.<br>
  Those who sing and listen to Your Praises, O my Lord and Master, have millions of sins destroyed.<br>
  I know that those divine beings who follow the Guru's Teachings are just like You, Lord. They are the greatest of the great, so very fortunate.<br>
  Let everyone meditate on the Lord, who was True in the primal beginning, and True throughout the ages; He is revealed as True here and now, and He shall be True forever and ever. Servant Nanak is the slave of His slaves. ||5||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  I meditate on my Lord, the Life of the World, the Lord, chanting the Guru's Mantra.<br>
  The Lord is Unapproachable, Inaccessible and Unfathomable; the Lord, Har, Har, has spontaneously come to meet me.<br>
  The Lord Himself is pervading each and every heart; the Lord Himself is Endless.<br>
  The Lord Himself enjoys all pleasures; the Lord Himself is the Husband of Maya.<br>
  The Lord Himself gives in charity to the whole world, and all the beings and creatures which He created.<br>
  O Merciful Lord God, please bless me with Your Bountiful Gifts; the humble Saints of the Lord beg for them.<br>
  O God of servant Nanak, please come and meet me; I sing the Songs of the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Name of the Lord God is my Best Friend. My mind and body are drenched with the Naam.<br>
  All the hopes of the Gurmukh are fulfilled; servant Nanak is comforted, hearing the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Lord's Sublime Name is energizing and rejuvenating. The Immaculate Lord, the Primal Being, blossoms forth.<br>
  Maya serves at the feet of those who chant and meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, day and night.<br>
  The Lord always looks after and cares for all His beings and creatures; He is with all, near and far.<br>
  Those whom the Lord inspires to understand, understand; the True Guru, God, the Primal Being, is pleased with them.<br>
  Let everyone sing the Praise of the Lord of the Universe, the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, the Lord, the Lord of the Universe; singing the Praise of the Lord, one is absorbed in His Glorious Virtues. ||6||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O mind, even in sleep, remember the Lord God; let yourself be intuitively absorbed into the Celestial State of Samaadhi.<br>
  Servant Nanak's mind longs for the Lord, Har, Har. As the Guru pleases, he is absorbed into the Lord, O mother. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  I am in love with the One and Only Lord; the One Lord fills my consciousness.<br>
  Servant Nanak takes the Support of the One Lord God; through the One, he obtains honor and salvation. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, vibrate with the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings; by great good fortune, the Unstruck Melody resonates and resounds.<br>
  I see the Lord, the Source of Bliss, everywhere; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord of the Universe is revealed.<br>
  From the primal beginning, and throughout the ages, the Lord has One Form. Through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, I vibrate and meditate on the Lord God.<br>
  O Merciful Lord God, please bless me with Your Bounty; O Lord God, please preserve and protect the honor of Your humble servant.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 023</h2></center>
  Let everyone proclaim: Blessed is the Guru, the True Guru, the Guru, the True Guru; meeting Him, the Lord covers their faults and deficiencies. ||7||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The sacred pool of devotional worship is filled to the brim and overflowing in torrents.<br>
  Those who obey the True Guru, O servant Nanak, are very fortunate - they find it. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Names of the Lord, Har, Har, are countless. The Glorious Virtues of the Lord, Har, Har, cannot be described.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, is Inaccessible and Unfathomable; how can the humble servants of the Lord be united in His Union?<br>
  Those humble beings meditate and chant the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, but they do not attain even a tiny bit of His Worth.<br>
  O servant Nanak, the Lord God is Inaccessible; the Lord has attached me to His Robe, and united me in His Union. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Lord is Inaccessible and Unfathomable. How will I see the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan?<br>
  If He were a material object, then I could describe Him, but He has no form or feature.<br>
  Understanding comes only when the Lord Himself gives understanding; only such a humble being sees it.<br>
  The Sat Sangat, the True Congregation of the True Guru, is the school of the soul, where the Glorious Virtues of the Lord are studied.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the tongue, blessed is the hand, and blessed is the Teacher, the True Guru; meeting Him, the Account of the Lord is written. ||8||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar. Meditate on the Lord, with love for the True Guru.<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har is Sacred and Pure. Chanting it and listening to it, pain is taken away.<br>
  They alone worship and adore the Lord's Name, upon whose foreheads such pre-ordained destiny is written.<br>
  Those humble beings are honored in the Court of the Lord; the Lord comes to abide in their minds.<br>
  O servant Nanak, their faces are radiant. They listen to the Lord; their minds are filled with love. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the greatest treasure. The Gurmukhs obtain it.<br>
  The True Guru comes to meet those who have such pre-ordained destiny written upon their foreheads.<br>
  Their bodies and minds are cooled and soothed; peace and tranquility come to dwell in their minds.<br>
  O Nanak, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, all poverty and pain is dispelled. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  I am a sacrifice, forever and ever, to those who have seen my Beloved True Guru.<br>
  They alone meet my True Guru, who have such pre-ordaind destiny written upon their foreheads.<br>
  I meditate on the Inaccessible Lord, according to the Guru's Teachings; God has no form or feature.<br>
  Those who follow the Guru's Teachings and meditate on the Inaccessible Lord, merge with their Lord and Master and become one with Him.<br>
  Let everyone proclaim out loud, the Name of the Lord, the Lord, the Lord; the profit of devotional worship of the Lord is blessed and sublime. ||9||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord's Name is permeating and pervading all. Repeat the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam.<br>
  The Lord is in the home of each and every soul. God created this play with its various colors and forms.<br>
  The Lord, the Life of the World, dwells near at hand. The Guru, my Friend, has made this clear.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 024</h2></center>
  They alone meet the Lord, the Lord God, their Lord and Master, whose love for the Lord is pre-ordained.<br>
  Servant Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, chant it consciously with your mind. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Seek the Lord God, your Best Friend; by great good fortune, He comes to dwell with the very fortunate ones.<br>
  Through the Perfect Guru, He is revealed, O Nanak, and one is lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Blessed, blessed, beauteous and fruitful is that moment, when service to the Lord becomes pleasing to the mind.<br>
  So proclaim the story of the Lord, O my GurSikhs; speak the Unspoken Speech of my Lord God.<br>
  How can I attain Him? How can I see Him? My Lord God is All-knowing and All-seeing.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, the Lord reveals Himself; we merge in absorption in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Nanak is a sacrifice unto those who meditate on the Lord of Nirvaanaa. ||10||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One's eyes are anointed by the Lord God, when the Guru bestows the ointment of spiritual wisdom.<br>
  I have found God, my Best Friend; servant Nanak is intuitively absorbed into the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Gurmukh is filled with peace and tranquility deep within. His mind and body are absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  He thinks of the Naam, and reads the Naam; he remains lovingly attuned to the Naam.<br>
  He obtains the Treasure of the Naam, and is rid of anxiety.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, the Naam wells up, and all hunger and thirst depart.<br>
  O Nanak, one who is imbued with the Naam, gathers the Naam in his lap. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You Yourself created the world, and You Yourself control it.<br>
  Some are self-willed manmukhs - they lose. Others are united with the Guru - they win.<br>
  The Name of the Lord, the Lord God is Sublime. The fortunate ones chant it, through the Word of the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  All pain and poverty are taken away, when the Guru bestows the Lord's Name.<br>
  Let everyone serve the Enticing Enticer of the Mind, the Enticer of the World, who created the world, and controls it all. ||11||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The disease of egotism is deep within the mind; the self-willed manmukhs and the evil beings are deluded by doubt.<br>
  O Nanak, the disease is cured only by meeting with the True Guru, the Holy Friend. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  My mind and body are embellished and exalted, when I behold the Lord with my eyes.<br>
  O Nanak, meeting with that God, I live, hearing His Voice. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Creator is the Lord of the World, the Master of the Universe, the Infinite Primal Immeasurable Being.<br>
  Meditate on the Lord's Name, O my GurSikhs; the Lord is Sublime, the Lord's Name is Invaluable.<br>
  Those who meditate on Him in their hearts, day and night, merge with the Lord - there is no doubt about it.<br>
  By great good fortune, they join the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, and speak the Word of the Guru, the Perfect True Guru.<br>
  Let everyone meditate on the Lord, the Lord, the All-pervading Lord, by which all disputes and conflicts with Death are ended. ||12||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord chants the Name, Har, Har. The foolish idiot shoots arrows at him.<br>
  O Nanak, the humble servant of the Lord is saved by the Love of the Lord. The arrow is turned around, and kills the one who shot it. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 32 - Raag Kaanraa - Part 025</h2></center>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The eyes which are attracted by the Lord's Love behold the Lord through the Name of the Lord.<br>
  If they gaze upon something else, O servant Nanak, they ought to be gouged out. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Infinite Lord totally permeates the water, the land and the sky.<br>
  He cherishes and sustains all beings and creatures; whatever He does comes to pass.<br>
  Without Him, we have no mother, father, children, sibling or friend.<br>
  He is permeating and pervading deep within each and every heart; let everyone meditate on Him.<br>
  Let all chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World, who is manifest all over the world. ||13||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Those Gurmukhs who meet as friends are blessed with the Lord God's Love.<br>
  O servant Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; you shall go to His court in joyous high spirits. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Lord, You are the Great Giver of all; all beings are Yours.<br>
  They all worship You in adoration; You bless them with Your Bounty, O Beloved.<br>
  The Generous Lord, the Great Giver reaches out with His Hands, and the rain pours down on the world.<br>
  The corn germinates in the fields; contemplate the Lord's Name with love.<br>
  Servant Nanak begs for the Gift of the Support of the Name of his Lord God. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The desires of the mind are satisfied, meditating on the Ocean of Peace.<br>
  Worship and adore the Feet of the Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the jewel mine.<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one is saved, and the Decree of Death is torn up.<br>
  The treasure of this human life is won, meditating on the Lord of Detachment.<br>
  Let everyone seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru; let the black spot of pain, the scar of suffering, be erased. ||14||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  I was seeking, searching for my Friend, but my Friend is right here with me.<br>
  O servant Nanak, the Unseen is not seen, but the Gurmukh is given to see Him. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, I am in love with the True Lord; I cannot survive without Him.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, the Perfect Lord is found, and the tongue savors His Sublime Essence. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Some sing, some listen, and some speek and preach.<br>
  The filth and pollution of countless lifetimes is washed away, and the wishes of the mind are fulfilled.<br>
  Coming and going in reincarnation ceases, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  They save themselves, and save their companions; they save all their generations as well.<br>
  Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to those who are pleasing to my Lord God. ||15||1||<br>
  Sudh||<br>
  Raag Kaanraa, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Such is the Sovereign Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of Hearts;<br>
  He sees everything as clearly as one's face reflected in a mirror. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He dwells in each and every heart; no stain or stigma sticks to Him.<br>
  He is liberated from bondage; He does not belong to any social class. ||1||<br>
  As one's face is reflected in the water,<br>
  so does Naam Dayv's Beloved Lord and Master appear. ||2||1||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr33.htm">Next: Raag Kalyaan</a></center>
 </body>