<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr34.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr36.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Jaijaavantee</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 35 - Raag Jaijaavantee - Part 001</h2></center>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Raag Jaijaavantee, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on the Lord - meditate on the Lord; this alone shall be of use to you.<br>
  Abandon your association with Maya, and take shelter in the Sanctuary of God.<br>
  Remember that the pleasures of the world are false; this whole show is just an illusion. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You must understand that this wealth is just a dream. Why are you so proud?<br>
  The empires of the earth are like walls of sand. ||1||<br>
  Servant Nanak speaks the Truth: your body shall perish and pass away.<br>
  Moment by moment, yesterday passed. Today is passing as well. ||2||1||<br>
  Jaijaavantee, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  Meditate on the Lord - vibrate on the Lord; your life is slipping away.<br>
  Why am I telling you this again and again? You fool - why don't you understand?<br>
  Your body is like a hail-stone; it melts away in no time at all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  So give up all your doubts, and utter the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  At the very last moment, this alone shall go along with you. ||1||<br>
  Forget the poisonous sins of corruption, and enshrine the Praises of God in your heart.<br>
  Servant Nanak proclaims that this opportunity is slipping away. ||2||2||<br>
  Jaijaavantee, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  O mortal, what will your condition be?<br>
  In this world, you have not listened to the Lord's Name.<br>
  You are totally engrossed in corruption and sin; you have not turned your mind away from them at all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You obtained this human life, but you have not remembered the Lord in meditation, even for an instant.<br>
  For the sake of pleasure, you have become subservient to your woman, and now your feet are bound. ||1||<br>
  Servant Nanak proclaims that the vast expanse of this world is just a dream.<br>
  Why not meditate on the Lord? Even Maya is His slave. ||2||3||<br>
  Jaijaavantee, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  Slipping away - your life is uselessly slipping away.<br>
  Night and day, you listen to the Puraanas, but you do not understand them, you ignorant fool!<br>
  Death has arrived; now where will you run? ||1||Pause||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr36.htm">Next: Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl &amp; Fifth Mehl</a></center>
 </body>