<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr35.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr37.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl &amp; Fifth Mehl</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl &amp; Fifth Mehl - Part 001</h2></center>
  You believed that this body was permanent, but it shall turn to dust.<br>
  Why don't you chant the Name of the Lord, you shameless fool? ||1||<br>
  Let devotional worship of the Lord enter into your heart, and abandon the intellectualism of your mind.<br>
  O Servant Nanak, this is the way to live in the world. ||2||4||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl:<br>
  You study the scriptures, say your prayers and argue;<br>
  you worship stones and sit like a crane, pretending to meditate.<br>
  You speak lies and well-ornamented falsehood,<br>
  and recite your daily prayers three times a day.<br>
  The mala is around your neck, and the sacred tilak mark is on your forehead.<br>
  You wear two loin cloths, and keep your head covered.<br>
  If you know God and the nature of karma,<br>
  you know that all these rituals and beliefs are useless.<br>
  Says Nanak, meditate on the Lord with faith.<br>
  Without the True Guru, no one finds the Way. ||1||<br>
  The mortal's life is fruitless, as long as he does not know God.<br>
  Only a few, by Guru's Grace, cross over the world-ocean.<br>
  The Creator, the Cause of causes, is All-powerful. Thus speaks Nanak, after deep deliberation.<br>
  The Creation is under the control of the Creator. By His Power, He sustains and supports it. ||2||<br>
  The Shabad is Yoga, the Shabad is spiritual wisdom; the Shabad is the Vedas for the Brahmin.<br>
  The Shabad is heroic bravery for the Khshaatriya; the Shabad is service to others for the Soodra.<br>
  The Shabad for all is the Shabad, the Word of the One God, for one who knows this secret.<br>
  Nanak is the slave of the Divine, Immaculate Lord. ||3||<br>
  The One Lord is the Divinity of all divinities. He is the Divinity of the soul.<br>
  Nanak is the slave of that one who knows the Secrets of the soul and the Supreme Lord God. He is the Divine Immaculate Lord Himself. ||4||<br>
  Shalok Sehskritee , Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Who is the mother, and who is the father? Who is the son, and what is the pleasure of marriage?<br>
  Who is the brother, friend, companion and relative? Who is emotionally attached to the family?<br>
  Who is restlessly attached to beauty? It leaves, as soon as we see it.<br>
  Only the meditative remembrance of God remains with us. O Nanak, it brings the blessings of the Saints, the sons of the Imperishable Lord. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl &amp; Fifth Mehl - Part 002</h2></center>
  Cursed is loving attachment to one's mother and father; cursed is loving attachment to one's siblings and relatives.<br>
  Cursed is attachment to the joys of family life with one's spouse and children.<br>
  Cursed is attachment to household affairs.<br>
  Only loving attachment to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is True. Nanak dwells there in peace. ||2||<br>
  The body is false; its power is temporary.<br>
  It grows old; its love for Maya increases greatly.<br>
  The human is only a temporary guest in the home of the body, but he has high hopes.<br>
  The Righteous Judge of Dharma is relentless; he counts each and every breath.<br>
  The human body, so difficult to obtain, has fallen into the deep dark pit of emotional attachment. O Nanak, its only support is God, the Essence of Reality.<br>
  O God, Lord of the World, Lord of the Universe, Master of the Universe, please be kind to me. ||3||<br>
  This fragile body-fortress is made up of water, plastered with blood and wrapped in skin.<br>
  It has nine gates, but no doors; it is supported by pillars of wind, the channels of the breath.<br>
  The ignorant person does not meditate in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe; he thinks that this body is permanent.<br>
  This precious body is saved and redeemed in the Sanctuary of the Holy, O Nanak,<br>
  chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, Haray. ||4||<br>
  O Glorious, Eternal and Imperishable, Perfect and Abundantly Compassionate,<br>
  Profound and Unfathomable, Lofty and Exalted, All-knowing and Infinite Lord God.<br>
  O Lover of Your devoted servants, Your Feet are a Sanctuary of Peace.<br>
  O Master of the masterless, Helper of the helpless, Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. ||5||<br>
  Seeing the deer, the hunter aims his weapons.<br>
  But if one is protected by the Lord of the World, O Nanak, not a hair on his head will be touched. ||6||<br>
  He may be surrounded on all four sides by servants and powerful warriors;<br>
  he may dwell in a lofty place, difficult to approach, and never even think of death.<br>
  But when the Order comes from the Primal Lord God, O Nanak, even an ant can take away his breath of life. ||7||<br>
  To be imbued and attuned to the Word of the Shabad; to be kind and compassionate; to sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises - these are the most worthwhile actions in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.<br>
  In this way, one's inner doubts and emotional attachments are dispelled.<br>
  God is pervading and permeating all places.<br>
  So obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; He dwells upon the tongues of the Holy.<br>
  O Nanak, meditate and chant the Name of the Beloved Lord, Har, Har, Har, Haray. ||8||<br>
  Beauty fades away, islands fade away, the sun, moon, stars and sky fade away.<br>
  The earth, mountains, forests and lands fade away.<br>
  One's spouse, children, siblings and loved friends fade away.<br>
  Gold and jewels and the incomparable beauty of Maya fade away.<br>
  Only the Eternal, Unchanging Lord does not fade away.<br>
  O Nanak, only the humble Saints are steady and stable forever. ||9||<br>
  Do not delay in practicing righteousness; delay in committing sins.<br>
  Implant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within yourself, and abandon greed.<br>
  In the Sanctuary of the Saints, the sins are erased. The character of righteousness is received by that person,<br>
  O Nanak, with whom the Lord is pleased and satisfied. ||10||<br>
  The person of shallow understanding is dying in emotional attachment; he is engrossed in pursuits of pleasure with his wife.<br>
  With youthful beauty and golden earrings,<br>
  wondrous mansions, decorations and clothes - this is how Maya clings to him.<br>
  O Eternal, Unchanging, Benevolent Lord God, O Sanctuary of the Saints, Nanak humbly bows to You. ||11||<br>
  If there is birth, then there is death. If there is pleasure, then there is pain. If there is enjoyment, then there is disease.<br>
  If there is high, then there is low. If there is small, then there is great.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl &amp; Fifth Mehl - Part 003</h2></center>
  If there is power, then there is pride. If there is egotistical pride, then there will be a fall.<br>
  Engrossed in worldly ways, one is ruined.<br>
  Meditating and vibrating on the Lord of the Universe in the Company of the Holy, you shall become steady and stable. Nanak vibrates and meditates on the Lord God. ||12||<br>
  By the Grace of God, genuine understanding comes to the mind.<br>
  The intellect blossoms forth, and one finds a place in the realm of celestial bliss.<br>
  The senses are brought under control, and pride is abandoned.<br>
  The heart is cooled and soothed, and the wisdom of the Saints is implanted within.<br>
  Reincarnation is ended, and the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan is obtained.<br>
  O Nanak, the musical instrument of the Word of the Shabad vibrates and resounds within. ||13||<br>
  The Vedas preach and recount God's Glories; people hear them by various ways and means.<br>
  The Merciful Lord, Har, Har, implants spiritual wisdom within.<br>
  Nanak begs for the Gift of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. The Guru is the Great Giver, the Lord of the World. ||14||<br>
  Do not worry so much about your mother, father and siblings. Do not worry so much about other people.<br>
  Do not worry about your spouse, children and friends. You are obsessed with your involvements in Maya.<br>
  The One Lord God is Kind and Compassionate, O Nanak. He is the Cherisher and Nurturer of all living beings. ||15||<br>
  Wealth is temporary; conscious existence is temporary; hopes of all sorts are temporary.<br>
  The bonds of love, attachment, egotism, doubt, Maya and the pollution of corruption are temporary.<br>
  The mortal passes through the fire of the womb of reincarnation countless times. He does not remember the Lord in meditation; his understanding is polluted.<br>
  O Lord of the Universe, when You grant Your Grace, even sinners are saved. Nanak dwells in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||16||<br>
  You may drop down from the mountains, and fall into the nether regions of the underworld, or be burnt in the blazing fire,<br>
  or swept away by the unfathomable waves of water; but the worst pain of all is household anxiety, which is the source of the cycle of death and rebirth.<br>
  No matter what you do, you cannot break its bonds, O Nanak. Man's only Support, Anchor and Mainstay is the Word of the Shabad, and the Holy, Friendly Saints. ||17||<br>
  Excruciating pain, countless killings, reincarnation, poverty and terrible misery<br>
  are all destroyed by meditating in remembrance on the Lord's Name, O Nanak, just as fire reduces piles of wood to ashes. ||18||<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the darkness is illuminated. Dwelling on His Glorious Praises, the ugly sins are destroyed.<br>
  Enshrining the Lord deep within the heart, and with the immaculate karma of doing good deeds, one strikes fear into the demons.<br>
  The cycle of coming and going in reincarnation is ended, absolute peace is obtained, and the Fruitful Vision of the Lord's Darshan.<br>
  He is Potent to give Protection, He is the Lover of His Saints. O Nanak, the Lord God blesses all with bliss. ||19||<br>
  Those who were left behind - the Lord brings them to the front. He fulfills the hopes of the hopeless.<br>
  He makes the poor rich, and cures the illnesses of the ill.<br>
  He blesses His devotees with devotion. They sing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord's Name.<br>
  O Nanak, those who serve the Guru find the Supreme Lord God, the Great Giver||20||<br>
  He gives Support to the unsupported. The Name of the Lord is the Wealth of the poor.<br>
  The Lord of the Universe is the Master of the masterless; the Beautiful-haired Lord is the Power of the weak.<br>
  The Lord is Merciful to all beings, Eternal and Unchanging, the Family of the meek and humble.<br>
  The All-knowing, Perfect, Primal Lord God is the Lover of His devotees, the Embodiment of Mercy.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl &amp; Fifth Mehl - Part 004</h2></center>
  The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent, Luminous Lord, dwells in each and every heart.<br>
  Nanak begs for this blessing from the Merciful Lord, that he may never forget Him, never forget Him. ||21||<br>
  I have no power; I do not serve You, and I do not love You, O Supreme Sublime Lord God.<br>
  By Your Grace, Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Merciful Lord, Har, Har. ||22||<br>
  The Lord feeds and sustains all living beings; He blesses them gifts of restful peace and fine clothes.<br>
  He created the jewel of human life, with all its cleverness and intelligence.<br>
  By His Grace, mortals abide in peace and bliss.<br>
  O Nanak, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har, Haray,<br>
  the mortal is released from attachment to the world. ||23||<br>
  The kings of the earth are eating up the blessings of the good karma of their past lives.<br>
  Those cruel-minded rulers who oppress the people, O Nanak, shall suffer in pain for a very long time. ||24||<br>
  Those who meditate in remembrance on the Lord in their hearts, look upon even pain as God's Grace.<br>
  The healthy person is very sick, if he does not remember the Lord, the Embodiment of Mercy. ||25||<br>
  To sing the Kirtan of God's Praises is the righteous duty incurred by taking birth in this human body.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is Ambrosial Nectar, O Nanak. The Saints drink it in, and never have enough of it. ||26||<br>
  The Saints are tolerant and good-natured; friends and enemies are the same to them.<br>
  O Nanak, it is all the same to them, whether someone offers them all sorts of foods, or slanders them, or draws weapons to kill them. ||27||<br>
  They pay no attention to dishonor or disrespect.<br>
  They are not bothered by gossip; the miseries of the world do not touch them.<br>
  Those who join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and chant the Name of the Lord of the Universe - O Nanak, those mortals abide in peace. ||28||<br>
  The Holy people are an invincible army of spiritual warriors; their bodies are protected by the armor of humility.<br>
  Their weapons are the Glorious Praises of the Lord which they chant; their Shelter and Shield is the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  The horses, chariots and elephants they ride are their way to realize God's Path.<br>
  They walk fearlessly through the armies of their enemies; they attack them with the Kirtan of God's Praises.<br>
  They conquer the entire world, O Nanak, and overpower the five thieves. ||29||<br>
  Misled by evil-mindedness, mortals are engrossed in the mirage of the illusory world, like the passing shade of a tree.<br>
  Emotional attachment to family is false, so Nanak meditates in remembrance on the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam. ||30||<br>
  I do not possess the treasure of the wisdom of the Vedas, nor do I possess the merits of the Praises of the Naam.<br>
  I do not have a beautiful voice to sing jewelled melodies; I am not clever, wise or shrewd.<br>
  By destiny and hard work, the wealth of Maya is obtained. O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, even fools become religious scholars. ||31||<br>
  The mala around my neck is the chanting of the Lord's Name. The Love of the Lord is my silent chanting.<br>
  Chanting this most Sublime Word brings salvation and joy to the eyes. ||32||<br>
  That mortal who lacks the Guru's Mantra - cursed and contaminated is his life.<br>
  That blockhead is just a dog, a pig, a jackass, a crow, a snake. ||33||<br>
  Whoever contemplates the Lord's Lotus Feet, and enshrines His Name within the heart,<br>
 <center><h2>Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl &amp; Fifth Mehl - Part 005</h2></center>
  and sings the Kirtan of His Praises in the Saadh Sangat, O Nanak, shall never see the Messenger of Death. ||34||<br>
  Wealth and beauty are not so difficult to obtain. Paradise and royal power are not so difficult to obtain.<br>
  Foods and delicacies are not so difficult to obtain. Elegant clothes are not so difficuilt to obtain.<br>
  Children, friends, siblings and relatives are not so difficult to obtain. The pleasures of woman are not so difficult to obtain.<br>
  Knowledge and wisdom are not so difficult to obtain. Cleverness and trickery are not so difficult to obtain.<br>
  Only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is difficult to obtain. O Nanak, it is only obtained by God's Grace, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||35||<br>
  Wherever I look, I see the Lord, whether in this world, in paradise, or the nether regions of the underworld.<br>
  The Lord of the Universe is All-pervading everywhere. O Nanak, no blame or stain sticks to Him. ||36||<br>
  Poison is transformed into nectar, and enemies into friends and companions.<br>
  Pain is changed into pleasure, and the fearful become fearless.<br>
  Those who have no home or place find their place of rest in the Naam, O Nanak, when the Guru, the Lord, becomes Merciful. ||37||<br>
  He blesses all with humility; He has blessed me with humility as well. He purifies all, and He has purified me as well.<br>
  The Creator of all is the Creator of me as well. O Nanak, no blame or stain sticks to Him. ||38||<br>
  The moon-god is not cool and calm, nor is the white sandalwood tree.<br>
  The winter season is not cool; O Nanak, only the Holy friends, the Saints, are cool and calm. ||39||<br>
  Through the Mantra of the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, one meditates on the All-pervading Lord.<br>
  Those who have the wisdom to look alike upon pleasure and pain, live the immaculate lifestyle, free of vengeance.<br>
  They are kind to all beings; they have overpowered the five thieves.<br>
  They take the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise as their food; they remain untouched by Maya, like the lotus in the water.<br>
  They share the Teachings with friend and enemy alike; they love the devotional worship of God.<br>
  They do not listen to slander; renouncing self-conceit, they become the dust of all.<br>
  Whoever has these six qualities, O Nanak, is called a Holy friend. ||40||<br>
  The goat enjoys eating fruits and roots, but if it lives near a tiger, it is always anxious.<br>
  This is the condition of the world, O Nanak; it is afflicted by pleasure and pain. ||41||<br>
  Fraud, false accusations, millions of diseases, sins and the filthy residues of evil mistakes;<br>
  doubt, emotional attachment, pride, dishonor and intoxication with Maya<br>
  - these lead mortals to death and rebirth, wandering lost in hell. In spite of all sorts of efforts, salvation is not found.<br>
  Chanting and meditating on the Name of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, mortals become immaculate and pure.<br>
  They continually dwell upon the Glorious Praises of God. ||42||<br>
  In the Sanctuary of the Kind-hearted Lord, our Transcendent Lord and Master, we are carried across.<br>
  God is the Perfect, All-powerful Cause of causes; He is the Giver of gifts.<br>
  He gives hope to the hopeless. He is the Source of all riches.<br>
  Nanak meditates in remembrance on the Treasure of Virtue; we are all beggars, begging at His Door. ||43||<br>
  The most difficult place becomes easy, and the worst pain turns into pleasure.<br>
  Evil words, differences and doubts are obliterated, and even faithless cynics and malicious gossips become good people.<br>
  They become steady and stable, whether happy or sad; their fears are taken away, and they are fearless.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl &amp; Fifth Mehl - Part 006</h2></center>
  The dreadful woods become a well-populated city; such are the merits of the righteous life of Dharma, given by God's Grace.<br>
  Chanting the Lord's Name in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, the Lotus Feet of the Merciful Lord are found. ||44||<br>
  O emotional attachment, you are the invincible warrior of the battlefield of life; you totally crush and destroy even the most powerful.<br>
  You entice and fascinate even the heavenly heralds, celestial singers, gods, mortals, beasts and birds.<br>
  Nanak bows in humble surrender to the Lord; he seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord of the Universe. ||45||<br>
  O sexual desire, you lead the mortals to hell; you make them wander in reincarnation through countless species.<br>
  You cheat the consciousness, and pervade the three worlds. You destroy meditation, penance and virtue.<br>
  But you give only shallow pleasure, while you make the mortals weak and unsteady; you pervade the high and the low.<br>
  Your fear is dispelled in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, through the Protection and Support of the Lord. ||46||<br>
  O anger, you are the root of conflict; compassion never rises up in you.<br>
  You take the corrupt, sinful beings in your power, and make them dance like monkeys.<br>
  Associating with you, mortals are debased and punished by the Messenger of Death in so many ways.<br>
  O Destroyer of the pains of the poor, O Merciful God, Nanak prays for You to protect all begins from such anger. ||47||<br>
  O greed, you cling to even the great, assaulting them with countless waves.<br>
  You cause them to run around wildly in all directions, wobbling and wavering unsteadily.<br>
  You have no respect for friends, ideals, relations, mother or father.<br>
  You make them do what they should not do. You make them eat what they should not eat. You make them accomplish what they should not accomplish.<br>
  Save me, save me - I have come to Your Sanctuary, O my Lord and Master; Nanak prays to the Lord. ||48||<br>
  O egotism, you are the root of birth and death and the cycle of reincarnation; you are the very soul of sin.<br>
  You forsake friends, and hold tight to enemies. You spread out countless illusions of Maya.<br>
  You cause the living beings to come and go until they are exhausted. You lead them to experience pain and pleasure.<br>
  You lead them to wander lost in the terrible wilderness of doubt; you lead them to contract the most horrible, incurable diseases.<br>
  The only Physician is the Supreme Lord, the Transcendent Lord God. Nanak worships and adores the Lord, Har, Har, Haray. ||49||<br>
  O Lord of the Universe, Master of the Breath of life, Treasure of Mercy, Guru of the World.<br>
  O Destroyer of the fever of the world, Embodiment of Compassion, please take away all my pain.<br>
  O Merciful Lord, Potent to give Sanctuary, Master of the meek and humble, please be kind to me.<br>
  Whether his body is healthy or sick, let Nanak meditate in remembrance on You, Lord. ||50||<br>
  I have come to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Lotus Feet, where I sing the Kirtan of His Praises.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak is carried across the utterly terrifying, difficult world-ocean. ||51||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God has procted my head and forehead; the Transcendent Lord has protected my hands and body.<br>
  God, my Lord and Master, has saved my soul; the Lord of the Universe has saved my wealth and feet.<br>
  The Merciful Guru has protected everything, and destroyed my fear and suffering.<br>
  God is the Lover of His devotees, the Master of the masterless. Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Imperishable Primal Lord God. ||52||<br>
  His Power supports the sky, and locks fire within wood.<br>
  His Power supports the moon, the sun and the stars, and infuses light and breath into the body.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl &amp; Fifth Mehl - Part 007</h2></center>
  His Power provides nourishment in the womb of the mother, and does not let disease strike.<br>
  His Power holds back the ocean, O Nanak, and does not allow the waves of water to destroy the land. ||53||<br>
  The Lord of the World is Supremely Beautiful; His Meditation is the Life of all.<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, O Nanak, He is found on the path of devotional worship of the Lord. ||54||<br>
  The mosquito pierces the stone, the ant crosses the swamp,<br>
  the cripple crosses the ocean, and the blind sees in the darkness,<br>
  meditating on the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat. Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, Har, Har, Haray. ||55||<br>
  Like a Brahmin without a sacred mark on his forehead, or a king without the power of command,<br>
  or a warrior without weapons, so is the devotee of God without Dharmic Faith. ||56||<br>
  God has no conch-shell, no religious mark, no paraphernalia; he does not have blue skin.<br>
  His Form is Wondrous and Amazing. He is beyond incarnation.<br>
  The Vedas say that He is not this, and not that.<br>
  The Lord of the Universe is Lofty and High, Great and Infinite.<br>
  The Imperishable Lord abides in the hearts of the Holy. He is understood, O Nanak, by those who are very fortunate. ||57||<br>
  Living in the world, it is like a wild jungle. One's relatives are like dogs, jackals and donkeys.<br>
  In this difficult place, the mind is intoxicated with the wine of emotional attachment; the five unconquered thieves lurk there.<br>
  The mortals wander lost in love and emotional attachment, fear and doubt; they are caught in the sharp, strong noose of egotism.<br>
  The ocean of fire is terrifying and impassable. The distant shore is so far away; it cannot be reached.<br>
  Vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the World, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; O Nanak, by His Grace, we are saved at the Lotus Feet of the Lord. ||58||<br>
  When the Lord of the Universe grants His Grace, all illnesses are cured.<br>
  Nanak chants His Glorious Praises in the Saadh Sangat, in the Sanctuary of the Perfect Transcendent Lord God. ||59||<br>
  The mortal is beautiful and speaks sweet words, but in the farm of his heart, he harbors cruel vengeance.<br>
  He pretends to bow in worship, but he is false. Beware of him, O friendly Saints. ||60||<br>
  The thoughtless fool does not know that each day, his breaths are being used up.<br>
  His most beautiful body is wearing away; old age, the daughter of death, has seized it.<br>
  He is engrossed in family play; placing his hopes in transitory things, he indulges in corrupt pleasures.<br>
  Wandering lost in countless incarnations, he is exhausted. Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Embodiment of Mercy. ||61||<br>
  O tongue, you love to enjoy the sweet delicacies.<br>
  You are dead to the Truth, and involved in great disputes. Instead, repeat the holy words:<br>
  Gobind, Daamodar, Maadhav. ||62||<br>
  Those who are proud, and intoxicated with the pleasures of sex,<br>
  and asserting their power over others,<br>
  never contemplate the Lord's Lotus Feet. Their lives are cursed, and as worthless as straw.<br>
  You are as tiny and insignificant as an ant, but you shall become great, by the Wealth of the Lord's Meditation.<br>
  Nanak bows in humble worship, countless times, over and over again. ||63||<br>
  The blade of grass becomes a mountain, and the barren land becomes green.<br>
  The drowning one swims across, and the empty is filled to overflowing.<br>
  Millions of suns illuminate the darkness,<br>
  prays Nanak, when the Guru, the Lord, becomes Merciful. ||64||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr37.htm">Next: Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa</a></center>
 </body>