<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr36.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr38.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 37 - Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa - Part 001</h2></center>
  Associating with the Brahmin, one is saved, if his actions are perfect and God-like.<br>
  Those whose souls are imbued with the world - O Nanak, their lives are fruitless. ||65||<br>
  The mortal steals the wealth of others, and makes all sorts of problems; his preaching is only for his own livelihood.<br>
  His desire for this and that is not satisfied; his mind is caught in Maya, and he is acting like a pig. ||66||<br>
  Those who are intoxicated and absorbed in the Lord's Lotus Feet are saved from the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Countless sins are destroyed, O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; there is no doubt about this. ||67||4||<br>
  Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Camphor, flowers and perfume become contaminated, by coming into contact with the human body.<br>
  O Nanak, the ignorant one is proud of his foul-smelling marrow, blood and bones. ||1||<br>
  Even if the mortal could reduce himself to the size of an atom, and shoot through the ethers, worlds and realms in the blink of an eye, O Nanak, without the Holy Saint, he shall not be saved. ||2||<br>
  Know for sure that death will come; whatever is seen is false.<br>
  So chant the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; this alone shall go along with you in the end. ||3||<br>
  The consciousness wanders lost in Maya, attached to friends and relatives.<br>
  Vibrating and meditating on the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, O Nanak, the eternal place of rest is found. ||4||<br>
  The lowly nim tree, growing near the sandalwood tree, becomes just like the sandalwood tree.<br>
  But the bamboo tree, also growing near it, does not pick up its fragrance; it is too tall and proud. ||5||<br>
  In this Gaat'haa, the Lord's Sermon is woven; listening to it, pride is crushed.<br>
  The five enemies are killed, O Nanak, by shooting the Arrow of the Lord. ||6||<br>
  The Words of the Holy are the path of peace. They are obtained by good karma.<br>
  The cycle of birth and death is ended, O Nanak, singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||7||<br>
  When the leaves wither and fall, they cannot be attached to the branch again.<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O Nanak, there is misery and suffering. The mortal wanders in reincarnation day and night. ||8||<br>
  One is blessed with love for the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, by great good fortune.<br>
  Whoever sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name, O Nanak, is not affected by the world-ocean. ||9||<br>
  This Gaat'haa is profound and infinite; how rare are those who understand it.<br>
  They forsake sexual desire and worldly love, O Nanak, and praise the Lord in the Saadh Sangat. ||10||<br>
  The Words of the Holy are the most sublime Mantra. They eradicate millions of sinful mistakes.<br>
  Meditating on the Lotus Feet of the Lord, O Nanak, all one's generations are saved. ||11||<br>
  That palace is beautiful, in which the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung.<br>
  Those who dwell on the Lord of the Universe are liberated. O Nanak, only the most fortunate are so blessed. ||12||<br>
  I have found the Lord, my Friend, my very Best Friend.<br>
  He shall never break my heart.<br>
  His dwelling is eternal; His weight cannot be weighed.<br>
  Nanak has made Him the Friend of his soul. ||13||<br>
  One's bad reputation is erased by a true son,<br>
  who meditates in his heart on the Guru's Mantra.<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr38.htm">Next: Phunhay, Fifth Mehl</a></center>
 </body>