<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr37.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr39.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Phunhay, Fifth Mehl</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 38 - Phunhay, Fifth Mehl - Part 001</h2></center>
  The Beloved Eternal Lord God,<br>
  O Nanak, carries us across the world-ocean. ||14||<br>
  It is death to forget the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  It is life to meditate on the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Lord is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,<br>
  O Nanak, by pre-ordained destiny. ||15||<br>
  The snake-charmer, by his spell, neutralizes the poison and leaves the snake without fangs.<br>
  Just so, the Saints remove suffering;<br>
  O Nanak, they are found by good karma. ||16||<br>
  The Lord is All-pervading everywhere; He gives Sanctuary to all living beings.<br>
  The mind is touched by His Love, O Nanak,<br>
  by Guru's Grace, and the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||17||<br>
  My mind is pierced through by the Lord's Lotus Feet.<br>
  I am blessed with total happiness.<br>
  Holy people have been singing this Gaat'haa, O Nanak, since the very beginning of time. ||18||<br>
  Chanting and singing the Sublime Word of God in the Saadh Sangat, mortals are saved from the world-ocean. O Nanak, they shall never again be consigned to reincarnation. ||19||<br>
  People contemplate the Vedas, Puraanas and Shaastras.<br>
  But by enshrining in their hearts the Naam, the Name of the One and Only Creator of the Universe,<br>
  everyone can be saved.<br>
  By great good fortune, O Nanak, a few cross over like this. ||20||<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of Lord of the Universe, all one's generations are saved.<br>
  It is obtained in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. O Nanak, by great good fortune, the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is seen. ||21||<br>
  Abandon all your evil habits, and implant all Dharmic faith within.<br>
  The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is obtained, O Nanak, by those who have such destiny written upon their foreheads. ||22||<br>
  God was, is, and shall always be. He sustains and destroys all.<br>
  Know that these Holy people are true, O Nanak; they are in love with the Lord. ||23||<br>
  The mortal is engrossed in sweet words and transitory pleasures which shall soon fade away.<br>
  Disease, sorrow and separation afflict him; O Nanak, he never finds peace, even in dreams. ||24||<br>
  Phunhay, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  With Pen in Hand, the Unfathomable Lord writes the mortal's destiny upon his forehead.<br>
  The Incomparably Beautiful Lord is involved with all.<br>
  I cannot utter Your Praises with my mouth.<br>
  Nanak is fascinated, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. I am a sacrifice to You. ||1||<br>
  Seated in the Society of the Saints, I chant the Lord's Praises.<br>
  I dedicate all my adornments to Him, and give all this soul to Him.<br>
  With hopeful yearning for Him, I have made the bed for my Husband.<br>
  O Lord! If such good destiny is inscribed upon my forehead, then I shall find my Friend. ||2||<br>
  O my companion, I have prepared everything: make-up, garlands and betel-leaves.<br>
  I have embellished myself with the sixteen decorations, and applied the mascara to my eyes.<br>
  If my Husband Lord comes to my home, then I obtain everything.<br>
  O Lord! Without my Husband, all these adornments are useless. ||3||<br>
  Very fortunate is she, within whose home the Husband Lord abides.<br>
  She is totally adorned and decorated; she is a happy soul-bride.<br>
  I sleep in peace, without anxiety; the hopes of my mind have been fulfilled.<br>
  O Lord! When my Husband came into the home of my heart, I obtained everything. ||4||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 38 - Phunhay, Fifth Mehl - Part 002</h2></center>
  My hope is so intense, that this hope alone should fulfill my hopes.<br>
  When the True Guru becomes merciful, then I attain the Perfect Lord.<br>
  My body is filled with so many demerits; I am covered with faults and demerits.<br>
  O Lord! When the True Guru becomes Merciful, then the mind is held in place. ||5||<br>
  Says Nanak, I have meditated on the Lord, Infinite and Endless.<br>
  This world-ocean is so difficult to cross; the True Guru has carried me across.<br>
  My comings and goings in reincarnation ended, when I met the Perfect Lord.<br>
  O Lord! I have obtained the Ambrosial Nectar of the Name of the Lord from the True Guru. ||6||<br>
  The lotus is in my hand; in the courtyard of my heart I abide in peace.<br>
  O my companion, the Jewel is around my neck; beholding it, sorrow is taken away.<br>
  I abide with the Lord of the World, the Treasury of Total Peace. O Lord!<br>
  All wealth, spiritual perfection and the nine treasures are in His Hand. ||7||<br>
  Those men who go out to enjoy other men's women shall suffer in shame.<br>
  Those who steal the wealth of others - how can their guilt be concealed?<br>
  Those who chant the Sacred Praises of the Lord save and redeem all their generations.<br>
  O Lord! Those who listen and contemplate the Supreme Lord God become pure and holy. ||8||<br>
  The sky above looks lovely, and the earth below is beautiful.<br>
  Lightning flashes in the ten directions; I behold the Face of my Beloved.<br>
  If I go searching in foreign lands, how can I find my Beloved?<br>
  O Lord! If such destiny is inscribed upon my forehead, I am absorbed in the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||9||<br>
  I have seen all places, but none can compare to You.<br>
  The Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, has established You; thus You are adorned and embellished.<br>
  Ramdaspur is prosperous and thickly populated, and incomparably beautiful.<br>
  O Lord! Bathing in the Sacred Pool of Raam Daas, the sins are washed away, O Nanak. ||10||<br>
  The rainbird is very smart; in its consciousness, it longs for the friendly rain.<br>
  It longs for that, to which its breath of life is attached.<br>
  It wanders depressed, from forest to forest, for the sake of a drop of water.<br>
  O Lord! In just the same way, the humble servant of the Lord begs for the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Nanak is a sacrifice to him. ||11||<br>
  The Consciousness of my Friend is incomparably beautiful. Its mystery cannot be known.<br>
  One who purchases the priceless virtues realizes the essence of reality.<br>
  When the consciousness is absorbed in the supreme consciousness, great joy and bliss are found.<br>
  O Lord! When the fickle thieves are overcome, the true wealth is obtained. ||12||<br>
  In a dream, I was lifted up; why didn't I grasp the hem of His Robe?<br>
  Gazing upon the Beautiful Lord relaxing there, my mind was charmed and fascinated.<br>
  I am searching for His Feet - tell me, where can I find Him?<br>
  O Lord! Tell me how I can find my Beloved, O my companion. ||13||<br>
  The eyes which do not see the Holy - those eyes are miserable.<br>
  The ears which do not hear the Sound-current of the Naad - those ears might just as well be plugged.<br>
  The tongue which does not chant the Naam ought to be cut out, bit by bit.<br>
  O Lord! When the mortal forgets the Lord of the Universe, the Sovereign Lord King, he grows weaker day by day. ||14||<br>
  The wings of the bumble bee are caught in the intoxicating fragrant petals of the lotus.<br>
  With its limbs entangled in the petals, it loses its senses.<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr39.htm">Next: Chaubolas, Fifth Mehl</a></center>
 </body>