<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr38.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr40.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Chaubolas, Fifth Mehl</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 39 - Chaubolas, Fifth Mehl - Part 001</h2></center>
  Is there any such friend, who can untie this difficult knot?<br>
  O Nanak, the One Supreme Lord and Master of the earth reunites the separated ones. ||15||<br>
  I run around in all directions, searching for the love of God.<br>
  The five evil enemies are tormenting me; how can I destroy them?<br>
  Shoot them with the sharp arrows of meditation on the Name of God.<br>
  O Lord! The way to slaughter these terrible sadistic enemies is obtained from the Perfect Guru. ||16||<br>
  The True Guru has blessed me with the bounty which shall never be exhausted.<br>
  Eating and consuming it, all the Gurmukhs are emancipated.<br>
  The Lord, in His Mercy, has blessed me with the treasure of the Ambrosial Naam.<br>
  O Nanak, worship and adore the Lord, who never dies. ||17||<br>
  Wherever the Lord's devotee goes is a blessed, beautiful place.<br>
  All comforts are obtained, meditating on the Lord's Name.<br>
  People praise and congratulate the devotee of the Lord, while the slanderers rot and die.<br>
  Says Nanak, O friend, chant the Naam, and your mind shall be filled with bliss. ||18||<br>
  The mortal never serves the Immaculate Lord, the Purifier of sinners.<br>
  The mortal wastes away in false pleasures. How long can this go on?<br>
  Why do you take such pleasure, looking at this mirage?<br>
  O Lord! I am a sacrifice to those who are known and approved in the Court of the Lord. ||19||<br>
  The fool commits countless foolish actions and so many sinful mistakes.<br>
  The fool's body smells rotten, and turns to dust.<br>
  He wanders lost in the darkness of pride, and never thinks of dying.<br>
  O Lord! The mortal gazes upon the mirage; why does he think it is true? ||20||<br>
  When someone's days are over, who can save him?<br>
  How long can the physicians go on, suggesting various therapies?<br>
  You fool, remember the One Lord; only He shall be of use to you in the end.<br>
  O Lord! Without the Name, the body turns to dust, and everything goes to waste. ||21||<br>
  Drink in the medicine of the Incomparable, Priceless Name.<br>
  Meeting and joining together, the Saints drink it in, and give it to everyone.<br>
  He alone is blessed with it, who is destined to receive it.<br>
  O Lord! I am a sacrifice to those who enjoy the Love of the Lord. ||22||<br>
  The physicians meet together in their assembly.<br>
  The medicines are effective, when the Lord Himself stands in their midst.<br>
  Their good deeds and karma become apparent.<br>
  O Lord! Pains, diseases and sins all vanish from their bodies. ||23||<br>
  Chaubolas, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O Samman, if one could buy this love with money,<br>
  then consider Raawan the king. He was not poor, but he could not buy it, even though he offered his head to Shiva. ||1||<br>
  My body is drenched in love and affection for the Lord; there is no distance at all between us.<br>
  My mind is pierced through by the Lotus Feet of the Lord. He is realized when one's intuitive consciousness is attuned to Him. ||2||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr40.htm">Next: Shaloks Of Devotee Kabeer Jee</a></center>
 </body>