<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr40.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr42.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 41 - Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee - Part 001</h2></center>
  He obtains the treasure of liberation, and the difficult road to the Lord is not blocked. ||231||<br>
  Kabeer, whether is is for an hour, half an hour, or half of that,<br>
  whatever it is, it is worthwhile to speak with the Holy. ||232||<br>
  Kabeer, those mortals who consume marijuana, fish and wine<br>
  - no matter what pilgrimages, fasts and rituals they follow, they will all go to hell. ||233||<br>
  Kabeer, I keep my eyes lowered, and enshrine my Friend within my heart.<br>
  I enjoy all pleasures with my Beloved, but I do not let anyone else know. ||234||<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, every hour, my soul continues to look to You, O Lord.<br>
  Why should I keep my eyes lowered? I see my Beloved in every heart. ||235||<br>
  Listen, O my companions: my soul dwells in my Beloved, and my Beloved dwells in my soul.<br>
  I realize that there is no difference between my soul and my Beloved; I cannot tell whether my soul or my Beloved dwells in my heart. ||236||<br>
  Kabeer, the Brahmin may be the guru of the world, but he is not the Guru of the devotees.<br>
  He rots and dies in the perplexities of the four Vedas. ||237||<br>
  The Lord is like sugar, scattered in the sand; the elephant cannot pick it up.<br>
  Says Kabeer, the Guru has given me this sublime understanding: become an ant, and feed on it. ||238||<br>
  Kabeer, if you desire to play the game of love with the Lord, then cut off your head, and make it into a ball.<br>
  Lose yourself in the play of it, and then whatever will be, will be. ||239||<br>
  Kabeer, if you desire to play the game of love with the Lord, play it with someone with committment.<br>
  Pressing the unripe mustard seeds produces neither oil nor flour. ||240||<br>
  Searching, the mortal stumbles like a blind person, and does not recognize the Saint.<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, how can one obtain the Lord God, without His devotee? ||241||<br>
  Forsaking the Diamond of the Lord, the mortals put their hopes in another.<br>
  Those people shall go to hell; Ravi Daas speaks the Truth. ||242||<br>
  Kabeer, if you live the householder's life, then practice righteousness; otherwise, you might as well retire from the world.<br>
  If someone renounces the world, and then gets involved in worldly entanglements, he shall suffer terrible misfortune. ||243||<br>
  Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The day of the bride's wedding is pre-ordained.<br>
  On that day, the Messenger of Death, of whom she had only heard, comes and shows its face.<br>
  It breaks the bones of the body and pulls the helpless soul out.<br>
  That pre-ordained time of marriage cannot be avoided. Explain this to your soul.<br>
  The soul is the bride, and death is the groom. He will marry her and take her away.<br>
  After the body sends her away with its own hands, whose neck will it embrace?<br>
  The bridge to hell is narrower than a hair; haven't you heard of it with your ears?<br>
  Fareed, the call has come; be careful now - don't let yourself be robbed. ||1||<br>
  Fareed, it is so difficult to become a humble Saint at the Lord's Door.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 41 - Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee - Part 002</h2></center>
  I am so accustomed to walking in the ways of the world. I have tied and picked up the bundle; where can I go to throw it away? ||2||<br>
  I know nothing; I understand nothing. The world is a smouldering fire.<br>
  My Lord did well to warn me about it; otherwise, I would have been burnt as well. ||3||<br>
  Fareed, if I had known that I had so few sesame seeds, I would have been more careful with them in my hands.<br>
  If I had known that my Husband Lord was so young and innocent, I would not have been so arrogant. ||4||<br>
  If I had known that my robe would come loose, I would have tied a tighter knot.<br>
  I have found none as great as You, Lord; I have looked and searched throughout the world. ||5||<br>
  Fareed, if you have a keen understanding, then do not write black marks against anyone else.<br>
  Look underneath your own collar instead. ||6||<br>
  Fareed, do not turn around and strike those who strike you with their fists.<br>
  Kiss their feet, and return to your own home. ||7||<br>
  Fareed, when there was time for you to earn good karma, you were in love with the world instead.<br>
  Now, death has a strong foothold; when the load is full, it is taken away. ||8||<br>
  See, Fareed, what has happened: your beard has become grey.<br>
  That which is coming is near, and the past is left far behind. ||9||<br>
  See, Fareed, what has happened: sugar has become poison.<br>
  Without my Lord, who can I tell of my sorrow? ||10||<br>
  Fareed, my eyes have become weak, and my ears have become hard of hearing.<br>
  The body's crop has become ripe and turned color. ||11||<br>
  Fareed, those who did not enjoy their Spouse when their hair was black - hardly any of them enjoy Him when their hair turns grey.<br>
  So be in love with the Lord, so that your color may ever be new. ||12||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Fareed, whether one's hair is black or grey, our Lord and Master is always here if one remembers Him.<br>
  This loving devotion to the Lord does not come by one's own efforts, even though all may long for it.<br>
  This cup of loving devotion belongs to our Lord and Master; He gives it to whomever He likes. ||13||<br>
  Fareed, those eyes which have enticed the world - I have seen those eyes.<br>
  Once, they could not endure even a bit of mascara; now, the birds hatch their young in them! ||14||<br>
  Fareed, they shouted and yelled, and constantly gave good advice.<br>
  But those whom the devil has spoiled - how can they turn their consciousness towards God? ||15||<br>
  Fareed, become the grass on the path,<br>
  if you long for the Lord of all.<br>
  One will cut you down, and another will trample you underfoot;<br>
  then, you shall enter the Court of the Lord. ||16||<br>
  Fareed, do not slander the dust; noting is as great as dust.<br>
  When we are alive, it is under our feet, and when we are dead, it is above us. ||17||<br>
  Fareed, when there is greed, what love can there be? When there is greed, love is false.<br>
  How long can one remain in a thatched hut which leaks when it rains? ||18||<br>
  Fareed, why do you wander from jungle to jungle, crashing through the thorny trees?<br>
  The Lord abides in the heart; why are you looking for Him in the jungle? ||19||<br>
  Fareed, with these small legs, I crossed deserts and mountains.<br>
  But today, Fareed, my water jug seems hundreds of miles away. ||20||<br>
  Fareed, the nights are long, and my sides are aching in pain.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 41 - Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee - Part 003</h2></center>
  Cursed are the lives of those who place their hopes in others. ||21||<br>
  Fareed, if I had been there when my friend came, I would have made myself a sacrifice to him.<br>
  Now my flesh is burning red on the hot coals. ||22||<br>
  Fareed, the farmer plants acacia trees, and wishes for grapes.<br>
  He is spinning wool, but he wishes to wear silk. ||23||<br>
  Fareed, the path is muddy, and the house of my Beloved is so far away.<br>
  If I go out, my blanket will get soaked, but if I remain at home, then my heart will be broken. ||24||<br>
  My blanket is soaked, drenched with the downpour of the Lord's Rain.<br>
  I am going out to meet my Friend, so that my heart will not be broken. ||25||<br>
  Fareed, I was worried that my turban might become dirty.<br>
  My thoughtless self did not realize that one day, dust will consume my head as well. ||26||<br>
  Fareed: sugar cane, candy, sugar, molasses, honey and buffalo's milk<br>
  - all these things are sweet, but they are not equal to You. ||27||<br>
  Fareed, my bread is made of wood, and hunger is my appetizer.<br>
  Those who eat buttered bread, will suffer in terrible pain. ||28||<br>
  Eat dry bread, and drink cold water.<br>
  Fareed, if you see someone else's buttered bread, do not envy him for it. ||29||<br>
  This night, I did not sleep with my Husband Lord, and now my body is suffering in pain.<br>
  Go and ask the deserted bride, how she passes her night. ||30||<br>
  She finds no place of rest in her father-in-law's home, and no place in her parents' home either.<br>
  Her Husband Lord does not care for her; what sort of a blessed, happy soul-bride is she? ||31||<br>
  In her father-in-law's home hereafter, and in her parents' home in this world, she belongs to her Husband Lord. Her Husband is Inaccessible and Unfathomable.<br>
  O Nanak, she is the happy soul-bride, who is pleasing to her Carefree Lord. ||32||<br>
  Bathing, washing and decorating herself, she comes and sleeps without anxiety.<br>
  Fareed, she still smells like asafoetida; the fragrance of musk is gone. ||33||<br>
  I am not afraid of losing my youth, as long as I do not lose the Love of my Husband Lord.<br>
  Fareed, so many youths, without His Love, have dried up and withered away. ||34||<br>
  Fareed, anxiety is my bed, pain is my mattress, and the pain of separation is my blanket and quilt.<br>
  Behold, this is my life, O my True Lord and Master. ||35||<br>
  Many talk of the pain and suffering of separation; O pain, you are the ruler of all.<br>
  Fareed, that body, within which love of the Lord does not well up - look upon that body as a cremation ground. ||36||<br>
  Fareed, these are poisonous sprouts coated with sugar.<br>
  Some die planting them, and some are ruined, harvesting and enjoying them. ||37||<br>
  Fareed, the hours of the day are lost wandering around, and the hours of the night are lost in sleep.<br>
  God will call for your account, and ask you why you came into this world. ||38||<br>
  Fareed, you have gone to the Lord's Door. Have you seen the gong there?<br>
  This blameless object is being beaten - imagine what is in store for us sinners! ||39||<br>
  Each and every hour, it is beaten; it is punished every day.<br>
  This beautiful body is like the gong; it passes the night in pain. ||40||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 41 - Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee - Part 004</h2></center>
  Shaykh Fareed has grown old, and his body has begun to tremble.<br>
  Even if he could live for hundreds of years, his body will eventually turn to dust. ||41||<br>
  Fareed begs, O Lord, do not make me sit at another's door.<br>
  If this is the way you are going to keep me, then go ahead and take the life out of my body. ||42||<br>
  With the axe on his shoulder, and a bucket on his head, the blacksmith is ready to cut down the tree.<br>
  Fareed, I long for my Lord; you long only for the charcoal. ||43||<br>
  Fareed, some have lots of flour, while others do not even have salt.<br>
  When they go beyond this world, it shall be seen, who will be punished. ||44||<br>
  Drums were beaten in their honor, there were canopies above their heads, and bugles announced their coming.<br>
  They have gone to sleep in the cemetary, buried like poor orphans. ||45||<br>
  Fareed, those who built houses, mansions and lofty buildings, are also gone.<br>
  They made false deals, and were dropped into their graves. ||46||<br>
  Fareed, there are many seams on the patched coat, but there are no seams on the soul.<br>
  The shaykhs and their disciples have all departed, each in his own turn. ||47||<br>
  Fareed, the two lamps are lit, but death has come anyway.<br>
  It has captured the fortress of the body, and plundered the home of the heart; it extinguishes the lamps and departs. ||48||<br>
  Fareed, look at what has happened to the cotton and the sesame seed,<br>
  the sugar cane and paper, the clay pots and the charcoal.<br>
  This is the punishment for those who do evil deeds. ||49||<br>
  Fareed, you wear your prayer shawl on your shoulders and the robes of a Sufi; your words are sweet, but there is a dagger in your heart.<br>
  Outwardly, you look bright, but your heart is dark as night. ||50||<br>
  Fareed, not even a drop of blood would issue forth, if someone cut my body.<br>
  Those bodies which are imbued with the Lord - those bodies contain no blood. ||51||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  This body is all blood; without blood, this body could not exist.<br>
  Those who are imbued with their Lord, do not have the blood of greed in their bodies.<br>
  When the Fear of God fills the body, it becomes thin; the blood of greed departs from within.<br>
  Just as metal is purified by fire, the Fear of God removes the filthy residues of evil-mindedness.<br>
  O Nanak, those humble beings are beautiful, who are imbued with the Lord's Love. ||52||<br>
  Fareed, seek that sacred pool, in which the genuine article is found.<br>
  Why do you bother to search in the pond? Your hand will only sink into the mud. ||53||<br>
  Fareed, when she is young, she does not enjoy her Husband. When she grows up, she dies.<br>
  Lying in the grave, the soul-bride cries, "I did not meet You, my Lord."||54||<br>
  Fareed, your hair has turned grey, your beard has turned grey, and your moustache has turned grey.<br>
  O my thoughtless and insane mind, why are you indulging in pleasures? ||55||<br>
  Fareed, how long can you run on the rooftop? You are asleep to your Husband Lord - give it up!<br>
  The days which were allotted to you are numbered, and they are passing, passing away. ||56||<br>
  Fareed, houses, mansions and balconies - do not attach your consciousness to these.<br>
  When these collapse into heaps of dust, none of them will be your friend. ||57||<br>
  Fareed, do not focus on mansions and wealth; center your consciousness on death, your powerful enemy.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 41 - Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee - Part 005</h2></center>
  Remember that place where you must go. ||58||<br>
  Fareed, those deeds which do not bring merit - forget about those deeds.<br>
  Otherwise, you shall be put to shame, in the Court of the Lord. ||59||<br>
  Fareed, work for your Lord and Master; dispel the doubts of your heart.<br>
  The dervishes, the humble devotees, have the patient endurance of trees. ||60||<br>
  Fareed, my clothes are black, and my outfit is black.<br>
  I wander around full of sins, and yet people call me a dervish - a holy man. ||61||<br>
  The crop which is burnt will not bloom, even if it is soaked in water.<br>
  Fareed, she who is forsaken by her Husband Lord, grieves and laments. ||62||<br>
  When she is a virgin, she is full of desire; but when she is married, then her troubles begin.<br>
  Fareed, she has this one regret, that she cannot be a virgin again. ||63||<br>
  The swans have landed in a small pond of salt water.<br>
  They dip in their bills, but do not drink; they fly away, still thirsty. ||64||<br>
  The swans fly away, and land in the fields of grain. The people go to chase them away.<br>
  The thoughtless people do not know, that the swans do not eat the grain. ||65||<br>
  The birds which lived in the pools have flown away and left.<br>
  Fareed, the overflowing pool shall also pass away, and only the lotus flowers shall remain. ||66||<br>
  Fareed, a stone will be your pillow, and the earth will be your bed. The worms shall eat into your flesh.<br>
  Countless ages will pass, and you will still be lying on one side. ||67||<br>
  Fareed, your beautiful body shall break apart, and the subtle thread of the breath shall be snapped.<br>
  In which house will the Messenger of Death be a guest today? ||68||<br>
  Fareed, your beautiful body shall break apart, and the subtle thread of the breath shall be snapped.<br>
  Those friends who were a burden on the earth - how can they come today? ||69||<br>
  Fareed: O faithless dog, this is not a good way of life.<br>
  You never come to the mosque for your five daily prayers. ||70||<br>
  Rise up, Fareed, and cleanse yourself; chant your morning prayer.<br>
  The head which does not bow to the Lord - chop off and remove that head. ||71||<br>
  That head which does not bow to the Lord - what is to be done with that head?<br>
  Put it in the fireplace, instead of firewood. ||72||<br>
  Fareed, where are your mother and father, who gave birth to you?<br>
  They have left you, but even so, you are not convinced that you shall also have to go. ||73||<br>
  Fareed, flatten out your mind; smooth out the hills and valleys.<br>
  Hereafter, the fires of hell shall not even approach you. ||74||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Fareed, the Creator is in the Creation, and the Creation abides in God.<br>
  Whom can we call bad? There is none without Him. ||75||<br>
  Fareed, if on that day when my umbilical cord was cut, my throat had been cut instead,<br>
  I would not have fallen into so many troubles, or undergone so many hardships. ||76||<br>
  My teeth, feet, eyes and ears have stopped working.<br>
  My body cries out, "Those whom I knew have left me!"||77||<br>
  Fareed, answer evil with goodness; do not fill your mind with anger.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 41 - Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee - Part 006</h2></center>
  Your body shall not suffer from any disease, and you shall obtain everything. ||78||<br>
  Fareed, the bird is a guest in this beautiful world-garden.<br>
  The morning drums are beating - get ready to leave! ||79||<br>
  Fareed, musk is released at night. Those who are sleeping do not receive their share.<br>
  Those whose eyes are heavy with sleep - how can they receive it? ||80||<br>
  Fareed, I thought that I was in trouble; the whole world is in trouble!<br>
  When I climbed the hill and looked around, I saw this fire in each and every home. ||81||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Fareed, in the midst of this beautiful earth, there is a garden of thorns.<br>
  Those humble beings who are blessed by their spiritual teacher, do not suffer even a scratch. ||82||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Fareed, life is blessed and beautiful, along with the beautiful body.<br>
  Only a rare few are found, who love their Beloved Lord. ||83||<br>
  O river, do not destroy your banks; you too will be asked to give your account.<br>
  The river flows in whatever direction the Lord orders. ||84||<br>
  Fareed, the day passes painfully; the night is spent in anguish.<br>
  The boatman stands up and shouts, "The boat is caught in the whirlpool!"||85||<br>
  The river flows on and on; it loves to eat into its banks.<br>
  What can the whirlpool do to the boat, if the boatman remains alert? ||86||<br>
  Fareed, there are dozens who say they are friends; I search, but I cannot find even one.<br>
  I yearn for my beloved like a smouldering fire. ||87||<br>
  Fareed, this body is always barking. Who can stand this constant suffering?<br>
  I have put plugs in my ears; I don't care how much the wind is blowing. ||88||<br>
  Fareed, God's dates have ripened, and rivers of honey flow.<br>
  With each passing day, your life is being stolen away. ||89||<br>
  Fareed, my withered body has become a skeleton; the crows are pecking at my palms.<br>
  Even now, God has not come to help me; behold, this is the fate of all mortal beings. ||90||<br>
  The crows have searched my skeleton, and eaten all my flesh.<br>
  But please do not touch these eyes; I hope to see my Lord. ||91||<br>
  O crow, do not peck at my skeleton; if you have landed on it, fly away.<br>
  Do not eat the flesh from that skeleton, within which my Husband Lord abides. ||92||<br>
  Fareed, the poor grave calls out, "O homeless one, come back to your home.<br>
  You shall surely have to come to me; do not be afraid of death."||93||<br>
  These eyes have seen a great many leave.<br>
  Fareed, the people have their fate, and I have mine. ||94||<br>
  God says, "If you reform yourself, you shall meet me, and meeting me, you shall be at peace.<br>
  O Fareed, if you will be mine, the whole world will be yours."||95||<br>
  How long can the tree remain implanted on the river-bank?<br>
  Fareed, how long can water be kept in a soft clay pot? ||96||<br>
  Fareed, the mansions are vacant; those who lived in them have gone to live underground.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 41 - Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee - Part 007</h2></center>
  They remain there, in those unhonored graves.<br>
  O Shaykh, dedicate yourself to God; you will have to depart, today or tomorrow. ||97||<br>
  Fareed, the shore of death looks like the river-bank, being eroded away.<br>
  Beyond is the burning hell, from which cries and shrieks are heard.<br>
  Some understand this completely, while others wander around carelessly.<br>
  Those actions which are done in this world, shall be examined in the Court of the Lord. ||98||<br>
  Fareed, the crane perches on the river bank, playing joyfully.<br>
  While it is playing, a hawk suddenly pounces on it.<br>
  When the Hawk of God attacks, playful sport is forgotten.<br>
  God does what is not expected or even considered. ||99||<br>
  The body is nourished by water and grain.<br>
  The mortal comes into the world with high hopes.<br>
  But when the Messenger of Death comes, it breaks down all the doors.<br>
  It binds and gags the mortal, before the eyes of his beloved brothers.<br>
  Behold, the mortal being is going away, carried on the shoulders of four men.<br>
  Fareed, only those good deeds done in the world will be of any use in the Court of the Lord. ||100||<br>
  Fareed, I am a sacrifice to those birds which live in the jungle.<br>
  They peck at the roots and live on the ground, but they do not leave the Lord's side. ||101||<br>
  Fareed, the seasons change, the woods shake and the leaves drop from the trees.<br>
  I have searched in the four directions, but I have not found any resting place anywhere. ||102||<br>
  Fareed, I have torn my clothes to tatters; now I wear only a rough blanket.<br>
  I wear only those clothes which will lead me to meet my Lord. ||103||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Why do you tear apart your fine clothes, and take to wearing a rough blanket?<br>
  O Nanak, even sitting in your own home, you can meet the Lord, if your mind is in the right place. ||104||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Fareed, those who are very proud of their greatness, wealth and youth,<br>
  shall return empty-handed from their Lord, like sandhills after the rain. ||105||<br>
  Fareed, the faces of those who forget the Lord's Name are dreadful.<br>
  They suffer terrible pain here, and hereafter they find no place of rest or refuge. ||106||<br>
  Fareed, if you do not awaken in the early hours before dawn, you are dead while yet alive.<br>
  Although you have forgotten God, God has not forgotten you. ||107||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Fareed, my Husband Lord is full of joy; He is Great and Self-sufficient.<br>
  To be imbued with the Lord God - this is the most beautiful decoration. ||108||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Fareed, look upon pleasure and pain as the same; eradicate corruption from your heart.<br>
  Whatever pleases the Lord God is good; understand this, and you will reach His Court. ||109||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Fareed, the world dances as it dances, and you dance with it as well.<br>
  That soul alone does not dance with it, who is under the care of the Lord God. ||110||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Fareed, the heart is imbued with this world, but the world is of no use to it at all.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 41 - Shaloks Of Shaykh Fareed Jee - Part 008</h2></center>
  It is so difficult to be like the fakeers - the Holy Saints; it is only achieved by perfect karma. ||111||<br>
  The first watch of the night brings flowers, and the later watches of the night bring fruit.<br>
  Those who remain awake and aware, receive the gifts from the Lord. ||112||<br>
  The gifts are from our Lord and Master; who can force Him to bestow them?<br>
  Some are awake, and do not receive them, while He awakens others from sleep to bless them. ||113||<br>
  You search for your Husband Lord; you must have some fault in your body.<br>
  Those who are known as happy soul-brides, do not look to others. ||114||<br>
  Within yourself, make patience the bow, and make patience the bowstring.<br>
  Make patience the arrow, the Creator will not let you miss the target. ||115||<br>
  Those who are patient abide in patience; in this way, they burn their bodies.<br>
  They are close to the Lord, but they do not reveal their secret to anyone. ||116||<br>
  Let patience be your purpose in life; implant this within your being.<br>
  In this way, you will grow into a great river; you will not break off into a tiny stream. ||117||<br>
  Fareed, it is difficult to be a dervish - a Holy Saint; it is easier to love bread when it is buttered.<br>
  Only a rare few follow the way of the Saints. ||118||<br>
  My body is cooking like an oven; my bones are burning like firewood.<br>
  If my feet become tired, I will walk on my head, if I can meet my Beloved. ||119||<br>
  Do not heat up your body like an oven, and do not burn your bones like firewood.<br>
  What harm have your feet and head done to you? Behold your Beloved within yourself. ||120||<br>
  I search for my Friend, but my Friend is already with me.<br>
  O Nanak, the Unseen Lord cannot be seen; He is revealed only to the Gurmukh. ||121||<br>
  Seeing the swans swimming, the cranes became excited.<br>
  The poor cranes were drowned to death, with their heads below the water and their feet sticking out above. ||122||<br>
  I knew him as a great swan, so I associated with him.<br>
  If I had known that he was a only wretched crane, I would never in my life have crossed paths with him. ||123||<br>
  Who is a swan, and who is a crane, if God blesses him with His Glance of Grace?<br>
  If it pleases Him, O Nanak, He changes a crow into a swan. ||124||<br>
  There is only one bird in the lake, but there are fifty trappers.<br>
  This body is caught in the waves of desire. O my True Lord, You are my only hope! ||125||<br>
  What is that word, what is that virtue, and what is that magic mantra?<br>
  What are those clothes, which I can wear to captivate my Husband Lord? ||126||<br>
  Humility is the word, forgiveness is the virtue, and sweet speech is the magic mantra.<br>
  Wear these three robes, O sister, and you will captivate your Husband Lord. ||127||<br>
  If you are wise, be simple;<br>
  if you are powerful, be weak;<br>
  and when there is nothing to share, then share with others.<br>
  How rare is one who is known as such a devotee. ||128||<br>
  Do not utter even a single harsh word; your True Lord and Master abides in all.<br>
  Do not break anyone's heart; these are all priceless jewels. ||129||<br>
  The minds of all are like precious jewels; to harm them is not good at all.<br>
  If you desire your Beloved, then do not break anyone's heart. ||130||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr42.htm">Next: Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl</a></center>
 </body>