<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr43.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr45.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Shalok, Ninth Mehl</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 44 - Shalok, Ninth Mehl - Part 001</h2></center>
  Those whom He saves, meditate in remembrance on the Creator Lord. ||15||<br>
  Forsake duality and the ways of evil; focus your consciousness on the One Lord.<br>
  In the love of duality, O Nanak, the mortals are being washed downstream. ||16||<br>
  In the markets and bazaars of the three qualities, the merchants make their deals.<br>
  Those who load the true merchandise are the true traders. ||17||<br>
  Those who do not know the way of love are foolish; they wander lost and confused.<br>
  O Nanak, forgetting the Lord, they fall into the deep, dark pit of hell. ||18||<br>
  In his mind, the mortal does not forget Maya; he begs for more and more wealth.<br>
  That God does not even come into his consciousness; O Nanak, it is not in his karma. ||19||<br>
  The mortal does not run out of capital, as long as the Lord Himself is merciful.<br>
  The Word of the Shabad is Guru Nanak's inexhaustible treasure; this wealth and capital never runs out, no matter how much it is spent and consumed. ||20||<br>
  If I could find wings for sale, I would buy them with an equal weight of my flesh.<br>
  I would attach them to my body, and seek out and find my Friend. ||21||<br>
  My Friend is the True Supreme King, the King over the heads of kings.<br>
  Sitting by His side, we are exalted and beautified; He is the Support of all. ||22||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Shalok, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  If you do not sing the Praises of the Lord, your life is rendered useless.<br>
  Says Nanak, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord; immerse your mind in Him, like the fish in the water. ||1||<br>
  Why are you engrossed in sin and corruption? You are not detached, even for a moment!<br>
  Says Nanak, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord, and you shall not be caught in the noose of death. ||2||<br>
  Your youth has passed away like this, and old age has overtaken your body.<br>
  Says Nanak, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord; your life is fleeting away! ||3||<br>
  You have become old, and you do not understand that death is overtaking you.<br>
  Says Nanak, you are insane! Why do you not remember and meditate on God? ||4||<br>
  Your wealth, spouse, and all the possessions which you claim as your own<br>
  - none of these shall go along with you in the end. O Nanak, know this as true. ||5||<br>
  He is the Saving Grace of sinners, the Destroyer of fear, the Master of the masterless.<br>
  Says Nanak, realize and know Him, who is always with you. ||6||<br>
  He has given you your body and wealth, but you are not in love with Him.<br>
  Says Nanak, you are insane! Why do you now shake and tremble so helplessly? ||7||<br>
  He has given you your body, wealth, property, peace and beautiful mansions.<br>
  Says Nanak, listen, mind: why don't you remember the Lord in meditation? ||8||<br>
  The Lord is the Giver of all peace and comfort. There is no other at all.<br>
  Says Nanak, listen, mind: meditating in remembrance on Him, salvation is attained. ||9||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 44 - Shalok, Ninth Mehl - Part 002</h2></center>
  Remembering Him in meditation, salvation is attained; vibrate and meditate on Him, O my friend.<br>
  Says Nanak, listen, mind: your life is passing away! ||10||<br>
  Your body is made up of the five elements; you are clever and wise - know this well.<br>
  Believe it - you shall merge once again into the One, O Nanak, from whom you originated. ||11||<br>
  The Dear Lord abides in each and every heart; the Saints proclaim this as true.<br>
  Says Nanak, meditate and vibrate upon Him, and you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||12||<br>
  One who is not touched by pleasure or pain, greed, emotional attachment and egotistical pride<br>
  - says Nanak, listen, mind: he is the very image of God. ||13||<br>
  One who is beyond praise and slander, who looks upon gold and iron alike<br>
  - says Nanak, listen, mind: know that such a person is liberated. ||14||<br>
  One who is not affected by pleasure or pain, who looks upon friend and enemy alike<br>
  - says Nanak, listen, mind: know that such a person is liberated. ||15||<br>
  One who does not frighten anyone, and who is not afraid of anyone else<br>
  - says Nanak, listen, mind: call him spiritually wise. ||16||<br>
  One who has forsaken all sin and corruption, who wears the robes of neutral detachment<br>
  - says Nanak, listen, mind: good destiny is written on his forehead. ||17||<br>
  One who renounces Maya and possessiveness and is detached from everything<br>
  - says Nanak, listen, mind: God abides in his heart. ||18||<br>
  That mortal, who forsakes egotism, and realizes the Creator Lord<br>
  - says Nanak, that person is liberated; O mind, know this as true. ||19||<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Name of the Lord is the Destroyer of fear, the Eradicator of evil-mindedness.<br>
  Night and day, O Nanak, whoever vibrates and meditates on the Lord's Name, sees all of his works brought to fruition. ||20||<br>
  Vibrate with your tongue the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe; with your ears, hear the Lord's Name.<br>
  Says Nanak, listen, man: you shall not have to go to the house of Death. ||21||<br>
  That mortal who renounces possessiveness, greed, emotional attachment and egotism<br>
  - says Nanak, he himself is saved, and he saves many others as well. ||22||<br>
  Like a dream and a show, so is this world, you must know.<br>
  None of this is true, O Nanak, without God. ||23||<br>
  Night and day, for the sake of Maya, the mortal wanders constantly.<br>
  Among millions, O Nanak, there is scarcely anyone, who keeps the Lord in his consciousness. ||24||<br>
  As the bubbles in the water well up and disappear again,<br>
  so is the universe created; says Nanak, listen, O my friend! ||25||<br>
  The mortal does not remember the Lord, even for a moment; he is blinded by the wine of Maya.<br>
  Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, he is caught by the noose of Death. ||26||<br>
  If you yearn for eternal peace, then seek the Sanctuary of the Lord.<br>
  Says Nanak, listen, mind: this human body is difficult to obtain. ||27||<br>
  For the sake of Maya, the fools and ignorant people run all around.<br>
  Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, life passes away uselessly. ||28||<br>
  That mortal who meditates and vibrates upon the Lord night and day - know him to be the embodiment of the Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 44 - Shalok, Ninth Mehl - Part 003</h2></center>
  There is no difference between the Lord and the humble servant of the Lord; O Nanak, know this as true. ||29||<br>
  The mortal is entangled in Maya; he has forgotten the Name of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, what is the use of this human life? ||30||<br>
  The mortal does not think of the Lord; he is blinded by the wine of Maya.<br>
  Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, he is caught in the noose of Death. ||31||<br>
  In good times, there are many companions around, but in bad times, there is no one at all.<br>
  Says Nanak, vibrate, and meditate on the Lord; He shall be your only Help and Support in the end. ||32||<br>
  Mortals wander lost and confused through countless lifetimes; their fear of death is never removed.<br>
  Says Nanak, vibrate and meditate on the Lord, and you shall dwell in the Fearless Lord. ||33||<br>
  I have tried so many things, but the pride of my mind has not been dispelled.<br>
  I am engrossed in evil-mindedness, Nanak. O God, please save me! ||34||<br>
  Childhood, youth and old age - know these as the three stages of life.<br>
  Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, everything is useless; you must appreciate this. ||35||<br>
  You have not done what you should have done; you are entangled in the web of greed.<br>
  Nanak, your time is past and gone; why are you crying now, you blind fool? ||36||<br>
  The mind is absorbed in Maya - it cannot escape it, my friend.<br>
  Nanak, it is like a picture painted on the wall - it cannot leave it. ||37||<br>
  The man wishes for something, but something different happens.<br>
  He plots to deceive others, O Nanak, but he places the noose around his own neck instead. ||38||<br>
  People make all sorts of efforts to find peace and pleasure, but no one tries to earn pain.<br>
  Says Nanak, listen, mind: whatever pleases God comes to pass. ||39||<br>
  The world wanders around begging, but the Lord is the Giver of all.<br>
  Says Nanak, meditate in remembrance on Him, and all your works will be successful. ||40||<br>
  Why do you take such false pride in yourself? You must know that the world is just a dream.<br>
  None of this is yours; Nanak proclaims this truth. ||41||<br>
  You are so proud of your body; it shall perish in an instant, my friend.<br>
  That mortal who chants the Praises of the Lord, O Nanak, conquers the world. ||42||<br>
  That person, who meditates in remembrance on the Lord in his heart, is liberated - know this well.<br>
  There is no difference between that person and the Lord: O Nanak, accept this as the Truth. ||43||<br>
  That person, who does not feel devotion to God in his mind<br>
  - O Nanak, know that his body is like that of a pig, or a dog. ||44||<br>
  A dog never abandons the home of his master.<br>
  O Nanak, in just the same way, vibrate, and meditate on the Lord, single-mindedly, with one-pointed consciousness. ||45||<br>
  Those who make pilgrimages to sacred shrines, observe ritualistic fasts and make donations to charity while still taking pride in their minds<br>
  - O Nanak, their actions are useless, like the elephant, who takes a bath, and then rolls in the dust. ||46||<br>
  The head shakes, the feet stagger, and the eyes become dull and weak.<br>
  Says Nanak, this is your condition. And even now, you have not savored the sublime essence of the Lord. ||47||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr45.htm">Next: Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl &amp; Raag Maalaa</a></center>
 </body>