<body>Reform Judaism
 <h3>A Centenary Perspective</h3>
 Adopted at San Francisco, 1976
 <p><i>Scanned (and uncorrected) from text provided by Ms. Emily Grotta, 
 director of communications for the Union of American Hebrew 
 Congregations</i>
  </p><hr>
 
 <p>The Central Conference of American Rabbis has on special occasions
 described the spiritual state of Reform Judaism. The centenaries of the
 founding of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations and the Hebrew
 Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion seem an appropriate time for
 another such effort. We therefore record our sense of the unity of our
 movement today. 
 
 </p><p>
 </p><h4><b>One Hundred Years: What We Have Taught</b></h4>
 We celebrate the role of Reform Judaism in North America, the growth of
 our movement on this free ground, the great contributions of our
 membership to the dreams and achievements of this society. We also feel
 great satisfaction at how much of our pioneering conception of Judaism has
 been accepted by the Household of Israel. It now seems self- evident to
 most Jews: that our tradition should interact with modern culture; that
 its forms ought to reflect a contemporary esthetic; that its scholarship
 needs to be conducted by modern, critical methods; and that change has
 been and must continue to be a fundamental reality in Jewish life. 
 Moreover, though some still disagree, substantial numbers have also
 accepted our teachings: that the ethics of universalism implicit in
 traditional Judaism must be an explicit part of our Jewish duty; that
 women have full rights to practice Judaism; and that Jewish obligation
 begins with the informed will of every individual. Most modern Jews,
 within their various religious movements, are embracing Reform Jewish
 perspectives. We see this past century as having confirmed the essential
 wisdom of our movement. 
 <p>
 
 </p><h4><b>One Hundred Years: What We Have Learned</b></h4>
 Obviously, much else has changed in the past century. We continue to probe
 the extraordinary events of the past generation, seeking to understand
 their meaning and to incorporate their significance in our lives. The
 Holocaust shattered our easy optimism about humanity and its inevitable
 progress. The State of Israel, through its many accomplishments, raised
 our sense of the Jews as a people to new heights of aspiration and
 devotion. The widespread threats to freedom, the problems inherent in the
 explosion of new knowledge and of ever more powerful technologies, and the
 spiritual emptiness of much of Western culture have taught us to be less
 dependent on the values of our society and to reassert what remains
 perenially valid in Judaism's teaching. We have learned that the survival
 of the Jewish people is of highest priority and that in carrying out our
 Jewish responsibilities we help move humanity toward its messianic
 fulfillment. 
 
 <p>
 </p><h4><b>Diversity Within Unity, the Hallmark of Reform</b></h4>
 Reform Jews respond to change in various ways according to the Reform
 principle of the autonomy of the individual.  However, Reform Judaism does
 more than tolerate diversity;  it engenders it.  In our uncertain
 historical situation we must expect to have far greater diversity than
 previous generations knew. How we shall live with diversity without
 stifling dissent and withou paralyzing our ability to take positive action
 will test ou character and our principles.  We stand open to any position
 thoughtfully and conscientiously advocated in the spirit of Reform Jewish
 belief. While we may differ in our interpretation and application of the
 ideas enunciated here, we accept such differences as precious and see in
 them Judaism's best hope for confronting whatever the future holds for 
 us. Yet in all our diversity we perceive a certain unity and we shall not
 allow our differences in some particulars to obscure what binds us
 together. 
 <p>
 </p><ol>
 
 <li><em>God</em> -- The affirmation of God has always been essential to
 our people's will to survive. In our struggle through the centuries to
 preserve our faith we have experienced and conceived of God in many ways.
 The trials of our own time and the challenges of modern culture have made
 steady belief and clear understanding difficult for some.  Nevertheless,
 we ground our lives, personally and communally, on God's reality and
 remain open to new experiences and conceptions of the Divine. Amid the
 mystery we call life, we affirm that human beings, created in God's image,
 share in God's eternality despite the mystery we call death. 
 <p>
 </p></li><li><em>The People Israel</em> -- The Jewish people and Judaism defy
 precise definition because both are in the process of becoming.  Jews, by
 birth or conversion, constitute an uncommon union of faith and peoplehood.
 Born as Hebrews in the ancient Near East, we are bound together like all
 ethnic groups by language, land, history, culture, and institutions. But
 the people of Israel is unique because of its involvement with God and its
 resulting perception of the human condition.  Throughout our long history
 our people has been inseparable from its religion with its messianic hope
 that humanity will be redeemed. 
 <p>
 </p></li><li><em>Torah</em> -- Torah results from the relationship between God and 
 the Jewish people. The records of our earliest confrontations are 
 uniquely important to us. Lawgivers and prophets, historians and poets 
 gave us a heritage whose study is a religious imperative and whose 
 practice is our chief means to holiness. Rabbis and teachers, 
 philosophers and mystics, gifted Jews in every age amplified the Torah 
 tradition. For millennia, the creation of Torah has not ceased and Jewish 
 creativity in our time is adding to the chain of tradition.
 <p>
 </p></li><li><em>Our Religious Obligations: Religious Practice</em> -- Judaism
 emphasizes action rather than creed as the primary expression of a
 religious life, the means by which we strive to achieve universal justice
 and peace.  Reform Judaism shares this emphasis on duty and obligation.
 Our founders stressed that the Jew's ethical responsibilities, personal
 and social, are enjoined by God. The past century has taught us that the
 claims made upon us may begin with our ethical obligations but they extend
 to many other aspects of Jewish living, including:  creating a Jewish home
 centered on family devotion:  lifelong study;  private prayer and public
 worship; daily religious observance; keeping the Sabbath and the holy
 days:  celebrating the major events of life; involvement with the
 synagogues and community; and other activities which promote the survival
 of the Jewish people and enhance its existence. Within each area of Jewish
 observance Reform Jews are called upon to confront the claims of Jewish
 tradition, however differently perceived, and to exercise their
  individual autonomy, choosing and creating on the basis of commitment and
 knowledge. 
 <p>
 </p></li><li><em>Our Obligations: The State of Israel and the Diaspora</em> -- We
 are privileged to live in an extraordinary time, one in which a third
 Jewish commonwealth has been established in our people's ancient homeland.
 We are bound to that land and to the newly reborn State of Israel by
 innumerable religious and ethnic ties.  We have been enriched by its
 culture and ennobled by its indomitable spirit.  We see it providing
 unique opportunities for Jewish self-expression.  We have both a stake and
 a responsibility in building the State of Israel, assuring its security,
 and defining its Jewish character. We encourage <i>aliyah</i> for those
 who wish to find maximum personal fulfillment in the cause of Zion.  We
 demand that Reform Judaism be unconditionally legitimized in the State of
 Israel. 
 
 <p>At the same time that we consider the State of Israel vital to the
 welfare of Judaism everywhere, we reaffirm the mandate of our tradition to
 create strong Jewish communities wherever we live.  A genuine Jewish life
 is possible in any land, each community developing its own particular
 character and determining its Jewish responsibilities. The foundation of
 Jewish community life is the synagogue. It leads us beyond itself to
 cooperate with other Jews, to share their concerns, and to assume
 leadership in communal affairs. We are therefore committed to the full
 democratization of the jewish community and to its hallowing in terms of
 Jewish values. 
 
 </p><p>The State of Israel and the Diaspora, in fruitful dialogue, can
 show how a people transcends nationalism even as it affirms it, thereby
 setting an exampic for humanity which remains largely concerned with  
 dangerously parochial goals. 
 </p><p>
 </p></li><li><em>Our Obligations: Survival and Service</em> -- Early Reform Jews,
 newly admitted to general society and seeing in this the evidence of a
 growing universalism, regularly spoke of Jewish purpose in terms of
 Jewry's service to humanity.  In recent years we have become freshly
 conscious of the virtues of pluralism and the values of particularism. 
 The Jewish people in its unique way of life validates its own worth while
 working toward the fulfillment of its messianic expectations. 
 
 <p> Until the recent past our obligations to the Jewish people and to all
 humanity seemed congruent.  At times now these two imperatives appear to
 conflict.  We know of no simple way to resolve such tensions.  We must,
 however, confront them without abandoning either of our commitments.  A
 universal concern for humanity unaccompanied by a devotion to our
 particular people is self-destructive;  a passion for our people without
 involvement in humankind contradicts what the prophets have meant to us.
 Judaism calls us simultaneously to universal and particular obligations. 
 
 </p></li></ol>
 <p>
 
 </p><h4><b>Hope: Our Jewish Obligation</b></h4>
 
  Previous generations of Reform Jews had unbound confidence in humanity's
 potential for good.  We have lived through terrible tragedy and been
 compelled to reappropriate our tradition's realism about the human
 capacity for evil.  Yet our people has always refused to despair. The
 survivors of the Holocaust, being granted life, seized it, nurtured it,
 and, rising above catastrophe, showed humankind that the human spirit is
 indomitable. The State of Israel, established and maintained by the Jewish
 will to live, demonstrates what a united people can accomplish in history. 
 The existence of the Jew is an argument against despair; Jewish survival
 is warrant for human hope. 
 
 <p>We remain God's witness that history is not meaningless.  We affirm
 that with God's help people are not powerless to affect their destiny.  We
 dedicate ourselves, as did the generations of Jews who went before us, to
 work and wait for that day when "They shall not hurt or destroy in all My
 holy mountain for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as
 the waters cover the sea." 
 
 </p><hr>
 </body>