<body>
 <h3>Declaration of Principles</h3> <h4>1885 Pittsburgh Conference</h4>
 <hr> Convening at the call of Kaufmann Kohler of New York, Reform rabbis
 from around the United States met from November 16 through November 19,
 1885 with Isaac Mayer Wise presiding. The meeting was declared the
 continuation of the Philadelphia Conference of 1869, which was the
 continuation of the German Conference of 1841 to 1846.  The rabbis adopted
 the following seminal text: 
 
 <blockquote>1. We recognize in every religion an attempt to grasp the
 Infinite, and in every mode, source or book of revelation held sacred in
 any religious system the consciousness of the indwelling of God in man. We
 hold that Judaism presents the highest conception of the God-idea as
 taught in our Holy Scriptures and developed and spiritualized by the
 Jewish teachers, in accordance with the moral and philosophical progress
 of their respective ages. We maintain that Judaism preserved and defended
 midst continual struggles and trials and under enforced isolation, this
 God-idea as the central religious truth for the human race. 
 
 <p>2. We recognize in the Bible the record of the consecration of the
 Jewish people to its mission as the priest of the one God, and value it as
 the most potent instrument of religious and moral instruction. We hold
 that the modern discoveries of scientific researches in the domain of
 nature and history are not antagonistic to the doctrines of Judaism, the
 Bible reflecting the primitive ideas of its own age, and at times clothing
 its conception of divine Providence and Justice dealing with men in
 miraculous narratives. 
 
 </p><p>3. We recognize in the Mosaic legislation a system of training the
 Jewish people for its mission during its national life in Palestine, and
 today we accept as binding only its moral laws, and maintain only such
 ceremonies as elevate and sanctify our lives, but reject al such as are
 not adapted to the views and habits of modern civilization. 
 
 </p><p>4. We hold that all such Mosaic and rabbinical laws as regulate diet,
 priestly purity, and dress originated in ages and under the influence of
 ideas entirely foreign to our present mental and spiritual state.  They
 fail to impress the modern Jew with a spirit of priestly holiness; their
 observance in our days is apt rather to obstruct than to further modern
 spiritual elevation. 
 
 </p><p>5.  We recognize, in the modern era of universal culture of heart and
 intellect, the approaching of the realization of Israel s great Messianic
 hope for the establishment of the kingdom of truth, justice, and peace
 among all men.  We consider ourselves no longer a nation, but a religious
 community, and therefore expect neither a return to Palestine, nor a
 sacrificial worship under the sons of Aaron, nor the restoration of any of
 the laws concerning the Jewish state. 
 
 </p><p>6. We recognize in Judaism a progressive religion, ever striving to be
 in accord with the postulates of reason.  We are convinced of the utmost
 necessity of preserving the historical identity with our great past..
 Christianity and Islam, being daughter religions of Judaism, we appreciate
 their providential mission, to aid in the spreading of monotheistic and
 moral truth.  We acknowledge that the spirit of broad humanity of our age
 is our ally in the fulfillment of our mission, and therefore we extend the
 hand of fellowship to all who cooperate with us in the establishment of
 the reign of truth and righteousness among men. 
 
 </p><p>7. We reassert the doctrine of Judaism that the soul is immortal,
 grounding the belief on the divine nature of human spirit, which forever
 finds bliss in righteousness and misery in wickedness.  We reject as ideas
 not rooted in Judaism, the beliefs both in bodily resurrection and in
 Gehenna and Eden (Hell and Paradise) as abodes for everlasting punishment
 and reward. 
 
 </p><p>8. In full accordance with the spirit of the Mosaic legislation, which
 strives to regulate the relations between rich and poor, we deem it our
 duty to participate in the great task of modern times, to solve, on the
 basis of justice and righteousness, the problems presented by the
 contrasts and evils of the present organization of society. 
 
 </p></blockquote>
 
 <p>--Quoted from James G. Heller, _Isaac M. Wise: His Life, Work and
 Thought_ (New York: 1965, The Union of American Hebrew Congregations,
 Library of Congres Catalogue Card No. 64-24340), pp. 464-465.
 </p><hr>
 </body>