<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_653.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_655.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:652</h3><p><i>Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi:</i></p>
 Allah's Apostle went to establish peace among Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf. In 
 the meantime the time of prayer was due and the Mu'adh-dhin went to 
 Abu Bakr and said, "Will you lead the prayer, so that I may pronounce 
 the Iqama?" Abu Bakr replied in the affirmative and led the prayer. 
 Allah's Apostle came while the people were still praying and he 
 entered the rows of the praying people till he stood in the (first 
 row). The people clapped their hands. Abu Bakr never glanced sideways 
 in his prayer but when the people continued clapping, Abu Bakr looked 
 and saw Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle beckoned him to stay at his 
 place. Abu Bakr raised his hands and thanked Allah for that order of 
 Allah's Apostle and then he retreated till he reached the first row. 
 Allah's Apostle went forward and led the prayer. When Allah's Apostle 
 finished the prayer, he said, "O Abu Bakr! What prevented you from 
 staying when I ordered you to do so?"
 <p>
 Abu Bakr replied, "How can Ibn Abi Quhafa (Abu Bakr) dare to lead the 
 prayer in the presence of Allah's Apostle?" Then Allah's Apostle said,
 "Why did you clap so much? If something happens to anyone during his 
 prayer he should say Subhan Allah. If he says so he will be attended 
 to, for clapping is for women."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_655.htm">Next: 1:653: Malik bin Huwairth: We went to the Prophet and we were all young men and stayed with him ...</a></center>
 </body>