<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_240.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_242.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:241</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:</i></p>
 Once the Prophet was offering prayers at the Ka'ba. Abu Jahl was 
 sitting with some of his companions. One of them said to the others, 
 "Who amongst you will bring the abdominal contents (intestines, etc.) 
 of a camel of Bani so and so and put it on the back of Muhammad, when 
 he prostrates?" The most unfortunate of them got up and brought it. He
 waited till the Prophet prostrated and then placed it on his back 
 between his shoulders. I was watching but could not do any thing. I 
 wish I had some people with me to hold out against them. They started 
 laughing and falling on one another. Allah's Apostle was in 
 prostration and he did not lift his head up till Fatima (Prophet's 
 daughter) came and threw that (camel's abdominal contents) away from 
 his back. He raised his head and said thrice, "O Allah! Punish 
 Quraish." So it was hard for Abu Jahl and his companions when the 
 Prophet invoked Allah against them as they had a conviction that the 
 prayers and invocations were accepted in this city (Mecca). The 
 Prophet said, "O Allah! Punish Abu Jahl, 'Utba bin Rabi'a, Shaiba bin 
 Rabi'a, Al-Walid bin 'Utba, Umaiya bin Khalaf, and 'Uqba bin Al Mu'it 
 (and he mentioned the seventh whose name I cannot recall). By Allah in
 Whose Hands my life is, I saw the dead bodies of those persons who 
 were counted by Allah's Apostle in the Qalib (one of the wells) of 
 Badr.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_242.htm">Next: 1:242: Anas: The Prophet once spat in his clothes....</a></center>
 </body>