<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_634.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_636.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:633</h3><p><i>Narrated Al-Aswad:</i></p>
 "We were with 'Aisha discussing the regularity of offering the prayer 
 and dignifying it. She said, 'When Allah's Apostle fell sick with the 
 fatal illness and when the time of prayer became due and Adhan was 
 pronounced, he said, 'Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.' He 
 was told that Abu Bakr was a soft-hearted man and would not be able to
 lead the prayer in his place. The Prophet gave the same order again 
 but he was given the same reply. He gave the order for the third time 
 and said, 'You (women) are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to 
 lead the prayer.' So Abu Bakr came out to lead the prayer. In the 
 meantime the condition of the Prophet improved a bit and he came out 
 with the help of two men one on each side. As if I was observing his 
 legs dragging on the ground owing to the disease. Abu Bakr wanted to 
 retreat but the Prophet beckoned him to remain at his place and the 
 Prophet was brought till he sat beside Abu Bakr." Al-A'mash was asked,
 "Was the Prophet praying and Abu Bakr following him, and were the 
 people following Abu Bakr in that prayer?" Al-A'mash replied in the 
 affirmative with a nod of his head. Abu Muawiya said, "The Prophet was
 sitting on the left side of Abu Bakr who was praying while standing."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_636.htm">Next: 1:634: 'Aisha:  When the Prophet became seriously ill and his disease became ...</a></center>
 </body>