<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_500.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_502.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:499</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Amr bin Maimuin:</i></p>
 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, "While Allah's Apostle was praying beside 
 the Ka'ba, there were some Quraish people sitting in a gathering. One 
 of them said, 'Don't you see this (who does deeds just to show off)? 
 Who amongst you can go and bring the dung, blood and the abdominal 
 contents (intestines, etc). of the slaughtered camels of the family of
 so and so and then wait till he prostrates and put that in between his
 shoulders?' The most unfortunate amongst them ('Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait) 
 went (and brought them) and when Allah's Apostle prostrated, he put 
 them between his shoulders. The Prophet remained in prostration and 
 they laughed so much so that they fell on each other. A passerby went 
 to Fatima, who was a young girl in those days. She came running and 
 the Prophet was still in prostration. She removed them and cursed upon
 the Quraish on their faces. When Allah's Apostle completed his prayer,
 he said, 'O Allah! Take revenge on Quraish.' He said so thrice and 
 added, 'O Allah! take revenge on 'Amr bin Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabia, 
 Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid bin'Utba, Umaiya bin Khalaf, 'Uqba bin Abi
 Mu'ait and 'Umar a bin Al-Walid." Abdullah added, "By Allah! I saw all
 of them dead in the battle field on the day of Badr and they were 
 dragged and thrown in the Qalib (a well) at Badr: Allah's Apostle then
 said, 'Allah's curse has descended upon the people of the Qalib 
 (well).
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_502.htm">Next: 1:500: Ibn Shihab: Once'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz delayed the prayer and 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair ...</a></center>
 </body>