<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_72.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_74.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:74</h3><p><i>Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:</i></p>
 That he differed with Hur bin Qais bin Hisn Al-Fazari regarding the 
 companion of (the Prophet) Moses. Ibn 'Abbas said that he was Khadir. 
 Meanwhile, Ubai bin Ka'b passed by them and Ibn 'Abbas called him, 
 saying "My friend (Hur) and I have differed regarding Moses' companion
 whom Moses, asked the way to meet. Have you heard the Prophet 
 mentioning something about him? He said, "Yes. I heard Allah's Apostle
 saying, "While Moses was sitting in the company of some Israelites, a 
 man came and asked him. "Do you know anyone who is more learned than 
 you? Moses replied: "No." So Allah sent the Divine Inspiration to 
 Moses: 'Yes, Our slave Khadir (is more learned than you.)' Moses asked
 (Allah) how to meet him (Khadir). So Allah made the fish as a sign for
 him and he was told that when the fish was lost, he should return (to 
 the place where he had lost it) and there he would meet him 
 (Al-Khadir). So Moses went on looking for the sign of the fish in the 
 sea. The servant-boy of Moses said to him: Do you remember when we 
 betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the fish, none but Satan
 made me forget to remember it. On that Moses said: 'That is what we 
 have been seeking? (18.64) So they went back retracing their 
 foot-steps, and found Khadir. (And) what happened further to them is 
 narrated in the Holy Qur'an by Allah. (18.54 up to 18.82)
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_74.htm">Next: 1:75: Ibn 'Abbas: Once the Prophet embraced me and said,  O Allah! Bestow on him the ...</a></center>
 </body>