<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_48.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_50.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:50</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Jamra:</i></p>
 I used to sit with Ibn 'Abbas and he made me sit on his sitting place.
 He requested me to stay with him in order that he might give me a 
 share from his property. So I stayed with him for two months. Once he 
 told (me) that when the delegation of the tribe of 'Abdul Qais came to
 the Prophet, the Prophet asked them, "Who are the people (i.e. you)? 
 (Or) who are the delegate?" They replied, "We are from the tribe of 
 Rabi'a." Then the Prophet said to them, "Welcome! O people (or O 
 delegation of 'Abdul Qais)! Neither will you have disgrace nor will 
 you regret." They said, "O Allah's Apostle! We cannot come to you 
 except in the sacred month and there is the infidel tribe of Mudar 
 intervening between you and us. So please order us to do something 
 good (religious deeds) so that we may inform our people whom we have 
 left behind (at home), and that we may enter Paradise (by acting on 
 them)." Then they asked about drinks (what is legal and what is 
 illegal). The Prophet ordered them to do four things and forbade them 
 from four things. He ordered them to believe in Allah Alone and asked 
 them, "Do you know what is meant by believing in Allah Alone?" They 
 replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." Thereupon the Prophet 
 said, "It means:
 <p>
 1. To testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and 
 Muhammad is Allah's Apostle. 
 </p><p>
 2. To offer prayers perfectly
 </p><p>
 3. To pay the Zakat (obligatory charity) 
 </p><p>
 4. To observe fast during the month of Ramadan.
 </p><p>
 5. And to pay Al-Khumus (one fifth of the booty to be given in Allah's
 Cause).
 </p><p>
 Then he forbade them four things, namely, Hantam, Dubba,' Naqir Ann 
 Muzaffat or Muqaiyar; (These were the names of pots in which Alcoholic
 drinks were prepared) (The Prophet mentioned the container of wine and
 he meant the wine itself). The Prophet further said (to them): 
 "Memorize them (these instructions) and convey them to the people whom
 you have left behind."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_50.htm">Next: 1:51: 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: Allah's Apostle said,  The reward of deeds depends upon the intention ...</a></center>
 </body>