<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_329.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_331.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:330</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Aisha:</i></p>
 (the wife of the Prophet) We set out with Allahs Apostle on one of his
 journeys till we reached Al-Baida' or Dhatul-Jaish, a necklace of mine
 was broken (and lost). Allah's Apostle stayed there to search for it, 
 and so did the people along with him. There was no water at that 
 place, so the people went to Abu- Bakr As-Siddiq and said, "Don't you 
 see what 'Aisha has done? She has made Allah's Apostle and the people 
 stay where there is no water and they have no water with them." Abu 
 Bakr came while Allah's Apostle was sleeping with his head on my 
 thigh, He said, to me: "You have detained Allah's Apostle and the 
 people where there is no water and they have no water with them.
 <p>
 So he admonished me and said what Allah wished him to say and hit me 
 on my flank with his hand. Nothing prevented me from moving (because 
 of pain) but the position of Allah's Apostle on my thigh. Allah's 
 Apostle got up when dawn broke and there was no water. So Allah 
 revealed the Divine Verses of Tayammum. So they all performed 
 Tayammum. Usaid bin Hudair said, "O the family of Abu Bakr! This is 
 not the first blessing of yours." Then the camel on which I was riding
 was caused to move from its place and the necklace was found beneath 
 it.
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_331.htm">Next: 1:331: Jabir bin 'Abdullah: The Prophet said,  I have been given five things which were not given ...</a></center>
 </body>