<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh1_103.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh1_105.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 1:104</h3><p><i>Narrated Said:</i></p>
 Abu Shuraih said, "When 'Amr bin Said was sending the troops to Mecca 
 (to fight 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair) I said to him, 'O chief! Allow me 
 to tell you what the Prophet said on the day following the conquests 
 of Mecca. My ears heard and my heart comprehended, and I saw him with 
 my own eyes, when he said it. He glorified and praised Allah and then 
 said, "Allah and not the people has made Mecca a sanctuary. So anybody
 who has belief in Allah and the Last Day (i.e. a Muslim) should 
 neither shed blood in it nor cut down its trees. If anybody argues 
 that fighting is allowed in Mecca as Allah's Apostle did fight (in 
 Mecca), tell him that Allah gave permission to His Apostle, but He did
 not give it to you. The Prophet added: Allah allowed me only for a few
 hours on that day (of the conquest) and today (now) its sanctity is 
 the same (valid) as it was before. So it is incumbent upon those who 
 are present to convey it (this information) to those who are absent." 
 Abu- Shuraih was asked, "What did 'Amr reply?" He said 'Amr said, "O 
 Abu Shuraih! I know better than you (in this respect). Mecca does not 
 give protection to one who disobeys (Allah) or runs after committing 
 murder, or theft (and takes refuge in Mecca).
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh1_105.htm">Next: 1:105: Abu Bakra: The Prophet said. No doubt your blood, property, the sub-narrator ...</a></center>
 </body>