<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Taoism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="ts17.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="ts19.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">THE POWER OF A GOOD MAN'S NAME.</h3>
 <p>King Tsing, while on his way to a large gathering, passed through a district called Chun-Hoa, where there lived a young girl who was possessed of evil spirits. When King passed the night at her home, the demons did not dare to enter, but they returned as soon as he left the house. The young girl asked them the reason and they answered, "We are afraid of King." She then told her father who ran after King Tsing to call him back. But the good man simply wrote these four words on a slip of paper: <i>King Tsing tsaï tzu</i> ("King Tsing is here"), and advised him to paste it on the door. The demons never dared to return.</p>
 <p>This true story goes to prove that the presence of a good man can put evil spirits to flight.</p>
 <font size="2"><p>[This story encourages the use of charms and incantations, but it reveals to us the logic of exorcism. If the presence of a good man keeps demons away, the same result might be effected in his absence, if the demons</p>
 </font><p>{p. 92}</p>
 <font size="2"><p>can be made to believe that the good man whom they fear is actually present.</p>
 <p>It is a common belief that the mere name of a person or god is as efficient as its owner, and hence is to be kept sacred. In this way, according to the faith of the early Christians, miracles are performed in the name of Jesus.]</p>
 </font><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="ts19.htm">Next: Good Spirits in Attendance</a></center>
 </body>