<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="twp04.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="twp06.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <a name="page_13"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 13</font></a><h1 align="CENTER">III. THE WITCH-PERSECUTION AT TRIER.</h1>
 <p>It was, however, not till a century later, in the second half of the sixteenth century, that the witch-persecutions reached their height. One of the fiercest was that which raged in the dominions of the Elector-Archbishop of Trier (Trèves) in western Germany. One who had been an eye-witness, the canon Linden, in later years described it thus:</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">1. THE SCOPE OF THE PERSECUTION.</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>Linden, <i>Gesta Trevirorum</i> (from his manuscript in the City Library of Trier.) <a name="fr_11"></a><a href="#fn_11"><font size="1">1</font></a> Latin.</p>
 </font><p>Inasmuch as it was popularly believed that the continued sterility of many years was caused by witches through the malice of the Devil, the whole country rose to exterminate the witches. This movement was promoted by many in office, who hoped wealth from the persecution. And so, from court to court throughout the towns and villages of all the diocese, scurried special accusers, inquisitors, notaries, jurors, judges, constables, dragging to trial and torture human beings of both sexes and burning them in great numbers. Scarcely any of those who were accused escaped punishment or were there spared even the leading men in the city of Trier. For the Judge, <a name="fr_12"></a><a href="#fn_12"><font size="1">2</font></a> with two Burgomasters, several Councilors and Associate Judges, canons of sundry collegiate churches, parish-priests, rural deans, were swept away in this ruin. So far, at length, did the madness of the furious populace and of the courts go in this thirst for blood and booty that there was scarcely anybody who was not smirched by some suspicion of this crime.</p>
 <p>Meanwhile notaries, copyists, and innkeepers grew rich. The executioner rode a blooded horse, like a noble of the court, and went clad in gold and silver; his wife vied with noble dames in the richness of her array. The children of those convicted and punished were sent into exile; their goods were confiscated; plowman and vintner failed--</p>
 <p><a name="page_14"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 14</font></a></p>
 <p>hence came sterility. A direr pestilence or a more ruthless invader could hardly have ravaged the territory of Trier than this inquisition and persecution without bounds: many were the reasons for doubting that all were really guilty. This persecution lasted for several years; and some of those who presided over the administration of justice gloried in the multitude of the stakes, at each of which a human being had been given to the flames.</p>
 <p>At last, though the flames were still unsated, the people grew impoverished, rules were made and enforced restricting the fees and costs of examinations and examiners, and suddenly, as when in war funds fail, the zeal of the persecutors died out.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">2. THE RECANTATION OF LOOS.</h3>
 <font size="2"><p>Delrio, Disquisitiones Magicae, lib. v, appendix I. Latin.</p>
 <p>It was during this persecution at Trier that Comelius Loos, a scholar of Dutch birth who held a professorship in the university of that city, dared to protest against both the persecution itself and the superstitions out of which it grew. Failing in his appeals to the authorities, he wrote a book to set forth his views; but the manuscript was seized in the hands of the printer, and Loos himself thrown into prison. Thence he was brought out, in the spring Of 1593, and, before the assembled church dignitaries of the place, pronounced a solemn recantation. This recantation has been preserved by the Jesuit Delrio in the great work which in 1599-1600 he published in support of the persecution. Thus Delrio tells the story:</p>
 </font><p>And, finally, as I have made mention of Losæus Callidius, who tried by a thousand arts to make public the book which he had written in defence of the witches (and some fear that even yet some evil demon may bring this about), I have brought for an antidote the Recantation signed by him. Its authentic and so-called original copy is in the possession of a devout and most honorable man, Joannes Baxius, J. U. Lie. (whose energy and zeal against this nefarious heresy God will some day reward), from whom 1 have received the following transcript, certified by a notary:</p>
 <p>I, Cornelius Losæus Callidius, born at the town of Gouda in Holland, but now (on account of a certain treatise On Trite and False Witchcraft, <a name="fr_13"></a><a href="#fn_13"><font size="1">1</font></a> rashly and presumptously written without the knowledge and permission of the superiors of this place, shown by me to others, and then sent to be printed at Cologne) arrested and imprisoned in the Imperial</p>
 <p><a name="page_15"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 15</font></a></p>
 <p>Monastery of St. Maximin, near Trier, by order of the Most Reverend and Most Illustrious Lord, the Papal Nuncio, Octavius, Bishop of Tricarico: whereas I am informed of a surety that in the aforesaid book and also in certain letters of mine on the same subject sent clandestinely to the clergy and town council of Trier, and to others (for the purpose of hindering the execution of justice against the witches, male and female), are contained many articles which are not only erroneous and scandalous, but also suspected of heresy and smacking of the crime of treason, as being seditious and foolhardy, against the common opinion of decisions and bulls of theological teachers and the decisions and bulls of the Supreme Pontiffs, and contrary to the practice and to the statutes and laws of the magistrates and judges, not only of this Archdiocese of Trier, but of other provinces and principalities, I do therefore revoke, condemn, reject, and repudiate the said articles, in the order in which they are here subjoined.</p>
 <p>1. In the first place, I revoke, condemn, reject, and censure the idea (which both in words and writing I have often and before many persons pertinaciously asserted, and which I wished to be the head and front of this my disputation) that the things which are written about the bodily transportation or translation of witches, male and female, are altogether fanciful and must be reckoned the empty superstition; [and this I recant] both because it smacks of rank heresy and because this opinion partakes of sedition and hence savors of the crime of treason.</p>
 <p>2. For (and this in the second place I recant), in the letters which I have clandestinely sent to sundry persons, I have pertinaciously, without solid reasons, alleged against the magistracy that the [aerial] flight of witches is false and imaginary; asserting, moreover, that the wretched creatures are compelled by the severity of the torture to confess things which they have never done, and that by cruel butchery innocent blood is shed and by a new alchemy gold and silver coined from human blood.</p>
 <p>3. By these and by other things of the same sort, partly in private conversations among the people, partly in sundry letters addressed to both the magistracies, <a name="fr_14"></a><a href="#fn_14"><font size="1">1</font></a> I have accused of tyranny to their subjects the superiors and the judges.</p>
 <p><a name="page_16"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 16</font></a></p>
 <p>4. And consequently, inasmuch as the Most Reverend and Most Illustrious Archbishop and Prince-Elector of Trier not only permits witches, male and female, to be subjected in his diocese to deserved punishment, but has also ordained laws regulating the method and costs of judicial procedure against witches, I have with heedless temerity tacitly insinuated the charge of tyranny against the aforesaid Elector of Trier.</p>
 <p>5. I revoke and condemn, moreover, the following conclusions of mine, to wit: that there are no witches who renounce God, pay worship to the Devil, bring storms by the Devils aid, and do other like things, but that all these things are dreams.</p>
 <p>6. Also, that magic (<i>magia</i>) ought not to he called witchcraft (<i>maleficium</i>), nor magicians (<i>magi</i>) witches (<i>malefici</i>), and that the passage of Holy Scripture, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live" (<i>Maleficos non patieris vivere</i>), <a name="fr_15"></a><a href="#fn_15"><font size="1">1</font></a> is to be understood of those who by a natural use of natural poisons inflict death.</p>
 <p>7. That no compact does or can exist between the Devil and a human being.</p>
 <p>8. That devils do not assume bodies.</p>
 <p>9. That the life of Hilarion written by St. Jerome is not authentic.</p>
 <p>10. That there is no sexual intercourse between the Devil and human beings.</p>
 <p>11. That neither devils nor witches can raise tempests, rainstorms, hail-storms, and the like, and that the things said about these are mere dreams.</p>
 <p>12. That spirit and form apart from matter cannot be seen by man.</p>
 <p>13. That it is rash to assert that whatever devils can do, witches also can do through their aid.</p>
 <p>14. That the opinion that a superior demon can cast out an inferior is erroneous and derogatory to Christ. <a name="fr_16"></a><a href="#fn_16"><font size="1">2</font></a></p>
 <p>15. That the Popes in their bulls do not say that magicians and witches perpetrate such things (as are mentioned above).</p>
 <p>16. That the Roman Pontiffs granted the power to proceed against witches, lest if they should refuse they might be unjustly accused of magic, just as some of their predecessors had been justly accused of it.</p>
 <p>These assertions, all and singular, with many calumnies, falsehoods,</p>
 <p><a name="page_17"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 17</font></a></p>
 <p>and sycophancies, toward the magistracy, both secular and ecelesiastical, spitefully, immodestly, and falsely poured forth, without cause, with which my writings on magic teem, I hereby expressly and deliberately condemn, revoke, and reject, earnestly beseeching the pardon of God and of my superiors for what I have done, and solemnly promising that in future I will neither in word nor in writing, by myself or through others, in whatsoever place it may befall me to be, teach, promulgate, defend, or assert any of these things. If I shall do to the contrary, I subject myself thenceforward, as if it were now, to all the penalties of the law against relapsed heretics, recusants, seditious offenders, traitors, backbiters, sycophants, who have been openly convicted, and also to those ordained against perjurers. I submit myself also to arbitrary correction, whether by the Archbishop of Trier or by any other magistrates under whom it may befall me to dwell, and who may he certified of my relapse and of my broken faith, that they may punish me according to my deserts, in honor and reputation, property and person.</p>
 <p>In testimony of all which I have, with my own hand, signed this my recantation of the aforesaid articles, in presence of notary and witnesses.</p>
 <p>(<i>Signed</i>)</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">CORNELIUS LOOSÆUS CALLIDIUS.</p>
 <p>(<i>and attested</i>)</p>
 <p>Done in the Imperial Monastery of St. Maximin, outside the walls of Trier, in the abbot's chamber, in presence of the Reverend, Venerable, and Eminent Sirs, Peter Binsfeld, <a name="fr_17"></a><a href="#fn_17"><font size="1">1</font></a> Bishop of Azotus, vicar-general in matters spiritual of the Most Reverend Archbishop of Trier, our most element lord, and Reinerus, abbot of the said monastery, Bartholomæus van Bodeghem, of Delft, J. U. L., Official of the Ecclesiastical Court of Trier, Georgius von Helffenstein, Doctor of Theology, Dean of the Collegiate Church of St. Simeon in the city of Trier, and Joannes Colmann, J. U. D., Canon of the said church and Seal-Bearer of the Court of Trier, <a name="fr_18"></a><a href="#fn_18"><font size="1">2</font></a> etc., in the year of Our Lord 1592 <i>more Trev</i>., <a name="fr_19"></a><a href="#fn_19"><font size="1">3</font></a> on</p>
 <p><a name="page_18"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 18</font></a></p>
 <p>Monday, March 15th, in the presence of me the notary undersigned and of the worthy Nicolaus Dolent and Daniel Maier, secretary and copyist respectively of the Reverend Lord Abbot, as witnesses specially called and summoned to this end.</p>
 <p>(<i>Signed</i>)</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">ADAMUS HEC Tectonius, Notary,</p>
 <p>(<i>And below</i>)</p>
 <p>Compared with its original and found to agree, by me the undersigned Secretary of the town of Antwerp,</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">G. KIEFFEL.</p>
 <p>Here you have the Recantation in full. And yet afterwards again at Brussels, while serving as curate in the church of Notre Dame de la Chapelle, he was accused of relapse, and was released only after a long imprisonment, and being again brought into suspicion (whence you way understand the pertinacity of his madness) escaped a third indictment through a premature death; but (much the pity!) left behind not a few partisans, men so imperfectly versed in medicine and sound theology as to share this stupid error. Would that they might he wise, and seriously realize at last how rash and noxious it is to prefer the ravings of a single heretic, Weyer, <a name="fr_20"></a><a href="twp06.htm#fn_20"><font size="1">1</font></a> to the judgment of the Church!</p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_11"></a><a href="twp05.htm#fr_11">13:1</a> Printed in Hontheim's <i>Historia Trevirensis diplomatica</i> (iii, p. 170, note) and in Wyttenbach and Müller's ed. of the <i>Gesta Trevirorum</i>; but with more care in Burr, <i>The Fate of Dietrich Flade</i>.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_12"></a><a href="twp05.htm#fr_12">13:2</a> Dr. Dietrich Flade, judge of the secular court at Trier and deputy governor of the city, was perhaps the most eminent victim of the witch-persecution in Germany. It is probable that he owed his fate in part or wholly to his attempt to check the persecution. Tortured into confession, he was burned in 1589.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_13"></a><a href="twp05.htm#fr_13">14:1</a> This book, confiscated by the ecclesiastical authorities, has been partly recovered in our own day.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_14"></a><a href="twp05.htm#fr_14">15:1</a> i. e. both lay and spiritual.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_15"></a><a href="twp05.htm#fr_15">16:1</a> Exodus, xxii, 18.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_16"></a><a href="twp05.htm#fr_16">16:2</a> A marginal note here cites Luke, xi.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_17"></a><a href="twp05.htm#fr_17">17:1</a> Binsfeld, suffragan bishop and real head of ecclesiastical affairs in the diocese, was doubtless the prime mover in the punishment of Loos. He had himself written a book, <i>De confessionibus maleficorum et sagarum</i> (Trier, 1589), to prove that the confessions of witches were worthy of all faith.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_18"></a><a href="twp05.htm#fr_18">17:2</a> i. e., the ecclesiastical court, of which Bodeghem was the head (the Official).</p>
 <p><a name="fn_19"></a><a href="twp05.htm#fr_19">17:3</a> 1593, according to our calendar; according to the <i>mos Trevirense</i> the year began on March 25th.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="twp06.htm">Next: IV. The Witch-Persecution at Bonn.</a></center>
 </body>