<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_544.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_546.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:544</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri :</i></p>
 Once the Prophet sat on a pulpit and we sat around him. Then he said, 
 "The things I am afraid of most for your sake (concerning what will 
 befall you after me) is the pleasures and splendors of the world and 
 its beauties which will be disclosed to you." Somebody said, "O 
 Allah's Apostle! Can the good bring forth evil?" The Prophet remained 
 silent for a while. It was said to that person, "What is wrong with 
 you? You are talking to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) while he is not talking 
 to you." Then we noticed that he was being inspired divinely. Then the
 Prophet wiped off his sweat and said, "Where is the questioner?" It 
 seemed as if the Prophet liked his question. Then he said, "Good never
 brings forth evil. Indeed it is like what grows on the banks of a 
 water-stream which either kill or make the animals sick, except if an 
 animal eats its fill the Khadira (a kind of vegetable) and then faces 
 the sun, and then defecates and urinates and grazes again. No doubt 
 this wealth is sweet and green. Blessed is the wealth of a Muslim from
 which he gives to the poor, the orphans and to needy travelers. (Or 
 the Prophet said something similar to it) No doubt, whoever takes it 
 illegally will be like the one who eats but is never satisfied, and 
 his wealth will be a witness against him on the Day of Resurrection." 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_546.htm">Next: 2:545: 'Amr bin Al-Harith: Zainab, the wife of 'Abdullah said,  I was in the Mosque and saw the ...</a></center>
 </body>