<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_154.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_156.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:156</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Aisha:</i></p>
 (the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h)  In the lifetime of the Prophet the
 sun eclipsed and he went to the Mosque and the people aligned behind 
 him. He said the Takbir (starting the prayer) and prolonged the 
 recitation (from the Quran) and then said Takbir and performed a 
 prolonged bowing; then he (lifted his head and) said, "Sami allahu 
 liman hamidah" (Allah heard him who sent his praises to Him). He then 
 did not prostrate but stood up and recited a prolonged recitation 
 which was shorter than the first recitation. He again said Takbir and 
 then bowed a prolonged bowing but shorter than the first one and then 
 said, "Sami 'a-l-lahu Lyman hamidah Rabbana walak-lhamd, (Allah heard 
 him who sent his praises to Him. O our Sustainer! All the praises are 
 for You)" and then prostrated and did the same in the second Raka; 
 thus he completed four bowing and four prostrations. The sun (eclipse)
 had cleared before he finished the prayer. (After the prayer) he stood
 up, glorified and praised Allah as He deserved and then said, "The sun
 and the moon are two of the signs of Allah. They do not eclipse 
 because of the death or the life (i.e. birth) of someone. When you see
 "When the sun eclipsed at Medina your brother ('Abdullah bin 
 Az-Zubair) offered only a two-Rakat prayer like that of the morning 
 (Fajr) prayer." 'Ursa replied, "Yes, for he missed the Prophet's 
 tradition (concerning this matter)." 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_156.htm">Next: 2:157: Aisha: (the wife of the Prophet) On the day when the sun Khasafat (eclipsed) ...</a></center>
 </body>