<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_219.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_221.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:221</h3><p><i>Narrated Ibn Abbas:</i></p>
 When the Prophet got up at night to offer the Tahajjud prayer, he used
 to say: Allahumma lakal-hamd. Anta qaiyimus-samawati wal-ard wa man 
 fihinna. Walakal-hamd, Laka mulkus-samawati wal-ard wa man fihinna. 
 Walakal-hamd, anta nurus-samawati wal-ard. Walakalhamd, anta-l-haq wa 
 wa'duka-l-haq, wa liqa'uka Haq, wa qualuka Haq, wal-jannatu Han 
 wan-naru Haq wannabiyuna Haq. Wa Muhammadun, sallal-lahu'alaihi 
 wasallam, Haq, was-sa'atu Haq. Allahumma aslamtu Laka wabika amantu, 
 wa 'Alaika tawakkaltu, wa ilaika anabtu wa bika khasamtu, wa ilaika 
 hakamtu faghfir li ma qaddamtu wama akh-khartu wama as-rartu wama'a 
 lantu, anta-l-muqaddim wa anta-l-mu akh-khir, la ilaha illa anta (or 
 la ilaha ghairuka). (O Allah! All the praises are for you, You are the
 Holder of the Heavens and the Earth, And whatever is in them. All the 
 praises are for You; You have the possession of the Heavens and the 
 Earth And whatever is in them. All the praises are for You; You are 
 the Light of the Heavens and the Earth And all the praises are for 
 You; You are the King of the Heavens and the Earth; And all the 
 praises are for You; You are the Truth and Your Promise is the truth, 
 And to meet You is true, Your Word is the truth And Paradise is true 
 And Hell is true And all the Prophets (Peace be upon them) are true; 
 And Muhammad is true, And the Day of Resurrection is true. O Allah ! I
 surrender (my will) to You; I believe in You and depend on You. And 
 repent to You, And with Your help I argue (with my opponents, the 
 non-believers) And I take You as a judge (to judge between us). Please
 forgive me my previous And future sins; And whatever I concealed or 
 revealed And You are the One who make (some people) forward And (some)
 backward. There is none to be worshipped but you . Sufyan said that 
 'Abdul Karim Abu Umaiya added to the above, 'Wala haula Wala quwata 
 illa billah' (There is neither might nor power except with Allah). 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_221.htm">Next: 2:222: Salim's father: In the life-time of the Prophet whosoever saw a dream would narrate it...</a></center>
 </body>