<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_633.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_635.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:632</h3><p><i>Narrated Al-Aswad:</i></p>
 ' Aisha said, We went out with the Prophet (from Medina) with the 
 intention of performing Hajj only and when we reached Mecca we 
 performed Tawaf round the Kaba and then the Prophet ordered those who 
 had not driven the Hadi along with them to finish their Ihram. So the 
 people who had not driven the Hadi along with them finished their 
 Ihram. The Prophet's wives, too, had not driven the Hadi with them, so
 they too, finished their Ihram." 'Aisha added, "I got my menses and 
 could not perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba." So when it was the night of 
 Hasba (i.e. when we stopped at Al-Muhassab), I said, 'O Allah's 
 Apostle! Everyone is returning after performing Hajj and 'Umra but I 
 am returning after performing Hajj only.' He said, 'Didn't you perform
 Tawaf round the Ka'ba the night we reached Mecca?' I replied in the 
 negative. He said, 'Go with your brother to Tan'im and assume the 
 Ihram for'Umra, (and after performing it) come back to such and such a
 place.' On that Safiya said, 'I feel that I will detain you all.' The 
 Prophet said, 'O 'Aqra Halqa! Didn't you perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba on
 the day of sacrifice? (i.e. Tawaf-al-ifada) Safiya replied in the 
 affirmative. He said, (to Safiya). 'There is no harm for you to 
 proceed on with us.' " 'Aisha added, "(after returning from 'Umra), 
 the Prophet met me while he was ascending (from Mecca) and I was 
 descending to it, or I was ascending and he was descending." 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_635.htm">Next: 2:633: 'Aisha: We set out with Allah's Apostles (to Mecca) in the year of the ...</a></center>
 </body>