<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_53.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_55.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:55</h3><p><i>Narrated Anas bin Malik:</i></p>
 Once in the lifetime of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) the people were 
 afflicted with drought (famine). While the Prophet was delivering the 
 Khutba on a Friday, a Bedouin stood up and said, "O, Allah's Apostle! 
 Our possessions are being destroyed and the children are hungry; 
 Please invoke Allah (for rain)". So the Prophet raised his hands. At 
 that time there was not a trace of cloud in the sky. By Him in Whose 
 Hands my soul is as soon as he lowered his hands, clouds gathered like
 mountains, and before he got down from the pulpit, I saw the rain 
 falling on the beard of the Prophet. It rained that day, the next day,
 the third day, the fourth day till the next Friday. The same Bedouin 
 or another man stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The houses have 
 collapsed, our possessions and livestock have been drowned; Please 
 invoke Allah (to protect us)". So the Prophet I raised both his hands 
 and said, "O Allah! Round about us and not on us". So, in whatever 
 direction he pointed with his hands, the clouds dispersed and cleared 
 away, and Medina's (sky) became clear as a hole in between the clouds.
 The valley of Qanat remained flooded, for one month, none came from 
 outside but talked about the abundant rain. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_55.htm">Next: 2:56: Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said,  When the Imam is delivering the ...</a></center>
 </body>