<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_816.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_818.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:815</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Aisha:</i></p>
 We set out with the Prophet with the intention of performing Hajj 
 only. The Prophet reached Mecca and performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and 
 between Safa and Marwa and did not finish the Ihram, because he had 
 the Hadi with him. His companions and his wives performed Tawaf (of 
 the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa), and those who had no Hadi with 
 them finished their Ihram. I got the menses and performed all the 
 ceremonies of Hajj. So, when the Night of Hasba (night of departure) 
 came, I said, "O Allah's Apostle! All your companions are returning 
 with Hajj and 'Umra except me." He asked me, "Didn't you perform Tawaf
 of the Ka'ba (Umra) when you reached Mecca?" I said, "No." He said, 
 "Go to Tan'im with your brother 'Abdur-Rahman, and assume Ihram for 
 'Umra and I will wait for you at such and such a place." So I went 
 with 'Abdur-Rahman to Tan'im and assumed Ihram for 'Umra. Then Safiya 
 bint Huyay got menses. The Prophet said, " 'Aqra Halqa! You will 
 detain us! Didn't you perform Tawaf-al-Ifada on the Day of Nahr 
 (slaughtering)?" She said, "Yes, I did." He said, "Then there is no 
 harm, depart." So I met the Prophet when he was ascending the heights 
 towards Mecca and I was descending, or vice-versa. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_818.htm">Next: 2:816: 'Abdul-Aziz bin Rufai: I asked Anas bin Malik,  Tell me something you have observed about the...</a></center>
 </body>