<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_94.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_96.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:96</h3><p><i>Narrated Aiyub:</i></p>
 Hafsa bint Sirin said, "On Id we used to forbid our girls to go out 
 for 'Id prayer. A lady came and stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf 
 and I went to her. She said, 'The husband of my sister took part in 
 twelve holy battles along with the Prophet and my sister was with her 
 husband in six of them. My sister said that they used to nurse the 
 sick and treat the wounded. Once she asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! If a 
 woman has no veil, is there any harm if she does not come out (on 'Id 
 day)?' The Prophet said, 'Her companion should let her share her veil 
 with her, and the women should participate in the good deeds and in 
 the religious gatherings of the believers.' " Hafsa added, "When 
 Um-'Atiya came, I went to her and asked her, 'Did you hear anything 
 about so-and-so?' Um-'Atlya said, 'Yes, let my father be sacrificed 
 for the Prophet (p.b.u.h). (And whenever she mentioned the name of the
 Prophet she always used to say, 'Let my father be' sacrificed for 
 him). He said, 'Virgin mature girls staying often screened (or said, 
 'Mature girls and virgins staying often screened--Aiyub is not sure as
 which was right) and menstruating women should come out (on the 'Id 
 day). But the menstruating women should keep away from the Musalla. 
 And all the women should participate in the good deeds and in the 
 religious gatherings of the believers'." Hafsa said, "On that I said 
 to Um-'Atiya, 'Also those who are menstruating?' " Um-'Atiya replied, 
 "Yes. Do they not present themselves at 'Arafat and elsewhere?". 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_96.htm">Next: 2:97: Um-'Atiya: We were ordered to go out (for 'Id) and also to take along with us the...</a></center>
 </body>