<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_262.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_264.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:263</h3><p><i>Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :</i></p>
 The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to teach us the way of doing Istikhara 
 (Istikhara means to ask Allah to guide one to the right sort of action
 concerning any job or a deed), in all matters as he taught us the 
 Suras of the Quran. He said, "If anyone of you thinks of doing any job
 he should offer a two Rakat prayer other than the compulsory ones and 
 say (after the prayer): -- 'Allahumma inni astakhiruka bi'ilmika, Wa 
 astaqdiruka bi-qudratika, Wa as'alaka min fadlika al-'azlm Fa-innaka 
 taqdiru Wala aqdiru, Wa ta'lamu Wala a'lamu, Wa anta 'allamu l-ghuyub.
 Allahumma, in kunta ta'lam anna hadha-l-amra Khairun li fi dini wa 
 ma'ashi wa'aqibati amri (or 'ajili amri wa'ajilihi) Faqdirhu wa 
 yas-sirhu li thumma barik li Fihi, Wa in kunta ta'lamu anna 
 hadha-lamra shar-run li fi dini wa ma'ashi wa'aqibati amri (or 
 fi'ajili amri wa ajilihi) Fasrifhu anni was-rifni anhu. Waqdir li 
 al-khaira haithu kana Thumma ardini bihi.' (O Allah! I ask guidance 
 from Your knowledge, And Power from Your Might and I ask for Your 
 great blessings. You are capable and I am not. You know and I do not 
 and You know the unseen. O Allah! If You know that this job is good 
 for my religion and my subsistence and in my Hereafter--(or said: If 
 it is better for my present and later needs)--Then You ordain it for 
 me and make it easy for me to get, And then bless me in it, and if You
 know that this job is harmful to me In my religion and subsistence and
 in the Hereafter--(or said: If it is worse for my present and later 
 needs)--Then keep it away from me and let me be away from it. And 
 ordain for me whatever is good for me, And make me satisfied with it).
 The Prophet added that then the person should name (mention) his need.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_264.htm">Next: 2:264: Abu Qatada bin Rabi Al-Ansari; The Prophet said,  If anyone of you enters a Mosque, he should not sit...</a></center>
 </body>