<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_375.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_377.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:375</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Ubaidullah bin Abi Mulaika:</i></p>
 One of the daughters of 'Uthman died at Mecca. We went to attend her 
 funeral procession. Ibn 'Umar and Ibn Abbas were also present. I sat 
 in between them (or said, I sat beside one of them. Then a man came 
 and sat beside me.) 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said to 'Amr bin 'Uthman, 
 "Will you not prohibit crying as Allah's Apostle has said, 'The dead 
 person is tortured by the crying of his relatives.?" Ibn Abbas said, 
 "Umar used to say so." Then he added narrating, "I accompanied Umar on
 a journey from Mecca till we reached Al-Baida. There he saw some 
 travelers in the shade of a Samura (A kind of forest tree). He said 
 (to me), "Go and see who those travelers are." So I went and saw that 
 one of them was Suhaib. I told this to 'Umar who then asked me to call
 him. So I went back to Suhaib and said to him, "Depart and follow the 
 chief of the faithful believers." Later, when 'Umar was stabbed, 
 Suhaib came in weeping and saying, "O my brother, O my friend!" (on 
 this 'Umar said to him, "O Suhaib! Are you weeping for me while the 
 Prophet said, "The dead person is punished by some of the weeping of 
 his relatives?" Ibn Abbas added, "When 'Umar  died I told all this to 
 Aisha and she said, 'May Allah be merciful to Umar. By Allah, Allah's 
 Apostle did not say that a believer is punished by the weeping of his 
 relatives. But he said, Allah increases the punishment of a 
 non-believer because of the weeping of his relatives." Aisha further 
 added, "The Quran is sufficient for you (to clear up this point) as 
 Allah has stated: 'No burdened soul will bear another's burden.' " 
 (35.18). Ibn Abbas then said, "Only Allah makes one laugh or cry." Ibn
 Umar did not say anything after that. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_377.htm">Next: 2:376: 'Aisha: (the wife of the Prophet) Once Allah's Apostle passed by (the grave ...</a></center>
 </body>