<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_334.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_336.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:333</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Aisha :</i></p>
 Abu Bakr came riding his horse from his dwelling place in As-Sunh. He 
 got down from it, entered the Mosque and did not speak with anybody 
 till he came to me and went direct to the Prophet, who was covered 
 with a marked blanket. Abu Bakr uncovered his face. He knelt down and 
 kissed him and then started weeping and said, "My father and my mother
 be sacrificed for you, O Allah's Prophet! Allah will not combine two 
 deaths on you. You have died the death which was written for you." 
 <p>
 was addressing the people, and Abu Bakr told him to sit down but 'Umar
 refused. Abu Bakr again told him to sit down but 'Umar again refused. 
 Then Abu Bakr recited the Tashah-hud (i.e. none has the right to be 
 worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is Allah's Apostle) and the people 
 attended to Abu Bakr and left 'Umar. Abu Bakr said, "Amma ba'du, 
 whoever amongst you worshipped Muhammad, then Muhammad is dead, but 
 whoever worshipped Allah, Allah is alive and will never die. Allah 
 said: 'Muhammad is no more than an Apostle and indeed (many) Apostles 
 have passed away before him ..(up to the) grateful.' " (3.144) (The 
 narrator added, "By Allah, it was as if the people never knew that 
 Allah had revealed this verse before till Abu Bakr recited it and then
 whoever heard it, started reciting it ") 
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_336.htm">Next: 2:334: Kharija bin Zaid bin Thabit: Um Al-'Ala', an Ansari woman who gave the pledge of allegiance to the ...</a></center>
 </body>