<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_326.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_328.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:325</h3><p><i>Narrated Kuraib:</i></p>
 I was sent to Aisha by Ibn Abbas, Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and 
 'Abdur-Rahman bin Azhar . They told me to greet her on their behalf 
 and to ask her about the offering of the two Rakat after the 'Asr 
 prayer and to say to her, "We were informed that you offer those two 
 Rakat and we were told that the Prophet had forbidden offering them." 
 Ibn Abbas said, "I along with 'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to beat the 
 people whenever they offered them." I went to Aisha and told her that 
 message. 'Aisha said, "Go and ask Um Salama about them." So I returned
 and informed them about her statement. They then told me to go to Um 
 Salama with the same question with which t sent me to 'Aisha. Um 
 Salama replied, "I heard the Prophet forbidding them. Later I saw him 
 offering them immediately after he prayed the 'Asr prayer. He then 
 entered my house at a time when some of the Ansari women from the 
 tribe of Bani Haram were sitting with me, so I sent my slave girl to 
 him having said to her, 'Stand beside him and tell him that Um Salama 
 says to you, "O Allah's Apostle! I have heard you forbidding the 
 offering of these (two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer) but I have seen 
 you offering them." If he waves his hand then wait for him.' The slave
 girl did that. The Prophet beckoned her with his hand and she waited 
 for him. When he had finished the prayer he said, "O daughter of Bani 
 Umaiya! You have asked me about the two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer. 
 The people of the tribe of 'Abdul-Qais came to me and made me busy and
 I could not offer the two Rakat after the Zuhr prayer. These (two 
 Rakat that I have just prayed) are for those (missed) ones. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_328.htm">Next: 2:326: Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi : The news about the differences amongst the people of Bani'Amr bin 'Auf...</a></center>
 </body>