<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_141.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_143.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:143</h3><p><i>Narrated Anas bin Malik:</i></p>
 In the life-time of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the people were 
 afflicted with a (famine) year. While the Prophet was delivering the 
 Khutba (sermon) on the pulpit on a Friday, a Bedouin stood up and 
 said, "O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the families 
 (offspring) are hungry: please pray to Allah to bless us with rain." 
 Allah's Apostle raised both his hands towards the sky and at that time
 there was not a trace of cloud in they sky. Then the clouds started 
 gathering like mountains. Before he got down from the pulpit I saw 
 rain-water trickling down his beard. It rained that day, the next day,
 the third day, the fourth day and till the next Friday, when the same 
 Bedouin or some other person stood up (during the Friday Khutba) and 
 said, "O Allah's Apostle! The houses have collapsed and the livestock 
 are drowned. Please invoke Allah for us." So Allah's Apostle raised 
 both his hands and said, "O Allah! Around us and not on us." Whichever
 side the Prophet directed his hand, the clouds dispersed from there 
 till a hole (in the clouds) was formed over Medina. The valley of 
 Qanat remained flowing (with water) for one month and none, came from 
 outside who didn't talk about the abundant rain. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_143.htm">Next: 2:144: Anas: Whenever a strong wind blew, anxiety appeared on the face of the ...</a></center>
 </body>