<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_125.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_127.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:127</h3><p><i>Narrated Sharik:</i></p>
 Anas bin Malik said, "A person entered the Mosque on a Friday through 
 the gate facing the Daril-Qada' and Allah's Apostle was standing 
 delivering the Khutba (sermon). The man stood in front of Allah's 
 Apostle and said, 'O Allah's Apostle, livestock are dying and the 
 roads are cut off; please pray to Allah for rain.' So Allah's Apostle 
 (p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Bless us with 
 rain. O Allah! Bless us with rain. O Allah! Bless us with rain!" Anas 
 added, "By Allah, there were no clouds in the sky and there was no 
 house or building between us and the mountain of Silas'. Then a big 
 cloud like a shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Silas Mountain) and 
 when it came in the middle of the sky, it spread and then rained. By 
 Allah! We could not see the sun for a week. The next Friday, a person 
 entered through the same gate and Allah's Apostle was delivering the 
 Friday Khutba and the man stood in front of him and said, 'O Allah's 
 Apostle! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut off; Please 
 pray to Allah to withhold rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's Apostle raised
 both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Round about us and not on us. O 
 Allah!' On the plateaus, on the mountains, on the hills, in the 
 valleys and on the places where trees grow.' " Anas added, "The rain 
 stopped and we came out, walking in the sun." Sharik asked Anas 
 whether it was the same person who had asked for rain the previous 
 Friday. Anas replied that he did not know. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_127.htm">Next: 2:128: Qatada: Anas I said,  While Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was delivering the ...</a></center>
 </body>