<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_540.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_542.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:540</h3><p><i>Narrated Ishaq bin 'Abdullah bin Al Talha:</i></p>
 I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "Abu Talha had more property of 
 date-palm trees gardens than any other amongst the Ansar in Medina and
 the most beloved of them to him was Bairuha garden, and it was in 
 front of the Mosque of the Prophet . Allah's Apostle used to go there 
 and used to drink its nice water." Anas added, "When these verses were
 revealed:--'By no means shall you Attain righteousness unless You 
 spend (in charity) of that Which you love. '   (3.92) Abu Talha said 
 to Allah's Apostle 'O Allah's Apostle! Allah, the Blessed, the 
 Superior says: By no means shall you attain righteousness, unless you 
 spend (in charity) of that which you love. And no doubt, Bairuha' 
 garden is the most beloved of all my property to me. So I want to give
 it in charity in Allah's Cause. I expect its reward from Allah. O 
 Allah's Apostle! Spend it where Allah makes you think it feasible.' On
 that Allah's Apostle said, 'Bravo! It is useful property. I have heard
 what you have said (O Abu Talha), and I think it would be proper if 
 you gave it to your Kith and kin.' Abu Talha said, I will do so, O 
 Allah's Apostle.' Then Abu Talha distributed that garden amongst his 
 relatives and his cousins." 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_542.htm">Next: 2:541: Abu Said Al-Khudri On 'Id ul Fitr or 'Id ul Adha Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) went out to ...</a></center>
 </body>