<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_93.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_95.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:95</h3><p><i>Narrated Ibn Juraij:</i></p>
 'Ata' told me that he had heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, "The 
 Prophet stood up to offer the prayer of the 'Id ul Fitr. He first 
 offered the prayer and then delivered the Khutba. After finishing it 
 he got down (from the pulpit) and went towards the women and advised 
 them while he was leaning on Bilal's hand. Bilal was spreading out his
 garment where the women were putting their alms." I asked 'Ata' 
 whether it was the Zakat of 'Id ul Fitr. He said, "No, it was just 
 alms given at that time. Some lady put her finger ring and the others 
 would do the same." I said, (to 'Ata'), "Do you think that it is 
 incumbent upon the Imam to give advice to the women (on 'Id day)?" He 
 said, "No doubt, it is incumbent upon the Imams to do so and why 
 should they not do so?" Al-Hasan bin Muslim told me that Ibn  Abbas 
 had said, "I join the Prophet, Abu Bakr,  Umar and 'Uthman in the 'Id 
 ul Fitr prayers. They used to offer the prayer before the Khutba and 
 then they used to deliver the Khutba afterwards. Once the Prophet I 
 came out (for the 'Id prayer) as if I were just observing him waving 
 to the people to sit down. He, then accompanied by Bilal, came 
 crossing the rows till he reached the women. He recited the following 
 verse: 'O Prophet! When the believing women come to you to take the 
 oath of fealty to you . . . (to the end of the verse) (60.12).' After 
 finishing the recitation he said, "O ladies! Are you fulfilling your 
 covenant?" None except one woman said, "Yes." Hasan did not know who 
 was that woman. The Prophet said, "Then give alms." Bilal spread his 
 garment and said, "Keep on giving alms. Let my father and mother 
 sacrifice their lives for you (ladies)." So the ladies kept on putting
 their Fatkhs (big rings) and other kinds of rings in Bilal's garment."
 Abdur-Razaq said, " 'Fatkhs' is a big ring which used to be worn in 
 the (Pre-lslamic) period of ignorance. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_95.htm">Next: 2:96: Aiyub: Hafsa bint Sirin said,  On Id we used to forbid our girls to go out ...</a></center>
 </body>