<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_714.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_716.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:713</h3><p><i>Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:</i></p>
 The Prophet and his companions assumed Ihram for Hajj and none except 
 the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and Talha had the Hadi (sacrifice) with them. 
 'Ali arrived from Yemen and had a Hadi with him. 'Ali said, "I have 
 assumed Ihram for what the Prophet has done." The Prophet ordered his 
 companions to perform the 'Umra with the lhram which they had assumed,
 and after finishing Tawaf (of Ka'ba, Safa and Marwa) to cut short 
 their hair, and to finish their lhram except those who had Hadi with 
 them. They (the people) said, "How can we proceed to Mina (for Hajj) 
 after having sexual relations with our wives?" When that news reached 
 the Prophet he said, "If I had formerly known what I came to know 
 lately, I would not have brought the Hadi with me. Had there been no 
 Hadi with me, I would have finished the state of lhram." 'Aisha got 
 her menses, so she performed all the ceremonies of Hajj except Tawaf 
 of the Ka'ba, and when she got clean (from her menses), she performed 
 Tawaf of the Ka'ba. She said, "O Allah's Apostle! (All of you) are 
 returning with the Hajj and 'Umra, but I am returning after performing
 Hajj only." So the Prophet ordered 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr to 
 accompany her to Tan'im and thus she performed the 'Umra after the 
 Hajj. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_716.htm">Next: 2:714: Hafsa: (On 'Id) We used to forbid our virgins to go out (for 'Id prayer). A ...</a></center>
 </body>