<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_437.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_439.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:437</h3><p><i>Narrated Ibn 'Umar:</i></p>
 'Umar set out along with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) with a group of people 
 to Ibn Saiyad till they saw him playing with the boys near the 
 hillocks of Bani Mughala. Ibn Saiyad at that time was nearing his 
 puberty and did not notice (us) until the Prophet stroked him with his
 hand and said to him, "Do you testify that I am Allah's Apostle?" Ibn 
 Saiyad looked at him and said, "I testify that you are the Messenger 
 of illiterates." Then Ibn Saiyad asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h), "Do you 
 testify that I am Allah's Apostle?" The Prophet (p.b.u.h) refuted it 
 and said, "I believe in Allah and His Apostles." Then he said (to Ibn 
 Saiyad), "What do you think?" Ibn Saiyad answered, "True people and 
 liars visit me." The Prophet said, "You have been confused as to this 
 matter." Then the Prophet said to him, "I have kept something (in my 
 mind) for you, (can you tell me that?)" Ibn Saiyad said, "It is 
 Al-Dukh (the smoke)." (2) The Prophet said, "Let you be in ignominy. 
 You cannot cross your limits." On that 'Umar, said, "O Allah's 
 Apostle! Allow me to chop his head off." The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, 
 "If he is he (i.e. Dajjal), then you cannot over-power him, and if he 
 is not, then there is no use of murdering him." (Ibn 'Umar added): 
 Later on Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) once again went along with Ubai bin
 Ka'b to the date-palm trees (garden) where Ibn Saiyad was staying. The
 Prophet (p.b.u.h) wanted to hear something from Ibn Saiyad before Ibn 
 Saiyad could see him, and the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saw him lying covered 
 with a sheet and from where his murmurs were heard. Ibn Saiyad's 
 mother saw Allah's Apostle while he was hiding himself behind the 
 trunks of the date-palm trees. She addressed Ibn Saiyad, "O Saf ! (and
 this was the name of Ibn Saiyad) Here is Muhammad." And with that Ibn 
 Saiyad got up. The Prophet said, "Had this woman left him (Had she not
 disturbed him), then Ibn Saiyad would have revealed the reality of his
 case. 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_439.htm">Next: 2:438: Anas: A young Jewish boy used to serve the Prophet and he became sick. So ...</a></center>
 </body>