<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_74.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_76.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:76</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:</i></p>
 The Prophet used to proceed to the Musalla on the days of Id-ul-Fitr 
 and Id-ul-Adha; the first thing to begin with was the prayer and after
 that he would stand in front of the people and the people would keep 
 sitting in their rows. Then he would preach to them, advise them and 
 give them orders, (i.e. Khutba). And after that if he wished to send 
 an army for an expedition, he would do so; or if he wanted to give and
 order, he would do so, and then depart. The people followed this 
 tradition till I went out with Marwan, the Governor of Medina, for the
 prayer of Id-ul-Adha or Id-ul-Fitr.
 <p>
 When we reached the Musalla, there was a pulpit made by Kathir bin 
 As-Salt. Marwan wanted to get up on that pulpit before the prayer. I 
 got hold of his clothes but he pulled them and ascended the pulpit and
 delivered the Khutba before the prayer. I said to him, "By Allah, you 
 have changed (the Prophet's tradition)." He replied, "O Abu Sa'id! 
 Gone is that which you know." I said, "By Allah! What I know is better
 than what I do not know." Marwan said, "People do not sit to listen to
 our Khutba after the prayer, so I delivered the Khutba before the 
 prayer."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_76.htm">Next: 2:77: 'Abdullah bin Umar: Allah's Apostle used to offer the prayer of 'Id-ul-Adha and ...</a></center>
 </body>