<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh2_559.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh2_561.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 2:559</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi</i></p>
 We took part in the holy battle of Tabuk in the company of the Prophet
 and when we arrived at the Wadi-al-Qura, there was a woman in her 
 garden. The Prophet asked his companions to estimate the amount of the
 fruits in the garden, and Allah's Apostle estimated it at ten Awsuq 
 (One Wasaq = 60 Sa's) and 1 Sa'= 3 kg. approximately). The Prophet 
 said to that lady, "Check what your garden will yield." When we 
 reached Tabuk, the Prophet said, "There will be a strong wind to-night
 and so no one should stand and whoever has a camel, should fasten it."
 So we fastened our camels. A strong wind blew at night and a man stood
 up and he was blown away to a mountain called Taiy, The King of Aila 
 sent a white mule and a sheet for wearing to the Prophet as a present,
 and wrote to the Prophet that his people would stay in their place 
 (and will pay Jizya taxation.) (1) When the Prophet reached 
 Wadi-al-Qura he asked that woman how much her garden had yielded. She 
 said, "Ten Awsuq," and that was what Allah's Apostle had estimated. 
 Then the Prophet said, "I want to reach Medina quickly, and whoever 
 among you wants to accompany me, should hurry up."  The sub-narrator 
 Ibn Bakkar said something which meant: When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saw 
 Medina he said, "This is Taba." And when he saw the mountain of Uhud, 
 he said, "This mountain loves us and we love it. Shall I tell you of 
 the best amongst the Ansar?" They replied in the affirmative. He said,
 "The family of Bani-n-Najjar, and then the family of Bani Sa'ida or 
 Bani Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj. (The above-mentioned are the best) but 
 there is goodness in all the families of Ansar." 
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh2_561.htm">Next: 2:560: Salim bin 'Abdullah from his father: The Prophet said,  On a land irrigated by rain water or by natural ...</a></center>
 </body>