<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Africa</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="jas087.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="jas089.htm">Next</a> 
 <br> <a href="jas088n.htm">[Note]</a></center>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">88. The Two Bulls.</h3>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Alexander Foster, Maroon Town, Cock-pit country.</p>
 <p>One time there is a bull range the common,--call the pen "Garshen pen." That bull wouldn't 'low no bull-calf to born an' to raise in that pen barring out him one; but every heifer born,</p>
 <p>{p. 112}</p>
 <p>him nurse them, go about lick them, nourish them, make them grow fine! Until one time cow was heavy, climb up into a high mountain an' have a calf, an' when the calf born he is a bull calf. Now that ol' bull we call him "Ol' Moody," an' the young bull name 'Tep'y-tep'y to-day.'</p>
 <p>The mother stay until the calf grow a tremendous bull, carry down that bull come to de river to drink water. Every time the father come to drink water, him go away, so then when the son come, the son try to put foot in the father track, an' the bull mamma say to him, "No, me son, de track no fit to' you fader yet," make her carry him back a couple of days more. Now at twelve o'clock in the day, mother carry down the bull again, try foot for him father again. Now he feel to himself that he come a man, an' he stan' up same place an' say to him mother, "Mus' see me father to-day."--"Massy, me son, yo' pa so cruel, have a dread to carry son go!" He stan' up holla, "Ma, I gwine go! I gwine try to see me father!" an' he raise a sing now,--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"Santy Moody o, Tep'y-tep'y deh!<br>
 Santy Moody o, Tep'y-tep'y deh!"</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>De ol' bull gwine answer him now,--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"Hum-um-m, wha' you say?<br>
 Me jus' a go a brudder Dickey an' Santy,<br>
 Moody say me mustn't go."</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>Coming up the common to meet him father, (like) when a pretty man coming up, you see all de young girl for dat gentleman; an' he sing coming,</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"Santy Moody o, Tep'y-tep'y deh!"</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>De ol' bull answer him,</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"Hum-um-m, wha' you say?<br>
 Me jus' a go a brudder Dickey an' Santy,<br>
 Moody say me mustn't go."</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>Meet to fight now, an' de ol' toss up him son into 'the air an' he drop on four feet. An' the son lif' him up in de air now; when de fader coming down, one foot break. An' he 'tamp on de t'ree foot an' lif' him son higher again. An' him son lif' him up again in de air, an' when he comming again, break one of de other foot. An' all de cow now running to the river for water wouldn't bother with the ol' bull at all, everybody for the young one. An' lif' up de young bull again deh 'pon him two foot, lif up in de air, an' de young bull drop on him four foot back. An' de young bull lif' him up again; when he drop, he break de udder</p>
 <p>{p. 113}</p>
 <p>foot. Lif' up de son again, but he couldn't go too far wid him; an' his son lif' him up in de air again break de udder foot. An' he lay down on him belly fe fight an' lif' up him son, but him couldn't go too far wid him foot. An' him son lif' him up de las', now, lif' him up in de air; an' when him come down, break him neck. An' from dat day, all young bull grow in pen; not'ing to destroy dem.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="jas089.htm">Next: 89. Ballinder Bull.</a></center>
 </body>