<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Africa</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="jas114.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="jas116.htm">Next</a> 
 <br> <a href="jas115n.htm">[Note]</a></center>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">115. Jack and the Devil.</h3>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Richard Pottinger, Claremont, St. Anne.</p>
 <p>Devil had his company in his house, had a woman also locked up while Jack, his servant, was heating the oven. Somebody was expected from home. Jack was very fond of that girl, promised her that if anybody will come from home, he will keep heating the oven. The two of them arrange that she will keep singing--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"Wah wah oo, wah wah oo, wah wah oo,<br>
 Nobody coming from Prince of Wales?"</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>Jack now (answers),</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"No, no, madame; no, no, madame; no, no, madame;<br>
 Nobody coming from Prince of Wales."</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The master came to the window; "Jack, is the oven hot?"--"No, Master, not yet hot." Jack put in two bundles of wood more. About an hour after, the girl began the same song. Jack gave the same reply. Master came again; "Jack, is the oven hot?"--"No, Master, not yet hot." The girl's father came. The girl started singing--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"Wah wah oo, wah wah oo, wah wah oo,<br>
 Nobody coming from Prince of Wales?"</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>Jack says,</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"Yes, yes, madame! yes, yes, madame! yes, yes, madame!<br>
 Somebody coming from Prince of Wales!"</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The master came to the window; "Jack, is the oven hot?"--"Yes, Master, red-hot!" Corning down the staircase the father drew a revolver and shot him. Jack has to put him in, the oven, and Jack, the girl, and all the company make a feast of him. The father took Jack and the girl back to his house and married them both for life.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="jas116.htm">Next: 116. Jack's Riddle.</a></center>
 </body>