<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Africa</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="jas129.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="jas131.htm">Next</a> 
 <br> <a href="jas130n.htm">[Note]</a></center>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">130. Clever Molly May.</h3>
 <i></i><p align="CENTER">Emily Alexander, Mandeville.</p>
 <p>Once Anansi went out to invite a friend to dinner, Little Molly May was his servant, so he left her to roast a turkey for dinner, Anansi filled the wine-jug, laid the table, put on his frock coat and his top hat, took his walking-stick and went out for his friend. Molly May roasted the turkey. Seeing that it looked so nice and charming, she thought that she would take a piece; so she did, and it tasted so nice she took another piece. That tasted so nice she took a next piece and a sip of the wine, and she sipped and tasted till at last she had eaten up the whole turkey and drunk the whole of the wine.</p>
 <p>She saw the master coming; so she ran in swift haste, took up the bones, fixed them nicely in the dish, covered the dish, and carried it and laid it on the table. When the master came, he sent the visitor into the house and said to Molly May, "Hullo, deh! everyt'ing all right?" She said, "Yes, sah! all is right." So the master took up the carving-knife and went outside to sharpen it. Molly ran inside and told the visitor that the master was sharpening the knife to cut off one of his hands; the visitor in swift haste left the house. Then Molly went outside and told the master that the visitor had eaten all the turkey and drunk the wine. The master ran through one door and, seeing all the bones on the table, went through the other. The visitor was running for his life and Anansi went running after him, calling "Leave one! leave one!" He meant leave one (side of) the turkey, but the visitor thought he meant one of his hands, so he ran for his life.</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="jas131.htm">Next: 131. Dancing to Anansi's Fiddle.</a></center>
 </body>