<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Journals</a> <a href="../../hin/etc/index.htm">Hindu Articles</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <h1 align="center">Mârka.n.deya Purâ.na.<br>
 Books VII and VIII.</h1>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <h2 align="center">JOURNAL</h2>
 
 <p align="center"><small>OF</small></p>
 
 <h2 align="center">THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.</h2>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <h4 align="center">[New Series, Volume XIII]</h4>
 
 <h6 align="center">[London, Trübner and Company]</h6>
 
 <h4 align="center">[1881]</h4>
 
 <h6 align="center">{Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May 2002}</h6>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 355------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_355"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 355</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p align="center">ART. XIII.--<i>Translation of the Mârka.n.deya Purâ.na</i>. Books VII. VIII. By the Rev. B. HALE WORTHAM.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <table align="center">
 
 <tr><td><p align="center">BOOK VII.</p>
 
 ONCE upon earth there lived a saintly king<br>
 Named Harišchandra; pure in heart and mind,<br>
 In virtue eminent, he ruled the world,<br>
 Guarding mankind from evil. While he reigned<br>
 No famine raged, nor pain; untimely death<br>
 Ne'er cut men off; nor were the citizens<br>
 Of his fair city lawless. All their wealth,<br>
 And power, and works of righteousness, ne'er filled<br>
 Their hearts with pride; in everlasting youth<br>
 And loveliness the women passed their days.<br>
    It so fell out, that while this mighty king<br>
 Was hunting in the forest, that he heard<br>
 The sound of female voices raised in cry<br>
 Of supplication. Then he turned and said,<br>
 Leaving the deer to fly unheeded: "Stop!<br>
 Who art thou, full of tyranny and hate,<br>
 That darest thus oppress the earth; while I,<br>
 The tamer of all evil, live and rule?"<br>
 Then, too, the fierce Ganeša,--he who blinds<br>
 The eyes, and foils the wills of men,--he heard<br>
 The cry, and thus within himself he thought:<br>
 "This surely is the great ascetic's work,<br>
 The mighty Višvâmitra; he whose acts<br>
 Display the fruits of penance hard and sore.<br>
 Upon the sciences he shows his power,<br>
 While they, in patience, discipline of mind,<br>
 And silence perfected, cry out with fear,<br>
 'What shall we do? The illustrious Kaušika<br>
 Is powerful; and we, compared with him,<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 356------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_356"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 356</font></a>
 
 Are feeble.' Thus they cry. What shall I do?<br>
 My mind is filled with doubt. Yet stay; a thought<br>
 Has come across me: Lo! this king who cries<br>
 Unceasingly, 'Fear not!' meeting with him,<br>
 And entering his heart, I will fulfil<br>
 All my desire." Then filled with Rudra's son--<br>
 Inspired with rage by Vigna Raj--the king<br>
 Spake up and said: "What evil doer is here,<br>
 Binding the fire on his garment's hem,<br>
 While I, his king, in power and arms renowned,<br>
 Resplendent in my glory, pass for nought?<br>
 Surely the never-ending sleep of death<br>
 Shall overtake him, and his limbs shall fail,<br>
 Smitten with darts from my far-reaching bow,<br>
 Whose fame this lower world may scarce contain."<br>
 Hearing the prince's words, the saint was filled<br>
 With wrath o'erpow'ring, and the sciences<br>
 Fell blasted in a moment at his glance.<br>
    But when the king beheld the pious sage<br>
 All-powerful, he quaked exceedingly,<br>
 And trembled like the sacred fig-tree's leaves.<br>
 Then Višvâmitra cried: "Stop, miscreant!"<br>
 And Harišchandra, humbly falling down<br>
 Before the saint, in accents low and meek:<br>
 "O Lord! most holy! most adorable!<br>
 Oh, blame me not! This is no fault of mine!<br>
 My duty calls," he said, "I must obey."<br>
 "Is it not written in the Holy Law,<br>
 'Alms must be given by a virtuous king;<br>
 His people must be fought for, and be kept<br>
 From every ill'?" Then Višvâmitra spoke<br>
 And said: "To whom, O king, should'st thou give alms?<br>
 For whom in battle should'st thou fight? and whom<br>
 Should'st thou protect? Oh, tell me, nor delay,<br>
 But quickly answer, if thou fearest sin."<br>
 "Alms should be given to Brâhmans," said the king:<br>
 "Those who are weak should be protected: foes<br>
 In battle should be met and overcome."<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 357------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_357"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 357</font></a>
 
 <br>
    Then Višvâmitra spoke and said: "O king!<br>
 If thus indeed thou rightly dost perceive<br>
 Thy royal duty, give thine alms to me;<br>
 I am a holy Brâhman, and I seek<br>
 A dwelling-place; moreover I would gain<br>
 A wife: therefore bestow on me thine alms."<br>
 The king, his heart filled with exceeding joy,<br>
 Felt, as it were, his youth return, and said:<br>
 "Fear not! but tell me, son of Kaušika,<br>
 Thy heart's desire; and be it hard to gain,<br>
 Or be it easy, it shall still be thine.<br>
 Say, shall I give thee gold, or wealth, or life?<br>
 Or shall I give thee wife, or child, or land?<br>
 Or my prosperity itself?" "O king!"<br>
 The sage replied, "thy present I accept;<br>
 But let thine alms, I pray, be granted first,--<br>
 The offering for the kingly sacrifice."<br>
 "O Brâhman!" said the king, "the alms are thine;<br>
 Further than this, whatever be the gift<br>
 Thou mayest desire, freely I give it thee.<br>
 Ask what thou wilt." Then Višvâmitra spake:<br>
 "Give me the earth, its mountains, seas, and towns,<br>
 With all its kingdoms, chariots, horses, men;<br>
 Its elephants, its treasure-houses too;<br>
 Its treasures vast, and all whate'er beside<br>
 Is recognized as thine: oh! give me all,<br>
 I pray, except thyself, thy wife, thy son,<br>
 And this thy righteousness, that follows close<br>
 Beside thee. Sinless one! oh thou who art<br>
 Perfect in righteousness! oh give me all--<br>
 All beside these. What need of further words."<br>
    The king, with heart rejoicing, and unchanged<br>
 In countenance, hearing the sage's words,<br>
 Said, humbly bowing down before the saint,<br>
 "So be thy wish fulfilled." "O saintly king,"<br>
 Said Višvâmitra, "if the world is mine,<br>
 And power, and wealth, I pray you who shall reign,<br>
 Since in this kingdom as a devotee<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 358------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_358"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 358</font></a>
 
 I dwell?" Then Harišchandra said: "'Ere this,<br>
 Before the world was thine by my free gift,<br>
 Thou wast the lord of all; how much more now?<br>
 Thy right is doubly sure." Then said the sage:<br>
 "If this indeed be so,--if the whole world<br>
 Be truly mine, and all its sovereignty,<br>
 Then should'st thou not remain, nor leave thyself<br>
 Aught of that kingdom which thou hast renounced,<br>
 But, casting off thy royal ornaments,<br>
 Thou should'st depart, clothed in a dress of bark."<br>
 The king, obedient to the sage's word,<br>
 Stripped off his royal dress, and, with his wife<br>
 And son, made haste to go. Then said the saint:<br>
 "Stop, Harišchandra! Hast thou then forgot<br>
 The offering for the kingly sacrifice<br>
 That thou hast promised us?" Replied the king:<br>
 "O mighty saint! the kingdom now is <i>thine</i>;<br>
 All have I given to <i>thee</i>: and as for me,<br>
 What have I left?--nought! save myself,<br>
 My wife, my son!" "Thou sayest the truth, indeed,"<br>
 Answered the sage; "but yet there still remains<br>
 The offering for the kingly sacrifice.<br>
 And this know well: A vow to Brâhmans made,<br>
 If unfulfilled, works special woe to him<br>
 Who made the vow. For in this sacrifice<br>
 Must offerings of worth be freely made<br>
 To Brâhmans;--offerings until they cry<br>
 Hold! that suffices for us! Therefore pay<br>
 Thy promised vow, nor longer hesitate.<br>
 'Alms are for Brâhmans,' thou thyself hast said,<br>
 'Those who are weak must be protected: foes<br>
 In battle must be met and overcome.'"<br>
 "O saintly priest!" answered the king, "my wealth<br>
 Is all departed: nothing now remains<br>
 For me to give: yet grant me time I pray,<br>
 And I will pay the offering!" "Noble king,"<br>
 Said Višvâmitra, "speak I pray thee! Say<br>
 What time dost thou appoint that I should wait?<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 359------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_359"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 359</font></a>
 
 Speak! no delay! or else my curse of fire<br>
 Shall burn thee up." Then Harišchandra said:<br>
 "Most holy Brâhman! when a month has past<br>
 The money for the offering shall be thine.<br>
 Now I have nothing. Oh! be pleased to grant<br>
 Remission for the present." Said the sage,<br>
 "Go! go! most noble prince! maintain thy faith!<br>
 And may'st thou prosper! may no enemies<br>
 Harass thy road." Commanded thus, the king<br>
 Departed as an outcast;--he, the king<br>
 Of all the earth, an exile with his wife<br>
 Unused to go afoot, and with his son<br>
 Went forth: while cries and lamentations rose<br>
 On every side: "Our hearts are filled with pain,<br>
 Why dost thou leave us thus? O virtuous king!<br>
 Show mercy to thy subjects. Righteousness<br>
 Indeed shines forth in thee; if thou art full<br>
 Of mercy, may it overflow on us.<br>
 Stay! Mighty Prince! one moment, while we gaze<br>
 With lover's eyes upon thy beauteous form.<br>
 Alas! our Prince! Shall we ne'er see thee more?<br>
 How changed thy princely state! Thou, who did'st once<br>
 Go forth, surrounded by attendant kings,<br>
 Who marched on foot; while stately elephants<br>
 Bore e'en thy ministers. Now, Lord of Kings!<br>
 Thyself art driven forth on foot. Yet, stay!<br>
 Think, Harišchandra! how wilt thou endure<br>
 The dust, the heat, the toil? Stay, mighty prince,<br>
 Nor cast thy duty off. Oh, show to us<br>
 Some mercy, for herein thy duty lies.<br>
 Behold, we cast off all for thee! Our wives,<br>
 Our wealth, our children, our possessions, all<br>
 Have we relinquished; like thy shadow,<br>
 We would follow thee. Oh leave us not!<br>
 For wheresoe'er thou art is happiness,<br>
 And heaven itself would be no heaven to us<br>
 Without our prince." Then, overwhelmed with grief<br>
 At these laments, the king stayed on his course,<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 360------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_360"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 360</font></a>
 
 In pity for his loving citizens.<br>
 Then Višvâmitra, filled with rage, his eyes<br>
 Rolling with wrath, exclaimed: "Shame on thee! shame!<br>
 O full of falsehood, and of wickedness.<br>
 How! would'st thou, then, speaker of lies!<br>
 Resume the gifts that thou hast freely made,<br>
 And reinstate thee in thy kingdom?" "Sir!<br>
 I go!" replied the king to these rude words,<br>
 And trembling crept away in haste, his wife<br>
 Holding him by the hand. And, as she went,<br>
 Her fragile form o'ercome with weariness,<br>
 The Brâhman smote her fiercely with his stick.<br>
 Then Harišchandra, pained with inmost grief,<br>
 Seeing the stroke, said meekly, "Sir! I go!"<br>
 Nor further spoke. Filled with compassion then,<br>
 The Višvadevas said: "What sin is this?<br>
 What torments shall indeed suffice for him<br>
 By whom this pious king--the offerer<br>
 Of prayer, and sacrifice, has been cast forth.<br>
 Who now will sanctify the Soma-juice<br>
 With prayers and hymns, at the great sacrifice,<br>
 That we may drink it with rejoicing hearts?"<br>
    Then, having heard these words, the Brâhman turned<br>
 Upon the Višvedevâs; and, in wrath<br>
 Exceeding hot, he spake a fearful curse:<br>
 "You shall be cast down from the height of heaven,<br>
 And live as men." The curse had hardly passed<br>
 His lips, when filled with pity for their fate,<br>
 The sage yet further added: "you shall live<br>
 Indeed as men, but yet, there shall be born<br>
 To you no son, nor shall you know the state<br>
 Of marriage. Envy, love, and wrath shall ne'er<br>
 Hold sway o'er you: and when the appointed time<br>
 Has past, you shall re-enter once again<br>
 The courts of heaven, and wear again the form<br>
 Which you had lost." The Višvedevâs then<br>
 Came down from heaven, and, clothed in human form,<br>
 Were born as men, the sons of Pritha, wife<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 361------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_361"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 361</font></a>
 
 Of Pa.n.du. Therefore those five Pâ.n.davas--<br>
 Mighty in war--by Višvâmitra cursed,<br>
 Knew not the state of marriage. Thou hast heard<br>
 The tale of Pa.n.du's sons; thy question, too,<br>
 Of fourfold import has been answered.<br>
 I pray thee, say, what further would'st thou hear?<br>
 
  <br>
 
 <p align="center">BOOK VIII.</p>
 
 Said Jaimîni: An answer ye have found<br>
 To all my questions; and indeed have filled<br>
 Me full of deepest interest. Oh! I long<br>
 To hear yet more! Alas! that saintly king!<br>
 What grief he suffered! Did he e'er attain<br>
 To any comfort answering to his woe?<br>
 Noblest of Birds! Oh tell me this, I pray.<br>
    The Holy Birds continued: Then the king,<br>
 O'ercome with grief and pain, hearing the words<br>
 Of Višvâmitra, with his wife and son<br>
 Journeyed along, dragging his weary steps.<br>
 At length the holy place appeared in view--<br>
 The shrine of Šiva; thus within himself,<br>
 He said: "Benares, sacred to the god,<br>
 Lies now before me; there shall I find rest,<br>
 For there man has no power." The king approached<br>
 The gates on foot: lo! at the entry stood<br>
 The Brâhman Višvâmitra. Mighty Saint!<br>
 The king, his hands in supplication joined,<br>
 With humble reverence, said: "Here is my life,<br>
 My wife, my son, I offer all to thee;<br>
 Accept, I pray, the offering! or choose<br>
 Whatever else thou wouldest!" But the sage<br>
 Replied: "The month is past! most saintly king!<br>
 Give me the present for the sacrifice--<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 362------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_362"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 362</font></a>
 
 The offering thou hast promised." "One half-day<br>
 As yet remains before the month be past,<br>
 Oh Brâhman of surpassing piety,<br>
 And penances unfading. Wait, I pray,<br>
 A few short hours." Then Višvâmitra said:<br>
 "So be it, king! once more I will return,<br>
 But if the offering be not duly paid,<br>
 Before the sinking of this evening's sun,<br>
 My curse shall smite thee." And the priest<br>
 Departed, while the king, in anxious thought,<br>
 Debated thus: "How shall I make the gift?<br>
 The promised gift? where are my friends? my wealth?<br>
 I may not beg for alms; how can I then<br>
 Fulfil my vow? Nor even in the world<br>
 Beyond shall I find rest. Destruction waits,<br>
 If with my promise unfulfilled, I pass<br>
 From hence. A robber of the holy saints;<br>
 I shall become the lowest of the low.<br>
 Nay, I will sell myself! and, as a slave,<br>
 Redeem my promise." Then the queen, in tears<br>
 Bewildered, and afflicted, lost in thought,<br>
 With face cast down, "Maintain thy truth," she said,<br>
 "Most mighty prince! Oh! let not doubt prevail!<br>
 The man devoid of truth is to be shunned<br>
 Like contact with the dead. The highest law<br>
 Declares, that inward truth and faithfulness<br>
 Must be maintained. Burnt sacrifices, alms,<br>
 The study of the scriptures, penances,<br>
 Are counted not for righteousness to him<br>
 Whose word is faithless. Listen! noble prince!<br>
 Is it not written in the sacred law:<br>
 'The wise attain Salvation through the truth,<br>
 While lies and falsehood are destruction's way<br>
 To men of low and evil minds.' There lived,<br>
 'Tis said, a king upon the earth, by whom<br>
 The kingly sacrifice--burnt offerings too,<br>
 Were offered in abundance. That same king<br>
 Fell once from truthfulness, and by that fall,<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 363------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_363"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 363</font></a>
 
 He lost his righteousness, and forfeited<br>
 His place in heaven. Prince! I have borne a son"--<br>
 Her utterance failed her, issuing forth in nought<br>
 But sighs and lamentations. Then the king,<br>
 With eyes o'erflowing, said, "Behold thy son!<br>
 He stands beside thee! cast away thy grief!<br>
 Tell me what presses on thee." Said the queen,<br>
 "Prince, I have borne a son; and sons are born<br>
 To none but worthy women. This my son<br>
 Shall take me--he shall offer me for sale--<br>
 Then with the money gained, pay thou the priest<br>
 The promised offering." Hearing these words,<br>
 He fell down fainting. When his sense returned,<br>
 Filled with exceeding pain, the king burst forth,<br>
 Lamenting: "This, alas! most loving one!<br>
 Is hardly to be framed in words, much less<br>
 Be carried out in deed. Alas! alas!"--<br>
 His spirit fled again, and to the earth<br>
 He fell unconscious. Overcome with grief,<br>
 The queen exclaimed, filled with compassion: "King!<br>
 How art thou fallen from thy high estate!<br>
 The ground is now thy resting-place, whom once<br>
 A gorgeous couch received. Lo! this my lord,<br>
 By whom wealth, honour, power, are freely given<br>
 An offering to the Brâhman--see, he lies<br>
 Insensate on the ground. Ye gods of heaven!<br>
 Tell me, I pray you, has this noble king,<br>
 Equal to gods in rank, committed sin<br>
 Against you, that he lies thus overcome<br>
 With woe?" Then fell the queen, bereft of sense<br>
 Upon the earth, o'erwhelmed with grief and pain,<br>
 Seeing her husband's misery. When the boy<br>
 Beheld his parents lying on the ground,<br>
 He cried in terror: "Father! give me food!<br>
 Mother! my tongue is parched with thirst!" Meanwhile<br>
 Upon the scene the mighty Brâhman came;<br>
 And when he saw the king lie senseless, "King!"--<br>
 Sprinkling cold water on his face--he said,<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 364------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_364"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 364</font></a>
 
 "Rise up! rise up! Pay me the promised vow;<br>
 For this thy misery from day to day<br>
 Increases, and will yet increase, until<br>
 The debt be paid." The water's cooling touch<br>
 Refreshed the king; his consciousness returned;<br>
 But when he saw the Brâhman, faintness seized<br>
 His limbs again. Then overpowering rage<br>
 Seized Višvâmitra; but before he left,<br>
 The best of Brâhmans said: "If what is just,<br>
 Or right, or true, enters thy mind, O king!<br>
 Give me the present. Lo! by truth divine<br>
 The sun sends forth his vivifying rays<br>
 Upon the earth. By truth this mighty world<br>
 Stands firm and steadfast. Truth all law excels.<br>
 By truth the very heaven itself exists.<br>
 Wert thou to weigh the truth, and in the scale<br>
 Opposing, wert to place burnt-offerings,<br>
 And sacrifices countless, still the truth<br>
 Would far outweigh them all. Why need I waste<br>
 My words of loving-kindness upon thee--<br>
 An ill-intentioned, false, ignoble man.<br>
 Thou art a king,--so should the truth prevail<br>
 With thee. Yet hear me;--if the offering<br>
 Be still unpaid when th' evening's sun has sunk<br>
 Behind the western mountain to his rest,<br>
 My curse shall smite thee." Speaking words like these<br>
 The Brâhman left him; and the king, o'ercome<br>
 With fear--a fugitive--robbed of his wealth--<br>
 Degraded to unfathomable depths--<br>
 The victim of his evil creditor--<br>
 Heard once again the counsel of his wife:<br>
 "O king! sell <i>me</i>! nor let the fiery curse<br>
 Dissolve thy being!" Urged repeatedly,<br>
 The king at length replied: "Most loving one!<br>
 What the most wicked man could hardly do,<br>
 That same will I:--and I will sell my wife.<br>
 Alas! that I should utter such a word!"<br>
 And going with his wife into the town--<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 365------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_365"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 365</font></a>
 
 Eyes dimmed with tears, voice choked with grief--he cried:<br>
 "Come hither, townsmen! hearken unto me!<br>
 A wretch! inhuman! savage as a fiend!<br>
 I offer here my wife for sale, and yet<br>
 I live! Here is a female slave! Who buys?<br>
 Make haste and speak." "The female slave is mine!"<br>
 (So spake an ancient Brâhman to the king.)<br>
 "Money I have in heaps, and I will pay<br>
 You well for her. My wife is delicate;<br>
 Her household duties are beyond her strength;<br>
 I want a slave, and therefore I will give<br>
 A price proportioned to the woman's skill<br>
 And temper; nor will I o'erlook her youth<br>
 And beauty. What you think is fair and right,<br>
 That will I pay." Struck dumb with grief, the king<br>
 Stood mute, nor answered aught. And then the priest,<br>
 Tying the price in the king's garment-hem--<br>
 His bark-cloth garment--roughly grasped the queen,<br>
 And dragged her off. But when the loving child<br>
 Beheld his mother led away, he seized<br>
 Her by her garment. And the queen exclaimed:<br>
 "If only for a moment, noble sir!<br>
 Oh! let me go! that I may gaze once more<br>
 Upon my child, whom I shall never see,<br>
 And never touch again! My child, behold<br>
 Thy mother, now a slave! And thou--a prince!<br>
 Oh, touch me not! My lot of servitude<br>
 Forbids that thou should'st touch me." But the child,<br>
 His eyes bedewed with tears, ran after her,<br>
 Calling her "Mother!" As the boy came near,<br>
 The Brâhman spurned him with his foot; but he<br>
 Still following close would not be torn from her,<br>
 Calling her "Mother!" "Oh, my lord! I pray,<br>
 Be gracious to me!" said the queen. "Oh, buy<br>
 My son with me; divide us not! For I<br>
 Without him shall be nought of use to you.<br>
 Be gracious, O my lord!" Then said the priest:<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 366------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_366"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 366</font></a>
 
 "Here! take the money! give the boy to me!<br>
 The saints, who know the scriptures, have ordained<br>
 The right and lawful sum. Take it!" He tied<br>
 The money in the king's bark dress, and led<br>
 Them both away--the mother and the child--<br>
 Together bound. But when the king beheld<br>
 Himself bereft of both his wife and son,<br>
 He burst forth: "Ah! my wife! whom neither sun,<br>
 Nor moon, nor air have ever seen I who hast<br>
 Been kept from vulgar gaze! Alas I a slave<br>
 Hast thou become! Alas! thou, too, my son!--<br>
 A scion of the noble dynasty,<br>
 Sprung from the sun! disgrace has seized on thee,<br>
 And--shame upon me!--thou too art a slave!<br>
 Ye have become a sacrifice; ye, through my fault,<br>
 Have fallen. Would that I were dead!" Thus spoke<br>
 The king. Meanwhile the Brâhman hastily<br>
 Entered the grove wherein his dwelling stood,<br>
 And vanished with his slaves. Then met the king<br>
 The Brâhman Višvâmitra. "Prince!" he said,<br>
 Pay me the offering!" Harišchandra gave<br>
 The money gainèd by the shameful sale<br>
 Of wife and child. And when the priest beheld<br>
 The money, overcome with wrath, he said:<br>
 "How canst thou mock me with this paltry sum!<br>
 Base Kshatriya! And thinkest thou that this<br>
 Suffices for a sacrificial gift<br>
 Such as I would accept? But if thy mind<br>
 Thus far misleads thee, thou shalt feel my power--<br>
 Power transcendant, gained by penances,<br>
 And scripture meditation. Yes! the power<br>
 Of my pure Brâhmanhood shall show itself<br>
 On thee." "More will I give thee," said the king,<br>
 "But wait, most noble saint! Nought have I left!<br>
 Even my wife and child are sold." Replied<br>
 The Brâhman: "Hold! be silent! Further time<br>
 Than the remaining fourth part of to-day<br>
 I grant thee not." Enraged, he turned away,<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 367------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_367"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 367</font></a>
 
 Departing with the money. And the king,<br>
 Immersed in grief and fear, with face cast down,<br>
 Cried out: "If there be any one of you<br>
 Who wants a slave, let him make haste and speak<br>
 While day remains." Then Dharma, putting on<br>
 The form of a Cha.n.dâla, hastily<br>
 Came forward, taking pity on the king.<br>
 His countenance was fearful,--black, with tusks<br>
 Projecting; savage in his words; his smell<br>
 Was foul and horrible; a crowd of dogs<br>
 Came after him. "Tell me thy price," he said;<br>
 "Be quick; and whether it be large or small<br>
 I care not, so I have thee as my slave:"<br>
 The king, beholding such a loathsome form,<br>
 Of mien revolting--"What art thou?" he said.<br>
 "Men call me a Cha.n.dâla," he replied.<br>
 I dwell in this same city--in a part<br>
 Of evil fame. As of a murderer<br>
 Condemned to death, such is my infamy.<br>
 My calling is a robber of the dead."<br>
 "I will not be a slave," exclaimed the king,<br>
 "To thee, a base Cha.n.dâla. Better far<br>
 That I should perish by the fiery curse."<br>
 The words were scarcely uttered, when the saint<br>
 Returned, his countenance with rage<br>
 Distorted; and he thus addressed the king:<br>
 "The sum is fair; why dost thou not accept<br>
 The offer? Then indeed thou mightest pay<br>
 The gift thou owest for the sacrifice."<br>
 "O son of Kušika!" replied the king,<br>
 "Consider this, I pray!--my noble race!<br>
 Truly am I descended from the sun!<br>
 How can I then become, though sore in want,<br>
 Lowest of creatures--a Cha.n.dâla's slave?"<br>
 "Delay no more," the Brâhman said, "but pay<br>
 The gift at once, and sell thyself a slave<br>
 To the Cha.n.dâla--or assuredly<br>
 I curse thee." "Saintly priest, be merciful!"<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 368------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_368"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 368</font></a>
 
 The king entreated; and, immersed in care,<br>
 He seized the Brâhman's feet, exclaiming thus:<br>
 "What am I but a slave, o'erwhelmed with grief!<br>
 Fear holds me! Saintly priest, be merciful!<br>
 Protect me, mighty saint! Save me, I pray,<br>
 From this most horrible Cha.n.dâla. Sir!<br>
 Most noble saint! hereafter shall thy will<br>
 Be all the object of my life! To serve<br>
 Thy lightest wish shall be my highest joy!<br>
 Thus will I make the offering--I will be<br>
 Thy <i>slave</i>!" Replied the Brahman: "If thou art<br>
 My slave, then will I sell thee as a slave<br>
 To the Cha.n.dâla." Then, filled with delight,<br>
 Paying the money, the Švapâka bound<br>
 His lately-purchased slave, and striking him,<br>
 Led hill away. Parted from all his friends;<br>
 In utmost grief; in the Cha.n.dâla's house<br>
 Abiding--morning, noon, and eventide,<br>
 And night, the king thus made lament:<br>
 "Alas! my tender wife, overwhelmed with pain,<br>
 Looking upon her son in misery,<br>
 Bewails her lot. But yet she says: 'The king<br>
 Will surely ransom us, for he has gained<br>
 By now more money than the Brâhman paid<br>
 For us;' and all the time she little knows<br>
 My fate--worse than her own. For I have passed<br>
 From woe to woe--kingdom and friends--my wife,<br>
 My son, have passed from me, and now the state<br>
 Of a Cha.n.dâla holds me." While he dwelt<br>
 A slave in the Cha.n.dâla's house, the forms<br>
 Of those he loved were still before his eyes--<br>
 Were ever in his mind. Meanwhile the king,<br>
 Obedient to his master's will, became<br>
 A robber of the dead; and night and day<br>
 He watched for plunder. "One part of the spoil<br>
 Is for the king, three for thy master, two<br>
 For thee. Go to the city's southern part,<br>
 Where is the dwelling of the dead, there wait."<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 369------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_369"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 369</font></a>
 
 Obeying the Cha.n.dâla, to the place<br>
 Of burial he went;--an awful place,<br>
 Filled full of fearful sounds and loathsome sights--<br>
 Of evil smells, and smoke, and locks of hair<br>
 Fallen from the dead; while troops of fiends and ghouls,<br>
 Vampires and demons, wandered to and fro.<br>
 Vultures and jackals prowled, and spirit forms'<br>
 Of evil hovered o'er. The ground was strewn<br>
 With heaps of bones; and wailing, sharp and shrill,<br>
 Re-echoed from the mourners of the dead.<br>
 The bodies on the funeral piles, half burnt,<br>
 Crackled and hissed; showing their shining teeth,<br>
 They grinned, as if in sport; while all the time<br>
 The howl of demons and the wail of fiends<br>
 Were mingled with the roar of flames--a sound<br>
 Of fearful import, such as ushers in<br>
 The day of doom. The sights, and sounds, and smells--<br>
 The heaps of ashes, and the piles of bones,<br>
 Blackened with filth--the smoke, the shouts,<br>
 The yells--struck fear on fear into the heart.<br>
 The burial-place resembled nought but hell.<br>
 Such was the place appointed for the king.<br>
 "Priests! Brâhmans! Counsellors! how have I fallen<br>
 From all my royal state! Alas! my queen!<br>
 Alas! my son! Oh! miserable fate!<br>
 We have been torn asunder by the power<br>
 Of Višvâmitra." Thoughts like these possessed<br>
 His inmost mind; while foul, unshorn, unwashed,<br>
 He served his master. Running here and there,<br>
 Armed with a jagged club, he sought the dead,<br>
 From whom he gained his wages. So he lived,<br>
 Degraded from his caste. Old knotted rags<br>
 Served as his dress; his face and arms and feet<br>
 With dust and ashes from the funeral piles<br>
 Begrimed; his hands defiled with putrid flesh<br>
 From contact with the bodies of the dead.<br>
 So neither day nor night he ceased from toil.<br>
 And twelve months passed--twelve weary months, which seemed<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 370------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_370"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 370</font></a>
 
 To his grief-stricken mind a hundred years;<br>
 And then at last, worn out, the best of kings<br>
 Lay down to rest; and as upon his couch<br>
 All motionless in sleep he lay, he saw<br>
 A wondrous vision. By the power divine<br>
 He seemed to wear another form,--a form<br>
 Both new and strange,--and in that form to pay<br>
 The vow. Twelve years of expiation passed<br>
 With difficulty. Then within himself<br>
 King Harišchandra thought: "So too will I,<br>
 When I am freed from hence, perform my vows<br>
 With generous freedom." Forthwith he was born<br>
 As a Pukkasa; while a place was found<br>
 For him among the dead, and funeral rites<br>
 Were ordered as his task. Thus seven years<br>
 Were passed; then to the burying-place was brought<br>
 A Brâhman seeking sepulture: in life<br>
 He had been poor, but honest; and the king,<br>
 Though he knew this--the dead man's poverty<br>
 And his uprightness--pressed his friends to pay<br>
 The funeral dues. "Enforce thy right," they said,<br>
 "And do this evil deed; yet know thou this:<br>
 Once upon earth there was a mighty king<br>
 Named Harišchandra; though he but disturbed<br>
 A Brâhman's sleep, through that offence he lost<br>
 His merit, and by Višvâmitra's curse<br>
 Became a base Pukkasa." "Yet the king<br>
 Spared not the dead man's friends, but still required<br>
 His fee. Therefore they cursed him in their rage--<br>
 "Go!--go!--thou most degraded of mankind--<br>
 Go to the lowest hell!" Then in his dream<br>
 The king beheld the messengers of death.<br>
 Fearful to look at, armed with heavy chains,<br>
 They seized him, and they bound him hand and foot,<br>
 And bore him off. And then, in fear and pain,<br>
 Headlong he fell into the bath of oil<br>
 In Nâraka. There, torn with instruments<br>
 Sharp-edged as razors, fed on putrid blood,<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 371------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_371"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 371</font></a>
 
 He saw himself. For seven years in hell--<br>
 Now burnt from day to day, now tossed and torn,<br>
 Now cut by knives, and now by icy winds<br>
 Frozen and numbed--a dead Pukkasa's fate<br>
 He underwent. Each day in Nâraka,<br>
 A hundred years of mortal reckoning--<br>
 So count the demons who inhabit hell.<br>
 Then he beheld himself cast up to earth,<br>
 His spirit entering a filthy dog;<br>
 Feeding on things all foul and horrible--<br>
 Consumed by cold. A month thus passed away.<br>
 His spirit changed its dwelling, and he saw<br>
 Himself an ass; and after that an ox,<br>
 A cow, a goat, a sheep, a bird, a worm.<br>
 So day by day he saw his spirit change<br>
 Its outward shape. A multitude of forms--<br>
 Some moving, others rooted to the ground--<br>
 Received his soul. And when the hundred years<br>
 Were passed and gone, he saw himself again<br>
 Re-occupy his pristine human form--<br>
 Once more a king. And then he seemed to lose<br>
 His kingdom, casting it away in games<br>
 Of chance. Turned from his home a wanderer<br>
 Into the forest with his wife and child:<br>
 Devoured by a ravening beast, but raised<br>
 To life again on earth, he sore bewailed<br>
 His wife: "Alas! why hast thou left me thus?<br>
 Alas! O Saivya! where hast thou gone?"<br>
 Then in his dream he seemed to see his wife<br>
 And son lamenting: "What hast thou to do<br>
 With gambling? Oh protect us, mighty king!"<br>
 The vision faded, and he saw no more<br>
 The cherished forms. And then the dream returned<br>
 By power divine. And Harišchandra stood<br>
 In heaven, and he beheld his wife on earth,<br>
 With flowing hair, dragged forcibly along--<br>
 Stripped of her clothes: the cry came to his ear,<br>
 "Protect us, king of men!" Then, snatched away,<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 372------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_372"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 372</font></a>
 
 The demons hurried him before the judge;<br>
 And Harišchandra seemed to hear the words:<br>
 "Go forth! return once more to earth! Thy grief<br>
 Is well nigh past and ended; joy ere long<br>
 Shall come to thee. The sorrows that remain<br>
 Endure." The king, then driven from the sky<br>
 By Yama's messengers, falling through space--<br>
 Senseless in fear and terror, filled with pain<br>
 Yet more exceeding--thought within himself,<br>
 "How shall I suffer all these torments sore!--<br>
 The changes manifold of form--the pain<br>
 In Nâraka." Then Harišchandra sought<br>
 Aid from the gods: "O mighty lords," he said,<br>
 "Protect me! O protect my wife and child!<br>
 O mighty Dharma, thee I worship! Thee,<br>
 O Krish.na, the Creator! Faultless ones,<br>
 Both far and near, before you now I come,<br>
 A suppliant. On thee, O lord of prayer,<br>
 I call! on thee, O Indra too! to thee<br>
 O ancient one! I pray--immutable!"<br>
 The vision fled, the king arose from sleep.<br>
 His tangled hair, his body black and grimed,<br>
 Recalled to him his state--the plunderer<br>
 Of dead men's clothes. His recollection gone,<br>
 He thought not of his sorrowing wife and child,<br>
 For reason failed. The loss of kingdom, wealth,<br>
 And friends, his dwelling-place among the tombs,<br>
 Had overthrown his senses, and destroyed<br>
 His mind. Then to the burying-place the queen<br>
 Came, bearing the dead body of her son--<br>
 Pale and distracted. "My beloved son!<br>
 My child!" she kept exclaiming, while she threw<br>
 Dust on her head. "Alas! alas! O king!<br>
 O that thou could'st behold thy child," she said--<br>
 "Thy child now lying dead upon the earth,<br>
 Killed by a serpent's bite. Alas! my son!<br>
 So lovely! so delightful!" Then the king,<br>
 Rearing the sounds of mourning, went in haste<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 373------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_373"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 373</font></a>
 
 To rob the dead: nor did he recognize<br>
 His wife, in that sad mourner, changed by grief<br>
 As if into another. And the queen<br>
 Knew not the form that stood before her, clothed<br>
 In rags, with matted hair, withered and foul.<br>
 Then recollection dawned upon the king,<br>
 Seeing the dead child's princely form, the thought<br>
 Of his own son came o'er him. "Ah! my child!<br>
 What evil chance," he said, "has brought thee here!<br>
 A child of princely race thou seemest. He, my son,<br>
 Long lost to me through my accursed fate,<br>
 Would have been even such as thou in age."<br>
 Then raised the queen her voice, and thus she spoke:<br>
 "Alas! has some unexpiated crime<br>
 Brought upon us, my child! this endless woe.<br>
 My absent lord! since thou did'st not console<br>
 My grief in times gone by, how can the pain<br>
 I suffer now assuage? Did'st thou not lose<br>
 Thy kingdom? did'st thou not desert thy friends?<br>
 Did'st thou not sell thy wife and child?" The king<br>
 Heard her lament, and as he heard, the wail<br>
 Fell from his eyes,--he recognized again<br>
 His wife and son--and saying but the words,<br>
 "Ah! Saivya! Ah! my beloved child!"<br>
 He fainting fell to earth. Then, too, the queen,<br>
 Hearing her husband's voice, o'ercome with grief,<br>
 Insensate fell. Returning consciousness<br>
 Brought to them both affliction's heaviest weight<br>
 And mutual lamentations. "Ah! my son!"<br>
 Thus mourned the king, "my inmost heart is torn,<br>
 When I behold thy form so delicate:<br>
 My child! embracing thee in tend'rest love,<br>
 Words of affection I will speak, that rise<br>
 Unbidden to my lips. Alas! thy limbs<br>
 Will be defiled by my embrace; the dust<br>
 That clings about my garments will pollute<br>
 Thy lovely form! Alas! my child, thou had'st<br>
 An evil father! He who should have kept<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 374------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_374"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 374</font></a>
 
 All dangers from thee, he it was who sold<br>
 Thee as a slave! and yet in heart and mind<br>
 First of all things I love thee. Ah! my child!<br>
 Thy father's realm--my heaped-up wealth--all this<br>
 By lawful right was thine inheritance,<br>
 And now thou liest slain! Ah me! the tears<br>
 Rise to my eyes in blinding force: thy form,<br>
 In grace and beauty like the lotus flower,<br>
 Fades from my sight." He spoke, and faltering<br>
 With grief embraced his son. The queen exclaimed:<br>
 "This is indeed my lord--I know his voice!<br>
 I know his form! this is the mighty king.<br>
 The wisest of all beings. But how changed!<br>
 What fate is this? Ah what a dreadful place<br>
 For him, the lord of men. This grief yet more<br>
 Is added to the mourning for my son--<br>
 My husband's fate--for as a slave he serves<br>
 A base Cha.n.dâla. Curséd be that god,<br>
 Or demon foul, through whom a godlike king<br>
 Has fallen to this degraded state; the lot<br>
 Of a Švapâka. Ah! most noble prince,<br>
 My mind is filled with grief, when I recall<br>
 Thy regal state, thy past magnificence.<br>
 No kingly ensigns go before thee now,<br>
 No captive kings, brought down to slavery,<br>
 Humbly precede thee, casting in the way<br>
 Their garments, lest the dust should soil thy feet.<br>
 But now! O king! alas, thyself a slave,<br>
 Thou livest in this fearful place, begrimed<br>
 With filth; thy sacred cord concealed, thy hair<br>
 Tangled and long, plunder of dead men's clothes<br>
 Thy livelihood. Ah! king! and is thy life<br>
 Spent in this awful wise?" So spake the queen,<br>
 And falling on his neck, embraced her lord:<br>
 While she, sprung from a king herself, bewailed<br>
 Her sorrows endless. "King! I pray thee speak!<br>
 Is this a dream? If it be real and true,<br>
 Then justice, truth, and righteousness have fled<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 375------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_375"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 375</font></a>
 
 And gone from earth: nor aught avails mankind,<br>
 Of sacrifice, or reverence, to gods<br>
 Or priests! 'Tis vain to follow innocence<br>
 If thou, most perfect, purest of mankind,<br>
 Art brought to such a depth of infamy."<br>
 Then spoke the king, and told his sorrowing wife<br>
 How he had fallen to this wretched state,--<br>
 The state of a Cha.n.dâla. She, in turn,<br>
 Weeping, with many sighs, poured out her tale,<br>
 Telling him how the serpent's bite had killed<br>
 Their child. "Beloved one! I suffer not<br>
 These evils," said the king, "by mine own will--<br>
 Thou seest what I endure; my evil fate<br>
 Depends not on myself. I am a slave,<br>
 And if I fly from the Cha.n.dâla's bonds,<br>
 The fiery torment in the depths of hell<br>
 Will overtake me, and I shall become<br>
 A slave again. My doom is fixed! lo! hell<br>
 Is my abode hereafter; and in forms,<br>
 Creeping and loathsome, shall my soul abide.<br>
 Yet from this miserable life on earth<br>
 There is one only refuge. He! my son!<br>
 My hope! my stay! is dead; drowned by the sea<br>
 Of my misfortunes. But I am a slave!<br>
 I am dependent on another's will!<br>
 Can I give up my wife? Yes! even so!<br>
 For know thou this: one who is steeped in woe<br>
 Cares not for evil chances; not the state<br>
 Of the most loathsome beast, nor yet the wood<br>
 Of sword-leaved plants, nor even hell's dread stream,<br>
 Could add the smallest fraction to the pain<br>
 I have already borne. My son is dead!<br>
 Who then will make atonement for my sins?<br>
 Yet listen to my words, beloved one,<br>
 If I have offered sacrifice, and paid<br>
 Due reverence to the saints; if I have given<br>
 Alms to the needy--may we meet again<br>
 Hereafter, in the world to come, and find<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 376------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_376"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 376</font></a>
 
 The refuge for our woes denied us here.<br>
 Let us together follow in the path<br>
 By which our son has gone. Our hopeless fate<br>
 Can never alter here. Whatever words<br>
 I may have uttered, thoughtlessly, in jest,<br>
 These, when I pray for pardon, shall receive<br>
 Fullest forgiveness. Thou must not despise<br>
 Thy lord: nor pride thee on thy queenly state<br>
 Now passed and gone." The prince's wife replied:<br>
 "I am prepared to tread that path with thee,<br>
 O king, most saintly! and with thee that world<br>
 To enter." While she spoke these words, the king<br>
 Made up the funeral pile, and placed thereon<br>
 His son, himself ascending with his wife.<br>
 And then, in meditation wrapt, he thought<br>
 Upon Nârâyana, the lord supreme,<br>
 And Vâsudeva, lord of deities,<br>
 Šiva, and Brâhma the eternal god,<br>
 And Krish.na clothed in glory. As the king<br>
 Was meditating, all the gods from heaven<br>
 Came down headed by Dharma. And they said:<br>
 "Hear us, O king! hear us, O lord! The gods--<br>
 Even the mighty gods have come to earth,<br>
 And at their head is Dharma. Gods, and saints,<br>
 And heroes--yea, and Višvâmitra too,<br>
 The sage implacable,--all summon thee--<br>
 Ascend! to heaven: receive the due reward,<br>
 That thou hast gained. O king! slay not thyself!<br>
 I, perfect Righteousness, I summon thee<br>
 To enter now the heaven that thou hast gained<br>
 By thy transcendant virtues, self-control,<br>
 Patience, and truth." Then Indra spoke, and said:--<br>
 "O Harišchandra! King, most eminent!<br>
 In virtue! lo! before you Indra stands--<br>
 For I am he. The everlasting world<br>
 Thou hast attained: together with thy wife,<br>
 And son, ascend to heaven;--to that third heav'n--<br>
 So difficult to be attained by men--<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 377------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_377"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 377</font></a>
 
 The heav'n that thou hast won." Then Indra rained<br>
 Life-giving am.rit from the sky, and flowers<br>
 That blossomed in the heavenly courts: while sounds<br>
 Of music filled the air, and round him stood<br>
 The gods, a vast assembly. Then the son<br>
 Of Harišchandra rose, restored to life,<br>
 And health, his mind and senses whole, his form<br>
 More beautiful than ever: and the king<br>
 Embraced his wife and son, with perfect joy<br>
 Filled to o'erflowing, crowned with heavenly wreaths.<br>
 Then Indra said: "Thou, with thy wife, and son,<br>
 Shalt dwell in bliss supreme: bliss that thyself<br>
 Hast purchased, by thy virtues and thy toils."<br>
 Then spoke the king: "Hear me! most holy gods!<br>
 Unbidden by my master, will I not<br>
 To heaven itself ascend." Then Dharma spoke:<br>
 "I am thy master. I assumed the form<br>
 Of a Cha.n.dâla. All thy pain and woe<br>
 Was brought upon thee by my magic power,<br>
 And thou wast made a slave! I have beheld<br>
 Thy truth, and thy uprightness. Saintly king!<br>
 The highest place that heaven accords to men,<br>
 Whose virtue has been tried and proved:--to that<br>
 Ascend!" But Harišchandra answering, said:<br>
 "Receive, most mighty lord! my words of praise<br>
 And thanksgiving. I offer them to thee<br>
 Full of affection. Lo! my people stand<br>
 With grieving hearts, longing for my return.<br>
 Can I ascend to heav'n while they on earth<br>
 Lament for me? If they have ever slain,<br>
 Brâhmans, or teachers of the holy law,--<br>
 If lust or avarice have ruled their hearts,--<br>
 Then may my labours and my toils atone,<br>
 For these their sins. I may not leave my friends.<br>
 For neither here, nor in the world to come,<br>
 Can there be peace to one who casts aside<br>
 The friend whose love is pure and true--the friend<br>
 Who serves him from the heart. Return!<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 378------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_378"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 378</font></a>
 
 Return! to heaven! O Indra! If thou grant<br>
 My friends to rise with me, to heav'n will I<br>
 Ascend; if not, with them will I descend<br>
 To Nâraka." "O king! thy prayer is heard!<br>
 Thy people's sins are pardoned: even for them,<br>
 Hard though it be, thy toils and pains have gained<br>
 A place in heaven." Thus mighty Indra spoke.<br>
 Replied the king: "Indra! I will not leave<br>
 My kinsmen. By his kinsmen's help a king<br>
 His kingdom rules; by them he offers up<br>
 The kingly sacrifice, and for himself<br>
 Lays up a store of meritorious deeds.<br>
 So have my kinsmen too enabled me<br>
 To work whate'er I may of righteousness.<br>
 My actions virtuous, my granted prayers,<br>
 Truly I owe to them, for by their aid<br>
 Have these been possible. May the reward<br>
 Thou grantest me, I pray, be shared with them.<br>
 My kinsmen, though I should ascend to heaven,<br>
 I will not leave." "So be it!" Indra said;<br>
 "So be it!" said the Brâhman; Dharma, too,<br>
 Gave his assent; and then, in countless hosts,<br>
 Appeared the heavenly chariots. Indra said:<br>
 "Men of Ayodhya, ascend to heaven."<br>
 The saintly Brâhman, having heard with joy<br>
 The words of Indra, poured the sacred oil<br>
 Upon the prince, and with the perfect ones,<br>
 The sages, and the gods, anointed him<br>
 "Son of the mighty king." Then all the throng--<br>
 The king, his wife, his son, his followers--<br>
 Filled with rejoicing and delight, ascend<br>
 To heaven, surrounding, as they go, the king<br>
 Borne in his chariot. He, too, filled with joy--<br>
 The mighty father, who eternal bliss<br>
 Both for his people and himself had gained,<br>
 Once more in form and mien a king--reposed,<br>
 Resting from all his toils, his faithful friends<br>
 Surrounding him with a protecting wall.<br>
 
 
 <!------------------------page 379------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_379"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 379</font></a>
 
 And Indra spoke and said: "Upon this earth<br>
 Great Harišchandra's equal has not been<br>
 Nor shall be. Whosoe'er may hear his life,<br>
 His toils, his sorrows, and in sympathy<br>
 For him lament, transcendant happiness<br>
 Shall he attain, and all his heart's desire<br>
 Shall be accomplished. Is his prayer a wife,<br>
 Or son, or kingdom, he shall gain them all,<br>
 E'en heaven itself. And he who imitates<br>
 The truth, and steadfastness, of that great king,<br>
 Like him shall enter everlasting rest.<br></td></tr>
 
 </table>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../index.htm">Journals</a> <a href="../../hin/etc/index.htm">Hindu Articles</a></p>
 
 </body>