<body>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Journals</a> <a href="../../hin/etc/index.htm">Hindu Articles</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <h1 align="center">THE TATTVA-MUKTAVÂLÎ</h1>
 
 <h3 align="center">by Pûr.nânanda Chakravartin</h3>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <h2 align="center">JOURNAL</h2>
 
 <p align="center"><small>OF</small></p>
 
 <h2 align="center">THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.</h2>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <h4 align="center">[New Series, Volume XV]</h4>
 
 <h6 align="center">[London, Trübner and Company]</h6>
 
 <h4 align="center">[1883]</h4>
 
 <h6 align="center">{Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}</h6>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 137------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_137"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 137</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <blockquote>ART. IV.--<i>The Tattva-muktavâlî of Gau.da-pûr.nânanda-chakra-vartin</i>. Edited and Translated by Prof. E. B. COWELL.</blockquote>
 
 <p>THE following poem was written by a native of Bengal, named Pûr.nânanda Chakravartin. Nothing is known as to his date; if the work were identical with the poem of the same name mentioned in the account of the Râmânuja system in Mâdhava's Sarvadaršanasa.mgraha, it would be, of course, older than the fourteenth century, but this is very uncertain; I should be inclined to assign it to a later date. The chief interest of the poem consists in its being a vigorous attack on the Vedânta system by a follower of the Pûr.naprajña school, which was founded by Madhva (or Ânandatîrtha) in the thirteenth century in the South of India. Some account of his system (which in many respects agrees with that of Râmânuja) is given in Wilson's "Hindu Sects;"<a name="page_137_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_137_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> but the fullest account is to be found in the fifth chapter of the Sarvadaršanasa.mgraha. Both the Râmânujas and the Pûr.naprajñas hold in opposition to the Vedânta<a name="page_137_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_137_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> that individual souls are distinct from Brahman; but they differ as to the sense in which they are thus distinct. The former
 
 <!------------------------page 138------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_138"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 138</font></a>
 
 maintain that "unity" and "plurality" are equally true from different points of view; the latter hold that the relation between the individual soul and Brahman is that of a master and a servant, and consequently that they are absolutely separate. It need not surprise us, therefore, to see that, although Râmânuja is praised in the fifty-third sloka of this poem as "the foremost of the learned," some of his tenets are attacked in the eightieth.</p>
 
 <p>   The Sanskrit text of this poem was published in the Benares Pa.n.dit for Sept. 1871, by Pa.n.dit Vechârâma Šarman. An edition, with a Bengali translation, was also published some years ago in Calcutta, by Jagadânanda Goswâmin;<a name="page_138_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_138_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> but the text is so full of false readings of every kind, and the translation in consequence goes so often astray, that I have not found much help from it. I have collated the text in the Benares Pa.n.dit (A.) with a MS. (B.) sent to me by my friend, Pa.n.dit Mahešachandra Nyâyaratna, the Principal of the Calcutta Sanskrit College. He has also sent me the readings in certain passages from two MSS. in the Calcutta Sanskrit College Library (C.D.); and I have to thank him for his help in explaining some obscure allusions.</p>
 
 <p>   The poem itself seems to me an interesting contribution to the history of Hindu philosophical controversy,<a name="page_138_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_138_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> and so I have subjoined a literal English translation. I would venture to remind my readers of the words of the manager in the prologue of the Mâlavikâgnimitra, "Every old poem is not good because it is old, nor is every modern poem to be blamed simply because it is modern."</p>
 
 <!------------------------page 155------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_155"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 155</font></a>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p align="center">TRANSLATION.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Victorious is the garland-wearing foster-son of Nanda,--the protector of his devotees,--the destroyer of the cruel king,--dark-blue like the delicate tamâla blossoms,--formidable with his many outspread rays,--mighty with all his attendant powers,<a name="page_155_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_155_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>--and having his forehead radiant like the moon.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. This follower of the Purâ.nas, who holds by his own belief, reads to his heart's content the Purâ.na in the morning, and he listens devotedly with profound meditation, his whole mind intent on the meaning of the book.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. Having abandoned the doctrine of the oneness of the individual and the Supreme Soul, he establishes by argument their mutual difference; having used Šruti and Šm.riti as a manifold proof, he employs Inference in many ways in the controversy.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. This individual soul must be different from Brahman because it is always circumscribed,--many are the similar arguments which are to be acknowledged in the course of our reasonings.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. "Might we not say that a jar and a web could be called identical because both are cognizable?"<a name="page_155_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_155_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> But we cannot say so in regard to these two things in question, for Brahman alone is that which cannot be cognized.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. The sentence "Thou art That" (<i>tat tvam asi</i>) which is understood in its primary meaning as referring to the object of the Veda,<a name="page_155_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_155_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>--the author thus explains its meaning, as he knows his own doctrine, and has fixed his mind on the system of Duality; since the word 'that' (<i>tat</i>) is here indeclinable and implies a difference, and the word 'thou' (<i>tvam</i>) means that which is to be differentiated, the sign of the genitive case has been elided;<a name="page_155_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_155_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a> "thou only," such is not the meaning of the sentence.<a name="page_155_fr_5"></a><a href="#page_155_note_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <!------------------------page 156------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_156"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 156</font></a>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. He is all-knowing, all-seeing, Himself the three worlds, in whose belly thou art thyself contained,--He causes at once by a movement of the brow the creation, preservation, and absorption of all beings! Thou art ignorant, and only seest relatively, He is the adorable, the one Witness of all worlds; thou art changing, He is One; thou art all dull and stained, not such is He.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. As for the text "I am Brahman," you must take the nominative case as only used there for the genitive by the licence of an inspired speaker. How, if it were otherwise, would there be a genitive in the illustration,<a name="page_156_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_156_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> as in the sentence "as the sparks of the fire"?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>. The poets call a lad fire (from his hot temper), the face the orb of a full moon, the eye a blue lotus, the bosom mount Meru, and the hand a young shoot; by a confusion of the superimposed appearance we may thus have the idea of identity where there is still a real difference; and so too must we deal with those words of Šruti "I am Brahman."<a name="page_156_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_156_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_10"></a><font color="GREEN">10</font>. As there are many waves in the sea, so are we many individual souls in Brahman; the wave can never become the sea; how then wilt thou, the individual soul, become Brahman?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_11"></a><font color="GREEN">11</font>. In the depths of all Šâstras the two things are both recognized, knowledge and ignorance; so too virtue and vice; and thus also science, and next to it closely clinging behind, but other than it, appears false science; thus everywhere there are opposite pairs, and similar is the notorious pair, Brahman and the soul. How can these two have oneness? Let the good answer with an upright mind.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_12"></a><font color="GREEN">12</font>. Thou, O Soul, art the reflection of the Supreme Being, who possesses the power of illusion and is the substratum of
 
 <!------------------------page 157------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_157"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 157</font></a>
 
 all, while He, the adorable, shines forth as Himself the original; the one moon in the sky is seen manifold in water and the like; therefore there is a difference between thee and Brahman as between the reflection and its original.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_13"></a><font color="GREEN">13</font>. Yonder Brahman is described by the words of the sacred texts as not to be known, nor to be reasoned about, and as devoid of all desire; but thou art within the range of speech and of thought; how shall there be oneness of thee and Brahman?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_14"></a><font color="GREEN">14</font>. Thou art verily bereft of thy understanding, O individual Soul, by the darkness of this doctrine of Mâyâ, while thou constantly proclaimest like a madman "I am Brahman"; where is thy sovereignty, where thy empire, where thy omniscience? There is as vast a difference between Brahman and thee as between mount Meru and a mustard-seed!</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_15"></a><font color="GREEN">15</font>. Thou art a finite soul, He is indeed all-pervading; thou standest only on one spot, while He is everywhere always; thou, being of a moment, art happy and unhappy; He is happy at all times; how canst thou say "I am He"? Fie! art thou not ashamed?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_16"></a><font color="GREEN">16</font>. Glass is glass, and a gem is a gem; a shell is but a shell, and silver is silver; there is never seen a transposition<a name="page_157_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_157_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> among them. But wherever other things are imagined, to be found in something else, it is through an error; and so it is when the soul utters such words as "that art thou!"</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_17"></a><font color="GREEN">17</font>. The meaning of the word "<i>that</i>" (<i>tat</i>) is an ocean of immortality, filled with manifest and supreme felicity; the meaning of the word "<i>thou</i>" is a most miserable being, bewildered in mind through the burden of the fear of existence; these two can never be one, they are divided by the nature of things; the doctrine of Non-unity is the truth for all worlds, thou art but His slave.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_18"></a><font color="GREEN">18</font>. If Brahman were meant by these words, the power employed would not be Denotation, for their literal meaning
 
 <!------------------------page 158------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_158"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 158</font></a>
 
 does not apply;<a name="page_158_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_158_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> consequently it must be the second power of a word, Indication.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_19"></a><font color="GREEN">19</font>. Yet if so, why should it be Indication? for this arises from some association with the primary meaning; but with what can that substance be associated which is disconnected with everything and without a second?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_20"></a><font color="GREEN">20</font>. That power of a word is Indication, by which, when the primary meaning is precluded, some other meaning is indicated in connexion therewith, through some motive or through common currency; and its causes are thus three.<a name="page_158_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_158_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_21"></a><font color="GREEN">21</font>. Now if there is no Denotation in a phrase, how can there arise any Indication? First there should be some primary meaning precluded, and then there may be the Indication of something else.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_22"></a><font color="GREEN">22</font>. Where there is no accepted Denotation, how can you there have Indication? If there is no village, how can there be a boundary?--there is no child without a father.<a name="page_158_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_158_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_23"></a><font color="GREEN">23</font>. "The lances enter, the swords, the bows and arrows,"--here we have Indication; for the sentence must suggest something else to complete itself, as there cannot be "entrance" in the case of an inanimate subject.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_24"></a><font color="GREEN">24</font>. "A herd-station on the Ganges,"--here we have the self-sacrifice of the primary to another meaning, since the Ganges, as being in the form of water, cannot be the site of a herd-station.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_25"></a><font color="GREEN">25</font>. In the example "ghî is life" there is produced the
 
 <!------------------------page 159------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_159"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 159</font></a>
 
 idea of sameness of form; in the example "this is life" there arises the idea of identity;<a name="page_159_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_159_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> but the knowledge of the meaning of the sentences will be produced by a metaphor,--there is not brought about a real oneness.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_26"></a><font color="GREEN">26</font>. The doctrine of Identity is established with a desperate effort, and men have recourse to the power "Indication"; but there are three things which should rise to our view,--the primary meaning, the indicated meaning, and their connexion.<a name="page_159_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_159_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_27"></a><font color="GREEN">27</font>. There is here no Denotation from the absence of conventional agreement; there is no Indication from the absence of any reason [to establish it]; by what reason, on the theory of Mâyâ, can Brahman be ever made known?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_28"></a><font color="GREEN">28</font>. He is described<a name="page_159_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_159_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a> in the Veda by the primary power of words [Denotation] as the Maker of the Universe; and by Inference we establish the conclusion that all these things have a Maker.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_29"></a><font color="GREEN">29</font>. The Vedas are a proof, the Šm.ritis are a proof; there is a being to be proved and known there in many passages; it is the great Personality which is to be made known by all the Vedas,--therefore it is this which the Veda takes as its subject.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_30"></a><font color="GREEN">30</font>. True verbal testimony produces knowledge even in regard to that which is absolutely non-existent,--then how much more in regard to Brahman the Lord, the maker of all that moves or is motionless!</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_31"></a><font color="GREEN">31</font>. It is said,<a name="page_159_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_159_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a> "Speech retires therefrom together with the Mind,"--but this is its explanation,--give ear: Together with the Mind Speech makes Him its object, and then retires, because His nature is not to be fathomed.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_32"></a><font color="GREEN">32</font>. "Brahman is not to be made the object of mind or of
 
 <!------------------------page 160------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_160"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 160</font></a>
 
 words,"<a name="page_160_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_160_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>--from this saying it is understood that he is only to be declared by Revelation, Revelation has no faltering action.<a name="page_160_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_160_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_33"></a><font color="GREEN">33</font>. "He who is versed in the Word-Brahman attains to the highest Brahman,"<a name="page_160_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_160_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>--surely such words of inspired sages are not mistaken babble.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_34"></a><font color="GREEN">34</font>. Assuredly the conventional meaning of the words "existent," "thought," and "joy" applies to Brahman, just as the words "pot," "cloth," etc., refer to those particular objects.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_35"></a><font color="GREEN">35</font>. The perception of the conventional meaning of words is aroused by the dialogue of the orderer and the ordered; and afterwards by insertion and omission the child becomes thoroughly skilled in the use of the words.<a name="page_160_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_160_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_36"></a><font color="GREEN">36</font>. So through hearing the words of the teacher and repeated study of the šâstras the conventional meaning of such words as Brahman, etc., is assuredly produced in the pupil.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_37"></a><font color="GREEN">37</font>. This earth must surely have had a maker; for its having the nature of an effect is a sign, just as we see to be the case in pots, etc.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_38"></a><font color="GREEN">38</font>. If it is established that the supreme Lord is the maker, then his having a body follows as a matter of course;<a name="page_160_fr_5"></a><a href="#page_160_note_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></a> for in all effects, as pots and the like, the maker is seen to have a body and not to be bodiless.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_39"></a><font color="GREEN">39</font>. [The objector urges] "If the supreme Lord has a body, then he will be like to beings such as we are; there cannot be a maker without an intermediate agency,<a name="page_160_fr_6"></a><a href="#page_160_note_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></a>--I see no difference whatever."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_40"></a><font color="GREEN">40</font>. But great is the difference which is declared to exist between the Adorable Lord and men working with spades,
 
 <!------------------------page 161------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_161"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 161</font></a>
 
 sickles, ploughshares, and hands; these are helpless in the six waves<a name="page_161_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_161_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> [of human infirmity,] and wearied with the burden of labour,--He effects everything by a mere motion of his brow.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_41"></a><font color="GREEN">41</font>. The Master can make, not make,<a name="page_161_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_161_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> and alter; hence one may learn that vast is the interval between the two.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_42"></a><font color="GREEN">42</font>. If the body is called the site of enjoyment, it is well known that this definition will hold good [even in this highest case<a name="page_161_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_161_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>],--there is nothing deficient but everything is present in the Lord's body,<a name="page_161_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_161_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a> since He is the husband of Lakshmî.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_43"></a><font color="GREEN">43</font>. "Every body is influenced by deserts,"--if this universal law is accepted, then He who is the Maker of all must be impelled [to create the world] by the deserts which dominate over beings like us.<a name="page_161_fr_5"></a><a href="#page_161_note_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_44"></a><font color="GREEN">44</font>. "Every body must be non-eternal,"--this is a general law, yet still Îšvara's body may be eternal; for earth is everywhere seen to be non-eternal, while in the form of its atoms it is eternal.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_45"></a><font color="GREEN">45</font>. One must not say, "why should the desert of one attach itself to another?" For it was in consequence of the respective merits and demerits of the elephant and the crocodile that the holder of the discus made all haste to interfere in the battle.<a name="page_161_fr_6"></a><a href="#page_161_note_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_46"></a><font color="GREEN">46</font>. It has been heard of old that all this universe proceeded from the lotus of the navel of the Lord; hence is it established that be has a body, for how can there be a navel without a body?</p>
 
 <!------------------------page 162------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_162"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 162</font></a>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_47"></a><font color="GREEN">47</font>. The body of God is very pure,--to be enjoyed by all the senses, as being richly endowed with the six qualities,<a name="page_162_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_162_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>--and to be discovered by means of all the Vedas,--Gangâ verily is the water wherewith he washes his feet.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_48"></a><font color="GREEN">48</font>. Whenever by the influence of time there comes the increase of evil and the diminution of right, then the adorable Lord accomplishes the preservation of the good and the destruction of the wicked.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_49"></a><font color="GREEN">49</font>. The Lord is said to be twofold, as the Incarnation and He who becomes incarnate; so too the souls are twofold, as divided into faithful and faithless.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_50"></a><font color="GREEN">50</font>. Now some say that the personal soul is only the reflection of the Supreme; but their opinion does not at all hold, since it cannot be established.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_51"></a><font color="GREEN">51</font>. For how could there arise a reflection of that Infinite and stainless one? and how could an insentient [reflection] enjoy the pain and pleasure arising from the merit and demerit declared in the Veda?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_52"></a><font color="GREEN">52</font>. There may indeed be a reflection of that which is limited; but how shall there be one of Him whose attribute is infinity?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_53"></a><font color="GREEN">53</font>. Râmânuja, the foremost of the learned, condemned this theory of an original and its reflection; the fact that this doctrine is not accepted by the learned, will not make it seem more plausible.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_54"></a><font color="GREEN">54</font>. There is an eternal division between the two, from the words of the Veda, "two birds;"<a name="page_162_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_162_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> from the mention there of "two friends," how can there be identity between them?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_55"></a><font color="GREEN">55</font>. I become Brahman, that is, I cease to have mundane existence through beholding the soul in Brahman; the result of this would be the abolition of sorrow, etc., but in no way absolute Oneness.</p>
 
 <!------------------------page 163------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_163"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 163</font></a>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_56"></a><font color="GREEN">56</font>. I become Brahman also through beholding Brahman in the soul;<a name="page_163_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_163_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> the result would be the abolition of His being out of sight,<a name="page_163_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_163_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> but in no way Oneness.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_57"></a><font color="GREEN">57</font>. It must not be said that by continued meditation with intent thought a man becomes Brahman; there will only enter into him a little merit; as we see indeed in the case of worms, bees, and the like;<a name="page_163_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_163_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_58"></a><font color="GREEN">58</font>. By devotedly worshipping Brâhmans without ceasing, a Šûdra will never become a Brâhman; there may enter into him a little merit, but one of the Šûdra caste will never become a Brâhman.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_59"></a><font color="GREEN">59</font>. The venerable author of the Aphorisms himself established a duality when he spoke of the application of the terms "object" and "agent";<a name="page_163_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_163_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a> and thus has it been explained by the author of the commentary by quoting passages of the Veda which imply duality, as that which says "the two entered the cave."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_60"></a><font color="GREEN">60</font>. The soul is also shown to be different [from Brahman] by the evidence of Šm.riti;<a name="page_163_fr_5"></a><a href="#page_163_note_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></a> thus their difference is proved to be essential. If it were not so, how could the Commentator have used such an expression as "the worshipper" and "the worshipped"?<a name="page_163_fr_6"></a><a href="#page_163_note_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_61"></a><font color="GREEN">61</font>. I am sometimes happy, sometimes miserable; He, the supreme Soul, is always essentially happy. Such is the difference,--then how can there be identity between these two different substances?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_62"></a><font color="GREEN">62</font>. He is eternally self-luminous and unobscured,--
 
 <!------------------------page 164------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_164"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 164</font></a>
 
 intensely pure, the one witness of the world; not so is the individual soul,--thus a thunderbolt falls on the tree of the theory of Identity.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_63"></a><font color="GREEN">63</font>. For those who maintain the identity of the individual and supreme soul, the hypothesis of a <i>dvandva</i> compound<a name="page_164_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_164_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> is precluded; or they bring forward such words as <i>d.rishadupala</i> as parallel cases;<a name="page_164_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_164_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> the <i>dvandva</i> is only consistent with "difference," but in no way with "identity."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_64"></a><font color="GREEN">64</font>. Where identity is the meaning, there arises the <i>karmadhâraya</i> compound,--for [such a <i>karmadhâraya</i> as] <i>nîlotpala</i> "the blue-lotus" is used as implying that the two members of the compound refer to the same subject.<a name="page_164_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_164_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_65"></a><font color="GREEN">65</font>. As there are many passages in Šruti such as that which says "food is Brahman,"<a name="page_164_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_164_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a> so too this passage "I am Brahman" is to be understood as meaning worship.<a name="page_164_fr_5"></a><a href="#page_164_note_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_66"></a><font color="GREEN">66</font>. The doctrine of Identity is not true; wherever it appears to be declared in Šruti, all those passages are to be taken as only meaning worship.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_67"></a><font color="GREEN">67</font>. There are many sentences in the ancient Veda which speak for non-identity as also for identity; having expelled envy and discussed the truth, let the wise declare that which each thinks wholesome.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_68"></a><font color="GREEN">68</font>. O soul, bewildered by a deceived opinion, drive far from thy mouth these words "I am Brahman"; how canst thou be That, O thou who art utterly at the mercy of fate, plunged as thou art in the great ocean of mundane existence hard to be crossed!</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_69"></a><font color="GREEN">69</font>. He who is the beloved of Lakshmi, the ambrosia-ocean, full of manifest supreme joy; the water of whose feet is Gangâ, worthy to be worshipped by Rudra and the other gods; who before creation created all instantaneously by a
 
 <!------------------------page 165------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_165"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 165</font></a>
 
 movement of his brow,--how canst thou say, O soul, "I am He,"--thou who art a poor beggar, not a king.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_70"></a><font color="GREEN">70</font>. O slow of mind, how canst thou say, I am He with whom are filled all the vast stores of this universe in its entirety? Collect thy faculties calmly in thy heart and consider thine own power; can a host of fierce world-supporting elephants enter into the belly of a gnat?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_71"></a><font color="GREEN">71</font>. Whose art thou? whence art thou come? how is the course of this mundane bondage? Ponder this matter in thy heart and forsake the path of the erring. Say not "I am He"; but worship Hari continually in the relation of adorer and adored; by this thou mayst attain the happy journey, but otherwise thou wilt assuredly fall.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_72"></a><font color="GREEN">72</font>. Great is the misery which thou hast experienced, O Soul, while dwelling in the womb in various births, and thou hast wandered again and again in heaven or in hell; this theory "I am He" is an error of thine,--worship thou Hari's lotus feet; thou art His worshipper, He is the adorable, for He is the lord of the three worlds.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_73"></a><font color="GREEN">73</font>. Renouncing the so-called theory of identity, forthwith devote thyself to duality, if there now dwells in thy heart a supreme feeling of faith in Hari; and, having learned the doctrine in Nârada's Pañcharâtra and everywhere else, let all the hymns of the Vaish.nava sacred books be thoroughly examined, as is truly for thy good.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_74"></a><font color="GREEN">74</font>. By what foolish teacher hast thou been instructed, that thou utterest these words "I am Brahman"? How art thou that being who is continually worshipped by Rudra and all the gods? O fool, consider it and see aright.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_75"></a><font color="GREEN">75</font>. The wicked cannot understand the difference between the embodied and the Supreme Souls; the great reason for this is a mind possessed by an evil obstinacy in favour of the doctrine of Illusion; just as the tongue of those who suffer from excess of bile cannot taste the sweetness of molasses, nor the eyes of those afflicted with gutta serena or jaundice see the whiteness of a shell.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_76"></a><font color="GREEN">76</font>. He by a particle of whose intellect thou, O Soul, hast been produced the foremost of intelligent beings--say not,
 
 <!------------------------page 166------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_166"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 166</font></a>
 
 O knave, that thou art <i>He</i>; for who but the ingrate desires to seize the seat of his Master?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_77"></a><font color="GREEN">77</font>. A particle of intelligence has been deposited in thee by the supreme Lord in His mercy,--it becomes thee not, O knave, to say that therefore thou art God; just as if some evil-minded man had received elephants, horses, and infantry from the king and then set his heart on seizing his kingdom.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_78"></a><font color="GREEN">78</font>. He under whose control is that mighty illusion which deceives the three worlds, He is to be recognized as the Supreme Lord, the adorable, essentially thought, existence and joy; but he who is himself always under her control like a camel drawn by a string through his nostrils, is to be recognized as the individual soul,--vast indeed is the difference between the two!</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_79"></a><font color="GREEN">79</font>. Having studied the doctrines of the Sâ"nkhya, Ka.nâda, and Gautama, and the doctrine of Patañjali, the doctrines of the Mîmâ.msâ and Bha.t.tabhâskara,<a name="page_166_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_166_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>--amidst all the six current systems,--let the wise tell the final conclusion if they can as to the real nature of the supreme and the individual soul,--is it duality, or is it oneness, or is it again a oneness in duality?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_80"></a><font color="GREEN">80</font>. In five of the systems I have only heard peremptorily asserted in many places the difference between the supreme and the individual souls; what is this that I hear asserted in the Vedânta system? "Plurality, unity, both,"--this is a threefold marvel!<a name="page_166_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_166_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_81"></a><font color="GREEN">81</font>. He who is the maker of all and the Lord of the world is independent by reason of his essential independence; the individual soul is notoriously dependent; how can they say then that these two are identical?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_82"></a><font color="GREEN">82</font>. There are various flavours in honey [existing distinct] through the difference of the trees [from whose flowers
 
 <!------------------------page 167------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_167"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 167</font></a>
 
 it is produced]; how else could it remove the three-fold disorders?<a name="page_167_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_167_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> So the individual souls at the world's dissolution are absorbed in the Lord; but they do not become identified with Him, for they are again separated at the next creation.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_83"></a><font color="GREEN">83</font>. There is a difference between rivers and the sea, with their respective sweet and salt water; so too God and the soul are different and possessed of distinct attributes.<a name="page_167_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_167_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_84"></a><font color="GREEN">84</font>. Rivers, when joined to the sea from all sides, are not identified with it nor yet do they appear to be separate; but from the difference between salt water and sweet water<a name="page_167_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_167_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a> there must be a real difference between them.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_85"></a><font color="GREEN">85</font>. Others see not the difference when water is mixed with milk, but the swan at once separates the milk and the water;<a name="page_167_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_167_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a> so too when the souls are absorbed in the supreme Brahman, the Lord,--the faithful, who have received the Guru's words, can at once draw a difference between them.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_86"></a><font color="GREEN">86</font>. Even when milk is mixed with milk and water with water, they do not become absolutely identified, for they still retain their fixed measure as before; so, when the souls through intense contemplation are absorbed in the Supreme Spirit, they do not become identified with Him; thus say the pure-minded saints.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_87"></a><font color="GREEN">87</font>. There are certain disputants, sunk in a sea of false logic, addicted to an evil way, filled with a hundred imaginations of idle babble, deceived themselves and deceiving
 
 <!------------------------page 168------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_168"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 168</font></a>
 
 the world,--all that they say, "I am Brahman and all this visible universe also is Brahman,"--is now shown clearly to be an empty desire.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_88"></a><font color="GREEN">88</font>. If I and all this universe were Brahman, then there would be an identity between thee and me; then thy wealth, sons, and wife would be mine, and mine would be thine, for there would be no distinction between us.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_89"></a><font color="GREEN">89</font>. And how then could there be injunction or prohibition, since all are one, and there is no distinction of caste? If the doctrine of non-duality be thus held to be established, then what offence has the Buddhist committed?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_90"></a><font color="GREEN">90</font>. "The Soul is different from the elements, the senses, the internal organ, and primary matter, and also from that which is called the individual,"--thus has it been declared of old by Kapila to his mother in the third book of the Bhâgavata<a name="page_168_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_168_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> (Purâ.na).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_91"></a><font color="GREEN">91</font>. Those who study the path pointed out by the teacher, resting upon a foundation of naught, and maintain with an empty understanding that all is void and that all the recognized deities are naught,--how can many words be uttered about them, for language fails in a topic of naught; naught indeed is their wisdom, and their fruit shall be also mostly naught.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_92"></a><font color="GREEN">92</font>. There are words uttered by Vyâsa in the Bhârata condemning this doctrine of the nothingness of all things;<a name="page_168_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_168_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> "their bodies are composed of the quality of darkness, and verily darkness shall be their end;"<a name="page_168_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_168_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_93"></a><font color="GREEN">93</font>. These words which were uttered of old by Kapila in the presence of the sage Syûmarašmi,<a name="page_168_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_168_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a> were afterwards recounted by Vyâsa in the Bhâ.rata.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_94"></a><font color="GREEN">94</font>. This theory of theirs concerning a void of qualities in Him who is the ocean of qualities,<a name="page_168_fr_5"></a><a href="#page_168_note_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></a>--it is but like the blind
 
 <!------------------------page 169------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_169"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 169</font></a>
 
 hurrying of sheep after the ewe that leads them! Having made a separate commentary of their own on the Sûtras they deceive those who follow their doctrine.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_95"></a><font color="GREEN">95</font>. All these qualities, sovereignty, creation, and the like, eternally belong to the Supreme Lord; how then can He be "without qualities" who is thus "possessed of qualities"? he theory of a void of qualities is mere disputation.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_96"></a><font color="GREEN">96</font>. The adorable one possesses knowledge, volition, and creative power; how then can he be destitute of qualities? or, if he is destitute of qualities, how can he be set forth by the Vedas? How can the absence of qualities be predicated of the sea of qualities, and yet all remonstrance be silent? Ponder it well in thine own mind, and then determine what is right.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_97"></a><font color="GREEN">97</font>. A substance without attributes, like the sky-flower, is not admitted either in the Veda or in the world; if the knowledge of such a thing were derived from the Veda, the Veda itself would then cease to be an authority.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_98"></a><font color="GREEN">98</font>. [The Vedântin may reply] "The bunch of Darbha grass<a name="page_169_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_169_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> is said to be the sacrificer, as it is the means of performing the sacrifice; [as the Darbha grass is understood by this description,] even though the attributes thus ascribed are not found in it, so is Brahman understood when we ascribe certain qualities [as 'truth,' etc., even though these qualities are precluded in a being without qualities]."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_99"></a><font color="GREEN">99</font>. [I answer] A thorough Vedântin like thee does not accept any where the existence of qualities or that which possesses qualities; but if imagined qualities are done away with [by deeper insight], real qualities are nowhere done away with.<a name="page_169_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_169_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_100"></a><font color="GREEN">100</font>. If Brahman is understood to be destitute of qualities,
 
 <!------------------------page 170------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_170"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 170</font></a>
 
 then "truth," etc., will not be applicable to Him; but, if so, there arises a contradiction in such passages [of Šruti] as "he is the truthful," etc.<a name="page_170_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_170_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_101"></a><font color="GREEN">101</font>. When the existence of such a thing as a quality is admitted, we can imagine it in something else;<a name="page_170_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_170_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> but to imagine that nacre is silver, we must first know clearly what silver is.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_102"></a><font color="GREEN">102</font>. This universe is based on the soul as its site, being imagined in it by ignorance; some teachers would describe it as an illusory emanation;<a name="page_170_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_170_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a> but this is not a pleasing doctrine to me.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_103"></a><font color="GREEN">103</font>. It cannot be said that all this universe is false; since it is really the plaything of Hari, who is eternally engaged in sport.<a name="page_170_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_170_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_104"></a><font color="GREEN">104</font>. The external world is not like a dream; for in dreams there is sleep and a host of imperfections; what we eat or drink in dreams gives us no enjoyment, but these things are enjoyable in our waking state.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_105"></a><font color="GREEN">105</font>. If all that is seen were false, then how could it produce effects? The carrying of water in a jar is not false; all we can say is that it is transient.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_106"></a><font color="GREEN">106</font>. The idea that all this world is false, is opposed to experience; for of what use would be all the expiations for sin, prescribed in the law-books? Why are these thieves to be punished even by the king? The upholder of the doctrine of Mâyâ can assert anything on his oath, but all is false.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_107"></a><font color="GREEN">107</font>. Thou canst not say that the visible world is only like the transitory enjoyment of one who smells a wreath of flowers; however closely it is scanned, there is no overpowering evidence of its unreality [to preclude the presumption
 
 <!------------------------page 171------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_171"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 171</font></a>
 
 founded on experience]; it continually manifests itself to us as eternal in its stream of successive events.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_108"></a><font color="GREEN">108</font>. This world is not false but it is rendered true by Vish.nu's protection;<a name="page_171_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_171_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> thou art made pure by the knowledge of Him, as all minerals shine as gold [when brought in contact with the philosopher's stone].</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_109"></a><font color="GREEN">109</font>. Dispassion and enjoyment stand equally aloof as disinterested spectators and are lost in faith; the partaking of the consecrated food is in no sense to be called an "enjoyment,"--it is itself an act of faith.<a name="page_171_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_171_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_110"></a><font color="GREEN">110</font>. By intense devotion to his object the man of the world will become the devotee of enjoyment, and by the absence of all enjoyment a man becomes absolutely dispassionate; this is the real truth.<a name="page_171_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_171_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_111"></a><font color="GREEN">111</font>. By association with the good and by repeatedly listening to the story of K.rish.na's sports there has arisen in the lake of the mind the great wave of pure faith and pure affection; abandoning the doctrine of unity and without hesitation embracing that of duality, we worship with our whole heart the lotus-feet of the beloved of Lakshmî.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_112"></a><font color="GREEN">112</font>. There is a rule in the things of the world, that he who is near the king may be called the king; so too in the things of Brahman and the soul must we understand the various sacred texts [which at first sight appear to identify them].</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_113"></a><font color="GREEN">113</font>. He in whom the universe,--sun, moon, and the rest,
 
 <!------------------------page 172------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_172"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 172</font></a>
 
 with the three worlds,--rose into being,--in whom it all abides until it perishes,--and in whom, each in its own time, it is all finally dissolved,--He, the Lord, whom, being beyond all qualities,<a name="page_172_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_172_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> even Brahman himself cannot declare in the Vedas,--why, O teacher, dost thou teach this miserable me the words "I am He"?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_114"></a><font color="GREEN">114</font>. He in whom the storehouse of the universe with all its creatures great and small, was all contained like a line of insects drowned in a ripe fruit of the glomerous fig-tree,--in whom it abides until the final destruction,--and in whom it is eventually dissolved,--Ah! how can there come from my mouth, O teacher, these words "I am He"?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_115"></a><font color="GREEN">115</font>. Him, the Supreme Lord, by whose compassion even the dumb becomes eloquent, the lame in a moment obtains strength to leap mountains, and even the man blind from his birth receives eyes beautiful like two lotuses,--or what still greater marvel shall I add?--Him I worship, the moon-faced son of Nanda, the philosopher's stone of the faithful.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_116"></a><font color="GREEN">116</font>. Boundless is time, bounteous the earth, and great is the family of the devout worshippers of Vish.nu; somebody will be found at some time or other on the earth who will appreciate my merits.<a name="page_172_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_172_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_117"></a><font color="GREEN">117</font>. Having studied under my preceptor Nârâya.na, the best of teachers, his book, which bears the title of "The Ornament of Faith,"--having read it with all its supplements and appendices, and by his kindness to his faithful disciples having mastered all its mysteries,--and having become a receptacle of faith myself, I have now composed according to my ability this century of stanzas, a necklace of pearls of good doctrine, which have for their subject the distinction of the individual Soul and Brahman.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_118"></a><font color="GREEN">118</font>. If we have uttered through inadvertence what is wrong, may the intelligent, observing it, correct all the
 
 <!------------------------page 173------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_173"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 173</font></a>
 
 errors; the feet of the traveller do sometimes stumble, and sometimes the speaker speaks through bewilderment what is incompatible.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_119"></a><font color="GREEN">119</font>. In a poem strung of all excellences the mean man hunts for faults and never an excellence; in a palace all compact of jewels it is the ant that will see a flaw.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_120"></a><font color="GREEN">120</font>. Let those who are envious and bereft of sense, detect a fault if they will; but let the connoisseurs count the merits; they who behold the merits and not the faults,--these are the good, these give the highest satisfaction.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_121"></a><font color="GREEN">121</font>. Let this work of the poet Pûr.nânanda be read and be heard, which is devoted to proving the difference of the individual soul from the Supreme,--which is excellent with its sentences that distinguish truth from falsehood, and is approved by the devotees of Vish.nu,--based on the doctrine of Madhva, and pleasing with a composition full of sweet words,--O ye best of the worshippers of Bhagavat, if faith be desired in your minds.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="pp_122"></a><font color="GREEN">122</font>. On the neck of the faithful may this Tattvamuktâvalî<a name="page_173_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_173_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> abide for ever,--whose beauty is increased by the apt arrangement of sweet and soft words but which is free from rhetorical ornaments,--beautiful with a profusion of sentences sweet like milk, and with its parts all bright and elegant,--a special source of delight to the intelligent,--charming with a host of excellences and devoid of even the trace of a fault.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../index.htm">Journals</a> <a href="../../hin/etc/index.htm">Hindu Articles</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 137------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_137"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 137</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_137_note_1"></a><a href="#page_137_fr_1">1</a>. Works, vol. i. pp. 139-150. See also Prof. Monier Williams, J.R.A.S. Vol. XIV. N.S. p. 304.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_137_note_2"></a><a href="#page_137_fr_2">2</a>. As the different systems are arranged in the Sarva D. S. according to their respective relation to the Vedânta, we can easily understand why Mâdhava there places these two systems so low down in the scale, and only just above the atheistic schools of the Chârvâkas, Buddhists, and Jainas.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 138------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_138"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 138</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_138_note_1"></a><a href="#page_138_fr_1">1</a>. No date is given.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_138_note_2"></a><a href="#page_138_fr_2">2</a>. Dr. Banerjea has quoted and translated several stanzas in his 'Dialogues on Hindu Philosophy.'</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 155------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_155"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 155</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_155_note_1"></a><a href="#page_155_fr_1">1</a>. The Bengali translation explains these as the internal powers (<i>antara"ngâ</i>) Hlâdinî, etc., and the external (<i>bahira"ngâ</i>) Prahvâ, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_155_note_2"></a><a href="#page_155_fr_2">2</a>. There is a favourite Naiyâyik example of a <i>kevalânvayi</i> middle term, "a jar is nameable because it is cognizable as a web is."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_155_note_3"></a><a href="#page_155_fr_3">3</a>. Or <i>vedavishaye</i> may perhaps simply mean <i>vede</i>, cf. šl. 112.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_155_note_4"></a><a href="#page_155_fr_4">4</a>. The author here explains the sentence <i>tat tvam asi</i>, as really meaning <i>tasya tvam asi</i> "thou art Its."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_155_note_5"></a><a href="#page_155_fr_5">5</a>. In "Thou art that," 'thou' and 'that' would refer to the same subject (<i>sâmânâdhikara.nya</i>).</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 156------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_156"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 156</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_156_note_1"></a><a href="#page_156_fr_1">1</a>. This is often used as an illustration in Vedânta works, as <i>e.g.</i> B.rihad Âra.ny. Up. ii. 1. 20, "as the spider proceeds with his web, as the little sparks proceed from fire, so from this Soul proceed all vital airs, all worlds, all gods, all beings."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_156_note_2"></a><a href="#page_156_fr_2">2</a>. This is another suggested method of interpreting the words "I am Brahman." It may be only a common case of "qualified superimponent indication," as "the man of the Panjâb is an ox" (cf. Kâvya Prakâša, ii. 10-12). Cf. the definition of upachâra in the Sâhitya Darpa.na: <i>upachâro hi nâmâtyanta.m višakalitayoh šâd.rišyâtišayamahimnâ bhedapratîtisthaganamâtram</i>.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 157------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_157"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 157</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_157_note_1"></a><a href="#page_157_fr_1">1</a>. Dr. Banerjea (<i>Dialogues</i>, p. 379) reads <i>kadâpy atyayajñânam, i.e.</i> vyabhichâra; but all the MSS. which I have compared read <i>na kadâ vyatyaya</i> (or <i>vyatyaya.m</i>) <i>jñânam</i>; <i>kadâ</i> seems irregularly used for <i>kadâpi</i>, as it is also in šl. 113, <i>c</i>.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 158------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_158"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 158</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_158_note_1"></a><a href="#page_158_fr_1">1</a>. In such sentences as "That art thou," "I am Brahman," etc., the primary power of the words, <i>i.e.</i> "Denotation" (<i>abhidhâ</i>), could not express the unconditioned Brahman destitute of all attributes; for Denotation rests upon the ordinary conventional meaning, and how could this take in an idea so far removed from ordinary experience? Nor could it be the secondary power "Indication" (<i>laksha.nâ</i>), as in the well-known instance of "the herd-station on the Ganges," where the Ganges, by "indication," means the shore and not the stream. For "indication" must be based on some connexion between the primary and the indicated secondary meaning; but how can that which is "without a second" be connected with anything?</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_158_note_2"></a><a href="#page_158_fr_2">2</a>. I suppose that these are (1) the incompatibility of the primary sense; (2) the common currency of the secondary meaning, <i>e.g.</i> when "Europe" is used to imply its inhabitants in the phrase "Europe makes war:" (3) a motive, as in "a herd-station on the Ganges," where "Ganges" is used instead of "the bank of the Ganges," in order to imply the coolness and purity of the spot.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_158_note_3"></a><a href="#page_158_fr_3">3</a>. Cf. the Bengali proverb <i>mâthâ nâi târ mâthâbyathâ</i>, "he has no head and yet he has a headache."</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 159------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_159"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 159</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_159_note_1"></a><a href="#page_159_fr_1">1</a>. In the first ex. there is <i>šuddha-sâropa-laksha.nâ</i> or "pure superimponent indication," in the second there is <i>šuddha-sâdhyavasâna-l.</i> or "pure introspeceptive indication," where the ghî is swallowed up in the "life." Most writers, however, disallow <i>upachâra</i> in <i>šuddha-laksha.nâ</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_159_note_2"></a><a href="#page_159_fr_2">2</a>. He seems to imply that each of these three requisites fails in the present case,--there is no primary meaning, and still less a secondary, and there is no connexion with any other object.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_159_note_3"></a><a href="#page_159_fr_3">3</a>. He now proceeds to declare his own opinions.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_159_note_4"></a><a href="#page_159_fr_4">4</a>. Taitt. Upanish. ii. 4.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 160------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_160"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 160</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_160_note_1"></a><a href="#page_160_fr_1">1</a>. Cf. the Ka.tha Up. vi. 12, "The soul is not to be reached by speech nor by the mind nor by the eye."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_160_note_2"></a><a href="#page_160_fr_2">2</a>. For <i>skhaladgati</i>, cf. <i>Kâvyaprakâša</i>, ii. 16.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_160_note_3"></a><a href="#page_160_fr_3">3</a>. This line is quoted from Šruti in the Maitri Upanishad, vi. 22.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_160_note_4"></a><a href="#page_160_fr_4">4</a>. Cf. Sâhityadarpa.na, ii. "On the old man's saying, when giving directions to the middle-aged man," etc. The Sâhitya D. uses the terms <i>âvâpoddhârau</i>, the Siddhântamuktâvalî (p. 80) uses <i>âvâpodvâpan</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_160_note_5"></a><a href="#page_160_fr_5">5</a>. This is one of the tenets of Râmânujas as well as Pûr.naprajñas.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_160_note_6"></a><a href="#page_160_fr_6">6</a>. The <i>vyâpâra</i> or intermediate agency is defined as <i>taj-janyatve sati taj-janya-janako hi vyâpâra.h</i>.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 161------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_161"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 161</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_161_note_1"></a><a href="#page_161_fr_1">1</a>. Compare the memorial line, <i>Šokamohau jarâm.rityû kshutpipâse sha.dûrmaya.h</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_161_note_2"></a><a href="#page_161_fr_2">2</a>. With this curious use of <i>akartum</i> (extending the analogy of such forms as <i>akurvan</i>, <i>ak.ritvâ</i>, etc.) cf. Theognis, 621: {Greek: <i>pas tis ploúsion ándpa tíei atíei dè penixrón</i>}. Cf. Shilleto, Cambridge Journ. of Philology, 1876, p. 161.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_161_note_3"></a><a href="#page_161_fr_3">3</a>. Could <i>loke</i> mean that it will hold good "of the world" as his body?</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_161_note_4"></a><a href="#page_161_fr_4">4</a>. Cf. "Whose body nature is and God the soul."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_161_note_5"></a><a href="#page_161_fr_5">5</a>. <i>I.e.</i> he creates the world to give their deserts to the different souls.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_161_note_6"></a><a href="#page_161_fr_6">6</a>. The objector urges "why should our good or evil deserts oblige God to act in a certain way?" He answers by referring to the well-known legend given in the Bhâgavata Purâ.na, viii. ch. 2-4. A certain king, named Indradyumna, became an elephant through Agastya's curse. One day, while drinking in a lake, he was seized by a crocodile, and the struggle lasted for a thousand years. At last, in despair, he prayed to Vish.nu, who came down mounted on Garu.da and killed the crocodile. Thus we see that, although in one sense the deserts of one being cannot attach themselves to another, still they must cause certain actions in another being, or it would be impossible that each should receive its due reward or punishment.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 162------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_162"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 162</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_162_note_1"></a><a href="#page_162_fr_1">1</a>. These six qualities, according to the Commentator on the Bhâgavata P. i. 3. 36, are sovereignty, knowledge, glory, prosperity, dispassion, and virtue; a different list is given in the Sarva Darš. S. p. 54, l. 22 (but cf. p. 69, l. 18). See also <i>infra</i> in šl. 95.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_162_note_2"></a><a href="#page_162_fr_2">2</a>. Rig V. i. 164, 20, "Two birds associated together, two friends, take refuge in the same tree; one of them eats the sweet fig; the other, abstaining from food, merely looks on."</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 163------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_163"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 163</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_163_note_1"></a><a href="#page_163_fr_1">1</a>. Another reading is <i>brahma.ny âtmanirîksha.nât</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_163_note_2"></a><a href="#page_163_fr_2">2</a>. <i>I.e.</i> it would be always <i>videre videntem</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_163_note_3"></a><a href="#page_163_fr_3">3</a>. Cf. Hitopadeša, Introd. šl. 45.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_163_note_4"></a><a href="#page_163_fr_4">4</a>. In Vedânta S. i. 2. 4, it is shown that certain passages in the Upanishads refer to Brahman and not the embodied soul, "because of the application therein of the terms object and agent;" as <i>e.g.</i> in the passage of the Chhândogya Upan. iii. 14, "I shall attain it when I have departed from hence." These words imply an agent who attains and also an object which is attained, <i>i.e.</i> Brahman. Ša"nkara in his comment on i. 2. 11 illustrates this by the passage in the Katha Upanishad iii. 1, "The two, drinking the due reward from their works, in this world entered the cave, in the highest place of the supreme soul" (sc. the heart).</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_163_note_5"></a><a href="#page_163_fr_5">5</a>. Cf. Vedânta Sûtras i. 2. 6, where Ša"nkara quotes the passage from the Bhagavad Gîtâ (xviii. 61), "The Lord of all beings abides in the region of the heart,--causing all beings to revolve by his illusion as though mounted on a machine."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_163_note_6"></a><a href="#page_163_fr_6">6</a>. He uses this very expression <i>upâsyopâsakabhâva</i> in his Comment. on i. 2. 4.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 164------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_164"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 164</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_164_note_1"></a><a href="#page_164_fr_1">1</a>. <i>I.e.</i> in the word <i>jîvâtmânau</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_164_note_2"></a><a href="#page_164_fr_2">2</a>. I suppose that this means that the <i>dvandva</i> compound <i>d.rishadupala</i> has some analogy to one like <i>jîvâtmânau</i>, which involves identity, as the upper and lower millstone form one instrument; but there (in accordance with Pâ.n. 2. 2. 34, <i>vârtt.</i>) the less important word meaning the upper and smaller stone (<i>upalâ</i>) is placed last (cf. 2. 2. 31).</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_164_note_3"></a><a href="#page_164_fr_3">3</a>. But <i>jîvâtmânau</i> is a <i>dvandva</i>, not a <i>karmadhâraya</i> compound.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_164_note_4"></a><a href="#page_164_fr_4">4</a>. Brihad Âra.nyaka Upan. v. 12. 1.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_164_note_5"></a><a href="#page_164_fr_5">5</a>. <i>I.e.</i> this is one of the modes of worshipping Brahman by meditating on him in some lower visible form, not as really expressing his real nature.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 166------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_166"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 166</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_166_note_1"></a><a href="#page_166_fr_1">1</a>. Colebrooke's Essays, vol i. p. 359.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_166_note_2"></a><a href="#page_166_fr_2">2</a>. This is an attack on Râmânuja's system, as opposed to that of Pûr.naprajña or Madhva, cf. Sarva-daršana S. p. 52, l. 20, "What is the real truth? The real truth is plurality, unity, and both. Thus unity is admitted in saying that Brahman alone subsists in all forms as all is its body; both unity and plurality are admitted in saying that one only Brahman subsists under a plurality of forms, diverse as soul and non-soul; and plurality is admitted in saying that the essential natures of soul, non-soul, and the Lord are different and not to be confounded." This doctrine is opposed by the followers of Madhva, see <i>ibid</i>., Pûr.naprajña-darš. p. 61, l. 11.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 167------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_167"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 167</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_167_note_1"></a><a href="#page_167_fr_1">1</a>. <i>I.e.</i> those affecting the three "humours" of the body, <i>i.e.</i> <i>vâyu</i> 'wind,' <i>pitta</i> 'bile,' and <i>kapha</i> 'phlegm.' Certain flavours of the honey counteract one disorder and others another. The Sušruta thus describes honey (vol. i. p. 185): "When cooked it removes the three-fold disorders, but when raw or sour it causes them; when used in various applications it cures many disorders; and since it is composed of many different things it is an excellent medium for mixing. But as it consists of the juices of flowers which are mutually contrary in the action, potency, and qualities of their various ingredients, and it may happen that poisonous insects may be included, it is only good as a remedy for cold diseases."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_167_note_2"></a><a href="#page_167_fr_2">2</a>. In allusion to Mu.n.d. Upan. iii. 2. 8.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_167_note_3"></a><a href="#page_167_fr_3">3</a>. Most of the MSS. and the Benares Pa.n.dit read <i>kshîroda</i>; but the Calcutta ed. and one of the two MSS. in the Library of the Calcutta Sanskrit College read <i>kshâroda</i>, which seems preferable. If we read <i>kshîroda</i>, the line would require to be rendered, "but from the difference between milk mixed with water and pure water," or perhaps "from the difference between the milk-ocean and the water-ocean."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_167_note_4"></a><a href="#page_167_fr_4">4</a>. Cf. Šakunt. šl. 155.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 168------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_168"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 168</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_168_note_1"></a><a href="#page_168_fr_1">1</a>. Bhâg. Pûr. iii. 28. 41.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_168_note_2"></a><a href="#page_168_fr_2">2</a>. The name <i>šûnyavâda</i> is generally applied to Buddhism; here it is applied by way of reproach to the Vedânta, which is called in the Padma-purâ.na "secret Buddhism" (<i>prachchhanna.m Bauddham</i>).</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_168_note_3"></a><a href="#page_168_fr_3">3</a>. Mahâbh. xii. 9690.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_168_note_4"></a><a href="#page_168_fr_4">4</a>. This dialogue occurs in Mahâbh. xii. 9604, ff.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_168_note_5"></a><a href="#page_168_fr_5">5</a>. The Râmânujas and the Mâdhvas deny that the Supreme Being is <i>nirgu.na</i>,--thus there is a quotation in the Sarva Daršana S. p. 64. "Vâsudeva is the supreme Brahman, endowed with auspicious attributes" (cf. p. 69, l. 18; p. 73, l. 2).</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 169------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_169"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 169</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_169_note_1"></a><a href="#page_169_fr_1">1</a>. This is the <i>prastara</i> or bundle of sacred grass, which plays an important part in the sacrificial ritual, cf. Taittirîya S. i. 7. 4, "<i>yajamâna.h prastara.h</i>," where Sâya.na remarks, "<i>yajamânavad yâgasâdhanatvât prastare yajamânatvopachâra.h</i>." This description of the grass as the sacrificer is really only meant as metaphorical praise, since the actual attributes of the sacrificer are evidently absent from the grass. (Cf. Mîmâ.msâ Sûtras, i. 4. 23.)</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_169_note_2"></a><a href="#page_169_fr_2">2</a>. Clearer insight abolishes imagined attributes, as <i>e.g.</i> the supposed snake in the rope; but real attributes remain untouched, and we hold Brahman's attributes to be real.--I read <i>abâdha.h</i> in I. 2.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 170------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_170"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 170</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_170_note_1"></a><a href="#page_170_fr_1">1</a>. I do not know where this passage occurs, but the kindred word <i>satyadharman</i> is applied to several deities in the Rigveda.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_170_note_2"></a><a href="#page_170_fr_2">2</a>. The Vedântins hold that nothing exists besides Brahman; and yet, although they thus deny the existence of any other thing or quality, they hold that certain qualities are imagined to exist in him, forgetting that only one who has seen silver can imagine <i>rajatatva</i> in nacre.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_170_note_3"></a><a href="#page_170_fr_3">3</a>. It is a favourite doctrine of the Vedânta that ignorance, as being imagined by ignorance, is itself false.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_170_note_4"></a><a href="#page_170_fr_4">4</a>. Manu, i. 80, "There are numberless Manvantaras, creations and destructions numberless; the being supremely exalted performs all this, as in sport, again and again."</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 171------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_171"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 171</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_171_note_1"></a><a href="#page_171_fr_1">1</a>. Or this may mean "since Vish.nu has accepted it as the instrument of his sport."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_171_note_2"></a><a href="#page_171_fr_2">2</a>. "The <i>prasâda</i> is any article of food that has been consecrated by previous presentation to an idol, after which it is distributed among the worshippers on the spot, or sent to persons of consequence at their own houses" (Wilson's Works, vol. 1. p. 116). Cf. also the legend in p. 134, where "Râm Dâs at noon halted and bathed the god, and prepared his food, and presented it, and then took the <i>prasâd</i>, and put it in a vessel, and fed upon what remained." (The food consecrated at the temple of Puri is especially called the <i>Mahâprasâda</i>.) There is a distich current among the Bhâktas:</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_171_note_3"></a><a href="#page_171_fr_3">3</a>. But the true devotee is neither devoted to enjoyment nor to dispassion, is equally apart from and superior to both.</p>
 
 <table align="center">
 
 <tr><td><i>jñâna.m nirâk.ritir, Brahma tyaktvâ bhaktyâ bhajâchyutam</i> |<br>
 <i>yatra prasâdasevâpi bhaktir anyasya kâ kathâ</i> ||</td></tr>
 
 </table>
 
 <p>"Knowledge is rejection; abandon Brahman and worship Vish.nu. Here where even the homage paid to the <i>prasâda</i> counts as faith, what need to mention anything besides?" Thus the devotee does everything by faith, and dispassion and enjoyment are to him alike swallowed up in faith.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 172------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_172"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 172</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_172_note_1"></a><a href="#page_172_fr_1">1</a>. Cf. Sarva D. S. p. 52, l. 8 infr. "The statements that the Supreme Spirit is devoid of qualities, are intended to deny his possession of phenomenal qualities [such as liking, disliking, etc.]."</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_172_note_2"></a><a href="#page_172_fr_2">2</a>. Cf. the šloka in the prologue of the Mâlatîmâdhava.</p>
 
 <!----------------------footnotes page 173------------------------>
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_173"></a><font color="GREEN" size="1">p. 173</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_173_note_1"></a><a href="#page_173_fr_1">1</a>. Or "the necklace of the pearls of truth."</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>