<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="tmt091.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="tmt093.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">68. THE BEAVER OF KILLISNOO</h3>
 <p>Some people belonging to the Dê'citân family captured a small beaver, and, as it was cunning and very clean, they kept it as a pet. By and by, however, although it was well cared for, it took offense at something and began to compose songs. Afterward one of the beaver's masters went through the woods to a certain salmon creek and found two salmon-spear handles, beautifully worked, standing at the foot of a big tree. He carried these home, and, as soon as they were brought into the house, the beaver said, "That is my make." Then something was said that offended it again. Upon this the beaver began to sing just like a human being and surprised the people very much. While it was doing this it seized a spear and threw it straight through its master's chest, killing him instantly. Then it threw its tail down upon the ground and the earth on which that house stood dropped in. They found out afterward that the beaver had been digging out the earth under the camp so as to make a great hollow. It is from this story that the Dê'citân claim the beaver and have the beaver hat. They also have songs composed by the beaver.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="tmt093.htm">Next: 69. Story Of The Grizzly-Bear Crest Of The Te'qoed<u>î</u></a></center>
 </body>