<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="tmt059.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="tmt061.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">36. THE THUNDERS</h3>
 <p>A high-caste girl who had four brothers went out of the house one morning and stepped on a snail. Then she said. "Oh! this nasty thing. There isn't a time when I go out but that snail is around this house." The evening after a youth of about her own age came to the girl, and she went off with him.</p>
 <p>When the people found that she had disappeared they searched for her everywhere. They did not know what had become of her. Her brothers also hunted everywhere, but for a long time without result.</p>
 <p>Some distance behind the village was a high, perpendicular cliff without a tree or a bush on it, and half way up they at last saw their sister with a very large snail coiled around her. They ran about underneath and called to her to throw herself down, but she could not. She was stuck there.</p>
 <p>After this the four brothers tried to find some way of flying. They tried one kind of wood after another and also bone for wings but in vain. After they had flown for a short distance they always dropped down again. Finally they employed yellow cedar. The first time they used it they got half way up to the place where their sister was, but the second time they reached her and dragged her down, leaving the snail still there.</p>
 <p>But the four brothers now left their own village, because they said that their sister had disgraced them, and they became the Thunders. When they wove their wings you hear the thunder, and, when they wink, you see the lightning.</p>
 <p>At the time when these brothers first went away the people at their father's village were starving, so they flew out over the ocean, caught a whale and brought it to the town that it might be found next morning. So nowadays people claim that the Thunder is powerful and can get anything, because they know that it was powerful. at that time. After the famine was over they left the world below, went to the sky to live, and have never been seen since.</p>
 <p>The, Taqêstîna' claim the Thunder, because those brothers belonged to that family.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="tmt061.htm">Next: 37. Origin of the Screech Owl</a></center>
 </body>