<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="tmt107.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="tmt109.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">84. THE REJECTED LOVER</h3>
 <p>Somewhere to the north lived a chief who had a daughter and a nephew who was in love with this daughter. In olden times when a man married a woman with a marriageable daughter he married the daughter as well, so the youth wanted to marry this chief's wife in order to get her daughter. The boy's father was chief of a certain clan. When he found that he could not get this woman by himself the young man told his mother, and his mother worked hard for him. They carried in slaves and goods of all kinds to the chief. Still the chief would not consent, for he wanted his daughter to marry some great chief from outside. He would not let anyone in the village have her. It was really the girl, however, that had induced her father not to give his consent. She must have been in love with somebody else or her father would not have spoken in that way.</p>
 <p>The boy's father had him ornamented with abalone shell, in his ears and all over his shirt, but, just as soon as he came in decorated in this way, along with his mother, the girl would jump up, raise her marten robe in front of her face, run to meet them before, they sat down and say to him, "You may be decorated with all kinds of valuable shells, but I will not have you." The boy and her mother were</p>
 <p><a name="page_244"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 244</font></a></p>
 <p>hurt at this. At first the girl liked her cousin well enough, but, when she found that he had made hard feelings between her parents, she began to feel unkindly toward him. Probably her father hated the boy because his wife was willing to marry him.</p>
 <p>One day the girl felt lonely and asked her cousin to go up with her to get spruce bark to eat. The girl took along her little servant girl and the boy his little servant boy. So they went up back of the town until they came to a place where there were only spruces with open grassy spots between. The girl sat down on one of these latter and her cousin took the bark off for her. He was very good to her, and tried to humor her in every way, but by and by she said to him, "Pull off your marten robe and put it into that pond close by." The boy did so, saying, "Did you think I could not do that? I have plenty of marten robes." Then the girl spoke again saying, "Pull off all of your hair." He began to do so, and, when it was all pulled out, she said, "All right." Then she said, "Take all those shells from your ears and face and throw them away." The boy began to feel disturbed (lit. strange) about what she was saying to him, but he did so. As soon as he had finished, however, the girl and her servant ran home.</p>
 <p>Now the boy did not dare to return, because he had nothing to wear, his marten robe being wet and his shells lost in the grass. So he took some moss wide enough to cover his shoulders and body and lay down upon a point at the edge of the woods. He felt very badly and cried hard as he lay there. When he looked up he saw a loon swimming about in the sea. By and by he looked up again and he again saw the loon in the same place. Every now and then it uttered a cry. Finally, as he was lying with his head down, he heard some one say to him, "I have come after you." He looked up again but saw nothing except that loon. The fourth time this happened he kept watch, for he thought that it was the loon, and he saw a man coming to him. Before this person, who was in fact the loon, could say anything the boy exclaimed, "I have seen you." Then the loon said, "Come along with me. Get on my back and shut your eyes tight."</p>
 <p>Then the man did as this loon directed, and the latter dived down into the sea with him and came up quite a distance out. "Look up," it said. The youth did so and found himself some distance out on the water. The hair was growing again upon his head. Then the loon told him to close his eyes a second time, went out still farther, and told him to reopen them. He was out a very long distance. Then the boy thought, "What is he taking me out here for?" When he opened his eyes for the third time he could see a village, and the loon said to him, "You see that village. The chief there has a lovely daughter whom you, are to marry." After he had come up to the shore with him he, showed him this chief's house and said, "You are</p>
 <p><a name="page_245"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 245</font></a></p>
 <p>to marry the daughter of the chief who owns that house." Then the loon handed him the shells for his ears and his marten robe, which looked as nice as ever.</p>
 <p>At night the youth went to the chief's house, passed in to where his daughter was, and said, "Chief's daughter, I have been told that I am not good enough to marry you." But the girl liked him very much and married him at once.</p>
 <p>When news came to this girl's father, who was the Calm, that his child was married, he did not say anything, for she had been brought up very well, and she was to marry whomsoever she pleased.</p>
 <p>So the man stayed there very many years, but at last he wanted to return to his father's people. The chief took down his own canoe for his daughter and son-in-law, and they put all kinds of food into it. The people disliked to see them go, and the chief told his daughter to be good to her husband. The canoe that they had was a bear canoe, and everywhere they camped they had to take very good care of it. Before they set out the chief said to his daughter, "Don't let anybody whatever give you water. Let your husband always bring it and give it to you. He gave her a quill to drink water out of and a very small basket for her cup. Then the girl said to her husband, "You must let alone those girls you used to go with and those you were in love with. You are not to speak to them."</p>
 <p>When they came to his father's town all were glad to see the youth, for they had been looking for him everywhere. While they were there he always brought the water for his wife to drink as he had been told. One day, however, as he was going for water, his former sweetheart, who was angry with him because he would follow his wife around and pay no attention to her, ran through the woods to him, seized him and spoke to him. He, however, pulled himself away and would not answer her. When the girl put her quill into the water this time, however, the water was slimy. Before it had been pure and would drip like raindrops. At once she said, "I must leave you," and, although he begged her hard to stay, she got up and walked out. He tried to stop her but in vain. Every time he seized her his hands passed right through her. Then she began walking right out on the surface of the sea and he followed her. She said "Go back," but he kept on until they were a long distance out. Then she said, "Go back or I will look at you." So she turned around and looked at him, and he went straight down into the ocean.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="tmt109.htm">Next: 85. The Faithless Wife</a></center>
 </body>