<body>
 <p><a name="P2400_681930"></a>
 <sup>6 </sup>Sur., Card., and the Colbert Codex give "Zoticus."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2402_683182"></a>
 <sup>7 </sup>The Colbert Codex reads "Extacteus;" Cardulus gives "Stacteus," by which name he is designated beneath by them all.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2404_683634"></a>
 <sup>8 </sup>In one of the Colbert codices, and in another from the Sorbonne, there is a passage inserted here about the death of Adrian, which is said to have happened a little after that of these martyrs. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2419_685195"></a>
 <sup>9 </sup>Routh, <i>Reliqu. Sacrae</i>, vol. ii. pp. 233, 339, 341, 355. Compare also vol. ii. 334 and 346, this series.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2427_685699"></a>
 <sup>10 </sup>Also on the <i>Seventy Weeks</i> (p. 134, <i>supra</i>), vol i. pp. 227-240 and 322.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2428_685851"></a>
 <sup>11 </sup><i>Origines Sacrae</i>, vol. i. pp. 64-120.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2430_686059"></a>
 <sup>12 </sup><i>Works</i>, vol. ii. pp. 457-468.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2431_686352"></a>
 <sup>13 </sup>See Introductory Notice, p. 123, note 4, <i>supra</i>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2463_687969"></a>
 <sup>1 </sup>First edited from ancient manuscript by Aegidius Bucherius, of the Society of Jesus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2470_688134"></a>
 <sup>2 </sup>Euseb., <i>Hist. Eccles.</i>, vi. 11. [Narcissus must have been born about A.D. 121. Might have known Polycarp.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2471_688440"></a>
 <sup>3 </sup><i>Ibid.</i>, vi. 46. [Narcissus lived till A.D. 237, and died a martyr, aged 116.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2472_688973"></a>
 <sup>4 </sup>He was a pupil of Pantaenus, continued under Clement, and defended Origen against the severity of Demetrius. Two dates which are conjectural are adjusted to these facts. I find it difficult to reconcile them with those <i>implied</i> by Eusebius.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2477_691016"></a>
 <sup>1 </sup><i>Circulos</i> [Note the reference to Hippolytus.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2478_691473"></a>
 <sup>2 </sup><i>Gressus.</i> Vol. v. p. 3: also Bunsen, i. pp. 13, 281.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2479_692349"></a>
 <sup>3 </sup>[It seems probable that the <i>hegemony</i> which Alexandria had established in all matters of learning led to that full recognition of it, by the Council of Nicaea, which made its bishop the dictator to the whole Church in the annual calculation of Easter. Vol. ii. 343.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2480_692743"></a>
 <sup>4 </sup>i.e., "smith" or "brasier," probably from his <i>assiduity</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2481_693410"></a>
 <sup>5 </sup>Lunae vii. Perhaps, as Bucher conjectures, Lunae xiv., fourteen days, &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2482_693901"></a>
 <sup>6 </sup>The text is doubtful and corrupt here.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2483_694122"></a>
 <sup>7 </sup><i>Aliquid stillicidii.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P2487_694933"></a>
 <sup>8 </sup>[The Church's Easter-calculations created modern astronomy, which passed to the Arabians from the Church. (See Whewell's <i>Inductive Sciences.</i>) They preserved it, but did not improve it, in Spain. Christianity re-adopted it, and the presbyter Copernicus new-created it. The court of Rome (not the Church Catholic) persecuted Galileo; but it did so under the lead of professional "Science,'" which had darkened the human mind, from the days of Pythagoras, respecting <i>his</i> more enlightened system.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P2488_695957"></a>
 <sup>9 </sup>The word is <font face="SPIonic">afesij</font>, which Valesius makes equivalent to <font face="SPIonic">a0fethria</font>, the rope or post from which the chariots started in the race, and so = starting-point.-Tr.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2489_696291"></a>
 <sup>10 </sup><font face="SPIonic">periodou</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2493_696665"></a>
 <sup>11 </sup><font face="SPIonic">pro\j au0tw=n</font>-others read <font face="SPIonic">pro/</font>, before them.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2494_696892"></a>
 <sup>12 </sup>Anatolius writes that there were two Agathobuli with the surname Masters; but I fear that he is wrong in his opinion that they were more ancient than Philo and Josephus. For Agathobulus, the philosopher, flourished in the times of Adrian, as Eusebius writes in his <i>Chronicon</i>, and after him Georgius Syncellus.-Vales.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2495_697274"></a>
 <sup>13 </sup><font face="SPIonic">Aristoboulou tou= pa/nu</font>-Rufinus erroneously renders it <i>Aristobulum ex Paneade</i>, Aristobulus of Paneas. Scaliger also, in his <i>Animadversiones Eusebianae</i>, p. 130, strangely thinks that the text should be corrected from the version of Rufinus. And Bede, in his <i>De Ratione Computi</i>, also follows the faulty rendering of Rufinus, and writes <i>Aristobulus et Paniada</i>, as though the latter word were the proper name of a Jewish writer, finding probably in the <i>Codex</i> of Rufinus, which he possessed, the reading <i>Aristobulus et Paneada</i>, which indeed is found in a very ancient Paris manuscript, and also in the <i>Codex Corbeiensis</i>. But that that Aristobulus was not one of the seventy translators, as Anatolius writes, is proved by Scaliger in the work cited above. This Aristobulus was also surnamed <font face="SPIonic">dioa/skaloj</font>, or <i>Master</i>, as we see from the Maccabees, ii. 1. For I do not agree with Scaliger in distinguishing this Aristobulus, of whom mention is made in the Maccabees, from the Peripatetic philosopher who dedicated his <i>Commentaries on the Law of Moses</i> to Ptolemy Philometor-Vales. [See vol. ii. p. 487, and Elucidation II. p. 520, same volume, this series.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P2496_698762"></a>
 <sup>14 </sup><font face="SPIonic">ta/ diarhthria qo/ein</font>.</p>
 
 </body>