<body>
 <p><a name="P3203_815215"></a>
 <sup>4 </sup>Thus Cyril of Jerusalem, in the sixth book of his <i>Catecheses</i>, §§ 27 and 30, tells us how Manes fled into Mesopotamia, and was met there by that shield of righteousness (<font face="SPIonic">o#plon dikaiosu/nhj</font>) Bishop Archelaus, and was refuted by him in the presence of a number of Greek philosophers, who had been brought together as judges of the discussion. Epiphanius, in his <i>Heresies</i>, lxvi., and again in his work <i>De Mensuris et Poderibus</i>, § 20, makes reference to the same occasion, and gives some excerpts from the <i>Acts of the Disputation</i>. And there are also passages of greater or less importance in Jerome (<i>De vir. illustr</i>., ch. 72), Socrates (<i>Hist. Eccles.</i>, i. 22), Heraclianus bishop of Chalcedon (as found in Photius, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, Cod. xcv.), Petrus Siculus (<i>Historia Manichaeorum</i>, pp. 25, 35, 37), Photius (<i>Adversus Manichaeos</i>, book i., edited in the Biblioth. Coislin., Montfaucon, pp. 356, 358), and the anonymous authors of the <i>Libellus Synodicus</i>, ch 27, and the <i>Historia Haereseos Manichaeorum</i> in the Codex Regius of Turin. [See Cyril's text in Routh, <i>R. S.</i>, vol. v. pp. 198-205.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3204_816671"></a>
 <sup>5 </sup>As by Zacagnius at Rome, in 1698, in his <i>Collectanea Monumentorum Veterum Ecclesiae Graecae ac Latinae</i>; by Fabricius, in the <i>Spicilegium Sanctorum Patrum Saeculi</i>, iii., in his edition of Hippolytus, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3223_819632"></a>
 <sup>1 </sup>See vol. ii. p. 342, Elucidation II., this series. Note also, in the same volume, what is said, pp. 166-167.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3224_820877"></a>
 <sup>2 </sup>Lewin, <i>St. Paul</i>, vol. ii. p. 340. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3232_825908"></a>
 <sup>1 </sup>Of Archelaus, bishop of Caschar in Mesopotamia.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3235_825994"></a>
 <sup>2 </sup><i>Treasury.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3236_826092"></a>
 <sup>3 </sup>In Epiphanius, <i>Haeres.</i>, lxvi. 10, it is Marsipus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3237_828113"></a>
 <sup>4 </sup><i>Pietatis pretia.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3238_828212"></a>
 <sup>5 </sup>Nec numero aliquo nec discretione ulla distinguit. For <i>distinguit</i>, some propose <i>distribuit.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3239_828532"></a>
 <sup>6 </sup>Reading <i>commonentur</i>, as in the text. <i>Commoventur</i> is also suggested, = "were deeply moved."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3240_828771"></a>
 <sup>7 </sup>On the attitude of the Christians of the primitive Church towards warfare, see Tertullian's <i>De Corona Militis</i>, ch. 11, and the twelfth canon of the Nicene Council.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3242_829976"></a>
 <sup>8 </sup>[The similar institution of the Rogation fasts in the West is referred to the fifth century. Pellicia, p. 372; Hooker, book v. cap. xli. 2.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3243_830574"></a>
 <sup>9 </sup>Reading <i>cervicibus degravatis et laxis, demisso capite, frontem genibus elidit.</i> The text gives <i>demerso.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3246_836877"></a>
 <sup>10 </sup>At this point begins the portion of the work edited by Valesius from the Codex Bobiensis, which is preserved now in the Ambrosian Library.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3247_838049"></a>
 <sup>11 </sup>The Codex Bobiensis reads <i>Adda Turbonem.</i> This Adda, or Addas, as the Greek gives it below in ch. xi., was one of those disciples of Manes whom he charged with the dissemination of his heretical opinions in the East, as we see from ch. xi.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3248_838764"></a>
 <sup>12 </sup>Codex Bobiensis adds, <i>ad vesperam</i>, towards evening.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3249_838824"></a>
 <sup>13 </sup>The text gives <i>veluti peregrinans.</i> The Codex Bobiensis has <i>quippe peregrinans.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3250_839035"></a>
 <sup>14 </sup>On the attention paid by the primitive Church to the duties of hospitality, see Tertullian, <i>De Praescriptionibus</i>, ch. 20 [vol. iii. p. 252, this series]: Gregory Nazianzenus, in his <i>First Invective against Julian</i>; also Priorius, <i>De literis canonicis</i>, ch. 5, etc.; and Thomassin, <i>De Tesseris hospitalitatis</i>, ch. 26.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3251_839685"></a>
 <sup>15 </sup>In the text, <i>ignotum</i>; in the Codex Bobiensis, <i>ignoratum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3253_840364"></a>
 <sup>16 </sup>This letter, along with the reply of Marcellus, is given by Epiphanius in his <i>Heresies</i>, n. 6, from which the Greek text is taken.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3256_841136"></a>
 <sup>17 </sup><font face="SPIonic">feido/menoj</font>, The Latin gives <i>subveniens</i>, relieving.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3257_841494"></a>
 <sup>18 </sup>The Greek text of Epiphanius gave <font face="SPIonic">pro\j to\ a0dia/kriton</font>. Petavius substituted <font face="SPIonic">pro\j to\ mh\ a0dia/kriton</font>; and that reading is confirmed by the Latin, <i>uti ne indiscretos animos geras.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3258_841893"></a>
 <sup>19 </sup><font face="SPIonic">apo tou autou fe/resqai</font>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3259_842558"></a>
 <sup>20 </sup><font face="SPIonic">w\n to\ te/loj kata/raj e0ggu/j</font>. Cf. Heb. vi. 8.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3260_842713"></a>
 <sup>21 </sup>The text gives <font face="SPIonic">e0n toi=j ei0rhme/noij eu\aggeli/oij</font>, for which <font face="SPIonic">toi=j ei0rhme/noij e0n toi=j eu0aggeli/oij</font> may be proposed.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3261_842950"></a>
 <sup>22 </sup>Matt. vii. 18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3262_843316"></a>
 <sup>23 </sup>John i. 18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3263_843441"></a>
 <sup>24 </sup><font face="SPIonic">th=j a@llhj duswdi/aj tw=n gunaikw=n</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3264_843826"></a>
 <sup>25 </sup><font face="SPIonic">fei/dh|</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3265_843902"></a>
 <sup>26 </sup>1 Cor. vii. 35.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3267_844258"></a>
 <sup>27 </sup>The text gives <i>infrendebat</i>; the Codex Bobiensis has <i>infringebat.</i> [It seems to be a proverb, and I have so marked it. We should say, "he <i>chafed</i> like a lion," etc.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3271_845699"></a>
 <sup>28 </sup><i>Ex pueris suis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3272_845963"></a>
 <sup>29 </sup>Epiphanius, under this <i>Heresy</i>, num. 7, says that this was a fort situated on the other side of the river Stranga, between Persia and Mesopotamia.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3273_846929"></a>
 <sup>30 </sup>The section extending from this point on to ch. xii. is found word for word in the Greek of Epiphanius, num. 25.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3275_847591"></a>
 <sup>31 </sup><font face="SPIonic">micin de htoi sugkrasin</font>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3276_848189"></a>
 <sup>32 </sup><font face="SPIonic">proba/llein e\c au0tou= du/namin</font>. But the Codex Bobiensis gives <i>produxit ex virtute</i>, put forth from His power one, etc. The Codex Casinensis has <i>produxerit et esse virtutem</i>, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3277_848499"></a>
 <sup>33 </sup>The text is simply <font face="SPIonic">kai\ au0th\n probeblhke/nai to\n prw=ton a@nqrwpon, ta\ pe/nte stoixe=ia</font>. The Latin, with emendations from the Codex Bobiensis and Epiphanius, gives <i>quâ virtute circumdedit primum hominem, quae sunt quinque elementa</i>, etc., = with which power He begirt the first man, which is the same as the five elements, etc. With slight differences the Codex Bobiensis reads <i>quâ circumdedit</i>, and the Codex Casinensis, <i>quae virtute.</i> Petavius pointed out that there is probably an omission in the text here. And from a passage in Epiphanius, <i>Hoer.</i>, lxvi. n. 45, it has been proposed to fill out the sentence thus: <font face="SPIonic">proba/llein e\c e9autou= du/namin mhte0ra th=j zwh=j, kai au0th\n probeblhke/nai to\n prw=ton a@nqrwpon, au0th\n de\ th\n mhte/ra th=j zwh=j to/n te prw=ton a@nqrwpon ta\ pe/nte stoixei=a</font>. The sense might then be that the good Father put forth from Himself a power called the <i>Mother of Life</i>, that this Mother of Life put forth the <i>first man</i>, and that the said Mother of Life and the first man put forth (or constituted) the five elements. See the note in Routh's <i>Reliquiae Sacrae</i>, v. p. 49.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3278_849647"></a>
 <sup>34 </sup>The Codex Bobiensis omits the <i>ventus</i>, wind.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3279_850824"></a>
 <sup>35 </sup>The Greek gives <font face="SPIonic">e0stere/wsen e0n tw|= sterew/mati</font>. The Latin version has, "crucifixit eos in firmamento." And Routh apparently favours the reading <font face="SPIonic">e0stau/rwsen</font> = crucified them, etc. Valesius and the Codex Bobiensis have, "descendens eduxit principes Jesu, exiens in firmamentum quod est," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3280_851404"></a>
 <sup>36 </sup><font face="SPIonic">ei0j ei@dh o0ktw/</font>. The Latin however, gives <i>et sunt octo</i>, "and they are eight;" thus apparently having read <font face="SPIonic">ei0si/de' o0ktw/</font>, instead of <font face="SPIonic">ei/j ei@dh o0ktw/</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3281_851583"></a>
 <sup>37 </sup>i.e., one who bears on his shoulders, the upholder.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3282_851908"></a>
 <sup>38 </sup>Reading <font face="SPIonic">e0k tw=n ko/lpwn,</font> <i>de sinibus suis.</i> But the Codex Bobiensis gives <i>de finibus</i>, from His own territories.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3283_852145"></a>
 <sup>39 </sup>The Greek text is, <font face="SPIonic">o@pwj au0tw\| thn prosh/kousan e0pitimi/an dw\|</font>. The Latin gives, "quo illum, ut par erat, coerceret." The Codex Bobiensis reads, "quod illum, ut pareret, coerceret." It is clear also that Petavius read correctly <font face="SPIonic">e/pitimi/an</font> for <font face="SPIonic">e0piqumi/an</font> in Epiphanius.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3284_852625"></a>
 <sup>40 </sup><font face="SPIonic">ta\ futa/</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3285_852903"></a>
 <sup>41 </sup><font face="SPIonic">e!dhsen</font>. The Codex Bobiensis gives, "vexit animam in eo."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3287_853422"></a>
 <sup>42 </sup>But certain codices read <i>et parebat</i>, "and was obedient," in stead of <i>apparebat.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3288_853747"></a>
 <sup>43 </sup><font face="SPIonic">ka/douj</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3289_854108"></a>
 <sup>44 </sup><font face="SPIonic">porqmei=n</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3290_854246"></a>
 <sup>45 </sup><font face="SPIonic">a0po/krousin</font>. The Codex Casinensis has <i>apocrisin</i>; but the Codex Bobiensis gives <i>apocrusin.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3291_854561"></a>
 <sup>46 </sup>The text gives <font face="SPIonic">th=j yuxh=j</font>. But from the old Latin version, which has <i>animarum</i>, we may conjecture that <font face="SPIonic">tw=n yuxw=n</font> was read.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3292_854985"></a>
 <sup>47 </sup>The Latin version has "<i>vir</i> perfectus",-a reading which is due apparently to the fact that the author had mistaken the <font face="SPIonic">a0h/r</font> of the Greek for <font face="SPIonic">a0nh/r</font> [See note 2, p. 176, <i>supra</i>]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3293_856314"></a>
 <sup>48 </sup><font face="SPIonic">o9 qerismo\j a@rxwn</font>. The version of Petavius has "Sic et princeps alter, messor appellatus." Perhaps the reading should be <font face="SPIonic">o9 qerismou= a@rxwn</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3294_856533"></a>
 <sup>49 </sup><font face="SPIonic">loimo/n</font>. Other codices give <i>famem</i>, as reading <font face="SPIonic">limo/n</font>, famine.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3295_857126"></a>
 <sup>50 </sup><font face="SPIonic">e0a\n de\ ta\ a@nw th=j r9i/zhj po/nw| saleu/sh</font>. It may be also = And if the upper parts of the root shake under the exertion.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3297_857505"></a>
 <sup>51 </sup><font face="SPIonic">pw=j metaggi/zetai h9 yuxh\ ei0j pe/nte sw/mata</font>. But the Codex Bobiensis reads <i>transferuntur</i>; and the Latin version gives "quomodo et animae in alia quoque corpora transfunduntur" = how the souls are also transfused into other bodies.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3298_857989"></a>
 <sup>52 </sup>The text gives <font face="SPIonic">kelefw=n</font>, which is spoken of in Migne as an unknown animal, though <font face="SPIonic">ke/lefoj</font> (thus accentuated) occurs in ecclesiastical writers in the sense of a <i>leper</i>. It is proposed to read <font face="SPIonic">e/lefantiw=n</font>, "of elephants;" and so the Codex Bobiensis gives "elephantorum corpora," and Codex Casinensis has "in elefantia eorum corpora," which is probably an error for "in elephantiacorum corpora." Routh suggests <font face="SPIonic">e0lefanteiwn</font>. [<i>Reliqu. Sac.</i>, vol. v. p. 58.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3299_858501"></a>
 <sup>53 </sup><font face="SPIonic">qerisasa</font>, reaping.</p>
 
 </body>