<body>
 <p><a name="P3400_897359"></a>
 <sup>146 </sup>Matt. vii. 16. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3401_898036"></a>
 <sup>147 </sup><i>Ingenitam.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3402_899928"></a>
 <sup>148 </sup>The text gives "quoniam quod futurum est nescio, homo enim sum, non tamen," etc. Routh suggests "<i>quonam?</i> quod futurum," etc. = What has that to do with the matter? The future I know not, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3403_900664"></a>
 <sup>149 </sup>The text is, "sed homo a mala natura plasmatus manifestum est quia ipse sit fructus," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3405_901493"></a>
 <sup>150 </sup>Routh, however, points differently, so that the sense is: Be assured that it is necessary to give some proof, etc....For the quality of a wine, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3406_902880"></a>
 <sup>151 </sup>The text is, "ex hominis tempore a se creati cur malus ostendatur," which is taken to be equivalent to, "ex tempore quo hominem ipse creavit," etc. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3407_903363"></a>
 <sup>152 </sup>The reading adopted by Migne is, "si ergo ex eo homo est, mala natura, demonstratur quomodo suus fuit, ut frequenter ostendi," Others put the sentence interrogatively = If man takes his origin from him, (and) the evil nature is thus demonstrated, in what sense was man his own, etc.? Routh suggests <i>ex quo</i> for <i>ex eo</i> = If the evil nature is demonstrated just from the time of man's existence, how was man, etc.?</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3408_905322"></a>
 <sup>153 </sup>The reading is <i>inutilitatem.</i> But Routh points that this is probably the translation of <font face="SPIonic">th/n eu0te9leian</font>, <i>vilitatem</i>, meanness.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3409_907261"></a>
 <sup>154 </sup>Matt. ix. 17.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3410_907552"></a>
 <sup>155 </sup><i>Dominatione et observantiae usu.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3411_908496"></a>
 <sup>156 </sup>Matt. ix. 16. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3412_909480"></a>
 <sup>157 </sup>1 Cor. xii. 18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3414_909758"></a>
 <sup>158 </sup>1 Cor. iii. 17; 2 Cor. vi. 16.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3415_910508"></a>
 <sup>159 </sup>The reading is <i>scit et audit.</i> Routh somewhat needlessly suggests <i>scite audit</i> = he who hears intelligently.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3416_910705"></a>
 <sup>160 </sup>The codex gives "hic enim qui exstruis." It is proposed to read "sic enim qui exstruit" = For in this very way he who constructs.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3417_911528"></a>
 <sup>161 </sup>The text gives "quod si dicat quis inimicum esse eum qui plasmaverit corpus; Deus qui Creator," etc. The Codex Casinensis reads <i>Deum</i>. We adopt the emendation <i>Deo</i> and the altered punctuation, thus: "quod si dicat quis inimicum esse eum qui plasmaverit corpus Deo qui creator est animae," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3418_913403"></a>
 <sup>162 </sup>Reading "<i>per</i> conjunctionem" for the simple <i>conjunctionem.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3420_915173"></a>
 <sup>163 </sup>Reading "natus est et creatus." The Codex Casinensis has "natus est creatus."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3421_915543"></a>
 <sup>164 </sup>Matt. vi. 9; Luke xi. 2.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3422_915629"></a>
 <sup>165 </sup>Matt. vi. 6.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3423_915750"></a>
 <sup>166 </sup>Luke x. 18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3424_916413"></a>
 <sup>167 </sup>Codex Casinensis gives <i>introduceret</i>; but, retaining the reference to the Gentiles we read <i>introducerent.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3426_917304"></a>
 <sup>168 </sup>Matt. xxiii. 25; Luke xi. 39.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3427_917656"></a>
 <sup>169 </sup>Luke xi. 42.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3428_917868"></a>
 <sup>170 </sup>Matt. xxiii. 6; Mark xii. 38; Luke xx. 46.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3429_917959"></a>
 <sup>171 </sup>The Codex Casinensis gives a strangely corrupt reading here: "primos discipulos subitos in coenis, quod scientes Dominus." It is restored thus: "primos discubitus in coenis, quos sciens Dominus," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3430_918847"></a>
 <sup>172 </sup>1 Cor. ix. 9.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3431_919140"></a>
 <sup>173 </sup><i>Dividitur.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3432_919391"></a>
 <sup>174 </sup>Reading <i>majus</i> for the inept <i>malus</i> of the Codex Casinensis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3433_919666"></a>
 <sup>175 </sup>Routh refers us here to Maximus, <i>De Natura</i>, ยง 2. See <i>Reliquiae Sacrae</i>, ii. 89-91.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3434_919959"></a>
 <sup>176 </sup>The text is "multo inferior virtutis humanae," which is probably a Graecism.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3435_920481"></a>
 <sup>177 </sup>Reading <i>ceu</i> for the <i>eu</i> of the Codex Casinensis. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3436_920666"></a>
 <sup>178 </sup>The Codex Casinensis gives "nec quae vellem quidem," for which "nec aequalem quidem," etc., is suggested, as in the translation.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3438_921082"></a>
 <sup>179 </sup>Matt v. 16.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3439_921262"></a>
 <sup>180 </sup>The text gives <i>a quo si</i>, etc. Routh suggests <i>atqui si,</i> etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3440_921991"></a>
 <sup>181 </sup><i>Medietas.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3441_922098"></a>
 <sup>182 </sup>Reading <i>objectu...creaturarum</i>, instead of <i>obtectu</i>, etc., in Codex Casinensis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3442_923110"></a>
 <sup>183 </sup>The text of this sentence stands thus in Migne and Routh: "cui enim non fiat manifestum, solem istum visibilem, cum ab oriente fuerit exortus, et tetenderit iter suum ad occidentem, cum sub terram ierit, et interior effectus fuerit ea quae apud Graecos <i>sphaera</i> vocatur, quod tunc objectu corporum obumbratus non appareat?" The Codex Casinensis reads <i>quod nunc oblectu</i>, etc. We should add that it was held by Anaximander and others that there was a species of globe or sphere (<font face="SPIonic">sfai=ra</font>) which surrounded the universe [Vol. ii. p. 136. n. 2]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3443_924182"></a>
 <sup>184 </sup>Reading <i>ex suimet ipsius umbra</i> for <i>exuet ipsius umbra</i>, which is given in the Codex Casinensis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3444_924715"></a>
 <sup>185 </sup><i>Plagam.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3445_925307"></a>
 <sup>186 </sup><i>Ministrante.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3446_925610"></a>
 <sup>187 </sup>The text is "Sicut autem ante," etc. Routh suggests, <i>Sole adeunte</i>, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3447_926145"></a>
 <sup>188 </sup>Reading "ex aequo et justo, solis fulgore," etc. The Codex Casinensis has "ex ea quo solis fulgure."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3448_926587"></a>
 <sup>189 </sup>The text is altogether corrupt-<i>sed non intui hunc fieri ratus sum</i>; so that the sense can only be guessed at. Routh suggests <i>istud</i> for <i>intui.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3449_926874"></a>
 <sup>190 </sup>Codex Casinensis gives "omni nisi," for which we adopt "omni nisu."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3451_928707"></a>
 <sup>191 </sup>Reading <i>utriusque majus.</i> The Codex Casinensis has <i>utrunque majus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3452_928799"></a>
 <sup>192 </sup>The text is <i>dicit</i>, for which <i>dicitur</i> may be adopted.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3453_928931"></a>
 <sup>193 </sup>Gen. i. 4.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3455_930845"></a>
 <sup>194 </sup>Reading "patefaceret" for the "partum faceret" of Codex Casinensis. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3456_932466"></a>
 <sup>195 </sup>The text gives <i>sine hoc uno.</i> But perhaps Routh is right in suggesting <i>muro</i> for <i>uno</i> = without this wall.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3457_933113"></a>
 <sup>196 </sup>Some suppose that Archelaus refers here to the taking of Charrae by the Persians in the time of Valerianus Augustus, or to its recapture and restoration to the Roman power by the Eastern king Odenathus during the empire of Gallienus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3458_933451"></a>
 <sup>197 </sup>The ballista was a large engine fitted with cords somewhat like a bow, by which large masses of stone and other missiles were hurled to a great distance.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3459_934283"></a>
 <sup>198 </sup>The sense is obscure here. The text gives, "non substantia id est proposito adversarius quis dejecit," etc. Migne edits the sentence without an interrogation. We adopt the interrogative form with Routh. The idea perhaps is, Did no adversary with materials such as the kings of earth use, and that is as much as to say also with a determinate plan, overthrow, etc.?</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3460_935895"></a>
 <sup>199 </sup>The Codex Casinensis has "nec mirum putandum est consortio," etc. We read with Routh and others, <i>si ejus consortio</i>, or <i>quod ejus consortio</i>, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3461_936779"></a>
 <sup>200 </sup>John i. 5.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3462_936917"></a>
 <sup>201 </sup>The text gives simply, <i>sicut enim haec.</i> Routh suggests <i>hae.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3463_937044"></a>
 <sup>202 </sup>Reading <i>illaesis oculis</i> for the <i>illius oculis</i> of Codex Casinensis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3465_937378"></a>
 <sup>203 </sup>Matt. xix. 11.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3466_937413"></a>
 <sup>204 </sup>The text gives <i>et jam quidem</i> for the <i>etiam quidem</i> of the Cod. Casin.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3467_937552"></a>
 <sup>205 </sup>John x. 27. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3468_938917"></a>
 <sup>206 </sup><i>Apprehensus est hoc ingenio.</i> For <i>hoc</i> here, Routh suggests <i>hic</i> in reference to the <i>leo</i> so that the sense might be = But by this plan the lion was caught, and hereafter He will save the soul.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3469_939711"></a>
 <sup>207 </sup>The text is, "Quando enim pastor, nonne David de ore leonis," etc. We adopt the amended reading, "Quando enim pastor hoc fecit? Nonne David," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3470_940190"></a>
 <sup>208 </sup>Routh would put this interrogatively = Can he bring out of the mouth or the belly of the lion what it has once devoured?</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3471_940715"></a>
 <sup>209 </sup>This seems to be the sense intended. The text in the Codex Casinensis runs thus: "Cur igitur quod possit non illud potius asseris quod poterit propria virtute vincere leonem, si et pura Dei potentia," etc. For <i>si et pura</i> we may read <i>sive pura</i>, or <i>si est pura</i>, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3472_941969"></a>
 <sup>210 </sup>Routh takes it as a direct assertion = It follows, then, that these two objects are of one substance, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3473_942720"></a>
 <sup>211 </sup>The text runs. "sed aliud alio longe differre ignorantiam pastori ascribimus;" for which we adopt the emendation, "sed alium ab alio longe differre si dicamus, ignorantiam pastori ascribimus."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3475_944190"></a>
 <sup>212 </sup>Migne reads <i>irrueret.</i> Routh gives <i>irruerat</i>, had made an assault. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3476_944491"></a>
 <sup>213 </sup>The text gives <i>si causa traditus</i>, etc. Routh suggests <i>sive causa.</i> <i>Traditus</i>, etc.; so that the sense would be, For on what creature can the shepherd of the kids and lambs pronounce judgment, seeing that he is himself proved to be in fault to them, or to be the cause of their position? For the lamb, having been given up, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3477_945493"></a>
 <sup>214 </sup>Reading <i>eum ipse</i> for <i>eum ipsum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3478_946687"></a>
 <sup>215 </sup>Reading <i>si quis</i> for the simple <i>quis</i> of Codex Casinensis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3479_946885"></a>
 <sup>216 </sup>Reading "quaestione <i>rejecta</i>" for the <i>relecta</i> of Codex Casinensis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3480_947658"></a>
 <sup>217 </sup>This seems to be the general sense of the corrupt text here, <i>et non longe possit ei Paulus</i>, etc., in which we must either suppose something to have been lost, or correct it in some such way as this: "ut non longe post sit ei Paulus." Compare what Manes says also of Paul and himself in ch. xiii. above. It should be added, however, that another idea of the passage is thrown out in Routh. According to this the <i>ei</i> refers to <i>Jesus</i>, and the text being emended thus, <i>etsi non longe post sit ei</i>, the sense would be: although not long after His departure He had Paul as an elect vessel, etc. The allusion thus would be to the circumstance that Manes made such a claim as he did, in spite of the fact that after Christ's departure Paul was gifted with the Spirit in so eminent a measure for the building up of the faithful.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3481_948594"></a>
 <sup>218 </sup>Reading <i>aiebat</i> for the <i>agebat</i> of Codex Casinensis.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3482_948706"></a>
 <sup>219 </sup>2 Cor. xiii. 3. The reading here is, "Aut documentum quaeritis," etc. The Vulgate also gives <i>An experimentum</i>, for the Greek <font face="SPIonic">e0pei/</font>, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3483_948940"></a>
 <sup>220 </sup>The text is, "et quidem quod dico tali exemplo sed clarius." For <i>sed</i> it is proposed to read <i>fit</i>, or <i>sit</i>, or <i>est.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3484_949886"></a>
 <sup>221 </sup>Codex Casinensis has <i>quicunque.</i> We adopt the correction, <i>qui cum nec.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3485_950246"></a>
 <sup>222 </sup>Reading <i>confutatus</i> for <i>confugatus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3486_950767"></a>
 <sup>223 </sup>The text gives "et ideo ut consequenter erat," etc. Codex Casinensis omits the <i>ut.</i> Routh proposes, "et ideo consequenter thesaurus," etc. = and thus, of course, the treasure was preserved, etc. Comp. ch. xxvii. and xxxiv. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3488_951658"></a>
 <sup>224 </sup>The text has, "sedens ipse per se," etc.; for which we adopt "sed et ipse," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3489_951885"></a>
 <sup>225 </sup>The Codex Casinensis gives, "deinde die moriturus," which may be either a mistake for "deinde moriturus," or a contraction for "deinde die qua moriturus"-then on the day that he was about to die, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3490_952777"></a>
 <sup>226 </sup>The codex has, "Sin autem conderem se dicens, exposceret, devitarent persequi," etc.; which is corrected to, "Sin autem cohaeredem se dicens exposceret, devitarent atque," etc., which emendation is followed in the translation.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3491_953209"></a>
 <sup>227 </sup><i>Opus autem magis facere debere.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3492_954520"></a>
 <sup>228 </sup>The same sort of argument is employed against the Montanists by Theodorus of Heracleia on John's Gospel, ch. xiv. 17.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3493_954875"></a>
 <sup>229 </sup>It is remarked in Migne, that it is only in the heat of his contention that this statement is made by Archelaus as to the date of the appearance of Manes; for from the death of Christ on to the time of this discussion there are only some 249 years. [Is it not probable that here is a token of the spurious character of not a little of this work?]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3494_955590"></a>
 <sup>230 </sup>John xvi. 8.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3495_955783"></a>
 <sup>231 </sup>John xiv. 18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3496_956117"></a>
 <sup>232 </sup>Reading "sed absit hoc a Domino nostro Jesu Christo Salvatore omnis animae," instead of the codex's "sed absit hanc a Domino Jesu Christo Salvatore omne animae."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3497_956335"></a>
 <sup>233 </sup>If the reference, however, is to 2 Pet. iii. 9, as Routh suggests, it may rather be = He was not slack concerning His promises. The text is, "non enim moratus est in promissionibus suis." [A noteworthy reference to the second Epistle of St. Peter. For, if this work be a mere romance, yet its undoubted antiquity makes it useful, not only in this, but in many other critical matters.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3498_956808"></a>
 <sup>234 </sup>John xiv. 12, xvi. 28.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3499_956991"></a>
 <sup>235 </sup>Reading "abundantius vero conferens Paulo," instead of the corrupt text in the Codex Casinensis, "abundantibus vero confitens Paulo."</p>
 
 </body>