<body>
 <p><a name="P3501_957149"></a>
 <sup>236 </sup>The opening sentences of this chapter are given in a very corrupt form in our Codex Casinensis. Its text stands thus: "Tuum et ipsius indicio comprehensus es; haec enim versum te locutus, ignorans, qui dum, me vis probra conjicere majori culpae se succumbit. Dic age mihi studias qua Tiberio usque ad Probum defuncti sunt, dicent ad Jesum nolite nos judicare," etc. We have adopted these emendations: <i>tuimet</i> for <i>tuum et; adversum</i> for <i>versum; ignoras</i> for <i>ignorans; in me</i> for <i>me; succumbis</i> for <i>se succumbit; si, ut ais, qui a</i>, for <i>studias qua</i>; and <i>noli</i> for <i>nolite.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3502_958220"></a>
 <sup>237 </sup>Supplying <i>missurum</i>, which is not in the codex.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3503_958527"></a>
 <sup>238 </sup>Reading "noli nos tradere tormentis," instead of the meaningless "noli nostra de tormentis" of the codex.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3504_959137"></a>
 <sup>239 </sup>Reading <i>ut ais</i> instead of <i>ut eas.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3505_959273"></a>
 <sup>240 </sup>Gal. iii. 13.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3506_959395"></a>
 <sup>241 </sup><i>Nec quemquam vivificat.</i> 2 Cor. iii. 6.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3507_959490"></a>
 <sup>242 </sup>2 Cor. iii. 7.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3508_959539"></a>
 <sup>243 </sup>1 Cor. xv. 56.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3509_959640"></a>
 <sup>244 </sup>Matt. xxii. 29.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3510_959979"></a>
 <sup>245 </sup>John i. 12.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3511_960396"></a>
 <sup>246 </sup>Matt. xiii. 35.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3512_960491"></a>
 <sup>247 </sup>Reading <i>reliqui per ordinem</i> for the <i>qui per ordinem</i> of the codex.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3513_960947"></a>
 <sup>248 </sup>Rom. ii. 15.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3514_961099"></a>
 <sup>249 </sup>Rom. ii. 14.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3515_961500"></a>
 <sup>250 </sup>Reading "per hunc modum." But the Codex Casinensis gives "per hunc mundum"-through this world.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3516_962494"></a>
 <sup>251 </sup>2 Cor. iii. 7.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3517_962577"></a>
 <sup>252 </sup>Gal. iii. 13.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3518_962641"></a>
 <sup>253 </sup>1 Cor. xv. 56.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3520_963039"></a>
 <sup>254 </sup>John viii. 44. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3521_963459"></a>
 <sup>255 </sup>John viii. 44.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3522_963515"></a>
 <sup>256 </sup>The text is "sufficit tibi haec sunt an habes et alia." Routh proposes "sufficientia tibi haec sunt," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3523_964227"></a>
 <sup>257 </sup>Routh would make it = <i>You</i> will come under the condemnation...<i>you</i> will have to bear: he suggests <i>eris ergo</i> for <i>ero ego</i>, and <i>feras</i> for <i>feram.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3524_964516"></a>
 <sup>258 </sup>Rom. v. 14.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3525_964605"></a>
 <sup>259 </sup>Rom. v. 14.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3526_964770"></a>
 <sup>260 </sup><i>Nec aliter nisi essent ingenita.</i> Routh, however, would read <i>esset</i> for <i>essent</i>, making it = and that death could be nothing else than unbegotten.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3527_965497"></a>
 <sup>261 </sup>Reading <i>ex tempore</i> for the corrupt <i>exemplo re</i> of the codex.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3528_965635"></a>
 <sup>262 </sup>1 Cor. xv. 54.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3529_965990"></a>
 <sup>263 </sup>Wisd. i. 13.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3530_966418"></a>
 <sup>264 </sup>The text gives <i>discere</i>, to learn; but <i>dicere</i> seems the probable reading.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3532_967301"></a>
 <sup>265 </sup>Reading <i>inquam</i> for the <i>iniquam</i> of the Codex Casinensis. But Routh suggests <i>iniquae</i>, in reference to what has been said towards the close of ch. xxviii.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3533_967750"></a>
 <sup>266 </sup>The codex gives, "cum eas inimica semper memoriae ineresis sed oblivio;" which is corrected thus, "cum eis inimica semper memoriae inhaesisset oblivio."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3534_968532"></a>
 <sup>267 </sup>The text writes it <i>Juda.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3535_968795"></a>
 <sup>268 </sup>Matt. xxiii. 35.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3536_968906"></a>
 <sup>269 </sup>This would appear to be the meaning of these words, "transferens semper usque ad tempus in similes illius," if we suppose the speaker still to be keeping Rom. v. 12-14 in view. Routh suggests <i>transiens.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3538_969562"></a>
 <sup>270 </sup>Referring perhaps to Ps. cv. 15.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3539_969704"></a>
 <sup>271 </sup>Reading <i>interitui tradens</i> for the <i>interit ut tradens</i> of the codex.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3540_970703"></a>
 <sup>272 </sup>Reading <i>pacti</i> for the <i>acti</i> of the codex.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3541_971343"></a>
 <sup>273 </sup><i>Mors.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3542_971424"></a>
 <sup>274 </sup>1 Cor. xv. 54, 55.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3544_971877"></a>
 <sup>275 </sup>Gal. iii. 13.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3545_972026"></a>
 <sup>276 </sup>Recte videre. But perhaps we should read "recte <i>vivere</i>," to lead a righteous life.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3546_972130"></a>
 <sup>277 </sup>The phrase is <i>imaginariam legem.</i> On this expression there is a note in Migne, which is worth quoting, to this effect: Archelaus calls the Old Testament an <i>emblematic</i> or <i>imaginary law</i>, because it was the type or image of a future new law. So, too, Petrus de Vineis, more than once in his Epistles, calls a messenger or legate a <i>homo imaginarius</i>, as Du Cange observes in his <i>Glossary</i>, because he represents the person by whom he is sent, and, as it were, reflects his image. This word is also used in a similar manner by the old interpreter of Evagrius the monk, in the <i>Disputation between Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, and Simon the Jew</i>, ch. 13, where the Sabbath is called the <i>requies imaginaria</i> of that seventh day on which God rested. Hence Archelaus, in his answer to the presbyter Diodorus, ch xli. beneath, devotes himself to proving that the Old Testament is not to he rejected, because, like a mirror, it gives us a true image of the new law.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3547_973554"></a>
 <sup>278 </sup>John v. 17.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3548_973895"></a>
 <sup>279 </sup>Reading "invisibilia autem et intrinsecus." The Codex Casinensis has "invisibili autem et trinsecus."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3549_974390"></a>
 <sup>280 </sup><i>Absurdam</i>, standing probably for <font face="SPIonic">a@topon</font>, which may also be = flagitious. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3550_974964"></a>
 <sup>281 </sup>The codex reads, "ultionem fecerat retorquebat." We adopt either "ultionem quam fecerat retorquebat," or "ultionem fecit retorqueri."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3551_975286"></a>
 <sup>282 </sup>Num. xv. 32.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3552_976014"></a>
 <sup>283 </sup>Matt. xviii. 21.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3553_976851"></a>
 <sup>284 </sup>Matt. xii. 32.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3554_977606"></a>
 <sup>285 </sup>1 Tim. i. 9.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3555_978360"></a>
 <sup>286 </sup>This is one of those passages in which we detect the tendency of many of the early fathers to adopt the peculiar opinions of the Jewish rabbis on difficult points of Scripture. See also the <i>Disputation between Theophilus of Alexandria and the Jew Simon</i>, ch. 13. In accordance with the opinion propounded here by Archelaus, we find, for instance, in the <i>Scemoth Rabba</i>, p. 157, col. 1, that the making of the golden calf is ascribed to the Egyptian proselytes. See the note in Migne. [The passage is a note of antiquity and in so far of authenticity.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3556_979141"></a>
 <sup>287 </sup>The text is in <i>quo nec scelerum poenas aliquando rependeret.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3558_979737"></a>
 <sup>288 </sup>John viii. 44.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3559_980360"></a>
 <sup>289 </sup>Reading <i>commonens</i> for <i>communis ne. Communiens</i> is also suggested. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3560_980914"></a>
 <sup>290 </sup>Luke x. 18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3561_980963"></a>
 <sup>291 </sup>We have another instance here of a characteristic opinion of the Jewish rabbis adopted by a Christian father. This notion as to the intercourse of the angels with the daughters of men was a current interpretation among the Jews from the times of Philo and Josephus, and was followed in whole or in part by Tertullian, Justin, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athenagoras, Methodius, Cyprian, Lactantius, etc. Consult the note in Migne; [also p. 131, note 2, <i>supra</i>].</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3562_981523"></a>
 <sup>292 </sup>We give the above as a <i>possible</i> rendering. Routh, however, understands the matter otherwise. The text is, "alii vero in felicitate hominum filiabus admisti a dracone afflicti," etc. Routh takes the phrase <i>in felicitate</i> as = "adhuc in statu felici existentes:" so that the sense would be, "others, while they still abode in the blessed estate, had intercourse," etc. [Routh, <i>R. S.</i>, vol. v. pp. 118-122.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3563_982581"></a>
 <sup>293 </sup>Archelaus seems here to assign a twofold etymology for the name <i>devil</i>, deriving the Greek <font face="SPIonic">dia/boloj</font>, accuser, from <font face="SPIonic">diaba/llw</font>, in its two senses of <i>trajicere</i> and <i>traducere</i>, to cross over and to slander.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3564_982917"></a>
 <sup>294 </sup>Matt. iv. 10.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3565_983098"></a>
 <sup>295 </sup>Matt. iv. 10.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3566_983321"></a>
 <sup>296 </sup>John viii. 44.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3567_983561"></a>
 <sup>297 </sup>Matt iii. 7, 8.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3568_983855"></a>
 <sup>298 </sup>Reading <i>a nobis</i> for the <i>a vobis</i> of the codex.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3569_984407"></a>
 <sup>299 </sup>John i. 18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3570_984886"></a>
 <sup>300 </sup><i>Ex uno.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3571_985363"></a>
 <sup>301 </sup>The sense is obscure here. The text runs, "Interimere debes judicii ratione ut quis nostrum fallat appareat." Migne proposes to read <i>rationem</i>, as if the idea intended was this: That, consistently with his reasonings, Manes ought not to admit the fact of a judgment, because the notions he has propounded on the subject of men and angels are not reconcilable with such a belief.-If this can be accepted as the probable meaning, then it would seem that the use of the verb <i>interimere</i> may be due to the fact that the Greek text gave <font face="SPIonic">a0na=irei=n</font>, between the two senses of which-viz to kill and to remove-the translator did not correctly distinguish. Routh, however, proposes to read <i>interimi</i>, taking it as equivalent to <i>condemnari</i>, so that the idea might be = on all principles of sound judgment you ought to be condemned, etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3572_986615"></a>
 <sup>302 </sup>The codex reads simply, <i>Dei servare mandata</i>. We may adopt either <i>Dei non servare mandata</i>, as above, or, <i>Dei servare vel non servare mandata</i>, in reference to the freedom of will, and so = they may or may not keep the commandments.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3573_986938"></a>
 <sup>303 </sup>The codex has <i>praecedit</i>, for which <i>procedit</i> is proposed.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3574_987229"></a>
 <sup>304 </sup>Reading "laederet-illuderetur." But might it not rather be "laederet-<i>illidertur,</i>" not to bruise, but rather to be bruised, etc.?</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3575_987482"></a>
 <sup>305 </sup>Luke x. 19. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3577_987923"></a>
 <sup>306 </sup>This appears to be general sense of the very corrupt passage, "Quo videntur ostenso nulli dubium est unusquisque in quamcunque elegerit partem propria usus arbitrii potestate." In Migne it is amended thus: "Quo evidenter ostenso, nulli dubium est, quod unusquisque in quamcunque elegerit partem, propria usus fuerit arbitrii potestate."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3578_988369"></a>
 <sup>307 </sup>Adopting the emendation, "si a Deo bonus, ut asseris, mendacem esse dixisti Jesum." In the Codex Casinensis it stands thus: "sic a Deo bonus ut as mendacem esse dixisti Jesus." But Routh woud substitute "si a Deo <i>diabolus</i>" = if the devil is from God.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3579_988777"></a>
 <sup>308 </sup>The argumentation throughout this passage seems to rest on the fact that, in support of the dogma of the evil deity, Manes perverted, among other passages, our Lord's words in John viii. 44, as if they were not only "Ye are of your father the devil" but possibly also, "Ye are of the father of the devil;" and again, "He is a liar, and the father of him <i>is the same.</i>" Thus what Manes urges against Archelaus is this: If only what is good proceeds from the Deity, and if He is the Supreme Good Himself, you make out Jesus to have spoken falsely, when in John's Gospel He uses expressions which imply that the devil's father is a liar, and also the Creator of the <i>lying</i> devil.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3580_990206"></a>
 <sup>309 </sup>There are some words deficient in this sentence. The text reads, "Manes dixit:... dico: et adjecit, Omnis qui conditor est vel Creator aliquorum pater eorum...condiderit appellatur." It is proposed to supply <i>jam</i> before <i>dico</i>, and <i>quae</i> before <i>condiderit</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3581_991595"></a>
 <sup>310 </sup>Reading <i>et effectum</i> for the <i>ut effectum</i> of the codex.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3582_992036"></a>
 <sup>311 </sup>Or it may be "cogitations," reading <i>cogitata</i> for <i>agitata.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3583_992266"></a>
 <sup>312 </sup><i>Conceptis in se doloribus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3584_993087"></a>
 <sup>313 </sup>Gen. iii. 5. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3585_994931"></a>
 <sup>314 </sup>The text gives <i>parturies</i>. Routh suggests <i>parturiens</i>. The sense then might be, But if you repent, you will also deliver yourself of your burden like one who brings to the birth.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3586_995345"></a>
 <sup>315 </sup>Reading <i>Domine</i> for <i>Dominum</i>, which is given in the text.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3587_995852"></a>
 <sup>316 </sup>The quotation may refer to Isa. xxvi. 18. [A curious version.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3588_996405"></a>
 <sup>317 </sup>John viii. 44.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3589_996504"></a>
 <sup>318 </sup><i>Conturbari.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3590_996730"></a>
 <sup>319 </sup><i>Translatis in se.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3591_997068"></a>
 <sup>320 </sup>John xiii. 27.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3592_997550"></a>
 <sup>321 </sup><i>Paenitentia</i>. [2 Cor. vii. 10.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3594_998366"></a>
 <sup>322 </sup><i>Aetatis ac temporis privilegio.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3595_998583"></a>
 <sup>323 </sup><i>Velociter.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3596_998667"></a>
 <sup>324 </sup><i>Nec in aliquo remoratus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P3597_998724"></a>
 <sup>325 </sup>The text gives "inter unius anni spatium," for which <i>intra</i>, etc., is proposed. With certain others of the fathers, Archelaus seems to assign but one year to the preaching of Christ and to His working of miracles. See ch. xlix. [Vol. i. p. 391, this series.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3598_999144"></a>
 <sup>326 </sup>Referring probably to Heb i. 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3599_999353"></a>
 <sup>327 </sup>Migne gives this sentence as a direct statement. We adopt the interrogative form with Routh.</p>
 
 </body>