<body>
 <p><a name="P6800_2137214"></a>
 <sup>135 </sup>Lit., "equal to the highness (<i>summitati</i>) of the prince."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6801_2137291"></a>
 <sup>136 </sup>So LB. and Orelli, reading <i>qui-a</i>; the rest, <i>qui</i>-"who."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6802_2138524"></a>
 <sup>137 </sup>So Gelenius, reading <i>divinitus</i> for the ms. <i>divinas</i>, i.e., "with a divine nature and origin," which is retained in the first ed. and Orelli.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6803_2138735"></a>
 <sup>138 </sup>The ms., both Roman edd., Hild., and Oehler, read <i>ut</i>, "so that there are."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6804_2139051"></a>
 <sup>139 </sup>Cf. on this Platonic doctrine, ch. 24, p. 443, <i>infra</i>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P6806_2140042"></a>
 <sup>140 </sup>Lit., "a feeling of cold."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6807_2140162"></a>
 <sup>141 </sup>Lit., "sound of voice at all."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6808_2140279"></a>
 <sup>142 </sup>Lit., "of heaven terribly crashing."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6809_2140487"></a>
 <sup>143 </sup>So the later edd., adopting the emendation of Scaliger, <i>nothum</i>-"spurious," which here seems to approach in meaning to its use by Lucretius (v. 574 sq.), of the moon's light as borrowed from the sun. The ms. and first four edd. read <i>notum</i>, "known."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6810_2140790"></a>
 <sup>144 </sup>According to Huet (quoted by Oehler), "between that spurious and the true light;" but perhaps the idea is that of darkness interposed at intervals to resemble the recurrence of night.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6812_2141292"></a>
 <sup>145 </sup>Lit., "born, and that, too (<i>et</i> wanting in almost all edd.), into the hospice of that place which has nothing, and is inane and empty."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6813_2142920"></a>
 <sup>146 </sup>So most edd. reading <i>porrigetur</i> for the ms. <i>corrigetur</i>-"be corrected," i.e., need to be corrected, which is retained in the first ed.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6815_2143856"></a>
 <sup>147 </sup>So Gelenius, followed by Canterus, Elmenh., and Oberthür, reading <i>portione-m et</i>, while the words <i>tam laetam</i>, "that he is so joyous a part" are inserted before <i>et</i> by Stewechius and the rest, except both Roman edd. which retain the ms. <i>portione jam laeta.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6816_2144589"></a>
 <sup>148 </sup>Lit., "sent to."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6817_2144918"></a>
 <sup>149 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>milvus</i>, for which all edd. (except Oberthuer) since Stewechius read <i>mulus</i>, "a mule."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6819_2145108"></a>
 <sup>150 </sup><i>Carduus</i>, no doubt the esculent thistle, a kind of artichoke.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6820_2145307"></a>
 <sup>151 </sup>So, according to an emendation in LB., <i>esui</i>, adopted by Orelli and others, instead of the ms. reading <i>et sui.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P6821_2145563"></a>
 <sup>152 </sup>There has been much discussion as to whether the <i>solifuga</i> or <i>solipuga</i> here spoken of is an ant or spider.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6822_2145871"></a>
 <sup>153 </sup>The ms. reads <i>discriminare, discernere</i>, with the latter word, however, marked as spurious.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6823_2146094"></a>
 <sup>154 </sup>A kind of rug.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6824_2146136"></a>
 <sup>155 </sup><i>Mitra.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6825_2146156"></a>
 <sup>156 </sup><i>Strophium</i>, passing round the breast, by some regarded as a kind of corset.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6826_2146296"></a>
 <sup>157 </sup><i>Mastruca</i>, a garment made of the skins of the <i>muflone</i>, a Sardinian wild sheep.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6827_2146457"></a>
 <sup>158 </sup><i>Tribula</i>, for rubbing out the corn.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6828_2146764"></a>
 <sup>159 </sup><i>Aurum</i> is omitted in all edd., except those of LB., Hild., and Oehler.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6829_2146864"></a>
 <sup>160 </sup><i>Liber</i>, a roll of parchment or papyrus, as opposed to the preceding <i>codex</i>, a book of pages.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6830_2147105"></a>
 <sup>161 </sup>The ms. reads <i>vobis</i> unintelligibly, corrected by Meursius <i>bovis</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6831_2147229"></a>
 <sup>162 </sup>So Orelli and modern edd.; but Crusius gives as the ms. reading <i>conspici-etur</i> (not <i>-et</i>), as given by Ursinus, and commonly received- "Will he not...be seen?"</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6832_2147445"></a>
 <sup>163 </sup>The ms. and first five edd. read <i>et</i>-"and," changed in LB. to <i>sed</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6834_2147773"></a>
 <sup>164 </sup>In this dialogue (st. p. 81) Socrates brings forward the doctrine of reminiscence as giving a reasonable ground for the pursuit of knowledge, and then proceeds to give a practical illustration of it by leading an uneducated slave to solve a mathematical problem by means of question and answer.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6835_2148460"></a>
 <sup>165 </sup>Lit., "his knowledge of things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6836_2148899"></a>
 <sup>166 </sup>So the ms. and edd., reading <i>i-gnarum rerum</i>, except LB., which by merely omitting the <i>i</i> gives the more natural meaning, "acquainted with the things," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6837_2149096"></a>
 <sup>167 </sup>Lit., "established in the limits of humanity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6838_2149313"></a>
 <sup>168 </sup>i.e., a square numerically or algebraically. The ms., both Roman edd., and Canterus read <i>di-bus aut dynam-us</i>, the former word being defended by Meursius as equivalent to <i>binio</i>, "a doubling,"- a sense, however, in which it does not occur. In the other edd., <i>cubus aut dynamis</i> has been received from the margin of Ursinus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6839_2150099"></a>
 <sup>169 </sup><i>Aeneid</i>, vi. 472.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6840_2150288"></a>
 <sup>170 </sup>This clause is with reason rejected by Meursius as a gloss.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6842_2150740"></a>
 <sup>171 </sup>Founded on Plato's words (<i>Phaedrus</i>, st. p. 247), <font face="SPIonic">tw\| d'</font> (i.e. Zeus) <font face="SPIonic">e@petai stratia\ qew=n te kai\ daimo/nwn</font>, the doctrine became prevalent that under the supreme God were lesser gods made by Him, beneath whom again were daemons, while men stood next. To this Orelli supposes that Arnobius here refers.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6843_2151094"></a>
 <sup>172 </sup>The vessels in which according to Plato (<i>Timaeus</i>, st. p. 41), the Supreme Being mixed the vital essence of all being. Cf. c. 52.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6844_2151271"></a>
 <sup>173 </sup>Lit., "and endowed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6845_2151618"></a>
 <sup>174 </sup>The text and meaning are both rather doubtful, and the edd. vary exceedingly. The reading of Orelli, <i>demoretur iners, valeat in aere quamvis</i>, has been translated as most akin to the ms., with which, according to Oehler, it agrees, although Orelli himself gives the ms. reading as <i>aer-io</i>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P6846_2152311"></a>
 <sup>175 </sup>Lit., "acknowledge turnings in the course."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6848_2152943"></a>
 <sup>176 </sup>Lit., "but retaining its own things, bind itself in earthly bodies."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6849_2153511"></a>
 <sup>177 </sup>Lit., "of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6850_2153616"></a>
 <sup>178 </sup>So the ms. and edd., reading <i>sua-de-ri</i>, for which Oehler reads very neatly <i>sua de vi</i>-"can anything of its own power destroy," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6851_2154022"></a>
 <sup>179 </sup>Lit., "not suffer forgetfulness."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6852_2154134"></a>
 <sup>180 </sup>I.it., "however the most solid unions of bodies may have bound them round."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6853_2154317"></a>
 <sup>181 </sup>So the edd. reading <i>privat immortalitate has omni</i>, for which, according to Hildebrand, the ms. reads <i>-tatem has omnis</i>-"all these of immortality."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6855_2155008"></a>
 <sup>182 </sup>Lit., "put on the blindness of oblivion."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6856_2155817"></a>
 <sup>183 </sup>Cf. Lucretius, iii. 969, where life is thus spoken of.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6858_2156088"></a>
 <sup>184 </sup>The ms. reads <i>ne videamu-s</i>, changed in both Roman edd. into <i>-amur</i>- "that we may not be seen by you (as ignorant), how say you," etc. Gelenius proposed the reading of the text, <i>audiamus</i>, which has been received by Canterus and Orelli. It is clear from the next words-<i>quemadmodum dicitis</i>-that in this case the verb must be treated as a kind of interjection, "How say you, let us hear." LB. reads, to much the same purpose, <i>scire avemus</i>, "we desire to know."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6859_2157054"></a>
 <sup>185 </sup>Lit., "before man."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6860_2157250"></a>
 <sup>186 </sup>Lit., "placed outside."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6861_2157339"></a>
 <sup>187 </sup><i>Quod enim.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6862_2157402"></a>
 <sup>188 </sup><i>Rebus ingressis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6863_2157795"></a>
 <sup>189 </sup>So read by Orelli, <i>artes suas antiquas</i>, omitting <i>atque</i>, which he says, follows in the ms. It is read after <i>suas</i>, however, in the first ed., and those of Gelenius, Canterus, Hildebrand; and according to Oehler, it is so given in the ms., "its own and ancient." Oberthür would supply <i>res</i>-"its own arts and ancient things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6864_2158167"></a>
 <sup>190 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>constitut-a</i>, followed by all edd. except those of Ursinus, Hildebrand, and Oehler, who read <i>-ae</i>, "how do they remember when established in the bodies," which is certainly more in accordance with the context. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P6865_2158540"></a>
 <sup>191 </sup>Lit., "of immortality."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6866_2158800"></a>
 <sup>192 </sup>Cf. ch. 16, p. 440.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6867_2159226"></a>
 <sup>193 </sup>Lit., "of a lost memory."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6868_2159308"></a>
 <sup>194 </sup>Lit., "of (a memory) preserved."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6870_2159599"></a>
 <sup>195 </sup><i>Capite cum censeatur.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6871_2159690"></a>
 <sup>196 </sup>Lit., "poor in hearth, and of a poor hut."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6872_2159915"></a>
 <sup>197 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>malis</i>, for which Ursinus suggested <i>alis</i>, "on the wings of which."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6873_2160461"></a>
 <sup>198 </sup>i.e., to death.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6874_2160556"></a>
 <sup>199 </sup>The ms. reads <i>securus, intrepidus</i>-"heedless, fearless;" the former word, however, being marked as a gloss. It is rejected in all edd., except LB.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6875_2160912"></a>
 <sup>200 </sup>Lit., "by the freedom of impunity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6876_2161366"></a>
 <sup>201 </sup>Lit., "the one (immortality)...in respect of the equality of condition of the other"-<i>nec in alterius (immortalatatis) altera (immortalitatas) possit aequalitate conditionis vexari</i>; the reference being clearly to the immediately preceding clause, with which it is so closely connected logically and grammatically. Orelli, however, would supply <i>anima</i>, <font face="SPIonic">a0po\ tou= koinou=</font>, as he puts it, of which nothing need be said. Meursius, with customary boldness, emends <i>nec vi alterius altera</i>, "nor by the power of one can the other," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6878_2161935"></a>
 <sup>202 </sup>So the ellipse is usually supplied, but it seems simpler and is more natural thus: "But punishments (have been) spoken of" (<i>memoratae</i>), etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6879_2162191"></a>
 <sup>203 </sup>So ms. and Oehler, for which the edd. read <i>ec quis</i>, "will any one."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6880_2162317"></a>
 <sup>204 </sup>Lit., "the consequences of things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6881_2162526"></a>
 <sup>205 </sup>Lit., "the moving of wheels whirling."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6883_2163243"></a>
 <sup>206 </sup>Lit., "in the unbroken course of ages"-<i>perpetuitate aevorum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6884_2163618"></a>
 <sup>207 </sup>Lit., "and to scatter the unbridled eagerness of boundless lust through," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6886_2164213"></a>
 <sup>208 </sup>Lucretius (iii. 417 sqq.) teaches at great length that the soul and mind are mortal, on the ground that they consist of atoms smaller than those of vapour, so that, like it, on the breaking of their case, they will be scattered abroad; next, on the ground of the analogy between them and the body in regard to disease, suffering, etc.; of their ignorance of the past, and want of developed qualities; and finally, on the ground of the adaptation of the soul to the body, as of a fish to the sea, so that life under other conditions would be impossible. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P6887_2164935"></a>
 <sup>209 </sup>The ms. and first four edd. read <i>has</i>, "that these souls," etc.; in the other edd., <i>hac</i> is received as above from the margin of Ursinus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6888_2165133"></a>
 <sup>210 </sup>Cf. Plato, <i>Phaedo</i> (st. p. 64 sq.), where death is spoken of as only a carrying further of that separation of the soul from the pleasures and imperfections of the body which the philosopher strives to effect in this life.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6889_2165377"></a>
 <sup>211 </sup>Lit., "in common."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6890_2165429"></a>
 <sup>212 </sup>Pl.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6891_2165498"></a>
 <sup>213 </sup>This refers to the second argument of Lucretius noticed above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6893_2166110"></a>
 <sup>214 </sup>i.e., the abandoned and dissolute immortal spoken of in last chapter.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6894_2166337"></a>
 <sup>215 </sup>Lit., "with."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6895_2166678"></a>
 <sup>216 </sup>Lit., "degenerate into mortal nature."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6896_2166794"></a>
 <sup>217 </sup>Arnobius seems in this chapter to refer to the doctrine of the Stoics, that the soul must be material, because, unless body and soul were of one substance, there could be no common feeling or mutual affection (so Cleanthes in <i>Nemes. de Nat. Hom.</i>, ii, p. 33); and to that held by some of them, that only the souls of the wise remained after death, and these only till the conflagration (Stob., <i>Ecl. Phys.</i>, p. 372) which awaits the world, and ends the Stoic great year or cycle. Others, however, held that the souls of the wise became daemons and demigods (Diog., <i>Laert.</i>, vii. 157 and 151).</p>
 
 <p><a name="P6897_2167497"></a>
 <sup>218 </sup>Lit., "they"-<i>eas.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P6899_2167803"></a>
 <sup>219 </sup>Lit., "from the gapings and," etc.</p>
 
 </body>