<body>
 <p><a name="P7600_2393217"></a>
 <sup>114 </sup><i>Copulatis corporibus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7601_2393598"></a>
 <sup>115 </sup>i.e. not his mother's, but the dug of the goat Amalthea.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7602_2394018"></a>
 <sup>116 </sup>Lit., "rattles heard."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7603_2394300"></a>
 <sup>117 </sup>Lit., "the eminence of the powers."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7604_2394505"></a>
 <sup>118 </sup>Lit., "inundation."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7606_2394659"></a>
 <sup>119 </sup>Lit., "Saturnian gravity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7607_2394828"></a>
 <sup>120 </sup>Cf. ch. 14, note 8, <i>supra</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7608_2395018"></a>
 <sup>121 </sup>It is worth while to compare this passage with ch. 16. Here Arnobius makes I.atona the mother of Apollo and Diana in accordance with the common legend; but there he represents the first Minerva as claming them as her children.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7609_2395296"></a>
 <sup>122 </sup>In the ms. there is here an evident blunder on the part of the copyist, who has inserted the preceding line ("the archer Apollo, and of the woods") after "the same." Omitting these words, the ms. reading is literally, "the name in Greek is to the Dioscori." Before "the name" some word is pretty generally supposed to have been lost, some conjecturing "to whom;" others (among them Orelli, following Salmasius) "Castores." But it is evidently not really necessary to supplement the text.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7610_2396794"></a>
 <sup>123 </sup>Lit., "scatter."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7611_2396886"></a>
 <sup>124 </sup>Orelli reads with the ms., LB., and Hild., <i>babecali</i>, which he interprets <i>belli</i>, i.e., "handsome."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7613_2398254"></a>
 <sup>125 </sup>ms. and first five edd. read <i>inde</i>-"thence;" the others <i>in se</i>, as above. [Elucidation III.] </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7615_2398657"></a>
 <sup>126 </sup>Orelli, without receiving into the text, approves of the reading of Stewechius, <i>promptam</i>, "evident," for the ms. <i>propriam.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7616_2399289"></a>
 <sup>127 </sup>Lit., "the benefits diminished by which it is lived."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7617_2399452"></a>
 <sup>128 </sup>The ms. reads <i>ex Jovis</i>; the first five edd. <i>Jove</i>-"from Jove," which is altogether out of place; the others, as above, <i>ex ovis</i>. Cf. i. 36.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7618_2399851"></a>
 <sup>129 </sup>The ms. reads <i>et ablui diebus tantis...elevari</i>; LB., Hild. and Oehler, <i>statis</i> or <i>statutis...et levari</i>-"and was loosed and released on fixed days:" Elm., Oberthür, and Orelli receive the conjecture of Ursinus, <i>et suis diebus tantum...rel.</i>, as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7619_2400135"></a>
 <sup>130 </sup>Cf. iii. [cap. 41, p. 475, and cap. 30, p. 472].</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7620_2400469"></a>
 <sup>131 </sup>i.e., hiding-place. Virg., <i>Aen.</i>, viii. 322: <i>Quoniam latuisset tutus in oris.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7621_2400947"></a>
 <sup>132 </sup><i>Pyth.</i>, iii. 102 sq.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7622_2401325"></a>
 <sup>133 </sup>ms. <i>Meglac.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7623_2401365"></a>
 <sup>134 </sup>The ms. and most edd. give <i>filias</i>, making the Muses daughters of Macarus; but Orelli, Hild., and Oehler adopt, as above, the reading of Canterus, <i>filiae</i>, in accordance with Clem. Alex.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7625_2401572"></a>
 <sup>135 </sup>So the ms. reading <i>numquid dictatum</i>, which would refer this sentence to the end of the last chapter. Gelenius, with Canth., Oberth., and Orelli, reads <i>quis ditatam</i>, and joins with the following sentence thus: "Who related that Venus, a courtezan enriched by C., was deified...? who that the palladium," etc. Cf. v. 19.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7626_2402344"></a>
 <sup>136 </sup>The ms. reads <i>quis mensibus in Arcadia tribus et decem vinctum</i>-"Who that he was bound thirteen months in Arcadia? was it not the son," etc. To which there are these two objections-that Homer never says so; and that Clemens Alexandrinus [vol. ii. p, 179, this series], from whom Arnobius here seems to draw, speaks of Homer as saying only that Mars was so bound, without referring to Arcadia. The ms. reading may have arisen from carelessness on the part of Arnobius in quoting (cf. ch. 14, n. 2), or may be a corruption of the copyists. The reading translated is an emendation by Jortin, adopted by Orelli.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7627_2403339"></a>
 <sup>137 </sup><i>Sardibus</i>,-a conjecture of Ursinus, adopted by LB., Hild., and Oehler for the ms. <i>sordibus</i>; for which the others read <i>sordidi</i>- "for the sake of base lust."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7628_2403974"></a>
 <sup>138 </sup>Lit., "the masculine one."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7629_2404019"></a>
 <sup>139 </sup>As this seems rather extravagant when said of one of the immortals, <i>laesam</i>, "hurt," has been proposed by Meursius.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7630_2404449"></a>
 <sup>140 </sup>Castor and Pollux.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7631_2404719"></a>
 <sup>141 </sup>Lit., "contained."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7632_2404781"></a>
 <sup>142 </sup>The ms. reads <i>Hieronymus Pl</i>-"is Hier., is Pl.," while Clem. Alex. mentions only "Hieronymus the philosopher." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7634_2405323"></a>
 <sup>143 </sup>These names are all in the plural in the original.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7635_2405419"></a>
 <sup>144 </sup>So LB. and Orelli, reading <i>Alopas</i>, from Clem. Alex., for the ms. <i>Alcyonas.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7636_2405708"></a>
 <sup>145 </sup>These names are all in the plural in the original.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7637_2406683"></a>
 <sup>146 </sup>Lit., "you add."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7638_2406864"></a>
 <sup>147 </sup>In the original, somewhat at large-<i>unam potuit prolem extundere, concinnare, compingere.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7640_2407648"></a>
 <sup>148 </sup>All edd. read this without mark of interrogation.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7641_2407962"></a>
 <sup>149 </sup>The ms. reads <i>Phaetontem</i>: for which, both here and in Clem., Potter proposed <i>Phaonem</i>, because no such amour is mentioned elsewhere.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7643_2409227"></a>
 <sup>150 </sup>i.e., either the arts which belong to each god (cf. the words in ii. 18: "these (arts) are not the gifts of science, but the discoveries of necessity"), or, referring to the words immediately preceding, obstetric arts. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7645_2411374"></a>
 <sup>151 </sup>Lit., "Euhemerus being opened."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7646_2411524"></a>
 <sup>152 </sup>So Elm. and Orelli, reading <i>Nicanore</i> for the ms. <i>Nicagora</i>, retained by all other edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7647_2411785"></a>
 <sup>153 </sup>Lit., "with the care of scrupulous diligence."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7648_2411994"></a>
 <sup>154 </sup>Meursius would join <i>virginis</i> to Minerva, thinking it an allusion to her title <font face="SPIonic">Parqe/noj</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7649_2412217"></a>
 <sup>155 </sup>These terms are employed of hetaerae.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7650_2412460"></a>
 <sup>156 </sup>Lit., "the title itself of their names was."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7652_2413240"></a>
 <sup>157 </sup><i>Qui sollicite relegit</i>. <i>Relegit</i> is here used by Arnobius to denote the root of <i>religio</i>, and has therefore some such meaning as that given above. Cf. Cicero, <i>de Nat. Deorum</i>, ii. 28.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7654_2414731"></a>
 <sup>158 </sup>Lit., "an error of inadvertence."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7655_2414829"></a>
 <sup>159 </sup>Lit., "with the sacrificial bowl."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7656_2414881"></a>
 <sup>160 </sup>So the ms., both Roman edd., Elm., Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>rursus</i>; the others <i>in cursu</i>-"in the course."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7657_2415262"></a>
 <sup>161 </sup><i>Patrimus</i>, i.e., one whose father is alive, is probably used loosely for <i>patrimus et matrimus</i>, to denote one both of whose parents were alive, who was therefore eligible for certain religious services.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7658_2415502"></a>
 <sup>162 </sup>So the ms. reading <i>terram tenere</i>, for which Hild. would read <i>tensam</i>, denoting the car on which were borne the images of the gods, the thongs or reins of which were held by the <i>patrimus et matrimus</i>; Lipsius, <i>siserram</i>, the sacrificial victim. The reading of the text has been explained as meaning to touch the ground with one's hands; but the general meaning is clear enough,-that it was unlucky if the boy made a slip, either with hands or feet.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7660_2416380"></a>
 <sup>163 </sup>Oberthür and Orelli omit <i>non</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7661_2416480"></a>
 <sup>164 </sup>Lit., "notions."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7662_2416529"></a>
 <sup>165 </sup>Lit., "placed in their ears." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7663_2417105"></a>
 <sup>166 </sup>Lit., "and it has <i>not</i> been established by you,"-a very abrupt transition in the structure of the sentence.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7664_2417289"></a>
 <sup>167 </sup>Lit., "which was very near to disgrace."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7665_2417379"></a>
 <sup>168 </sup>So the margin of Ursinus, followed by later edd., prefixing <i>d</i> before the ms. <i>-eorum.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7666_2417858"></a>
 <sup>169 </sup>Lit., "has less bite, being weakened by the testimony of silent reviewing," <i>recognitionis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7668_2418257"></a>
 <sup>170 </sup>Lit., "most enduring."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7669_2419450"></a>
 <sup>171 </sup><i>Coetu</i>. The ms. and most edd. read <i>coalitu</i>,-a word not occurring elsewhere; which Gesner would explain, "put away that it may not be established among men," the sense being the same in either case.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7671_2420073"></a>
 <sup>172 </sup>Lit., "complain of the neglected insults of the other gods."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7672_2420337"></a>
 <sup>173 </sup>Lit., "as a lover by." Cf. Homer, <i>Il.</i>, 14, 312.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7673_2420483"></a>
 <sup>174 </sup>i.e., of himself.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7674_2421258"></a>
 <sup>175 </sup>Lit., "except that which was full of religion."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7675_2421953"></a>
 <sup>176 </sup>i.e., according to which such offenses should be punished.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7677_2422508"></a>
 <sup>177 </sup>Lit., "have willed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7678_2422702"></a>
 <sup>178 </sup>Lit., "full-grown race," <i>exoleti</i>, a word frequently used, as here, <i>sensu obscaeno.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P7679_2422800"></a>
 <sup>179 </sup>i.e., the actors, etc. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7680_2422901"></a>
 <sup>180 </sup>i.e., the crowd of adulterers, as Orelli suggests.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7681_2422986"></a>
 <sup>181 </sup>Lit., "draw enticements of pleasures from."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7682_2423774"></a>
 <sup>182 </sup>Or, "Venus, the mother...and loving parent," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7683_2423938"></a>
 <sup>183 </sup>Lit., "of meretricious vileness."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7684_2424093"></a>
 <sup>184 </sup>i.e., Cybele, to whom Mount Dindymus in Mysia was sacred, whose rites, however, were celebrated at Pessinus also, a very ancient city of Galatia.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7685_2424412"></a>
 <sup>185 </sup>ms. <i>Sofocles</i>, corrected in LB. <i>Sophocles</i>. Cf. Trach. 1022 sqq.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7686_2424725"></a>
 <sup>186 </sup>Lit., "towards (<i>in</i>) the last <i>of the</i> wasting consumed by the softening of his bowels flowing apart."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7688_2425591"></a>
 <sup>187 </sup>Lit., "debauched and scoffers."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7689_2426102"></a>
 <sup>188 </sup>So Orelli, reading <i>et quando</i>; ms. and other edd. <i>et si</i>-"and if ever."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7690_2426703"></a>
 <sup>189 </sup>Arnobius is generally thought to refer here to the persecution under Diocletian mentioned by Eusebius, <i>Hist. Eccl.</i>, viii. 2.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7691_2427039"></a>
 <sup>190 </sup>The service in which these prayers were offered was presided over by the bishop, to whom the dead body was brought: hymns were then sung of thanksgiving to God, the giver of victory, by whose help and grace the departed brother had been victorious. The priest next gave thanks to God, and some chapters of the Scriptures were read; afterwards the catechumens were dismissed; the names of those at rest were then read in a clear voice, to remind the survivors of the success with which others had combated the temptations of the world. The priest again prayed for the departed, at the close beseeching God to grant him pardon, and admission among the undying. Thereafter the body was kissed, anointed, and buried.-Dionysius, <i>Eccl. Hier.</i>, last chapter quoted by Heraldus. Cf. <i>Const. Apost.</i>, viii. 41. With the Church's advance in power there was an accession of pomp to these rites. [Elucidation IV.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7692_2428002"></a>
 <sup>191 </sup>Cf. the younger Pliny, <i>Epist.</i>, x. 97: "They affirmed that they bound themselves by oath not for any wicked purpose, but to pledge themselves not to commit theft, robbery, or adultery, nor break faith, or prove false to a trust."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7693_2428373"></a>
 <sup>192 </sup>Lit., "whom <i>our</i> society joins together," <i>quos solidet germanitas</i>. [Lardner justly argues that this passage proves our author's familiarity with rites to which catechumens were not admitted. <i>Credibil.</i>, vol. iii. p. 458.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7695_2428787"></a>
 <sup>193 </sup>i.e., in their sight or estimation.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7696_2429163"></a>
 <sup>194 </sup>Lit., "conceive these torches."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7697_2429336"></a>
 <sup>195 </sup>Lit., "have roared with tremblings of the earth." </p>
 
 <p><a name="P7698_2429494"></a>
 <sup>196 </sup>The ms. reads <i>conru-isse auras temporum</i>, all except the first four edd. inserting <i>p</i> as above. Meursius would also change <i>temp.</i> into <i>ventorum</i>- "the breezes of the winds."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P7699_2430623"></a>
 <sup>197 </sup>So the ms., reading <i>comptu</i>-tie, according to Hild., followed by LB. and Orelli.</p>
 
 </body>