<body>
 <p><a name="P8100_2550890"></a>
 <sup>46 </sup>Lit., "is."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8101_2551043"></a>
 <sup>47 </sup>So the ms., both Rom. edd., Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>quamvis poenam</i>; Gelenius, Canterus, Elm, and Oberthür omit <i>vis</i>, and the other edd. <i>v</i>, i.e., "as to what punishment the Egyptian," etc. This must refer to the cases in which the sacred bull, having outlived the term of twenty-five years, was secretly killed by the priests, while the people were taught that it had thrown itself into the water.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8102_2551571"></a>
 <sup>48 </sup>i.e., "burial-places." By this Oehler has attempted to show is meant the <i>Hebdomades vel de Imaginibus</i> of Varro, a series of biographical sketches illustrated with portraits, executed in some way which cannot be clearly ascertained.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8103_2551818"></a>
 <sup>49 </sup>ms. <i>Barronis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8105_2552061"></a>
 <sup>50 </sup>So the ms., first four edd., and Oberthür, reading <i>Toli</i>, corrected <i>Oli</i> in the others, from Servius (<i>ad. Aen.</i>, viii. 345). Arnobius himself gives the form Aulus, i.e. Olus, immediately below, so that it is probably correct.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8106_2552359"></a>
 <sup>51 </sup>Lit., "the seats of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8107_2552677"></a>
 <sup>52 </sup>Ursinus suggested <i>Valerius Antias</i>, mentioned in the first chapter of the fifth book, a conjecture adopted by Hild.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8108_2552844"></a>
 <sup>53 </sup>The ms., LB., Hild., and Oehler read Aulus, and, acc. to Oehler, all other edd. <i>Tolus</i>. Orelli, however, reads <i>Olus</i>, as above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8109_2553009"></a>
 <sup>54 </sup>The ms. and both Roman edd. read <i>germani servuli vita</i> without meaning, corrected as above by Gelenius, Canterus, Elm., and Oberthür, <i>ut a g. servulo</i>, and <i>ut a g. servulis</i>-"by the slaves," in the others, except Oehler who reads as above, <i>g. servulo ut.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8110_2553424"></a>
 <sup>55 </sup>The ms. and both Roman edd. read unintelligibly <i>patientiae</i>, corrected <i>paternae</i> in Hild. and Oehler, <i>patriae</i> in the rest.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8111_2553836"></a>
 <sup>56 </sup>Lit., "the perpetuity of the omen sealed might stand."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8112_2554219"></a>
 <sup>57 </sup>Lit., "through the times given to itself."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8113_2554412"></a>
 <sup>58 </sup>The ms. reads <i>s-oli</i>,-changed into <i>Toli</i> by the first four edd., Elm., and Oberthür. The others omit <i>s</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8115_2554780"></a>
 <sup>59 </sup>["Belittle." This word here is noteworthy. President Jefferson is said to have coined it, and I have never before seen it in a transatlantic book.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8116_2555324"></a>
 <sup>60 </sup>i.e., "which you pretend to worship."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8117_2555878"></a>
 <sup>61 </sup>So the edd., reading <i>formar-e</i>, except Hild. and Oehler, who retain the ms. reading <i>i</i>-"that images be formed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8118_2556256"></a>
 <sup>62 </sup>The ms. and both Roman edd. read corruptly <i>insolidi</i>, corrected <i>ita</i> or <i>sic coli</i>, as above, in all except the last two edd.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8120_2556707"></a>
 <sup>63 </sup>[It is manifest that nothing of the kind was said by Christians. See p. 506, note 3, <i>supra</i>.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8121_2557015"></a>
 <sup>64 </sup>i.e., you do not seek access to the gods directly, and seek to do them honour by giving that honour to the idols instead. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8122_2557369"></a>
 <sup>65 </sup>i.e., the transmission of the sacrifice to the gods is made dependent on idols.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8123_2557781"></a>
 <sup>66 </sup>This corresponds exactly to the English, "to shoot at the pigeon and hit the crow."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8125_2558078"></a>
 <sup>67 </sup>Lit., "with vicarious substitution for." [A very pertinent question as to the images worshipped in Rome to this day. There is one <i>Madonna</i> of African hue and features. See also <i>Murray's Handbook, Italy</i>, p. 72.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8126_2558432"></a>
 <sup>68 </sup>The ms. reads <i>effigitur</i>, corrected as above, <i>effin.</i>, in all edd. except Hild., who reads <i>efficitur</i>-"is made," and Stewechius, <i>effigiatur</i>-"is formed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8127_2558692"></a>
 <sup>69 </sup>Lit., "boy's age."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8128_2558754"></a>
 <sup>70 </sup><i>Flavus</i>, so invariably associated with blue eyes, that though these are the feature brought into contrast, they are only suggested in this way, and not directly mentioned-a mode of speech very characteristic of Arnobius.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8129_2559203"></a>
 <sup>71 </sup>i.e., a fact which can be seen to be true by appealing to analogy.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8130_2559463"></a>
 <sup>72 </sup>So the ms., LB., Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>donastis</i>, the others <i>donatis</i>-"you give."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8131_2559692"></a>
 <sup>73 </sup>As the appearance of the moon is the same in some of its phases as in others, it is clear that Arnobius cannot mean that it has thirty distinct forms. We must therefore suppose that he is either speaking very loosely of change upon change day after day, or that he is referring to some of the lunar theories of the ancients, such as that a new moon is created each day, and that its form is thus ever new (<i>Lucr.</i>, v. 729-748).</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8132_2560285"></a>
 <sup>74 </sup>Lit., "is changed through a thousand states with daily instability."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8133_2560475"></a>
 <sup>75 </sup>Lit., "are."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8134_2560581"></a>
 <sup>76 </sup>Lit., "intestine and domestic."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8135_2560708"></a>
 <sup>77 </sup>The ms. reads <i>leon-e-s torvissimam faciem</i>, emended, as above, <i>leonis t. f.</i>, in LB., Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, and <i>l. torvissima facie</i>-"lions of very stern face," in the others. Nourry supposes that the reference is to the use of lions, or lion-headed figures, as architectural ornaments on temples (cf. the two lions rampant surmounting the gate of Mycenae), but partially coincides in the view of Elm., that mixed figures are meant, such as are described by Tertullian and Minucius Felix (ch. 28: "You deify gods made up of a goat and a lion, and with the faces of lions and of dogs"). The epithet <i>frugifer</i>, however, which was applied to the Egyptian Osiris, the Persian Mithras, and Bacchus, who were also represented as lions, makes it probable that the reference is to symbolic statues of the sun.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8136_2561760"></a>
 <sup>78 </sup>Lit., "such a god to whose form and appearance the likeness of this image has been directed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8137_2561932"></a>
 <sup>79 </sup>Lit., "that."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8138_2562066"></a>
 <sup>80 </sup>The ms. and both Roman edd. read unintelligibly <i>sanquineo decotoro</i>, for which <i>s. de colore</i>, as above, has been suggested by Canterus, with the approval of Heraldus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8139_2562357"></a>
 <sup>81 </sup>The ms. here inserts <i>puetuitate</i>, for which no satisfactory emendation has been proposed. The early edd. read <i>pituitate</i>, a word for which there is no authority, while LB. gives <i>potus aviditate</i>-"drunk with avidity"-both being equally hopeless.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8140_2562612"></a>
 <sup>82 </sup>ms. <i>sic</i>, corrected by Gelenius <i>si</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8141_2562822"></a>
 <sup>83 </sup>So Meursius, <i>ac dicere</i>, for ms. <i>-cidere.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8143_2563105"></a>
 <sup>84 </sup>It is worthy of notice that although in this passage, as often elsewhere, Arnobius adheres pretty closely to the argument proposed by Clemens Alexandrinus, he even in such passages sometimes differs from it, and not at random. Thus Clement speaks merely of a "stone," and Arnobius of an "unshaped stone." The former expression harmonizes with the words of Maximus Tyrius (<i>Serm.</i>, xxxviii. p. 225, Steph.), "The Arabians worship I know not whom, but the image which I saw was a square stone;" while Suidas (Küster's ed., s. v. <font face="SPIonic">qeu\s !Arhj</font>) agrees with Arnobius in calling it a "stone, black, square, unfashioned" (<font face="SPIonic">a0tu/pwtoj</font>). This is the more noteworthy, as at times Arnobius would almost seem to be following Clement blindly. [See Clement, cap. iv. vol. ii. p. 184, this series.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8144_2563962"></a>
 <sup>85 </sup>So Arnobius renders Clement's <i>Cithaeronian Hera.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8145_2564029"></a>
 <sup>86 </sup>So corrected in the notes of Canterus from Clem. for the ms. reading <i>Carios</i>, retained by the first four edd. and Elmenh. In Icaria there was a temple of Diana called <font face="SPIonic">Tauropo/lion</font>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8146_2564459"></a>
 <sup>87 </sup>The ms. and first four edd. read <i>p-uteum</i>-"a well," corrected <i>plut.</i>, as above, by Gifanius, and in the notes of Canterus. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8147_2564615"></a>
 <sup>88 </sup>The ms. reads <i>ethedius</i>, corrected in the notes of Canterus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8148_2565069"></a>
 <sup>89 </sup>So all edd., except both Roman edd., which retain the ms. reading in the singular, <i>suffraginem.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8149_2565301"></a>
 <sup>90 </sup>i. e., iii. 13. p. 467.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8150_2565427"></a>
 <sup>91 </sup>Lit., "it was allowed."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8151_2565855"></a>
 <sup>92 </sup>So Meursius suggested <i>amentes</i> for the ms. reading <i>animantis</i> for which Heraldus proposed <i>argumentis</i>-"by arguments."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8153_2566891"></a>
 <sup>93 </sup>Lit., "and most dissolved with the laxity of feminine liquidity."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8154_2567061"></a>
 <sup>94 </sup><i>Divendere.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8155_2567224"></a>
 <sup>95 </sup>Lit., "with a workman's preparing."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8156_2567526"></a>
 <sup>96 </sup>Lit., "is there any figure to find."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8157_2567612"></a>
 <sup>97 </sup><i>Habitus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8158_2567763"></a>
 <sup>98 </sup><i>Ex foribus</i>. Cf. Tertull., <i>de Idol.</i>, ch. 15: "In Greek writers we also read that Apollo <font face="SPIonic">Qurai=oj</font> and the <i>daemones Antelii</i> watch over doors."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8159_2568147"></a>
 <sup>99 </sup>So the edd, reading <i>petas-un-culum</i> for the ms. <i>-io-</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8161_2569281"></a>
 <sup>100 </sup>Lit., "are."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8162_2569573"></a>
 <sup>101 </sup>Lit., "with strife of skills."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8163_2569830"></a>
 <sup>102 </sup>ms. <i>Phyrna</i>, but below <i>Phryna</i>, which is read in both instances by Hild. and Oehler.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8164_2570205"></a>
 <sup>103 </sup>So Meursius, followed by Orelli, reading <i>istic</i> for the ms. <i>iste.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8165_2570597"></a>
 <sup>104 </sup>i.e., either the conceptions in their minds, or realized in their works. Orelli, followed by the German translator Besnard, adopting the former view, translates "the ideas of the artists (die Ideale der Künstler) were full of fire and life."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8166_2570999"></a>
 <sup>105 </sup>[See note 15, p. 511.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8167_2571234"></a>
 <sup>106 </sup>[True, alas! to this day; notorious courtesans furnishing the models for the pictures and statues worshipped as saints, angels, etc.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8168_2571395"></a>
 <sup>107 </sup>So Gelenius and Canterus, reading <i>et</i> for ms. <i>est.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8169_2571572"></a>
 <sup>108 </sup>Lit., "with exertion of immense strength."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8170_2571667"></a>
 <sup>109 </sup>ms. Pantarches. This was a very common mode of expressing love among the ancients, the name of the loved one being carved on the bark of trees (as if the Loves or the mountain nymphs had done it), on walls, doors, or, as in this case, on statues, with the addition "beautiful" (Suidas, s. v. <font face="SPIonic">Kaloi/</font> and <font face="SPIonic"> 9Ramnousi/a Ne/mesij</font>, with Küster's notes). [Vol. ii. p. 187, note 1, this series.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8171_2572814"></a>
 <sup>110 </sup>Lit., "bones."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8172_2572968"></a>
 <sup>111 </sup>Lit., "conditions," <i>habitus.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8173_2573055"></a>
 <sup>112 </sup>Lit., "similitude."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8174_2573136"></a>
 <sup>113 </sup>Lit., "first among."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8175_2573257"></a>
 <sup>114 </sup>Lit., "human things."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8177_2573442"></a>
 <sup>115 </sup>[Isa. xl. 18-20, xliv. 9-20, xlvi. 5-8.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8178_2573753"></a>
 <sup>116 </sup>i.e., the faculty of discernment, which is properly man's.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8179_2573848"></a>
 <sup>117 </sup>Lit., "are in the limits of."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8180_2573926"></a>
 <sup>118 </sup>The ms. reads <i>his</i>-"these", emended, as above, <i>vobis</i> in the margin of Ursinus, Elm., and LB.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8181_2574112"></a>
 <sup>119 </sup>Lit., "and humble."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8182_2574336"></a>
 <sup>120 </sup>i.e., a respectable woman.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8183_2574439"></a>
 <sup>121 </sup>i.e., the elephant's tusk.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8184_2574846"></a>
 <sup>122 </sup>So Salmasius, followed by Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>furfuraculis</i>, and LB., reading <i>perforaculis</i> for the ms. <i>furfure aculeis.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8185_2575332"></a>
 <sup>123 </sup>So the margin of Ursinus, Meursius (according to Orelli), Hild., and Oehler, reading <i>part-u-m</i> for the ms. <i>-e-</i>-"is a part of your labour," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8186_2575511"></a>
 <sup>124 </sup>Lit., "of thy work and fingers."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8187_2575669"></a>
 <sup>125 </sup>So the ms., both Roman edd., Elm., and Orelli, reading <i>numinis favore</i>, for which LB. reads <i>favorem</i>-"the favour of the propitious deity to succour." [Isaiah's argument reproduced.]</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8189_2575972"></a>
 <sup>126 </sup>Lit., "thrown together."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8190_2576296"></a>
 <sup>127 </sup>Rigaltius suggested <i>confracta</i>-"shattered," for ms. <i>-flata.</i> </p>
 
 <p><a name="P8191_2577224"></a>
 <sup>128 </sup>So the edd. reading <i>cog-</i> for the ms. <i>cogit-amini.</i></p>
 
 <p><a name="P8192_2577525"></a>
 <sup>129 </sup>Lit., "be moved with agitation of breathing."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8193_2577625"></a>
 <sup>130 </sup>Lit., "outside," i.e., before being in bodily forms.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8194_2577707"></a>
 <sup>131 </sup>So Ursinus and LB., reading <i>retin-e-nt</i> for the ms. <i>-ea-</i>, which can hardly be correct. There may possibly be an ellipsis of <i>si</i> before this clause, so that the sentence would run: "If they had any natural properties, (if) they retain all these, what stupidity," etc.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8195_2578325"></a>
 <sup>132 </sup>Lit., "deprived of moveableness of feeling."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8197_2578490"></a>
 <sup>133 </sup>Lit., "a rational animal."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8198_2579011"></a>
 <sup>134 </sup>Lit., "with deceit of vain credulity." The edd. read this as an interrogation: "Do you, therefore, sink down, adore, and bring yourselves into disgrace?"</p>
 
 <p><a name="P8199_2579259"></a>
 <sup>135 </sup>So Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, adopting a conjecture of Graevius, <i>di-</i>, for the ms. <i>de-ducere</i>-"to lead down."</p>
 
 </body>