<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_16.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_18.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:18</h3><p><i>Narrated Hisham Ibn 'Urwa from his father who said:</i></p>
 While I was a youngster, I asked 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet. "What
 about the meaning of the Statement of Allah;
 <p>
 "Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al Marwa, are among the symbols 
 of Allah. So, it is not harmful if those who perform Hajj or 'Umra of 
 the House (Ka'ba at Mecca) to perform the going (Tawaf) between them? 
 (2.158) I understand (from that) that there is no harm if somebody 
 does not perform the Tawaf between them." 'Aisha replied, "No, for if 
 it were as you are saying, then the recitation would have been like 
 this: 'It is not harmful not to perform Tawaf between them.' This 
 verse was revealed in connection with the Ansar who used to assume the
 Ihram for the idol Manat which was put beside a place called Qudaid 
 and those people thought it not right to perform the Tawaf of As-Safa 
 and Al-Marwa. When Islam came, they asked Allah's Apostle about that, 
 and Allah revealed:--
 </p><p>
 "Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa Are among the symbols of
 Allah. So, it is not harmful of those who perform Hajj or 'Umra of the
 House (Ka'ba at Mecca) to perform the going (Tawaf) between them." 
 (2.158)  Sufyan and Abu Muawiya added from Hisham (from 'Aisha): "The 
 Hajj or 'Umra of the person who does not perform the going (Tawaf) 
 between As-Safa and Al-Marwa is incomplete in Allah's sight.
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_18.htm">Next: 3:19: Isma'il: Abdullah bin Abu Aufa said:  Allah's Apostle performed 'Umra and we ...</a></center>
 </body>