<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_753.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_755.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:755</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Urwa from 'Aisha:</i></p>
 The wives of Allah's Apostle were in two groups. One group consisted 
 of 'Aisha, Hafsa, Safiyya and Sauda; and the other group consisted of 
 Um Salama and the other wives of Allah's Apostle. The Muslims knew 
 that Allah's Apostle loved 'Aisha, so if any of them had a gift and 
 wished to give to Allah's Apostle, he would delay it, till Allah's 
 Apostle had come to 'Aisha's home and then he would send his gift to 
 Allah's Apostle in her home. The group of Um Salama discussed the 
 matter together and decided that Um Salama should request Allah's 
 Apostle to tell the people to send their gifts to him in whatever 
 wife's house he was. Um Salama told Allah's Apostle of what they had 
 said, but he did not reply. Then they (those wives) asked Um Salama 
 about it. She said, "He did not say anything to me." They asked her to
 talk to him again. She talked to him again when she met him on her 
 day, but he gave no reply. When they asked her, she replied that he 
 had given no reply. They said to her, "Talk to him till he gives you a
 reply." When it was her turn, she talked to him again. He then said to
 her, "Do not hurt me regarding Aisha, as the Divine Inspirations do 
 not come to me on any of the beds except that of Aisha." On that Um 
 Salama said, "I repent to Allah for hurting you." Then the group of Um
 Salama called Fatima, the daughter of Allah's Apostle and sent her to 
 Allah's Apostle to say to him, "Your wives request to treat them and 
 the daughter of Abu Bakr on equal terms." Then Fatima conveyed the 
 message to him. The Prophet said, "O my daughter! Don't you love whom 
 I love?" She replied in the affirmative and returned and told them of 
 the situation. They requested her to go to him again but she refused. 
 They then sent Zainab bint Jahsh who went to him and used harsh words 
 saying, "Your wives request you to treat them and the daughter of Ibn 
 Abu Quhafa on equal terms." On that she raised her voice and abused 
 'Aisha to her face so much so that Allah's Apostle looked at 'Aisha to
 see whether she would retort. 'Aisha started replying to Zainab till 
 she silenced her. The Prophet then looked at 'Aisha and said, "She is 
 really the daughter of Abu Bakr."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_755.htm">Next: 3:756: 'Azra bin Thabit Al-Ansari: When I went to Thumama bin 'Abdullah, he gave me some perfume and said...</a></center>
 </body>