<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_306.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_308.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:310</h3><p><i>Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:</i></p>
 I was with the Prophet in a Ghazwa (Military Expedition) and my camel 
 was slow and exhausted. The Prophet came up to me and said, "O Jabir."
 I replied, "Yes?" He said, "What is the matter with you?" I replied, 
 "My camel is slow and tired, so I am left behind." So, he got down and
 poked the camel with his stick and then ordered me to ride. I rode the
 camel and it became so fast that I had to hold it from going ahead of 
 Allah's Apostle . He then asked me, have you got married?" I replied 
 in the affirmative. He asked, "A virgin or a matron?" I replied, "I 
 married a matron." The Prophet said, "Why have you not married a 
 virgin, so that you may play with her and she may play with you?" 
 Jabir replied, "I have sisters (young in age) so I liked to marry a 
 matron who could collect them all and comb their hair and look after 
 them." The Prophet said, "You will reach, so when you have arrived (at
 home), I advise you to associate with your wife (that you may have an 
 intelligent son)." Then he asked me, "Would you like to sell your 
 camel?" I replied in the affirmative and the Prophet purchased it for 
 one Uqiya of gold. Allah's Apostle reached before me and I reached in 
 the morning, and when I went to the mosque, I found him at the door of
 the mosque. He asked me, "Have you arrived just now?" I replied in the
 affirmative. He said, "Leave your camel and come into (the mosque) and
 pray two Rakat." I entered and offered the prayer. He told Bilal to 
 weigh and give me one Uqiya of gold. So Bilal weighed for me fairly 
 and I went away. The Prophet sent for me and I thought that he would 
 return to me my camel which I hated more than anything else. But the 
 Prophet said to me, "Take your camel as well as its price."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_308.htm">Next: 3:311: Ibn 'Abbas: 'Ukaz, Majanna and Dhul-Majaz were markets in the Pre-lslamic period. ...</a></center>
 </body>