<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_109.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_111.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:113</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Aisha:</i></p>
 When Allah's Apostle reached Medina, Abu Bakr and Bilal became ill. 
 When Abu Bakr's fever got worse, he would recite (this poetic verse): 
 "Everybody is staying alive with his People, yet Death is nearer to 
 him than His shoe laces." And Bilal, when his fever deserted him, 
 would recite: "Would that I could stay overnight in A valley wherein I
 would be Surrounded by Idhkhir and Jalil (kinds of good-smelling 
 grass). Would that one day I could Drink the water of the Majanna, and
 Would that (The two mountains) Shama and Tafil would appear to me!" 
 The Prophet said, "O Allah! Curse Shaiba bin Rabi'a and 'Utba bin 
 Rabi'a and Umaiya bin Khalaf as they turned us out of our land to the 
 land of epidemics." Allah's Apostle then said, "O Allah! Make us love 
 Medina as we love Mecca or even more than that. O Allah! Give 
 blessings in our Sa and our Mudd (measures symbolizing food) and make 
 the climate of Medina suitable for us, and divert its fever towards 
 Aljuhfa." Aisha added: When we reached Medina, it was the most 
 unhealthy of Allah's lands, and the valley of Bathan (the valley of 
 Medina) used to flow with impure colored water.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_111.htm">Next: 3:114: Zaid bin Aslam from his father: Umar said, O Allah! Grant me martyrdom in Your cause, and let my death...</a></center>
 </body>