<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_472.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_474.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:476</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Said:</i></p>
 Some of the companions of the Prophet went on a journey till they 
 reached some of the 'Arab tribes (at night). They asked the latter to 
 treat them as their guests but they refused. The chief of that tribe 
 was then bitten by a snake (or stung by a scorpion) and they tried 
 their best to cure him but in vain. Some of them said (to the others),
 "Nothing has benefited him, will you go to the people who resided here
 at night, it may be that some of them might possess something (as 
 treatment)," They went to the group of the companions (of the Prophet 
 ) and said, "Our chief has been bitten by a snake (or stung by a 
 scorpion) and we have tried everything but he has not benefitted. Have
 you got anything (useful)?" One of them replied, "Yes, by Allah! I can
 recite a Ruqya, but as you have refused to accept us as your guests, I
 will not recite the Ruqya for you unless you fix for us some wages for
 it." They agrees to pay them a flock of sheep. One of them then went 
 and recited (Suratul-Fatiha): 'All the praises are for the Lord of the
 Worlds' and puffed over the chief who became all right as if he was 
 released from a chain, and got up and started walking, showing no 
 signs of sickness.
 <p>
 They paid them what they agreed to pay. Some of them (i.e. the 
 companions) then  suggested to divide their earnings among themselves,
 but the one who performed the recitation said, "Do not divide them 
 till we go to the Prophet and narrate the whole story to him, and wait
 for his order." So, they went to Allah's Apostle and narrated the 
 story. Allah's Apostle asked, "How did you come to know that 
 Surat-ul-Fatiha was recited as Ruqya?" Then he added, "You have done 
 the right thing. Divide (what you have earned) and assign a share for 
 me as well." The Prophet smiled thereupon.
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_474.htm">Next: 3:477: Anas bin Malik: When Abu Taiba cupped the Prophet and the Prophet ordered that he be ...</a></center>
 </body>