<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_45.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_47.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:47</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:</i></p>
 My father set out (for Mecca) in the year of Al-Hudaibiya, and his 
 companions assumed Ihram, but he did not. At that time the Prophet was
 informed that an enemy wanted to attack him, so the Prophet proceeded 
 onwards. While my father was among his companions, some of them 
 laughed among themselves. (My father said), "I looked up and saw an 
 onager. I attacked, stabbed and caught it. I then sought my 
 companions' help but they refused to help me. (Later) we all ate its 
 meat. We were afraid that we might be left behind (separated) from the
 Prophet so I went in search of the Prophet and made my horse to run at
 a galloping speed at times and let it go slow at an ordinary speed at 
 other times till I met a man from the tribe of Bani Ghifar at 
 midnight. I asked him, "Where did you leave the Prophet ?" He replied,
 "I left him at Ta'hun and he had the intention of having the midday 
 rest at As-Suqya. I followed the trace and joined the Prophet and 
 said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Your people (companions) send you their 
 compliments, and (ask for) Allah's Blessings upon you. They are afraid
 lest they may be left behind; so please wait for them.' I added, 'O 
 Allah's Apostle! I hunted an onager and some of its meat is with me. 
 The Prophet told the people to eat it though all of them were in the 
 state of Ihram."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_47.htm">Next: 3:48: 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada: That his father said  We proceeded with the Prophet in the year of ...</a></center>
 </body>