<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_468.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_470.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:472</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:</i></p>
 I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Three men from among those who were 
 before you, set out together till they reached a cave at night and 
 entered it. A big rock rolled down the mountain and closed the mouth 
 of the cave. They said (to each other), Nothing could save you Tom 
 this rock but to invoke Allah by giving referenda to the righteous 
 deed which you have done (for Allah's sake only).' So, one of them 
 said, 'O Allah! I had old parents and I never provided my family 
 (wife, children etc.) with milk before them. One day, by chance I was 
 delayed, and I came late (at night) while they had slept. I milked the
 sheep for them and took the milk to them, but I found them sleeping. I
 disliked to provide my family with the milk before them. I waited for 
 them and the bowl of milk was in my hand and I kept on waiting for 
 them to get up till the day dawned. Then they got up and drank the 
 milk. O Allah! If I did that for Your Sake only, please relieve us 
 from our critical situation caused by this rock.' So, the rock shifted
 a little but they could not get out."
 <p>
 The Prophet added, "The second man said, 'O Allah! I had a cousin who 
 was the dearest of all people to me and I wanted to have sexual 
 relations with her but she refused. Later she had a hard time in a 
 famine year and she came to me and I gave her one-hundred-and-twenty 
 Dinars on the condition that she would not resist my desire, and she 
 agreed. When I was about to fulfill my desire, she said: It is illegal
 for you to outrage my chastity except by legitimate marriage. So, I 
 thought it a sin to have sexual intercourse with her and left her 
 though she was the dearest of all the people to me, and also I left 
 the gold I had given her. O Allah! If I did that for Your Sake only, 
 please relieve us from the present calamity.' So, the rock shifted a 
 little more but still they could not get out from there."
 </p><p>
 The Prophet added, "Then the third man said, 'O Allah! I employed few 
 laborers and I paid them their wages with the exception of one man who
 did not take his wages and went away. I invested his wages and I got 
 much property thereby. (Then after some time) he came and said to me: 
 O Allah's slave! Pay me my wages. I said to him: All the camels, cows,
 sheep and slaves you see, are yours. He said: O Allah's slave! Don't 
 mock at me. I said: I am not mocking at you. So, he took all the herd 
 and drove them away and left nothing. O Allah! If I did that for Your 
 Sake only, please relieve us from the present suffering.' So, that 
 rock shifted completely and they got out walking.
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_470.htm">Next: 3:473: Abu May' id Al-Ansari: Whenever Allah's Apostle  ordered us to give in charity we would go to...</a></center>
 </body>