<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_416.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_418.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:420</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Huraira:</i></p>
 The Prophet said, "The Prophet Abraham emigrated with Sarah and 
 entered a village where there was a king or a tyrant. (The king) was 
 told that Abraham had entered (the village) accompanied by a woman who
 was one of the most charming women. So, the king sent for Abraham and 
 asked, 'O Abraham! Who is this lady accompanying you?' Abraham 
 replied, 'She is my sister (i.e. in religion).' Then Abraham returned 
 to her and said, 'Do not contradict my statement, for I have informed 
 them that you are my sister. By Allah, there are no true believers on 
 this land except you and 1.' Then Abraham sent her to the king. When 
 the king got to her, she got up and performed ablution, prayed and 
 said, 'O Allah! If I have believed in You and Your Apostle, and have 
 saved my private parts from everybody except my husband, then please 
 do not let this pagan overpower me.' On that the king fell in a mood 
 of agitation and started moving his legs. Seeing the condition of the 
 king, Sarah said, 'O Allah! If he should die, the people will say that
 I have killed him.' The king regained his power, and proceeded towards
 her but she got up again and performed ablution, prayed and said, 'O 
 Allah! If I have believed in You and Your Apostle and have kept my 
 private parts safe from all except my husband, then please do not let 
 this pagan overpower me.' The king again fell in a mood of agitation 
 and started moving his legs. On seeing that state of the king, Sarah 
 said, 'O Allah! If he should die, the people will say that I have 
 killed him.' The king got either two or three attacks, and after 
 recovering from the last attack he said, 'By Allah! You have sent a 
 satan to me. Take her to Abraham and give her Ajar.' So she came back 
 to Abraham and said, 'Allah humiliated the pagan and gave us a 
 slavegirl for service."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_418.htm">Next: 3:421: 'Aisha: Sad bin Abi Waqqas and 'Abu bin Zam'a quarreled over a boy. Sad said, ...</a></center>
 </body>