<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_538.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_540.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:540</h3><p><i>Narrated Abu Huraira:</i></p>
 The people say that Abu Huraira narrates too many narrations. In fact 
 Allah knows whether I say the truth or not. They also ask, "Why do the
 emigrants and the Ansar not narrate as he does?" In fact, my emigrant 
 brethren were busy trading in the markets, and my Ansar brethren were 
 busy with their properties. I was a poor man keeping the company of 
 Allah's Apostle and was satisfied with what filled my stomach. So, I 
 used to be present while they (i.e. the emigrants and the Ansar) were 
 absent, and I used to remember while they forgot (the Hadith). One day
 the Prophet said, "Whoever spreads his sheet till I finish this 
 statement of mine and then gathers it on his chest, will never forget 
 anything of my statement." So, I spread my covering sheet which was 
 the only garment I had, till the Prophet finished his statement and 
 then I gathered it over my chest. By Him Who had sent him (i.e. 
 Allah's Apostle) with the truth, since then I did not forget even a 
 single word of that statement of his, until this day of mine. By 
 Allah, but for two verses in Allah's Book, I would never have related 
 any narration (from the Prophet). (These two verses are): "Verily! 
 Those who conceal the clear signs and the guidance which we have sent 
 down .....(up to)  the Merciful.'   (2.159-160)
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_540.htm">Next: 3:541: Sahl bin Sad: A tumbler (full of milk or water) was brought to the Prophet who drank...</a></center>
 </body>