<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_561.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_563.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:563</h3><p><i>Narrated Husain bin Ali:</i></p>
 Ali bin Abi Talib said: "I got a she-camel as my share of the war 
 booty on the day (of the battle) of Badr, and Allah's Apostle gave me 
 another she-camel. I let both of them kneel at the door of one of the 
 Ansar, intending to carry Idhkhir on them to sell it and use its price
 for my wedding banquet on marrying Fatima. A goldsmith from Bam 
 Qainqa' was with me. Hamza bin 'Abdul-Muttalib was in that house 
 drinking wine and a lady singer was reciting: "O Hamza! (Kill) the 
 (two) fat old she camels (and serve them to your guests)."
 <p>
 So Hamza took his sword and went towards the two she-camels and cut 
 off their humps and opened their flanks and took a part of their 
 livers." (I said to Ibn Shihab, "Did he take part of the humps?" He 
 replied, "He cut off their humps and carried them away.") 'Ali further
 said, "When I saw that dreadful sight, I went to the Prophet and told 
 him the news. The Prophet came out in the company of Zaid bin Haritha 
 who was with him then, and I too went with them. He went to Hamza and 
 spoke harshly to him. Hamza looked up and said, 'Aren't you only the 
 slaves of my forefathers?' The Prophet retreated and went out. This 
 incident happened before the prohibition of drinking."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_563.htm">Next: 3:564: Anas: The Prophet decided to grant a portion of (the uncultivated land of) ...</a></center>
 </body>