<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_681.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_683.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:683</h3><p><i>Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:</i></p>
 The Prophet (along with his companions) reached Mecca in the morning 
 of the fourth of Dhul-Hijja assuming Ihram for Hajj only. So when we 
 arrived at Mecca, the Prophet ordered us to change our intentions of 
 the Ihram for'Umra and that we could finish our Ihram after performing
 the 'Umra and could go to our wives (for sexual intercourse). The 
 people began talking about that. Jabir said surprisingly, "Shall we go
 to Mina while semen is dribbling from our male organs?" Jabir moved 
 his hand while saying so. When this news reached the Prophet he 
 delivered a sermon and said, "I have been informed that some peoples 
 were saying so and so; By Allah I fear Allah more than you do, and am 
 more obedient to Him than you. If I had known what I know now, I would
 not have brought the Hadi (sacrifice) with me and had the Hadi not 
 been with me, I would have finished the Ihram." At that Suraqa bin 
 Malik stood up and asked "O Allah's Apostle! Is this permission for us
 only or is it forever?" The Prophet replied, "It is forever." In the 
 meantime 'Ali bin Abu Talib came from Yemen and was saying Labbaik for
 what the Prophet has intended. (According to another man, 'Ali was 
 saying Labbaik for Hajj similar to Allah's Apostle's). The Prophet 
 told him to keep on the Ihram and let him share the Hadi with him.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_683.htm">Next: 3:684: Abaya bin Rifaa: My grandfather, Rafi bin Khadij said,  We were in the valley of ...</a></center>
 </body>