<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Women</a> 
 <a href="../../bib/index.htm">Bible</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="wb04.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="wb06.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">CHAPTER III.</h1>
 <font size="2"><p><i>Genesis iii: 1-24.</i></p>
 <p>1 Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?</p>
 <p>2 And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:</p>
 <p>3 But of the fruit of the tree which <i>is</i> in the midst of the garden, God hath said Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.</p>
 <p>4 And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:</p>
 <p>5 For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.</p>
 <p>6 And when the woman saw that the tree <i>was</i> good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make <i>one</i> wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.</p>
 <p>7 And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they <i>were</i> naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.</p>
 <p>8 And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day; and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees in the garden.</p>
 <p>9 And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where <i>art</i> thou?</p>
 <p>10 And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.</p>
 <p>11 And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not eat?</p>
 <p>12 And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest <i>to be</i> with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.</p>
 <p>13 And the Lord God said unto the woman, What <i>is</i> this <i>that</i> thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.</p>
 <p>14 And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou <i>art</i> cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life:</p>
 <p>15 And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his heel.</p>
 <p>16 Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children: and thy desire <i>shall be</i> to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.</p>
 <p>17 And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it; cursed <i>is</i> the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat <i>of</i> it all the days of thy life;</p>
 <p>18 Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;</p>
 <p>19. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou <i>art</i>, and unto dust shalt thou return.</p>
 <p>20. And Adam called his wife's name Eve: because she was the mother of all living.</p>
 <p>21 Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins and clothed them.</p>
 <p>22 ¶ And the Lord God said, Behold the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil; and now, let he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever;</p>
 <p>23 Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.</p>
 <p>24 So he drove out the man: and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden cherubim, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.</p>
 </font><p>ADAM CLARKE, in his commentaries, asks the question, "is this an allegory?" He finds it beset with so many difficulties as an historical fact, that he inclines at first to regard it as a fable, a mere symbol, of some hidden truth. His</p>
 <p>{p. 24}</p>
 <p>mind seems more troubled about the serpent than any other personage in the drama. As snakes cannot walk upright, and have never been known to speak, he thinks this beguiling creature must have been an ourang-outang, or some species of ape. However, after expressing all his doubts, he rests in the assumption that it must be taken literally, and that with higher knowledge of the possibilities of all living things, many seeming improbabilities will be fully realized.</p>
 <p>A learned professor in Yale College,[*] before a large class of students, expressed serious doubts as to the forbidden fruit being an apple, as none grew in that latitude. He said it must have been a quince. If the serpent and the apple arc to be withdrawn thus recklessly from the tableaux, it is feared that with advancing civilization the whole drama may fall into discredit. Scientists tells us that "the missing link" between the ape and man, has recently been discovered., so that we can now trace back an unbroken line of ancestors to the dawn of creation.</p>
 <p>As out of this allegory grows the doctrines of original sin, the fall of man, and woman the author of all our woes, and the curses on the serpent, the woman, and the man; the Darwinian theory of the gradual growth of the race from a lower to a higher type of animal life, is more hopeful and encouraging. However, as our chief interest is in woman's part in the drama, we are equally pleased with her attitude, whether as a myth in an allegory, or as the heroine of an historical occurrence.</p>
 <p>In this prolonged interview, the unprejudiced reader must be impressed with the courage, the dignity, and the lofty ambition of the woman. The tempter evidently had a profound knowledge of human nature, and saw at a glance the high character of the person he met by chance in his walks in the garden. He did not try to tempt her from the path of duty by brilliant jewels, rich dresses, worldly luxuries or pleasures, but with the promise of knowledge, with the wisdom of the Gods.</p>
 <font size="2"><p>[*. Daniel Cady Eaton, Professor of Botany.]</p>
 </font><p>{p. 25} Like Socrates or Plato, his powers of conversation and asking puzzling questions, were no doubt marvellous, and he roused in the woman that intense thirst for knowledge, that the simple pleasures of picking flowers and talking with Adam did not satisfy. Compared with Adam she appears to great advantage through the entire drama.</p>
 <p>The curse pronounced on woman is inserted in an unfriendly spirit to justify her degradation and subjection to man. With obedience to the laws of health, diet, dress, and exercise, the period of maternity should be one of added vigor in both body and mind, a perfectly natural operation should not be attended with suffering. By the observance of physical and psychical laws the supposed curse can be easily transformed into a blessing. Some churchmen speak of maternity as a disability, and then chant the Magnificat in all their cathedrals round the globe. Through all life's shifting scenes, the mother of the race has been the greatest factor in civilization.</p>
 <p>We hear the opinion often expressed, that woman always has, and always will be in subjection. Neither assertion is true. She enjoyed unlimited individual freedom for many centuries, and the events of the present day all point to her speedy emancipation. Scientists now give 85,000 years for the growth of the race. They assign 60,000 to savagism, 20,000 to barbarism, and 5,000 to civilization. Recent historians tell us that for centuries woman reigned supreme. That period was called the Matriarchate. Then man seized the reins of government, and we are now under the Patriarchate. But we see on all sides new forces gathering, and woman is already abreast with man in art, science, literature, and government. The next dynasty, in which both will reign as equals, will be the Amphiarchate, which is close at hand.</p>
 <p>Psychologists tell us of a sixth sense now in process of development, by which we can read each other's mind and communicate without speech. The Tempter might have had that sense, as he evidently read the minds of both the creature and</p>
 <p>{p. 26}</p>
 <p>the Creator, if we are to take this account as literally true, as Adam Clarke advises.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">E. C. S.</p>
 <p>Note the significant fact that we always hear of the "fall of man," not the fall of woman, showing that the consensus of human thought has been more unerring than masculine interpretation. Reading this narrative carefully, it is amazing that any set of men ever claimed that the dogma of the inferiority of woman is here set forth. The conduct of Eve from the beginning to the end is so superior to that of Adam. The command not to eat of the fruit of the tree of Knowledge was given to the man alone before woman was formed. Genesis ii, 17. Therefore the injunction was not brought to Eve with the impressive solemnity of a Divine Voice, but whispered to her by her husband and equal. It was a serpent supernaturally endowed, a seraphim as Scott and other commentators have claimed, who talked with Eve, and whose words might reasonably seem superior to the second-hand story of her companion nor does the woman yield at once. She quotes the command not to eat of the fruit to which the serpent replies "Dying ye shall not die," v. 4, literal translation. In other words telling her that if the mortal body does perish, the immortal part shall live forever, and offering as the reward of her act the attainment of Knowledge.</p>
 <p>Then the woman fearless of death if she can gain wisdom takes of the fruit; and all this time Adam standing beside her interposes no word of objection. "Her husband with her" are the words of v. 6. Had he been the representative of the divinely appointed head in married life, he assuredly would have taken upon himself the burden of the discussion with the serpent, but no, he is silent in this crisis of their fate. Having had the command from God himself he interposes no word of warning or remonstrance, but takes the fruit from the hand of his wife without a protest. It takes six verses to describe the "fall" of</p>
 <p>{p. 27}</p>
 <p>woman, the fall of man is contemptuously dismissed in a line and a half.</p>
 <p>The subsequent conduct of Adam was to the last degree dastardly. When the awful time of reckoning comes, and the Jehovah God appears to demand why his command has been disobeyed, Adam endeavors to shield himself behind the gentle being he has declared to be so dear. "The woman thou gavest to be with me, she gave me and I did eat," he whines--trying to shield himself at his wife's expense! Again we are amazed that upon such a story men have built up a theory of their superiority!</p>
 <p>Then follows what has been called the curse. Is it not rather a prediction? First is the future fate of the serpent described, the enmity of the whole human race--"it shall lie in wait for thee as to the head" (v. 15, literal translation). Next the subjection of the woman is foretold, thy husband "shall rule over thee," v. 16. Lastly the long struggle of man with the forces of nature is portrayed. "In the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat food until thy turning back to the earth" (v. 19, literal translation). With the evolution of humanity an ever increasing number of men have ceased to toil for their bread with their hands, and with the introduction of improved machinery, and the uplifting of the race there will come a time when there shall be no severities of labor, and when women shall be freed from all oppressions.</p>
 <p>"And Adam called his wife's name Life for she was the mother of all living" (V. 20, literal translation).</p>
 <p>It is a pity that all versions of the Bible do not give this word instead of the Hebrew Eve. She was Life, the eternal mother, the first representative of the more valuable and important half of the human race.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">L. D. B.</p>
 <p>{p. 28}</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="wb06.htm">Next: GENESIS CHAPTER IV.</a></center>
 </body>