<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Women</a> 
 <a href="../../bib/index.htm">Bible</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="wb16.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="wb18.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">CHAPTER III.</h1>
 <font size="2"><p><i>Exodus iv.</i></p>
 <p>18 ¶ And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said unto him, let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which <i>are</i> in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.</p>
 <p>19 And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead which sought thy life.</p>
 <p>20 And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in his hand.</p>
 <p>21 And the Lord said unto Moses, when thou goest to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.</p>
 <p>22 And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord, Israel <i>is</i> my son, <i>even</i> my firstborn:</p>
 <p>23 And I say unto thee. let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy firstborn:</p>
 <p>24 ¶ And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him.</p>
 <p>25 Then Zipporah took a sharp stone. and circumcised her son.</p>
 <p>26 So he let him go.</p>
 </font><p>WHEN Moses married Zipporah he represented himself as a stranger who desired nothing better than to adopt Jethro's mode of life, But now that he desired to see his own people, his wife has no choice but to accompany him. So Moses took his wife and his sons and set them on an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt.</p>
 <p>The reason the Lord met them and sought to kill the son, was readily devined by Zipporah; her son had not been circumcised; so with woman's quick intuition and natural courage to save the life of her husband, she skillfully performed the necessary operation, and the travellers went on their way rejoicing. The word circumcision seems to have a very elastic meaning "uncircumcised lips" is used to describe that want of power to speak fluently, from which Moses suffered and which he so often deplored.</p>
 <p>As in every chapter of Jewish history this rite is dwelt upon it is worthy of remark that its prominence as a religious observance means a disparagement of all female life, unfit for offerings, and unfit to, take part in religious services, incapable of consecration. The circumcision of the heart even, which women might achieve, does not render them fit to take an active part in any of the holy services of the Lord. They were permitted</p>
 <p>{p. 76}</p>
 <p>to violate the moral code of laws to secure liberty for their people, but they could not officiate in any of the sacraments, nor eat of the consecrated bread at meals. Although the Mosaic code and customs so plainly degrade the female sex, and their position in the church to-day grows out of these ancient customs, yet many people insist that our religion dignifies women. But so long as the Pentateuch is read and accepted as the Word of God, an undefined influence is felt by each generation that. destroys a proper respect for all womankind.</p>
 <p>It is the contempt that the canon and civil law alike express for women that has multiplied their hardships and intensified man's, desire to hold them in subjection. The sentiment that statesmen and bishops proclaim in their high places are responsible for the actions of the lower classes on the highways. We scarce take up a paper that does not herald some outrage committed on a matron on her way to church, or the little girl gathering wild flowers on her way to school; yet you cannot go so low down in the scale of being as to find men who will enter our churches to desecrate the altars or toss about the emblems of the sacrament; because they have been educated with some respect for churches, altars and sacraments. But where are any lessons of respect taught for the mothers of the human family? And yet as the great factor in the building of the race are they not more sacred than churches, altars, sacraments or the priesthood?</p>
 <p>Do our sons in their law schools, who read the old common law of England and its commentators, rise from their studies with higher respect for women? Do our sons in their theological seminaries rise from their studies of the Mosaic laws and Paul's epistles with higher respect for their mothers? Alas! in both cases they may have learned their first lessons of disrespect and contempt. They who would protect their innocent daughters from the outrages so common to-day, must lay anew the foundation stones of law and gospel in justice and equality, in a profound respect of the sexes for each other.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">E. C. S.</p>
 <p>{p. 77}</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="wb18.htm">Next: EXODUS CHAPTER IV.</a></center>
 </body>