<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Women</a> 
 <a href="../../bib/index.htm">Bible</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="wb41.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="wb43.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Advertisements from original, Vol. 1</h1>
 <h2 align="CENTER">Eighty Years and More</h2>
 <h5 align="CENTER">BEING THE REMINISCENCES OF</h5>
 <h3 align="CENTER">ELIZABETH CADY STANTON.</h3>
 <h4 align="CENTER">(1815-1897.)</h4>
 <b></b><p>This new work by our distinguished countrywoman is a 12mo of 475 pp., complete in one volume, cloth bound, with eleven portraits. Price $2.00.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">I DEDICATE THIS VOLUME TO</p>
 <p align="CENTER">SUSAN B. ANTHONY,</p>
 <p align="CENTER">MY STEADFAST FRIEND FOR HALF A CENTURY.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">CONTENTS.</p>
 <p align="CENTER"></p><center><table cellspacing="0" border="0" cellpadding="9" width="782">
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p><font size="1">Chapter.</font></p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <font size="1"><p>Chapter.</p></font></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>I.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Childhood.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XVII.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Lyceums and Lecturers.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>II.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>School Days.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XVIII.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Westward Ho!</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>III.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Girlhood.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XIX.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>The Spirit Of '76.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>IV.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Life at Peterboro.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XX.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Writing "The History of Woman Suffrage."</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>V.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Our Wedding journey.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XXI.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>In the South of France.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>VI.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Homeward Bound.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XXII.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Reforms and Reformers in Great Britain.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>VII.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Motherhood.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XXIII.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Woman and Theology.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>VIII.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Boston and Chelsea.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XXIV.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>England and France Revisited.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>IX.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>The First Woman's Rights Convention.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XXV.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>The International Council of Women.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>X.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Susan B. Anthony.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XXVI.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>My Last Visit to England.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XI.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Susan B. Anthony (Continued).</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XXVII.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Sixtieth Anniversary of the Class of 1832--The Woman's Bible.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XII.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>My First Speech Before a Legislature.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XXVIII.</p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p>My Eightieth Birthday.</p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XIII.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Reforms and Mobs.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XIV.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Views on Marriage and Divorce.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XV.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Women as Patriots.</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 </tr>
 <tr><td width="14%" valign="TOP">
 <p>XVI.</p></td>
 <td width="36%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Pioneer Life in Kansas--Our Newspaper, "The Revolution."</p></td>
 <td width="11%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 <td width="39%" valign="TOP">
 <p> </p></td>
 </tr>
 </table>
 </center>
 
 <p align="CENTER"> </p>
 <h2 align="CENTER">PREFACE</h2>
 <p>The interest my family and friends have always manifested in the narration of my early and varied experiences, and their earnest desire to have them in permanent form for the</p>
 <p>{p. 154}</p>
 <p>amusement of another generation, moved me to publish this volume. I am fully aware that its contents have no especial artistic merit, being composed partly of extracts from my diary, a few hasty sketches of my travels and people I have met, and of my opinions on many social questions.</p>
 <p>The story of my private life as the wife of an earnest reformer, as an enthusiastic housekeeper, proud of my skill in every department of domestic economy, and as the mother of seven children., may amuse and benefit the reader.</p>
 <p>The incidents of my public career as a leader in the most momentous reform yet launched upon the world-the emancipation of woman-will be found in "The History of Woman Suffrage."</p>
 <p>New York City, September, 1897        ELIZABETH CADY STANTON.</p>
 <p>Mrs. Stanton in this book, in her inimitable way, relates anecdotes of, and experiences with, a number of the leading women, statesmen, authors, and reformers of the last sixty years. The following are a few names selected at random from the</p>
 <h4 align="CENTER">INDEX OF NAMES.</h4>
 <p align="CENTER"></p><center><table cellspacing="0" border="0" cellpadding="9" width="798">
 <tr><td width="50%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Beecher, Rev. Henry Ward.<br>
 Bradlaugh, Hon. Charles, M. P.<br>
 Bright, Hon. Jacob M. P.<br>
 Bright, Hon. John, M. P.<br>
 Browning, Robert.<br>
 Bryant, William Cullen.<br>
 Curtis, George William.<br>
 Cobbe, Frances Power.<br>
 Clarkson, Thomas.<br>
 Charming, Rev. William Ellery.<br>
 Carlisle, Lord and Lady.<br>
 Byron, Lady.<br>
 Cushman, Charlotte.<br>
 Dana, Charles A.<br>
 Douglass, Frederick.<br>
 Emerson, Ralph Waldo.<br>
 Fry, Elizabeth.<br>
 Fuller, Margaret.<br>
 Garrison, William Lloyd.<br>
 George, Henry.<br>
 Grant, General Ulysses S<br>
 Greeley, Horace.<br>
 Grevy, President Jules.<br>
 Holmes, Oliver Wendell.</p></td>
 <td width="50%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Hyacinthe, Pere.<br>
 Ingersoll, Robert G.<br>
 Kingsley, Canon Charles.<br>
 Krapotkine, Prince.<br>
 Lowell, James Russell.<br>
 Martineau, Harriet.<br>
 Mill, John Stuart.<br>
 Mott, Lucretia.<br>
 O'Connell, Daniel.<br>
 Owen, Robert Dale.<br>
 Parker, Rev. Theodore.<br>
 Parnell, Hon. Charles Stuart, M. P.<br>
 Phillips, Wendell.<br>
 Seward, Governor William H.<br>
 Shelley, Percy Bysshe.<br>
 Smith, Hon. Gerrit.<br>
 Stanton, Hon. Henry B.<br>
 Stepniak.<br>
 Stone, Lucy.<br>
 Stowe, Harriet Beecher.<br>
 Sumner, Hon. Charles.<br>
 Whittier, John G.<br>
 Willard, Emma.<br>
 Willard, Frances E.</p></td>
 </tr>
 </table>
 </center>
 
 <p align="CENTER"> </p>
 <p align="CENTER">See Press Comments on following pages.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">This book will be sent, mail prepaid, on receipt of price, by</p>
 <p align="CENTER">EUROPEAN PUBLISHING COMPANY,</p>
 <p align="CENTER">W BROAD STREET, NEW YORK CITY.</p>
 <p>{p. 155}</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">PRESS COMMENTS.</h3>
 <p>It is a very readable book.--Albany <i>Times-Union</i>.</p>
 <p>The Reminiscences are delightful.--The Louisville <i>Dispatch</i>.</p>
 <p>The tale is as interesting as any romance or drama.--N. Y. <i>Mail and Express</i>.</p>
 <p>A bright, entertaining tale, and one which contains much valuable information.--N. Y. <i>Herald</i>.</p>
 <p>We know of no other autobiography which will command more profound interest.--<i>The Rocky Mountain News</i>.</p>
 <p>It is the life story of a genuine American woman and will excite wide interest.--The Minneapolis <i>Tribune</i>.</p>
 <p>A breezy narrative of a long and active life, told with spirit and humor.--<i>The Woman's Journal</i>.</p>
 <p>Every sentence in this book would serve as a text for a chapter were merited amplification practicable.--Ithaca <i>Journal</i>.</p>
 <p>The book is illustrated with a number of excellent portraits of the author, and is full of interest.-New London Day.</p>
 <p>A well written account of a long and busy life. A highly interesting biography and a delightful book, which is well worth reading.--N. Y. <i>Evening World</i>.</p>
 <p>A human document of no small interest and value. A straightforward and piquant story of a noteworthy personality.--The Chicago <i>Tribune</i>.</p>
 <p>A combination of several kinds of charm. It is frankly personal. It is impossible not to wish there had been very much more of each chapter.--N. Y. <i>Evening Sun</i>.</p>
 <p>It is unexpectedly amusing, as well as instructive, some of the author's experiences being narrated in a most realistic and delightful manner.--Washington <i>Post</i>.</p>
 <p>Two chapters of this interesting autobiography are devoted to Miss Susan B. Anthony, the friend and fellow-laborer in the field of Woman's Rights with Mrs. Stanton.--Jeannette L. Gilder in N. Y. <i>Sunday Journal</i>.</p>
 <p>It is a book well worth reading and shows what one woman may do with a purpose and a will back of it. The personal part of the Reminiscences are of much interest, and force admiration for the tactful, courageous and able woman.--Pittsburg <i>Post</i>.</p>
 <p>It is one of the most important books of the year, Particularly to the women of this country. It is absorbingly interesting. The trouble that the reader encounters is that he finds it hard work to lay the book down.--Boston <i>Daily Advertiser</i>.</p>
 <p>The story of the life of this great American woman will be read with much interest in many homes. It is a book of much artistic merit and her Reminiscences cannot be other than interesting. The book throughout is delightfully entertaining--Troy <i>Times</i>.</p>
 <p>A most charming and interesting picture of a wife, mother and a friend. Every one who has seen or heard of this leader of the woman question of the century will rejoice that such a book has been given to the world.--Boston <i>Investigator</i>.</p>
 <p>It is not principally the record of her public career as a leader in the movement for the emancipation of woman, but rather the story of her private life which is set forth in this volume. Especially interesting are those reminiscences that deal with the author's early days.--N. Y. <i>Sun</i>.</p>
 <p>This book abounds in interesting experiences. The style is simple and amusing, showing the writer possessed of a keen sense of humor arid the fitness of things. as well as justice. It is particularly interesting to women whether they sympathize with the views of the writer or otherwise.--Rochester <i>Democrat and Chronicle</i>.</p>
 <p>This is a thoroughly enjoyable book and never lacking in interest. It will be an inspiration for American girls to read its chapters. She gives graphic pictures. The volume contains several fine portraits. The book is racy and pleasing, whether the reader agrees with the author in all things or not.--Chicago <i>Inter-Ocean</i>.</p>
 <p>Elizabeth Cady Stanton's recollections, covering eighty years, easily come first in the array of new noteworthy books, because of the surprise they will afford the public, having been almost unheralded; because of the impressive and protracted public career of the author; because of her inflexible devotion to and sincerity in a cause long unpopular, and because, moreover, Mrs. Stanton is an American. This is a most interesting volume.--N. Y. <i>Times</i>.</p>
 <p>{p. 156}</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Eighty Years and More.</h3>
 <h5 align="CENTER">Being the Reminiscences of ELIZABETH CADY STANTON. Complete In one volume. 12mo, 475 pp. Cloth, eleven portraits. Price $2.00.</h5>
 <p align="CENTER">PRESS COMMENTS--(Continued).</p>
 <p>The story of Mrs. Stanton's life is one which interests many thousands in this country, and which will also be read with interest in other lands, for her reputation as a reformer and writer is international; her strong personal characteristics give to this autobiographical work a charm of its own. It contains some of the most entertaining reminiscences that have been given to the public. It is a book which is sure to be widely read.--Worcester <i>Spy</i>.</p>
 <p>The personal element is the fascinating part of the book which holds one's attention and keeps him reading to the end. It is a bright, breezy, and radical turn-the-world-upside-down book. We do not like its religious tone. We do not like the author's occult theosophy. We do not like her sociology, with its good word for the windmill logic of the speculative Bellamy. We do not like her views of marriage and divorce. But when all is said, and with all these wide differences lying between us to qualify our enjoyment of this book, we have enjoyed it much. Mrs. Stanton is a first-rate raconteuse and fills her pages with amusing recitals and brilliant encounters--N. Y. <i>Independent</i>.</p>
 <p>TO WOMAN SUFFRAGE CLUBS: We will supply Clubs with single copies of this book at $2 per copy, postage prepaid. We will forward five (5) copies of this book to any address, express charges prepaid, on the receipt of six dollars ($6.00).</p>
 <p>WE WISH AN AGENT IN EVERY WOMAN SUFFRAGE CLUB. Correspondence with those who desire to become Agents solicited.</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Speeches, Letters and Miscellaneous Writings</h3>
 <h6 align="CENTER">OF</h6>
 <h4 align="CENTER">ELIZABETH CADY STANTON.</h4>
 <h4 align="CENTER">12mo, 500 pp., cloth, five portraits. Price $2.00.</h4>
 <p>This work will be similar in style and binding to Eighty Years and More, will contain valuable editorial notes by Theodore Stanton, A. M., and will be published in January, 1899.</p>
 <p>NEW YORK</p>
 <p>EUROPEAN PUBLISHING COMPANY</p>
 <p>AND PARIS</p>
 <p>{p. 157}</p>
 <h2 align="CENTER">THE WOMAN'S BIBLE.</h2>
 <h4 align="CENTER">COMPLETE IN TWO PARTS.</h4>
 <h5 align="CENTER">REVISING COMMITTEE.</h5>
 <p align="CENTER"></p><center><table cellspacing="0" border="0" cellpadding="9" width="798">
 <tr><td width="50%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Elizabeth Cady Stanton.<br>
 Rev. Phebe A. Hanaford.<br>
 Clara Bewick Colby.<br>
 Rev. Augusta Chapin.<br>
 Mary Seymour Howell.<br>
 Josephine K. Henry.<br>
 Mrs. Robert G. Ingersoll.<br>
 Sarah A. Underwood.<br>
 Catharine F. Stebbins.<br>
 Ellen Battelle Dietrick.<br>
 Ursula N. Gestefeld.<br>
 Lillie Devereux Blake.<br>
 Matilda Joslyn Gage.</p></td>
 <td width="50%" valign="TOP">
 <p>Rev. Olympia Brown.<br>
 Frances Ellen Burr.<br>
 Clara B. Neyman.<br>
 Helen H. Gardener.<br>
 Charlotte Beebe Wilbour.<br>
 Lucinda B. Chandler.<br>
 Louisa Southworth.<br>
 Baroness Alexandra Gripenberg, Finland.<br>
 Ursula M. Bright, England.<br>
 Irma von Troll-Borostyani, Austria.<br>
 Priscilla Bright McLaren, Scotland.<br>
 Isabelle Bogelot, France.</p></td>
 </tr>
 </table>
 </center>
 
 <p align="CENTER"> </p>
 <p align="CENTER">PART I.</p>
 <b></b><p align="CENTER">A 12mo, 160 pp. paper. Third American and Second English Edition. Twentieth Thousand. Price 50 Cents.</p>
 <p>It contains Comments on Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lillie Devereux Blake, Rev. Phebe A. Hanaford, Clara Bewick Colby, Ellen Battelle Dietrick, Ursula N. Gestefeld, Louisa Southworth, Frances Ellen Burr.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">PART II.</p>
 <b></b><p>A 12mo, 217 pp. paper. First American Edition, Ten Thousand. Price 50 Cents.</p>
 <p>It contains Comments on The Old and New Testaments from Joshua to Revelation, by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Louisa Southworth, Lucinda B. Chandler, Anonymous, Matilda Joslyn Gage, Rev. Phebe A. Hanaford, Clara B. Neyman, Frances Ellen Burr, Ellen Battelle Dietrick, and Letters and Comments in an Appendix, by Rev. Antoinette Brown Blackwell, Mary A. Livermore, Frances E. Willard, Mrs. Robert G. Ingersoll, Irma von Troll-Borostyani, Mrs. Jacob Bright, Rev. Phebe A. Hanaford, Anonymous, Susan B. Anthony, Edna D. Cheney, Sarah A. Underwood, Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, Josephine K. Henry, Ursula N. Gestefeld, Catharine F. Stebbins, Alice Stone Blackwell, Matilda Joslyn Gage, E. T. M., Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and others, and the resolution passed by the National-American Woman Suffrage Association, repudiating "The Woman's Bible," together with the discussion thereon.</p>
 <b></b><p align="CENTER">See Press Comments on The Woman's Bible on next page.</p>
 <p>{p. 158}</p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">PRESS COMMENTS</h3>
 <h5 align="CENTER">ON THE</h5>
 <h2 align="CENTER">WOMAN'S BIBLE</h2>
 <p>The comments are right up to date.--Cincinnati <i>Tribune</i>.</p>
 <p>The most humorous book of the year.--The Hartford <i>Seminary Record</i>.</p>
 <p>Of all possible books this is perhaps the most extraordinary possible.--<i>The Week</i>, Toronto, Canada.</p>
 <p>A very clever analysis of passages relating to the sex.--<i>Public Opinion</i>, N. Y. City.</p>
 <p>The new Woman s Bible is one of the remarkable productions of the century.--Denver <i>News</i>.</p>
 <p>A unique edition of the Scripture. An extraordinary presentment of Holy Writ!--Denver <i>Times</i>.</p>
 <p>The work is unique. Its aim is to help the cause of woman in her battle for equality.--<i>Beacon</i>, Akron, Ohio.</p>
 <p>Robert G. Ingersoll is the only person on earth capable of a work equal to Mrs. Stanton's sensation, "The Woman's Bible."--Chicago <i>Times-Herald</i>.</p>
 <p>The attack of the new woman on the King James Bible will be observed with interest where it does not alarm. But let "The Woman's Bible" and the truth prevail. It may be that Lot himself was turned into a pillar of salt.--Chicago <i>Post</i>.</p>
 <p>It has come at last, as it was bound to come--the emancipated woman's Bible. The wonder is it has been delayed so long. This is not a blasphemous book.--The <i>Egyptian Gazette</i>, Alexandria, Egypt.</p>
 <p>The "new woman" has broken out in a fresh direction and published "The Woman's Bible." In it the conduct of Adam, the father of the race, is described as "to the last degree dastardly."--Westminster <i>Budget</i>, London, Eng.</p>
 <p>One of the most striking protests devised by woman for the purpose of showing her rejection of the conditions under which our mothers lived. It is evidently the mission of "The Woman's Bible" to exalt and dignify woman.--<i>The Morning</i>, London, Eng.</p>
 <p>We have read some of the passages of</p>
 <p>the commentary prepared for "the Woman's Bible" by that very accomplished American woman and Biblical student, Mrs. Elizabeth Cady Stanton. They are a great deal more satisfactory than many of the comments upon the same texts that we have read in other and more pretentious Commentaries. Mrs. Stanton's interpretative remarks are shrewd and sensible--Editorial N. Y. <i>Sun</i>.</p>
 <p>Of man-made commentaries on the Bible we have had sufficient to stock a library and yet they have left room for this commentary by women. These revisers have proved the need of an intelligent examination of the Scriptures from the woman's point of view. The lady commentators are not wanting in a sense of humor--the quality in which biblical critics of the male sex are usually unhappily deficient. There is much that is very funny and very interesting in this new commentary upon the Bible.--<i>The Daily Chronicle</i>, London, Eng.</p>
 <p>The <i>Standard</i> says, "The Sisterhood of Advanced Women has taken a bold step towards emancipation. It has long groaned under certain implications of servitude contained in a few passages of Scripture, and has, therefore, determined to abolish these disabilities by publishing 'The Woman's Bible.'" It is not only the type that is new. New readings of old passages are given, and the volume contains suggestions to show that the verses about women's inferiority really mean the opposite of the ordinary acceptation. In it Eve is rather praised than otherwise for having eaten the apple. It is pointed out that Satan did not tempt her with an array of silks and satins, and gold watches, or even a cycling costume--the things which some people think most seductive to her descendants--but with the offer of knowledge; a man being of such a lethargic and groveling nature that a similar lofty ambition never entered his mind. Besides, if the fruit was not to be eaten, Eve should have been informed of the fact at first hand, and not through an agent.--<i>Pall Mall Gazette</i>, London, Eng.</p>
 <p align="CENTER">The above books will be sent, mail prepaid, on receipt of price, by</p>
 <p align="CENTER">EUROPEAN PUBLISHING COMPANY,</p>
 <p align="CENTER">68 BROAD STREET, NEW YORK CITY.</p>
 <p>{p. 1}</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="wb43.htm">Next: Title Page, Part II</a></center>
 </body>