<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Women</a> 
 <a href="../../bib/index.htm">Bible</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="wb61.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="wb63.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">CHAPTER II.</h1>
 <font size="2"><p><i>Matthew xxv.</i></p>
 <p>1 Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.</p>
 <p>2 And five of them were wise, and five were foolish.</p>
 <p>3 They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them:</p>
 <p>4 But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.</p>
 <p>5 While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.</p>
 <p>6 And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.</p>
 <p>7 Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.</p>
 <p>8 And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out.</p>
 <p>9 But the wise answered, saying, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.</p>
 <p>10 And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut.</p>
 <p>11 Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.</p>
 <p>12 But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.</p>
 </font><p>IN this chapter we have the duty of self-development impressively and repeatedly urged in the form of parables, addressed alike to man and to woman. The sin of neglecting and of burying one's talents, capacities and powers, and the penalties which such a course involve, are here strikingly portrayed.</p>
 <p>This parable is found among the Jewish records substantially the same as in our own Scriptures. Their weddings were generally celebrated at night; yet they usually began at the rising of the evening star; but in this case there was a more than ordinary delay. Adam Clarke in his commentaries explains this parable as referring chiefly to spiritual gifts and the religious life. He makes the Lord of Hosts the bridegroom, the judgment day the wedding feast, the foolish virgins the sinners whose hearts were cold and dead, devoid of all spiritual graces, and unfit to enter the kingdom of heaven, The wise virgins were the saints who were ready for translation, or for the bridal procession. They followed to the wedding feast; and when the chosen had entered "<i>the door was shut</i>."</p>
 <p>{p. 124}</p>
 <p>This strikes us as a strained interpretation of a very simple parable, which, considered in connection with the other parables, seems to apply much more closely to this life than to that which is to come, to the intellectual and the moral nature, and to the whole round of human duties. It fairly describes the two classes which help to make up society in general. The one who, like the foolish virgins, have never learned the first important duty of cultivating their own individual powers, using the talents given to them, and keeping their own lamps trimmed and burning. The idea of being a helpmeet to somebody else has been so sedulously drilled into most women that an individual life, aim, purpose and ambition are never taken into consideration. They oftimes do so much in other directions that they neglect the most vital duties to themselves.</p>
 <p>We may find in this simple parable a lesson for the cultivation of courage and of self-reliance. These virgins are summoned to the discharge of an important duty at midnight, alone, in darkness, and in solitude. No chivalrous gentleman is there to run for oil and to trim their lamps. They must depend on themselves, unsupported, and pay the penalty of their own improvidence and unwisdom. Perhaps in that bridal procession might have been seen fathers, brothers, friends, for whose service and amusement the foolish virgins had wasted many precious hours, when they should have been trimming their own lamps and keeping oil in their vessels.</p>
 <p>And now, with music, banners, lanterns, torches, guns and rockets fired at intervals, come the bride and the groom, with their attendants and friends numbering thousands, brilliant in jewels, gold and silver, magnificently mounted on richly caparisoned horses--for nothing can be more brilliant than were those nuptial solemnities of Eastern nations. As this spectacle, grand beyond description, sweeps by, imagine the foolish virgins pushed aside, in the shadow of some tall edifice, with dark, empty lamps in their hands, unnoticed and unknown. And while the castle walls resound with music and merriment, and the lights from every window stream out far into the darkness, no kind friends gather round them to sympathize in their humiliation, nor to cheer their loneliness. It matters little that women may be ignorant, dependent, unprepared for trial</p>
 <p>{p. 125}</p>
 <p>and for temptation. Alone they must meet the terrible emergencies of life, to be sustained and protected amid danger and death by their own courage, skill and self-reliance, or perish.</p>
 <p>Woman's devotion to the comfort, the education, the success of men in general, and to their plans and projects, is in a great measure due to her self-abnegation and self-sacrifice having been so long and so sweetly lauded by poets, philosophers and priests as the acme of human goodness and glory.</p>
 <p>Now, to my mind, there is nothing commendable in the action of young women who go about begging funds to educate young men for the ministry, while they and the majority of their sex are too poor to educate themselves, and if able, are still denied admittance into some of the leading institutions of learning throughout our land. It is not commendable for women to get up fairs and donation parties for churches in which the gifted of their sex may neither pray, preach, share in the offices and honors, nor have a voice in the business affairs, creeds and discipline, and from whose altars come forth Biblical interpretations in favor of woman's subjection.</p>
 <p>It is not commendable for the women of this Republic to expend much enthusiasm on political parties as now organized, nor in national celebrations, for they have as yet no lot or part in the great experiment of self-government.</p>
 <p>In their ignorance, women sacrifice themselves to educate the men of their households, and to make of themselves ladders by which their husbands, brothers and sons climb up into the kingdom of knowledge, while they themselves are shut out from all intellectual companionship, even with those they love best; such are indeed like the foolish virgins. They have not kept their own lamps trimmed and burning; they have no oil in their vessels, no resources in themselves; they bring no light to their households nor to the circle in which they move; and when the bridegroom cometh, when the philosopher, the scientist, the saint, the scholar, the great and the learned, all come together to celebrate the marriage feast of science and religion, the foolish virgins, though present, are practically shut out; for what know they of the grand themes which inspire</p>
 <p>{p. 126}</p>
 <p>each tongue and kindle every thought? Even the brothers and the sons whom they have educated, now rise to heights which they cannot reach, span distances which they cannot comprehend.</p>
 <p>The solitude of ignorance, oh, who can measure its misery!</p>
 <p>The wise virgins are they who keep their lamps trimmed, who burn oil in their vessels for their own use, who have improved every advantage for their education, secured a healthy, happy, complete development, and entered all the profitable avenues of labor, for self-support, so that when the opportunities and the responsibilities of life come, they may be fitted fully to enjoy the one and ably to discharge the other.</p>
 <p>These are the women who to-day are close upon the heels of man in the whole realm of thought, in art, in science, in literature and in government. With telescopic vision they explore the starry firmament, and bring back the history of the planetary world. With chart and compass they pilot ships across the mighty deep, and with skilful fingers send electric messages around the world. In galleries of art, the grandeur of nature and the greatness of humanity are immortalized by them on canvas, and by their inspired touch, dull blocks of marble are transformed into angels of light. In music they speak again the language of Mendelssohn, of Beethoven, of Chopin, of Schumann, and are worthy interpreters of their great souls. The poetry and the novels of the century are theirs; they, too, have touched the keynote of reform in religion, in politics and in social life. They fill the editors' and the professors' chairs, plead at the bar of justice, walk the wards of the hospital, and speak from the pulpit and the platform.</p>
 <p>Such is the widespread preparation for the marriage feast of science and religion; such is the type of womanhood which the bridegroom of an enlightened public sentiment welcomes to-day; and such is the triumph of the wise virgins over the folly, the ignorance and the degradation of the past as in grand procession they enter the temple of knowledge, and the door is no longer shut.</p>
 <p>{p. 127}</p>
 <font size="2"><p><i>Matthew xxvi.</i></p>
 <p>6 Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,</p>
 <p>7 There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on his head.</p>
 <p>8 But. when his disciples saw it, they said, To what purpose is this waste?</p>
 <p>9 For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.</p>
 <p>10 When Jesus understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman?</p>
 <p>11 For ye have the poor always with you; but me ye have not always.</p>
 <p>12 For in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial.</p>
 <p>13 Verily, I say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached, there shall also this be told for a memorial of her.</p>
 <p><i>Matthew xxvii.</i></p>
 <p>19 When Pilate was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream, because of him.</p>
 <p>24 When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it.</p>
 <p>25 Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on our children.</p>
 <p>55 And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him;</p>
 <p>56 Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary, the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's children.</p>
 <p>61 And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over against the sepulchre.</p>
 </font><p>It is a common opinion among Christians that the persecutions of the Jews in all periods and latitudes is a punishment on them for their crucifixion of Jesus, and that this defiant acceptance of the responsibility is being justly fulfilled.</p>
 <font size="2"><p><i>Matthew xxviii.</i></p>
 <p>1 In the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre.</p>
 <p>2 And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.</p>
 <p>3 His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow:</p>
 <p>4 And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.</p>
 <p>5 And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye; for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified.</p>
 <p>7 Go quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him.</p>
 <p>8 And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with great joy.</p>
 <p>9 And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and worshiped him.</p>
 <p>10 Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.</p>
 </font><p>Among the witnesses of the crucifixion, this melancholy and untimely scene, there were some women who had followed Jesus from Galilee and had waited on him, supplying his wants from their substance. Affection and anxious concern induced them to be present, and probably they stand afar off, fearing the outrages of the multitude. {p. 128} Words cannot express the mixed emotions of true gratitude, reverence, sorrow and compassion which must have agitated their souls on this occasion. We find from John, who was also present, that Mary the mother of Jesus was a spectator of this distressing scene.</p>
 <p>When Jesus was brought before Pilate, he was greatly troubled as to what judgment he should give, and his hesitation was increased by a warning from his wife, to have no part in the death of that righteous man; for she had terrifying dreams respecting him, which made her conclude that his death would be avenged by some unseen power.</p>
 <p align="RIGHT">E. C. S.</p>
 <p>{p. 129}</p>
 <hr>
 <center>
 <a href="wb63.htm">Next: THE BOOK OF MARK.</a></center>
 </body>