<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Women</a> 
 <a href="../../bib/index.htm">Bible</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="wb75.htm">Previous</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Advertisements from original, Vol. 2</h1>
 <p>{<i>advertisements identical to Vol. I omitted</i>}</p>
 <p>{p. 225}</p>
 <p>"Of all Magazines the most American in interest."</p>
 <p>The National Magazine.</p>
 <p>A MONTHLY ILLUSTRATED MAGAZINE OF THE BEST READING FOR THE HOME. BRIGHT, TIMELY AND ORIGINAL.</p>
 <p>FOR SALE BY ALL NEWSDEALERS AND IN THE TRAINS. PRICE 10 CENTS.</p>
 <p>"It is only $1.00 per annum, and is equal to some that charge thrice that price."--NEW ERA, Pa.</p>
 <p>It is the aim of THE NATIONAL to differentiate itself from other monthlies by devoting its pages FIRST, to subjects that are of distinctly American nature and of current American interest, and second, to whatever foreign topics are deserving of occasional attention. Each number contains five or six profusely illustrated articles, several of the most readable short stories published, and the regular club women and literary departments.</p>
 <p>THE NATIONAL began in November, 1896, the publication of what is proving itself to be "THE MOST REMARKABLE MAGAZINE SERIAL OF THE YEAR," entitled</p>
 <p>CHRIST AND HIS TIME.</p>
 <p>BY DALLAS LORE SHARP. AN INTENSELY INTERESTING HISTORY OF THE WORLD'S</p>
 <p>GREATEST PERSONALITY.</p>
 <p>Written for the Average Magazine Reader. TO BE ILLUSTRATED FROM THE</p>
 <p>FAMOUS PAINTINGS OF THE WORLD.</p>
 <p>THIS serial, which began In November, of 1896, will be completed In the March, 1896, Issue. Persons wishing the entire serial can secure It by sending $1.00 to publishers.</p>
 <p>Each number as it appears keeps notably abreast of the best that is in American life, making the magazine one of the most readable of the ten cent publications.</p>
 <p>CLUB WOMEN AND THEIR WORK.</p>
 <p>THE NATIONAL publishes monthly an intensely interesting department under the above title. Short articles appear on live subjects by prominent club women throughout the country. Mrs. Ellen M. Henrotin has articles in the October and January issues. In November, Alice Ives Breed is a contributor. The work of the different clubs receives full attention.</p>
 <p>NATIONAL QUESTION CLASS.</p>
 <p>This is a new department just established. Fifteen questions in art, literature and cur. rent topics are given each month, and FOUR PRIZES are awarded for the four best sets of answers. Every subscriber to THE NATIONAL becomes a member of this class by merely writing for a certificate of entry.</p>
 <p>The search for the answers to these fifteen questions monthly is not only a pleasure but an education. Mothers should have their children try these contests.</p>
 <p>Your newsdealer will sell you THE NATIONAL or take your subscription.</p>
 <p>THE W. W. POTTER CO.,</p>
 <p>ARTHUR W. TARBELL, Editor.</p>
 <p>91 Bedford Street, Boston, Mass.</p>
 <p>JOE. M. CHAPPLE, Publisher.</p>
 <p>{p. 226}</p>
 <p>A MONTHLY MAGAZINE</p>
 <p>Subscription $2.50 a Year. 25 Cents a Copy.</p>
 <p>THE ARENA</p>
 <p>Edited by</p>
 <p>JOHN CLARK RIDPATH, LL.D.</p>
 <p>To preserve for the people one unmuzzled organ of Public Opinion in which Truth is the criterion and the Betterment of Conditions the end and aim,--such is the purpose of The Arena.</p>
 <p>--The Editor.</p>
 <p>SPECIMEN COPY FREE</p>
 <p>THE ARENA COMPANY</p>
 <p>COPLEY SQUARE</p>
 <p>BOSTON</p>
 <p>For sale by all booksellers. Sent postpaid on receipt of price.</p>
 <p>{p. 227}</p>
 <p>THE NESTOR OF THE MAGAZINES</p>
 <p>"According to Homer, Nestor, the old warrior and the wise counselor of the Greeks, had ruled over three generations of men, and was wise as the immortal gods."</p>
 <p>The North American Review</p>
 <p>has been in the van of American thought for more than three-quarters of a century, ranking always with the best and most influential periodicals in the world.</p>
 <p>It is the mouthpiece of the men who know most about the great topics on which Americans require to be informed from month to month, its contributors being the leaders of thought and action in every field.</p>
 <p>Those who would take counsel of the highest knowledge on the .affairs of the time, and learn what is to be said regarding them by the recognized authorities on both sides, must therefore read THE NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW, the Nestor of the magazines.</p>
 <p>THE NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW constantly offers to the public a programme of writers and essays that excite the reader and gratify the intellectual appetite. In this respect there is no other magazine that approaches it.--<i>New York Sun</i>.</p>
 <p>THE NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW is ahead of any magazine this country has ever seen in the importance of the topics it discusses and the eminence of its contributors.--<i>Albany Argus</i>.</p>
 <p>No other magazine in the world so fully and fairly presents the opinions of the leading writers and thinkers on all questions of public interest as THE NORTH AMERICAN REVIEW.--<i>Boston Journal</i>.</p>
 <p>This magazine has for more than eighty years, within its own well-defined lines, stood at the head of monthly publications.--<i>Chicago Record</i>.</p>
 <p>Presents the best current thought on the topics it treats of. It appeals to a field above mere popularity, and it stands there pre-eminent.--<i>Wheeling Intelligencer</i>.</p>
 <p>Cannot be ignored by the reader who keeps along with current discussion.--<i>Indianapolis Journal</i>.</p>
 <p>50 Cents a Number, $5.00 a Year.</p>
 <p>The North American Review, 291 Fifth Avenue, New York.</p>
 <p>{p. 228}</p>
 <p>THE WOMAN'S TRIBUNE</p>
 <p>ONE DOLLAR A YEAR</p>
 <p>Published Fortnightly at 1325 Tenth Street, N, W., WASHINGTON, D. C.</p>
 <p>(Founded in 1883 at Beatrice, Neb.)</p>
 <p>The WOMAN'S TRIBUNE is one of the two National Woman Suffrage papers in the United States, and being published at the National Capital, has many points of advantage.</p>
 <p>It reports all important features of National and State work of Woman Suffrage Associations; gives a summary of whatever relates to the advancement of women and general progress; has choice poetry, book reviews, a corner for Zintka Lanuni and her friends, and much that is of interest to all members of the family.</p>
 <p>Elizabeth Cady Stanton writes for the TRIBUNE. Valuable books offered as premiums. Send ten cents for five sample copies. Clara Bewick Colby, Editor and Publisher.</p>
 <p>MRS. CLARA BEWICK COLBY is prepared to lecture for Woman's Clubs and Literary Societies on Reform, Literary and Historical Topics. Send for circulars to 1325 Tenth St., N. W., Washington, D. C.</p>
 <p>------------------------</p>
 <p>Woman, Church and State.</p>
 <p>BY MATILDA JOSLYN GAGE.</p>
 <p>This is Mrs. Gage's latest and crowning work. It is the book to show how the Church has enslaved women, and kept and keeps her in an inferior position. Every woman ought to read it. Every liberal man and woman will want it.</p>
 <p>CLOTH, $2.00; HALF LEATHER,, $3.00.</p>
 <p>(Complete in One Vol.)</p>
 <p>Address</p>
 <p>MATILDA JOSLYN GAGE,</p>
 <p>120 FLEURNOY ST., CHICAGO, ILL.</p>
 <p>{p. 229}</p>
 <p>FREE THOUGHT MAGAZINE H. L. GREEN . . . Editor and Publisher.</p>
 <p>Price:--$ 1.00 a Year; 15 Cents a Single Copy.</p>
 <p>EDITORIAL CONTRIBUTORS:</p>
 <p>JUDGE C. B. WAITE, THADDEUS B. WAKEMAN,</p>
 <p>B. F. UNDERWOOD, HELEN H. GARDENER,</p>
 <p>GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE</p>
 <p>Testimonials:</p>
 <p>COL. ROBERT G. INGERSOLL:</p>
 <p>"Every Liberal in this country ought to take the Free Thought Magazine, and I hope they will."</p>
 <p>ELIZABETH CADY STANTON:</p>
 <p>"I like the Free Thought Magazine because it breathes the spirit of liberty. It deserves the support of all Liberal thinkers."</p>
 <p>HON. GEO. W. JULIAN:</p>
 <p>"It fills a place and meets a want which is not supplied by any other publication, and it deserves the support and encouragement of all true Liberals."</p>
 <p>HELEN H. GARDENER:</p>
 <p>"I have always liked and admired the Free Thought Magazine. I am glad to hear it is to be enlarged though I am sure that all of us were satisfied with it before."</p>
 <p>HON. D. K. TENNEY:</p>
 <p>"It stands decidedly in the front rank of publications designed to clear the religious atmosphere of the delusions, superstitions and dogmas which for so many centuries have misled and cursed the world. It deserves the sympathy and support of all who favor the highest thought on gravest subjects."</p>
 <p>B. F. UNDERWOOD:</p>
 <p>"The Free Thought Magazine, which has steadily improved from the first, is now a publication that reflects great credit upon it. editor and corps of contributors. It contains many strong and fine articles. Free Thinkers everywhere ought to sustain it handsomely by taking it, and by making an effort to induce others to subscribe."</p>
 <p>T. B. WAKEMAN, ESQ.:</p>
 <p>"I do hereby solemnly certify that, in my humble but honest belief, the improved Free Thought Magazine is the greatest and best Free Thought and Liberal Organ of all real or would-be <i>emancipated souls</i> in the United States, and that its regular perusal is the most healthy and effective means of grace possible for such souls to enjoy, and to impart to others to secure their salvation in this world."</p>
 <p>Address FREE THOUGHT MAGAZINE, 218 E. Indiana St., Chicago, Ill.</p>
 <p>------------------------</p>
 <p>WILLIAM Us HEWITT</p>
 <p>BOOK, MAGAZINE AND NEWSPAPER PRINTER</p>
 <p>24-26 VANDEWATER STREET,</p>
 <p>Near Frankfort Street. NEW YORK CITY</p>
 <p>{p. 230}</p>
 <p>The Pacific Empire</p>
 <p>A Weekly Publication Conducted By Women For Women.</p>
 <p>It is devoted to the interests of women and the development of art and literature in the Pacific Northwest. It contains serial and short stories depicting true characters and original types of the Wild West; "Household Work," "What to Wear," "Literary Comment," and "Woman's Work" filling its pages. It is the one woman's journal of the Pacific Coast.</p>
 <p>Subscription Price, $1.00 per Year in Advance.</p>
 <p>L. M. MILLER, C. C. COGGSWELL, Editors.</p>
 <p>Address</p>
 <p>TIRE PACIFIC EXPIRE</p>
 <p>PORTLAND, ORE.</p>
 <p>------------------------</p>
 <p>BARR=DINWIDDIE</p>
 <p>Printing and Bookbinding Company</p>
 <p>GREENVILLE, JERSEY CITY, N. J.</p>
 <p>Fine Bindings a Specialty.</p>
 <p>{p. 231}</p>
 <p>THE BOSTON INVESTIGATOR</p>
 <p>LEMUEL K. WASHBURN, Editor. RALPH WASHBURN CHAINEY, Associate Editor.</p>
 <p>The Oldest and Most Progressive Reform Journal in the United States.</p>
 <p>The INVESTIGATOR is devoted to Universal Mental Liberty. For more than sixty Years this paper has maintained the battle for Liberty against a world of opposition. It has borne the brunt of the battle. Thus it may well be called "the tried and true friend of human rights." It has had for its grand aim the elevation of man through the truth and moral education. In short, the INVESTIGATOR is the people's paper.</p>
 <p>Col. R. G. Ingersoll says of it: "It is the best of all the Liberal papers."</p>
 <p>Published every Saturday, at $3.00 per year, by the BOSTON INVESTIGATOR PUBLISHING CO., at the Paine Memorial Building, 9 Appleton Street, Boston, Mass.</p>
 <p>SPECIMEN COPIES FREE.</p>
 <p>Address</p>
 <p>THE BOSTON INVESTIGATOR CO.</p>
 <p>Paine Memorial Building, Appleton St.,</p>
 <p>BOSTON, MASS.</p>
 <p>------------------------</p>
 <p>SUBSCRIBE</p>
 <p>FOR</p>
 <p>The Wisconsin Citizen</p>
 <p>A monthly paper published by the Wisconsin Equal Suffrage Association at BRODHEAD, WISCONSIN</p>
 <p>HELEN H. CHARLTON</p>
 <p>EDITOR</p>
 <p>Price Twenty-five Cents per Year</p></body>