<body>
 <p><a name="P3500_690923"></a>
 <sup>15 </sup>Orbi.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3511_691373"></a>
 <sup>16 </sup>i.e., of the Jews.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3517_691610"></a>
 <sup>17 </sup>"In fossa," i.e., as Fabricius (quoted in Migne's ed.) explains it, "in <i>de</i>fossa." It is the past part. of <i>fodio</i>. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P3526_692035"></a>
 <sup>18 </sup>If this line be correct, - "Speratis pro pace truces homicidia blanda," - though I cannot see the propriety of the "truces" in it, it seems to mean, "Do ye hope or expect that the master you are serving will, instead of the gently peace he promises you, prove a murderer and lead you to death? No, you do not expect it; but so it is."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3534_692630"></a>
 <sup>19 </sup>Mundi.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3537_692770"></a>
 <sup>20 </sup>Animalia.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3551_693368"></a>
 <sup>21 </sup>The sentence breaks off abruptly, and the verb which should apparently have gone with "e'en one" is joined to the "ye" in the next line.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3559_693818"></a>
 <sup>22 </sup>The Latin is: -</p>
 
     <ul><ul><p>"Nec venit in mentem quod vos, a nomine Christi</p>
 
 </ul></ul><p>Seductos, ad Marcionis tulit infima nomen."The rendering in my text, I admit, involves an exceedingly harsh construction of the Latin, but I see not how it is to be avoided; unless either (1) we take <i>nomen</i> absolutely, and "ad Marcionis infima" together, and translate, "A name has carried you to Marcion's lowest depthes;" in which case the question arises, What name is meant? can it be the name "Electi"? Or else (2) we take "tulit" as referring to the "terrible renegade," i.e., the arch-fiend, and "infima" as in apposition with "ad Marcionis nomen," and translate, "He has carried you to the name of Marcion - deepest degradation."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3565_694748"></a>
 <sup>23 </sup>i.e., the Gospels and other parts of Holy Scripture.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3568_694900"></a>
 <sup>24 </sup>i.e., I take it, the resurrection. Cf. 2 Tim. ii. 17, 18.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3570_695023"></a>
 <sup>25 </sup>Whether this be the sense (i.e., "either tell us what it is which displeases you in <i>our</i> God, whether it be His too great patience in bearing with you, or what; or else tell <i>us</i> what is to hinder us from believing <i>your</i> God to be an <i>incredible</i> being") of this passage, I will not venture to determine. The last line in the edd. previous to Oehler's ran: "Aut incredibil<i>e</i> quid differt craedere vestrum?" Oehler reads "incredibil<i>em</i>" (sc. Deum), which I have followed; but he suggests, "Aut incredibil<i>em qui</i> differt caedere vestrum?" Which may mean "or else" - i.e., if it were not for his "too great patience" - "why" - "qui" - "does He delay to smite your incredible god?" and thus challenge a contest and prove His own superiority.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3572_695793"></a>
 <sup>26 </sup>i.e., the "terrible renegade."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3583_696223"></a>
 <sup>27 </sup>The reference here is to Simon Magus; for a brief account of whom, and of the other heretics in this list, down to Hebion inclusive, the reader is referred to the <i>Adv. omn. Haer.</i>, above. The words "to roam, to fly," refer to the alleged wanderings of Simon with his paramour Helen, and his reported attempt (at Rome, in the presence of St. Peter) to fly. The tale is doubtful.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3587_696708"></a>
 <sup>28 </sup>The Latin runs thus: -</p>
 
     <ul><ul><p>"Et aevo</p>
 
 </ul></ul><p>Triginta tribuit caelos, patremque Profundum."But there seems a confusion between Valentine and his aeons and Basilides and his heavens. See the <i>Adv. omn. Haer</i>., above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P3596_697254"></a>
 <sup>29 </sup>i.e., the Evil One's, as before. </p>
 
 </body>