<body>
 <p><a name="P4700_755485"></a>
 <sup>211 </sup>Migne's pointing is followed, in preference to Oehler's.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4703_755625"></a>
 <sup>212 </sup>"Un<i>um hunc</i> esse Patrem;" i.e., "that <i>this One</i> (God) is the Father." But I rather incline to read, "un<i>umque</i> esse;" or we may render, "This One is the Sire."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4706_755873"></a>
 <sup>213 </sup>See 1 Cor. viii. 5, 6 (but notice the prepositions in the Greek; our author is not accurate in rendering them); Eph. iv. 4, 5, 6.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4708_756066"></a>
 <sup>214 </sup>Ad quem se curvare genu plane omne fatetur. The reference is to Phil. ii. 10; but our author is careless in using the present tense, "se curvare."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4710_756247"></a>
 <sup>215 </sup>The reference is to Eph. iii. 14, 15; but here again our author seems in error, as he refers the words to <i>Christ</i>, whereas the meaning of the apostle appears clearly to refer them<i> to the Father</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4716_756674"></a>
 <sup>216 </sup>Legitimos. See book iv. 91.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4721_756872"></a>
 <sup>217 </sup>See Gal. iii. 20. But here, again, "Galatas" seems rather like an error; for in speaking to the <i>Corinthians</i> St. Paul uses an expression more like our author's: see 2 Cor. xi. 2. The Latin, too, is faulty: "Talem <i>se</i> Paulus zelum <i>se</i> scripsit habere," where, perhaps, for the first "<i>se</i>" we should read "<i>sic.</i>"</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4725_757339"></a>
 <sup>218 </sup>Comp. Ex. xx. 5; Deut. v. 9.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4750_758343"></a>
 <sup>219 </sup>See Isa. i. 10-15; Jer. vi. 20.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4755_758558"></a>
 <sup>220 </sup>Causa etenim fidei rationis imagine major.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4756_758625"></a>
 <sup>221 </sup>Comp. 1 Cor. xiii. 12; Heb. x. 1.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4763_758872"></a>
 <sup>222 </sup>Moses. See Heb. ix. 19-22, and the references there.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4768_759109"></a>
 <sup>223 </sup>Comp. Heb. ix. 13. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P4772_759256"></a>
 <sup>224 </sup>Alluding probably to our Lord's bearing of the <i>cross-beam</i> of His <i>cross</i> - the beam being the "yokes," and the upright stem of the cross the "plough-beam" - on His shoulders. - See John xix. 17.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4777_759642"></a>
 <sup>225 </sup>Templum. Comp. John ii. 19-22; Col. ii. 9.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4783_759915"></a>
 <sup>226 </sup>Libro. The reference is to the preceding lines, especially 89, and Heb. ix. 19, auto to Biblion. The use of "libro" is curious, as it seems to be used partly as if it would be equivalent to <i>pro libro</i>, "in the place of a book," partly in a more truly datival sense, "to serve the purposes of a book;" and our "for" is capable of the two senses.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4785_760290"></a>
 <sup>227 </sup>For this comparison of "speaking" to "sprinkling," comp. Deut. xxxii. 2, "My <i>doctrine shall drop as the rain</i>; my <i>speech shall distil as the dew</i>," etc.; Job xxix. 22, "My <i>speech dropped</i> upon them;" with Eph. v. 26, and with our Lord's significant action (recorded in the passage here alluded to, John xx. 22) of "<i>breathing on</i>" (<font face="SPIonic">enefushsen</font>) His disciples. Comp., too, for the "witnesses" and "words of presage," Luke xxiv. 48, 49; Acts i. 6-8.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4791_760968"></a>
 <sup>228 </sup>i.e., the chief of the Levites, the high priest.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4796_761221"></a>
 <sup>229 </sup>Comp. Heb. xiii. 12, 13; John xix. 19, 20.</p>
 
 </body>