<body>
 <p><a name="P4901_767578"></a>
 <sup>256 </sup>Terra.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4904_767670"></a>
 <sup>257 </sup>See 141, 142, above.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4914_768062"></a>
 <sup>258 </sup>C<i>ae</i>lataque sancta. We might conjecture "c<i>e</i>lataque sancta," = "and the sanctuaries formerly hidden."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4921_768423"></a>
 <sup>259 </sup>This sense appears intelligible, as the writer's aim seems to be to distinguish between the "actual" commands of God, i.e., the spiritual, essential ones, which the spiritual people "follow," and which "bind" - not the ceremonial observance of a "shadow of the future blessings" (see Heb. x. 1), but "real persons," i.e., living souls. But, as Migne has said, the passage is probably faulty and mutilated.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4923_768886"></a>
 <sup>260 </sup>Comp. Heb. vii. 19, x. 1, xi. 11, 12.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4926_769023"></a>
 <sup>261 </sup>"Lignum:" here probably = "the flesh," which He took from Mary; the "rod" (according to our author) which Isaiah had foretold.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4928_769188"></a>
 <sup>262 </sup>Aërial, i.e., as he said above, "dyed with <i>heaven's hue</i>."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4930_769310"></a>
 <sup>263 </sup>"Ligno," i.e., "the cross," represented by the "wood" of which the tabernacle's boards, on which the coverings were stretched (but comp. 147-8, above), were made.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4932_769527"></a>
 <sup>264 </sup>As the flame of the lamps appeared to grow out of and be fused with the "golden semblance" or "form" of the lampstand or candlestick.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4935_769734"></a>
 <sup>265 </sup>Of which the olive - of which the pure oil for the lamps was to be made: Ex. xxvii. 20; Lev. xxiv. 2 - is a type. "Peace" is granted to "the flesh" through Christ's work and death in flesh.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4941_770177"></a>
 <sup>266 </sup>Traditus. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P4955_770731"></a>
 <sup>267 </sup>In ligno. The passage is again in an almost desperate state.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4960_770964"></a>
 <sup>268 </sup>Isa. xi. 1, 2.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4968_771251"></a>
 <sup>269 </sup>Matt. v. 23, 24.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4971_771364"></a>
 <sup>270 </sup>Primus.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4973_771440"></a>
 <sup>271 </sup>See Rev. viii. 3, 4.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4974_771481"></a>
 <sup>272 </sup>Here ensues a confused medley of all the cherubic figures of Moses, Ezekiel, and St. John.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4977_771668"></a>
 <sup>273 </sup>i.e., by the four evangelists.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4982_771859"></a>
 <sup>274 </sup>The cherubim, (or, "seraphim" rather,) of Isa. vi. have each <i>six</i> wings. Ezekiel mentions <i>four</i> cherubim, or "living creatures." St. John likewise mentions <i>four</i> "living creatures." Our author, combining the passages, and thrusting them into the subject of the Mosaic cherubim, multiplies the <i>six</i> (wings) by the <i>four</i> (cherubs), and so attains his end - the desired number "<i>twenty-four</i>" - to represent the books of the Old Testament, which (by combining certain books) may be reckoned to be <i>twenty-four</i> in number.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4985_772480"></a>
 <sup>275 </sup>These wings.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P4997_772961"></a>
 <sup>276 </sup>There is again some great confusion in the text. The elders could not "<i>stand enthroned</i>:" nor do they stand "<i>over</i>," but "<i>around</i>" God's throne; so that the "insuper solio" could not apply to that.</p>
 
 </body>