<body>
 <p><a name="P5100_777987"></a>
 <sup>290 </sup>Cf. John i. 11, and see the Greek.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5115_778585"></a>
 <sup>291 </sup>Whether this be the sense I know not. The passage is a mass of confusion.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5120_778832"></a>
 <sup>292 </sup>i.e., according to Marcion's view.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5123_778972"></a>
 <sup>293 </sup>i.e., as spirits, like himself. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P5128_779141"></a>
 <sup>294 </sup>Mundum.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5133_779338"></a>
 <sup>295 </sup>i.e., Marcionite.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5135_779399"></a>
 <sup>296 </sup>See book ii. 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5137_779458"></a>
 <sup>297 </sup>i.e., apparently on the day of Christ's resurrection.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5142_779689"></a>
 <sup>298 </sup>Rep<i>l</i>esset, i.e., replevisset. If this be the right reading, the meaning would seem to be, "would have taken away all further desire for" them, as satiety or <i>repletion</i> takes away all appetite for food. One is almost inclined to hazard the suggestion "rep<i>r</i>esset," i.e., repressisset, "he would have <i>repressed</i>," but that such a contraction would be irregular. Yet, with an author who takes such liberties as the present one, perhaps that might not be a decisive objection.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5149_780415"></a>
 <sup>299 </sup>"Junct<i>u</i>s," for the edd.'s "junct<i>is</i>," which, if retained, will mean "in the case of beings still joined with (or to) blood."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5156_780795"></a>
 <sup>300 </sup>"Doc<i>e</i>tur," for the edd.'s "doc<i>en</i>tur." The sense seems to be, if there be any, exceedingly obscure; but for the idea of a half-salvation - the salvation of the "inner man" without the outer - being no salvation at all, and unworthy of "the Good Shepherd" and His work, we may compare the very difficult passage in the <i>de Pudic.</i>, c. xiii. <i>ad fin</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5168_781605"></a>
 <sup>301 </sup>This sense, which I deduce from a transposition of one line and the supplying of the words "<i>he did exhort</i>," which are not expressed, but seem necessary, in the original, agrees well with 1 Cor. vii., which is plainly the passage referred to.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5181_782396"></a>
 <sup>302 </sup>"Causa;" or perhaps "<i>means</i>." It is, of course, the French "chose."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5186_782638"></a>
 <sup>303 </sup>i.e., you and your like, through whom sin, and in consequence death, is disseminated.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5194_783043"></a>
 <sup>304 </sup>Here, again, for the sake of the sense, I have transposed a line.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5198_783241"></a>
 <sup>305 </sup>i.e., "the other," the "inner man," or spirit.</p>
 
 </body>