<body>
 <p><a name="P5200_783341"></a>
 <sup>306 </sup>i.e., through flesh. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P5217_784038"></a>
 <sup>307 </sup>i.e., in His own person.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5224_784321"></a>
 <sup>308 </sup>I hope I have succeeded in giving some intelligible sense; but the passage as it stands in the Latin is nearly hopeless.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5229_784565"></a>
 <sup>309 </sup>I read "lege<i>m</i>" for "lege<i>s</i>."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5230_784625"></a>
 <sup>310 </sup>I read "<i>v</i>alle" for "<i>c</i>alle."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5236_784837"></a>
 <sup>311 </sup>Alios.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5237_784873"></a>
 <sup>312 </sup>Altera.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5247_785292"></a>
 <sup>313 </sup>i.e., "the gifts of baptism."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5257_785757"></a>
 <sup>314 </sup>This seems to give sense to a very obscure passage, in which I have been guided more by Migne's pointing than by Oehler's.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5259_785892"></a>
 <sup>315 </sup>I read here "qu<i>i</i>d" for "qu<i>o</i>d."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5262_786031"></a>
 <sup>316 </sup>i.e., to make men live by recognising that. Comp. the Psalmist's prayer: "Give me <i>understanding</i> and I shall live" (Ps. cxix. 144; in LXX., Ps. cxviii. 144).</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5265_786284"></a>
 <sup>317 </sup>The "f<i>u</i>rentes" of Pam. and Rig. is preferred to Oehler's "f<i>e</i>rentes."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5270_786490"></a>
 <sup>318 </sup>"Complexis," lit. "embracing."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5272_786590"></a>
 <sup>319 </sup>i.e., both Jews and Gentile heretics, the "senseless frantic men" just referred to probably: or possibly the "ambo" may mean "<i>both sects</i>," viz., the Marcionites and Manichees, against whom the writer whom Oehler supposes to be the probable author of these "Five Books," Victorinus, a rhetorician of Marseilles, directed his efforts. But it may again be the acc. neut. pl., and mean "let them" - i.e., the "senseless frantic men" - "learn to believe <i>as to both facts</i>," i.e., the incarnation and the resurrection; (see vers. 179, 180;) "the testimony at least of human reason."</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5282_787530"></a>
 <sup>320 </sup>I would suggest here, for</p>
 
     <ul><ul><p>" ... quia summa voluntas</p>
 
     <p>In cujus manu regnantis cor <i>legibus esset</i>,"something like this,</p>
 
     <p>" ... quia summa voluntas,</p>
 
 </ul></ul><p>In cujus manu regnantis cor <i>regis, egisset</i>,"which would only add one more to our author's false quantities. "Regum egisset" would avoid even that, while it would give some sense. Comp. Prov. xxi. 1.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5287_788009"></a>
 <sup>321 </sup>Maria cum conjuge feta. What follows seems to decide the meaning of "feta," as a child could hardly be included in a census before birth.</p>
 
 <p><a name="P5296_788468"></a>
 <sup>322 </sup>Again I have had to attempt to amend the text of the Latin in order to extract any sense, and am far from sure that I have extracted the right one. </p>
 
 <p><a name="P5298_788642"></a>
 <sup>323 </sup>"Fatentur," unless our author use it passively = "are confessed."</p>
 
 </body>