<body>
 
 
 
 <p align="center"><a name="top"></a><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a>   <a href="../index.htm">Buddhism</a>   <a href="index.htm">SBE 11 Index</a>   <a href="sbe1312.htm">Previous</a>   <a href="sbe1314.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 239------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_239"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 239</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h2 align="center">SECOND KHANDHAKA.</h2>
 
 <p align="center">(THE UPOSATHA CEREMONY, AND THE PÂTIMOKKHA.)</p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 1======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the blessed Buddha dwelt near Râ<i>g</i>agaha, on the Gi<i>ggh</i>akû<i>t</i>a mountain ('the Vulture's Peak'). At that time the Paribbâ<i>g</i>akas belonging to Titthiya schools assembled on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth day of each half month<a name="page_239_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_239_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> and recited their Dhamma. The people went to them in order to hear the Dhamma. They were filled with favour towards, and were filled with faith in, the Paribbâ<i>g</i>akas belonging to Titthiya schools; the Paribbâ<i>g</i>akas belonging to Titthiya schools gained adherents.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. Now when the Mâgadha king Seniya Bimbisâra was alone, and had retired into solitude, the following consideration presented itself to his mind: 'The Paribbâ<i>g</i>akas belonging to Titthiya schools assemble now on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth day of each half month and recite their Dhamma. The people go to them in order to hear the Dhamma. They are filled with favour towards, and are filled with faith in, the Paribbâ<i>g</i>akas who belong to Titthiya
 
 <!------------------------page 240------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_240"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 240</font></a>
 
 schools; the Paribbâ<i>g</i>akas who belong to Titthiya schools gain adherents. What if the reverend ones (the Buddhist Bhikkhus) were to assemble also on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth clay of each half month.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. Then the Mâgadha king Seniya Bimbisâra went to the place where the Blessed One was; having approached him and having respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat clown near him. Sitting near him the Mâgadha king Seniya Bimbisâra said to the Blessed One: 'Lord, when I was alone and had retired into solitude, the following consideration presented itself to my mind: "The Paribbâ<i>g</i>akas, &amp;c.; what if the reverend ones were to assemble also on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth clay of each half month." Well, Lord, let the reverend ones assemble also on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth clay of each half month.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. Then the Blessed One taught, incited, animated, and gladdened the Mâgadha king Seniya Bimbisâra by religious discourse; and the Mâgadha king Seniya Bimbisâra, having been taught and gladdened by the Blessed One by religious discourse, rose from his seat, respectfully saluted the Blessed One, passed round him with his right side towards him, and went away.</p>
 
 <p>   In consequence of that and on this occasion the Blessed One, after having delivered a religious discourse, thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you assemble on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth clay of each month.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 241------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_241"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 241</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 2======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that the Blessed One had ordered them to assemble on the fourteenth &amp;c. day of each half month, assembled on the fourteenth &amp;c. day of each half month and sat there silent. The people went to them in order to hear the Dhamma. They were annoyed, murmured, and became angry: 'How can the Sakyaputtiya Sama<i>n</i>as, when they have assembled on the fourteenth &amp;c. day of each half month, sit there silent, like the dumb, or like hogs? Ought they not to recite the Dhamma, when they have assembled?' Some Bhikkhus heard those people that were annoyed, murmured, and had become angry; these Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One. In consequence of that and on this occasion the Blessed One, after having delivered a religious discourse, thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you recite the Dhamma, when you have assembled on the fourteenth &amp;c. day of each half month.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 3======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Now when the Blessed One was alone and had retired into solitude, the following consideration presented itself to his mind: 'What if I were to prescribe that the Bhikkhus recite as the Pâtimokkha<a name="page_241_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_241_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> the precepts which I have promulgated to
 
 <!------------------------page 242------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_242"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 242</font></a>
 
 them; this will be their Uposatha service (service of the fast-day).'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. And the Blessed One, having left the solitude in the evening, in consequence of that and on this occasion, after having delivered a religious discourse, thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'When I was alone, O Bhikkhus, and had retired into solitude, the following consideration, &amp;c., this will be their Uposatha service. I prescribe you, O Bhikkhus, to recite the Pâtimokkha.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to recite it in this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the foilowing <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. To-day it is Uposatha, the fifteenth (of the half month). If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha hold the Uposatha service and recite the Pâtimokkha. What ought to be first done by the Sa<i>m</i>gha? Proclaim the pârisuddhi<a name="page_242_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_242_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, Sirs. I will recite the Pâtimokkha."</p>
 
 <p>   '"We hear it well and fix well the mind on it all of us<a name="page_242_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_242_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>."</p>
 
 <p>   '"He who has committed an offence, may confess it; if there is no offence, you should remain silent; from your being silent I shall understand that the reverend brethen are pure (from offences). As a single person that has been asked a question, answers it, the same is the matter if before an
 
 <!------------------------page 243------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_243"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 243</font></a>
 
 assembly like this a question has been solemnly proclaimed three times: if a Bhikkhu, after a threefold proclamation, does not confess an existing offence which he remembers, he commits an intentional falsehood. Now, reverend brethren, an intentional falsehood has been declared an impediment<a name="page_243_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_243_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> by the Blessed One. Therefore, by a Bhikkhu who has committed (an offence), and remembers it, and desires to become pure, an existing offence should be confessed; for if it has been confessed, it is treated duly."'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>.<a name="page_243_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_243_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> 'Pâtimokkha<i>m</i>:' it is the beginning, it is the face (mukha<i>m</i>), it is the principal (pamukha<i>m</i>) of good qualities; therefore it is called 'pâtimokkham<a name="page_243_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_243_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <p>   'Âyasmanto:' this word 'âyasmanto ' is an expression of friendliness, an expression of respect, an appellation that infers respectfulness and reverence.</p>
 
 <p>   'Uddisissâmi:' I will pronounce, I will show, I will proclaim, I will establish, I will unveil, I will distinguish, I will make evident, I will declare.</p>
 
 <p>   'Ta<i>m</i>' (it): this refers to the Pâtimokkha.</p>
 
 <p>   'Sabbe va santâ' (all of us): as many as are present in that assembly, aged, young, and middle-aged (Bhikkhus), are denoted by , sabbe va santâ<a name="page_243_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_243_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <p>   'Sâdhuka<i>m</i> su<i>n</i>oma' (we hear it well): admitting
 
 <!------------------------page 244------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_244"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 244</font></a>
 
 its authority, fixing our minds on it, we repeat the whole of it in our thoughts.</p>
 
 <p>   'Manasikaroma' (we fix our minds on it): we listen to it with concentrated, not perplexed, not confused thoughts.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. 'Yassa siyâ âpatti' (he who has committed an offence): he who, whether an aged or young or middle-aged Bhikkhu, has committed some offence belonging to the five classes of ofiences or to the seven classes of offences<a name="page_244_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_244_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   'So âvikareyya:' he may show it, unveil it, make it evident, declare it before the Sa<i>m</i>gha (the full chapter of Bhikkhus), or before a small number, or before one person.</p>
 
 <p>   'Asanti âpatti' (a non-existing offence): an offence which has not been committed, or which has been committed and atoned for.</p>
 
 <p>   'Tu<i>n</i>hi bhavitabba<i>m</i>' (he ought to remain silent): he ought to accept (the recitation of the Pâtimokkha without any answer), he ought not to utter anything.</p>
 
 <p>   'Parisuddhâ 'ti vedissâmi' (I shall understand that they are pure): I shall infer, I shall know.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. 'Yathâ kho pana pa<i>kk</i>ekapu<i>tth</i>assa veyyâkara<i>n</i>a<i>m</i> hoti' (as a single person that has been asked a question answers it): as a single person that has been asked a question by another one, would answer it, thus (those who are present) in that assembly ought to understand: 'He asks me.'
 
 <!------------------------page 245------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_245"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 245</font></a>
 
 'Evarûpâ parisâ' (an assembly like this): this refers to the assembly of Bhikkhus.</p>
 
 <p>   'Yâvatatiya<i>m</i> anussâvita<i>m</i> hoti' (it has been solemnly proclaimed three times): it has been solemnly proclaimed once, and the second time, and the third time.</p>
 
 <p>   'Saramâno' (remembering it): knowing it, being conscious of it.</p>
 
 <p>   'Santî âpatti' (an existing offence): an offence which has been committed, or which has been committed and not been atoned for.</p>
 
 <p>   'Nâvikareyya:' he does not show it, he does not unveil it, he does not make it evident, he does not declare it before the Sa<i>m</i>gha, or before a small chapter, or before one person.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. 'Sampa<i>g</i>ânamusâvâd' assa hoti' (he commits an intentional falsehood): what is intentional falsehood? It is a sin<a name="page_245_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_245_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   'Antarâyiko dhammo vutto bhagavatâ' (it has been declared an impediment by the Blessed One): an impediment to what? An impediment to the attainment of the first <i>Gh</i>âna, an impediment to the attainment of tbe second . . . third . . . fourth <i>Gh</i>âna, an impediment to the attainment of the <i>Gh</i>ânas, Vimokkhas<a name="page_245_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_245_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, Samâdhis (states of self-concentration), Samâpattis (the eight attainments of the four <i>Gh</i>ânas and four of the eight Vimokkhas),
 
 <!------------------------page 246------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_246"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 246</font></a>
 
 the states of renunciation, of escape (from the world), of seclusion, of (all) good qualities.</p>
 
 <p>   'Tasmâ:' for that reason.</p>
 
 <p>   'Saramânena' (by him who remembers it): by him who knows it and is conscious of it.</p>
 
 <p>   'Visuddhâpekkhena' (by him who desires to become pure): by him who wishes to atone for it and to make himself pure of it.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. 'Santî âpatti' . . . (see § 6).</p>
 
 <p>   'Âvikâtabbâ' (it is to be confessed): it is to be confessed before the Sa<i>m</i>gha, or before a small chapter, or before one person.'</p>
 
 <p>   'Âvikatâ hi 'ssa phâsu hoti' (for if it has been confessed, it is treated duly): duly for what purpose? In the due way for the attainment of the first <i>Gh</i>âna (and so on, as in § 7, clown to:) of (all) good qualities.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 4======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="4:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that the Pâtimokkha recitation had been instituted by the Blessed One, recited the Pâtimokkha every day.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'The Pâtimokkha, O Bhikkhus, is not to be recited every day. He who recites it (every day), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I ordain, O Bhikkhus, to recite the Pâtimokkha on the Uposatha day.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="4:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that it had been prescribed by the Blessed One to recite the Pâtimokkha on the Uposatha day, recited the Pâtimokkha three times each half month, on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth day of each half month.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 247------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_247"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 247</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   'The Pâtimokkha, O Bhikkhus, is not to be recited three times each half month. He who recites it (tnree times), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you recite the Pâtimokkha once each half month, on the fourteenth or on the fifteenth day.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 5======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus recited the Pâtimokkha according as they lived together, every one before his own companions.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'The Pâtimokkha, O Bhikkhus, is not to be recited according as (the Bhikkhus) live together, by every one before his own companions. He who recites it (in that way), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Uposatha service is to be held by the complete fraternity.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed that the Uposatha service is to be held by the complete fraternity. How far does completeness extend, as far as one residence (or one district), or all over the earth?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that completeness is to extend as far as one residence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. At that time the reverend Mahâ Kappina dwelt near Râ<i>g</i>agaha, in the deer park of Maddaku<i>kkh</i>i. Now (one day) when the reverend Mahâ Kappina was alone and had retired into solitude, the following consideration presented itself to his mind: 'Shall I go to the Uposatha service or shall I not go? Shall I go to the functions of the Order 
 
 <!------------------------page 248------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_248"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 248</font></a>
 
 or shall I not go? Indeed I have become pure by the highest purity (i.e. I have reached Arahatship or Nirvâ<i>n</i>a).'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. Then the Blessed One, understanding by the power of his mind the reflection which had arisen in Mahâ Kappina's mind, disappeared from the Gi<i>ggh</i>akû<i>t</i>a mountain and appeared in the deer park of Maddaku<i>kkh</i>i, before the reverend Mahâ Kappina (as quickly) as a strong man might stretch his bent arm out, or draw his outstretched arm back. The Blessed One sat down on a seat laid out for him, and the reverend Mahâ Kappina, after having respectfully saluted the Blessed One, sat down also near him.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. When the reverend Mahâ Kappina was seated near him, the Blessed One said to him: 'When you were alone, Kappina, and had retired into solitude, has not the following consideration presented itself to your mind: "Shall I go (&amp;c., as in § 3 down to:) by the highest purity?"'</p>
 
 <p>   'Even so, Lord.'</p>
 
 <p>   'If you Brâhmanas do not honour, do not regard, do nat revere, do not pay reverence to the Uposatha, who will then honour, regard, revere, pay reverence to the Uposatha? Go to the Uposatha, O Brâhmana, do not neglect to go; go to the functions of the Order, do not neglect to go.' The reverend Mahâ Kappina promised the Blessed One to do so (by saying), 'Even so, Lord.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. Then, having taught, incited, animated, and gladdened the reverend Mahâ Kappina by a religious discourse, the Blessed One disappeared from the deer park of Maddaku<i>kkh</i>i, from the presence of the reverend Mahâ Kappina, and appeared on the 
 
 <!------------------------page 249------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_249"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 249</font></a>
 
 Gi<i>ggh</i>akû<i>t</i>a mountain (as quickly) as a strong man might stretch his bent arm out, or draw his outstretched arm back.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 6======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed that completeness (of the assembled fraternity) is to extend as far as one residence<a name="page_249_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_249_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>. Now how far does one residence extend?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus; that you determine a boundary. And it ought to be determined, O Bhikkus, in this way: First the landmarks are to be proclaimed: a landmark consisting in a mountain, in a rock, in a wood, in a tree, in a path, in an anthill, in a river, in a piece of water. The landmarks having been proclaimed, let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, as the landmarks have been proclaimed all around, by these land marks determine the boundary for common residence and communion of Uposatha. This is the <i>ñ</i>atti. Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. The Sa<i>m</i>gha determines the boundary (&amp;c., as above). Thus I understand."'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 7======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="7:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus, considering that fixing of boundaries had been
 
 <!------------------------page 250------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_250"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 250</font></a>
 
 prescribed by the Blessed One, fixed boundaries of excessive extension, of four yo<i>g</i>anas, five yo<i>g</i>anas, six yo<i>g</i>anas. The Bhikkhus who came to the Uposatha, arrived when the Pâtimokkha was being recited, or when it had just been recited, or they were obliged to stay the night on the way.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, determine a boundary of excessive extension, of four, five, or six yo<i>g</i>anas. He who determines (such a boundary), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you determine boundaries of three yo<i>g</i>anas' extent at most.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="7:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus determined a boundary which extended to the opposite side of a river. The Bhikkhus who came to the Uposatha, were carried down (by the river), and their alms-bowls and robes were carried away.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, determine a boundary which extends to the opposite side of a river. He who determines (such a boundary), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, if there is a regular communication by a ferry boat or a dike, at such places to determine a boundary which extends also to the opposite side of the river.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 8======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="8:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the Bhikkhus recited the Pâtimokkha in their successive cells without appointing (a certain place for doing so). The Bhikkhus who
 
 <!------------------------page 251------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_251"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 251</font></a>
 
 arrived (from distant places), did not know where the Uposatha was to be held that day.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the Pâtimokkha in the successive cells without appointing a certain place for it. He who recites it (in this way), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, the holding of Uposatha after having fix:ed upon an Uposatha hall, wherever the Sa<i>m</i>gha likes, a Vihâra, or an A<i>ddh</i>ayoga, or a storied building, or a house, or a cave<a name="page_251_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_251_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>. And you ought to appoint it in this way:</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="8:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha appoint the Vihâra called N. N. to be our Uposatha hall. This is the <i>ñ</i>atti Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. The Sa<i>m</i>gha appoints, &amp;c. Thus I understand." ,</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="8:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. At that time there were in a certain residence (or district) two Uposatha halls fixed upon. The Bhikkhus assembled in both places, because (some of them) thought, 'The Uposatha will be held here;' (and some), 'It will be held there.'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, fix upon two Uposatha halls in one district. He who does so, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I ordain, O Bhikkhus, the abolishing of one of them<a name="page_251_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_251_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, and the holding of Uposatha ( only) in one place.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="8:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'And you ought to abolish it, O Bhikkhus, in this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim
 
 <!------------------------page 252------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_252"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 252</font></a>
 
 the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, the Sa<i>m</i>gha may abolish the Uposatha hall called N.N. This is the <i>ñ</i>atti. Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, &amp;c. Thus I understand."'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 9======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="9:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time in a certain district too small an Uposatha hall had been appointed. On the day of Uposatha a great assembly of Bhikkhus met together. The Bhikkhus heard the Pâtimokkha sitting outside the site fixed upon. Now those Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has promulgated the precept that Uposatha is to be held after an Uposatha hall has been fixed upon, and we have heard the Pâtimokkha sitting outside the site fixed upon. Have we therefore (duly) held Uposatha or have we not held it?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Whether (a Bhikkhu) be seated inside or outside the site fixed upon, provided he hears the Pâtimokkha, Uposatha has been duly held by him.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="9:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'Therefore, O Bhikkhus, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha determine as large an uposatha-pamukha<a name="page_252_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_252_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> as it desires. And it ought to be determined, O Bhikkhus, in this way: First the landmarks are to be proclaimed. The landmarks having been proclaimed, let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti
 
 <!------------------------page 253------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_253"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 253</font></a>
 
 before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, as the land marks have been proclaimed all around, determine an uposathapamukha by these land marks. This is the <i>ñ</i>atti. Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, &amp;c. Thus I understand."'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 10======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="10"></a><font color="GREEN">10</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   At that time in a certain district on the day of Uposatha the young Bhikkhus, who had assembled first, thought: 'The Theras do not come yet,' and went away. The Uposatha service was held after the right time.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that on the Uposatha day the Theras ought to assemble first.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 11======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="11"></a><font color="GREEN">11</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   At that time there were at Râ<i>g</i>agaha several residences (of Bhikkhus) within the same boundary. Now the Bhikkhus quarrelled: (some of them said), 'The Uposatha shall be held in our residence;' (others said), 'It shall be held in our residence.'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'There are, O Bhikkhus, several (Bhikkhu) residences within the same boundary; now the Bhikkus quarrel: (some of them say), "The Uposatha shall be held in our residence;" (others say), "It shall be held in our residence." Let those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, assemble in one place all of them and hold Uposatha there, or let them assemble where
 
 <!------------------------page 254------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_254"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 254</font></a>
 
 the senior Bhikkhu dwells and hold Uposatha there. But in no case is Uposatha to be held by an incomplete congregation. He who holds it (in that way), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 12======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="12"></a><font color="GREEN">12</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="12:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the reverend Mahâ Kassapa, when going to the Uposatha from Andhakavinda to Râ<i>g</i>agaha, and crossing a river on his way, was neârly<a name="page_254_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_254_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> being carried away (by the river)<a name="page_254_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_254_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>; and his robes got wet. The Bhikkhus said to the reverend Mahâ Kassapa: 'How have your robes got wet, friend?' (He replied): 'As I was going, friends, to the Uposatha from Andhakavinda to Râ<i>g</i>agaha, and crossing a river on my way, I was nearly being carried away (by the river); thus my robes have become wet.'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, O Bhikkhus, confer on the boundary which it has determined for common
 
 <!------------------------page 255------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_255"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 255</font></a>
 
 residence and for communion of Uposatha, the I character of ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa<a name="page_255_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_255_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="12:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to confer on it this character in this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha confer on the boundary which the Sa<i>m</i>gha has determined for common residence and for communion of Uposatha. the character of ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa. 'This is the <i>ñ</i>atti. Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha (&amp;c., as above). Thus I understand."'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="12:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that the Blessed One had ordained the conferring of the character of ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa (on the boundaries), deposited their robes in a house. Those robes were lost, bumt, or eaten by rats; the Bhikkhus were badly dressed and had coarse robes. (Other) Bhikkhus said: 'How comes it that you are badly dressed, friends, and that you have coarse robes?' (They replied): 'Considering, friends, that the Blessed One had ordained the conferring (on the boundaries) of the character of ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa, we deposited our robes in a house; the robes have been lost, burnt, or eaten by rats;
 
 <!------------------------page 256------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_256"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 256</font></a>
 
 therefore we are badly dressed and have coarse robes.'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let<a name="page_256_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_256_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> the Sa<i>m</i>gha, O Bhikkhus, confer on the boundary which it has determined for common residence and for communion of Uposatha, the character of ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa, excepting villages and the neighbourhood of villages<a name="page_256_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_256_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="12:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'And yop ought, O Bhikkhus, to confer on it this character in this way, &amp;c.<a name="page_256_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_256_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="12:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. 'Let him who determines a boundary, O Bhikkhus, first determine the boundary for common residence and for communion of Uposatha, and afterwards decree about the ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa. Let him who abolishes a boundary, O Bhikkhus, first abolish the decree about the ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa, and afterwards abolish the boundary for common residence and for communion of Uposatha.</p>
 
 <p>   'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to abolish the
 
 <!------------------------page 257------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_257"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 257</font></a>
 
 ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa in this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha abolish the ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa, which the Sa<i>m</i>gha has decreed. This is the <i>ñ</i>atti. Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, &amp;c."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="12:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. 'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to abolish the boundary in this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha abolish the boundary for common residence and for communion of Uposatha which it has determined. This is the <i>ñ</i>atti. Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, &amp;c."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="12:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. 'If there is no boundary determined nor fixed, O Bhikkhus, the village boundary of that village, or the nigama boundary ofthat nigama (market town) near which village or nigama (a Bhikkhu) dwells, is to be considered as boundary for common residence and for the communion of Uposatha. If (he lives), O Bhikkhus, in a forest where no villages are, community of residence and Uposatha extends to a distance of seven abbhantaras<a name="page_257_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_257_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> all around. A river, O Bhikkhus, cannot be a boundary, a sea cannot be a boundary, a natural lake cannot be a boundary. In a river, O Bhikkhus, or in a sea, or in a natural lake, community of residence and Uposatha extends as far as an average man can spirt water all around.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 258------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_258"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 258</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 13======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="13"></a><font color="GREEN">13</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="13:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus made one boundary overlap another one (which had been determined before by other Bhikkhus).</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'The act of those who have determined their boundary first is lawful, unobjectionable, and valid. The act of those who have determined their boundary afterwards is unlawful, objectionable, and invalid. Let no one, O Bhikkhus, make one boundary overlap another one. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="13:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus made one boundary encompass another one (which had been determined before by other Bhikkhus).</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'The act of those, &amp;c. (see § 1). Let no one, O Bhikkhus, make one boundary encompass another one. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that he who determines a boundary, is to determine it so as to leave an interstice<a name="page_258_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_258_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> between the boundaries.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 14======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="14"></a><font color="GREEN">14</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="14:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'How many Uposatha (days) are there?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 259------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_259"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 259</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   'There are the following two Uposatha (days), O Bhikkhus, the fourteenth and the fifteenth (of the half month); these are the two Uposatha (days), O Bhikkhus.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="14:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'How many Uposatha services are there?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'There are the following four Uposatha services. O Bhikkhus: the Uposatha service which is held unlawfully (by an) incomplete (congregation)<a name="page_259_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_259_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, the Uposatha service which is held unlawfully (by a) complete (congregation), the Uposatha service which is held lawfully (by an) incomplete (congregation), the Uposatha service which is held lawfully (by a) complete; (congregation).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="14:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. Now, O Bhikkhus, the Uposatha service Which is held unlawfully (by an) mcomplete (congregation), such an Uposatha service, O Bhikkhus, ought not to be held, nor is such an Uposatha service allowed by me. Now, O Bhikkhus, the Uposatha service which is held unlawfully (by a) complete (congregation), such an Uposatha service, O Bhikkus, ought not to be held, nor is such an Uposatha service allowed by me. Now, O Bhikkhus, the Uposatha service which is held lawfully (by an) incomplete (congregation), such an Uposatha service, O Bhikkhus, ought not to be held, nor is such an Uposatha service allowed by me. Now, O Bhikkhus, the Uposatha service which is held lawfully (by a) complete (congregation), such an Uposatha service, O Bhikkhus, ought to be held, and such an Uposatha
 
 <!------------------------page 260------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_260"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 260</font></a>
 
 service is allowed by me. Therefore, O Bhikkhus, you ought to train yourselves thus: "The Uposatha service which is held lawfully (by a) complete (congregation), such an Uposatha service will we hold."'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 15======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="15"></a><font color="GREEN">15</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'How many ways are there of reciting the Pâtimokkha?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'There are the following five ways of reciting the Pâtimokkha: The introduction<a name="page_260_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_260_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> having been recited, as to the rest, it may be proclaimed: "Such and such rules are known (to the fraternity<a name="page_260_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_260_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>)." This is the first way of reciting the Pâtimokkha. The introduction having been recited, the four pârâ<i>g</i>ikâ dhammâ having been recited, as to the rest, it may be proclaimed: "Such and such rules are known (to the fratemity)." This is the second way of reciting the Pâtimokkha. The introduction having been recited, the four pârâ<i>g</i>ikâ dhammâ having been recited, the thirteen sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesâ dhammâ having been recited, . . . the introduction having been recited, the four pârâ<i>g</i>ikâ dhammâ having been recited, the thirteen sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesâ dhammâ having been recited, the two aniyatâ dhammâ having been recited, as to the rest, it may be proclaimed:
 
 <!------------------------page 261------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_261"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 261</font></a>
 
 "Such and such rules are known (to the fraternity)." This is the fourth way of reciting the Pâtimokkha. The fifth way is (to recite it) in its full extent. These, O Bhikkhus, are the five ways of reciting the Pâtimokkha.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time the Bhikkhus, considering that the Blessed One had allowed to recite the Pâtimokkha abridged, always recited the Pâtimokkha abridged.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to recite the Pâtimokkha abridged. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. At that time a certain residence (of Bhikkhus) in the Kosala country was menaced on the day of Uposatha by savage people. The Bhikkhus were not able to recite the Pâtimokkha in its full extent.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, in the case of danger to recite the Pâtimokkha abridged.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus (ecited the Pâtimokkha abridged also when there was no danger .</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'You ought not to recite the Pâtimokkha abridged, O Bhikkhus, if there is no danger. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, in the case of danger only to recite the Pâtimokkha abridged. The cases of danger are the following: danger from kings, from robbers, from fire, from water, from human beings, from non-human beings, from beasts of prey, from creeping things, danger of life, danger against chastity. I ordain, O Bhikkhus, the recitation in such cases of danger
 
 <!------------------------page 262------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_262"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 262</font></a>
 
 of the Pâtimokkha abridged; if there is no danger, in its full extent.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus preached the Dhamma before the Sa<i>m</i>gha without being called upon (by the Thera).</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, preach the Dhamma before the Sa<i>m</i>gha without being called upon. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Thera is either to preach the Dhamma himself or to call upon another (Bhikkhu to do so).'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus put questions about the Vinaya before the Sa<i>m</i>gha without being appointed thereto.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, put questions about the Vinaya before the Sa<i>m</i>gha without being appointed thereto. He who so questions, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that an appointed (Bhikkhu) is to put questions about the Vinaya before the Sa<i>m</i>gha. And (this Bhikkhu) is to be appointed, O Bhikkhus, in this way: One may either appoint himself, or one may appoint another person.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. I And how is (a Bhikkhu) to appoint himself? Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, I will question N. N. about the Vinaya." Thus one may appoint himself. And how is (a Bhikkhu) to appoint another person? Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, &amp;c. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is
 
 <!------------------------page 263------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_263"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 263</font></a>
 
 ready, let N. N. question N. N. about the Vinaya." Thus one may appoint another person.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. At that time appointed, clever Bhikkhus put questions about the Vinaya before the Sa<i>m</i>gha; The <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus conceived anger (towards those Bhikkhus), conceived discontent, and threatened them with blows.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe you, O Bhikkhus, that even he who has been appointed shall (not) put questions about the Vinaya before the Sa<i>m</i>gha (without) having looked at the assembly and weighed (with the mind each) person (present).'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>, 10. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus answered questions about the Vinaya before the Sa<i>m</i>gha without being appointed thereto.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus; answer questions about the Vinaya before the Sa<i>m</i>gha without being appointed thereto. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that questions about the Vinaya are to be answered before the Sa<i>m</i>gha (only) by an appointed (Bhikkhu). And (this Bhikkhu) is to be appointed<a name="page_263_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_263_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, &amp;c.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:11"></a><font color="GREEN">11</font>. At that time appointed, clever Bhikkhus answered questions about the Vinaya before the Sa<i>m</i>gha. The <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus<a name="page_263_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_263_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, &amp;c.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 264------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_264"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 264</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 16======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="16"></a><font color="GREEN">16</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that tlme the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus reproved for an offence a Bhikkhu who had not given them leave.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. No Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who has not given leave, may be reproved for an offence. He who reproves (such a Bhikkhu), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you reprove (Bhikkhus) for an offence (only) after having asked for leave (by saying), "Give me leave, reverend brother; I wish to speak to you."'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time clever Bhikkhus reproved the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus for an offence after having asked for leave. The <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus conceived anger (towards those Bhikkhus), conceived discontent, and threatened them with blows.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you are (not) to reprove (a Bhikkhu) for an offence, even if he has given leave, (without) having weighed (with your mind) the person (concerned).'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus, who thought: 'Otherwise clever Bhikkhus might ask us for leave (and reprove us tor an offence),' themselves asked beforehand pure Bhikkhus who had committed no offence, for leave without object and reason.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no pure Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, who have committed no offence, be asked for leave without object and reason. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you
 
 <!------------------------page 265------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_265"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 265</font></a>
 
 are (not) to ask for leave (without) having weighed (with your mind) the person (concerned).'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus performed an unlawful official act before the Sa<i>m</i>gha.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blcssed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, perform unlawful acts before the Sa<i>m</i>gha. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   They performed an unlawful act nevertheless.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you should protest, if an unlawful act is being performed.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. At that time clever Bhikkhus protested at an unlawful act being performed by the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus. The <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus conceived anger, conceived discontent, and threatened (those Bhikkhus) with blows.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to express your opinion only (instead of protesting formally).'</p>
 
 <p>   They expressed their opinion in the presence of the said (Bhikkhus). The <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus conceived anger, conceived discontent, and threatened (them) with blows.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that four or five persons may protest, that two or three may express their opinion, and that one person may determine (in his mind): "I do not think this right."'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus, when reciting the Pâtimokkha before the Sa<i>m</i>gha, intentionally recited it so that it could hot be heard.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let not him who is to recite the Pâtimokkha,
 
 <!------------------------page 266------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_266"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 266</font></a>
 
 O Bhikkhus, intentionally recite it so that it cannot be heard. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. At that time the reverend Udâyi, who had a crow's voice, had the duty to recite the Pâtimokkha before the Sa<i>m</i>gha. Now the reverend Udâyi thought: 'It has been prescribed by the 'Blessed One that he who is to recite the Pâtimokkha, ought to recite it so that it may be heard; but I have a crow's voice. Well, how am I to act?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that he who is to recite the Pâtimokkha may endeavour to make it audible. If he endeavours (to do so), he is free from offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. At that time Devadatta recited the Pâtimokkha before an assembly in which laymen were present.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the Pâtimokkha before an assembly in which laymen are present. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus recited the Pâtimokkha before the Sa<i>m</i>gha without being called upon (by the Thera).</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the Pâtimokkha before the Sa<i>m</i>gha without being called upon. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Thera is master of the Pâtimokkha<a name="page_266_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_266_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the Bhâ<i>n</i>avâra of the A<i>ññ</i>atitthiyas<a name="page_266_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_266_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 267------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_267"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 267</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 17======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="17"></a><font color="GREEN">17</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Then the Blessed One, after having dwelt near Râ<i>g</i>agaha as long as he thought fit, went forth on his pilgrimage to <i>K</i>odanâvatthu. Going from place to place on his pilgrimage, he came to <i>K</i>odanâvatthu. At that time there dwelt in a certain residence many Bhikkhus, the eldest of whom was an ignorant, unlearned person: he neither knew Uposatha, nor the Uposatha service, nor the Pâtimokkha, nor the recital of the Pâtimokkha.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. Now those Bhikkhus thought: 'It has been prescribed by the Blessed One that the eldest Bhikku is master of the Pâtimokkha, and here the eldest of us is an ignorant, unlearned person: he neither knows Uposatha . . . nor the recital of the Pâtimokkha. Well, how are we to act?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that (in such a case) that Bhikkhu who is (most) learned and competent, is to be made master of the Pâtimokkha.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. At that time there dwelt in a certain residence on the day of Uposatha many ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus: they neither knew Uposatha . . . nor the recital of the Pâtimokkha. They called upon the Thera: 'May it please the Thera, reverend Sir, to recite the Pâtimokkha.' He replied: 'I am not competent to do so.' They called upon the next eldest, &amp;c. He also replied, &amp;c. They called upon the third eldest, &amp;c. In this manner they called upon (all Bhikkhus) down to the youngest one: 'May it please the reverend brother to recite the Pâtimokkha.' He also replied: 'I am not competent, venerable Sirs, to do so.'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 268------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_268"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 268</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>, 5. 'When, O Bhikkhus, in a certain residence, &amp;c.<a name="page_268_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_268_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>; in that case, O Bhikkhus, these Bhikkhus are instantly to send one Bhikkhu to the neighbouring residence (of Bhikkhus): "Go, friend, and come back when you have learnt the Pâtimokkha abridged or in its full extent."'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'By whom is (this Bhikkhu) to be sent?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Thera is to give order to a young Bhikkhu.'</p>
 
 <p>   The young Bhikkhus, having received that order from the Thera, did not go.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one who has been ordered by the Thera forbear to go, unless he be sick. He who does not go, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 18======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="18"></a><font color="GREEN">18</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Then the Blessed One, after having dwelt at <i>K</i>odanâvatthu as long as he thought fit, went back again to Râ<i>g</i>agaha. At that time the people asked the Bhikkhus who went about for alms: 'What day of the half month is this, reverend Sirs?' The Bhikkus replied: 'We do not know, friends.' The people were annoyed, murmured, and became angry: 'Those Sakyaputtiya Sama<i>n</i>as do not even know how to count (the days of) the half month; what good things else will they know?'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 269------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_269"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 269</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you learn how to count (the days of) the half month.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'Who ought to learn to count (the days of) the half month?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you learn all of you to count (the days of) the half month.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. At that time the people asked the Bhikkhus who went about for alms: 'How many Bhikkhus are there, reverend Sirs?' The Bhikkhus replied: 'We do not know, friends.' The people were annoyed, murmured, and became angry: 'Those Sakyaputtiya Sama<i>n</i>as do not even know each other; what good things else will they know?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you count the Bhikkhus.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'At what time ought we to count the Bhikkhus?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you count (the Bhikkhus) on the day of Uposatha, either by way of (counting the single) troops (of which the assembly is composed)<a name="page_269_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_269_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, or that you take (each of you) a ticket (and count those tickets).'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 19======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="19"></a><font color="GREEN">19</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   At that time Bhikkhus who did not know that it was Uposatha day, went for alms to a distant village.
 
 <!------------------------page 270------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_270"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 270</font></a>
 
 They came back when the Pâtimokkha was being recited, or when it just had been recited.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus,that you proclaim: "To-day is Uposatha."'</p>
 
 <p>   Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'Who is to proclaim so?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Thera is to proclaim (the day of Uposatha) in due time.'</p>
 
 <p>   At that time a certain Thera did not think of it in due time.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to proclaim it also at meal time.'</p>
 
 <p>   (The Thera) did not think of it at meal time either.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I allow, O Bhikkhus, to proclaim it whenever (the Thera) thinks of it.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 20======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="20"></a><font color="GREEN">20</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="20:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the Uposatha hall in a certain residence was full of sweepings. The Bhikkhus who arrived there were annoyed, murmured, and became angry: 'How can the Bhikkhus neglect to sweep the Uposatha hall?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus; that you sweep the Uposatha hall.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="20:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'Well, who is to sweep the Uposatha hall?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 271------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_271"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 271</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Thera is to Order a young Bhikkhu (to sweep the Uposatha hall). The young Bhikkhus, having received that order from the Thera, did not sweep it.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'He who has been ordered by the Thera, ought not to forbear to sweep it, unless he be sick. He who does not sweep it, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="20:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. At that time there were no seats prepared in the Uposatha hall. The Bhikkhus sat down on the ground. Their bodies and their robes became full of dust.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you prepare seats in the Uposatha hall.'</p>
 
 <p>   Now the Bhikkhus thought, &amp;c. (see § 2).</p>
 
 <p>   'He who does not prepare (seats), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="20:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. At that time there was no lamp in the Uposatha hall. The Bhikkhus in the darkness trod upon (each other's) bodies and robes.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you light a lamp In te Uposatha hall.'</p>
 
 <p>   Now the Bhikkhus thought, &amp;c. (see § 2).</p>
 
 <p>   'He who does not light (the lanip), commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="20:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. At that time the resident Bhikkhus in a certain residence did not provide drink (i.e. water), nor did they provide food. The incoming Bhikkhus were annoyed, murmured, and became angry: 'How can the relident Bhikkhus neglect to provide for drink and to provide for food?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One. ~</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 272------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_272"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 272</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you provide drink and food.'</p>
 
 <p>   Now the Bhikkhus thought, &amp;c. (see § 2).</p>
 
 <p>   'He who does not provide for it, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 21======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="21"></a><font color="GREEN">21</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="21:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time many ignorant, unlearned Bhikkus who travelled to the (four) quarters (of the world) did not ask leave of their â<i>k</i>ariyas and upa<i>ggh</i>âyas (when going away).</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, there are many ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus who travel to the (four) quarters without asking leave of their â<i>k</i>ariyas and upa<i>ggh</i>âyas; such Bhikkhus ought to be asked by their â<i>k</i>ariyas and upa<i>ggh</i>âyas: "Where will you go? with whom will you go?" If those ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus name other ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus, their â<i>k</i>ariyas and upa<i>ggh</i>âyas ought not to allow them (to go); if they allow them, they commit a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. If those ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus go without the permission of their â<i>k</i>ariyas and upa<i>ggh</i>âyas, they commit a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="21:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, there dwell in a certain residence many ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus who neither know Uposatha, nor the Uposatha service, nor the Pâtimokkha, nor the recital of the Pâtimokkha: now there arrives (at that place) another Bhikkhu who is erudite, who has studied the âgamas (i.e. the collections of Suttas), who knows
 
 <!------------------------page 273------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_273"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 273</font></a>
 
 the Dhamma, the Vinaya, the mâtikâ<a name="page_273_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_273_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, who is wise, learned, intelligent, modest, conscientious<a name="page_273_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_273_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, anxious for training; let those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkus, kindly receive that Bhikkhu, let them show attention to him, exchange (friendly) words with him, provide him with powder, clay<a name="page_273_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_273_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>, a tooth-cleanser, and water to rinse his mouth with. If they do not receive him kindly, or show no attention to him, or do not exchange (friendly) words with him, or do not provide him with powder, clay, a tooth-cleanser, and water to rinse his mouth with, they commit a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="21:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, there dwell in a certain residence on the day of Uposatha many ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus who neither know Uposatha . . . nor the recital of the Pâtimokkha; let those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, instantly send one Bhikkhu to the neighbouring residence (of Bhikkhus, saying), "Go, friend, and come back when you have learnt the Pâtimokkha abridged or in its full extent." If they succeed in this way, well and good. If they do not succeed, those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, ought all to go to a residence where they (the Bhikkhus there) know Uposatha or the Uposatha service or the Pâtimokkha or the recital of the Pâtimokkha.
 
 <!------------------------page 274------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_274"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 274</font></a>
 
 If they do not go, they commit a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="21:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, many ignorant, unlearned Bhikkhus keep vassa<a name="page_274_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_274_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> in a certain residence who neither know, &amp;c.<a name="page_274_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_274_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> If they succeed in this way, well and good. If they do not succeed, they ought to send away one Bhikkhu for seven days' time (saying), "Go, friend, and come back when you have learnt the Pâtimokkha abridged or in its full extent." If they succeed in this way, well and good. If they do not succeed, those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, ought not to keep vassa in that residence. If they do, they commit a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 22======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="22"></a><font color="GREEN">22</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="22:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'Assemble, O Bhikkhus, the Sa<i>m</i>gha will hold Uposatha.' When he had spoken thus, a certain Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: 'There is a sick Bhikkhu, Lord, who is not present.'</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a sick Bhikkhu is to declare (lit. to give) his pârisuddhi<a name="page_274_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_274_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>. And let it be declared, O Bhikkhus, in this way: Let that sick Bhikkhu go to one Bhikkhu, adjust his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting, raise his joined hands, and say: "I declare my pârisuddhi, take my pârisuddhi, proclaim my pârisuddhi (before the fraternity)." Whether he
 
 <!------------------------page 275------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_275"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 275</font></a>
 
 express this by gesture (lit. by his body), or by word or by gesture and word, the pârisuddhi has been declared. If he does not express this by gesture, &amp;c., the pârisuddhi has not been declared.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="22:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'If (the sick Bhikkhu) succeeds in doing so, well and good. If he does not succeed, let them take that sick Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, on his bed or his chair to the assembly, and (then) let them hold Uposatha. If, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhus who are nursing the sick, think: "If we move this sick person from his place, the sickness will increase, or he will die," let them not move the sick, O Bhikkhus, from his place; let the Sa<i>m</i>gha go there and hold there Uposatha. But in no case are they to hold Uposatha with an incomplete congregation. If (a Bhikkhu) does so, he commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="22:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'If he who has been charged with the pârisuddhi, O Bhikkhus, leaves the place at once<a name="page_275_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_275_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, after the pârisuddhi has been entrusted (to him), the pârisuddhi ought to be declared to another. If he who has been charged with the pârisuddhi, O Bhikkhus, after the pârisuddhi has been entrusted to him, returns to the world<a name="page_275_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_275_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> at once<a name="page_275_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_275_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>; or dies; or admits that he is a sâma<i>n</i>era; or that he has abandoned the precepts<a name="page_275_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_275_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>; or that he has become
 
 <!------------------------page 276------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_276"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 276</font></a>
 
 guilty of an extreme offence<a name="page_276_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_276_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>; or that he is mad; or thit his mind is unhinged; or that he suffers (bodily) pain; or that expulsion has been pronounced against him for his refusal to see an offence (committed by himself); or to atone for such an offence; or to renounce a false doctrine; or that he is a eunuch; or that he has furtively attached himself (to the Sa<i>m</i>gha); or that he is gone over to the Titthiyas; or that he is an animal<a name="page_276_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_276_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>; or that he is guilty of matricide; or that he is guilty of parricide; or that he has murdered an Arahat; or that he has violated a Bhikkhunî; or that he has caused a schism among the Sa<i>m</i>gha; or that he has shed (a Buddha's) blood; or that he is a hermaphrodite: (in these cases) the pârisuddhi ought to be entrusted to another one.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="22:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'If he who has been chùrged with the pârisuddhi, O Bhikkhus, after the pârisuddhi has been entrusted to him, and whilst he is on his way (to the assembly), leaves the place, or returns to the world, or dies, or admits that he is a sâma<i>n</i>era, &amp;c., or admits that he is a hermaphrodite, the pârisuddhi has not been conveyed (to the Sa<i>m</i>gha). If he who has been charged with the pârisuddhi, O Bhikkhus, after the pârisuddhi has been entrusted to him, having arrived with the fraternity, leaves the place, or dies, &amp;c., the pârisuddhi has
 
 <!------------------------page 277------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_277"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 277</font></a>
 
 been conveyed. If he who has been charged with the pârisuddhi, O Bhikkhus, after the pârisuddhi has been entrusted to him, though he reaches the assembly, does not proclaim (the pârisuddhi he is charged with) because he falls asleep, or by carelessness, or because he attains (meditation), the pârisuddhi has been conveyed, and there is no offence on the part of him who has been charged with the pârisuddhi. If he who has been charged, &amp;c., intentionally omits to proclaim (the pârisuddhi), the pârisuddhi has been conveyed, but he who has been charged with the pârisuddhi is guilty of a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 23======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="23"></a><font color="GREEN">23</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   Then the BIessed One thus addressed the Bhikkus: 'Assemble, O Bhikkhus, the Sa<i>m</i>gha will perform an (official) act.' When he had spoken thus, a certain Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: 'there is a sick Bhikkhu, Lord, who is not present.'</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a sick Bhikkhu is to declare (lit. to give) his consent (to the act to be performed), &amp;c.<a name="page_277_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_277_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that on the day of Uposatha he who declares his pârisuddhi is to declare his consent (to official acts to be performed eventually) also, for (both declarations) are required for the Sa<i>m</i>gha (and for the validity of its acts).</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 278------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_278"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 278</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 24======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="24"></a><font color="GREEN">24</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="24:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time relations of a certain Bhikkhu seized him on the day of Uposatha.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, a certain Bhikkhu is seized on the day of Uposatha by relations of his, let the Bhikkhus say to those relations: "Pray, friends, let this Bhikkhu free for a moment until this Bhikkhu has held Uposatha."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="24:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'If they succeed in this way, well and good. If they do not succeed, let the Bhikkhus say to those relations: "Pray, friends, stand apart for a moment, until this Bhikkhu has declared his pârisuddhi." If they succeed, well and good. If they do not succeed, let the Bhikkhus say to those relations: "Pray, friends, take this Bhikkhu for a moment outside the boundary, until the Sa<i>m</i>gha has held Uposatha." If they succeed, well and good. If they do not succeed, in no case is Uposatha to be held by an assembly that is incomplete. Should it be so held, (each Bhikkhu in the assembly) is guilty of a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="24:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a certain Bhikkhu is seized on the day of Uposatha by kings, by robbers, by rascals, by hostile Bhikkhus, &amp;c.<a name="page_278_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_278_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 25======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="25"></a><font color="GREEN">25</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="25:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'Assemble, O Bhikkhus, the Sa<i>m</i>gha
 
 <!------------------------page 279------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_279"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 279</font></a>
 
 has duties (official acts) to perform.' When he had spoken thus, a certain Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: 'There is a mad Bhikkhu, Lord, called Gagga, who is not present.' 'There are, O Bhikkhus, two sorts of madmen: There is one mad Bhikkhu who now remembers the Uposatha, now does not remember it, who now remembers official acts (of the Order), now does not remember them, (and) there is (another mad Bhikkhu) who does not remember them; one who now goes to Uposatha, now does not go, who now goes to official acts, now does not go, (and another) who does not go.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="25:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'Now, O Bhikkhus, that madman that now remembers, &amp;c., that now goes to, &amp;c., to such a madman I prescribe that you grant ummattakasammuti (i.e. the madman's leave).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="25:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to grant it in this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu prodaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. Gagga, a mad Bhikkhu, now remembers the Uposatha, now does not remember, &amp;c., now goes to, &amp;c.; if the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha grant ummattakasammuti to the mad Bhikkhu Gagga: let the Bhikkhu Gagga remember or not remember Uposatha, remember or not remember official acts (of the Order), let him go to Uposatha or not go, let him go to official acts or not go: (in every case) it may be free to the Sa<i>m</i>gha to hold Uposatha and to perform, official acts with Gagga as well as without Gagga. This is the <i>ñ</i>atti.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="25:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. '"Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, &amp;c. Gagga, a mad Bhikkhu, &amp;c.; the Sa<i>m</i>gha grants, &amp;c. Thus I understand."'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 280------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_280"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 280</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 26======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="26"></a><font color="GREEN">26</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="26:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time four Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain residence (of Bhikkhus) on the day of Uposatha. Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed the holding of Uposatha, and we are (only) four persons<a name="page_280_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_280_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>. Welll how are we to hold Uposatha?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that four (Bhikkhus) may recite the Pâtimokkha.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="26:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time three Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain residence (of Bhikkhus) at the day of Uposatha. Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed to four (Bhikkhus) the reciting of the Pâtimokkha, and we are (only) three persons: &amp;c. 'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that three Bhikkhus may hold pârisuddhi-uposatha<a name="page_280_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_280_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="26:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'And it ought to be held in this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before those Bhikkhus: "Let the reverend brethren hear me. To-day is Uposatha, the fifteenth (day of the half month). If the reverend brethren are ready, let us hold pârisuddhi-uposatha with each other." Let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting, raise his joined hands, and say to those Bhikkhus: "I am pure, friends, understand that I am pure, &amp;c.<a name="page_280_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_280_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>"</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="26:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'Let (each) younger Bhikkhu (in his tum) adjust
 
 <!------------------------page 281------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_281"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 281</font></a>
 
 his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting, raise his joined hands, and say to those Bhikkhus: "I am pure, reverend Sirs, &amp;c:"'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="26:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. At that time two Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain residence on the day of Uposatha. Now these Bhikkus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed to four (Bhikkhus) the reciting of the Pâtimokkha, to three (Bhikkhus) the holding of pârisuddhi-uposatha, and we are (only) two persons,' &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that two persons may hold pârisuddhi-uposatha.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="26:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>, 7. 'And it ought to be held in this way: Let the senior Bhikkhu, &amp;c.<a name="page_281_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_281_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="26:8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. At that time there dwelt a single Bhikkhu in a certain residence on the day of Uposatha. Now this Bhikkhu thought, &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="26:9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>. 'In case there dwell, O Bhikkhus, in a certain residence on the day of Uposatha a single Bhikkhu; let that Bhikkhu; O Bhikkhus, sweep the place which the Bhikkhus used to frequent, the refectory, or hall, or place at the foot of a tree; let him (then) provide water and food, prepare seats, put a lamp there, and sit down. If other Bhikkhus come, let him hold Uposatha with them; if they do not come, let him fix his mind upon the thought: "To-day is my Uposatha." If he does not fix his mind upon this thought, he commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="26:10"></a><font color="GREEN">10</font>. 'Now, O Bhikkhus, where four Bhikkhus dwell (together), they must not convey the pârisuddhi<a name="page_281_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_281_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> of one (to their assembly), and recite the
 
 <!------------------------page 282------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_282"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 282</font></a>
 
 Pâtimokkha by three; If they do, they commit a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   'Now, O Bhikkhus, where three Bhikkhus dwell (together), they must not convey the pârisuddhi of one (to their assembly), and hold pârisuddhi-uposatha by two. If they do, they commit a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   'Now, O Bhikkhus, where two Bhikkhus dwell, one of them must not convey the pârisuddhi of the other one, and fix (only) his thoughts (upon the Uposatha). If he does, he commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 27======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="27"></a><font color="GREEN">27</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time a certain Bhikkhu was guilty of an offence on the day of Uposatha. Now this Bhikku thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed: "Uposatha is not to be held by a Bhikkhu who is guilty of an offence<a name="page_282_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_282_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>." Now I am guilty of an offence. What am I to do?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, a certain Bhikkhu be guilty of an offence on the day of Uposatha; let that Bhikku, O Bhikkhus, go to one Bhikkhu, adjust his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting, raise his joined hands, and say: "I have committed, friend, such and such an offence; I confess that offence." Let the other say: "Do you see it?" "Yes, I see it." "Refrain from it in future."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, there be a Bhikkhu on the day of Uposatha who feels doubt with regard
 
 <!------------------------page 283------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_283"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 283</font></a>
 
 to an offence; let this Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, go to one Bhikkhu, &amp;c. (§ 1),and say: "I feeldoubt, friend, with regard to such and such an offence. When I shall feel no doubt, then I will atone for that offence." Having spoken thus, let him hoid Uposatha and hear the Pâtimokkha. But in no case must there be any hindrance to holding Uposatha from such a cause.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>, At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus confessed in common an offence (shared by them all).</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to confess an offence in common, He who do es so, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus accepted the common confession of an offence (shared by several Bhikkhus).</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to accept the common confession of an offence. He who does so, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. At that time a certain Bhikkhu remembered an offence, while Pâtimokkha was being recited. Now this Bhikkhu thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed: "Uposatha is not to be held by (a Bhikkhu) who is guilty of an offence." Now I am guilty of an offence. What am I to do?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, there be a Bhikkhu who remembers an offence, while Pâtimokkha is being recited; let this Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, say to his neighbour Bhikkhu: "I have committed such and such an offence, friend; when I have arisen from this (assembly), I will atone for that offence." Having spoken thus, &amp;c. (§ 2).</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 284------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_284"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 284</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, there be a Bhikkhu who feels doubt with regard to an offence, while Pâtimokkha is being recited, &amp;c. (§§ 2, 4).'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. At that time the whole Sa<i>m</i>gha in a certain residence was guilty of a common offence on the day of Uposatha. Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed that offences (shared by many Bhikkhus) are not to be confessed in common, and that the common confession of such offences is not to be accepted. Now this whole Sa<i>m</i>gha is guilty of a common offence. What are we to do?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, the whole Sa<i>m</i>gha in a certain residence is guilty of a common offence on the day of Uposatha; let those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkus, send instantly one Bhikkhu to the neighbouring residence of Bhikkhus (saying), "Go, friend, and come back when you have atoned for that offence (for yourself); we will (then) atone for the offence before you."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. 'If they succeed in this way, well and good. If they do not succeed, let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. This whole Sa<i>m</i>gha is guilty of a common offence. When it shall see another pure, guiltless Bhikkhu, it will atone for the offence before him." (One of the Bhikkhus) having spoken thus, let them hold Uposatha and recite the Pâtimokkha. But in no case must there be any hindrance to holding Uposatha from such a cause.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the whole Sa<i>m</i>gha in a certain residence feels doubt with regard to a
 
 <!------------------------page 285------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_285"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 285</font></a>
 
 common offence on the day of Uposatha; (in this case) let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following <i>ñ</i>atti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. This whole Sa<i>m</i>gha feels doubt with regard to a common offence. When it will feel no doubt, it will atone for that offence." (One of the Bhikkhus) having spoken thus, &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain residence the Sa<i>m</i>gha that has entered (there) upon vassa is guilty of a common offence. Those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, are instantly, &amp;c. (§§ 6, 7). If they do not succeed, let them send away one Bhikkhu for seven days' time: "Go, friend, and come back when you have atoned for that offence (for yourself); we will (then) atone for the offence before you."'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:10"></a><font color="GREEN">10</font>. At that time the whole Sa<i>m</i>gha in a certain residence was guilty of a common offence, and did not know the name nor the class to which that offence belonged. Now there arrived (at that place) another Bhikkhu, &amp;c. (see chap. 21. 2), anxious for training. To that Bhikkhu one of the Bhikkhus went, and having gone to him, he said to him: 'He who does such and such a thing, friend, what sort of offence does he commit?'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:11"></a><font color="GREEN">11</font>. He replied: 'He who does such and such a thing, friend, commits such and such an offence. If you have committed such an offence, friend, atone for that offence.' The other replied: 'Not I myself alone, friend, am guilty of that offence; this whole Sa<i>m</i>gha is guilty of that offence.' He said: 'What is it to you, friend, whether another is guilty or guiltless? Come, friend, atone for your own offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:12"></a><font color="GREEN">12</font>. Now this Bhikkhu, after having atoned for
 
 <!------------------------page 286------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_286"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 286</font></a>
 
 that offence by the advice of that Bhikkhu, went to those Bhikkhus (to his brethren who shared in the same offence); having gone to them, he said to those Bhikkhus: 'He who does such and such a thing, friends, commits such and such an offence. As you have committed such an offence, friends, atone for that offence.' Now those Bhikkhus refused to atone for that offence by that Bhikkhu's advice.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:13"></a><font color="GREEN">13</font>, 14. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the whole Sa<i>m</i>gha in a certain residence is guilty of a common offence, &amp;c. (§§ 10, 11)--</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="27:15"></a><font color="GREEN">15</font>. 'If this Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, after having atoned for that offence by the advice of that Bhikkhu, goes to those Bhikkhus, and having gone to them, says to those Bhikkhus: "He who does, &amp;c.," and if those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, atone for that offence by that Bhikkhu's advice, well and good; if they do not atone for it, that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, need not say anything (further) to those Bhikkhus, if he does not like.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the Bhâ<i>n</i>avâra on <i>K</i>odanâvatthu.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 28======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="28"></a><font color="GREEN">28</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="28:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time there assembled in a certain residence (of Bhikkhus) at the day of Uposatha a number of resident Bhikkhus, four or more. They did not know that there were other resident Bhikkus absent. Intending to act according to Dhamma and Vinaya, thinking themselves to be complete while (really) incomplete, they held Uposatha and
 
 <!------------------------page 287------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_287"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 287</font></a>
 
 recited the Pâtimokkha. While they were reciting the Pâtimokkha, other resident Bhikkhus, a greater number (than the first ones), arrived.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed one.</p>
 
 <p>    2. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble in a certain residence at the day of Uposatha, &amp;c. (§ 1); while they are reciting the Pâtimokkha, other resident Bhikkhus, a greater number, arrive; let those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, recite the Pâtimokkha again; they who have recited it, are free from guilt.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="28:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &amp;c.; while they are reciting the Pâtimokkha, other resident Bhikkhus, exactly the same number (as the first ones), arrive; in that case (the part of the Pâtimokkha) that has been recited, has been correccly recited; let those (who have arrived late), hear the rest; they who have recited it, are free from guilt.</p>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &amp;c.; while they are reciting the Pâtimokkha, other resident Bhikkhus, a smaller number, arrive, &amp;c.<a name="page_287_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_287_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="28:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &amp;c.; when they have just finished the recital of the Pâtimokkha, other resident Bhikkhus, &amp;c.<a name="page_287_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_287_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 288------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_288"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 288</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   <a name="28:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &amp;c.; when they have just finished the recital of the Pâtimokkha, and the assembly has not yet risen, other resident Bhikkhus, &amp;c.<a name="page_288_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_288_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="28:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &amp;c.; when they have just finished the recital of the Pâtimokkha, and a part of the assembly has risen, &amp;c.<a name="page_288_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_288_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="28:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &amp;c.; when they have just finished the reciia~ of the Pâtimokkha, and the whole assembly has risen, &amp;c.<a name="page_288_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_288_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the fifteen cases in which there is no offence.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 29======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="29"></a><font color="GREEN">29</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble in a certain residence on the day of Uposatha a number of resident Bhikkhus, four or more; they know that there are other resident Bhikkhus absent; intending to act according to Dhamma and Vinaya, incomplete, conscious of their incompleteness, they hold Uposatha and recite the Pâtimokkha, &amp;c.<a name="page_288_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_288_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the fifteen cases of the incompletely assembled Bhikkhus who are conscious of their incompleteness.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 289------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_289"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 289</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 30======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="30"></a><font color="GREEN">30</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &amp;c.; they know that there are other resident Bhikkhus absent. Feeling doubt as to whether they are competent to hold Uposatha or not competent, they hold Uposatha and recite the Pâtimokkha, &amp;c.<a name="page_289_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_289_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the fifteen cases of the Bhikkhus who feel doubt.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 31======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="31"></a><font color="GREEN">31</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &amp;c.; they know that there are other resident Bhikkhus absent. (Thinking): "We are competent to hold Uposatha, we are not incompetent," they abandon themselves to misbehaviour, hold Uposatha, and recite the Pâtimokkha, &amp;c.<a name="page_289_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_289_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the fifteen cases of the Bhikkhus abandoning themselves to misbehaviour.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 32======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="32"></a><font color="GREEN">32</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble, &amp;c.; they know that there are other resident Bhikkhus absent. They perish and become ruined<a name="page_289_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_289_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, saying, "What are those people to us?" and risking a schism
 
 <!------------------------page 290------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_290"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 290</font></a>
 
 (among the fraternity), they hold Uposatha and recite the Pâtimokkha, &amp;c.<a name="page_290_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_290_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the fifteen cases of the Bhikkhus risking a schism.</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the seventy-five<a name="page_290_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_290_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> cases.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 33======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="33"></a><font color="GREEN">33</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, there assemble in a certain residence on the day of Uposatha a number of resident Bhikkhus, four or more; they know that other resident Bhikkhus are about to enter the boundary. They know that other resident Bhikkhus have entered within the boundary. They see other resident Bhikkhus who are about to enter, &amp;c., who have entered within the boundary. They hear that other resident Bhikkhus are about to enter, &amp;c., have entered within the boundary.'</p>
 
 <p>   Thus<a name="page_290_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_290_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a> a hundred and seventy-five systems of triads are produced which refer to resident and resident
 
 <!------------------------page 291------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_291"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 291</font></a>
 
 Bhikkhus<a name="page_291_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_291_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>. (Then follow the same cases with regard to) resident and incoming Bhikkhus, incoming and resident Bhikkhus, incoming and incoming Bhikkus. By putting these words (successively) into the peyyâla<a name="page_291_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_291_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, seven hundred triands are produced.</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 34======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="34"></a><font color="GREEN">34</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus count the day as the fourteenth (of the pakkha), the incoming Bhikkhus as the fifteenth<a name="page_291_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_291_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>; if the number of the resident Bhikkhus is greater, the incoming Bhikkhu<a name="page_291_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_291_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a> ought to accommodate themselves to the resident Bhikkhus. If their number is equal, the incoming Bhikkhus ought to accommodate themselves to the resident Bhikkhus. If the number of the incoming Bhikkhus is greater, the resident Bhikkhus ought to accommodate themselves to the incoming Bhikkhus.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus count the day as the fifteenth, the incoming Bhikkhus as the fourteenth; if, &amp;c. (§ 1).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>
 
 <!------------------------page 292------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_292"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 292</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus count the day as the first (of the pakkha), the incoming Bhikkhus as the fifteenth (of the preceding pakkha); if the number of the resident Bhikkhus is greater, the resident Bhikkhus need not, if they do not like, admit the incoming ones to their communion; let the incoming Bhikkhus go outside the boundary and hold (there) Uposatha. If their number is equal, &amp;c. (as in the preceding case). If the number of the incoming Bhikkhus is greater, let the resident Bhikkhus either admit the incoming ones to their communion or go outside the boundary.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus count the day as the fifteenth, the incoming Bhikkus as the first (of the following pakkha); if the number of the resident Bhikkhus is greater, let the incoming Bhikkhus either admit the resident Bhikkus to their communion or go outside the boundary. If their number is equal, &amp;c. (as in the preceding case). If the number of the incoming Bhikkhus is greater, the incoming Bhikkhus need not, if they do not like, admit the resident Bhikkhus to their communion; let the resident Bhikkhus go outside the boundary and hold Uposatha (there).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. ' In case, O Bhikkhus, the incoming Bhikkhus see the signs, the tokens, the marks, the characteristics of (the presence of) resident Bhikkhus, well prepared beds and chairs and mats and pillows, food and water well provided for, well swept cells; seeing this, they begin to doubt: "Are there here any resident Bhikkhus or are there not?"--</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. 'Being doubtful they do not search, having not searched they hold Uposatha: this is a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. Being doubtful they search, searching they
 
 <!------------------------page 293------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_293"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 293</font></a>
 
 do not see them, not seeing them they hold Uposatha: (in this case) they are free from offence. Being doubtful they search, searching they see them, seeing them they hold Uposatha together: (in this case) they are free from offence. Being doubtful they search, searching they see them, seeing them they hold Uposatha apart: this is a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. Being doubtful they search, searching they see them, seeing them they perish and become ruined<a name="page_293_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_293_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, saying, "What are those people to us?" and risking a schism, they hold Uposatha: this is a thulla<i>kk</i>aya (grave) offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the incoming Bhikkhus hear the signs &amp;c. of (the presence of) resident Bhikkhus, the sound of their footsteps when they are walking, the sound of their rehearsal (of the Dhamma), of their clearing the throat and sneezing; hearing this they begin to doubt, &amp;c. (§§ 5, 6).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus see the signs &amp;c. of (the presence of) incoming Bhikkhus, unknown bowls, unknown robes, unknown seats, (the traces of) foot-washing, water sprinkled about; seeing this they begin to doubt, &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus hear the signs &amp;c. of (the presence of) incoming Bhikkhus, the sound of their footsteps when they are arriving, the sound of their shaking out their shoes, clearing the throat, and sneezing; hearing this, &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:10"></a><font color="GREEN">10</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the incoming Bhikkhus see resident Bhikkhus belonging to a different district; they take them as belonging to the same district; taking them as belonging to the same district
 
 <!------------------------page 294------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_294"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 294</font></a>
 
 they do not ask; having not asked, they hold Uposatha together: (in this case) they are free from offence. They ask; having asked, they do not go through the matter; having not gone through the matter, they hold Uposatha together: this is a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. They ask, &amp;c. (as in the last case), they hold Uposatha apart: (in this case) they are free from offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:11"></a><font color="GREEN">11</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the incoming Bhikkhus see resident Bhikkhus belonging to the same district. They take them as belonging to a different district; taking them, &amp;c. they do not ask; having not asked, they hold Uposatha together: this is a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. They ask; having asked, they go through the matter; having gone through the matter, they hold Uposatha apart: this is a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. They ask, &amp;c. (as in the last case), they hold Uposatha together: (in this case) they are free from offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:12"></a><font color="GREEN">12</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus see incoming Bhikkhus belonging to a different district, &amp;c. (see § 10).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="34:13"></a><font color="GREEN">13</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, the resident Bhikkhus see incoming Bhikkhus belonging to the same district, &amp;c. (see § 11).'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 35======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="35"></a><font color="GREEN">35</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="35:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. 'You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day of Uposatha from a residence in which Bhikkhus are, to a residence in which no Bhikkhus are, except with a Sa<i>m</i>gha<a name="page_294_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_294_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> or in a case of danger<a name="page_294_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_294_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>. You ought not,
 
 <!------------------------page 295------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_295"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 295</font></a>
 
 O Bhikkhus, to go on the day of Uposatha from a residence in which Bhikkhus are, to a non-residence in which no Bhikkhus are, except, &amp;c. You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day of Uposatha from a residence in which Bhikkhus are, to a residence or non-residence<a name="page_295_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_295_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> in which no Bhikkhus are, except, &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="35:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day of Uposatha from a non-residence in which Bhikkhus are, to a residence, &amp;c., to a non-residence, &amp;c., to a residence or non-residence in which no Bhikkhus are, except, &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="35:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day of Uposatha from a residence or non-residence in which Bhikkhus are, to a residence, &amp;c., to a non-residence, &amp;c., to a residence or non-residence in which no Bhikkhus are, except, &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="35:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'You ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go on the day of Uposatha from a residence in which Bhikkhus are, to a residence in which Bhikkhus are, if these Bhikkus belong to a different district, except, &amp;c.<a name="page_295_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_295_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="35:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. 'You may go, O Bhikkhus, on the day of U posatha from a residence in which Bhikkhus are, to a residence in which Bhikkhus are, if these Bhikkus belong to the same district, and if you know: "I can attain that place to-day." You may, &amp;c.<a name="page_295_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_295_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <hr align="center" width="33%">
 
 <!--======================chapter 36======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="36"></a><font color="GREEN">36</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="36:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. ' Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the Pâtimokkha in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before a Bhikkhunî. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a
 
 <!------------------------page 296------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_296"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 296</font></a>
 
 offence. Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the Pâtimokkha in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before a sikkhamânâ<a name="page_296_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_296_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, a sâma<i>n</i>era, a sâma<i>n</i>erî, one who has abandoned the precepts<a name="page_296_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_296_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, one who is guilty of an extreme offence<a name="page_296_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_296_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="36:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'Let no one, O Bhikklius, recite the Pâtimokkha in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before a (Bhikkhu) against whom expulsion has been pronounced for his refusal to see an offence (committed by himself), before a (Bhikkhu) against whom expulsion has been pronounced for his refusal to atone for such an offence, or for his refusal to renounce a false doctrine. He who does, is to be treated according to the law<a name="page_296_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_296_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="36:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>, 'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, recite the Pâtimokkha in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before a eunuch, before one who has furtively attached himself (to the Sa<i>m</i>gha), &amp;c. {see chap. 22. 3), before a hermaphrodite. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 297------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_297"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 297</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   <a name="36:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Uposatba by (accepting) tbe pârisuddhi declaration<a name="page_297_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_297_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> of a pârivâsika<a name="page_297_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_297_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, except if the assembly has not yet risen (at the time when the pârisuddhi is declared). And let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Uposatha on another day than the Uposatha day, except for the sake of (declaring the re-establishment of) concord among tbe Sa<i>m</i>gha<a name="page_297_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_297_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the third Bhâ<i>n</i>avâra in the Uposathakhandhaka.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="sbe1314.htm">Next: Mahâvagga - Third Khandaka</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 239------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_239"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 239</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_239_note_1"></a><a href="#page_239_fr_1">1</a> One should be inclined to understand that the Paribbâ<i>g</i>akas assembled twice each half month, on the eighth day of the pakkha and on the fourteenth or fifteenth day, according to the different length of the pakkha. However, chap. 4 makes it probable that not two days in each pakkha are to be understood, but three. Compare, however, the remark of Buddhaghosa, quoted in the note on chap. 34. 1.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 241------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_241"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 241</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_241_note_1"></a><a href="#page_241_fr_1">1</a> On the origin and the meaning of the title 'Pâtimokkha,' see our Introduction, <a href="sbe1302.htm#page_xxvii">p. xxvii</a>.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 242------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_242"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 242</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_242_note_1"></a><a href="#page_242_fr_1">1</a> See chap. 22. If a Bhikkhu is prevented by distase from assisting to the Pâtimokkha ceremony, he is to charge another Bhikkhu with his pârisuddhi, i.e. with the solemn declaration that he is pure from the offences specified in the Pâtimokkha.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_242_note_2"></a><a href="#page_242_fr_2">2</a> These words are evidently the answer of the Bhikkhus then present to the proclamation of the pâtimokkhuddesaka.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 243------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_243"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 243</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_243_note_1"></a><a href="#page_243_fr_1">1</a> See § 7.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_243_note_2"></a><a href="#page_243_fr_2">2</a> §§ 4-8 contain an explanation, word by word, of the formula given in § 3. This explanation is a portion of the ancient commentarf on the Pâtimokkha which at the time of the redaction of the Vinaya Pi<i>t</i>aka has been admitted into it in its full extent (see the Introduction, <a href="sbe1302.htm#page_xv">p. xv</a> seq.).</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_243_note_3"></a><a href="#page_243_fr_3">3</a> See <a href="#page_241_note_1">p. 241, note 1</a>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_243_note_4"></a><a href="#page_243_fr_4">4</a> See <a href="sbe1303.htm#page_1_note_5">p. 1, note 5</a>.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 244------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_244"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 244</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_244_note_1"></a><a href="#page_244_fr_1">1</a> The five classes of offences are, the pârâ<i>g</i>ika, sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa, pâ<i>k</i>ittiya, pâ<i>t</i>idesaniya, dukka<i>t</i>a offences; the seven classes, the pârâ<i>g</i>ika, sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa, thulla<i>kk</i>aya, pâ<i>k</i>ittiya, pâ<i>t</i>idesaniya, dukka<i>t</i>a, dubbhâsita off en ces. See, for instance, <i>K</i>ullavagga IX, 3, 3.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 245------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_245"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 245</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_245_note_1"></a><a href="#page_245_fr_1">1</a> The Pâli text has ' dukka<i>t</i>a.' We cannot interpret here dukka<i>t</i>a in the technical sense of a dukka<i>t</i>a offence (see the Introduction, <a href="sbe1302.htm#page_xxiv">p. xxiv</a>), for intentional falsehood belongs to the class of the pâ<i>k</i>ittiya offences, among which it occupies the first place.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_245_note_2"></a><a href="#page_245_fr_2">2</a> See the note on I, 78, 5.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 249------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_249"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 249</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_249_note_1"></a><a href="#page_249_fr_1">1</a> See chap. 5. 2.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 251------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_251"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 251</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_251_note_1"></a><a href="#page_251_fr_1">1</a> See the note on I, 30, 4.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_251_note_2"></a><a href="#page_251_fr_2">2</a> I.e. to abolish the (character of uposathâgâra, conferred on the Vihâra &amp;c. by the act of sammuti.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 252------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_252"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 252</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_252_note_1"></a><a href="#page_252_fr_1">1</a> Uposatha-pamukha (literally, that which has the Uposatha at its head, or, that which is situated in front of the Uposatha) evidently means the place around the uposathâgâra, in which the Pâtimokkha recitation may be heard as well as in the uposathâgâra itself.</p>
 
 <p>l 'Mana<i>m</i> vu<i>lh</i>o ahosi.' Buddhaghosa: 'îsaka<i>m</i> appattavu<i>lh</i>abhâvo ahosi.' Mana<i>m</i> is evidently the equivalent of Sanskrit manâk.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_254_note_2"></a><a href="#page_254_fr_2">2</a> Buddhaghosa's note on this passage contains some details regarding the way which Mahâ Kassapa went. Andhakavinda is three gâvuta distant from Râ<i>g</i>agaha. There were eighteen (? the MS. reads: a<i>tth</i>âra mahâvihârâ) great Vihâras around Râ<i>g</i>agaha included by the same boundary which Buddha himself had consecrated. The Uposatha service for this whole district was performed in the Ve<i>l</i>uvana monastery. The river which Mahâ Kassapa crossed on his way to the Ve<i>l</i>uvana was the Sappinî, which rises in the Gi<i>ggh</i>akû<i>t</i>a mountain.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 255------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_255"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 255</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_255_note_1"></a><a href="#page_255_fr_1">1</a> Ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa means not parting with the three robes which belong to the usual 'parikkhârâ ' (requisites) of a Bhikkhu. Bhikkhus were not allowed to part with their <i>k</i>îvaras, excepting under special circumstances and for a limited time (see the Pâtimokkha, 29th nissaggiya dhamma). Conferring the character of ti<i>k</i>îvarena avippavâsa on a boundary means, we believe, to determine that it should be free to Bhikkhus residing within this boundary, to keep a set of robes wherever they liked within the same boundary (excepting in a village, § 3), and that such an act should not be considered as parting with the robes.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 256------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_256"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 256</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_256_note_1"></a><a href="#page_256_fr_1">1</a> Buddhaghosa observes that this rule applies to Bhikkhus only, and not to Bhikkhunîs. For Bhikkhunîs reside only in villages; there would be no <i>k</i>îvaraparihâra at all for Bhikkhunîs, if they were to use the kammavâ<i>k</i>â given in § 4. Buddhaghosa also observes at this occasion that the boundaries of the Bhikkhusa<i>m</i>gha and of the Bhikkhunîsa<i>m</i>gha are quite independent from each other, and that the rules given in chap. 13 do not refer to boundaries the one of which belongs to the Bhikkhusa<i>m</i>gha, the other to the Bhikkhunîsa<i>m</i>gha.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_256_note_2"></a><a href="#page_256_fr_2">2</a> As to the extent attributed to the 'gâmûpa<i>k</i>âra' (neighbourhood of the village), see the Vibha<u>n</u>ga, quoted by Minayeff, Prâtim. p. 66, l. 1.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_256_note_3"></a><a href="#page_256_fr_3">3</a> This formula is identical with that given in § 2. The only difference is that after the words 'the character of ti<i>k</i>îvarena a vippavâsa,' the words 'excepting villages and the neighbourhood of villages' are inserted.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 257------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_257"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 257</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_257_note_1"></a><a href="#page_257_fr_1">1</a> 1 abbhantara = 28 hattha (Buddhaghosa and Abhidhânappadîpikâ, v. 197). See Rh. D., 'Coins and Measures,' &amp;c., p. 15.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 258------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_258"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 258</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_258_note_1"></a><a href="#page_258_fr_1">1</a> Buddhaghosa prescribes to leave an interstice of one hattha, and he adds that the ancient Sinhalese commentaries differ as to the measure required for this interstice: the Kurundi requires one vidatthi, the Mahâpa<i>kk</i>ari four a<u>n</u>gula.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 259------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_259"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 259</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_259_note_1"></a><a href="#page_259_fr_1">1</a> For a definition of lawfulness and unlawfulness of the official functions of the Order as well as of completeness and incompleteness of the congregation by which such acts are performed, see IX, 3.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 260------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_260"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 260</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_260_note_1"></a><a href="#page_260_fr_1">1</a> The introduction (nidâna) of the Pâtimokkha is the fonnula given above, chap. 3. 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_260_note_2"></a><a href="#page_260_fr_2">2</a> 'Avasesa<i>m</i> sutena sâvetabba<i>m</i>,' i.e. it is to be proclaimed: 'The four pârâ<i>g</i>ikâ dhammâ, &amp;c., are known to the reverend brethren (literally, have been heard by the reverend brethren).'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 263------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_263"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 263</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_263_note_1"></a><a href="#page_263_fr_1">1</a> See §§ 6, 7. Read: '. . . I will answer the questions of N.N . about the Vinaya.' And, '. . . let N. N. answer the questions of N. N. about the Vinaya.'</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_263_note_2"></a><a href="#page_263_fr_2">2</a> See § 8. Read: '. . . shall (not) answer questions about the Vinaya . . .'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 266------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_266"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 266</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_266_note_1"></a><a href="#page_266_fr_1">1</a> I.e. of reciting the Pâtimokkha himself or causing another Bhikkhu to do so.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_266_note_2"></a><a href="#page_266_fr_2">2</a> I.e. Sama<i>n</i>as belonging to other schools. See chap. 1.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 268------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_268"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 268</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_268_note_1"></a><a href="#page_268_fr_1">1</a> Here rollows an exact repetition or the story told in § 3, which is given here, of course, in the present tense.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 269------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_269"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 269</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_269_note_1"></a><a href="#page_269_fr_1">1</a> This appears to be the meaning of ga<i>n</i>amaggena ga<i>n</i>etu<i>m</i>; Buddhaghosa has no note on this passage.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 273------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_273"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 273</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_273_note_1"></a><a href="#page_273_fr_1">1</a> Enumerations of terms indicating the different cases that come under a Vinaya rule or a dogmatical proposition are called mâtikâ; for instance, in discussing the first pârâ<i>g</i>ika rule the Vibha<u>n</u>ga gives the following mâtikâpadâni: tisso itthiyo manussitthi amanussitthi tira<i>kkh</i>ânagatitthi, tayo ubhatovya<i>ñg</i>anakâ manussubhatovya<i>ñg</i>anako amanussubh. tira<i>kkh</i>ânagatubh., &amp;c. Most of the works belonging to the Abhidhamma Pi<i>t</i>aka are based on and opened by such mâtikâ lists.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_273_note_2"></a><a href="#page_273_fr_2">2</a> Or 'scrupulous,' in good sense.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_273_note_3"></a><a href="#page_273_fr_3">3</a> See I, 25, 12, with our note.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 274------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_274"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 274</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_274_note_1"></a><a href="#page_274_fr_1">1</a> See III, 1 seq.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_274_note_2"></a><a href="#page_274_fr_2">2</a> See § 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_274_note_3"></a><a href="#page_274_fr_3">3</a> Pârisuddhi, literally, means purity. He declares that he is pure from the offences specified in the Pâtimokkha, and charges another Bhikkhu with proclaiming his declaration before the assembled chapter.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 275------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_275"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 275</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_275_note_1"></a><a href="#page_275_fr_1">1</a> Literally, on the spot, i.e. without setting out on his way to the assembly.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_275_note_2"></a><a href="#page_275_fr_2">2</a> We have no doubt that this is the correct translation or vibbhamati (see I, 39, 5). The difference between vibbhamati (he returns to the world) and sikkha<i>m</i> pa<i>kk</i>akkhâti (he abandons the precepts) seems to be that the former is an informal, and the latter a formal, renunciation or the Order.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_275_note_3"></a><a href="#page_275_fr_3">3</a> The precepts are abandoned (sikkhâ pa<i>kk</i>akkhitâ hoti) by declaring that one abandons the Buddha, or the Dhamma, or the Sa<i>m</i>gha, or the Vinaya, &amp;c. By such a declaration a Bhikkhu who wishes to return to a layman's life, or to go over to a Titthiya sect, gives up his character as a member of the Buddhist fraternity, The rules about the sikkhâpa<i>kk</i>akkhâna are given in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga, in the explanation of the first pârâ<i>g</i>ika rule (chap. 8, § 2).</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 276------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_276"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 276</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_276_note_1"></a><a href="#page_276_fr_1">1</a> Most probably antimavatthu refers to the pârâ<i>g</i>ika offences which require excommunication.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_276_note_2"></a><a href="#page_276_fr_2">2</a> See the story given in I, 63.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 277------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_277"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 277</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_277_note_1"></a><a href="#page_277_fr_1">1</a> The rules given here regarding the <i>kh</i>anda (declaration of consent of an absentee) that is required for the performance of official acts are word for word the same as those set out in chap. 22. 1-4, regarding the pârisuddhi required at the Uposatha service.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 278------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_278"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 278</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_278_note_1"></a><a href="#page_278_fr_1">1</a> See §§ 1, 2.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 280------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_280"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 280</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_280_note_1"></a><a href="#page_280_fr_1">1</a> The quorum for several official acts of the Order was five or more Bhikkhus; see IX, 4.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_280_note_2"></a><a href="#page_280_fr_2">2</a> Uposatha by mutual declaration of purity from the offences specified in the Pâtimokkha; see § 3 seq.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_280_note_3"></a><a href="#page_280_fr_3">3</a> The same phrase is repeated twice more.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 281------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_281"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 281</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_281_note_1"></a><a href="#page_281_fr_1">1</a> See §§ 3, 4. The <i>ñ</i>atti prescribed in the preceding case does not apply to this case.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_281_note_2"></a><a href="#page_281_fr_2">2</a> See chap. 22.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 282------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_282"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 282</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_282_note_1"></a><a href="#page_282_fr_1">1</a> See <i>K</i>ullavagga IX, 2.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 287------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_287"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 287</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_287_note_1"></a><a href="#page_287_fr_1">1</a> The decision given for the case of a smaller number of Bhikkus arriving late, is here, and invariably throughout the following exposition, identical with the decision of the case of the number of Bhikkhus being equal on the two sides.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_287_note_2"></a><a href="#page_287_fr_2">2</a> The same three cases are distinguished here as in §§ 2, 3, according as the number of Bhikkhus who are late, is greater, the same, or smaller than that of the other Bhikkhus. The first case is decided by Buddha as above; in the decision of the second and third cases, instead of let those (who have arrived late) hear the rest, read: 'let those (who have arrived late) proclaim their pârisuddhi in the presence (of the other brethren).'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 288------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_288"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 288</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_288_note_1"></a><a href="#page_288_fr_1">1</a> The three triads of §§ 5, 6, 7 agree exactly with the triad of § 4.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_288_note_2"></a><a href="#page_288_fr_2">2</a> Here follow fifteen cases which are arranged exactly as in chap. 28. Instead of 'they who have recited it, are free from guilt,' read: 'they who have recited it, have committed a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 289------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_289"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 289</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_289_note_1"></a><a href="#page_289_fr_1">1</a> The decision of these fifteen cases is the same as in chap. 29.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_289_note_2"></a><a href="#page_289_fr_2">2</a> I.e. they destroy their own welfare by their wickedness.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 290------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_290"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 290</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_290_note_1"></a><a href="#page_290_fr_1">1</a> The decisions as in chap. 29; only read instead of 'd ukka/a offence,' 'thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence' (grave sin).</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_290_note_2"></a><a href="#page_290_fr_2">2</a> Five times fifteen cases, in chaps. 28-32.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_290_note_3"></a><a href="#page_290_fr_3">3</a> Remarks like this, which indicate the rules for supplying abbreviated passages, do not belong, strictly speaking, to the text of the Vinaya itself, but form a posterior addition, as is shown also by grammatical peculiarities. In chaps. 28-32 we have seventy-five cases, or twenty-five triads; all of these triads contain the words: 'They know that there are other resident Bhikkhus absent.' By successively varying these words six times, as is indicated in chap. 33, we obtain a hundred and seventy-five triads.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 291------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_291"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 291</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_291_note_1"></a><a href="#page_291_fr_1">1</a> I.e. the assembled Bhikkhus as well as the incoming reside in the same âvâsa.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_291_note_2"></a><a href="#page_291_fr_2">2</a> 'Peyyâla' is identical in meaning and, we believe, etymologically with 'pariyâya.' See Childers s.v.; H. O.'s remarks in; Kuhn's Zeitschrift fur vergleichende Sprachforschung, vol. xxv, 324; Trenckner, Pali Miscellany, p. 66.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_291_note_3"></a><a href="#page_291_fr_3">3</a> Buddhaghosa: 'They who count the day as the fifteenth, arrive from a distant kingdom, or they have held the preceding Uposatha on the fourteenth.' It seems to follow from this remark of Buddhaghosa that after an Uposatha on the fourteenth invariably an Uposatha on the fifteenth must follow, i.e. the Uposatha may not be held on the fourteenth ad libitum, but only in the second pakkha of the short months. Compare chap. 4 and the note on chap. 1. 1.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 293------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_293"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 293</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_293_note_1"></a><a href="#page_293_fr_1">1</a> See chap. 32.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 294------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_294"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 294</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_294_note_1"></a><a href="#page_294_fr_1">1</a> I.e. with a number of Bhikkhus sufficient for holding Uposatha.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_294_note_2"></a><a href="#page_294_fr_2">2</a> See chap. 15.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 295------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_295"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 295</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_295_note_1"></a><a href="#page_295_fr_1">1</a> Probably this means a place the quality of which, whether residence or non-residence, is doubtful.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_295_note_2"></a><a href="#page_295_fr_2">2</a> Nine cases are distinguished here quite as in §§ 1-3.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 296------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_296"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 296</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_296_note_1"></a><a href="#page_296_fr_1">1</a> In the Bhikkhunîkhandhaka (<i>K</i>ullav. X, 1, 4) we are told that Buddha, when admitting women to the Order of mendicants, prescribed for them a probationary course of instruction, which should last two years, after which time they were to ask for the upasampadâ ordination. During these two years the candidates were called sikkhamâ<i>n</i>âs. Childers (Dict. s.v. sikkhati) has misunderstood the Mahâva<i>m</i>sa (p. 37), when he states that in the case of Asoka's daughter Sa<i>m</i>ghamittâ the training prescribed for the sikkhamâ<i>n</i>âs was absolved in a single day.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_296_note_2"></a><a href="#page_296_fr_2">2</a> See the note on chap. 22. 3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_296_note_3"></a><a href="#page_296_fr_3">3</a> The law alluded to most probably is the 69th Pâ<i>k</i>ittiya rule, which expressly treats only of the conduct towards Bhikkhus refusing to renounce false doctrines, but it may be extended by analogy also to the two other categories of Bhikkhus mentioned in our passage.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 297------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_297"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 297</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_297_note_1"></a><a href="#page_297_fr_1">1</a> See chap. 22.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_297_note_2"></a><a href="#page_297_fr_2">2</a> I.e. a Bhikkhu subject to the penal discipline of parivâsa, the rules of which are discussed at length in the second and third books of the <i>K</i>ullavagga.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_297_note_3"></a><a href="#page_297_fr_3">3</a> If a schism among the fraternity has been composed, the reconciled parties hold Uposatha together (X, 5, 14).</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>