<body>
 
 
 
 <p align="center"><a name="top"></a><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a>   <a href="../index.htm">Buddhism</a>   <a href="index.htm">SBE 11 Index</a>   <a href="sbe1314.htm">Previous</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 325------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_325"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 325</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h2 align="center">FOURTH KHANDHAKA.</h2>
 
 <p align="center">(THE PAVÂRA<i>N</i>Â CEREMONY AT THE END OF THE RAINY SEASON, VASSA).</p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 1======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the blessed Buddha dwelt at Sâvatthi, in the <i>G</i>etavana, the garden of Anâthapi<i>nd</i>ika. At that time a number of Bhikkhus, companions and friends of each other, entered upon Vassa in a certain district of the Kosala country. Now those Bhikkhus thought: 'What shall we do in order that we may keep Vassa well, in unity, and in concord, and without quarrel, and that we may not suffer from want of food?'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. Then those Bhikkhus thought: 'If we do not speak to or converse with each other, if he who comes back first from the village, from his alms-pilgrimage, prepares seats, gets water for washing the feet, a foot-stool, and a towel<a name="page_325_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_325_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, cleans the slop-basin and gets it ready, and puts there (water to) drink and food,--</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'And if he who comes back last from the village, from his alms-pilgrimage, eats, if there is any food left (from the dinner of the other Bhikkhus) and if he desires to do so; and if he does not desire (to eat), throws it away at a place free from grass, or pours it away into water in which no living things are; puts away the water for washing the feet, the foot-stool, and the towel<a name="page_325_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_325_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>; cleans the slop-basin and
 
 <!------------------------page 326------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_326"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 326</font></a>
 
 puts it away, puts the water and the food away, and sweeps the dining-room,--</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'And if he, who sees a water-pot, or a bowl for food, or a vessel for evacuations, empty and void, puts it (into its proper place), and if he is not able to do so single-handed, calls some one else and puts it away with their united effort<a name="page_326_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_326_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> without uttering a word on that account,--thus shall we keep Vassa well, in unity, and in concord, and without quarrel, and not suffer from want of food<a name="page_326_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_326_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>-7. And those Bhikkhus did not speak to or converse with each other. He who came back from the village from his alms-pilgrimage first, prepared seats (&amp;c., as above, § 4, down to) without uttering a word on that account.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. Now it is the custom of the Bhikkhus who have finished their Vassa residence, to go to see the Blessed One. Thus those Bhikkhus, when they had finished their Vassa residence and when the three months (of Vassa) had elapsed, set their places of rest in order, took their alms-bowls and robes, and went on their way to Sâvatthi. Wandering from place to place, they came to Sâvatthi, to the <i>G</i>etavana, the garden of Anâthapi<i>nd</i>ika, to the Blessed One; having approached the Blessed One and respectfully saluted him, they sat down near him.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>. Now it is the custom of the blessed Buddhas
 
 <!------------------------page 327------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_327"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 327</font></a>
 
 to exchange greeting with incoming Bhikkhus. And the Blessed One said to those Bhikkhus: 'Do things go well with you, O Bhikkhus? Do you get enough to support yourselves with? Have you kept Vassa well, in unity, and in concord, and without quarrel? and have you not suffered from want of food?'</p>
 
 <p>   'Things go tolerably well with us, Lord; we get enough, Lord, wherewith to support ourselves; we have kept Vassa well, in unity, in concord, and without quarrel; and have not suffered from want of food.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:10"></a><font color="GREEN">10</font>. The Tathâgatas sometimes ask about what they know; sometimes they do not ask about what they know. They understand the right time when to ask, and they understand the right time when not to ask. The Tathâgatas put questions full of sense, not void of sense; to what is void of sense the bridge is pulled down for the Tathâgatas. For two purposes the blessed Buddhas put questions to the Bhikkhus, when they intend to preach the doctrine. or when they intend to institute a rule of conduct to their disciples.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:11"></a><font color="GREEN">11</font>. And the Blessed One said to those Bhikkhus: 'In what way, O Bhikkhus, have you kept Vassa well, in unity, and in concord, and without quarrel, and not suffered from want of food?'</p>
 
 <p>   'We have entered upon Vassa, Lord, a number of Bhikkhus, companions and friends of each other. in a certain district of the Kosala country. Now, Lord, we thought: "What shall we do (&amp;c., as in § 1)?" Then we thought, Lord: "If we do not speak (&amp;c., as in §§ 2-4)." Thus, Lord, we did not speak to or converse with each other (&amp;c., down to:) without uttering a word on that account. In that
 
 <!------------------------page 328------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_328"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 328</font></a>
 
 way, Lord, we have kept Vassa well, in unity, and in concord, and without quarrel; and have not suffered from want of food.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:12"></a><font color="GREEN">12</font>. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'Indeed, O Bhikkhus, these foolish men who profess to have kept Vassa well, have kept it badly; indeed, O Bhikkhus, these foolish men who profess to have kept Vassa well, have kept it like a herd of cattle; indeed have kept it like a herd of rams; indeed have kept it like a company of indolent people. How can these foolish persons, O Bhikkhus, take upon themselves the vow of silence, as the Titthiyas do?</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:13"></a><font color="GREEN">13</font>. 'This will not do, O Bhikkhus, for converting the unconverted (&amp;c., as in Book III, chapter 14, § 3).' And when he bad rebuked them and delivered a religious discourse, he thus addressed the Bhikkhus:</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, take upon himself the vow of silence, as the Titthiyas do. He who does, I commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Bhikkhus, when they have finished their Vassa residence, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with each other<a name="page_328_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_328_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> in these three ways: by what has been seen, or by what has been heard, or by what is suspected. Hence it will result that you live in accord with each other, that you atone for the offences (you have committed), and that you keep the rules of discipline before your eyes.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1:14"></a><font color="GREEN">14</font>. 'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â in this way:</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 329------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_329"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 329</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   'Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following ñatti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. To-day is the Pavâra<i>n</i>â day. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â."</p>
 
 <p>   'Then let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting, raise his joined hands, and say: "I pronounce my Pavâra<i>n</i>â, friends, before the Sa<i>m</i>gha, by what has been seen, or by what has been heard, or by what is suspected<a name="page_329_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_329_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>; may you speak to me, Sirs, out of compassion towards me; if I see (an offence), I will atone for it. And for the second time, &amp;c. And for the third time I pronounce my Pavâra<i>n</i>â (&amp;c., down to) if I see (an offence), I will atone for it."</p>
 
 <p>   'Then let (each) younger Bhikkhu adjust his upper robe . . . . (&amp;c.)<a name="page_329_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_329_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <!--======================chapter 2======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="2:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At. that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus, while the senior Bhikkhus were crouching down and were performing their Pavâra<i>n</i>â, remained on their seats. The moderate Bhikkhus were annoyed, murmured, and became angry: 'How can the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus remain on their seats, while the senior
 
 <!------------------------page 330------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_330"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 330</font></a>
 
 Bhikkhus crouch down, and perform their Pavâra<i>n</i>â?'</p>
 
 <p>   Those Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Is it true, O Bhikkhus, that the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus, &amp;c.?'</p>
 
 <p>   'It is true, O Lord.'</p>
 
 <p>   Then the blessed Buddha rebuked them: 'How can these foolish men, O Bhikkhus, remain on their seats (&amp;c., as above)? This will not do, O Bhikkhus, for converting the unconverted (&amp;c., as in chap. 1, § 13).'</p>
 
 <p>   Having rebuked them and delivered a religious discourse, he thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, remain on his seat, while the senior Bhikkhus crouch down, and perform their Pavâra<i>n</i>â. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a. offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that all of you crouch down while Pavâra<i>n</i>â is being performed.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="2:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time a certain Bhikkhu weak from age, who waited crouching till all had finished their Pavâra<i>n</i>â, fell down fainting.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that (every Bhikkhu) crouches down the whole while till he has performed his Pavâra<i>n</i>â, and sits down on his seat when he has performed it.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <!--======================chapter 3======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'How many Pavâra<i>n</i>â (days) are there?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'There are the two following Pavâra<i>n</i>â (days),
 
 <!------------------------page 331------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_331"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 331</font></a>
 
 O Bhikkhus: the fourteenth and the fifteenth (of the half month)<a name="page_331_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_331_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>; these are the two Pavâra<i>n</i>â (days), O Bhikkhus.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'How many Pavâra<i>n</i>â services are there?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'There are the four followingPavâra<i>n</i>â services. O Bhikkhus, &amp;c.<a name="page_331_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_331_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the Bhikkhus: 'Assemble, O Bhikkhus, the Sa<i>m</i>gha will hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.' When he had spoken thus, a certain Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: 'There is a sick Bhikkhu, Lord, who is not present.'</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a sick Bhikkhu shall declare (lit. give) his Pavâra<i>n</i>â. And let him declare it, O Bhikkhus, in this way: Let that sick Bhikkhu go to some Bhikkhu, adjust his upper robe so as to cover one shoulder, sit down squatting, raise his joined hands, and say: "I declare my Pavâra<i>n</i>â, take my Pavâra<i>n</i>â, perform the Pavâra<i>n</i>â for me." If he expresses this by gesture, or by word, or by gesture and word, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â has been declared. If he does not express this by gesture, &amp;c., the Pavâra<i>n</i>â has not been declared.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="3:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>-5. 'If (the sick Bhikkhu) succeeds in doing so, well and good. If he do es not succeed, let them take that sick Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, on his bed or his chair to the assembly, &amp;c.<a name="page_331_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_331_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 332------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_332"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 332</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus. that on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â he who declares his Pavâra<i>n</i>â, is to declare also his consent<a name="page_332_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_332_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> (to acts to be performed eventually by the Order), for (both declarations) are required for the Sa<i>m</i>gha (and for the validity of its acts)<a name="page_332_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_332_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <!--======================chapter 4======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   At that time relations of a certain Bhikkhu kept him back on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â, &amp;c.<a name="page_332_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_332_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <!--======================chapter 5======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time five Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain district (or, in a certain residence of Bhikkhus) on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed the holding of Pavâra<i>n</i>â by the Sa<i>m</i>gha, and we are (only) five persons<a name="page_332_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_332_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a>. Well, how are we to hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe,O Bhikkhus, that five Bhikkhus should . hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â in a (regular) chapter<a name="page_332_fr_5"></a><a href="#page_332_note_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time four Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain
 
 <!------------------------page 333------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_333"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 333</font></a>
 
 district on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â. Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed that five Bhikkhus shall hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â in a (regular) chapter, and we, are (only) four persons. Well, how are we to hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that four Bhikkhus should hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with each other.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'And let them hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, O Bhikkhus, in this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following ñatti hefore those Bhikkhus:</p>
 
 <p>   "Hear me, Sirs. To-day is Pavâra<i>n</i>â day. If you are ready, Sirs, let us hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with each other."</p>
 
 <p>   'Then let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper rohe, &amp;c., and say to those Bhikkhus: "I pronounce my Pavâra<i>n</i>â, friends, hefore you, by what has heen seen, or by what has heen heard, or by what is suspected; may you speak to me, Sirs, out of compassion towards me; if I see (an offence), I will atone for it. And for the second time, &amp;c.; and for the third time, &amp;c."</p>
 
 <p>   'Then let each younger Bhikkhu, &amp;c.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. At that time three Bhikkhus dwelt in a certain district on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â. Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescrihed that five Bhikkhus shail hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â in a (regular) chapter, that four Bhikkhus shall hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with each other, and we are (only) three persons. Well, how are we to hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â?'</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that three Bhikkhus should hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with each other. And let them hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â (&amp;c., see §.3).'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. At that time two Bhiklthus dwelt in a certain
 
 <!------------------------page 334------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_334"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 334</font></a>
 
 district on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â. Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescrihed that five Bhikkhus, &amp;c., that four Bhikkhus, &amp;c., that three Bhikkhus, &amp;c., and we are (only) two persons. Well, how are we to hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â?'</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescrihe, O Bhikkhus, that two Bhikkhus should hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with each other.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. 'And let them hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, O Bhikkhus, in this way: Let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper rohe, &amp;c., and say to the junior Bhikkhu: "I pronounce my Pavâra<i>n</i>â, friend, &amp;c."</p>
 
 <p>   'Then let the junior Bhikkhu, &amp;c.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. At that time there dwelt a single Bhikkhu in a certain district on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â. Now this Bhikkhu thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed that five Bhikkhus, &amp;c., &amp;c., and I am only one person. Well, how am I to hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â?'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. 'In case there dwell, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â, a single Bhikkhu: Let that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, sweep the place which the Bhikkhus use to frequent,--the refectory, or hall, or place at the foot of a tree; let him (then) provide water and food, prepare seats, put a lamp there, and sit down. If other Bhikkhus come, let him hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with them; if they do not come, let him fix his mind upon the thought: "To-day is my Pavâra<i>n</i>â." If he does not fix his mind upon this thought, he commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="5:9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>. 'Now, O Bhikkhus, where five Bhikkhus dwell (together), they must not convey the Pavâra<i>n</i>â<a name="page_334_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_334_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> of one (to their assemhly) and hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â by
 
 <!------------------------page 335------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_335"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 335</font></a>
 
 four (as) in a (regular) chapter. If they do, they commit a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   'Now, O Bhikkhus, where four Bhikkhus dwell (together), they must not convey the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of one (to their assembly) and hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with each other by three. If they do, they commit a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   'Now, O Bhikkhus, where three Bhikkhus (&amp;c., as in the last clause).</p>
 
 <p>   'Now, O Bhikkhus, where two Bhikkhus dwen, one of them must not convey the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of the other one, and fix (only) his thoughts (upon the Pavâra<i>n</i>â). If he does, he commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <!--======================chapter 6======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="6:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time a certain Bhikkhu was guilty of an offence on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â. Now this Bhikkhu thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed: "Pavâra<i>n</i>â is not to be held by a Bhikkhu who is guilty of an offence<a name="page_335_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_335_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>." Now I am guilty of a an offence. What am I to do?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'In case, O Bhikkhus, a certain Bhikkhu be guilty of an offence on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â (&amp;c., as in II, 27. 1, 2, down to:) "When I shall feel no doubt, then I will atone for that offence." Having spoken thus, let him hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â. But in no case must there any hindrance arise to holding Pavâra<i>n</i>â from such a cause.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="6:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>-3. At that time a certain Bhikkhu remembered
 
 <!------------------------page 336------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_336"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 336</font></a>
 
 an offence, while Pavâra<i>n</i>â was being held (&amp;c., see II, 27. 4-8).</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the first Bhâ<i>n</i>avâra.</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <!--======================chapters 7-13======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="7"></a><a name="8"></a><a name="9"></a><a name="10"></a><a name="11"></a><a name="12"></a><a name="13"></a><font color="GREEN">7-13</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <big><b>7</b></big>. <a name="7:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time there assembled in a certain residence (or district) on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â a number of resident Bhikkhus, five or more. They did not know that there were other resident Bhikkhus absent. Intending to act according to Dhamma and Vinaya, thinking themselves to be complete while (really) incomplete, they held Pavâra<i>n</i>â. While they were holding Pavâra<i>n</i>â, other resident Bhikkhus, a greater number (than the first ones), arrived.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="7:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'In case there assemble, O Bhikkhus, in a certain residence on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â (&amp;c., as in § 1, down to) they hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â. While they are holding Pavâra<i>n</i>â, other resident Bhikkhus, a greater number, arrive. Let (all) those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â again; they who have held Pavâra<i>n</i>â, are free from guilt</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="7:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'In case there assemble, &amp;c. While they are holding Pavâra<i>n</i>â, other resident Bhikkhus, exactly the same number (as the first ones), arrive. Those who have held Pavâra<i>n</i>â, have held it correctly; let the other ones hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â; they who have held Pavâra<i>n</i>â, are free from guilt.'</p>
 
 <table align="center"><tr><td>.         .         .         .         .         .         .         .<br>.         .         .         .         .         .         .         .<br>.         .         .         .         .         .         .         .<a name="page_336_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_336_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a></td></tr></table>
 
 <p></p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 337------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_337"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 337</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 14======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="14"></a><font color="GREEN">14</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="14:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>-3. 'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before a Bhikkhunî, (&amp;c,<a name="page_337_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_337_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>)</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="14:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â by (accepting) the Pavâra<i>n</i>â declaration of a pârivâsika<a name="page_337_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_337_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, except if the assembly has not yet risen (at the time when the Pavâra<i>n</i>â is declared). And let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â on another day than the Pavâra<i>n</i>â day, except for the sake of (preserving) concord among the Sa<i>m</i>gha<a name="page_337_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_337_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <!--======================chapter 15======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="15"></a><font color="GREEN">15</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time a certain residence (of Bhikkhus) in the Kosala country was menaced on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â by savage people. The Bhikkhus were not able to perform Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the threefold formula.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 338------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_338"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 338</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to perform Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the twofold formula<a name="page_338_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_338_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <p>   The danger from savage people became still more urgent. The Bhikkhus were not able to perform Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the twofold formula.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to perform Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the onefold formula<a name="page_338_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_338_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <p>   The danger from savage people became still more urgent. The Bhikkhus were not able to perform Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the onefold formula.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I allow, O Bhikkhus, that all the Bhikkhus who have kept Vassa together, perform Pavâra<i>n</i>â (by one common declaration).'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time in a certain district on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â the greater part of the night had passed away while (lay-)people were offering gifts (to the Bhikkhus). Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'The greater part of the night has passed away while the people were offering gifts. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha performs Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the threefold formula, it will not have finished the Pavâra<i>n</i>â when day breaks. Well, what are we to do?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thingto the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â the greater part of the night has passed away while people were offering gifts (to the Bhikkhus). Now if those Bhikkhus think: "The greater part (&amp;c., down to:) when day breaks,"
 
 <!------------------------page 339------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_339"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 339</font></a>
 
 let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following ñatti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. While people were offering gifts, the greater part of the night has passed away. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha performs Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the threefold formula, it will not have finished the Pavâra<i>n</i>â when day breaks. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the twofold formula, or with the onefold formula, or by common declaration of all the Bhikkhus who have kept Vassa together."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â the greater part of the night has passed away while the Bhikkhus were in confusion: the Bhikkhus were reciting the Dhamma, those versed in the Suttantas were propounding the Suttantas, those versed in the Vinaya were discussing the Vinaya, the Dhamma preachers were talking about the Dhamma. Now if those Bhikkhus think: "The greater part of the night has passed away while the Bhikkhus were in confusion. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha performs Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the threefold formula, it will not have finished the Pavâra<i>n</i>â when day breaks," let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following ñatti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, &amp;c. The greater part of the night has passed away while the Bhikkhus were in confusion. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha performs Pavâra<i>n</i>â (&amp;c. as in § 3)"'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. At that time in a certain district in the Kosala country a great assembly of Bhikkhus had come together on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â, and there was but a small place protected from rain, and a great cloud was in the sky. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'A great assembly of Bhikkhus has come together
 
 <!------------------------page 340------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_340"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 340</font></a>
 
 here, and there is but a small place protected from rain, and a great cloud is in the sky. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha performs Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the threefold formula, it will not have finished the Pavâra<i>n</i>â when this cloud will begin to rain. Well, what are we to do?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district a great assembly of Bhikkhus has come together on the day ofPavâra<i>n</i>â, and there is but a small place protected from rain, and a great cloud is in the sky. Now if those Bhikkhus think . . . . (&amp;c., as in § 3 to the end).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="15:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â danger arises from kings, danger from robbers, danger from fire, danger from water, danger from human beings, danger from non-human beings, danger from beasts of prey, danger from creeping things, danger of life, danger against chastity. Now if those Bhikkhus think: "Here is danger for our chastity. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha performs Pavâra<i>n</i>â with the threefold formula, it will not have finished the Pavâra<i>n</i>â when this danger for chastity will arise," let a learned, competent Bhikkhu . . . .' (&amp;c., as in § 3 to the end).</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <!--======================chapter 16======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="16"></a><font color="GREEN">16</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus held Pavâra<i>n</i>â being guilty of an offence.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â who is guilty of an offence. He who does, commits a
 
 <!------------------------page 341------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_341"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 341</font></a>
 
 dukka<i>t</i>a offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you ask a Bhikkhu who holds Pavâra<i>n</i>â being guilty of an offence. for his leave<a name="page_341_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_341_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> and reprove him for that offence.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbaggiya Bhikkhus, when asked for leave, were not willing to give leave (to Bhikkhus who were going to reprove them for an offence).</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you inhibit the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of a Bhikkhu who does not give leave. And you ought to inhibit it, O Bhikkhus, in this way: Let (a Bhikkhu) say on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â, on the fourteenth or on the fifteenth day (of the half month), in presence of that person, before the assembled Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. Such and such a person is guilty of an offence; I inhibit his Pavâra<i>n</i>â; Pavâra<i>n</i>â must not be held in his presence." Thus his Pavâra<i>n</i>â is inhibited.'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>, At that time the <i>Kh</i>abbagiya Bhikkhus, who thought: 'Otherwise good Bhikkhus might inhibit our Pavâra<i>n</i>â,' themselves inhibited beforehand, without object and reason, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of pure Bhikkhus who had committed no offence, and they also inhibited the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of Bhikkhus who had already performed their Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, inhibit, without object and reason, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of pure Bhikkhus who have committed no offence. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. And further, O Bhikkhus, let no
 
 <!------------------------page 342------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_342"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 342</font></a>
 
 one inhibit the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of Bhikkhus who have already performed their Pavâra<i>n</i>â. He who does, commits a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'And thus, O Bhikkhus, (you may discern whether) the Pavâra<i>n</i>â is (duly) inhibited or not inhibited.</p>
 
 <p>   'In what cases is the Pavâra<i>n</i>â, O Bhikkhus, not inhibited? When Pavâra<i>n</i>â, O Bhikkhus, is pronounced, dedared, and finished with the threefold formula, and if (a Bhikkhu then) inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â (of another Bhikkhu), the Pavâra<i>n</i>â is not inhibited. When Pavâra<i>n</i>â, O Bhikkhus, is pronounced, declared, and finished with the twofold formula, with the onefold formula, by common declaration of all Bhikkhus who have kept Vassa together, and if (a Bhikkhu then) inhibits, (&amp;c., as before). In these cases, O Bhikkhus, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â is not inhibited.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. 'And in what cases, O Bhikkhus, is the Pavâra<i>n</i>â inhibited? When Pavâra<i>n</i>â, O Bhikkhus, is pronounced, declared, but not finished<a name="page_342_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_342_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> with the threefold formula, and if (a Bhikkhu then) inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â (of another Bhikkhu), the Pavâra<i>n</i>â is inhibited, (&amp;c.<a name="page_342_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_342_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>). In these cases, O Bhikkhus, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â is inhibited.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, one Bhikkhu, on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â, inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of another Bhikkhu: then if the other Bhikkhus know with regard to that (inhibiting) Bhikkhu: "This venerable
 
 <!------------------------page 343------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_343"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 343</font></a>
 
 brother is not of a pure conduct in his deeds, nor in his words, nor as regards his means of livelihood, he is ignorant, unlearned, unable to give explanation when he is questioned," (let them say to him): "Nay, friend, let not quarrel arise, nor strife, nor discord, nor dispute," and having thus put him to silence, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>-9. 'In case; O Bhikkhus, &amp;c.<a name="page_343_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_343_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:10"></a><font color="GREEN">10</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, one Bhikkhu on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of another Bhikkhu: then if the other Bhikkhus know with regard to that (inhibiting) Bhikkhu: "This venerable brother is of a pure conduct in his deeds and in his words and with regard to his means of livelihood, he is clever, learned, and able to give explanation when he is questioned," let them say to him: "If you inhibit, friend, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of this Bhikkhu, on what account do you inhibit it, on account of a moral transgression, or on account of a transgression against the rules of conduct or on account of heresy?"</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:11"></a><font color="GREEN">11</font>. ' If he replies: "I inhibit it on account of a moral transgression, I inhibit it on account of a transgression against the rules of conduct. I inhibit it on account of heresy," let them say to him: "Well, do you know, Sir, what a moral transgression is, what a transgression against the rules of conduct is, what heresy is?" If he replies. "I
 
 <!------------------------page 344------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_344"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 344</font></a>
 
 know, friends, what a moral transgression is, &amp;c.," let them say to him: "And what is, friend, a moral transgression, &amp;c.?"</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:12"></a><font color="GREEN">12</font>. 'If he replies: "The four pârâ<i>g</i>ika offences and the thirteen sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa offences are the moral transgressions; thulla<i>kk</i>aya offences, pâ<i>k</i>ittiya offences, pâ<i>t</i>idesanîya offences, dukka<i>t</i>a offences, and wicked language are the transgressions against the rules of conduct; false doctrine and . . . . doctrine<a name="page_344_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_344_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> are heresy," let them say to him: "If you inhibit, friend, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of this Bhikkhu, do you inhibit it on account of what you have seen, or of what you have heard, or of what you suspect?"</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:13"></a><font color="GREEN">13</font>. 'If he replies: "I inhibit it on account of what I have seen, or on account of what I have heard, or on account of what I suspect," let them say to him: "If you inhibit, friend, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of this Bhikkhu on account of what you have seen, what have you seen? What is it that you have seen? When have you seen it? Where have you seen it? Have you seen him committing a pârâ<i>g</i>ika offence? Have you seen him committing a sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa offence? Have you seen him committing a thulla<i>kk</i>a ya offence, a pâ<i>k</i>ittiya offence, a pâ<i>t</i>idesanîya offence, a dukka<i>t</i>a offence, or making himself guilty of wicked language? And where were you? And where was this Bhikkhu? And what did you do? And what did this Bhikkhu do?"</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 345------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_345"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 345</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:14"></a><font color="GREEN">14</font>. 'If he then replies: "I do not inhibit, friends, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of this Bhikkhu on account of what I have seen, but I inhibit it on account of what I have heard," let them say to him: "If you inhibit, friend, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of this Bhikkhu on account of what you have heard, what have you heard? What is it that you have heard? When have you heard it? Where have you heard it? Have you heard that he has committed a pârâ<i>g</i>ika offence, (&amp;c., down to) or that he has made himself guilty of wicked language? Have you heard it from a Bhikkhu? Have you heard it from a Bhikkhunî? Have you heard it from a sikkhamânâ, from a sâma<i>n</i>era, from a sâma<i>n</i>erî, from an upâsaka, from an upâsikâ, from kings, from royal officers, from Titthiyas, from Titthiya disciples?"</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:15"></a><font color="GREEN">15</font>. 'If he then replies: "I do not inhibit, friends, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of this Bhikkhu on account of what I have heard, but I inhibit it on account of what I suspect," let them say to him: "If you inhibit, friend, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of this Bhikkhu on account of what you suspect, what do you suspect? What is it that you suspect? When do you suspect it? Where do you suspect it? Do you suspect that he has committed a pârâ<i>g</i>ika offence, (&amp;c., down to) wicked language? Does your suspicion come from what you have heard from a Bhikkhu, (&amp;c., down to) from Titthiya disciples?"</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:16"></a><font color="GREEN">16</font>. 'If he then replies: "I do not inhibit. friends, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of this Bhikkhu on account of what I suspect; I do not know the reason why I inhibit the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of this Bhikkhu," and if that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (the other one), being questioned by intelligent fellow Bhikkhus, is not able
 
 <!------------------------page 346------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_346"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 346</font></a>
 
 to convince tbeir minds, you are right in saying that in such case the Bhikkhu who has been reproved is blameless. But if that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (the other one), being questioned by intelligent fellow Bhikkhus, is able to convince their minds, you are right in saying that in such case the Bhikkhu who has been reproved is blamable.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:17"></a><font color="GREEN">17</font>. 'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (another one), admits that be has charged him unfoundedly with a pârâ<i>g</i>ika offence, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha enter upon the sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa proceedings<a name="page_346_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_346_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> (against the accuser) and then hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (another one), admits that he has charged him unfoundedly with a sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa offence, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha treat (the accuser) according to the law<a name="page_346_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_346_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> and then hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (another one), admits that he has charged him unfoundedly with a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence, or with a pâ<i>k</i>ittiya offence, or with a pâ<i>t</i>idesanîya offence, or with a dukka<i>t</i>a offence, or with having used wicked language, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha treat (the accuser) according to the law<a name="page_346_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_346_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a> and then hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:18"></a><font color="GREEN">18</font>. 'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who has been reproved, admits that be has committed a pârâ<i>g</i>ika offence, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha expel him and then bold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   'If that Bhikkhu, &amp;c., admits that be has committed
 
 <!------------------------page 347------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_347"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 347</font></a>
 
 a sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa offence, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha enter upon the sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa proceedings (against him) and then hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   'If that Bhikkhu, &amp;c., admits that he has committed a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence, or a pâ<i>k</i>ittiya offence, . . . . (&amp;c., down to) . . . . wicked language, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha treat him according to the law and then hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:19"></a><font color="GREEN">19</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â is guilty of a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence. Some Bhikkhus believe that it is a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa offence. In that case, O Bhikkhus, let those Bhikkhus who take it for a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence, take that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, aside, treat him according to the law, go back to the Sa<i>m</i>gha, and say: "The offence, friends, which this Bhikkhu has committed, he has atoned for according to the law. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:20"></a><font color="GREEN">20</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â is guilty of a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence. Some Bhikkhus believe that it is a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a pâ<i>k</i>ittiya offence. Some Bhikkhus believe that it is a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a pâ<i>t</i>idesanîya offence; a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence; a dukka<i>t</i>a offence; a thulla<i>kk</i>aya offence, an offence by wicked language. In that case (&amp;c., as in § 19, down to the end).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:21"></a><font color="GREEN">21</font>, 22. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â is guilty of a pâ<i>k</i>ittiya offence, of a pâ<i>t</i>idesanîya offence, or a dukka<i>t</i>a offence, of an offence by wicked language. Some Bhikkhus believe
 
 <!------------------------page 348------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_348"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 348</font></a>
 
 that it is an offence by wicked language, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa offence, &amp;c. Some Bhikkhus believe that it is an offence by wicked language, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a dukka<i>t</i>a offence. In that case, O Bhikkhus, let those Bhikkhus who take it for an offence by wicked language, take that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, aside (&amp;c., see § 19).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:23"></a><font color="GREEN">23</font>. 'If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu speaks thus before the assembly on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. Here this deed is known (to me), but not the (guilty) person. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â excluding this deed," (the Bhikkhus) ought to reply: "The Blessed One, friend, has prescribed that they who hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, ought to be pure. If a deed is known, but not the (guilty) person, report it (to us) now."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:24"></a><font color="GREEN">24</font>. 'If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu speaks thus before the assembly on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. Here a person is known (to me as guilty), but not his deed. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â excluding this person," (the Bhikkhus) ought to reply: "The Blessed One, friend, has prescribed that they who hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, ought to be complete. If a person is known to you (as guilty), but not his deed, report it (to us) now."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:25"></a><font color="GREEN">25</font>. 'If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu speaks thus before the assembly on the day of Pavâra<i>n</i>â: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. Here a deed is known (to me) as well as the (guilty) person. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â excluding this deed and this person," (the
 
 <!------------------------page 349------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_349"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 349</font></a>
 
 Bhikkhus) ought to reply: "The Blessed One, friend, has prescribed that they who hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, ought to be pure as well as complete. If the deed and the (guilty) person are known to you, report it (to us) now."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="16:26"></a><font color="GREEN">26</font>. 'If, O Bhikkhus, a deed becomes known before the Pavâra<i>n</i>â, and the (guilty) person afterwards (i.e. after the Pavâra<i>n</i>â), it is right to bring it forward (then)<a name="page_349_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_349_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   'If, O Bhikkhus, the (guilty) person becomes known before the Pavâra<i>n</i>â, and his deed afterwards, it is right to bring it forward (then).</p>
 
 <p>   'If, O Bhikkhus, the deed as well as the (guilty) person becomes known before the Pavâra<i>n</i>â, and if (a Bhikkhu) raises up that matter again after the Pavâra<i>n</i>â, he makes himsef guilty of a pâ<i>k</i>ittiya offence for raising up (a matter that has been settled)<a name="page_349_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_349_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <!--======================chapter 17======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="17"></a><font color="GREEN">17</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time a number of Bhikkhus, companions and friends of each other, entered upon Vassa in a certain district of the Kosala country. In their neighbourhood other Bhikkhus, litigious, contentious, quarrelsome, disputatious persons, who used to raise questions before the Sa<i>m</i>gha, entered upon Vassa with the intention of inhibiting, on the Pavâra<i>n</i>â day, the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of those Bhikkhus when
 
 <!------------------------page 350------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_350"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 350</font></a>
 
 they should have finished their Vassa residence. Now those Bhikkhus heard: 'In our neighbourhood other Bhikkhus, &amp;c. Well, what are we to do?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a number of Bhikkhus, companions and friends of each other, enter upon Vassa in a certain district. In their neighbourhood other Bhikkhus, . . . . (&amp;c., § 1). I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that those Bhikkhus hold Uposatha twice or thrice on the fourteenth day (of the half-month)<a name="page_350_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_350_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a> in order that they may be able to hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â before those (other) Bhikkhus. If those litigious, contentious, . . . . (&amp;c., § 1) Bhikkhus approach that district, let the resident Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, quickly assemble and hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â; having held Pavâra<i>n</i>â, let them say to them: "We have held our Pavâra<i>n</i>â, friends; do you do, Sirs, as you think fit."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'If those litigious, . . . . (&amp;c., § 1) Bhikkhus come to that residence unexpectedly, let the resident Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, prepare seats (for them), get water for the washing of their feet, foot-stools, and towels<a name="page_350_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_350_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, then let them go to meet them, take their bowls and their robes, and offer them (water) to drink; having thus looked after those Bhikkhus, let them go outside the boundary and hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â; having held Pavâra<i>n</i>â, let
 
 <!------------------------page 351------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_351"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 351</font></a>
 
 them say: "We have held our Pavâra<i>n</i>â, friends, do you do, Sirs, as you think fit."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. 'If they succeed in tbis way, well and good; if they do not succeed, let a learned, competent, resident Bhikkhu proclaim the following ñatti before the resident Bhikkhus: "Let the resident Bhikkhus hear me, Sirs. If you are ready, Sirs, let us now bold Uposatha and recite the Pâtimokkha, and let us hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â on the next new-moon day." If, O Bhikkhus, the litigious, . . . . (&amp;c., § 1) Bhikkhus say to those Bhikkhus: "Well, friends, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â with us now," let them reply: "You are not masters, friends, of our Pavâra<i>n</i>â; we will not hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â now."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. 'If, O Bhikkhus, those litigious, (&amp;c., § 1) Bhikkhus stay there till that new-moon day, let a learned, competent, resident Bhikkhu, . . . .<a name="page_351_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_351_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a></p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. 'If, O Bhikkhus, those litigious, . . . . (&amp;c., § 1) Bhikkhus stay there still till that full-moon day, those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, ought to hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â all of them, no matter whether they like it or not, on the next full-moon day, on the day of the komudî <i>k</i>âtumâsinî<a name="page_351_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_351_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:7"></a><font color="GREEN">7</font>. 'If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, and a sick Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of a healthy Bhikkhu, let them say (to the inhibiting Bhikkhu): "You are sick, Sir, and the Blessed One has said that a sick person cannot endure being questioned. Wait, friend, until you have recovered;
 
 <!------------------------page 352------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_352"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 352</font></a>
 
 having recovered, you may reprove him, if you like." If they speak to him thus, and he reproves (that Bhikkhu) notwithstanding, he makes himself guilty of the pâ<i>k</i>ittiya offence of disregard<a name="page_352_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_352_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:8"></a><font color="GREEN">8</font>. 'If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, and a healthy Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of a sick Bhikkhu, let them say (to the inhibiting Bhikkhu): "This Bhikkhu is sick, friend, and the Blessed One has said that a sick person cannot endure being questioned. Wait, friend, until this Bhikkhu has recovered; when he has recovered you may reprove him, if you like." If they speak to him thus, . . . . (&amp;c., as in § 7).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:9"></a><font color="GREEN">9</font>. 'If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, and a sick Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of another sick Bhikkhu, let them say (to the inhibiting Bhikkhu): "You are sick, Sirs, and the "Blessed One has said that a sick person cannot endure being questioned. Wait, friend, until you have recovered; when he has recovered<a name="page_352_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_352_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a> you may reprove him, if you like." If they speak to him thus, . . . . (&amp;c., as in § 7).</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="17:10"></a><font color="GREEN">10</font>. 'If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, and a healthy Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of another healthy Bhikkhu, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha question and examine them both and treat them according to the law, and then hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 353------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_353"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 353</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <!--======================chapter 18======================-->
 
 <h3 align="center"><a name="18"></a><font color="GREEN">18</font>.</h3>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. At that time a number of Bhikkhus, companions and friends of each other, entered upon Vassa in a certain district of the Kosala country. These Bhikkhus, living in unity, and concord, and without quarrel, had found a comfortable place to dwell in. Now those Bhikkhus thought: 'Living in unity, &amp;c., we have found a comfortable place to dwell in. If we hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â now, (other Bhikkhus) might come on a journey, having held their Pavâra<i>n</i>â, (and might occupy this place); thus we should lose this place which is comfortable to dwell in. Well, what are we to do?'</p>
 
 <p>   They told this thing to the Blessed One.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a number of Bhikkhus, companions and friends of each other, have entered upon Vassa in a certain district. These Bhikkhus, . . . . (&amp;c., § 1).</p>
 
 <p>   'If these Bhikkhus think: "Living in unity, . . . . (&amp;c., § 1, down to:) thus we should lose this place which is comfortable to dwell in," I allow, O Bhikkhus, these Bhikkhus to agree upon pavâra<i>n</i>âsa<i>m</i>gaha<a name="page_353_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_353_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. 'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to agree upon it in this way: Let them all assemble together. When
 
 <!------------------------page 354------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_354"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 354</font></a>
 
 they have assembled, let a leamed, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following ñatti before the Sa<i>m</i>gha: "Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, reverend Sirs, hear me.</p>
 
 <p>   Living in unity, . . . . (&amp;c., § 1, down to:) thus we should lose this place which is comfortable to dwell in. If the Sa<i>m</i>gha is ready, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha agree upon pavâra<i>n</i>âsa<i>m</i>gaha; let it now hold Uposatha and recite the Pâtimokkha, and let the Sa<i>m</i>gha hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â on the next komudî <i>k</i>âtumâsinî day. This is the ñatti."</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. '"Let the Sa<i>m</i>gha, &amp;c.<a name="page_354_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_354_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>"</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:5"></a><font color="GREEN">5</font>. 'If, O Bhikkhus, after those Bhikkhus have agreed upon pavâra<i>n</i>âsa<i>m</i>gaha, a Bhikkhu should say: "I wish, friends, to go on my travels through the country; I have a business in the country," let them reply to him: "Good, friend, hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â; and go." If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, when holding Pavâra<i>n</i>â inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of another Bhikkhu, let (that other Bhikkhu) say to him: "You are not master of my Pavâra<i>n</i>â, friend; I will not hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â now."</p>
 
 <p>   'If, O Bhikkhus, when that Bhikkhu holds Pavâra<i>n</i>â, another Bhikkhu inhibits his Pavâra<i>n</i>â, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha question and examine them both and treat them according to the law.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="18:6"></a><font color="GREEN">6</font>. 'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, has finished that business in the country and comes back to that district before the clay of komudî <i>k</i>âtumâsinî, and if a Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, when the Bhikkhus hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of that Bhikkhu (who has been absent), let him say (to the
 
 <!------------------------page 355------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_355"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 355</font></a>
 
 inhibiting Bhikkhu): "You are not master of my Pavâra<i>n</i>â, friend; I have held my Pavâra<i>n</i>â."</p>
 
 <p>   'If, O Bhikkhus, when the Bhikkhus hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â, this Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavâra<i>n</i>â of another Bhikkhu, let the Sa<i>m</i>gha question and examine them both and treat them according to the law, and then hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â.'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">End of the Pavâra<i>n</i>â-Khandhaka.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 325------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_325"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 325</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_325_note_1"></a><a href="#page_325_fr_1">1</a> See the note on I, 6, 11.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 326------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_326"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 326</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_326_note_1"></a><a href="#page_326_fr_1">1</a> We are not quite sure of the meaning of the compounds hattha-vikâreha and hattha-vita<u>n</u>ghakena. Buddhaghosa says merely hatthavila<u>n</u>ghakenâ 'ti hatthukkhepakena.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_326_note_2"></a><a href="#page_326_fr_2">2</a> For this whole passage, compare <i>K</i>ullavagga VIII, 5, 3. The single actions which these Bhikkhus do, are quite correct, except that they keep silence during the whole time of Vassa, and especially at the end of it, for which time Buddha, on this occasion, prescribes the Pavâra<i>n</i>â ceremony.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 328------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_328"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 328</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_328_note_1"></a><a href="#page_328_fr_1">1</a> Literally, invite each other; i.e. every Bhikkhu present invites his companions to tell him if they believe him guilty of an offence, having seen that offence, or having heard of it, or suspecting it.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 329------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_329"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 329</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_329_note_1"></a><a href="#page_329_fr_1">1</a> I.e. I invite the Sa<i>m</i>gha to charge me with any offence they think me guilty of, which they have seen, or heard of, or which they suspect.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_329_note_2"></a><a href="#page_329_fr_2">2</a> As in the preceding sentence, except that the younger Bhikkhus do not address the Sa<i>m</i>gha,' 'Friends,' but, 'Reverend Sirs.'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 331------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_331"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 331</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_331_note_1"></a><a href="#page_331_fr_1">1</a> Comp. II, 14, 1, and the note on II, 34, 1.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_331_note_2"></a><a href="#page_331_fr_2">2</a> This passage is exactly identical with II, 14. 2. 3, replacing 'Uposatha service' by 'Pavâra<i>n</i>â service.'</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_331_note_3"></a><a href="#page_331_fr_3">3</a> This passage is a repetition of II, 22, 2-4, the words, 'Hold Uposatha,' 'Declare the Pârisuddhi,' &amp;c., being replaced respectively by 'Hold Pavâra<i>n</i>â,' 'Declare the Pavâra<i>n</i>â,' &amp;c.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 332------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_332"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 332</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_332_note_1"></a><a href="#page_332_fr_1">1</a> See II, 23.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_332_note_2"></a><a href="#page_332_fr_2">2</a> Comp. the finishing clause of II, 23.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_332_note_3"></a><a href="#page_332_fr_3">3</a> This is a repetition of II, 24, but instead of 'Uposatha' and 'Pârisuddhi' read 'Pavâra<i>n</i>â.'</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_332_note_4"></a><a href="#page_332_fr_4">4</a> As a general rule five Bhikkhus were sufficient to form the quorum; but for the performance of several among the official acts of the Order the presence of more than five members was required; see IX, 4, 1 seq.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_332_note_5"></a><a href="#page_332_fr_5">5</a> See IX, 4, 1.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 334------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_334"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 334</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_334_note_1"></a><a href="#page_334_fr_1">1</a> See chap. 3, § 3. Compare II, chap. 22, and chap. 26, § 10.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 335------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_335"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 335</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_335_note_1"></a><a href="#page_335_fr_1">1</a> See chap. 16, § 1.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 336------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_336"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 336</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_336_note_1"></a><a href="#page_336_fr_1">1</a> The following paragraphs and chapters exactly follow the course indicated by II, 28-35. The alterations to be made are obvious and sufficiently indicated by §§ 1-3; instead of, 'Let them proclaim their Pârisuddhi ' (II, 28, 4, &amp;c.), read here, 'Let them pronounce their Pavâra<i>n</i>â.'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 337------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_337"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 337</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_337_note_1"></a><a href="#page_337_fr_1">1</a> See II, 36, 1-3.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_337_note_2"></a><a href="#page_337_fr_2">2</a> Comp. II, 36, 4, with the note.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_337_note_3"></a><a href="#page_337_fr_3">3</a> See, for instance, the cases in chap. 17. Buddhaghosa's explanation is different; he says: 'Concord among the Sa<i>m</i>gha js to be understood of such cases as that of Kosambî,' It is said in the account of the schism of Kosambî that, if concord has been re-established, the reconciled parties hold Uposatha together (X, 5, 14; comp. II, 36, 4); Buddhaghosa apparently extends this to holding Pavâra<i>n</i>â also.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 338------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_338"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 338</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_338_note_1"></a><a href="#page_338_fr_1">1</a> This means apparently that the Bhikkhus were not obliged to pronounce the formula of Pavâra<i>n</i>â (chap. 1, 14) thrice, but twice or once respectively.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 341------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_341"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 341</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_341_note_1"></a><a href="#page_341_fr_1">1</a> Comp. II, 16, 1.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 342------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_342"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 342</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_342_note_1"></a><a href="#page_342_fr_1">1</a> Correct in the Pâli text pariyositâya into apariyositâya.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_342_note_2"></a><a href="#page_342_fr_2">2</a> The paragraph is repeated with the phrases, 'With the twofold formula,' 'with the onefold formula,' and 'by common declaration of all the Bhikkhus who have kept Vassa together,' respectively, instead of 'with the threefold formula.'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 343------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_343"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 343</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_343_note_1"></a><a href="#page_343_fr_1">1</a> As in § 6. But instead of 'Not of a pure conduct in his deeds, nor in his words, nor as regards his means of livelihood,' read respectively, 'Of a pure conduct in his deeds, but not in his words, nor as regards his means of livelihood' (§ 7); 'Of a pure conduct in his deeds and in his words, but not with regard to his means of livelihood' (§ 8); 'Of a pure conduct in his deeds and in his words and with regard to his means of livelihood' (§ 9).</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 344------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_344"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 344</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_344_note_1"></a><a href="#page_344_fr_1">1</a> The meaning of antaggâhikâ di<i>tth</i>i (Sanskrit ântargrahikâ d<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>i? ântagrahikâ d<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>i?) is unknown to us; Buddhaghosa gives no explanation. Perhaps it may mean doctrine partly false and partly correct (eclectic).</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 346------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_346"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 346</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_346_note_1"></a><a href="#page_346_fr_1">1</a> See the 5th Sa<i>m</i>ghâdisesa rule.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_346_note_2"></a><a href="#page_346_fr_2">2</a> See the 76th Pâ<i>k</i>ittiya rule.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_346_note_3"></a><a href="#page_346_fr_3">3</a> According to Buddhaghosa, the Bhikkhu who brings such an unfounded charge against a fellow Bhikkhu, is guilty of a dukka<i>t</i>a offence.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 349------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_349"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 349</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_349_note_1"></a><a href="#page_349_fr_1">1</a> 'Because it had not been possible to decide the matter at the Pavâra<i>n</i>â ' (Buddhaghosa).</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_349_note_2"></a><a href="#page_349_fr_2">2</a> See the 63rd Pâ<i>k</i>ittiya rule.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 350------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_350"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 350</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_350_note_1"></a><a href="#page_350_fr_1">1</a> In this way, when the inimical Bhikkhus are arriving about the time of Pavâra<i>n</i>â, the resident Bhikkhus count the day which is the thirteenth or fourteenth to the other Bhikkhus, as the fifteenth, and thus they are enabled to finish their Pavâra<i>n</i>â before they can be prevented.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_350_note_2"></a><a href="#page_350_fr_2">2</a> See I, 6, 11.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 351------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_351"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 351</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_351_note_1"></a><a href="#page_351_fr_1">1</a> As in § 4, down to the end of the paragraph; instead of, 'On the next new-moon day,' it is to be read here, 'On the next full-moon day.'</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_351_note_2"></a><a href="#page_351_fr_2">2</a> See the note on III, 14, 11.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 352------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_352"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 352</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_352_note_1"></a><a href="#page_352_fr_1">1</a> See the 54th Pâ<i>k</i>ittiya rule.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_352_note_2"></a><a href="#page_352_fr_2">2</a> Probably we should read in the Pâli text, 'ârogo âroga<i>m</i> âka<u>n</u>khamâno <i>k</i>odessasîti.' Then the translation would be: 'When you have recovered and he has recovered, &amp;c.'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 353------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_353"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 353</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_353_note_1"></a><a href="#page_353_fr_1">1</a> Literally this word means, we believe, 'Keeping back one's own Pavâra<i>n</i>â,' Buddhaghosa says: 'When the decree of pavâra<i>n</i>âsa<i>m</i>gaha has been issued, the Bhikkhus (who have issued it) ought to live as in the rainy season. Incoming Bhikkhus are not allowed to take possession of their places of rest. On the other side, they ought not to interrupt their Vassa residence.'</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 354------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_354"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 354</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_354_note_1"></a><a href="#page_354_fr_1">1</a> Here follows the usual formula of a ñattidutiya kamma as in Book ll, chap. 6. Comp. the note on Book I, chap. 28, § 3.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>