<body>
 
 
 
 <p align="center"><a name="top"></a><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a>   <a href="../index.htm">Buddhism</a>   <a href="index.htm">SBE 11 Index</a>   <a href="sbe1308.htm">Previous</a>   <a href="sbe1310.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 56------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_56"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 56</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h2 align="center">PÂ<i>T</i>IDESANIYÂ DHAMMÂ.</h2>
 
 <p align="center">RULES REGARDING MATTERS WHICH OUGHT TO BE CONFESSED.</p>
 
 <p>   Here, venerable Sirs, the four rules regarding matters which ought to be confessed come into recitation.</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="1"></a><font color="GREEN">1</font>. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when a Bhikkhunî not related to him has entered within the houses<a name="page_56_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_56_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, shall, with his own hand, accept at her hands food, either hard or soft, and eat or enjoy it--that is a matter which ought to be confessed by that Bhikkhu, saying, 'I have fallen, Brethren, into a blameworthy offence, unbecoming, which ought to be confessed; and I confess it!'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="2"></a><font color="GREEN">2</font>. Now Bhikkhus, when they have been invited to laymen's houses, eat. If the Bhikkhunî stay there giving directions, saying, 'Here give curry, give rice here!' the Bhikkhunî ought to be rebuked by those Bhikkhus, saying, 'Stand aside, Sister, as long as the Bhikkhus are eating!' If it should not occur to a single Bhikkhu to rebuke the Bhikkhunî, saying, 'Stand aside, Sister, as long as the Bhikkhus are eating!'--that is a matter that ought to be confessed by those Bhikkhus, saying, 'We have fallen, Brethren, into a blameworthy offence, unbecoming, which ought to be confessed; and we confess it!' <a name="3"></a><font color="GREEN">3</font>. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall accept, with his
 
 <!------------------------page 57------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_57"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 57</font></a>
 
 own hand, food, either hard or soft, in such households as have been (by a formal sammuti) declared to be households, under discipline<a name="page_57_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_57_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>, without having been previously invited, and without being sick, and eat it or enjoy it--that is a matter that ought to be confessed by that Bhikkhu, saying, 'I have fallen, Brethren, into a blameworthy offence, unbecoming, which ought to be confessed; and I confess it!'</p>
 
 <p>   <a name="4"></a><font color="GREEN">4</font>. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, while he is dwelling in a place belonging to the class of those forest dwellings which are held to be insecure and dangerous<a name="page_57_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_57_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, shall accept, with his own hand, at his home, food, either hard or soft, without having previously given notice (of the danger incurred by people that enter that forest), unless he is sick, and shall eat it or enjoy it--that is a matter that ought to be confessed by that Bhikkhu, saying, 'I have fallen, Brethren, into a blameworthy offence, unbecoming, which ought to be confessed; and I confess it!'</p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p align="center">Here end the Pâ<i>t</i>idesaniyas. </p>
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <hr width="33%" align="center">
 
 <p>   Venerable Sirs, the four rules regarding matters which require confession have been recited.</p>
 
 <p>   In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this matter?'</p>
 
 <p>   A second time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this matter?'</p>
 
 <p>   A third time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this matter?'</p>
 
 <p>   The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore do they keep silence. Thus I understand.</p>
 
 <p>   Here endeth the recitation or the Pâtidesaniyas.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="sbe1310.htm">Next: Pâtimokkha - Sekhiyâ Dhammâ</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 56------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_56"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 56</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_56_note_1"></a><a href="#page_56_fr_1">1</a> Antaraghara<i>m</i> pavi<i>tth</i>â; that is, during her alms-visit to the village. Compare the 3rd Sekhiya; Mahâvagga I, 23, 3; and Kullavagga VIII, 5, 2.</p>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------footnotes page 57------------------------>
 
 <a name="footnotes_page_57"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 57</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <p><a name="page_57_note_1"></a><a href="#page_57_fr_1">1</a> Sekha-sammatâni kulâni; which the Vibha<u>n</u>ga explains as a household grown rich in faith, but poor in goods; where whatever they get is given away to the Order, though the family may be some days in want of it. Compare what is said of Anâtha-pi<i>nd</i>ika in the Introduction to the 40th <i>G</i>âtaka (<i>G</i>âtaka I, 228); though his lot had not reached the very lowest limit.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_57_note_2"></a><a href="#page_57_fr_2">2</a> Compare the 29th Nissaggiya.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>