<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn017.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn019.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Since Evil is here, "haunting this world by necessary 
 law," and
 it is the Soul's design to escape from Evil, we must escape hence.
 
 </p><p>But what is this escape?
 
 </p><p>"In attaining Likeness to God," we read. And this is explained
 as "becoming just and holy, living by wisdom," the entire nature
 grounded in Virtue.
 
 </p><p>But does not Likeness by way of Virtue imply Likeness to some
 being that has Virtue? To what Divine Being, then, would our
 Likeness be? To the Being- must we not think?- in Which, above all,
 such excellence seems to inhere, that is to the Soul of the 
 Kosmos and
 to the Principle ruling within it, the Principle endowed 
 with a wisdom
 most wonderful. What could be more fitting than that we, living in
 this world, should become Like to its ruler?
 
 </p><p>But, at the beginning, we are met by the doubt whether even in
 this Divine-Being all the virtues find place- Moral-Balance
 [Sophrosyne], for example; or Fortitude where there can be no danger
 since nothing is alien; where there can be nothing alluring 
 whose lack
 could induce the desire of possession.
 
 </p><p>If, indeed, that aspiration towards the Intelligible which is in
 our nature exists also in this Ruling-Power, then need not look
 elsewhere for the source of order and of the virtues in ourselves.
 
 </p><p>But does this Power possess the Virtues?
 
 </p><p>We cannot expect to find There what are called the Civic
 Virtues, the Prudence which belongs to the reasoning faculty; the
 Fortitude which conducts the emotional and passionate nature; the
 Sophrosyne which consists in a certain pact, in a concord between
 the passionate faculty and the reason; or Rectitude which is the due
 application of all the other virtues as each in turn should 
 command or
 obey.
 
 </p><p>Is Likeness, then, attained, perhaps, not by these virtues of
 the social order but by those greater qualities known by the same
 general name? And if so do the Civic Virtues give us no help at all?
 
 </p><p>It is against reason, utterly to deny Likeness by these while
 admitting it by the greater: tradition at least recognizes 
 certain men
 of the civic excellence as divine, and we must believe that these
 too had in some sort attained Likeness: on both levels there 
 is virtue
 for us, though not the same virtue.
 
 </p><p>Now, if it be admitted that Likeness is possible, though by a
 varying use of different virtues and though the civic virtues do not
 suffice, there is no reason why we should not, by virtues peculiar
 to our state, attain Likeness to a model in which virtue has 
 no place.
 
 </p><p>But is that conceivable?
 
 </p><p>When warmth comes in to make anything warm, must there needs be
 something to warm the source of the warmth?
 
 </p><p>If a fire is to warm something else, must there be a fire to
 warm that fire?
 
 </p><p>Against the first illustration it may be retorted that the
 source of the warmth does already contain warmth, not by an infusion
 but as an essential phase of its nature, so that, if the 
 analogy is to
 hold, the argument would make Virtue something communicated to the
 Soul but an essential constituent of the Principle from 
 which the Soul
 attaining Likeness absorbs it.
 
 </p><p>Against the illustration drawn from the fire, it may be 
 urged that
 the analogy would make that Principle identical with virtue, whereas
 we hold it to be something higher.
 
 </p><p>The objection would be valid if what the soul takes in were one
 and the same with the source, but in fact virtue is one thing, the
 source of virtue quite another. The material house is not identical
 with the house conceived in the intellect, and yet stands in its
 likeness: the material house has distribution and order 
 while the pure
 idea is not constituted by any such elements; distribution, order,
 symmetry are not parts of an idea.
 
 </p><p>So with us: it is from the Supreme that we derive order and
 distribution and harmony, which are virtues in this sphere: the
 Existences There, having no need of harmony, order or distribution,
 have nothing to do with virtue; and, none the less, it is by our
 possession of virtue that we become like to Them.
 
 </p><p>Thus much to show that the principle that we attain Likeness by
 virtue in no way involves the existence of virtue in the Supreme.
 But we have not merely to make a formal demonstration: we must
 persuade as well as demonstrate.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn019.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>