<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn079.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn081.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. If this be so, how do we explain the teaching that evils can
 never pass away but "exist of necessity," that "while evil has no
 place in the divine order, it haunts mortal nature and this place
 for ever"?
 
 </p><p>Does this mean that heaven is clear of evil, ever moving its
 orderly way, spinning on the appointed path, no injustice 
 There or any
 flaw, no wrong done by any power to any other but all true to the
 settled plan, while injustice and disorder prevail on earth,
 designated as "the Mortal Kind and this Place"?
 
 </p><p>Not quite so: for the precept to "flee hence" does not refer to
 earth and earthly life. The flight we read of consists not 
 in quitting
 earth but in living our earth-life "with justice and piety in the
 light of philosophy"; it is vice we are to flee, so that clearly to
 the writer Evil is simply vice with the sequels of vice. And when
 the disputant in that dialogue says that, if men could be 
 convinced of
 the doctrine advanced, there would be an end of Evil, he is
 answered, "That can never be: Evil is of necessity, for there must
 be a contrary to good."
 
 </p><p>Still we may reasonably ask how can vice in man be a contrary to
 The Good in the Supernal: for vice is the contrary to virtue and
 virtue is not The Good but merely the good thing by which Matter is
 brought to order.
 
 </p><p>How can there any contrary to the Absolute Good, when 
 the absolute
 has no quality?
 
 </p><p>Besides, is there any universal necessity that the existence of
 one of two contraries should entail the existence of the other?
 Admit that the existence of one is often accompanied by the
 existence of the other- sickness and health, for example- 
 yet there is
 no universal compulsion.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps, however, our author did not mean that this was
 universally true; he is speaking only of The Good.
 
 </p><p>But then, if The Good is an essence, and still more, if 
 It is that
 which transcends all existence, how can It have any contrary?
 
 </p><p>That there is nothing contrary to essence is certain in the case
 of particular existences- established by practical proof- but not in
 the quite different case of the Universal.
 
 </p><p>But of what nature would this contrary be, the contrary to
 universal existence and in general to the Primals?
 
 </p><p>To essential existence would be opposed the non-existence; to
 the nature of Good, some principle and source of evil. Both 
 these will
 be sources, the one of what is good, the other of what is evil; and
 all within the domain of the one principle is opposed, as 
 contrary, to
 the entire domain of the other, and this in a contrariety 
 more violent
 than any existing between secondary things.
 
 </p><p>For these last are opposed as members of one species or of one
 genus, and, within that common ground, they participate in 
 some common
 quality.
 
 </p><p>In the case of the Primals or Universals there is such complete
 separation that what is the exact negation of one group constitutes
 the very nature of the other; we have diametric contrariety if by
 contrariety we mean the extreme of remoteness.
 
 </p><p>Now to the content of the divine order, the fixed quality, the
 measuredness and so forth- there is opposed the content of the evil
 principle, its unfixedness, measurelessness and so forth: total is
 opposed to total. The existence of the one genus is a falsity,
 primarily, essentially, a falseness: the other genus has
 Essence-Authentic: the opposition is of truth to lie; essence is
 opposed to essence.
 
 </p><p>Thus we see that it is not universally true that an Essence can
 have no contrary.
 
 </p><p>In the case of fire and water we would admit contrariety if it
 were not for their common element, the Matter, about which are
 gathered the warmth and dryness of one and the dampness and cold of
 the other: if there were only present what constitutes their
 distinct kinds, the common ground being absent, there would be, here
 also, essence contrary to essence.
 
 </p><p>In sum, things utterly sundered, having nothing in common,
 standing at the remotest poles, are opposites in nature: the
 contrariety does not depend upon quality or upon the existence of a
 distinct genus of beings, but upon the utmost difference, clash in
 content, clash in effect.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn081.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>