<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn018.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn020.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. First, then, let us examine those good qualities by which we
 hold Likeness comes, and seek to establish what is this thing which,
 as we possess it, in transcription, is virtue but as the Supreme
 possesses it, is in the nature of an exemplar or archetype and is
 not virtue.
 
 </p><p>We must first distinguish two modes of Likeness.
 
 </p><p>There is the likeness demanding an identical nature in 
 the objects
 which, further, must draw their likeness from a common principle:
 and there is the case in which B resembles A, but A is a Primal, not
 concerned about B and not said to resemble B. In this second case,
 likeness is understood in a distinct sense: we no longer look for
 identity of nature, but, on the contrary, for divergence since the
 likeness has come about by the mode of difference.
 
 </p><p>What, then, precisely is Virtue, collectively and in the
 particular? The clearer method will be to begin with the particular,
 for so the common element by which all the forms hold the 
 general name
 will readily appear.
 
 </p><p>The Civic Virtues, on which we have touched above, are a 
 principle
 or order and beauty in us as long as we remain passing our life
 here: they ennoble us by setting bound and measure to our desires
 and to our entire sensibility, and dispelling false judgement- and
 this by sheer efficacy of the better, by the very setting of the
 bounds, by the fact that the measured is lifted outside of the
 sphere of the unmeasured and lawless.
 
 </p><p>And, further, these Civic Virtues- measured and ordered 
 themselves
 and acting as a principle of measure to the Soul which is as 
 Matter to
 their forming- are like to the measure reigning in the 
 over-world, and
 they carry a trace of that Highest Good in the Supreme; for, while
 utter measurelessness is brute Matter and wholly outside of
 Likeness, any participation in Ideal-Form produces some
 corresponding degree of Likeness to the formless Being There. And
 participation goes by nearness: the Soul nearer than the body,
 therefore closer akin, participates more fully and shows a godlike
 presence, almost cheating us into the delusion that in the 
 Soul we see
 God entire.
 
 </p><p>This is the way in which men of the Civic Virtues attain 
 Likeness.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn020.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>