<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn035.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn037.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. If, then, the perfect life is within human reach, the man
 attaining it attains happiness: if not, happiness must be 
 made over to
 the gods, for the perfect life is for them alone.
 
 </p><p>But since we hold that happiness is for human beings too, we
 must consider what this perfect life is. The matter may be stated
 thus:
 
 </p><p>It has been shown elsewhere that man, when he commands not
 merely the life of sensation but also Reason and Authentic
 Intellection, has realised the perfect life.
 
 </p><p>But are we to picture this kind of life as something foreign
 imported into his nature?
 
 </p><p>No: there exists no single human being that does not either
 potentially or effectively possess this thing which we hold to
 constitute happiness.
 
 </p><p>But are we to think of man as including this form of life, the
 perfect, after the manner of a partial constituent of his entire
 nature?
 
 </p><p>We say, rather, that while in some men it is present as a mere
 portion of their total being- in those, namely, that have it
 potentially- there is, too, the man, already in possession of true
 felicity, who is this perfection realized, who has passed over into
 actual identification with it. All else is now mere clothing 
 about the
 man, not to be called part of him since it lies about him unsought,
 not his because not appropriated to himself by any act of the will.
 
 </p><p>To the man in this state, what is the Good?
 
 </p><p>He himself by what he has and is.
 
 </p><p>And the author and principle of what he is and holds is the
 Supreme, which within Itself is the Good but manifests Itself within
 the human being after this other mode.
 
 </p><p>The sign that this state has been achieved is that the man seeks
 nothing else.
 
 </p><p>What indeed could he be seeking? Certainly none of the 
 less worthy
 things; and the Best he carries always within him.
 
 </p><p>He that has such a life as this has all he needs in life.
 
 </p><p>Once the man is a Sage, the means of happiness, the way to good,
 are within, for nothing is good that lies outside him. Anything he
 desires further than this he seeks as a necessity, and not 
 for himself
 but for a subordinate, for the body bound to him, to which since it
 has life he must minister the needs of life, not needs, however, to
 the true man of this degree. He knows himself to stand above all
 such things, and what he gives to the lower he so gives as to leave
 his true life undiminished.
 
 </p><p>Adverse fortune does not shake his felicity: the life so founded
 is stable ever. Suppose death strikes at his household or at his
 friends; he knows what death is, as the victims, if they are 
 among the
 wise, know too. And if death taking from him his familiars and
 intimates does bring grief, it is not to him, not to the 
 true man, but
 to that in him which stands apart from the Supreme, to that lower
 man in whose distress he takes no part.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn037.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>