<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn041.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn043.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. Perhaps the reason this continuous activity remains
 unperceived is that it has no touch whatever with things of sense.
 No doubt action upon material things, or action dictated by 
 them, must
 proceed through the sensitive faculty which exists for that use: but
 why should there not be an immediate activity of the
 Intellectual-Principle and of the soul that attends it, the soul
 that antedates sensation or any perception? For, if Intellection and
 Authentic-Existence are identical, this "Earlier-than-perception" 
 must
 be a thing having Act.
 
 </p><p>Let us explain the conditions under which we become conscious of
 this Intellective-Act.
 
 </p><p>When the Intellect is in upward orientation that [lower part of
 it] which contains [or, corresponds to] the life of the Soul, is, so
 to speak, flung down again and becomes like the reflection resting
 on the smooth and shining surface of a mirror; in this illustration,
 when the mirror is in place the image appears but, though the mirror
 be absent or out of gear, all that would have acted and produced an
 image still exists; so in the case of the Soul; when there 
 is peace in
 that within us which is capable of reflecting the images of the
 Rational and Intellectual-Principles these images appear. Then, side
 by side with the primal knowledge of the activity of the Rational
 and the Intellectual-Principles, we have also as it were a
 sense-perception of their operation.
 
 </p><p>When, on the contrary, the mirror within is shattered 
 through some
 disturbance of the harmony of the body, Reason and the
 Intellectual-Principle act unpictured: Intellection is unattended by
 imagination.
 
 </p><p>In sum we may safely gather that while the 
 Intellective-Act may be
 attended by the Imaging Principle, it is not to be 
 confounded with it.
 
 </p><p>And even in our conscious life we can point to many noble
 activities, of mind and of hand alike, which at the time in no way
 compel our consciousness. A reader will often be quite unconscious
 when he is most intent: in a feat of courage there can be no sense
 either of the brave action or of the fact that all that is done
 conforms to the rules of courage. And so in cases beyond number.
 
 </p><p>So that it would even seem that consciousness tends to blunt the
 activities upon which it is exercised, and that in the 
 degree in which
 these pass unobserved they are purer and have more effect, more
 vitality, and that, consequently, the Sage arrived at this state has
 the truer fulness of life, life not spilled out in sensation but
 gathered closely within itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn043.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>