<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn092.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn094.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. But matters are involved here which demand specific
 investigation and cannot be treated as incidental merely to our
 present problem. We are faced with several questions: Is the
 heavenly system exposed to any such flux as would occasion 
 the need of
 some restoration corresponding to nourishment; or do its 
 members, once
 set in their due places, suffer no loss of substance, permanent by
 Kind? Does it consist of fire only, or is it mainly of fire with the
 other elements, as well, taken up and carried in the circuit by the
 dominant Principle?
 
 </p><p>Our doctrine of the immortality of the heavenly system rests on
 the firmest foundation once we have cited the sovereign agent, the
 soul, and considered, besides, the peculiar excellence of the bodily
 substance constituting the stars, a material so pure, so entirely
 the noblest, and chosen by the soul as, in all living beings, the
 determining principle appropriates to itself the choicest among
 their characteristic parts. No doubt Aristotle is right in 
 speaking of
 flame as a turmoil, fire insolently rioting; but the 
 celestial fire is
 equable, placid, docile to the purposes of the stars.
 
 </p><p>Still, the great argument remains, the Soul, moving in its
 marvellous might second only to the very loftiest Existents: 
 how could
 anything once placed within this Soul break away from it into
 non-being? No one that understands this principle, the support of
 all things, can fail to see that, sprung from God, it is a stronger
 stay than any bonds.
 
 </p><p>And is it conceivable that the Soul, valid to sustain for a
 certain space of time, could not so sustain for ever? This 
 would be to
 assume that it holds things together by violence; that there is a
 "natural course" at variance with what actually exists in the nature
 of the universe and in these exquisitely ordered beings; and that
 there is some power able to storm the established system and destroy
 its ordered coherence, some kingdom or dominion that may shatter the
 order founded by the Soul.
 
 </p><p>Further: The Kosmos has had no beginning- the impossibility has
 been shown elsewhere- and this is warrant for its continued 
 existence.
 Why should there be in the future a change that has not yet
 occurred? The elements there are not worn away like beams 
 and rafters:
 they hold sound for ever, and so the All holds sound. And even
 supposing these elements to be in ceaseless transmutation, 
 yet the All
 persists: the ground of all the change must itself be changeless.
 
 </p><p>As to any alteration of purpose in the Soul we have already
 shown the emptiness of that fancy: the administration of the
 universe entails neither labour nor loss; and, even supposing the
 possibility of annihilating all that is material, the Soul 
 would be no
 whit the better or the worse.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn094.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>