<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn067.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn069.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. But what must we do? How lies the path? How come to vision of
 the inaccessible Beauty, dwelling as if in consecrated precincts,
 apart from the common ways where all may see, even the profane?
 
 </p><p>He that has the strength, let him arise and withdraw 
 into himself,
 foregoing all that is known by the eyes, turning away for ever from
 the material beauty that once made his joy. When he perceives those
 shapes of grace that show in body, let him not pursue: he must know
 them for copies, vestiges, shadows, and hasten away towards That
 they tell of. For if anyone follow what is like a beautiful shape
 playing over water- is there not a myth telling in symbol of such a
 dupe, how he sank into the depths of the current and was 
 swept away to
 nothingness? So too, one that is held by material beauty and will
 not break free shall be precipitated, not in body but in 
 Soul, down to
 the dark depths loathed of the Intellective-Being, where, blind even
 in the Lower-World, he shall have commerce only with 
 shadows, there as
 here.
 
 </p><p>"Let us flee then to the beloved Fatherland": this is 
 the soundest
 counsel. But what is this flight? How are we to gain the 
 open sea? For
 Odysseus is surely a parable to us when he commands the flight from
 the sorceries of Circe or Calypso- not content to linger for all the
 pleasure offered to his eyes and all the delight of sense filling
 his days.
 
 </p><p>The Fatherland to us is There whence we have come, and There is
 The Father.
 
 </p><p>What then is our course, what the manner of our flight? This is
 not a journey for the feet; the feet bring us only from land to
 land; nor need you think of coach or ship to carry you away; all
 this order of things you must set aside and refuse to see: you must
 close the eyes and call instead upon another vision which is to be
 waked within you, a vision, the birth-right of all, which few turn
 to use.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn069.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>