<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn037.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn039.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. Now if happiness did indeed require freedom from pain,
 sickness, misfortune, disaster, it would be utterly denied to anyone
 confronted by such trials: but if it lies in the fruition of the
 Authentic Good, why turn away from this Term and look to means,
 imagining that to be happy a man must need a variety of 
 things none of
 which enter into happiness? If, in fact, felicity were made up by
 heaping together all that is at once desirable and necessary we must
 bid for these also. But if the Term must be one and not many; if in
 other words our quest is of a Term and not of Terms; that only can
 be elected which is ultimate and noblest, that which calls to the
 tenderest longings of the soul.
 
 </p><p>The quest and will of the Soul are not pointed directly towards
 freedom from this sphere: the reason which disciplines away our
 concern about this life has no fundamental quarrel with 
 things of this
 order; it merely resents their interference; sometimes, even, it
 must seek them; essentially all the aspiration is not so much away
 from evil as towards the Soul's own highest and noblest: this
 attained, all is won and there is rest- and this is the veritably
 willed state of life.
 
 </p><p>There can be no such thing as "willing" the acquirement of
 necessaries, if Will is to be taken in its strict sense, and not
 misapplied to the mere recognition of need.
 
 </p><p>It is certain that we shrink from the unpleasant, and such
 shrinking is assuredly not what we should have willed; to have no
 occasion for any such shrinking would be much nearer to our 
 taste; but
 the things we seek tell the story as soon as they are ours. For
 instance, health and freedom from pain; which of these has any great
 charm? As long as we possess them, we set no store upon them.
 
 </p><p>Anything which, present, has no charm and adds nothing to
 happiness, which when lacking is desired because of the 
 presence of an
 annoying opposite, may reasonably be called a necessity but not a
 Good.
 
 </p><p>Such things can never make part of our final object: our 
 Term must
 be such that though these pleasanter conditions be absent and their
 contraries present, it shall remain, still, intact.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn039.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>