<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn085.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn087.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. If the existence of Matter be denied, the necessity of this
 Principle must be demonstrated from the treatises "On Matter" where
 the question is copiously treated.
 
 </p><p>To deny Evil a place among realities is necessarily to do away
 with the Good as well, and even to deny the existence of anything
 desirable; it is to deny desire, avoidance and all intellectual act;
 for desire has Good for its object, aversion looks to Evil; all
 intellectual act, all Wisdom, deals with Good and Bad, and is itself
 one of the things that are good.
 
 </p><p>There must then be The Good- good unmixed- and the Mingled Good
 and Bad, and the Rather Bad than Good, this last ending with the
 Utterly Bad we have been seeking, just as that in which Evil
 constitutes the lesser part tends, by that lessening, towards the
 Good.
 
 </p><p>What, then, must Evil be to the Soul?
 
 </p><p>What Soul could contain Evil unless by contact with the lower
 Kind? There could be no desire, no sorrow, no rage, no fear: fear
 touches the compounded dreading its dissolution; pain and sorrow are
 the accompaniments of the dissolution; desires spring from something
 troubling the grouped being or are a provision against trouble
 threatened; all impression is the stroke of something unreasonable
 outside the Soul, accepted only because the Soul is not devoid of
 parts or phases; the Soul takes up false notions through having gone
 outside of its own truth by ceasing to be purely itself.
 
 </p><p>One desire or appetite there is which does not fall under this
 condemnation; it is the aspiration towards the 
 Intellectual-Principle:
 this demands only that the Soul dwell alone enshrined within that
 place of its choice, never lapsing towards the lower.
 
 </p><p>Evil is not alone: by virtue of the nature of Good, the power of
 Good, it is not Evil only: it appears, necessarily, bound around
 with bonds of Beauty, like some captive bound in fetters of gold;
 and beneath these it is hidden so that, while it must exist, it may
 not be seen by the gods, and that men need not always have 
 evil before
 their eyes, but that when it comes before them they may still be not
 destitute of Images of the Good and Beautiful for their Remembrance.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn087.htm">Next: NINTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>