<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn082.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn084.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. But what approach have we to the knowing of Good and Evil?
 
 </p><p>And first of the Evil of soul: Virtue, we may know by the
 Intellectual-Principle and by means of the philosophic habit; but
 Vice?
 
 </p><p>A a ruler marks off straight from crooked, so Vice is 
 known by its
 divergence from the line of Virtue.
 
 </p><p>But are we able to affirm Vice by any vision we can have 
 of it, or
 is there some other way of knowing it?
 
 </p><p>Utter viciousness, certainly not by any vision, for it is
 utterly outside of bound and measure; this thing which is nowhere
 can be seized only by abstraction; but any degree of evil falling
 short of The Absolute is knowable by the extent of that 
 falling short.
 
 </p><p>We see partial wrong; from what is before us we divine that
 which is lacking to the entire form [or Kind] thus indicated; we see
 that the completed Kind would be the Indeterminate; by this 
 process we
 are able to identify and affirm Evil. In the same way when we
 observe what we feel to be an ugly appearance in Matter- left there
 because the Reason-Principle has not become so completely the master
 as to cover over the unseemliness- we  recognise Ugliness by the
 falling-short from Ideal-Form.
 
 </p><p>But how can we identify what has never had any touch of Form?
 
 </p><p>We utterly eliminate every kind of Form; and the object in which
 there is none whatever we call Matter: if we are to see 
 Matter we must
 so completely abolish Form that we take shapelessness into our very
 selves.
 
 </p><p>In fact it is another Intellectual-Principle, not the true, this
 which ventures a vision so uncongenial.
 
 </p><p>To see darkness the eye withdraws from the light; it is striving
 to cease from seeing, therefore it abandons the light which 
 would make
 the darkness invisible; away from the light its power is rather that
 of not-seeing than of seeing and this not-seeing is its nearest
 approach to seeing Darkness. So the Intellectual-Principle, in order
 to see its contrary [Matter], must leave its own light locked up
 within itself, and as it were go forth from itself into an outside
 realm, it must ignore its native brightness and submit itself to the
 very contradition of its being.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn084.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>