<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn005.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn007.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. We may treat of the Soul as in the body- whether it be set
 above it or actually within it- since the association of the two
 constitutes the one thing called the living organism, the Animate.
 
 </p><p>Now from this relation, from the Soul using the body as an
 instrument, it does not follow that the Soul must share the body's
 experiences: a man does not himself feel all the experiences of the
 tools with which he is working.
 
 </p><p>It may be objected that the Soul must however, have
 Sense-Perception since its use of its instrument must 
 acquaint it with
 the external conditions, and such knowledge comes by way of sense.
 Thus, it will be argued, the eyes are the instrument of seeing, and
 seeing may bring distress to the soul: hence the Soul may feel
 sorrow and pain and every other affection that belongs to the body;
 and from this again will spring desire, the Soul seeking the mending
 of its instrument.
 
 </p><p>But, we ask, how, possibly, can these affections pass 
 from body to
 Soul? Body may communicate qualities or conditions to another body:
 but- body to Soul? Something happens to A; does that make it 
 happen to
 B? As long as we have agent and instrument, there are two distinct
 entities; if the Soul uses the body it is separate from it.
 
 </p><p>But apart from the philosophical separation how does 
 Soul stand to
 body?
 
 </p><p>Clearly there is a combination. And for this several modes are
 possible. There might be a complete coalescence: Soul might be
 interwoven through the body: or it might be an Ideal-Form detached
 or an Ideal-Form in governing contact like a pilot: or there might
 be part of the Soul detached and another part in contact, the
 disjoined part being the agent or user, the conjoined part ranking
 with the instrument or thing used.
 
 </p><p>In this last case it will be the double task of philosophy to
 direct this lower Soul towards the higher, the agent, and 
 except in so
 far as the conjunction is absolutely necessary, to sever the agent
 from the instrument, the body, so that it need not forever have its
 Act upon or through this inferior.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn007.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>