<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn033.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn035.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Those that deny the happy life to the plants on the 
 ground that
 they lack sensation are really denying it to all living things.
 
 </p><p>By sensation can be meant only perception of state, and the
 state of well-being must be Good in itself quite apart from the
 perception: to be a part of the natural plan is good whether 
 knowingly
 or without knowledge: there is good in the appropriate state even
 though there be no recognition of its fitness or desirable quality-
 for it must be in itself desirable.
 
 </p><p>This Good exists, then; is present: that in which it is present
 has well-being without more ado: what need then to ask for sensation
 into the bargain?
 
 </p><p>Perhaps, however, the theory is that the good of any state
 consists not in the condition itself but in the knowledge and
 perception of it.
 
 </p><p>But at this rate the Good is nothing but the mere sensation, the
 bare activity of the sentient life. And so it will be 
 possessed by all
 that feel, no matter what. Perhaps it will be said that two
 constituents are needed to make up the Good, that there must be both
 feeling and a given state felt: but how can it be maintained that
 the bringing together of two neutrals can produce the Good?
 
 </p><p>They will explain, possibly, that the state must be a state of
 Good and that such a condition constitutes well-being on the
 discernment of that present good; but then they invite the question
 whether the well-being comes by discerning the presence of the Good
 that is there, or whether there must further be the double 
 recognition
 that the state is agreeable and that the agreeable state constitutes
 the Good.
 
 </p><p>If well-being demands this recognition, it depends no longer
 upon sensation but upon another, a higher faculty; and well-being is
 vested not in a faculty receptive of pleasure but in one competent
 to discern that pleasure is the Good.
 
 </p><p>Then the cause of the well-being is no longer pleasure but the
 faculty competent to pronounce as to pleasure's value. Now a judging
 entity is nobler than one that merely accepts a state: it is a
 principle of Reason or of Intellection: pleasure is a state: the
 reasonless can never be closer to the Good than reason is. How can
 reason abdicate and declare nearer to good than itself 
 something lying
 in a contrary order?
 
 </p><p>No: those denying the good of life to the vegetable world, and
 those that make it consist in some precise quality of sensation, are
 in reality seeking a loftier well-being than they are aware of, and
 setting their highest in a more luminous phase of life.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps, then, those are in the right who found happiness not on
 the bare living or even on sensitive life but on the life of Reason?
 
 </p><p>But they must tell us it should be thus restricted and why
 precisely they make Reason an essential to the happiness in a living
 being:
 
 </p><p>"When you insist on Reason, is it because Reason is resourceful,
 swift to discern and compass the primal needs of nature; or would
 you demand it, even though it were powerless in that domain?"
 
 </p><p>If you call it in as a provider, then the reasonless, 
 equally with
 the reasoning, may possess happiness after their kind, as long as,
 without any thought of theirs, nature supplies their wants: Reason
 becomes a servant; there is no longer any worth in it for itself and
 no worth in that consummation of reason which, we hold, is virtue.
 
 </p><p>If you say that reason is to be cherished for its own 
 sake and not
 as supplying these human needs, you must tell us what other services
 it renders, what is its proper nature and what makes it the perfect
 thing it is.
 
 </p><p>For, on this admission, its perfection cannot reside in any such
 planning and providing: its perfection will be something quite
 different, something of quite another class: Reason cannot be itself
 one of those first needs of nature; it cannot even be a 
 cause of those
 first needs of nature or at all belong to that order: it must be
 nobler than any and all of such things: otherwise it is not easy to
 see how we can be asked to rate it so highly.
 
 </p><p>Until these people light upon some nobler principle than any at
 which they still halt, they must be left where they are and 
 where they
 choose to be, never understanding what the Good of Life is to those
 that can make it theirs, never knowing to what kind of beings it is
 accessible.
 
 </p><p>What then is happiness? Let us try basing it upon Life.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn035.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>