<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn084.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn086.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. It may be suggested that Vice is feebleness in the Soul.
 
 </p><p>We shall be reminded that the Vicious Soul is unstable, swept
 along from every ill to every other, quickly stirred by appetites,
 headlong to anger, as hasty to compromises, yielding at once to
 obscure imaginations, as weak, in fact, as the weakest thing made by
 man or nature, blown about by every breeze, burned away by 
 every heat.
 
 </p><p>Still the question must be faced what constitutes this 
 weakness in
 the Soul, whence it comes.
 
 </p><p>For weakness in the body is not like that in the Soul: the word
 weakness, which covers the incapacity for work and the lack of
 resistance in the body, is applied to the Soul merely by analogy-
 unless, indeed, in the one case as in the other, the cause of the
 weakness is Matter.
 
 </p><p>But we must go more thoroughly into the source of this weakness,
 as we call it, in the Soul, which is certainly not made weak as the
 result of any density or rarity, or by any thickening or thinning or
 anything like a disease, like a fever.
 
 </p><p>Now this weakness must be seated either in Souls utterly
 disengaged or in Souls bound to Matter or in both.
 
 </p><p>It cannot exist in those apart from Matter, for all 
 these are pure
 and, as we read, winged and perfect and unimpeded in their 
 task: there
 remains only that the weakness be in the fallen Souls, neither
 cleansed nor clean; and in them the weakness will be, not in any
 privation but in some hostile presence, like that of phlegm 
 or bile in
 the organs of the body.
 
 </p><p>If we form an acute and accurate notion of the cause of the fall
 we shall understand the weakness that comes by it.
 
 </p><p>Matter exists; Soul exists; and they occupy, so to speak, one
 place. There is not one place for Matter and another for
 Soul-Matter, for instance, kept to earth, Soul in the air: the
 soul's "separate place" is simply its not being in Matter; that is,
 its not being united with it; that is that there be no compound unit
 consisting of Soul and Matter; that is that Soul be not moulded in
 Matter as in a matrix; this is the Soul's apartness.
 
 </p><p>But the faculties of the Soul are many, and it has its
 beginning, its intermediate phases, its final fringe. Matter
 appears, importunes, raises disorders, seeks to force its way
 within; but all the ground is holy, nothing there without part in
 Soul. Matter therefore submits, and takes light: but the 
 source of its
 illumination it cannot attain to, for the Soul cannot lift up this
 foreign thing close by, since the evil of it makes it invisible. On
 the contrary the illumination, the light streaming from the Soul, is
 dulled, is weakened, as it mixes with Matter which offers 
 Birth to the
 Soul, providing the means by which it enters into generation,
 impossible to it if no recipient were at hand.
 
 </p><p>This is the fall of the Soul, this entry into Matter: thence its
 weakness: not all the faculties of its being retain free play, for
 Matter hinders their manifestation; it encroaches upon the Soul's
 territory and, as it were, crushes the Soul back; and it 
 turns to evil
 all that it has stolen, until the Soul finds strength to advance
 again.
 
 </p><p>Thus the cause, at once, of the weakness of Soul and of all its
 evil is Matter.
 
 </p><p>The evil of Matter precedes the weakness, the vice; it is Primal
 Evil. Even though the Soul itself submits to Matter and engenders to
 it; if it becomes evil within itself by its commerce with Matter,
 the cause is still the presence of Matter: the Soul would never have
 approached Matter but that the presence of Matter is the occasion of
 its earth-life.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn086.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>