<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn006.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn008.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. Let us consider, then, the hypothesis of a coalescence.
 
 </p><p>Now if there is a coalescence, the lower is ennobled, the nobler
 degraded; the body is raised in the scale of being as made 
 participant
 in life; the Soul, as associated with death and unreason, is brought
 lower. How can a lessening of the life-quality produce an increase
 such as Sense-Perception?
 
 </p><p>No: the body has acquired life, it is the body that will
 acquire, with life, sensation and the affections coming by
 sensation. Desire, then, will belong to the body, as the objects of
 desire are to be enjoyed by the body. And fear, too, will belong to
 the body alone; for it is the body's doom to fail of its joys and to
 perish.
 
 </p><p>Then again we should have to examine how such a coalescence
 could be conceived: we might find it impossible: perhaps all this is
 like announcing the coalescence of things utterly 
 incongruous in kind,
 let us say of a line and whiteness.
 
 </p><p>Next for the suggestion that the Soul is interwoven through the
 body: such a relation would not give woof and warp community of
 sensation: the interwoven element might very well suffer no change:
 the permeating soul might remain entirely untouched by what affects
 the body- as light goes always free of all it floods- and 
 all the more
 so, since, precisely, we are asked to consider it as diffused
 throughout the entire frame.
 
 </p><p>Under such an interweaving, then, the Soul would not be
 subjected to the body's affections and experiences: it would be
 present rather as Ideal-Form in Matter.
 
 </p><p>Let us then suppose Soul to be in body as Ideal-Form in Matter.
 Now if- the first possibility- the Soul is an essence, a
 self-existent, it can be present only as separable form and will
 therefore all the more decidedly be the Using-Principle [and 
 therefore
 unaffected].
 
 </p><p>Suppose, next, the Soul to be present like axe-form on 
 iron: here,
 no doubt, the form is all important but it is still the axe, the
 complement of iron and form, that effects whatever is effected by
 the iron thus modified: on this analogy, therefore, we are even more
 strictly compelled to assign all the experiences of the 
 combination to
 the body: their natural seat is the material member, the instrument,
 the potential recipient of life.
 
 </p><p>Compare the passage where we read* that "it is absurd to suppose
 that the Soul weaves"; equally absurd to think of it as desiring,
 grieving. All this is rather in the province of something 
 which we may
 call the Animate.
 
 
 </p><p>* "We read" translates "he says" of the text, and always 
 indicates
 a reference to Plato, whose name does not appear in the translation
 except where it was written by Plotinus. S.M.
 
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn008.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>