<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn039.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn041.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. As for violent personal sufferings, he will carry them off as
 well as he can; if they overpass his endurance they will carry him
 off.
 
 </p><p>And so in all his pain he asks no pity: there is always the
 radiance in the inner soul of the man, untroubled like the light in
 a lantern when fierce gusts beat about it in a wild turmoil of wind
 and tempest.
 
 </p><p>But what if he be put beyond himself? What if pain grow 
 so intense
 and so torture him that the agony all but kills? Well, when he is
 put to torture he will plan what is to be done: he retains 
 his freedom
 of action.
 
 </p><p>Besides we must remember that the Sage sees things very
 differently from the average man; neither ordinary experiences nor
 pains and sorrows, whether touching himself or others, pierce to the
 inner hold. To allow them any such passage would be a weakness in
 our soul.
 
 </p><p>And it is a sign of weakness, too, if we should think it gain
 not to hear of miseries, gain to die before they come: this is not
 concern for others' welfare but for our own peace of mind. 
 Here we see
 our imperfection: we must not indulge it, we must put it from us and
 cease to tremble over what perhaps may be.
 
 </p><p>Anyone that says that it is in human nature to grieve over
 misfortune to our household must learn that this is not so with all,
 and that, precisely, it is virtue's use to raise the general level
 of nature towards the better and finer, above the mass of 
 men. And the
 finer is to set at nought what terrifies the common mind.
 
 </p><p>We cannot be indolent: this is an arena for the powerful 
 combatant
 holding his ground against the blows of fortune, and knowing that,
 sore though they be to some natures, they are little to his, nothing
 dreadful, nursery terrors.
 
 </p><p>So, the Sage would have desired misfortune?
 
 </p><p>It is precisely to meet the undesired when it appears that he
 has the virtue which gives him, to confront it, his passionless and
 unshakeable soul.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn041.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>