<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn089.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn091.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. We hold that the ordered universe, in its material mass, has
 existed for ever and will for ever endure: but simply to refer this
 perdurance to the Will of God, however true an explanation, 
 is utterly
 inadequate.
 
 </p><p>The elements of this sphere change; the living beings of earth
 pass away; only the Ideal-form [the species] persists: possibly a
 similar process obtains in the All.
 
 </p><p>The Will of God is able to cope with the ceaseless flux 
 and escape
 of body stuff by ceaselessly reintroducing the known forms in new
 substances, thus ensuring perpetuity not to the particular 
 item but to
 the unity of idea: now, seeing that objects of this realm possess no
 more than duration of form, why should celestial objects, and the
 celestial system itself, be distinguished by duration of the
 particular entity?
 
 </p><p>Let us suppose this persistence to be the result of the
 all-inclusiveness of the celestial and universal- with its
 consequence, the absence of any outlying matter into which change
 could take place or which could break in and destroy.
 
 </p><p>This explanation would, no doubt, safeguard the integrity of the
 Whole, of the All; but our sun and the individual being of the other
 heavenly bodies would not on these terms be secured in perpetuity:
 they are parts; no one of them is in itself the whole, the all; it
 would still be probable that theirs is no more than that duration in
 form which belongs to fire and such entities.
 
 </p><p>This would apply even to the entire ordered universe itself. For
 it is very possible that this too, though not in process of
 destruction from outside, might have only formal duration; its parts
 may be so wearing each other down as to keep it in a continuous
 decay while, amid the ceaseless flux of the Kind constituting its
 base, an outside power ceaselessly restores the form: in this way
 the living All may lie under the same conditions as man and horse
 and the rest man and horse persisting but not the individual of the
 type.
 
 </p><p>With this, we would have no longer the distinction of one order,
 the heavenly system, stable for ever, and another, the earthly, in
 process of decay: all would be alike except in the point of time;
 the celestial would merely be longer lasting. If, then, we accepted
 this duration of type alone as a true account of the All equally
 with its partial members, our difficulties would be eased- or indeed
 we should have no further problem- once the Will of God were shown
 to be capable, under these conditions and by such communication, of
 sustaining the Universe.
 
 </p><p>But if we are obliged to allow individual persistence to any
 definite entity within the Kosmos then, firstly, we must 
 show that the
 Divine Will is adequate to make it so; secondly, we have to face the
 question, What accounts for some things having individual
 persistence and others only the persistence of type? and, thirdly,
 we ask how the partial entities of the celestial system hold a real
 duration which would thus appear possible to all partial things.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn091.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>