<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn054.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn056.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. Well, but take the unhappy man: must not increase of 
 time bring
 an increase of his unhappiness? Do not all troubles- long-lasting
 pains, sorrows, and everything of that type- yield a greater sum of
 misery in the longer time? And if thus in misery the evil is 
 augmented
 by time why should not time equally augment happiness when all is
 well?
 
 </p><p>In the matter of sorrows and pains there is, no doubt, ground
 for saying that time brings increase: for example, in a lingering
 malady the evil hardens into a state, and as time goes on the body
 is brought lower and lower. But if the constitution did not
 deteriorate, if the mischief grew no worse, then, here too, there
 would be no trouble but that of the present moment: we 
 cannot tell the
 past into the tale of unhappiness except in the sense that 
 it has gone
 to make up an actually existing state- in the sense that, the evil
 in the sufferer's condition having been extended over a longer time,
 the mischief has gained ground. The increase of ill-being then is
 due to the aggravation of the malady not to the extension of time.
 
 </p><p>It may be pointed out also that this greater length of 
 time is not
 a thing existent at any given moment; and surely a "more" is 
 not to be
 made out by adding to something actually present something that has
 passed away.
 
 </p><p>No: true happiness is not vague and fluid: it is an unchanging
 state.
 
 </p><p>If there is in this matter any increase besides that of 
 mere time,
 it is in the sense that a greater happiness is the reward of a
 higher virtue: this is not counting up to the credit of happiness
 the years of its continuance; it is simply noting the high-water
 mark once for all attained.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn056.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>