<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn068.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn070.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. And this inner vision, what is its operation?
 
 </p><p>Newly awakened it is all too feeble to bear the ultimate
 splendour. Therefore the Soul must be trained- to the habit of
 remarking, first, all noble pursuits, then the works of beauty
 produced not by the labour of the arts but by the virtue of men
 known for their goodness: lastly, you must search the souls of those
 that have shaped these beautiful forms.
 
 </p><p>But how are you to see into a virtuous soul and know its
 loveliness?
 
 </p><p>Withdraw into yourself and look. And if you do not find yourself
 beautiful yet, act as does the creator of a statue that is to be
 made beautiful: he cuts away here, he smoothes there, he makes this
 line lighter, this other purer, until a lovely face has 
 grown upon his
 work. So do you also: cut away all that is excessive, straighten all
 that is crooked, bring light to all that is overcast, labour to make
 all one glow of beauty and never cease chiselling your statue, until
 there shall shine out on you from it the godlike splendour of
 virtue, until you shall see the perfect goodness surely 
 established in
 the stainless shrine.
 
 </p><p>When you know that you have become this perfect work, 
 when you are
 self-gathered in the purity of your being, nothing now remaining
 that can shatter that inner unity, nothing from without clinging to
 the authentic man, when you find yourself wholly true to your
 essential nature, wholly that only veritable Light which is not
 measured by space, not narrowed to any circumscribed form nor again
 diffused as a thing void of term, but ever unmeasurable as something
 greater than all measure and more than all quantity- when 
 you perceive
 that you have grown to this, you are now become very vision: now
 call up all your confidence, strike forward yet a step- you need a
 guide no longer- strain, and see.
 
 </p><p>This is the only eye that sees the mighty Beauty. If the eye
 that adventures the vision be dimmed by vice, impure, or weak, and
 unable in its cowardly blenching to see the uttermost 
 brightness, then
 it sees nothing even though another point to what lies plain to
 sight before it. To any vision must be brought an eye adapted to
 what is to be seen, and having some likeness to it. Never did eye
 see the sun unless it had first become sunlike, and never 
 can the soul
 have vision of the First Beauty unless itself be beautiful.
 
 </p><p>Therefore, first let each become godlike and each beautiful who
 cares to see God and Beauty. So, mounting, the Soul will 
 come first to
 the Intellectual-Principle and survey all the beautiful Ideas in the
 Supreme and will avow that this is Beauty, that the Ideas are
 Beauty. For by their efficacy comes all Beauty else, but the 
 offspring
 and essence of the Intellectual-Being. What is beyond the
 Intellectual-Principle we affirm to be the nature of Good radiating
 Beauty before it. So that, treating the Intellectual-Kosmos as one,
 the first is the Beautiful: if we make distinction there, 
 the Realm of
 Ideas constitutes the Beauty of the Intellectual Sphere; and 
 The Good,
 which lies beyond, is the Fountain at once and Principle of Beauty:
 the Primal Good and the Primal Beauty have the one 
 dwelling-place and,
 thus, always, Beauty's seat is There.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn070.htm">Next: SEVENTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>