<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn081.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn083.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. But there will still be some to deny that it is through this
 Matter that we ourselves become evil.
 
 </p><p>They will say that neither ignorance nor wicked desires arise in
 Matter. Even if they admit that the unhappy condition within 
 us is due
 to the  pravity inherent in body, they will urge that still the
 blame lies not in the Matter itself but with the Form present in it-
 such Form as heat, cold, bitterness, saltness and all other 
 conditions
 perceptible to sense, or again such states as being full or void-
 not in the concrete signification but in the presence or absence of
 just such forms. In a word, they will argue, all particularity in
 desires and even in perverted judgements upon things, can be
 referred to such causes, so that Evil lies in this Form much 
 more than
 in the mere Matter.
 
 </p><p>Yet, even with all this, they can be compelled to admit that
 Matter is the Evil.
 
 </p><p>For, the quality [form] that has entered into Matter does not
 act as an entity apart from the Matter, any more than axe-shape will
 cut apart from iron. Further, Forms lodged in Matter are not the
 same as they would be if they remained within themselves; they are
 Reason-Principles Materialized, they are corrupted in the 
 Matter, they
 have absorbed its nature: essential fire does not burn, nor do any
 of the essential entities effect, of themselves alone, the operation
 which, once they have entered into Matter, is traced to their action.
 
 </p><p>Matter becomes mistress of what is manifested through it: it
 corrupts and destroys the incomer, it substitutes its own opposite
 character and kind, not in the sense of opposing, for example,
 concrete cold to concrete warmth, but by setting its own
 formlessness against the Form of heat, shapelessness to shape,
 excess and defect to the duly ordered. Thus, in sum, what enters
 into Matter ceases to belong to itself, comes to belong to Matter,
 just as, in the nourishment of living beings, what is taken in does
 not remain as it came, but is turned into, say, dog's blood and all
 that goes to make a dog, becomes, in fact, any of the humours of any
 recipient.
 
 </p><p>No, if body is the cause of Evil, then there is no escape; the
 cause of Evil is Matter.
 
 </p><p>Still, it will be urged, the incoming Idea should have been able
 to conquer the Matter.
 
 </p><p>The difficulty is that Matter's master cannot remain pure itself
 except by avoidance of Matter.
 
 </p><p>Besides, the constitution determines both the desires and their
 violence so that there are bodies in which the incoming idea cannot
 hold sway: there is a vicious constitution which chills and clogs
 the activity and inhibits choice; a contrary bodily habit produces
 frivolity, lack of balance. The same fact is indicated by our
 successive variations of mood: in times of stress, we are 
 not the same
 either in desires or in ideas- as when we are at peace, and we
 differ again with every several object that brings us satisfaction.
 
 </p><p>To resume: the Measureless is evil primarily; whatever, either
 by resemblance or participation, exists in the state of unmeasure,
 is evil secondarily, by force of its dealing with the Primal-
 primarily, the darkness; secondarily, the darkened. Now, Vice, being
 an ignorance and a lack of measure in the Soul, is secondarily evil,
 not the Essential Evil, just as Virtue is not the Primal Good but is
 Likeness to The Good, or participation in it.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn083.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>