<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn021.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn023.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. So we come to the scope of the purification: that understood,
 the nature of Likeness becomes clear. Likeness to what Principle?
 Identity with what God?
 
 </p><p>The question is substantially this: how far does purification
 dispel the two orders of passion- anger, desire and the like, with
 grief and its kin- and in what degree the disengagement from the
 body is possible.
 
 </p><p>Disengagement means simply that the soul withdraws to its own
 place.
 
 </p><p>It will hold itself above all passions and affections. Necessary
 pleasures and all the activity of the senses it will employ only for
 medicament and assuagement lest its work be impeded. Pain it may
 combat, but, failing the cure, it will bear meekly and ease it by
 refusing assent to it. All passionate action it will check: the
 suppression will be complete if that be possible, but at worst the
 Soul will never itself take fire but will keep the involuntary and
 uncontrolled outside its precincts and rare and weak at 
 that. The Soul
 has nothing to dread, though no doubt the involuntary has some power
 here too: fear therefore must cease, except so far as it is purely
 monitory. What desire there may be can never be for the 
 vile; even the
 food and drink necessary for restoration will lie outside of the
 Soul's attention, and not less the sexual appetite: or if such
 desire there must be, it will turn upon the actual needs of 
 the nature
 and be entirely under control; or if any uncontrolled motion takes
 place, it will reach no further than the imagination, be no more
 than a fleeting fancy.
 
 </p><p>The Soul itself will be inviolately free and will be working to
 set the irrational part of the nature above all attack, or 
 if that may
 not be, then at least to preserve it from violent assault, 
 so that any
 wound it takes may be slight and be healed at once by virtue of the
 Soul's presence, just as a man living next door to a Sage 
 would profit
 by the neighbourhood, either in becoming wise and good 
 himself or, for
 sheer shame, never venturing any act which the nobler mind would
 disapprove.
 
 </p><p>There will be no battling in the Soul: the mere intervention of
 Reason is enough: the lower nature will stand in such awe of Reason
 that for any slightest movement it has made it will grieve, and
 censure its own weakness, in not having kept low and still in the
 presence of its lord.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn023.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>