<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn045.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn047.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. For man, and especially the Sage, is not the Couplement of
 soul and body: the proof is that man can be disengaged from the body
 and disdain its nominal goods.
 
 </p><p>It would be absurd to think that happiness begins and ends with
 the living-body: happiness is the possession of the good of life: it
 is centred therefore in Soul, is an Act of the Soul- and not of all
 the Soul at that: for it certainly is not characteristic of the
 vegetative soul, the soul of growth; that would at once connect it
 with the body.
 
 </p><p>A powerful frame, a healthy constitution, even a happy balance
 of temperament, these surely do not make felicity; in the excess of
 these advantages there is, even, the danger that the man be crushed
 down and forced more and more within their power. There must 
 be a sort
 of counter-pressure in the other direction, towards the noblest: the
 body must be lessened, reduced, that the veritable man may 
 show forth,
 the man behind the appearances.
 
 </p><p>Let the earth-bound man be handsome and powerful and rich, and
 so apt to this world that he may rule the entire human race: still
 there can be no envying him, the fool of such lures. Perhaps such
 splendours could not, from the beginning even, have gathered to the
 Sage; but if it should happen so, he of his own action will lower
 his state, if he has any care for his true life; the tyranny of the
 body he will work down or wear away by inattention to its claims;
 the rulership he will lay aside. While he will safeguard his bodily
 health, he will not wish to be wholly untried in sickness, still
 less never to feel pain: if such troubles should not come to him of
 themselves, he will wish to know them, during youth at least: in old
 age, it is true, he will desire neither pains nor pleasures to
 hamper him; he will desire nothing of this world, pleasant 
 or painful;
 his one desire will be to know nothing of the body. If he should
 meet with pain he will pit against it the powers he holds to meet
 it; but pleasure and health and ease of life will not mean any
 increase of happiness to him nor will their contraries destroy or
 lessen it.
 
 </p><p>When in the one subject, a positive can add nothing, how can the
 negative take away?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn047.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>