<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn008.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn010.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. It may seem reasonable to lay down as a law that when any
 powers are contained by a recipient, every action or state
 expressive of them must be the action or state of that 
 recipient, they
 themselves remaining unaffected as merely furnishing efficiency.
 
 </p><p>But if this were so, then, since the Animate is the recipient of
 the Causing-Principle [i.e., the Soul] which brings life to the
 Couplement, this Cause must itself remain unaffected, all the
 experiences and expressive activities of the life being vested in
 the recipient, the Animate.
 
 </p><p>But this would mean that life itself belongs not to the Soul but
 to the Couplement; or at least the life of the Couplement 
 would not be
 the life of the Soul; Sense-Perception would belong not to the
 Sensitive-Faculty but to the container of the faculty.
 
 </p><p>But if sensation is a movement traversing the body and 
 culminating
 in Soul, how the soul lack sensation? The very presence of the
 Sensitive-Faculty must assure sensation to the Soul.
 
 </p><p>Once again, where is Sense-Perception seated?
 
 </p><p>In the Couplement.
 
 </p><p>Yet how can the Couplement have sensation independently of
 action in the Sensitive-Faculty, the Soul left out of count and the
 Soul-Faculty?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn010.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>