<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn029.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn031.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. But whence does this science derive its own initial laws?
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle furnishes standards, the most certain
 for any soul that is able to apply them. What else is necessary,
 Dialectic puts together for itself, combining and dividing, until it
 has reached perfect Intellection. "For," we read, "it is the purest
 [perfection] of Intellection and Contemplative-Wisdom." And, 
 being the
 noblest method and science that exists it must needs deal with
 Authentic-Existence, The Highest there is: as 
 Contemplative-Wisdom [or
 true-knowing] it deals with Being, as Intellection with what
 transcends Being.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is Philosophy?
 
 </p><p>Philosophy is the supremely precious.
 
 </p><p>Is Dialectic, then, the same as Philosophy?
 
 </p><p>It is the precious part of Philosophy. We must not think of it
 as the mere tool of the metaphysician: Dialectic does not consist of
 bare theories and rules: it deals with verities; Existences 
 are, as it
 were, Matter to it, or at least it proceeds methodically towards
 Existences, and possesses itself, at the one step, of the notions
 and of the realities.
 
 </p><p>Untruth and sophism it knows, not directly, not of its 
 own nature,
 but merely as something produced outside itself, something which it
 recognises to be foreign to the verities laid up in itself; in the
 falsity presented to it, it perceives a clash with its own canon of
 truth. Dialectic, that is to say, has no knowledge of propositions-
 collections of words- but it knows the truth, and, in that
 knowledge, knows what the schools call their propositions: it knows
 above all, the operation of the soul, and, by virtue of this
 knowing, it knows, too, what is affirmed and what is denied, whether
 the denial is of what was asserted or of something else, and whether
 propositions agree or differ; all that is submitted to it, it
 attacks with the directness of sense-perception and it leaves petty
 precisions of process to what other science may care for such
 exercises.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn031.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>