<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn066.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn068.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Therefore we must ascend again towards the Good, the 
 desired of
 every Soul. Anyone that has seen This, knows what I intend when I
 say that it is beautiful. Even the desire of it is to be desired as
 a Good. To attain it is for those that will take the upward path,
 who will set all their forces towards it, who will divest themselves
 of all that we have put on in our descent:- so, to those 
 that approach
 the Holy Celebrations of the Mysteries, there are appointed
 purifications and the laying aside of the garments worn before, and
 the entry in nakedness- until, passing, on the upward way, 
 all that is
 other than the God, each in the solitude of himself shall behold
 that solitary-dwelling Existence, the Apart, the Unmingled, the
 Pure, that from Which all things depend, for Which all look and live
 and act and know, the Source of Life and of Intellection and 
 of Being.
 
 </p><p>And one that shall know this vision- with what passion of love
 shall he not be seized, with what pang of desire, what longing to be
 molten into one with This, what wondering delight! If he that has
 never seen this Being must hunger for It as for all his welfare, he
 that has known must love and reverence It as the very Beauty; he
 will be flooded with awe and gladness, stricken by a salutary
 terror; he loves with a veritable love, with sharp desire; all other
 loves than this he must despise, and disdain all that once seemed
 fair.
 
 </p><p>This, indeed, is the mood even of those who, having witnessed
 the manifestation of Gods or Supernals, can never again feel the old
 delight in the comeliness of material forms: what then are 
 we to think
 of one that contemplates Absolute Beauty in Its essential integrity,
 no accumulation of flesh and matter, no dweller on earth or in the
 heavens- so perfect Its purity- far above all such things in 
 that they
 are non-essential, composite, not primal but descending from This?
 
 </p><p>Beholding this Being- the Choragos of all Existence, the
 Self-Intent that ever gives forth and never takes- resting, rapt, in
 the vision and possession of so lofty a loveliness, growing to Its
 likeness, what Beauty can the soul yet lack? For This, the Beauty
 supreme, the absolute, and the primal, fashions Its lovers to Beauty
 and makes them also worthy of love.
 
 </p><p>And for This, the sternest and the uttermost combat is set
 before the Souls; all our labour is for This, lest we be left
 without part in this noblest vision, which to attain is to be
 blessed in the blissful sight, which to fail of is to fail utterly.
 
 </p><p>For not he that has failed of the joy that is in colour or in
 visible forms, not he that has failed of power or of honours or of
 kingdom has failed, but only he that has failed of only This, for
 Whose winning he should renounce kingdoms and command over earth and
 ocean and sky, if only, spurning the world of sense from beneath his
 feet, and straining to This, he may see.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn068.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>