<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn058.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn060.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. But, it may be said, length of time produces an abundance of
 good actions missed by the man whose attainment of the happy state
 is recent- if indeed we can think at all of a state of 
 happiness where
 good actions have been few.
 
 </p><p>Now to make multiplicity, whether in time or in action,
 essential to Happiness is to put it together by combining
 non-existents, represented by the past, with some one thing that
 actually is. This consideration it was that led us at the very
 beginning to place Happiness in the actually existent and on that
 basis to launch our enquiry as to whether the higher degree was
 determined by the longer time. It might be thought that the
 Happiness of longer date must surpass the shorter by virtue of the
 greater number of acts it included.
 
 </p><p>But, to begin with, men quite outside of the active life may
 attain the state of felicity, and not in a less but in a greater
 degree than men of affairs.
 
 </p><p>Secondly, the good does not derive from the act itself but from
 the inner disposition which prompts the noble conduct: the wise and
 good man in his very action harvests the good not by what he does
 but by what he is.
 
 </p><p>A wicked man no less than a Sage may save the country, and the
 good of the act is for all alike, no matter whose was the 
 saving hand.
 The contentment of the Sage does not hang upon such actions and
 events: it is his own inner habit that creates at once his felicity
 and whatever pleasure may accompany it.
 
 </p><p>To put Happiness in actions is to put it in things that are
 outside virtue and outside the Soul; for the Soul's expression is
 not in action but in wisdom, in a contemplative operation within
 itself; and this, this alone, is Happiness.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn060.htm">Next: SIXTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>