<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn075.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn077.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. For the moment let us define the nature of the Good as far as
 the immediate purpose demands.
 
 </p><p>The Good is that on which all else depends, towards which all
 Existences aspire as to their source and their need, while Itself is
 without need, sufficient to Itself, aspiring to no other, the
 measure and Term of all, giving out from itself the
 Intellectual-Principle and Existence and Soul and Life and all
 Intellective-Act.
 
 </p><p>All until The Good is reached is beautiful; The Good is
 beyond-beautiful, beyond the Highest, holding kingly state in the
 Intellectual-Kosmos, that sphere constituted by a Principle wholly
 unlike what is known as Intelligence in us. Our intelligence is
 nourished on the propositions of logic, is skilled in following
 discussions, works by reasonings, examines links of 
 demonstration, and
 comes to know the world of Being also by the steps of 
 logical process,
 having no prior grasp of Reality but remaining empty, all 
 Intelligence
 though it be, until it has put itself to school.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle we are discussing is not of such a
 kind: It possesses all: It is all: It is present to all by Its
 self-presence: It has all by other means than having, for what It
 possesses is still Itself, nor does any particular of all within It
 stand apart; for every such particular is the whole and in all
 respects all, while yet not confused in the mass but still distinct,
 apart to the extent that any participant in the 
 Intellectual-Principle
 participates not in the entire as one thing but in whatsoever lies
 within its own reach.
 
 </p><p>And the First Act is the Act of The Good stationary 
 within Itself,
 and the First Existence is the self-contained Existence of The Good;
 but there is also an Act upon It, that of the Intellectual-Principle
 which, as it were, lives about It.
 
 </p><p>And the Soul, outside, circles around the
 Intellectual-Principle, and by gazing upon it, seeing into the
 depths of It, through It sees God.
 
 </p><p>Such is the untroubled, the blissful, life of divine beings, and
 Evil has no place in it; if this were all, there would be no Evil
 but Good only, the first, the second and the third Good. All, thus
 far, is with the King of All, unfailing Cause of Good and Beauty and
 controller of all; and what is Good in the second degree depends
 upon the Second-Principle and tertiary Good upon the Third.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn077.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>