<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn012.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn014.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. It will be objected, that if the Soul constitutes the We
 [the personality] and We are subject to these states then the Soul
 must be subject to them, and similarly that what We do must 
 be done by
 the Soul.
 
 </p><p>But it has been observed that the Couplement, too- especially
 before our emancipation- is a member of this total We, and in fact
 what the body experiences we say We experience. This then covers two
 distinct notions; sometimes it includes the brute-part, sometimes it
 transcends the brute. The body is brute touched to life; the true
 man is the other, going pure of the body, natively endowed with the
 virtues which belong to the Intellectual-Activity, virtues whose
 seat is the Separate Soul, the Soul which even in its dwelling here
 may be kept apart. [This Soul constitutes the human being] 
 for when it
 has wholly withdrawn, that other Soul which is a radiation [or
 emanation] from it withdraws also, drawn after it.
 
 </p><p>Those virtues, on the other hand, which spring not from
 contemplative wisdom but from custom or practical discipline 
 belong to
 the Couplement: to the Couplement, too, belong the vices; 
 they are its
 repugnances, desires, sympathies.
 
 </p><p>And Friendship?
 
 </p><p>This emotion belongs sometimes to the lower part, 
 sometimes to the
 interior man.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn014.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>