<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn072.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn074.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. But if life is a good, is there good for all that lives?
 
 </p><p>No: in the vile, life limps: it is like the eye to the
 dim-sighted; it fails of its task.
 
 </p><p>But if the mingled strand of life is to us, though entwined with
 evil, still in the total a good, must not death be an evil?
 
 </p><p>Evil to What? There must be a subject for the evil: but if the
 possible subject is no longer among beings, or, still among 
 beings, is
 devoid of life... why, a stone is not more immune.
 
 </p><p>If, on the contrary, after death life and soul continue, then
 death will be no evil but a good; Soul, disembodied, is the freer to
 ply its own Act.
 
 </p><p>If it be taken into the All-Soul- what evil can reach it There?
 And as the Gods are possessed of Good and untouched by evil- so,
 certainly is the Soul that has preserved its essential character.
 And if it should lose its purity, the evil it experiences is not in
 its death but in its life. Suppose it to be under punishment in the
 lower world, even there the evil thing is its life and not its
 death; the misfortune is still life, a life of a definite character.
 
 </p><p>Life is a partnership of a Soul and body; death is the
 dissolution; in either life or death, then, the Soul will feel
 itself at home.
 
 </p><p>But, again, if life is good, how can death be anything but evil?
 
 </p><p>Remember that the good of life, where it has any good at all, is
 not due to anything in the partnership but to the repelling 
 of evil by
 virtue; death, then, must be the greater good.
 
 </p><p>In a word, life in the body is of itself an evil but the Soul
 enters its Good through Virtue, not living the life of the
 Couplement but holding itself apart, even here.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn074.htm">Next: EIGHTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>