<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn023.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn025.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. The virtues in the Soul run in a sequence 
 correspondent to that
 existing in the over-world, that is among their exemplars in the
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>In the Supreme, Intellection constitutes Knowledge and Wisdom;
 self-concentration is Sophrosyne; Its proper Act is Its Dutifulness;
 Its Immateriality, by which It remains inviolate within Itself is
 the equivalent of Fortitude.
 
 </p><p>In the Soul, the direction of vision towards the
 Intellectual-Principle is Wisdom and Prudence, soul-virtues not
 appropriate to the Supreme where Thinker and Thought are identical.
 All the other virtues have similar correspondences.
 
 </p><p>And if the term of purification is the production of a 
 pure being,
 then the purification of the Soul must produce all the 
 virtues; if any
 are lacking, then not one of them is perfect.
 
 </p><p>And to possess the greater is potentially to possess the minor,
 though the minor need not carry the greater with them.
 
 </p><p>Thus we have indicated the dominant note in the life of the
 Sage; but whether his possession of the minor virtues be actual as
 well as potential, whether even the greater are in Act in 
 him or yield
 to qualities higher still, must be decided afresh in each several
 case.
 
 </p><p>Take, for example, Contemplative-Wisdom. If other guides of
 conduct must be called in to meet a given need, can this virtue hold
 its ground even in mere potentiality?
 
 </p><p>And what happens when the virtues in their very nature differ in
 scope and province? Where, for example, Sophrosyne would 
 allow certain
 acts or emotions under due restraint and another virtue 
 would cut them
 off altogether? And is it not clear that all may have to yield, once
 Contemplative-Wisdom comes into action?
 
 </p><p>The solution is in understanding the virtues and what each has
 to give: thus the man will learn to work with this or that as every
 several need demands. And as he reaches to loftier principles and
 other standards these in turn will define his conduct: for example,
 Restraint in its earlier form will no longer satisfy him; he 
 will work
 for the final Disengagement; he will live, no longer, the human life
 of the good man- such as Civic Virtue commends- but, leaving this
 beneath him, will take up instead another life, that of the Gods.
 
 </p><p>For it is to the Gods, not to the Good, that our Likeness must
 look: to model ourselves upon good men is to produce an image of an
 image: we have to fix our gaze above the image and attain Likeness
 to the Supreme Exemplar.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn025.htm">Next: THIRD TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>