<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn020.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn022.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. We come, so, to the question whether Purification is the
 whole of this human quality, virtue, or merely the forerunner upon
 which virtue follows? Does virtue imply the achieved state of
 purification or does the mere process suffice to it, Virtue being
 something of less perfection than the accomplished pureness which is
 almost the Term?
 
 </p><p>To have been purified is to have cleansed away everything alien:
 but Goodness is something more.
 
 </p><p>If before the impurity entered there was Goodness, the Goodness
 suffices; but even so, not the act of cleansing but the 
 cleansed thing
 that emerges will be The Good. And it remains to establish what this
 emergent is.
 
 </p><p>It can scarcely prove to be The Good: The Absolute Good cannot
 be thought to have taken up its abode with Evil. We can think of it
 only as something of the nature of good but paying a double 
 allegiance
 and unable to rest in the Authentic Good.
 
 </p><p>The Soul's true Good is in devotion to the 
 Intellectual-Principle,
 its kin; evil to the Soul lies in frequenting strangers. There is no
 other way for it than to purify itself and so enter into 
 relation with
 its own; the new phase begins by a new orientation.
 
 </p><p>After the Purification, then, there is still this orientation to
 be made? No: by the purification the true alignment stands
 accomplished.
 
 </p><p>The Soul's virtue, then, is this alignment? No: it is what the
 alignment brings about within.
 
 </p><p>And this is...?
 
 </p><p>That it sees; that, like sight affected by the thing seen, the
 soul admits the imprint, graven upon it and working within it, of
 the vision it has come to.
 
 </p><p>But was not the Soul possessed of all this always, or had it
 forgotten?
 
 </p><p>What it now sees, it certainly always possessed, but as 
 lying away
 in the dark, not as acting within it: to dispel the 
 darkness, and thus
 come to knowledge of its inner content, it must thrust towards the
 light.
 
 </p><p>Besides, it possessed not the originals but images, pictures;
 and these it must bring into closer accord with the verities they
 represent. And, further, if the Intellectual-Principle is 
 said to be a
 possession of the Soul, this is only in the sense that It is 
 not alien
 and that the link becomes very close when the Soul's sight is turned
 towards It: otherwise, ever-present though It be, It remains
 foreign, just as our knowledge, if it does not determine action, is
 dead to us.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn022.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>