<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn022.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn024.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. In all this there is no sin- there is only matter of
 discipline- but our concern is not merely to be sinless but 
 to be God.
 
 </p><p>As long as there is any such involuntary action, the nature is
 twofold, God and Demi-God, or rather God in association with a
 nature of a lower power: when all the involuntary is 
 suppressed, there
 is God unmingled, a Divine Being of those that follow upon The First.
 
 </p><p>For, at this height, the man is the very being that came from
 the Supreme. The primal excellence restored, the essential man is
 There: entering this sphere, he has associated himself with the
 reasoning phase of his nature and this he will lead up into likeness
 with his highest self, as far as earthly mind is capable, so that if
 possible it shall never be inclined to, and at the least never
 adopt, any course displeasing to its overlord.
 
 </p><p>What form, then, does virtue take in one so lofty?
 
 </p><p>It appears as Wisdom, which consists in the contemplation of all
 that exists in the Intellectual-Principle, and as the immediate
 presence of the Intellectual-Principle itself.
 
 </p><p>And each of these has two modes or aspects: there is Wisdom as
 it is in the Intellectual-Principle and as in the Soul; and there is
 the Intellectual-Principle as it is present to itself and as it is
 present to the Soul: this gives what in the Soul is Virtue, in the
 Supreme not Virtue.
 
 </p><p>In the Supreme, then, what is it?
 
 </p><p>Its proper Act and Its Essence.
 
 </p><p>That Act and Essence of the Supreme, manifested in a new form,
 constitute the virtue of this sphere. For the Supreme is not
 self-existent justice, or the Absolute of any defined virtue: it is,
 so to speak, an exemplar, the source of what in the soul becomes
 virtue: for virtue is dependent, seated in something not itself; the
 Supreme is self-standing, independent.
 
 </p><p>But taking Rectitude to be the due ordering of faculty, does it
 not always imply the existence of diverse parts?
 
 </p><p>No: There is a Rectitude of Diversity appropriate to what has
 parts, but there is another, not less Rectitude than the 
 former though
 it resides in a Unity. And the authentic Absolute-Rectitude 
 is the Act
 of a Unity upon itself, of a Unity in which there is no this and
 that and the other.
 
 </p><p>On this principle, the supreme Rectitude of the Soul is that it
 direct its Act towards the Intellectual-Principle: its Restraint
 (Sophrosyne) is its inward bending towards the 
 Intellectual-Principle;
 its Fortitude is its being impassive in the likeness of That towards
 which its gaze is set, Whose nature comports an impassivity which
 the Soul acquires by virtue and must acquire if it is not to 
 be at the
 mercy of every state arising in its less noble companion.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn024.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>