<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn061.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn063.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Let us, then, go back to the source, and indicate at once the
 Principle that bestows beauty on material things.
 
 </p><p>Undoubtedly this Principle exists; it is something that is
 perceived at the first glance, something which the soul names as
 from an ancient knowledge and, recognising, welcomes it, enters into
 unison with it.
 
 </p><p>But let the soul fall in with the Ugly and at once it shrinks
 within itself, denies the thing, turns away from it, not accordant,
 resenting it.
 
 </p><p>Our interpretation is that the soul- by the very truth of its
 nature, by its affiliation to the noblest Existents in the hierarchy
 of Being- when it sees anything of that kin, or any trace of that
 kinship, thrills with an immediate delight, takes its own to itself,
 and thus stirs anew to the sense of its nature and of all its
 affinity.
 
 </p><p>But, is there any such likeness between the loveliness of this
 world and the splendours in the Supreme? Such a likeness in the
 particulars would make the two orders alike: but what is there in
 common between beauty here and beauty There?
 
 </p><p>We hold that all the loveliness of this world comes by communion
 in Ideal-Form.
 
 </p><p>All shapelessness whose kind admits of pattern and form, as long
 as it remains outside of Reason and Idea, is ugly by that very
 isolation from the Divine-Thought. And this is the Absolute Ugly: an
 ugly thing is something that has not been entirely mastered by
 pattern, that is by Reason, the Matter not yielding at all points
 and in all respects to Ideal-Form.
 
 </p><p>But where the Ideal-Form has entered, it has grouped and
 coordinated what from a diversity of parts was to become a unity: it
 has rallied confusion into co-operation: it has made the sum one
 harmonious coherence: for the Idea is a unity and what it moulds
 must come to unity as far as multiplicity may.
 
 </p><p>And on what has thus been compacted to unity, Beauty enthrones
 itself, giving itself to the parts as to the sum: when it lights on
 some natural unity, a thing of like parts, then it gives itself to
 that whole. Thus, for an illustration, there is the beauty,
 conferred by craftsmanship, of all a house with all its 
 parts, and the
 beauty which some natural quality may give to a single stone.
 
 </p><p>This, then, is how the material thing becomes beautiful- by
 communicating in the thought that flows from the Divine.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn063.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>