<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn188.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn190.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Nor would it be sound to condemn this Kosmos as less than
 beautiful, as less than the noblest possible in the corporeal; and
 neither can any charge be laid against its source.
 
 </p><p>The world, we must reflect, is a product of Necessity, not of
 deliberate purpose: it is due to a higher Kind engendering in its
 own likeness by a natural process. And none the less, a second
 consideration, if a considered plan brought it into being it would
 still be no disgrace to its maker- for it stands a stately whole,
 complete within itself, serving at once its own purpose and that of
 all its parts which, leading and lesser alike, are of such a 
 nature as
 to further the interests of the total. It is, therefore, 
 impossible to
 condemn the whole on the merits of the parts which, besides, must be
 judged only as they enter harmoniously or not into the 
 whole, the main
 consideration, quite overpassing the members which thus cease to
 have importance. To linger about the parts is to condemn not the
 Kosmos but some isolated appendage of it; in the entire living Being
 we fasten our eyes on a hair or a toe neglecting the marvellous
 spectacle of the complete Man; we ignore all the tribes and kinds of
 animals except for the meanest; we pass over an entire race, 
 humanity,
 and bring forward- Thersites.
 
 </p><p>No: this thing that has come into Being is the Kosmos 
 complete: do
 but survey it, and surely this is the pleading you will hear:
 
 
 </p><p>I am made by a God: from that God I came perfect above all forms
 of life, adequate to my function, self-sufficing, lacking 
 nothing: for
 I am the container of all, that is, of every plant and every animal,
 of all the Kinds of created things, and many Gods and nations of
 Spirit-Beings and lofty souls and men happy in their goodness.
 
 </p><p>And do not think that, while earth is ornate with all its
 growths and with living things of every race, and while the very sea
 has answered to the power of Soul, do not think that the 
 great air and
 the ether and the far-spread heavens remain void of it: there it is
 that all good Souls dwell, infusing life into the stars and into
 that orderly eternal circuit of the heavens which in its conscious
 movement ever about the one Centre, seeking nothing beyond, is a
 faithful copy of the divine Mind. And all that is within me strives
 towards the Good; and each, to the measure of its faculty, attains.
 For from that Good all the heavens depend, with all my own Soul and
 the Gods that dwell in my every part, and all that lives and grows,
 and even all in me that you may judge inanimate.
 
 
 </p><p>But there are degrees of participation: here no more than
 Existence, elsewhere Life; and, in Life, sometimes mainly that of
 Sensation, higher again that of Reason, finally Life in all its
 fullness. We have no right to demand equal powers in the unequal:
 the finger is not to be asked to see; there is the eye for that; a
 finger has its own business- to be finger and have finger power.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn190.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>