<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn172.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn174.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. But perhaps this school will maintain that, while their
 teaching leads to a hate and utter abandonment of the body, 
 ours binds
 the Soul down in it.
 
 </p><p>In other words: two people inhabit the one stately house; one of
 them declaims against its plan and against its Architect, 
 but none the
 less maintains his residence in it; the other makes no complaint,
 asserts the entire competency of the Architect and waits cheerfully
 for the day when he may leave it, having no further need of a house:
 the malcontent imagines himself to be the wiser and to be the
 readier to leave because he has learned to repeat that the walls are
 of soulless stone and timber and that the place falls far short of a
 true home; he does not see that his only distinction is in not being
 able to bear with necessity assuming that his conduct, his
 grumbling, does not cover a secret admiration for the beauty of
 those same "stones." As long as we have bodies we must inhabit the
 dwellings prepared for us by our good sister the Soul in her vast
 power of labourless creation.
 
 </p><p>Or would this school reject the word Sister? They are willing to
 address the lowest of men as brothers; are they capable of 
 such raving
 as to disown the tie with the Sun and the powers of the Heavens and
 the very Soul of the Kosmos? Such kinship, it is true, is not for
 the vile; it may be asserted only of those that have become good and
 are no longer body but embodied Soul and of a quality to inhabit the
 body in a mode very closely resembling the indwelling. of 
 the All-Soul
 in the universal frame. And this means continence, self-restraint,
 holding staunch against outside pleasure and against outer
 spectacle, allowing no hardship to disturb the mind. The All-Soul is
 immune from shock; there is nothing that can affect it: but 
 we, in our
 passage here, must call on virtue in repelling these 
 assaults, reduced
 for us from the beginning by a great conception of life, annulled by
 matured strength.
 
 </p><p>Attaining to something of this immunity, we begin to reproduce
 within ourselves the Soul of the vast All and of the heavenly
 bodies: when we are come to the very closest resemblance, all the
 effort of our fervid pursuit will be towards that goal to which they
 also tend; their contemplative vision becomes ours, prepared as we
 are, first by natural disposition and afterwards by all this 
 training,
 for that state which is theirs by the Principle of their Being.
 
 </p><p>This school may lay claim to vision as a dignity reserved to
 themselves, but they are not any the nearer to vision by the 
 claim- or
 by the boast that while the celestial powers, bound for ever to the
 ordering of the Heavens, can never stand outside the material
 universe, they themselves have their freedom in their death. 
 This is a
 failure to grasp the very notion of "standing outside," a failure to
 appreciate the mode in which the All-Soul cares for the unensouled.
 
 </p><p>No: it is possible to go free of love for the body; to be
 clean-living, to disregard death; to know the Highest and aim at
 that other world; not to slander, as negligent in the quest, others
 who are able for it and faithful to it; and not to err with 
 those that
 deny vital motion to the stars because to our sense they stand
 still- the error which in another form leads this school to 
 deny outer
 vision to the Star-Nature, only because they do not see the
 Star-Soul in outer manifestation.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn174.htm">Next: THE THIRD ENNEAD</a></center>
 </body>