<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn110.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn112.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. This brings us to the Spindle-destiny, spun according to the
 ancients by the Fates. To Plato the Spindle represents the
 co-operation of the moving and the stable elements of the kosmic
 circuit: the Fates with Necessity, Mother of the Fates, manipulate
 it and spin at the birth of every being, so that all comes into
 existence through Necessity.
 
 </p><p>In the Timaeus, the creating God bestows the essential of the
 Soul, but it is the divinities moving in the kosmos [the stars] that
 infuse the powerful affections holding from Necessity our impulse
 and our desire, our sense of pleasure and of pain- and that lower
 phase of the Soul in which such experiences originate. By this
 statement our personality is bound up with the stars, whence our
 Soul [as total of Principle and affections] takes shape; and we are
 set under necessity at our very entrance into the world: our
 temperament will be of the stars' ordering, and so, therefore, the
 actions which derive from temperament, and all the experiences of a
 nature shaped to impressions.
 
 </p><p>What, after all this, remains to stand for the "We"?
 
 </p><p>The "We" is the actual resultant of a Being whose nature 
 includes,
 with certain sensibilities, the power of governing them. Cut 
 off as we
 are by the nature of the body, God has yet given us, in the midst of
 all this evil, virtue the unconquerable, meaningless in a state of
 tranquil safety but everything where its absence would be peril of
 fall.
 
 </p><p>Our task, then, is to work for our liberation from this sphere,
 severing ourselves from all that has gathered about us; the total
 man is to be something better than a body ensouled- the 
 bodily element
 dominant with a trace of Soul running through it and a resultant
 life-course mainly of the body- for in such a combination all is, in
 fact, bodily. There is another life, emancipated, whose quality is
 progression towards the higher realm, towards the good and divine,
 towards that Principle which no one possesses except by deliberate
 usage but so may appropriate, becoming, each personally, the higher,
 the beautiful, the Godlike, and living, remote, in and by It- unless
 one choose to go bereaved of that higher Soul and therefore, to live
 fate-bound, no longer profiting, merely, by the significance of the
 sidereal system but becoming as it were a part sunken in it and
 dragged along with the whole thus adopted.
 
 </p><p>For every human Being is of twofold character; there is that
 compromise-total and there is the Authentic Man: and it is 
 so with the
 Kosmos as a whole; it is in the one phase a conjunction of 
 body with a
 certain form of the Soul bound up in body; in the other phase it is
 the Universal Soul, that which is not itself embodied but 
 flashes down
 its rays into the embodied Soul: and the same twofold quality
 belongs to the Sun and the other members of the heavenly system.
 
 </p><p>To the remoter Soul, the pure, sun and stars communicate no
 baseness. In their efficacy upon the [material] All, they 
 act as parts
 of it, as ensouled bodies within it; and they act only upon what is
 partial; body is the agent while, at the same time, it becomes the
 vehicle through which is transmitted something of the star's will
 and of that authentic Soul in it which is steadfastly in 
 contemplation
 of the Highest.
 
 </p><p>But [with every allowance to the lower forces] all follows
 either upon that Highest or rather upon the Beings about It- we may
 think of the Divine as a fire whose outgoing warmth pervades the
 Universe- or upon whatsoever is transmitted by the one Soul [the
 divine first Soul] to the other, its Kin [the Soul of any particular
 being]. All that is graceless is admixture. For the Universe is in
 truth a thing of blend, and if we separate from it that separable
 Soul, the residue is little. The All is a God when the divine Soul
 is counted in with it; "the rest," we read, "is a mighty spirit and
 its ways are subdivine."
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn112.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>