<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn186.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn188.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. To make the existence and coherent structure of this Universe
 depend upon automatic activity and upon chance is against all good
 sense.
 
 </p><p>Such a notion could be entertained only where there is neither
 intelligence nor even ordinary perception; and reason enough has
 been urged against it, though none is really necessary.
 
 </p><p>But there is still the question as to the process by which the
 individual things of this sphere have come into being, how they were
 made.
 
 </p><p>Some of them seem so undesirable as to cast doubts upon a
 Universal Providence; and we find, on the one hand, the denial of
 any controlling power, on the other the belief that the Kosmos is
 the work of an evil creator.
 
 </p><p>This matter must be examined through and through from the very
 first principles. We may, however, omit for the present any
 consideration of the particular providence, that beforehand decision
 which accomplishes or holds things in abeyance to some good purpose
 and gives or withholds in our own regard: when we have 
 established the
 Universal Providence which we affirm, we can link the secondary with
 it.
 
 </p><p>Of course the belief that after a certain lapse of time a Kosmos
 previously non-existent came into being would imply a 
 foreseeing and a
 reasoned plan on the part of God providing for the production of the
 Universe and securing all possible perfection in it- a guidance and
 partial providence, therefore, such as is indicated. But 
 since we hold
 the eternal existence of the Universe, the utter absence of a
 beginning to it, we are forced, in sound and sequent reasoning, to
 explain the providence ruling in the Universe as a universal
 consonance with the divine Intelligence to which the Kosmos is
 subsequent not in time but in the fact of derivation, in the 
 fact that
 the Divine Intelligence, preceding it in Kind, is its cause as being
 the Archetype and Model which it merely images, the primal by which,
 from all eternity, it has its existence and subsistence.
 
 </p><p>The relationship may be presented thus:
 
 </p><p>The authentic and primal Kosmos is the Being of the Intellectual
 Principle and of the Veritable Existent. This contains within itself
 no spatial distinction, and has none of the feebleness of division,
 and even its parts bring no incompleteness to it since here the
 individual is not severed from the entire. In this Nature inheres
 all life and all intellect, a life living and having intellection as
 one act within a unity: every part that it gives forth is a 
 whole; all
 its content is its very own, for there is here no separation of
 thing from thing, no part standing in isolated existence estranged
 from the rest, and therefore nowhere is there any wronging of any
 other, any opposition. Everywhere one and complete, it is at rest
 throughout and shows difference at no point; it does not 
 make over any
 of its content into any new form; there can be no reason for
 changing what is everywhere perfect.
 
 </p><p>Why should Reason elaborate yet another Reason, or Intelligence
 another Intelligence? An indwelling power of making things is in the
 character of a being not at all points as it should be but making,
 moving, by reason of some failure in quality. Those whose nature is
 all blessedness have no more to do than to repose in 
 themselves and be
 their being.
 
 </p><p>A widespread activity is dangerous to those who must go out from
 themselves to act. But such is the blessedness of this Being that in
 its very non-action it magnificently operates and in its 
 self-dwelling
 it produces mightily.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn188.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>