<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn145.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn147.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. But we must enquire into Quality in itself: to know its
 nature is certainly the way to settle our general question.
 
 </p><p>The first point is to assure ourselves whether or not one and
 the same thing may be held to be sometimes a mere qualification and
 sometimes a constituent of Reality- not staying on the point that
 qualification could not be constitutive of a Reality but of a
 qualified Reality only.
 
 </p><p>Now in a Reality possessing a determined quality, the Reality
 and the fact of existence precede the qualified Reality.
 
 </p><p>What, then, in the case of fire is the Reality which precedes
 the qualified Reality?
 
 </p><p>Its mere body, perhaps? If so, body being the Reality, fire is a
 warmed body; and the total thing is not the Reality; and the fire
 has warmth as a man might have a snub nose.
 
 </p><p>Rejecting its warmth, its glow, its lightness- all which 
 certainly
 do seem to be qualities- and its resistance, there is left only its
 extension by three dimensions: in other words, its Matter is its
 Reality.
 
 </p><p>But that cannot be held: surely the form is much more likely
 than the Matter to be the Reality.
 
 </p><p>But is not the Form of Quality?
 
 </p><p>No, the Form is not a Quality: it is a Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>And the outcome of this Reason-Principle entering into the
 underlying Matter, what is that?
 
 </p><p>Certainly not what is seen and burns, for that is the 
 something in
 which these qualities inhere.
 
 </p><p>We might define the burning as an Act springing from the
 Reason-Principle: then the warming and lighting and other effects of
 fire will be its Acts and we still have found no foothold for its
 quality.
 
 </p><p>Such completions of a Reality cannot be called qualities since
 they are its Acts emanating from the Reason-Principles and from the
 essential powers. A quality is something persistently 
 outside Reality;
 it cannot appear as Reality in one place after having figured in
 another as quality; its function is to bring in the something more
 after the Reality is established, such additions as virtue, vice,
 ugliness, beauty, health, a certain shape. On this last, however, it
 may be remarked that triangularity and quadrangularity are not in
 themselves qualities, but there is quality when a thing is
 triangular by having been brought to that shape; the quality is not
 the triangularity but the patterning to it. The case is the same
 with the arts and avocations.
 
 </p><p>Thus: Quality is a condition superadded to a Reality whose
 existence does not depend upon it, whether this something more be a
 later acquirement or an accompaniment from the first; it is
 something in whose absence the Reality would still be complete. It
 will sometimes come and go, sometimes be inextricably attached, so
 that there are two forms of Quality, the moveable and the fixed.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn147.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>