<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn175.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn177.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. In the two orders of things- those whose existence is that of
 process and those in whom it is Authentic Being- there is a 
 variety of
 possible relation to Cause.
 
 </p><p>Cause might conceivably underly all the entities in both 
 orders or
 none in either. It might underly some, only, in each order, 
 the others
 being causeless. It might, again, underly the Realm of Process
 universally while in the Realm of Authentic Existence some 
 things were
 caused, others not, or all were causeless. Conceivably, on the other
 hand, the Authentic Existents are all caused while in the Realm of
 Process some things are caused and others not, or all are causeless.
 
 </p><p>Now, to begin with the Eternal Existents:
 
 </p><p>The Firsts among these, by the fact that they are Firsts, cannot
 be referred to outside Causes; but all such as depend upon those
 Firsts may be admitted to derive their Being from them.
 
 </p><p>And in all cases the Act may be referred to the Essence [as its
 cause], for their Essence consists, precisely, in giving forth an
 appropriate Act.
 
 </p><p>As for Things of Process- or for Eternal Existents whose Act is
 not eternally invariable- we must hold that these are due to Cause;
 Causelessness is quite inadmissible; we can make no place here for
 unwarranted "slantings," for sudden movement of bodies apart from
 any initiating power, for precipitate spurts in a soul with 
 nothing to
 drive it into the new course of action. Such causelessness would
 bind the Soul under an even sterner compulsion, no longer master of
 itself, but at the mercy of movements apart from will and cause.
 Something willed- within itself or without- something desired, must
 lead it to action; without motive it can have no motion.
 
 </p><p>On the assumption that all happens by Cause, it is easy to
 discover the nearest determinants of any particular act or state and
 to trace it plainly to them.
 
 </p><p>The cause of a visit to the centre of affairs will be that one
 thinks it necessary to see some person or to receive a debt, or, in
 a word, that one has some definite motive or impulse confirmed by a
 judgement of expediency. Sometimes a condition may be referred to
 the arts, the recovery of health for instance to medical science and
 the doctor. Wealth has for its cause the discovery of a treasure or
 the receipt of a gift, or the earning of money by manual or
 intellectual labour. The child is traced to the father as its Cause
 and perhaps to a chain of favourable outside circumstances such as a
 particular diet or, more immediately, a special organic aptitude or
 a wife apt to childbirth.
 
 </p><p>And the general cause of all is Nature.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn177.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>