<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn161.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn163.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. That this world has neither beginning nor end but exists for
 ever as long as the Supreme stands is certainly no novel 
 teaching. And
 before this school rose it had been urged that commerce with the
 body is no gain to a Soul.
 
 </p><p>But to treat the human Soul as a fair presentment of the Soul of
 the Universe is like picking out potters and blacksmiths and making
 them warrant for discrediting an entire well-ordered city.
 
 </p><p>We must recognize how different is the governance 
 exercised by the
 All-Soul; the relation is not the same: it is not in fetters. Among
 the very great number of differences it should not have been
 overlooked that the We [the human Soul] lies under fetter; 
 and this in
 a second limitation, for the Body-Kind, already fettered within the
 All-Soul, imprisons all that it grasps.
 
 </p><p>But the Soul of the Universe cannot be in bond to what itself
 has bound: it is sovereign and therefore immune of the lower things,
 over which we on the contrary are not masters. That in it which is
 directed to the Divine and Transcendent is ever unmingled, knows no
 encumbering; that in it which imparts life to the body admits
 nothing bodily to itself. It is the general fact that an 
 inset [as the
 Body], necessarily shares the conditions of its containing principle
 [as the Soul], and does not communicate its own conditions where
 that principle has an independent life: thus a graft will die if the
 stock dies, but the stock will live on by its proper life though the
 graft wither. The fire within your own self may be quenched, but the
 thing, fire, will exist still; and if fire itself were annihilated
 that would make no difference to the Soul, the Soul in the Supreme,
 but only to the plan of the material world; and if the other
 elements sufficed to maintain a Kosmos, the Soul in the Supreme
 would be unconcerned.
 
 </p><p>The constitution of the All is very different from that of the
 single, separate forms of life: there, the established rule 
 commanding
 to permanence is sovereign; here things are like deserters kept to
 their own place and duty by a double bond; there is no 
 outlet from the
 All, and therefore no need of restraining or of driving errants back
 to bounds: all remains where from the beginning the Soul's nature
 appointed.
 
 </p><p>The natural movement within the plan will be injurious 
 to anything
 whose natural tendency it opposes: one group will sweep 
 bravely onward
 with the great total to which it is adapted; the others, not able to
 comply with the larger order, are destroyed. A great choral is
 moving to its concerted plan; midway in the march, a tortoise is
 intercepted; unable to get away from the choral line it is trampled
 under foot; but if it could only range itself within the greater
 movement it too would suffer nothing.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn163.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>