<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn159.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn161.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. Still more unreasonably:
 
 </p><p>There are men, bound to human bodies and subject to 
 desire, grief,
 anger, who think so generously of their own faculty that they
 declare themselves in contact with the Intelligible World, but deny
 that the sun possesses a similar faculty less subject to 
 influence, to
 disorder, to change; they deny that it is any wiser than we, the
 late born, hindered by so many cheats on the way towards truth.
 
 </p><p>Their own soul, the soul of the least of mankind, they declare
 deathless, divine; but the entire heavens and the stars within the
 heavens have had no communion with the Immortal Principle, though
 these are far purer and lovelier than their own souls- yet they are
 not blind to the order, the shapely pattern, the discipline 
 prevailing
 in the heavens, since they are the loudest in complaint of the
 disorder that troubles our earth. We are to imagine the 
 deathless Soul
 choosing of design the less worthy place, and preferring to abandon
 the nobler to the Soul that is to die.
 
 </p><p>Equally unreasonable is their introduction of that other Soul
 which they piece together from the elements.
 
 </p><p>How could any form or degree of life come about by a blend of
 the elements? Their conjunction could produce only a warm or cold or
 an intermediate substance, something dry or wet or intermediate.
 
 </p><p>Besides, how could such a soul be a bond holding the 
 four elements
 together when it is a later thing and rises from them? And this
 element- soul is described as possessing consciousness and will and
 the rest- what can we think?
 
 </p><p>Furthermore, these teachers, in their contempt for this creation
 and this earth, proclaim that another earth has been made for them
 into which they are to enter when they depart. Now this new earth is
 the Reason-Form [the Logos] of our world. Why should they desire to
 live in the archetype of a world abhorrent to them?
 
 </p><p>Then again, what is the origin of that pattern world? It would
 appear, from the theory, that the Maker had already declined towards
 the things of this sphere before that pattern came into being.
 
 </p><p>Now let us suppose the Maker craving to construct such an
 Intermediate World- though what motive could He have?- in addition
 to the Intellectual world which He eternally possesses. If 
 He made the
 mid-world first, what end was it to serve?
 
 </p><p>To be a dwelling-place for Souls?
 
 </p><p>How then did they ever fall from it? It exists in vain.
 
 </p><p>If He made it later than this world- abstracting the formal-idea
 of this world and leaving the Matter out- the Souls that have come
 to know that intermediate sphere would have experienced 
 enough to keep
 them from entering this. If the meaning is simply that Souls exhibit
 the Ideal-Form of the Universe, what is there distinctive in the
 teaching?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn161.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>