<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn124.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn126.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. The present existence of the Ideal-Forms has been
 demonstrated elsewhere: we take up our argument from that point.
 
 </p><p>If, then, there is more than one of such forming Ideas, 
 there must
 of necessity be some character common to all and equally 
 some peculiar
 character in each keeping them distinct.
 
 </p><p>This peculiar characteristic, this distinguishing difference, is
 the individual shape. But if shape, then there is the shaped, that
 in which the difference is lodged.
 
 </p><p>There is, therefore, a Matter accepting the shape, a permanent
 substratum.
 
 </p><p>Further, admitting that there is an Intelligible Realm beyond,
 of which this world is an image, then, since this world-compound is
 based on Matter, there must be Matter there also.
 
 </p><p>And how can you predicate an ordered system without thinking of
 form, and how think of form apart from the notion of something in
 which the form is lodged?
 
 </p><p>No doubt that Realm is, in the strict fact, utterly 
 without parts,
 but in some sense there is part there too. And in so far as these
 parts are really separate from each other, any such division and
 difference can be no other than a condition of Matter, of a
 something divided and differentiated: in so far as that realm,
 though without parts, yet consists of a variety of entities, these
 diverse entities, residing in a unity of which they are variations,
 reside in a Matter; for this unity, since it is also a 
 diversity, must
 be conceived of as varied and multiform; it must have been shapeless
 before it took the form in which variation occurs. For if we
 abstract from the Intellectual-Principle the variety and the
 particular shapes, the Reason-Principles and the Thoughts, what
 precedes these was something shapeless and undetermined, nothing of
 what is actually present there.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn126.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>