<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn116.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn118.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. According to Plato, lots and choice play a part [in the
 determination of human conditions] before the Spindle of Necessity
 is turned; that once done, only the Spindle-destiny is 
 valid; it fixes
 the chosen conditions irretrievably since the elected
 guardian-spirit becomes accessory to their accomplishment.
 
 </p><p>But what is the significance of the Lots?
 
 </p><p>By the Lots we are to understand birth into the conditions
 actually existent in the All at the particular moment of each entry
 into body, birth into such and such a physical frame, from such and
 such parents, in this or that place, and generally all that in our
 phraseology is the External.
 
 </p><p>For Particulars and Universals alike it is established 
 that to the
 first of those known as the Fates, to Clotho the Spinner, must be
 due the unity and as it were interweaving of all that 
 exists: Lachesis
 presides over the Lots: to Atropos must necessarily belong 
 the conduct
 of mundane events.
 
 </p><p>Of men, some enter into life as fragments of the All, bound to
 that which is external to themselves: they are victims of a sort of
 fascination, and are hardly, or not at all, themselves: but others
 mastering all this- straining, so to speak, by the head towards the
 Higher, to what is outside even the Soul- preserve still the
 nobility and the ancient privilege of the Soul's essential being.
 
 </p><p>For certainly we cannot think of the Soul as a thing whose
 nature is just a sum of impressions from outside- as if it, alone,
 of all that exists, had no native character.
 
 </p><p>No: much more than all else, the Soul, possessing the Idea which
 belongs to a Principle, must have as its native wealth many powers
 serving to the activities of its Kind. It is an 
 Essential-Existent and
 with this Existence must go desire and act and the tendency towards
 some good.
 
 </p><p>While body and soul stand one combined thing, there is a joint
 nature, a definite entity having definite functions and employments;
 but as soon as any Soul is detached, its employments are kept apart,
 its very own: it ceases to take the body's concerns to itself: it
 has vision now: body and soul stand widely apart.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn118.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>