<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn187.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn189.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. By derivation from that Authentic Kosmos, one within itself,
 there subsists this lower kosmos, no longer a true unity.
 
 </p><p>It is multiple, divided into various elements, thing standing
 apart from thing in a new estrangement. No longer is there concord
 unbroken; hostility, too, has entered as the result of difference
 and distance; imperfection has inevitably introduced discord; for a
 part is not self-sufficient, it must pursue something outside itself
 for its fulfillment, and so it becomes the enemy to what it needs.
 
 </p><p>This Kosmos of parts has come into being not as the result of a
 judgement establishing its desirability, but by the sheer 
 necessity of
 a secondary Kind.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual Realm was not of a nature to be the ultimate of
 existents. It was the First and it held great power, all there is of
 power; this means that it is productive without seeking to produce;
 for if effort and search were incumbent upon it, the Act would not
 be its own, would not spring from its essential nature; it would be,
 like a craftsman, producing by a power not inherent but acquired,
 mastered by dint of study.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual Principle, then, in its unperturbed serenity
 has brought the universe into being, by communicating from its own
 store to Matter: and this gift is the Reason-Form flowing 
 from it. For
 the Emanation of the Intellectual Principle is Reason, an emanation
 unfailing as long as the Intellectual Principle continues to have
 place among beings.
 
 </p><p>The Reason-Principle within a seed contains all the parts and
 qualities concentrated in identity; there is no distinction, no
 jarring, no internal hindering; then there comes a pushing out into
 bulk, part rises in distinction with part, and at once the members
 of the organism stand in each other's way and begin to wear 
 each other
 down.
 
 </p><p>So from this, the One Intellectual Principle, and the
 Reason-Form emanating from it, our Universe rises and develops part,
 and inevitably are formed groups concordant and helpful in contrast
 with groups discordant and combative; sometimes of choice and
 sometimes incidentally, the parts maltreat each other; engendering
 proceeds by destruction.
 
 </p><p>Yet: Amid all that they effect and accept, the divine Realm
 imposes the one harmonious act; each utters its own voice, but all
 is brought into accord, into an ordered system, for the universal
 purpose, by the ruling Reason-Principle. This Universe is not
 Intelligence and Reason, like the Supernal, but participant in
 Intelligence and Reason: it stands in need of the harmonizing
 because it is the meeting ground of Necessity and divine
 Reason-Necessity pulling towards the lower, towards the 
 unreason which
 is its own characteristic, while yet the Intellectual Principle
 remains sovereign over it.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual Sphere [the Divine] alone is Reason, and there
 can never be another Sphere that is Reason and nothing else; so
 that, given some other system, it cannot be as noble as that 
 first; it
 cannot be Reason: yet since such a system cannot be merely Matter,
 which is the utterly unordered, it must be a mixed thing. Its two
 extremes are Matter and the Divine Reason; its governing principle
 is Soul, presiding over the conjunction of the two, and to be
 thought of not as labouring in the task but as administering
 serenely by little more than an act of presence.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn189.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>