<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn135.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn137.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. The further question, therefore, is raised whether
 boundlessness and indetermination are things lodging in something
 other than themselves as a sort of attribute and whether 
 Privation [or
 Negation of quality] is also an attribute residing in some separate
 substratum.
 
 </p><p>Now all that is Number and Reason-Principle is outside of
 boundlessness: these bestow bound and settlement and order in
 general upon all else: neither anything that has been brought under
 order nor any Order-Absolute is needed to bring them under order.
 The thing that has to be brought under order [e.g., Matter] is other
 than the Ordering Principle which is Limit and Definiteness and
 Reason-Principle. Therefore, necessarily, the thing to be brought
 under order and to definiteness must be in itself a thing lacking
 delimitation.
 
 </p><p>Now Matter is a thing that is brought under order- like all that
 shares its nature by participation or by possessing the same
 principle- therefore, necessarily, Matter is The Undelimited and not
 merely the recipient of a nonessential quality of Indefiniteness
 entering as an attribute.
 
 </p><p>For, first, any attribute to any subject must be a
 Reason-Principle; and Indefiniteness is not a Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>Secondly, what must a thing be to take Indefiniteness as an
 attribute? Obviously it must, beforehand, be either Definiteness or
 a defined thing. But Matter is neither.
 
 </p><p>Then again Indefiniteness entering as an attribute into the
 definite must cease to be indefinite: but Indefiniteness has not
 entered as an attribute into Matter: that is, Matter is essentially
 Indefiniteness.
 
 </p><p>The Matter even of the Intellectual Realm is the Indefinite,
 [the undelimited]; it must be a thing generated by the undefined
 nature, the illimitable nature, of the Eternal Being, The One
 illimitableness, however, not possessing native existence There but
 engendered by The One.
 
 </p><p>But how can Matter be common to both spheres, be here and be
 There?
 
 </p><p>Because even Indefiniteness has two phases.
 
 </p><p>But what difference can there be between phase and phase of
 Indefiniteness?
 
 </p><p>The difference of archetype and image.
 
 </p><p>So that Matter here [as only an image of Indefiniteness] would
 be less indefinite?
 
 </p><p>On the contrary, more indefinite as an Image-thing remote from
 true being. Indefiniteness is the greater in the less ordered
 object; the less deep in good, the deeper in evil. The Indeterminate
 in the Intellectual Realm, where there is truer being, might 
 almost be
 called merely an Image of Indefiniteness: in this lower Sphere where
 there is less Being, where there is a refusal of the 
 Authentic, and an
 adoption of the Image-Kind, Indefiniteness is more authentically
 indefinite.
 
 </p><p>But this argument seems to make no difference between the
 indefinite object and Indefiniteness-essential. Is there none?
 
 </p><p>In any object in which Reason and Matter co-exist we distinguish
 between Indeterminateness and the Indeterminate subject: but where
 Matter stands alone we make them identical, or, better, we would say
 right out that in that case essential Indeterminateness is not
 present; for it is a Reason-Principle and could not lodge in the
 indeterminate object without at once annulling the indeterminateness.
 
 </p><p>Matter, then, must be described as Indefinite of itself, by its
 natural opposition to Reason-Principle. Reason is Reason and nothing
 else; just so Matter, opposed by its indeterminateness to Reason, is
 Indeterminateness and nothing else.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn137.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>