<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn144.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn146.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Are not Being and Reality (to on and he ousia) distinct;
 must we not envisage Being as the substance stripped of all else,
 while Reality is this same thing, Being, accompanied by the others-
 Movement, Rest, Identity, Difference- so that these are the specific
 constituents of Reality?
 
 </p><p>The universal fabric, then, is Reality in which Being, Movement,
 and so on are separate constituents.
 
 </p><p>Now Movement has Being as an accident and therefore should have
 Reality as an accident; or is it something serving to the completion
 of Reality?
 
 </p><p>No: Movement is a Reality; everything in the Supreme is 
 a Reality.
 
 </p><p>Why, then, does not Reality reside, equally, in this sphere?
 
 </p><p>In the Supreme there is Reality because all things are one; ours
 is the sphere of images whose separation produces grades of
 difference. Thus in the spermatic unity all the human members are
 present undistinguishably; there is no separation of head and hand:
 their distinct existence begins in the life here, whose content is
 image, not Authentic Existence.
 
 </p><p>And are the distinct Qualities in the Authentic Realm to be
 explained in the same way? Are they differing Realities 
 centred in one
 Reality or gathered round Being- differences which constitute
 Realities distinct from each other within the common fact of Reality?
 
 </p><p>This is sound enough; but it does not apply to all the qualities
 of this sphere, some of which, no doubt, are differentiations of
 Reality- such as the quality of two-footedness or 
 four-footedness- but
 others are not such differentiations of Reality and, because they
 are not so, must be called qualities and nothing more.
 
 </p><p>On the other hand, one and the same thing may be sometimes a
 differentiation of Reality and sometimes not- a differentiation when
 it is a constitutive element, and no differentiation in some other
 thing, where it is not a constitutive element but an accidental. The
 distinction may be seen in the [constitutive] whiteness of a swan or
 of ceruse and the whiteness which in a man is an accidental.
 
 </p><p>Where whiteness belongs to the very Reason-Form of the 
 thing it is
 a constitutive element and not a quality; where it is a superficial
 appearance it is a quality.
 
 </p><p>In other words, qualification may be distinguished. We may think
 of a qualification that is of the very substance of the thing,
 something exclusively belonging to it. And there is a qualifying
 that is nothing more, [not constituting but simply] giving some
 particular character to the real thing; in this second case the
 qualification does not produce any alteration towards Reality or
 away from it; the Reality has existed fully constituted before the
 incoming of the qualification which- whether in soul or body- merely
 introduces some state from outside, and by this addition elaborates
 the Reality into the particular thing.
 
 </p><p>But what if [the superficial appearance such as] the visible
 whiteness in ceruse is constitutive? In the swan the whiteness is not
 constitutive since a swan need not be white: it is constitutive in
 ceruse, just as warmth is constitutive of the Reality, fire.
 
 </p><p>No doubt we may be told that the Reality in fire is [not warmth
 but] fieriness and in ceruse an analogous abstraction: yet the fact
 remains that in visible fire warmth or fieriness is constitutive and
 in the ceruse whiteness.
 
 </p><p>Thus the same entities are represented at once as being not
 qualities but constituents of Reality and not constituents but
 qualities.
 
 </p><p>Now it is absurd to talk as if one identical thing 
 changed its own
 nature according to whether it is present as a constituent or as an
 accidental.
 
 </p><p>The truth is that while the Reason-Principles producing these
 entities contain nothing but what is of the nature of Reality, yet
 only in the Intellectual Realm do the produced things possess real
 existence: here they are not real; they are qualified.
 
 </p><p>And this is the starting-point of an error we constantly make:
 in our enquiries into things we let realities escape us and fasten
 on what is mere quality. Thus fire is not the thing we so name from
 the observation of certain qualities present; fire is a 
 Reality [not a
 combination of material phenomena]; the phenomena observed here and
 leading us to name fire call us away from the authentic thing; a
 quality is erected into the very matter of definition- a procedure,
 however, reasonable enough in regard to things of the realm of sense
 which are in no case realities but accidents of Reality.
 
 </p><p>And this raises the question how Reality can ever spring 
 from what
 are not Realities.
 
 </p><p>It has been shown that a thing coming into being cannot be
 identical with its origins: it must here be added that nothing thus
 coming into being [no "thing of process"] can be a Reality.
 
 </p><p>Then how do we assert the rising in the Supreme of what we have
 called Reality from what is not Reality [i.e., from the pure Being
 which is above Reality]?
 
 </p><p>The Reality there- possessing Authentic Being in the strictest
 sense, with the least admixture- is Reality by existing among the
 differentiations of the Authentic Being; or, better, Reality is
 affirmed in the sense that with the existence of the Supreme is
 included its Act so that Reality seems to be a perfectionment of the
 Authentic Being, though in the truth it is a diminution; the
 produced thing is deficient by the very addition, by being less
 simplex, by standing one step away from the Authentic.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn146.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>