<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn140.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn142.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. We come now to the purpose of all this discussion; to make
 clear in what sense or to what degree Actualization is predicable in
 the Intellectual Realm and whether all is in Actualization 
 there, each
 and every member of that realm being an Act, or whether Potentiality
 also has place there.
 
 </p><p>Now: if there is no Matter there to harbour potentiality: if
 nothing there has any future apart from its actual mode: if nothing
 there generates, whether by changes or in the permanence of its
 identity; if nothing goes outside of itself to give being to what is
 other than itself; then, potentiality has no place there: the Beings
 there possess actuality as belonging to eternity, not to time.
 
 </p><p>Those, however, who assert Matter in the Intellectual Realm will
 be asked whether the existence of that Matter does not imply the
 potential there too; for even if Matter there exists in another mode
 than here, every Being there will have its Matter, its form and the
 union of the two [and therefore the potential, separable from the
 actual]. What answer is to be made?
 
 </p><p>Simply, that even the Matter there is Idea, just as the Soul, an
 Idea, is Matter to another [a higher] Being.
 
 </p><p>But relatively to that higher, the Soul is a potentiality?
 
 </p><p>No: for the Idea [to which it is Matter] is integral to the Soul
 and does not look to a future; the distinction between the Soul and
 its Idea is purely mental: the Idea and the Matter it includes are
 conceived as a conjunction but are essentially one Kind: 
 remember that
 Aristotle makes his Fifth Body immaterial.
 
 </p><p>But surely Potentiality exists in the Soul? Surely the Soul is
 potentially the living-being of this world before it has 
 become so? Is
 it not potentially musical, and everything else that it has not been
 and becomes? Does not this imply potentiality even in the 
 Intellectual
 Existences?
 
 </p><p>No: the Soul is not potentially these things; it is a Power
 towards them.
 
 </p><p>But after what mode does Actualization exist in the Intellectual
 Realm?
 
 </p><p>Is it the Actualization of a statue, where the combination is
 realized because the Form-Idea has mastered each separate
 constituent of the total?
 
 </p><p>No: it is that every constituent there is a Form-Idea and, thus,
 is perfect in its Being.
 
 </p><p>There is in the Intellectual Principle no progression from some
 power capable of intellection to the Actuality of 
 intellection: such a
 progression would send us in search of a Prior Principle not
 progressing from Power to Act; there all stands ever realized.
 Potentiality requires an intervention from outside itself to bring
 it to the actualization which otherwise cannot be; but what 
 possesses,
 of itself, identity unchangeable for ever is an 
 actualization: all the
 Firsts then are actualizations, simply because eternally and of
 themselves they possess all that is necessary to their completion.
 
 </p><p>This applies equally to the Soul, not to that in Matter but to
 that in the Intellectual Sphere; and even that in Matter, the Soul
 of Growth, is an actualization in its difference; it possesses
 actually [and not, like material things, merely in image] the Being
 that belongs to it.
 
 </p><p>Then, everything, in the intellectual is in actualization and so
 all There is Actuality?
 
 </p><p>Why not? If that Nature is rightly said to be "Sleepless," and
 to be Life and the noblest mode of Life, the noblest Activities must
 be there; all then is actualization there, everything is an 
 Actuality,
 for everything is a Life, and all Place there is the Place 
 of Life, in
 the true sense the ground and spring of Soul and of the Intellectual
 Principle.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn142.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>