<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn128.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn130.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. What, then, is this Kind, this Matter, described as one
 stuff, continuous and without quality?
 
 </p><p>Clearly since it is without quality it is incorporeal;
 bodiliness would be quality.
 
 </p><p>It must be the basic stuff of all the entities of the
 sense-world and not merely base to some while being to 
 others achieved
 form.
 
 </p><p>Clay, for example, is matter to the potter but is not Matter
 pure and simple. Nothing of this sort is our object: we are seeking
 the stuff which underlies all alike. We must therefore refuse to it
 all that we find in things of sense- not merely such attributes as
 colour, heat or cold, but weight or weightlessness, thickness or
 thinness, shape and therefore magnitude; though notice that to be
 present within magnitude and shape is very different from possessing
 these qualities.
 
 </p><p>It cannot be a compound, it must be a simplex, one distinct
 thing in its nature; only so can it be void of all quality. The
 Principle which gives it form gives this as something alien: so with
 magnitude and all really-existent things bestowed upon it. If, for
 example, it possessed a magnitude of its own, the Principle giving
 it form would be at the mercy of that magnitude and must produce not
 at will, but only within the limit of the Matter's capacity: to
 imagine that Will keeping step with its material is fantastic.
 
 </p><p>The Matter must be of later origin than the forming-power, and
 therefore must be at its disposition throughout, ready to become
 anything, ready therefore to any bulk; besides, if it possessed
 magnitude, it would necessarily possess shape also: it would 
 be doubly
 inductile.
 
 </p><p>No: all that ever appears upon it is brought in by the Idea: the
 Idea alone possesses: to it belongs the magnitude and all else that
 goes with the Reason-Principle or follows upon it. Quantity is given
 with the Ideal-Form in all the particular species- man, bird, and
 particular kind of bird.
 
 </p><p>The imaging of Quantity upon Matter by an outside power is not
 more surprising than the imaging of Quality; Quality is no doubt a
 Reason-Principle, but Quantity also- being measure, number- 
 is equally
 so.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn130.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>