<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn164.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn166.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. Under detailed investigation, many other tenets of this
 school- indeed we might say all- could be corrected with an
 abundance of proof. But I am withheld by regard for some of our own
 friends who fell in with this doctrine before joining our circle
 and, strangely, still cling to it.
 
 </p><p>The school, no doubt, is free-spoken enough- whether in the set
 purpose of giving its opinions a plausible colour of verity or in
 honest belief- but we are addressing here our own acquaintances, not
 those people with whom we could make no way. We have spoken in the
 hope of preventing our friends from being perturbed by a party which
 brings, not proof- how could it?- but arbitrary, tyrannical 
 assertion;
 another style of address would be applicable to such as have the
 audacity to flout the noble and true doctrines of the august
 teachers of antiquity.
 
 </p><p>That method we will not apply; anyone that has fully grasped the
 preceding discussion will know how to meet every point in the system.
 
 </p><p>Only one other tenet of theirs will be mentioned before passing
 the matter; it is one which surpasses all the rest in sheer folly,
 if that is the word.
 
 </p><p>They first maintain that the Soul and a certain "Wisdom"
 [Sophia] declined and entered this lower sphere though they leave us
 in doubt of whether the movement originated in Soul or in this
 Sophia of theirs, or whether the two are the same to them- then they
 tell us that the other Souls came down in the descent and that these
 members of Sophia took to themselves bodies, human bodies, for
 example.
 
 </p><p>Yet in the same breath, that very Soul which was the occasion of
 descent to the others is declared not to have descended. "It knew no
 decline," but merely illuminated the darkness in such a way that an
 image of it was formed upon the Matter. Then, they shape an image of
 that image somewhere below- through the medium of Matter or of
 Materiality or whatever else of many names they choose to give it in
 their frequent change of terms, invented to darken their 
 doctrine- and
 so they bring into being what they call the Creator or Demiurge,
 then this lower is severed from his Mother [Sophia] and becomes the
 author of the Kosmos down to the latest of the succession of images
 constituting it.
 
 </p><p>Such is the blasphemy of one of their writers.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn166.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>