<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn158.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn160.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. To those who assert that creation is the work of the 
 Soul after
 the failing of its wings, we answer that no such disgrace could
 overtake the Soul of the All. If they tell us of its falling, they
 must tell us also what caused the fall. And when did it take 
 place? If
 from eternity, then the Soul must be essentially a fallen 
 thing: if at
 some one moment, why not before that?
 
 </p><p>We assert its creative act to be a proof not of decline 
 but rather
 of its steadfast hold. Its decline could consist only in its
 forgetting the Divine: but if it forgot, how could it create? Whence
 does it create but from the things it knew in the Divine? If it
 creates from the memory of that vision, it never fell. Even
 supposing it to be in some dim intermediate state, it need not be
 supposed more likely to decline: any inclination would be towards
 its Prior, in an effort to the clearer vision. If any memory at all
 remained, what other desire could it have than to retrace the way?
 
 </p><p>What could it have been planning to gain by 
 world-creating? Glory?
 That would be absurd- a motive borrowed from the sculptors of our
 earth.
 
 </p><p>Finally, if the Soul created by policy and not by sheer need of
 its nature, by being characteristically the creative power- how
 explain the making of this universe?
 
 </p><p>And when will it destroy the work? If it repents of its 
 work, what
 is it waiting for? If it has not yet repented, then it will never
 repent: it must be already accustomed to the world, must be growing
 more tender towards it with the passing of time.
 
 </p><p>Can it be waiting for certain souls still here? Long since would
 these have ceased returning for such re-birth, having known in
 former life the evils of this sphere; long since would they have
 foreborne to come.
 
 </p><p>Nor may we grant that this world is of unhappy origin because
 there are many jarring things in it. Such a judgement would rate it
 too high, treating it as the same with the Intelligible Realm and
 not merely its reflection.
 
 </p><p>And yet- what reflection of that world could be conceived more
 beautiful than this of ours? What fire could be a nobler 
 reflection of
 the fire there than the fire we know here? Or what other earth than
 this could have been modelled after that earth? And what globe more
 minutely perfect than this, or more admirably ordered in its course
 could have been conceived in the image of the self-centred 
 circling of
 the World of Intelligibles? And for a sun figuring the Divine
 sphere, if it is to be more splendid than the sun visible to us,
 what a sun it must be.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn160.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>