<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn127.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn129.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Empedokles in identifying his "elements" with Matter 
 is refuted
 by their decay.
 
 </p><p>Anaxagoras, in identifying his "primal-combination" with Matter-
 to which he allots no mere aptness to any and every nature or
 quality but the effective possession of all- withdraws in 
 this way the
 very Intellectual-Principle he had introduced; for this Mind 
 is not to
 him the bestower of shape, of Forming Idea; and it is co-aeval with
 Matter, not its prior. But this simultaneous existence is
 impossible: for if the combination derives Being by participation,
 Being is the prior; if both are Authentic Existents, then an
 additional Principle, a third, is imperative [a ground of
 unification]. And if this Creator, Mind, must pre-exist, why need
 Matter contain the Forming-Ideas parcel-wise for the Mind, with
 unending labour, to assort and allot? Surely the 
 undetermined could be
 brought to quality and pattern in the one comprehensive act?
 
 </p><p>As for the notion that all is in all, this clearly is impossible.
 
 </p><p>Those who make the base to be "the infinite" must define 
 the term.
 
 </p><p>If this "infinite" means "of endless extension" there is no
 infinite among beings; there is neither an infinity-in-itself
 [Infinity Abstract] nor an infinity as an attribute to some body;
 for in the first case every part of that infinity would be infinite
 and in the second an object in which the infinity was present as an
 attribute could not be infinite apart from that attribute, could not
 be simplex, could not therefore be Matter.
 
 </p><p>Atoms again cannot meet the need of a base.
 
 </p><p>There are no atoms; all body is divisible endlessly: besides
 neither the continuity nor the ductility of corporeal things is
 explicable apart from Mind, or apart from the Soul which cannot be
 made up of atoms; and, again, out of atoms creation could produce
 nothing but atoms: a creative power could produce nothing from a
 material devoid of continuity. Any number of reasons might 
 be brought,
 and have been brought, against this hypothesis and it need detain us
 no longer.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn129.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>