<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn114.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn116.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. Of phenomena of this sphere some derive from the Kosmic
 Circuit and some not: we must take them singly and mark them off,
 assigning to each its origin.
 
 </p><p>The gist of the whole matter lies in the consideration that Soul
 governs this All by the plan contained in the Reason-Principle and
 plays in the All exactly the part of the particular 
 principle which in
 every living-thing forms the members of the organism and adjusts
 them to the unity of which they are portions; the entire force of
 the Soul is represented in the All, but, in the parts, Soul 
 is present
 only in proportion to the degree of essential reality held by each
 of such partial objects. Surrounding every separate entity there are
 other entities, whose approach will sometimes be hostile and 
 sometimes
 helpful to the purpose of its nature; but to the All taken in its
 length and breadth each and every separate existent is an adjusted
 part, holding its own characteristic and yet contributing by its own
 native tendency to the entire life-history of the Universe.
 
 </p><p>The soulless parts of the All are merely instruments; all their
 action is effected, so to speak, under a compulsion from outside
 themselves.
 
 </p><p>The ensouled fall into two classes. The one kind has a motion of
 its own, but haphazard like that of horses between the shafts but
 before their driver sets the course; they are set right by the whip.
 In the Living-Being possessed of Reason, the 
 nature-principle includes
 the driver; where the driver is intelligent, it takes in the main a
 straight path to a set end. But both classes are members of the All
 and co-operate towards the general purpose.
 
 </p><p>The greater and most valuable among them have an important
 operation over a wide range: their contribution towards the life of
 the whole consists in acting, not in being acted upon; others, but
 feebly equipped for action, are almost wholly passive; there is an
 intermediate order whose members contain within themselves a 
 principle
 of productivity and activity and make themselves very effective in
 many spheres or ways and yet serve also by their passivity.
 
 </p><p>Thus the All stands as one all-complete Life, whose members, to
 the measure in which each contains within itself the Highest, effect
 all that is high and noble: and the entire scheme must be
 subordinate to its Dirigeant as an army to its general, "following
 upon Zeus"- it has been said- "as he proceeds towards the 
 Intelligible
 Kind."
 
 </p><p>Secondary in the All are those of its parts which possess a less
 exalted nature just as in us the members rank lower than the 
 Soul; and
 so all through, there is a general analogy between the things of the
 All and our own members- none of quite equal rank.
 
 </p><p>All living things, then- all in the heavens and all elsewhere-
 fall under the general Reason-Principle of the All- they have been
 made parts with a view to the whole: not one of these parts, however
 exalted, has power to effect any alteration of these 
 Reason-Principles
 or of things shaped by them and to them; some modification one part
 may work upon another, whether for better or for worse; but there is
 no power that can wrest anything outside of its distinct nature.
 
 </p><p>The part effecting such a modification for the worse may act in
 several ways.
 
 </p><p>It may set up some weakness restricted to the material frame. Or
 it may carry the weakness through to the sympathetic Soul 
 which by the
 medium of the material frame, become a power to debasement, has been
 delivered over, though never in its essence, to the inferior order
 of being. Or, in the case of a material frame ill-organized, it may
 check all such action [of the Soul] upon the material frame 
 as demands
 a certain collaboration in the part acted upon: thus a lyre may be
 so ill-strung as to be incapable of the melodic exactitude necessary
 to musical effect.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn116.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>