<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn117.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn119.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. The question arises what phase of the Soul enters into the
 union for the period of embodiment and what phase remains distinct,
 what is separable and what necessarily interlinked, and in general
 what the Living-Being is.
 
 </p><p>On all this there has been a conflict of teaching: the 
 matter must
 be examined later on from quite other considerations than occupy us
 here. For the present let us explain in what sense we have described
 the All as the expressed idea of the Governing Soul.
 
 </p><p>One theory might be that the Soul creates the particular
 entities in succession- man followed by horse and other animals
 domestic or wild: fire and earth, though, first of all- that it
 watches these creations acting upon each other whether to help or to
 harm, observes, and no more, the tangled web formed of all these
 strands, and their unfailing sequences; and that it makes no concern
 of the result beyond securing the reproduction of the primal
 living-beings, leaving them for the rest to act upon each other
 according to their definite natures.
 
 </p><p>Another view makes the soul answerable for all that thus comes
 about, since its first creations have set up the entire enchainment.
 
 </p><p>No doubt the Reason-Principle [conveyed by the Soul] covers all
 the action and experience of this realm: nothing happens, even here,
 by any form of haphazard; all follows a necessary order.
 
 </p><p>Is everything, then, to be attributed to the act of the
 Reason-Principles?
 
 </p><p>To their existence, no doubt, but not to their effective action;
 they exist and they know; or better, the Soul, which contains the
 engendering Reason-Principle, knows the results of all it has
 brought to pass. For whensoever similar factors meet and act in
 relation to each other, similar consequences must inevitably ensue:
 the Soul adopting or foreplanning the given conditions accomplishes
 the due outcome and links all into a total.
 
 </p><p>All, then, is antecedent and resultant, each sequent becoming in
 turn an antecedent once it has taken its place among things. And
 perhaps this is a cause of progressive deterioration: men, for
 instance, are not as they were of old; by dint of interval and of
 the inevitable law, the Reason-Principles have ceded something to
 the characteristics of the Matter.
 
 </p><p>But:
 
 </p><p>The Soul watches the ceaselessly changing universe and 
 follows all
 the fate of all its works: this is its life, and it knows no respite
 from this care, but is ever labouring to bring about perfection,
 planning to lead all to an unending state of excellence- like a
 farmer, first sowing and planting and then constantly setting to
 rights where rainstorms and long frosts and high gales have played
 havoc.
 
 </p><p>If such a conception of Soul be rejected as untenable, we are
 obliged to think that the Reason-Principles themselves foreknew or
 even contained the ruin and all the consequences of flaw.
 
 </p><p>But then we would be imputing the creation of evil to the
 Reason-Principles, though the arts and their guiding principle do
 not include blundering, do not cover the inartistic, the destruction
 of the work of art.
 
 </p><p>And here it will be objected that in All there is 
 nothing contrary
 to nature, nothing evil.
 
 </p><p>Still, by the side of the better there exists also what is less
 good.
 
 </p><p>Well, perhaps even the less good has its contributory 
 value in the
 All. Perhaps there is no need that everything be good. Contraries
 may co-operate; and without opposites there could be no ordered
 Universe: all living beings of the partial realm include contraries.
 The better elements are compelled into existence and moulded to
 their function by the Reason-Principle directly; the less good are
 potentially present in the Reason-Principles, actually present in
 the phenomena themselves; the Soul's power had reached its limit,
 and failed to bring the Reason-Principles into complete actuality
 since, amid the clash of these antecedent Principles, Matter had
 already from its own stock produced the less good.
 
 </p><p>Yet, with all this, Matter is continuously overruled towards the
 better; so that out of the total of things- modified by Soul on the
 one hand and by Matter on the other hand, and on neither 
 hand as sound
 as in the Reason-Principles- there is, in the end, a Unity.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn119.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>