<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn152.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn154.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Seen from a distance, objects appear reduced and close
 together, however far apart they be: within easy range, their sizes
 and the distances that separate them are observed correctly.
 
 </p><p>Distant objects show in this reduction because they must be
 drawn together for vision and the light must be concentrated to suit
 the size of the pupil; besides, as we are placed farther and farther
 away from the material mass under observation, it is more 
 and more the
 bare form that reaches us, stripped, so to speak, of magnitude as of
 all other quality.
 
 </p><p>Or it may be that we appreciate the magnitude of an object by
 observing the salience and recession of its several parts, so that
 to perceive its true size we must have it close at hand.
 
 </p><p>Or again, it may be that magnitude is known incidentally [as a
 deduction] from the observation of colour. With an object at hand we
 know how much space is covered by the colour; at a distance, 
 only that
 something is coloured, for the parts, quantitatively distinct among
 themselves, do not give us the precise knowledge of that 
 quantity, the
 colours themselves reaching us only in a blurred impression.
 
 </p><p>What wonder, then, if size be like sound- reduced when the form
 reaches us but faintly- for in sound the hearing is concerned only
 about the form; magnitude is not discerned except incidentally.
 
 </p><p>Well, in hearing magnitude is known incidentally; but how? Touch
 conveys a direct impression of a visible object; what gives us the
 same direct impression of an object of hearing?
 
 </p><p>The magnitude of a sound is known not by actual quantity but by
 degree of impact, by intensity- and this in no indirect 
 knowledge; the
 ear appreciates a certain degree of force, exactly as the palate
 perceives by no indirect knowledge, a certain degree of 
 sweetness. But
 the true magnitude of a sound is its extension; this the hearing may
 define to itself incidentally by deduction from the degree of
 intensity but not to the point of precision. The intensity is merely
 the definite effect at a particular spot; the magnitude is a 
 matter of
 totality, the sum of space occupied.
 
 </p><p>Still the colours seen from a distance are faint; but 
 they are not
 small as the masses are.
 
 </p><p>True; but there is the common fact of diminution. There is
 colour with its diminution, faintness; there is magnitude with its
 diminution, smallness; and magnitude follows colour diminishing
 stage by stage with it.
 
 </p><p>But, the phenomenon is more easily explained by the example of
 things of wide variety. Take mountains dotted with houses, woods and
 other land-marks; the observation of each detail gives us 
 the means of
 calculating, by the single objects noted, the total extent covered:
 but, where no such detail of form reaches us, our vision, which
 deals with detail, has not the means towards the knowledge of the
 whole by measurement of any one clearly discerned magnitude. This
 applies even to objects of vision close at hand: where there is
 variety and the eye sweeps over all at one glance so that the forms
 are not all caught, the total appears the less in proportion to the
 detail which has escaped the eye; observe each single point and then
 you can estimate the volume precisely. Again, magnitudes of 
 one colour
 and unbroken form trick the sense of quantity: the vision can no
 longer estimate by the particular; it slips away, not finding the
 stand-by of the difference between part and part.
 
 </p><p>It was the detail that prevented a near object deceiving 
 our sense
 of magnitude: in the case of the distant object, because the eye
 does not pass stage by stage through the stretch of intervening
 space so as to note its forms, therefore it cannot report the
 magnitude of that space.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn154.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>