<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn149.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn151.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. This, however, raises a problem deserving investigation in
 itself: what has happened when a definite magnitude of water becomes
 air, and how do we explain the increase of volume? But for 
 the present
 we must be content with the matter thus far discussed out of all the
 varied controversy accumulated on either side.
 
 </p><p>It remains for us to make out on our own account the true
 explanation of the phenomenon of mixing, without regard to the
 agreement or disagreement of that theory with any of the current
 opinions mentioned.
 
 </p><p>When water runs through wool or when papyrus-pulp gives up its
 moisture why is not the moist content expressed to the very last
 drop or even, without question of outflow, how can we possibly think
 that in a mixture the relation of matter with matter, mass with
 mass, is contact and that only the qualities are fused? The pulp is
 not merely in touch with water outside it or even in its pores; it
 is wet through and through so that every particle of its matter is
 drenched in that quality. Now if the matter is soaked all 
 through with
 the quality, then the water is everywhere in the pulp.
 
 </p><p>"Not the water; the quality of the water."
 
 </p><p>But then, where is the water? and [if only a quality has
 entered] why is there a change of volume? The pulp has been expanded
 by the addition: that is to say it has received magnitude from the
 incoming substance but if it has received the magnitude, 
 magnitude has
 been added; and a magnitude added has not been absorbed; 
 therefore the
 combined matter must occupy two several places. And as the two
 mixing substances communicate quality and receive matter in mutual
 give and take so they may give and take magnitude. Indeed when a
 quality meets another quality it suffers some change; it is 
 mixed, and
 by that admixture it is no longer pure and therefore no longer
 itself but a blunter thing, whereas magnitude joining magnitude
 retains its full strength.
 
 </p><p>But let it be understood how we came to say that body passing
 through and through another body must produce 
 disintegration, while we
 make qualities pervade their substances without producing
 disintegration: the bodilessness of qualities is the reason. Matter,
 too, is bodiless: it may, then, be supposed that as Matter pervades
 everything so the bodiless qualities associated with it- as long as
 they are few- have the power of penetration without disintegration.
 Anything solid would be stopped either in virtue of the fact that a
 solid has the precise quality which forbids it to penetrate 
 or in that
 the mere coexistence of too many qualities in Matter [constitutes
 density and so] produces the same inhibition.
 
 </p><p>If, then, what we call a dense body is so by reason of the
 presence of many qualities, that plenitude of qualities will be the
 cause [of the inhibition].
 
 </p><p>If on the other hand density is itself a quality like what they
 call corporeity, then the cause will be that particular quality.
 
 </p><p>This would mean that the qualities of two substances do not
 bring about the mixing by merely being qualities but by being apt to
 mixture; nor does Matter refuse to enter into a mixing as Matter but
 as being associated with a quality repugnant to mixture; and this
 all the more since it has no magnitude of its own but only does not
 reject magnitude.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn151.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>