<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn195.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn197.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. But: if the evil in men is involuntary, if their own will
 has not made them what they are, how can we either blame wrong-doers
 or even reproach their victims with suffering through their 
 own fault?
 
 </p><p>If there is a Necessity, bringing about human wickedness 
 either by
 force of the celestial movement or by a rigorous sequence set up by
 the First Cause, is not the evil a thin rooted in Nature? And if
 thus the Reason-Principle of the universe is the creator of evil,
 surely all is injustice?
 
 </p><p>No: Men are no doubt involuntary sinners in the sense 
 that they do
 not actually desire to sin; but this does not alter the fact that
 wrongdoers, of their own choice, are, themselves, the agents; it is
 because they themselves act that the sin is in their own; if 
 they were
 not agents they could not sin.
 
 </p><p>The Necessity [held to underlie human wickedness] is not an
 outer force [actually compelling the individual], but exists only in
 the sense of a universal relationship.
 
 </p><p>Nor is the force of the celestial Movement such as to leave us
 powerless: if the universe were something outside and apart 
 from us it
 would stand as its makers willed so that, once the gods had 
 done their
 part, no man, however impious, could introduce anything contrary to
 their intention. But, as things are, efficient act does come 
 from men:
 given the starting Principle, the secondary line, no doubt, is
 inevitably completed; but each and every principle 
 contributes towards
 the sequence. Now Men are Principles, or, at least, they are moved
 by their characteristic nature towards all that is good, and that
 nature is a Principle, a freely acting cause.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn197.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>