<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn165.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn167.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. Now, in the first place, if the Soul has not actually come
 down but has illuminated the darkness, how can it truly be said to
 have declined? The outflow from it of something in the 
 nature of light
 does not justify the assertion of its decline; for that, it must
 make an actual movement towards the object lying in the lower realm
 and illuminate it by contact.
 
 </p><p>If, on the other hand, the Soul keeps to its own place and
 illuminates the lower without directing any act towards that end,
 why should it alone be the illuminant? Why should not the Kosmos
 draw light also from the yet greater powers contained in the total
 of existence?
 
 </p><p>Again, if the Soul possesses the plan of a Universe, and 
 by virtue
 of this plan illuminates it, why do not that illumination and the
 creating of the world take place simultaneously? Why must the Soul
 wait till the representations of the plan be made actual?
 
 </p><p>Then again this Plan- the "Far Country" of their terminology-
 brought into being, as they hold, by the greater powers, could not
 have been the occasion of decline to the creators.
 
 </p><p>Further, how explain that under this illumination the Matter of
 the Kosmos produces images of the order of Soul instead of mere
 bodily-nature? An image of Soul could not demand darkness or Matter,
 but wherever formed it would exhibit the character of the producing
 element and remain in close union with it.
 
 </p><p>Next, is this image a real-being, or, as they say, an
 Intellection?
 
 </p><p>If it is a reality, in what way does it differ from its
 original? By being a distinct form of the Soul? But then, since the
 original is the reasoning Soul, this secondary form must be the
 vegetative and generative Soul; and then, what becomes of the theory
 that it is produced for glory's sake, what becomes of the creation
 in arrogance and self-assertion? The theory puts an end also to
 creation by representation and, still more decidedly, to any
 thinking in the act; and what need is left for a creator creating by
 way of Matter and Image?
 
 </p><p>If it is an Intellection, then we ask first "What justifies the
 name?" and next, "How does anything come into being unless the Soul
 give this Intellection creative power and how, after all, 
 can creative
 power reside in a created thing?" Are we to be told that it is a
 question of a first Image followed by a second?
 
 </p><p>But this is quite arbitrary.
 
 </p><p>And why is fire the first creation?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn167.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>