<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn163.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn165.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. Wealth and poverty, and all inequalities of that order, are
 made ground of complaint. But this is to ignore that the Sage
 demands no equality in such matters: he cannot think that to own
 many things is to be richer or that the powerful have the better of
 the simple; he leaves all such preoccupations to another kind of
 man. He has learned that life on earth has two distinct 
 forms, the way
 of the Sage and the way of the mass, the Sage intent upon the
 sublimest, upon the realm above, while those of the more strictly
 human type fall, again, under two classes, the one reminiscent of
 virtue and therefore not without touch with good, the other mere
 populace, serving to provide necessaries to the better sort.
 
 </p><p>But what of murder? What of the feebleness that brings men under
 slavery to the passions?
 
 </p><p>Is it any wonder that there should be failing and error, not in
 the highest, the intellectual, Principle but in Souls that are like
 undeveloped children? And is not life justified even so if it is a
 training ground with its victors and its vanquished?
 
 </p><p>You are wronged; need that trouble an immortal? You are put to
 death; you have attained your desire. And from the moment your
 citizenship of the world becomes irksome you are not bound to it.
 
 </p><p>Our adversaries do not deny that even here there is a system of
 law and penalty: and surely we cannot in justice blame a dominion
 which awards to every one his due, where virtue has its honour, and
 vice comes to its fitting shame, in which there are not merely
 representations of the gods, but the gods themselves, watchers from
 above, and- as we read- easily rebutting human reproaches, since
 they lead all things in order from a beginning to an end, 
 allotting to
 each human being, as life follows life, a fortune shaped to all that
 has preceded- the destiny which, to those that do not penetrate it,
 becomes the matter of boorish insolence upon things divine.
 
 </p><p>A man's one task is to strive towards making himself perfect-
 though not in the idea- really fatal to perfection- that to 
 be perfect
 is possible to himself alone.
 
 </p><p>We must recognize that other men have attained the heights of
 goodness; we must admit the goodness of the celestial spirits, and
 above all of the gods- those whose presence is here but their
 contemplation in the Supreme, and loftiest of them, the lord of this
 All, the most blessed Soul. Rising still higher, we hymn the
 divinities of the Intellectual Sphere, and, above all these, the
 mighty King of that dominion, whose majesty is made patent 
 in the very
 multitude of the gods.
 
 </p><p>It is not by crushing the divine unto a unity but by displaying
 its exuberance- as the Supreme himself has displayed it- that we
 show knowledge of the might of God, who, abidingly what He is, yet
 creates that multitude, all dependent on Him, existing by 
 Him and from
 Him.
 
 </p><p>This Universe, too, exists by Him and looks to Him- the Universe
 as a whole and every God within it- and tells of Him to men, 
 all alike
 revealing the plan and will of the Supreme.
 
 </p><p>These, in the nature of things, cannot be what He is, but that
 does not justify you in contempt of them, in pushing yourself
 forward as not inferior to them.
 
 </p><p>The more perfect the man, the more compliant he is, even towards
 his fellows; we must temper our importance, not thrusting insolently
 beyond what our nature warrants; we must allow other beings, also,
 their place in the presence of the Godhead; we may not set ourselves
 alone next after the First in a dream-flight which deprives us of
 our power of attaining identity with the Godhead in the measure
 possible to the human Soul, that is to say, to the point of likeness
 to which the Intellectual-Principle leads us; to exalt 
 ourselves above
 the Intellectual-Principle is to fall from it.
 
 </p><p>Yet imbeciles are found to accept such teaching at the mere
 sound of the words "You, yourself, are to be nobler than all else,
 nobler than men, nobler than even gods." Human audacity is 
 very great:
 a man once modest, restrained and simple hears, "You, yourself, are
 the child of God; those men whom you used to venerate, those beings
 whose worship they inherit from antiquity, none of these are His
 children; you without lifting a hand are nobler than the very
 heavens"; others take up the cry: the issue will be much as if in a
 crowd all equally ignorant of figures, one man were told that he
 stands a thousand cubic feet; he will naturally accept his thousand
 cubits even though the others present are said to measure only five
 cubits; he will merely tell himself that the thousand indicates a
 considerable figure.
 
 </p><p>Another point: God has care for you; how then can He be
 indifferent to the entire Universe in which you exist?
 
 </p><p>We may be told that He is too much occupied to look upon the
 Universe, and that it would not be right for Him to do so; yet, when
 He looks down and upon these people, is He not looking 
 outside Himself
 and upon the Universe in which they exist? If He cannot look outside
 Himself so as to survey the Kosmos, then neither does He look upon
 them.
 
 </p><p>But they have no need of Him?
 
 </p><p>The Universe has need of Him, and He knows its ordering and its
 indwellers and how far they belong to it and how far to the Supreme,
 and which of the men upon it are friends of God, mildly acquiescing
 with the Kosmic dispensation when in the total course of things some
 pain must be brought to them- for we are to look not to the single
 will of any man but to the universe entire, regarding every one
 according to worth but not stopping for such things where 
 all that may
 is hastening onward.
 
 </p><p>Not one only kind of being is bent upon this quest, which brings
 bliss to whatsoever achieves, and earns for the others a future
 destiny in accord with their power. No man, therefore, may flatter
 himself that he alone is competent; a pretension is not a
 possession; many boast though fully conscious of their lack and many
 imagine themselves to possess what was never theirs and even to be
 alone in possessing what they alone of men never had.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn165.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>