<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn170.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn172.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. On the other hand, to despise this Sphere, and the 
 Gods within
 it or anything else that is lovely, is not the way to goodness.
 
 </p><p>Every evil-doer began by despising the Gods; and one not
 previously corrupt, taking to this contempt, even though in other
 respects not wholly bad, becomes an evil-doer by the very fact.
 
 </p><p>Besides, in this slighting of the Mundane Gods and the world,
 the honour they profess for the gods of the Intellectual Sphere
 becomes an inconsistency; Where we love, our hearts are warm also to
 the Kin of the beloved; we are not indifferent to the children of
 our friend. Now every Soul is a child of that Father; but in the
 heavenly bodies there are Souls, intellective, holy, much closer to
 the Supernal Beings than are ours; for how can this Kosmos be a
 thing cut off from That and how imagine the gods in it to 
 stand apart?
 
 </p><p>But of this matter we have treated elsewhere: here we urge that
 where there is contempt for the Kin of the Supreme the knowledge of
 the Supreme itself is merely verbal.
 
 </p><p>What sort of piety can make Providence stop short of earthly
 concerns or set any limit whatsoever to it?
 
 </p><p>And what consistency is there in this school when they proceed
 to assert that Providence cares for them, though for them alone?
 
 </p><p>And is this Providence over them to be understood of their
 existence in that other world only or of their lives here as well?
 If in the other world, how came they to this? If in this world, why
 are they not already raised from it?
 
 </p><p>Again, how can they deny that the Lord of Providence is here?
 How else can He know either that they are here, or that in their
 sojourn here they have not forgotten Him and fallen away? 
 And if He is
 aware of the goodness of some, He must know of the wickedness of
 others, to distinguish good from bad. That means that He is 
 present to
 all, is, by whatever mode, within this Universe. The Universe,
 therefore, must be participant in Him.
 
 </p><p>If He is absent from the Universe, He is absent from yourselves,
 and you can have nothing to tell about Him or about the powers that
 come after Him.
 
 </p><p>But, allowing that a Providence reaches to you from the world
 beyond- making any concession to your liking- it remains 
 none the less
 certain that this world holds from the Supernal and is not deserted
 and will not be: a Providence watching entires is even more likely
 than one over fragments only; and similarly, Participation is more
 perfect in the case of the All-Soul- as is shown, further, 
 by the very
 existence of things and the wisdom manifest in their existence. Of
 those that advance these wild pretensions, who is so well ordered,
 so wise, as the Universe? The comparison is laughable, utterly out
 of place; to make it, except as a help towards truth, would be
 impiety.
 
 </p><p>The very question can be entertained by no intelligent being but
 only by one so blind, so utterly devoid of perception and thought,
 so far from any vision of the Intellectual Universe as not 
 even to see
 this world of our own.
 
 </p><p>For who that truly perceives the harmony of the 
 Intellectual Realm
 could fail, if he has any bent towards music, to answer to 
 the harmony
 in sensible sounds? What geometrician or arithmetician could fail to
 take pleasure in the symmetries, correspondences and principles of
 order observed in visible things? Consider, even, the case of
 pictures: those seeing by the bodily sense the productions of the
 art of painting do not see the one thing in the one only 
 way; they are
 deeply stirred by recognizing in the objects depicted to the eyes
 the presentation of what lies in the idea, and so are called to
 recollection of the truth- the very experience out of which Love
 rises. Now, if the sight of Beauty excellently reproduced upon a
 face hurries the mind to that other Sphere, surely no one seeing the
 loveliness lavish in the world of sense- this vast orderliness, the
 Form which the stars even in their remoteness display- no 
 one could be
 so dull-witted, so immoveable, as not to be carried by all this to
 recollection, and gripped by reverent awe in the thought of all
 this, so great, sprung from that greatness. Not to answer thus could
 only be to have neither fathomed this world nor had any 
 vision of that
 other.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn172.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>