<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn105.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn107.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. It is again not in reason that a particular star should be
 gladdened by seeing this or that other while, in a second 
 couple, such
 an aspect is distressing: what enmities can affect such beings? what
 causes of enmity can there be among them?
 
 </p><p>And why should there be any difference as a given star sees
 certain others from the corner of a triangle or in opposition or at
 the angle of a square?
 
 </p><p>Why, again, should it see its fellow from some one given
 position and yet, in the next Zodiacal figure, not see it, though
 the two are actually nearer?
 
 </p><p>And, the cardinal question; by what conceivable process 
 could they
 affect what is attributed to them? How explain either the action of
 any single star independently or, still more perplexing, the 
 effect of
 their combined intentions?
 
 </p><p>We cannot think of them entering into compromises, each 
 renouncing
 something of its efficiency and their final action in our regard
 amounting to a concerted plan.
 
 </p><p>No one star would suppress the contribution of another, nor
 would star yield to star and shape its conduct under suasion.
 
 </p><p>As for the fancy that while one is glad when it enters another's
 region, the second is vexed when in its turn it occupies the place
 of the first, surely this is like starting with the 
 supposition of two
 friends and then going on to talk of one being attracted to the
 other who, however, abhors the first.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn107.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>