<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn103.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn105.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Are these planets to be thought of as soulless or unsouled?
 
 </p><p>Suppose them, first, to be without Soul.
 
 </p><p>In that case they can purvey only heat or cold- if cold from the
 stars can be thought of- that is to say, any communication from them
 will affect only our bodily nature, since all they have to 
 communicate
 to us is merely corporeal. This implies that no considerable change
 can be caused in the bodies affected since emanations merely 
 corporeal
 cannot differ greatly from star to star, and must, moreover, blend
 upon earth into one collective resultant: at most the differences
 would be such as depend upon local position, upon nearness or
 farness with regard to the centre of influence. This reasoning, of
 course, is as valid of any cold emanation there may be as of 
 the warm.
 
 </p><p>Now, what is there in such corporeal action to account for the
 various classes and kinds of men, learned and illiterate, scholars
 as against orators, musicians as against people of other
 professions? Can a power merely physical make rich or poor? Can it
 bring about such conditions as in no sense depend upon the 
 interaction
 of corporeal elements? Could it, for example, bring a man such and
 such a brother, father, son, or wife, give him a stroke of good
 fortune at a particular moment, or make him generalissimo or king?
 
 </p><p>Next, suppose the stars to have life and mind and to be
 effective by deliberate purpose.
 
 </p><p>In that case, what have they suffered from us that they 
 should, in
 free will, do us hurt, they who are established in a divine place,
 themselves divine? There is nothing in their nature of what makes
 men base, nor can our weal or woe bring them the slightest good or
 ill.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn105.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>