<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn168.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn170.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. In yet another way they infringe still more gravely upon the
 inviolability of the Supreme.
 
 </p><p>In the sacred formulas they inscribe, purporting to address the
 Supernal Beings- not merely the Soul but even the Transcendents-
 they are simply uttering spells and appeasements and 
 evocations in the
 idea that these Powers will obey a call and be led about by a word
 from any of us who is in some degree trained to use the appropriate
 forms in the appropriate way- certain melodies, certain sounds,
 specially directed breathings, sibilant cries, and all else to which
 is ascribed magic potency upon the Supreme. Perhaps they would
 repudiate any such intention: still they must explain how 
 these things
 act upon the unembodied: they do not see that the power they 
 attribute
 to their own words is so much taken away from the majesty of the
 divine.
 
 </p><p>They tell us they can free themselves of diseases.
 
 </p><p>If they meant, by temperate living and an appropriate 
 regime, they
 would be right and in accordance with all sound knowledge. But they
 assert diseases to be Spirit-Beings and boast of being able to expel
 them by formula: this pretension may enhance their 
 importance with the
 crowd, gaping upon the powers of magicians; but they can never
 persuade the intelligent that disease arises otherwise than from
 such causes as overstrain, excess, deficiency, putrid decay; in a
 word, some variation whether from within or from without.
 
 </p><p>The nature of illness is indicated by its very cure. A motion, a
 medicine, the letting of blood, and the disease shifts down and
 away; sometimes scantiness of nourishment restores the system:
 presumably the Spiritual power gets hungry or is debilitated by the
 purge. Either this Spirit makes a hasty exit or it remains within.
 If it stays, how does the disease disappear, with the cause still
 present? If it quits the place, what has driven it out? Has anything
 happened to it? Are we to suppose it throve on the disease? In that
 case the disease existed as something distinct from the
 Spirit-Power. Then again, if it steps in where no cause of sickness
 exists, why should there be anything else but illness? If there must
 be such a cause, the Spirit is unnecessary: that cause is sufficient
 to produce that fever. As for the notion, that just when the cause
 presents itself, the watchful Spirit leaps to incorporate itself
 with it, this is simply amusing.
 
 </p><p>But the manner and motive of their teaching have been 
 sufficiently
 exhibited; and this was the main purpose of the discussion here upon
 their Spirit-Powers. I leave it to yourselves to read the books and
 examine the rest of the doctrine: you will note all through how our
 form of philosophy inculcates simplicity of character and honest
 thinking in addition to all other good qualities, how it cultivates
 reverence and not arrogant self-assertion, how its boldness is
 balanced by reason, by careful proof, by cautious progression, by
 the utmost circumspection- and you will compare those other 
 systems to
 one proceeding by this method. You will find that the tenets of
 their school have been huddled together under a very different plan:
 they do not deserve any further examination here.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn170.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>