<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn177.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn179.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. "Atoms" or "elements"- it is in either case an absurdity, an
 impossibility, to hand over the universe and its contents to
 material entities, and out of the disorderly swirl thus occasioned
 to call order, reasoning, and the governing soul into being; but the
 atomic origin is, if we may use the phrase, the most impossible.
 
 </p><p>A good deal of truth has resulted from the discussion of this
 subject; but, even to admit such principles does not compel us to
 admit universal compulsion or any kind of "fate."
 
 </p><p>Suppose the atoms to exist:
 
 </p><p>These atoms are to move, one downwards- admitting a down and an
 up- another slant-wise, all at haphazard, in a confused conflict.
 Nothing here is orderly; order has not come into being, though the
 outcome, this Universe, when it achieves existence, is all order;
 and thus prediction and divination are utterly impossible, whether
 by the laws of the science- what science can operate where 
 there is no
 order?- or by divine possession and inspiration, which no 
 less require
 that the future be something regulated.
 
 </p><p>Material entities exposed to all this onslaught may very well be
 under compulsion to yield to whatsoever the atoms may bring: 
 but would
 anyone pretend that the acts and states of a soul or mind could be
 explained by any atomic movements? How can we imagine that the
 onslaught of an atom, striking downwards or dashing in from any
 direction, could force the soul to definite and necessary reasonings
 or impulses or into any reasonings, impulses or thoughts at all,
 necessary or otherwise? And what of the soul's resistance to bodily
 states? What movement of atoms could compel one man to be a
 geometrician, set another studying arithmetic or astronomy, lead a
 third to the philosophic life? In a word, if we must go, 
 like soulless
 bodies, wherever bodies push and drive us, there is an end to our
 personal act and to our very existence as living beings.
 
 </p><p>The School that erects other material forces into 
 universal causes
 is met by the same reasoning: we say that while these can warm us
 and chill us, and destroy weaker forms of existence, they can be
 causes of nothing that is done in the sphere of mind or 
 soul: all this
 must be traceable to quite another kind of Principle.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn179.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>