<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn153.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn155.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. The explanation by lesser angle of vision has been elsewhere
 dismissed; one point, however, we may urge here.
 
 </p><p>Those attributing the reduced appearance to the lesser angle
 occupied allow by their very theory that the unoccupied 
 portion of the
 eye still sees something beyond or something quite apart from the
 object of vision, if only air-space.
 
 </p><p>Now consider some very large object of vision, that mountain for
 example. No part of the eye is unoccupied; the mountain adequately
 fills it so that it can take in nothing beyond, for the mountain as
 seen either corresponds exactly to the eye-space or 
 stretches away out
 of range to right and to left. How does the explanation by lesser
 angle of vision hold good in this case, where the object 
 still appears
 smaller, far, than it is and yet occupies the eye entire?
 
 </p><p>Or look up to the sky and no hesitation can remain. Of course we
 cannot take in the entire hemisphere at one glance; the eye directed
 to it could not cover so vast an expanse. But suppose the 
 possibility:
 the entire eye, then, embraces the hemisphere entire; but the
 expanse of the heavens is far greater than it appears; how can its
 appearing far less than it is be explained by a lessening of 
 the angle
 of vision?
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn155.htm">Next: NINTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>