<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn115.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn117.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. What of poverty and riches, glory and power?
 
 </p><p>In the case of inherited fortune, the stars merely 
 announce a rich
 man, exactly as they announce the high social standing of the child
 born to a distinguished house.
 
 </p><p>Wealth may be due to personal activity: in this case if the body
 has contributed, part of the effect is due to whatever has 
 contributed
 towards the physical powers, first the parents and then, if place
 has had its influence, sky and earth; if the body has borne 
 no part of
 the burden, then the success, and all the splendid accompaniments
 added by the Recompensers, must be attributed to virtue exclusively.
 If fortune has come by gift from the good, then the source of the
 wealth is, again, virtue: if by gift from the evil, but to a
 meritorious recipient, then the credit must be given to the action
 of the best in them: if the recipient is himself unprincipled, the
 wealth must be attributed primarily to the very wickedness and to
 whatsoever is responsible for the wickedness, while the 
 givers bear an
 equal share in the wrong.
 
 </p><p>When the success is due to labour, tillage for example, 
 it must be
 put down to the tiller, with all his environment as contributory. In
 the case of treasure-trove, something from the All has entered into
 action; and if this be so, it will be foreshown- since all 
 things make
 a chain, so that we can speak of things universally. Money 
 is lost: if
 by robbery, the blame lies with the robber and the native principle
 guiding him: if by shipwreck, the cause is the chain of 
 events. As for
 good fame, it is either deserved and then is due to the services
 done and to the merit of those appraising them, or it is undeserved,
 and then must be attributed to the injustice of those making the
 award. And the same principle holds is regards power- for this also
 may be rightly or unrightly placed- it depends either upon the merit
 of the dispensers of place or upon the man himself who has effected
 his purpose by the organization of supporters or in many other
 possible ways. Marriages, similarly, are brought about either by
 choice or by chance interplay of circumstance. And births are
 determined by marriages: the child is moulded true to type when all
 goes well; otherwise it is marred by some inner detriment, something
 due to the mother personally or to an environment 
 unfavourable to that
 particular conception.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn117.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>