<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn176.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn178.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. But to halt at these nearest determinants, not to be 
 willing to
 penetrate deeper, indicates a sluggish mind, a dullness to all that
 calls us towards the primal and transcendent causes.
 
 </p><p>How comes it that the same surface causes produce different
 results? There is moonshine, and one man steals and the other does
 not: under the influence of exactly similar surroundings one 
 man falls
 sick and the other keeps well; an identical set of operations makes
 one rich and leaves another poor. The differences amongst us in
 manners, in characters, in success, force us to go still 
 further back.
 
 </p><p>Men therefore have never been able to rest at the surface causes.
 
 </p><p>One school postulates material principles, such as 
 atoms; from the
 movement, from the collisions and combinations of these, it derives
 the existence and the mode of being of all particular phenomena,
 supposing that all depends upon how these atoms are agglomerated,
 how they act, how they are affected; our own impulses and states,
 even, are supposed to be determined by these principles.
 
 </p><p>Such teaching, then, obtrudes this compulsion, an atomic Anagke,
 even upon Real Being. Substitute, for the atoms, any other material
 entities as principles and the cause of all things, and at once Real
 Being becomes servile to the determination set up by them.
 
 </p><p>Others rise to the first-principle of all that exists and from
 it derive all they tell of a cause penetrating all things, not
 merely moving all but making each and everything; but they pose this
 as a fate and a supremely dominating cause; not merely all else that
 comes into being, but even our own thinking and thoughts would
 spring from its movement, just as the several members of an animal
 move not at their own choice but at the dictation of the leading
 principle which animal life presupposes.
 
 </p><p>Yet another school fastens on the universal Circuit as embracing
 all things and producing all by its motion and by the positions and
 mutual aspect of the planets and fixed stars in whose power of
 foretelling they find warrant for the belief that this Circuit is
 the universal determinant.
 
 </p><p>Finally, there are those that dwell on the interconnection of
 the causative forces and on their linked descent- every later
 phenomenon following upon an earlier, one always leading back to
 others by which it arose and without which it could not be, and the
 latest always subservient to what went before them- but this is
 obviously to bring in fate by another path. This school may be
 fairly distinguished into two branches; a section which makes all
 depend upon some one principle and a section which ignores such a
 unity.
 
 </p><p>Of this last opinion we will have something to say, but for the
 moment we will deal with the former, taking the others in their turn.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn178.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>