<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn155.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn157.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. We have seen elsewhere that the Good, the Principle, is
 simplex, and, correspondingly, primal- for the secondary can never
 be simplex- that it contains nothing: that it is an integral Unity.
 
 </p><p>Now the same Nature belongs to the Principle we know as The One.
 just as the goodness of The Good is essential and not the 
 outgrowth of
 some prior substance so the Unity of The One is its essential.
 
 </p><p>Therefore:
 
 </p><p>When we speak of The One and when we speak of The Good we must
 recognize an Identical Nature; we must affirm that they are the
 same- not, it is true, as venturing any predication with regard to
 that [unknowable] Hypostasis but simply as indicating it to ourselves
 in the best terms we find.
 
 </p><p>Even in calling it "The First" we mean no more than to express
 that it is the most absolutely simplex: it is the Self-Sufficing
 only in the sense that it is not of that compound nature which would
 make it dependent upon any constituent; it is "the Self-Contained"
 because everything contained in something alien must also exist by
 that alien.
 
 </p><p>Deriving, then, from nothing alien, entering into nothing alien,
 in no way a made-up thing, there can be nothing above it.
 
 </p><p>We need not, then, go seeking any other Principles; this- the
 One and the Good- is our First; next to it follows the Intellectual
 Principle, the Primal Thinker; and upon this follows Soul. 
 Such is the
 order in nature. The Intellectual Realm allows no more than these
 and no fewer.
 
 </p><p>Those who hold to fewer Principles must hold the identity of
 either Intellectual-Principle and Soul or of Intellectual-Principle
 and The First; but we have abundantly shown that these are distinct.
 
 </p><p>It remains for us to consider whether there are more than these
 Three.
 
 </p><p>Now what other [Divine] Kinds could there be? No 
 Principles of the
 universe could be found at once simpler and more transcendent than
 this whose existence we have affirmed and described.
 
 </p><p>They will scarcely urge upon us the doubling of the Principle in
 Act by a Principle in Potentiality. It is absurd to seek such a
 plurality by distinguishing between potentiality and actuality in
 the case of immaterial beings whose existence is in Act- 
 even in lower
 forms no such division can be made and we cannot conceive a 
 duality in
 the Intellectual-Principle, one phase in some vague calm, another
 all astir. Under what form can we think of repose in the
 Intellectual Principle as contrasted with its movement or utterance?
 What would the quiescence of the one phase be as against the 
 energy of
 the others?
 
 </p><p>No: the Intellectual-Principle is continuously itself,
 unchangeably constituted in stable Act. With movement- towards it or
 within it- we are in the realm of the Soul's operation: such act is
 a Reason-Principle emanating from it and entering into Soul, 
 thus made
 an Intellectual Soul, but in no sense creating an intermediate
 Principle to stand between the two.
 
 </p><p>Nor are we warranted in affirming a plurality of Intellectual
 Principles on the ground that there is one that knows and thinks and
 another knowing that it knows and thinks. For whatever distinction
 be possible in the Divine between its Intellectual Act and its
 Consciousness of that Act, still all must be one projection not
 unaware of its own operation: it would be absurd to imagine any such
 unconsciousness in the Authentic Intelligence; the knowing principle
 must be one and the selfsame with that which knows of the knowing.
 
 </p><p>The contrary supposition would give us two beings, one 
 that merely
 knows, and another separate being that knows of the act of knowing.
 
 </p><p>If we are answered that the distinction is merely a 
 process of our
 thought, then, at once, the theory of a plurality in the Divine
 Hypostasis is abandoned: further, the question is opened whether our
 thought can entertain a knowing principle so narrowed to its knowing
 as not to know that it knows- a limitation which would be charged as
 imbecility even in ourselves, who if but of very ordinary moral
 force are always master of our emotions and mental processes.
 
 </p><p>No: The Divine Mind in its mentation thinks itself; the object
 of the thought is nothing external: Thinker and Thought are one;
 therefore in its thinking and knowing it possesses itself, observes
 itself and sees itself not as something unconscious but as 
 knowing: in
 this Primal Knowing it must include, as one and the same Act, the
 knowledge of the knowing; and even the logical distinction mentioned
 above cannot be made in the case of the Divine; the very eternity of
 its self-thinking precludes any such separation between that
 intellective act and the consciousness of the act.
 
 </p><p>The absurdity becomes still more blatant if we introduce yet a
 further distinction- after that which affirms the knowledge of the
 knowing, a third distinction affirming the knowing of the 
 knowledge of
 the knowing: yet there is no reason against carrying on the division
 for ever and ever.
 
 </p><p>To increase the Primals by making the Supreme Mind engender the
 Reason-Principle, and this again engender in the Soul a 
 distinct power
 to act as mediator between Soul and the Supreme Mind, this is to
 deny intellection to the Soul, which would no longer derive 
 its Reason
 from the Intellectual-Principle but from an intermediate: the Soul
 then would possess not the Reason-Principle but an image of it: the
 Soul could not know the Intellectual-Principle; it could have no
 intellection.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn157.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>