<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn119.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn121.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. Are the evils in the Universe necessary because it 
 is of later
 origin than the Higher Sphere?
 
 </p><p>Perhaps rather because without evil the All would be incomplete.
 For most or even all forms of evil serve the Universe- much as the
 poisonous snake has its use- though in most cases their function is
 unknown. Vice itself has many useful sides: it brings about much
 that is beautiful, in artistic creations for example, and it stirs
 us to thoughtful living, not allowing us to drowse in security.
 
 </p><p>If all this is so, then [the secret of creation is that] the
 Soul of the All abides in contemplation of the Highest and Best,
 ceaselessly striving towards the Intelligible Kind and towards God:
 but, thus absorbing and filled full, it overflows- so to speak- and
 the image it gives forth, its last utterance towards the lower, will
 be the creative puissance.
 
 </p><p>This ultimate phase, then, is the Maker, secondary to that
 aspect of the Soul which is primarily saturated from the Divine
 Intelligence. But the Creator above all is the 
 Intellectual-Principle,
 as giver, to the Soul that follows it, of those gifts whose traces
 exist in the Third Kind.
 
 </p><p>Rightly, therefore, is this Kosmos described as an image
 continuously being imaged, the First and the Second Principles
 immobile, the Third, too, immobile essentially, but, accidentally
 and in Matter, having motion.
 
 </p><p>For as long as divine Mind and Soul exist, the divine
 Thought-Forms will pour forth into that phase of the Soul: as long as
 there is a sun, all that streams from it will be some form of Light.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn121.htm">Next: FOURTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>