<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn099.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn101.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. And what of lower things? [Why have they not this motion?]
 
 </p><p>[Their case is very different]: the single thing here is not an
 all but a part and limited to a given segment of space; that other
 realm is all, is space, so to speak, and is subject to no 
 hindrance or
 control, for in itself it is all that is.
 
 </p><p>And men?
 
 </p><p>As a self, each is a personal whole, no doubt; but as member of
 the universe, each is a partial thing.
 
 </p><p>But if, wherever the circling body be, it possesses the 
 Soul, what
 need of the circling?
 
 </p><p>Because everywhere it finds something else besides the 
 Soul [which
 it desires to possess alone].
 
 </p><p>The circular movement would be explained, too, if the 
 Soul's power
 may be taken as resident at its centre.
 
 </p><p>Here, however, we must distinguish between a centre in reference
 to the two different natures, body and Soul.
 
 </p><p>In body, centre is a point of place; in Soul it is a source, the
 source of some other nature. The word, which without qualification
 would mean the midpoint of a spheric mass, may serve in the double
 reference; and, as in a material mass so in the Soul, there must be
 a centre, that around which the object, Soul or material mass,
 revolves.
 
 </p><p>The Soul exists in revolution around God to whom it clings in
 love, holding itself to the utmost of its power near to Him as the
 Being on which all depends; and since it cannot coincide with God it
 circles about Him.
 
 </p><p>Why then do not all souls [i.e., the lower, also, as those of
 men and animals] thus circle about the Godhead?
 
 </p><p>Every Soul does in its own rank and place.
 
 </p><p>And why not our very bodies, also?
 
 </p><p>Because the forward path is characteristic of body and 
 because all
 the body's impulses are to other ends and because what in us is of
 this circling nature is hampered in its motion by the clay it bears
 with it, while in the higher realm everything flows on its course,
 lightly and easily, with nothing to check it, once there is any
 principle of motion in it at all.
 
 </p><p>And it may very well be that even in us the Spirit which dwells
 with the Soul does thus circle about the divinity. For since God is
 omnipresent the Soul desiring perfect union must take the circular
 course: God is not stationed.
 
 </p><p>Similarly Plato attributes to the stars not only the spheric
 movement belonging to the universe as a whole but also to each a
 revolution around their common centre; each- not by way of 
 thought but
 by links of natural necessity- has in its own place taken hold of
 God and exults.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn101.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>