<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn194.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn196.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. It would not be just, because Providence cannot be a
 something reducing us to nothingness: to think of Providence as
 everything, with no other thing in existence, is to annihilate the
 Universe; such a providence could have no field of action; nothing
 would exist except the Divine. As things are, the Divine, of course,
 exists, but has reached forth to something other- not to reduce that
 to nothingness but to preside over it; thus in the case of Man, for
 instance, the Divine presides as the Providence, preserving the
 character of human nature, that is the character of a being under
 the providential law, which, again, implies subjection to what that
 law may enjoin.
 
 </p><p>And that law enjoins that those who have made themselves good
 shall know the best of life, here and later, the bad the reverse.
 But the law does not warrant the wicked in expecting that their
 prayers should bring others to sacrifice themselves for their sakes;
 or that the gods should lay aside the divine life in order to direct
 their daily concerns; or that good men, who have chosen a path
 nobler than all earthly rule, should become their rulers. 
 The perverse
 have never made a single effort to bring the good into authority,
 nor do they take any steps to improve themselves; they are all spite
 against anyone that becomes good of his own motion, though 
 if good men
 were placed in authority the total of goodness would be increased.
 
 </p><p>In sum: Man has come into existence, a living being but not a
 member of the noblest order; he occupies by choice an intermediate
 rank; still, in that place in which he exists, Providence does not
 allow him to be reduced to nothing; on the contrary he is ever being
 led upwards by all those varied devices which the Divine employs in
 its labour to increase the dominance of moral value. The human race,
 therefore, is not deprived by Providence of its rational being; it
 retains its share, though necessarily limited, in wisdom,
 intelligence, executive power and right doing, the right doing, at
 least, of individuals to each other- and even in wronging others
 people think they are doing right and only paying what is due.
 
 </p><p>Man is, therefore, a noble creation, as perfect as the scheme
 allows; a part, no doubt, in the fabric of the All, he yet 
 holds a lot
 higher than that of all the other living things of earth.
 
 </p><p>Now, no one of any intelligence complains of these others, man's
 inferiors, which serve to the adornment of the world; it would be
 feeble indeed to complain of animals biting man, as if we 
 were to pass
 our days asleep. No: the animal, too, exists of necessity, and is
 serviceable in many ways, some obvious and many progressively
 discovered- so that not one lives without profit to itself 
 and even to
 humanity. It is ridiculous, also, to complain that many of them are
 dangerous- there are dangerous men abroad as well- and if they
 distrust us, and in their distrust attack, is that anything to
 wonder at?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn196.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>