<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn169.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn171.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. There is, however, one matter which we must on no account
 overlook- the effect of these teachings upon the hearers led by them
 into despising the world and all that is in it.
 
 </p><p>There are two theories as to the attainment of the End of life.
 The one proposes pleasure, bodily pleasure, as the term; the other
 pronounces for good and virtue, the desire of which comes 
 from God and
 moves, by ways to be studied elsewhere, towards God.
 
 </p><p>Epicurus denies a Providence and recommends pleasure and its
 enjoyment, all that is left to us: but the doctrine under discussion
 is still more wanton; it carps at Providence and the Lord of
 Providence; it scorns every law known to us; immemorial 
 virtue and all
 restraint it makes into a laughing stock, lest any loveliness be
 seen on earth; it cuts at the root of all orderly living, and of the
 righteousness which, innate in the moral sense, is made perfect by
 thought and by self-discipline: all that would give us a noble human
 being is gone. What is left for them except where the pupil 
 by his own
 character betters the teaching- comes to pleasure, self-seeking, the
 grudge of any share with one's fellows, the pursuit of advantage.
 
 </p><p>Their error is that they know nothing good here: all 
 they care for
 is something else to which they will at some future time apply
 themselves: yet, this world, to those that have known it 
 once, must be
 the starting-point of the pursuit: arrived here from out of 
 the divine
 nature, they must inaugurate their effort by some earthly
 correction. The understanding of beauty is not given except to a
 nature scorning the delight of the body, and those that have no part
 in well-doing can make no step towards the Supernal.
 
 </p><p>This school, in fact, is convicted by its neglect of all mention
 of virtue: any discussion of such matters is missing utterly: we are
 not told what virtue is or under what different kinds it appears;
 there is no word of all the numerous and noble reflections upon it
 that have come down to us from the ancients; we do not learn what
 constitutes it or how it is acquired, how the Soul is tended, how it
 is cleaned. For to say "Look to God" is not helpful without some
 instruction as to what this looking imports: it might very well be
 said that one can "look" and still sacrifice no pleasure, 
 still be the
 slave of impulse, repeating the word God but held in the 
 grip of every
 passion and making no effort to master any. Virtue, advancing
 towards the Term and, linked with thought, occupying a Soul makes
 God manifest: God on the lips, without a good conduct of life, is a
 word.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn171.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>