<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn166.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn168.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. And how does this image set to its task immediately after it
 comes into being?
 
 </p><p>By memory of what it has seen?
 
 </p><p>But it was utterly non-existent, it could have no vision, either
 it or the Mother they bestow upon it.
 
 </p><p>Another difficulty: These people come upon earth not as
 Soul-Images but as veritable Souls; yet, by great stress and strain,
 one or two of them are able to stir beyond the limits of the world,
 and when they do attain Reminiscence barely carry with them some
 slight recollection of the Sphere they once knew: on the other hand,
 this Image, a new-comer into being, is able, they tell us- as also
 is its Mother- to form at least some dim representation of the
 celestial world. It is an Image, stamped in Matter, yet it not
 merely has the conception of the Supreme and adopts from that world
 the plan of this, but knows what elements serve the purpose. How,
 for instance, did it come to make fire before anything else? 
 What made
 it judge fire a better first than some other object?
 
 </p><p>Again, if it created the fire of the Universe by 
 thinking of fire,
 why did it not make the Universe at a stroke by thinking of the
 Universe? It must have conceived the product complete from the
 first; the constituent elements would be embraced in that general
 conception.
 
 </p><p>The creation must have been in all respects more according to
 the way of Nature than to that of the arts- for the arts are of
 later origin than Nature and the Universe, and even at the present
 stage the partial things brought into being by the natural Kinds do
 not follow any such order- first fire, then the several other
 elements, then the various blends of these- on the contrary 
 the living
 organism entire is encompassed and rounded off within the uterine
 germ. Why should not the material of the Universe be similarly
 embraced in a Kosmic Type in which earth, fire and the rest would be
 included? We can only suppose that these people themselves, acting
 by their more authentic Soul, would have produced the world by such
 a process, but that the Creator had not wit to do so.
 
 </p><p>And yet to conceive the vast span of the Heavens- to be great in
 that degree- to devise the obliquity of the Zodiac and the circling
 path of all the celestial bodies beneath it, and this earth of ours-
 and all in such a way that reason can be given for the plan- this
 could never be the work of an Image; it tells of that Power [the
 All-Soul] next to the very Highest Beings.
 
 </p><p>Against their will, they themselves admit this: their
 "outshining upon the darkness," if the doctrine is sifted, makes it
 impossible to deny the true origins of the Kosmos.
 
 </p><p>Why should this down-shining take place unless such a process
 belonged to a universal law?
 
 </p><p>Either the process is in the order of Nature or against that
 order. If it is in the nature of things, it must have taken 
 place from
 eternity; if it is against the nature of things, then the breach of
 natural right exists in the Supreme also; evil antedates this world;
 the cause of evil is not the world; on the contrary the 
 Supreme is the
 evil to us; instead of the Soul's harm coming from this sphere, we
 have this Sphere harmed by the Soul.
 
 </p><p>In fine, the theory amounts to making the world one of the
 Primals, and with it the Matter from which it emerges.
 
 </p><p>The Soul that declined, they tell us, saw and illuminated the
 already existent Darkness. Now whence came that Darkness?
 
 </p><p>If they tell us that the Soul created the Darkness by 
 its Decline,
 then, obviously, there was nowhere for the Soul to decline to; the
 cause of the decline was not the Darkness but the very nature of the
 Soul. The theory, therefore, refers the entire process to 
 pre-existing
 compulsions: the guilt inheres in the Primal Beings.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn168.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>