<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn146.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn148.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. The Whiteness, therefore, in a human being is, clearly, to be
 classed not as a quality but as an activity- the act of a power
 which can make white; and similarly what we think of as qualities in
 the Intellectual Realm should be known as activities; they are
 activities which to our minds take the appearance of quality from
 the fact that, differing in character among themselves, each of them
 is a particularity which, so to speak, distinguishes those Realities
 from each other.
 
 </p><p>What, then, distinguishes Quality in the Intellectual Realm from
 that here, if both are Acts?
 
 </p><p>The difference is that these ["Quality-Activities"] in 
 the Supreme
 do not indicate the very nature of the Reality [as do the
 corresponding Activities here] nor do they indicate variations of
 substance or of [essential] character; they merely indicate what we
 think of as Quality but in the Intellectual Realm must still be
 Activity.
 
 </p><p>In other words this thing, considered in its aspect as
 possessing the characteristic property of Reality is by that alone
 recognised as no mere Quality. But when our reason separates what is
 distinctive in these ["Quality-Activities"]- not in the sense of
 abolishing them but rather as taking them to itself and making
 something new of them- this new something is Quality: reason has, so
 to speak, appropriated a portion of Reality, that portion manifest
 to it on the surface.
 
 </p><p>By this analogy, warmth, as a concomitant of the specific nature
 of fire, may very well be no quality in fire but an Idea-Form
 belonging to it, one of its activities, while being merely a Quality
 in other things than fire: as it is manifested in any warm object,
 it is not a mode of Reality but merely a trace, a shadow, an image,
 something that has gone forth from its own Reality- where it was an
 Act- and in the warm object is a quality.
 
 </p><p>All, then, that is accident and not Act; all but what is 
 Idea-form
 of the Reality; all that merely confers pattern; all this is
 Quality: qualities are characteristics and modes other than those
 constituting the substratum of a thing.
 
 </p><p>But the Archetypes of all such qualities, the foundation in
 which they exist primarily, these are Activities of the Intellectual
 Beings.
 
 </p><p>And; one and the same thing cannot be both Quality and
 non-quality: the thing void of Real-Existence is Quality; but the
 thing accompanying Reality is either Form or Activity: there is no
 longer self-identity when, from having its being in itself, anything
 comes to be in something else with a fall from its standing as Form
 and Activity.
 
 </p><p>Finally, anything which is never Form but always accidental to
 something else is Quality unmixed and nothing more.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn148.htm">Next: SEVENTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>