<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn192.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn194.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. A preliminary observation: in looking for excellence in this
 thing of mixture, the Kosmos, we cannot require all that is 
 implied in
 the excellence of the unmingled; it is folly to ask for Firsts in
 the Secondary, and since this Universe contains body, we must allow
 for some bodily influence upon the total and be thankful if the
 mingled existent lack nothing of what its nature allowed it 
 to receive
 from the Divine Reason.
 
 </p><p>Thus, supposing we were enquiring for the finest type of 
 the human
 being as known here, we would certainly not demand that he prove
 identical with Man as in the Divine Intellect; we would think it
 enough in the Creator to have so brought this thing of flesh 
 and nerve
 and bone under Reason as to give grace to these corporeal 
 elements and
 to have made it possible for Reason to have contact with Matter.
 
 </p><p>Our progress towards the object of our investigation must begin
 from this principle of gradation which will open to us the wonder of
 the Providence and of the power by which our universe holds 
 its being.
 
 </p><p>We begin with evil acts entirely dependent upon the Souls which
 perpetrate them- the harm, for example, which perverted Souls do to
 the good and to each other. Unless the foreplanning power alone is
 to be charged with the vice in such Souls, we have no ground of
 accusation, no claim to redress: the blame lies on the Soul 
 exercising
 its choice. Even a Soul, we have seen, must have its individual
 movement; it is not abstract Spirit; the first step towards animal
 life has been taken and the conduct will naturally be in keeping
 with that character.
 
 </p><p>It is not because the world existed that Souls are here: before
 the world was, they had it in them to be of the world, to concern
 themselves with it, to presuppose it, to administer it: it was in
 their nature to produce it- by whatever method, whether by giving
 forth some emanation while they themselves remained above, or by an
 actual descent, or in both ways together, some presiding from above,
 others descending; some for we are not at the moment concerned about
 the mode of creation but are simply urging that, however the 
 world was
 produced, no blame falls on Providence for what exists within it.
 
 </p><p>There remains the other phase of the question- the 
 distribution of
 evil to the opposite classes of men: the good go bare while 
 the wicked
 are rich: all that human need demands, the least deserving have in
 abundance; it is they that rule; peoples and states are at their
 disposal. Would not all this imply that the divine power does not
 reach to earth?
 
 </p><p>That it does is sufficiently established by the fact that Reason
 rules in the lower things: animals and plants have their share in
 Reason, Soul and Life.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps, then, it reaches to earth but is not master over all?
 
 </p><p>We answer that the universe is one living organism: as well
 maintain that while human head and face are the work of nature and
 of the ruling reason-principle, the rest of the frame is due to
 other agencies- accident or sheer necessity- and owes its
 inferiority to this origin, or to the incompetence of unaided
 Nature. And even granting that those less noble members are not in
 themselves admirable it would still be neither pious nor 
 even reverent
 to censure the entire structure.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn194.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>