<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn138.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn140.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. A distinction is made between things existing actually and
 things existing potentially; a certain Actuality, also, is spoken of
 as a really existent entity. We must consider what content 
 there is in
 these terms.
 
 </p><p>Can we distinguish between Actuality [an absolute, abstract
 Principle] and the state of being-in-act? And if there is such an
 Actuality, is this itself in Act, or are the two quite distinct so
 that this actually existent thing need not be, itself, an Act?
 
 </p><p>It is indubitable that Potentiality exists in the Realm of
 Sense: but does the Intellectual Realm similarly include the 
 potential
 or only the actual? and if the potential exists there, does it
 remain merely potential for ever? And, if so, is this resistance to
 actualization due to its being precluded [as a member of the 
 Divine or
 Intellectual world] from time-processes?
 
 </p><p>First we must make clear what potentiality is.
 
 </p><p>We cannot think of potentiality as standing by itself; there can
 be no potentiality apart from something which a given thing may be
 or become. Thus bronze is the potentiality of a statue: but 
 if nothing
 could be made out of the bronze, nothing wrought upon it, if it
 could never be anything as a future to what it has been, if it
 rejected all change, it would be bronze and nothing else: its own
 character it holds already as a present thing, and that would be the
 full of its capacity: it would be destitute of potentiality.
 Whatsoever has a potentiality must first have a character of its
 own; and its potentiality will consist in its having a reach beyond
 that character to some other.
 
 </p><p>Sometimes after it has turned its potentiality into actuality it
 will remain what it was; sometimes it will sink itself to the
 fullest extent in the new form and itself disappear: these two
 different modes are exemplified in (1) bronze as potentially a
 statue and (2) water [= primal-liquid] as potentially bronze or,
 again, air as potentially fire.
 
 </p><p>But if this be the significance of potentiality, may we describe
 it as a Power towards the thing that is to be? Is the Bronze a power
 towards a statue?
 
 </p><p>Not in the sense of an effectively productive force: such a
 power could not be called a potentiality. Of course Potentiality may
 be a power, as, for instance, when we are referring not merely to a
 thing which may be brought into actualization but to Actuality
 itself [the Principle or Abstract in which potentiality and the
 power of realizing potentiality may be thought of as identical]: but
 it is better, as more conducive to clarity, to use "Potentiality" in
 regard to the process of Actualization and "Power" in regard to the
 Principle, Actuality.
 
 </p><p>Potentiality may be thought of as a Substratum to states and
 shapes- and forms which are to be received, which it welcomes by its
 nature and even strives for- sometimes in gain but 
 sometimes, also, to
 loss, to the annulling of some distinctive manner of Being already
 actually achieved.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn140.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>