<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn108.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn110.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. But, if the stars announce the future- as we hold of 
 many other
 things also- what explanation of the cause have we to offer? What
 explains the purposeful arrangement thus implied? Obviously, unless
 the particular is included under some general principle of order,
 there can be no signification.
 
 </p><p>We may think of the stars as letters perpetually being inscribed
 on the heavens or inscribed once for all and yet moving as 
 they pursue
 the other tasks allotted to them: upon these main tasks will follow
 the quality of signifying, just as the one principle underlying any
 living unit enables us to reason from member to member, so that for
 example we may judge of character and even of perils and 
 safeguards by
 indications in the eyes or in some other part of the body. If these
 parts of us are members of a whole, so are we: in different ways the
 one law applies.
 
 </p><p>All teems with symbol; the wise man is the man who in any one
 thing can read another, a process familiar to all of us in not a few
 examples of everyday experience.
 
 </p><p>But what is the comprehensive principle of co-ordination?
 Establish this and we have a reasonable basis for the divination,
 not only by stars but also by birds and other animals, from which we
 derive guidance in our varied concerns.
 
 </p><p>All things must be enchained; and the sympathy and
 correspondence obtaining in any one closely knit organism must
 exist, first, and most intensely, in the All. There must be one
 principle constituting this unit of many forms of life and enclosing
 the several members within the unity, while at the same time,
 precisely as in each thing of detail the parts too have each a
 definite function, so in the All each several member must 
 have its own
 task- but more markedly so since in this case the parts are 
 not merely
 members but themselves Alls, members of the loftier Kind.
 
 </p><p>Thus each entity takes its origin from one Principle and,
 therefore, while executing its own function, works in with 
 every other
 member of that All from which its distinct task has by no 
 means cut it
 off: each performs its act, each receives something from the others,
 every one at its own moment bringing its touch of sweet or 
 bitter. And
 there is nothing undesigned, nothing of chance, in all the process:
 all is one scheme of differentiation, starting from the Firsts and
 working itself out in a continuous progression of Kinds.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn110.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>