<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn133.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn135.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. Are we asked to accept as the substratum some attribute or
 quality present to all the elements in common?
 
 </p><p>Then, first, we must be told what precise attribute this is and,
 next, how an attribute can be a substratum.
 
 </p><p>The elements are sizeless, and how conceive an attribute where
 there is neither base nor bulk?
 
 </p><p>Again, if the quality possesses determination, it is not Matter
 the undetermined; and anything without determination is not a
 quality but is the substratum- the very Matter we are seeking.
 
 </p><p>It may be suggested that perhaps this absence of quality means
 simply that, of its own nature, it has no participation in any of
 the set and familiar properties, but takes quality by this very
 non-participation, holding thus an absolutely individual character,
 marked off from everything else, being as it were the negation of
 those others. Deprivation, we will be told, comports quality: a
 blind man has the quality of his lack of sight. If then- it will be
 urged- Matter exhibits such a negation, surely it has a quality, all
 the more so, assuming any deprivation to be a quality, in that here
 the deprivation is all comprehensive.
 
 </p><p>But this notion reduces all existence to qualified things or
 qualities: Quantity itself becomes a Quality and so does even
 Existence. Now this cannot be: if such things as Quantity and
 Existence are qualified, they are, by that very fact, not qualities:
 Quality is an addition to them; we must not commit the absurdity of
 giving the name Quality to something distinguishable from Quality,
 something therefore that is not Quality.
 
 </p><p>Is it suggested that its mere Alienism is a quality in Matter?
 
 </p><p>If this Alienism is difference-absolute [the abstract entity] it
 possesses no Quality: absolute Quality cannot be itself a qualified
 thing.
 
 </p><p>If the Alienism is to be understood as meaning only that 
 Matter is
 differentiated, then it is different not by itself [since it is
 certainly not an absolute] but by this Difference, just as all
 identical objects are so by virtue of Identicalness [the Absolute
 principle of Identity].
 
 </p><p>An absence is neither a Quality nor a qualified entity; it is
 the negation of a Quality or of something else, as noiselessness is
 the negation of noise and so on. A lack is negative; Quality demands
 something positive. The distinctive character of Matter is unshape,
 the lack of qualification and of form; surely then it is absurd to
 pretend that it has Quality in not being qualified; that is like
 saying that sizelessness constitutes a certain size.
 
 </p><p>The distinctive character of Matter, then, is simply its 
 manner of
 being- not something definite inserted in it but, rather a relation
 towards other things, the relation of being distinct from them.
 
 </p><p>Other things possess something besides this relation of
 Alienism: their form makes each an entity. Matter may with propriety
 be described as merely alien; perhaps, even, we might describe it as
 "The Aliens," for the singular suggests a certain definiteness while
 the plural would indicate the absence of any determination.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn135.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>