<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn281.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn283.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. In the Intellectual Kosmos dwells Authentic Essence, with the
 Intellectual-Principle [Divine Mind] as the noblest of its content,
 but containing also souls, since every soul in this lower sphere has
 come thence: that is the world of unembodied spirits while to our
 world belong those that have entered body and undergone bodily
 division.
 
 </p><p>There the Intellectual-Principle is a concentrated all- 
 nothing of
 it distinguished or divided- and in that kosmos of unity all 
 souls are
 concentrated also, with no spatial discrimination.
 
 </p><p>But there is a difference:
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle is for ever repugnant to distinction
 and to partition. Soul, there without distinction and partition, has
 yet a nature lending itself to divisional existence: its division is
 secession, entry into body.
 
 </p><p>In view of this seceding and the ensuing partition we may
 legitimately speak of it as a partible thing.
 
 </p><p>But if so, how can it still be described as indivisible?
 
 </p><p>In that the secession is not of the soul entire; something of it
 holds its ground, that in it which recoils from separate existence.
 
 </p><p>The entity, therefore, described as "consisting of the undivided
 soul and of the soul divided among bodies," contains a soul which is
 at once above and below, attached to the Supreme and yet 
 reaching down
 to this sphere, like a radius from a centre.
 
 </p><p>Thus it is that, entering this realm, it possesses still the
 vision inherent to that superior phase in virtue of which it
 unchangingly maintains its integral nature. Even here it is not
 exclusively the partible soul: it is still the impartible as well:
 what in it knows partition is parted without partibility; 
 undivided as
 giving itself to the entire body, a whole to a whole, it is 
 divided as
 being effective in every part.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn283.htm">Next: SECOND TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>