<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn257.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn259.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Now comes the question whether, in all this discussion, we
 are not merely helping to make out a case for some other order of
 Beings and talking of matters alien to ourselves.
 
 </p><p>But how could that be? What understanding can there be failing
 some point of contact? And what contact could there be with the
 utterly alien?
 
 </p><p>We must then have, ourselves, some part or share in Eternity.
 
 </p><p>Still, how is this possible to us who exist in Time?
 
 </p><p>The whole question turns on the distinction between being in
 Time and being in Eternity, and this will be best realized by
 probing to the Nature of Time. We must, therefore, descend from
 Eternity to the investigation of Time, to the realm of Time: till
 now we have been taking the upward way; we must now take the 
 downward-
 not to the lowest levels but within the degree in which Time 
 itself is
 a descent from Eternity.
 
 </p><p>If the venerable sages of former days had not treated of 
 Time, our
 method would be to begin by linking to [the idea of] Eternity [the
 idea of] its Next [its inevitable downward or outgoing subsequent in
 the same order], then setting forth the probable nature of 
 such a Next
 and proceeding to show how the conception thus formed 
 tallies with our
 own doctrine.
 
 </p><p>But, as things are, our best beginning is to range over the most
 noteworthy of the ancient opinions and see whether any of them
 accord with ours.
 
 </p><p>Existing explanations of Time seem to fall into three classes:
 
 </p><p>Time is variously identified with what we know as 
 Movement, with a
 moved object, and with some phenomenon of Movement: obviously it
 cannot be Rest or a resting object or any phenomenon of rest, since,
 in its characteristic idea, it is concerned with change.
 
 </p><p>Of those that explain it as Movement, some identify it with
 Absolute Movement [or with the total of Movement], others 
 with that of
 the All. Those that make it a moved object would identify it with
 the orb of the All. Those that conceive it as some 
 phenomenon, or some
 period, of Movement treat it, severally, either as a standard of
 measure or as something inevitably accompanying Movement, abstract
 or definite.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn259.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>