<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn231.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn233.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. In our theory, feelings are not states; they are action upon
 experience, action accompanied by judgement: the states, we hold,
 are seated elsewhere; they may be referred to the vitalized body;
 the judgement resides in the Soul, and is distinct from the state-
 for, if it is not distinct, another judgement is demanded, 
 one that is
 distinct, and, so, we may be sent back for ever.
 
 </p><p>Still, this leaves it undecided whether in the act of judgement
 the judging faculty does or does not take to itself something of its
 object.
 
 </p><p>If the judging faculty does actually receive an imprint, then it
 partakes of the state- though what are called the Impressions may be
 of quite another nature than is supposed; they may be like Thought,
 that is to say they may be acts rather than states; there 
 may be, here
 too, awareness without participation.
 
 </p><p>For ourselves, it could never be in our system- or in our
 liking- to bring the Soul down to participation in such modes and
 modifications as the warmth and cold of material frames.
 
 </p><p>What is known as the Impressionable faculty of the soul- to
 pathetikon- would need to be identified: we must satisfy ourselves
 as to whether this too, like the Soul as a unity, is to be classed
 as immune or, on the contrary, as precisely the only part
 susceptible of being affected; this question, however, may be held
 over; we proceed to examine its preliminaries.
 
 </p><p>Even in the superior phase of the Soul- that which precedes the
 impressionable faculty and any sensation- how can we reconcile
 immunity with the indwelling of vice, false notions, ignorance?
 Inviolability; and yet likings and dislikings, the Soul enjoying,
 grieving, angry, grudging, envying, desiring, never at peace but
 stirring and shifting with everything that confronts it!
 
 </p><p>If the Soul were material and had magnitude, it would be
 difficult, indeed quite impossible, to make it appear to be immune,
 unchangeable, when any of such emotions lodge in it. And even
 considering it as an Authentic Being, devoid of magnitude and
 necessarily indestructible, we must be very careful how we attribute
 any such experiences to it or we will find ourselves unconsciously
 making it subject to dissolution. If its essence is a Number or as
 we hold a Reason-Principle, under neither head could it be 
 susceptible
 of feeling. We can think, only, that it entertains unreasoned
 reasons and experiences unexperienced, all transmuted from the
 material frames, foreign and recognized only by parallel, so that it
 possesses in a kind of non-possession and knows affection without
 being affected. How this can be demands enquiry.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn233.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>