<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn201.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn203.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. But if all this is true, what room is left for evil? 
 Where are
 we to place wrong-doing and sin?
 
 </p><p>How explain that in a world organized in good, the efficient
 agents [human beings] behave unjustly, commit sin? And how comes
 misery if neither sin nor injustice exists?
 
 </p><p>Again, if all our action is determined by a natural process, how
 can the distinction be maintained between behaviour in 
 accordance with
 nature and behaviour in conflict with it?
 
 </p><p>And what becomes of blasphemy against the divine? The blasphemer
 is made what he is: a dramatist has written a part insulting and
 maligning himself and given it to an actor to play.
 
 </p><p>These considerations oblige us to state the Logos [the
 Reason-Principle of the Universe] once again, and more 
 clearly, and to
 justify its nature.
 
 </p><p>This Reason-Principle, then- let us dare the definition in the
 hope of conveying the truth- this Logos is not the Intellectual
 Principle unmingled, not the Absolute Divine Intellect; nor does it
 descend from the pure Soul alone; it is a dependent of that Soul
 while, in a sense, it is a radiation from both those divine
 Hypostases; the Intellectual Principle and the Soul- the Soul as
 conditioned by the Intellectual Principle engender this 
 Logos which is
 a Life holding restfully a certain measure of Reason.
 
 </p><p>Now all life, even the least valuable, is an activity, and not a
 blind activity like that of flame; even where there is not sensation
 the activity of life is no mere haphazard play of Movement: 
 any object
 in which life is present, and object which participates in 
 Life, is at
 once enreasoned in the sense that the activity peculiar to life is
 formative, shaping as it moves.
 
 </p><p>Life, then, aims at pattern as does the pantomimic 
 dancer with his
 set movements; the mime, in himself, represents life, and, besides,
 his movements proceed in obedience to a pattern designed to
 symbolize life.
 
 </p><p>Thus far to give us some idea of the nature of Life in general.
 
 </p><p>But this Reason-Principle which emanates from the complete
 unity, divine Mind, and the complete unity Life [= Soul]- is 
 neither a
 uniate complete Life nor a uniate complete divine Mind, nor does it
 give itself whole and all-including to its subject. [By an imperfect
 communication] it sets up a conflict of part against part: 
 it produces
 imperfect things and so engenders and maintains war and attack, and
 thus its unity can be that only of a sum-total not of a thing
 undivided. At war with itself in the parts which it now exhibits, it
 has the unity, or harmony, of a drama torn with struggle. The drama,
 of course, brings the conflicting elements to one final harmony,
 weaving the entire story of the clashing characters into one thing;
 while in the Logos the conflict of the divergent elements 
 rises within
 the one element, the Reason-Principle: the comparison therefore is
 rather with a harmony emerging directly from the conflicting
 elements themselves, and the question becomes what 
 introduces clashing
 elements among these Reason-Principles.
 
 </p><p>Now in the case of music, tones high and low are the product of
 Reason-Principles which, by the fact that they are Principles of
 harmony, meet in the unit of Harmony, the absolute Harmony, a more
 comprehensive Principle, greater than they and including them as its
 parts. Similarly in the Universe at large we find contraries- white
 and black, hot and cold, winged and wingless, footed and footless,
 reasoning and unreasoning- but all these elements are members of one
 living body, their sum-total; the Universe is a 
 self-accordant entity,
 its members everywhere clashing but the total being the
 manifestation of a Reason-Principle. That one Reason-Principle,
 then, must be the unification of conflicting Reason-Principles whose
 very opposition is the support of its coherence and, almost, of its
 Being.
 
 </p><p>And indeed, if it were not multiple, it could not be a Universal
 Principle, it could not even be at all a Reason-Principle; 
 in the fact
 of its being a Reason-Principle is contained the fact of interior
 difference. Now the maximum of difference is contrariety; admitting
 that this differentiation exists and creates, it will create
 difference in the greatest and not in the least degree; in other
 words, the Reason-Principle, bringing about differentiation to the
 uttermost degree, will of necessity create contrarieties: it will be
 complete only by producing itself not in merely diverse things but
 in contrary things.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn203.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>