<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn239.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn241.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. In answer: It must, first, be noted that there are a 
 variety of
 modes in which an object may be said to be present to another or to
 exist in another. There is a "presence" which acts by changing the
 object- for good or for ill- as we see in the case of bodies,
 especially where there is life. But there is also a "presence" which
 acts, towards good or ill, with no modification of the object, as we
 have indicated in the case of the Soul. Then there is the case
 represented by the stamping of a design upon wax, where the 
 "presence"
 of the added pattern causes no modification in the substance nor
 does its obliteration diminish it. And there is the example of Light
 whose presence does not even bring change of pattern to the object
 illuminated. A stone becoming cold does not change its nature in the
 process; it remains the stone it was. A drawing does not 
 cease to be a
 drawing for being coloured.
 
 </p><p>The intermediary mass on which these surface changes appear is
 certainly not transmuted by them; but might there not be a
 modification of the underlying Matter?
 
 </p><p>No: it is impossible to think of Matter being modified by, for
 instance, colour- for, of course we must not talk of 
 modification when
 there is no more than a presence, or at most a presenting of shape.
 
 </p><p>Mirrors and transparent objects, even more, offer a close
 parallel; they are quite unaffected by what is seen in or through
 them: material things are reflections, and the Matter on which they
 appear is further from being affected than is a mirror. Heat and
 cold are present in Matter, but the Matter itself suffers no 
 change of
 temperature: growing hot and growing cold have to do only with
 quality; a quality enters and brings the impassible Substance under
 a new state- though, by the way, research into nature may show that
 cold is nothing positive but an absence, a mere negation. The
 qualities come together into Matter, but in most cases they can have
 no action upon each other; certainly there can be none between those
 of unlike scope: what effect, for example, could fragrance have on
 sweetness or the colour-quality on the quality of form, any 
 quality on
 another of some unrelated order? The illustration of the mirror may
 well indicate to us that a given substratum may contain something
 quite distinct from itself- even something standing to it as a
 direct contrary- and yet remain entirely unaffected by what is thus
 present to it or merged into it.
 
 </p><p>A thing can be hurt only by something related to it, and 
 similarly
 things are not changed or modified by any chance presence:
 modification comes by contrary acting upon contrary; things merely
 different leave each other as they were. Such modification 
 by a direct
 contrary can obviously not occur in an order of things to which
 there is no contrary: Matter, therefore [the mere absence of
 Reality] cannot be modified: any modification that takes place can
 occur only in some compound of Matter and reality, or, speaking
 generally, in some agglomeration of actual things. The Matter
 itself- isolated, quite apart from all else, utterly simplex- must
 remain immune, untouched in the midst of all the interacting 
 agencies;
 just as when people fight within their four walls, the house and the
 air in it remain without part in the turmoil.
 
 </p><p>We may take it, then, that while all the qualities and entities
 that appear upon Matter group to produce each the effect belonging
 to its nature, yet Matter itself remains immune, even more
 definitely immune than any of those qualities entering into it
 which, not being contraries, are not affected by each other.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn241.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>