<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn267.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn269.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. But if this Reason-Principle [Nature] is in act- and produces
 by the process indicated- how can it have any part in Contemplation?
 
 </p><p>To begin with, since in all its production it is stationary and
 intact, a Reason-Principle self-indwelling, it is in its own nature
 a Contemplative act. All doing must be guided by an Idea, and will
 therefore be distinct from that Idea: the Reason-Principle then, as
 accompanying and guiding the work, will be distinct from the 
 work; not
 being action but Reason-Principle it is, necessarily, Contemplation.
 Taking the Reason-Principle, the Logos, in all its phases, the
 lowest and last springs from a mental act [in the higher 
 Logos] and is
 itself a contemplation, though only in the sense of being
 contemplated, but above it stands the total Logos with its two
 distinguishable phases, first, that identified not as Nature but as
 All-Soul and, next, that operating in Nature and being itself the
 Nature-Principle.
 
 </p><p>And does this Reason-Principle, Nature, spring from a
 contemplation?
 
 </p><p>Wholly and solely?
 
 </p><p>From self-contemplation, then? Or what are we to think? 
 It derives
 from a Contemplation and some contemplating Being; how are we to
 suppose it to have Contemplation itself?
 
 </p><p>The Contemplation springing from the reasoning faculty- that, I
 mean, of planning its own content, it does not possess.
 
 </p><p>But why not, since it is a phase of Life, a 
 Reason-Principle and a
 creative Power?
 
 </p><p>Because to plan for a thing is to lack it: Nature does not lack;
 it creates because it possesses. Its creative act is simply its
 possession of it own characteristic Essence; now its 
 Essence, since it
 is a Reason-Principle, is to be at once an act of 
 contemplation and an
 object of contemplation. In other words, the, Nature-Principle
 produces by virtue of being an act of contemplation, an object of
 contemplation and a Reason-Principle; on this triple 
 character depends
 its creative efficacy.
 
 </p><p>Thus the act of production is seen to be in Nature an act of
 contemplation, for creation is the outcome of a contemplation which
 never becomes anything else, which never does anything else, but
 creates by simply being a contemplation.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn269.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>