<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn288.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn290.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Is it a question of part in the sense that, taking one living
 being, the soul in a finger might be called a part of the 
 soul entire?
 
 </p><p>This would carry the alternative that either there is no soul
 outside of body, or that- no soul being within body- the thing
 described as the soul of the universe is, none the less, outside the
 body of the universe. That is a point to be investigated, but for
 the present we must consider what kind of soul this parallel would
 give us.
 
 </p><p>If the particular soul is a part of the All-Soul only in 
 the sense
 that this bestows itself upon all living things of the 
 partial sphere,
 such a self-bestowal does not imply division; on the contrary, it is
 the identical soul that is present everywhere, the one 
 complete thing,
 multi-present at the one moment: there is no longer question 
 of a soul
 that is a part against a soul that is an all- especially where an
 identical power is present. Even difference of function, as in eyes
 and ears, cannot warrant the assertion of distinct parts concerned
 in each separate act- with other parts again making allotment of
 faculty- all is met by the notion of one identical thing, but a
 thing in which a distinct power operates in each separate function.
 All the powers are present either in seeing or in hearing; the
 difference in impression received is due to the difference in the
 organs concerned; all the varying impressions are our various
 responses to Ideal-forms that can be taken in a variety of modes.
 
 </p><p>A further proof [of the unity of Soul] is that perception
 demands a common gathering place; every organ has its distinct
 function, and is competent only upon its own material, and must
 interpret each several experience in its own fashion; the judgement
 upon these impressions must, then, be vested in some one principle,
 a judge informed upon all that is said and done.
 
 </p><p>But again: "Everywhere, Unity": in the variety of functions if
 each "part of the soul" were as distinct as are the entrant
 sensations, none of those parts could have knowledge; awareness
 would belong only to that judging faculty- or, if local, every such
 act of awareness would stand quite unrelated to any other. But since
 the soul is a rational soul, by the very same title by which it is
 an All-Soul, and is called the rational soul, in the sense of being
 a whole [and so not merely "reasoning locally"], then what is
 thought of as a part must in reality be no part but the 
 identity of an
 unparted thing.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn290.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>