<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn241.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn243.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. I think, in fact, that Plato had this in mind where he
 justly speaks of the Images of Real Existents "entering and passing
 out": these particular words are not used idly: he wishes us to
 grasp the precise nature of the relation between Matter and 
 the Ideas.
 
 </p><p>The difficulty on this point is not really that which presented
 itself to most of our predecessors- how the Ideas enter into Matter-
 it is rather the mode of their presence in it.
 
 </p><p>It is in fact strange at sight that Matter should remain itself
 intact, unaffected by Ideal-forms present within it, 
 especially seeing
 that these are affected by each other. It is surprising, 
 too, that the
 entrant Forms should regularly expel preceding shapes and qualities,
 and that the modification [which cannot touch Matter] should affect
 what is a compound [of Idea with Matter] and this, again, not a
 haphazard but precisely where there is need of the incoming or
 outgoing of some certain Ideal-form, the compound being deficient
 through the absence of a particular principle whose presence will
 complete it.
 
 </p><p>But the reason is that the fundamental nature of Matter can take
 no increase by anything entering it, and no decrease by any
 withdrawal: what from the beginning it was, it remains. It 
 is not like
 those things whose lack is merely that of arrangement and order
 which can be supplied without change of substance as when we dress
 or decorate something bare or ugly.
 
 </p><p>But where the bringing to order must cut through to the very
 nature, the base original must be transmuted: it can leave ugliness
 for beauty only by a change of substance. Matter, then, thus brought
 to order must lose its own nature in the supreme degree unless its
 baseness is an accidental: if it is base in the sense of being
 Baseness the Absolute, it could never participate in order, and, if
 evil in the sense of being Evil the Absolute, it could never
 participate in good.
 
 </p><p>We conclude that Matter's participation in Idea is not by way of
 modification within itself: the process is very different; it is a
 bare seeming. Perhaps we have here the solution of the difficulty as
 to how Matter, essentially evil, can be reaching towards The Good:
 there would be no such participation as would destroy its essential
 nature. Given this mode of pseudo-participation- in which Matter
 would, as we say, retain its nature, unchanged, always being what it
 has essentially been- there is no longer any reason to wonder as to
 how while essentially evil, it yet participates in Idea: for, by
 this mode, it does not abandon its own character: 
 participation is the
 law, but it participates only just so far as its essence 
 allows. Under
 a mode of participation which allows it to remain on its own
 footing, its essential nature stands none the less, whatsoever the
 Idea, within that limit, may communicate to it: it is by no means
 the less evil for remaining immutably in its own order. If it had
 authentic participation in The Good and were veritably changed, it
 would not be essentially evil.
 
 </p><p>In a word, when we call Matter evil we are right only if we mean
 that it is not amenable to modification by The Good; but that means
 simply that it is subject to no modification whatever.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn243.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>