<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn209.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn211.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. There is, then a Providence, which permeates the Kosmos from
 first to last, not everywhere equal, as in a numerical distribution,
 but proportioned, differing, according to the grades of 
 place- just as
 in some one animal, linked from first to last, each member 
 has its own
 function, the nobler organ the higher activity while others
 successively concern the lower degrees of the life, each part acting
 of itself, and experiencing what belongs to its own nature and what
 comes from its relation with every other. Strike, and what 
 is designed
 for utterance gives forth the appropriate volume of sound while
 other parts take the blow in silence but react in their own especial
 movement; the total of all the utterance and action and receptivity
 constitutes what we may call the personal voice, life and history of
 the living form. The parts, distinct in Kind, have distinct 
 functions:
 the feet have their work and the eyes theirs; the 
 understanding serves
 to one end, the Intellectual Principle to another.
 
 </p><p>But all sums to a unity, a comprehensive Providence. From the
 inferior grade downwards is Fate: the upper is Providence alone: for
 in the Intellectual Kosmos all is Reason-Principle or its
 Priors-Divine Mind and unmingled Soul-and immediately upon these
 follows Providence which rises from Divine Mind, is the 
 content of the
 Unmingled Soul, and, through this Soul, is communicated to the
 Sphere of living things.
 
 </p><p>This Reason-Principle comes as a thing of unequal parts, and
 therefore its creations are unequal, as, for example, the several
 members of one Living Being. But after this allotment of rank and
 function, all act consonant with the will of the gods keeps the
 sequence and is included under the providential government, for the
 Reason-Principle of providence is god-serving.
 
 </p><p>All such right-doing, then, is linked to Providence; but 
 it is not
 therefore performed by it: men or other agents, living or lifeless,
 are causes of certain things happening, and any good that may result
 is taken up again by Providence. In the total, then, the right rules
 and what has happened amiss is transformed and corrected. Thus, to
 take an example from a single body, the Providence of a living
 organism implies its health; let it be gashed or otherwise wounded,
 and that Reason-Principle which governs it sets to work to draw it
 together, knit it anew, heal it, and put the affected part to rights.
 
 </p><p>In sum, evil belongs to the sequence of things, but it comes
 from necessity. It originates in ourselves; it has its causes no
 doubt, but we are not, therefore, forced to it by Providence: some
 of these causes we adapt to the operation of Providence and of its
 subordinates, but with others we fail to make the connection; the
 act instead of being ranged under the will of Providence consults
 the desire of the agent alone or of some other element in the
 Universe, something which is either itself at variance with 
 Providence
 or has set up some such state of variance in ourselves.
 
 </p><p>The one circumstance does not produce the same result wherever
 it acts; the normal operation will be modified from case to case:
 Helen's beauty told very differently on Paris and on Idomeneus;
 bring together two handsome people of loose character and two living
 honourably and the resulting conduct is very different; a good man
 meeting a libertine exhibits a distinct phase of his nature and,
 similarly, the dissolute answer to the society of their betters.
 
 </p><p>The act of the libertine is not done by Providence or in
 accordance with Providence; neither is the action of the good done
 by Providence- it is done by the man- but it is done in accordance
 with Providence, for it is an act consonant with the 
 Reason-Principle.
 Thus a patient following his treatment is himself an agent and yet
 is acting in accordance with the doctor's method inspired by the art
 concerned with the causes of health and sickness: what one does
 against the laws of health is one's act, but an act conflicting with
 the Providence of medicine.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn211.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>