<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn236.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn238.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. the Intellectual Essence, wholly of the order of Ideal-form,
 must be taken as impassive has been already established.
 
 </p><p>But Matter also is an incorporeal, though after a mode 
 of its own;
 we must examine, therefore, how this stands, whether it is 
 passive, as
 is commonly held, a thing that can be twisted to every shape 
 and Kind,
 or whether it too must be considered impassive and in what sense and
 fashion so. But in engaging this question and defining the nature of
 matter we must correct certain prevailing errors about the nature of
 the Authentic Existent, about Essence, about Being.
 
 </p><p>The Existent- rightly so called- is that which has authentic
 existence, that, therefore, which is existent completely, and
 therefore, again, that which at no point fails in existence. Having
 existence perfectly, it needs nothing to preserve it in being; it
 is, on the contrary, the source and cause from which all that
 appears to exist derives that appearance. This admitted, it must of
 necessity be in life, in a perfect life: if it failed it 
 would be more
 nearly the nonexistent than the existent. But: The Being thus
 indicated is Intellect, is wisdom unalloyed. It is, therefore,
 determined and rounded off; it is nothing potentially that is not of
 the same determined order, otherwise it would be in default.
 
 </p><p>Hence its eternity, its identity, its utter irreceptivity and
 impermeability. If it took in anything, it must be taking in 
 something
 outside itself, that is to say, Existence would at last include
 non-existence. But it must be Authentic Existence all through; it
 must, therefore, present itself equipped from its own stores with
 all that makes up Existence so that all stands together and 
 all is one
 thing. The Existent [Real Being] must have thus much of 
 determination:
 if it had not, then it could not be the source of the Intellectual
 Principle and of Life which would be importations into it
 originating in the sphere of non-Being; and Real Being would be
 lifeless and mindless; but mindlessness and lifelessness are the
 characteristics of non-being and must belong to the lower order, to
 the outer borders of the existent; for Intellect and Life rise from
 the Beyond-Existence [the Indefinable Supreme]- though Itself has no
 need of them- and are conveyed from It into the Authentic Existent.
 
 </p><p>If we have thus rightly described the Authentic Existent, we see
 that it cannot be any kind of body nor the under-stuff of body; in
 such entities the Being is simply the existing of things outside of
 Being.
 
 </p><p>But body, a non-existence? Matter, on which all this universe
 rises, a non-existence? Mountain and rock, the wide solid earth, all
 that resists, all that can be struck and driven, surely all
 proclaims the real existence of the corporeal? And how, it will be
 asked, can we, on the contrary, attribute Being, and the only
 Authentic Being, to entities like Soul and Intellect, things 
 having no
 weight or pressure, yielding to no force, offering no resistance,
 things not even visible?
 
 </p><p>Yet even the corporeal realm witnesses for us; the resting earth
 has certainly a scantier share in Being than belongs to what has
 more motion and less solidity- and less than belongs to its own most
 upward element, for fire begins, already, to flit up and away
 outside of the body-kind.
 
 </p><p>In fact, it appears to be precisely the most self-sufficing that
 bear least hardly, least painfully, on other things, while the
 heaviest and earthiest bodies- deficient, falling, unable to bear
 themselves upward- these, by the very down-thrust due to their
 feebleness, offer the resistance which belongs to the falling habit
 and to the lack of buoyancy. It is lifeless objects that deal the
 severest blows; they hit hardest and hurt most; where there is life-
 that is to say participation in Being- there is beneficence towards
 the environment, all the greater as the measure of Being is fuller.
 
 </p><p>Again, Movement, which is a sort of life within bodies, an
 imitation of true Life, is the more decided where there is the least
 of body a sign that the waning of Being makes the object 
 affected more
 distinctly corporeal.
 
 </p><p>The changes known as affections show even more clearly that
 where the bodily quality is most pronounced susceptibility is at its
 intensest- earth more susceptible than other elements, and these
 others again more or less so in the degree of their corporeality:
 sever the other elements and, failing some preventive force, 
 they join
 again; but earthy matter divided remains apart indefinitely. Things
 whose nature represents a diminishment have no power of recuperation
 after even a slight disturbance and they perish; thus what has most
 definitely become body, having most closely approximated to
 non-being lacks the strength to reknit its unity: the heavy and
 violent crash of body against body works destruction, and weak is
 powerful against weak, non-being against its like.
 
 </p><p>Thus far we have been meeting those who, on the evidence 
 of thrust
 and resistance, identify body with real being and find assurance of
 truth in the phantasms that reach us through the senses, those, in a
 word, who, like dreamers, take for actualities the figments of their
 sleeping vision. The sphere of sense, the Soul in its 
 slumber; for all
 of the Soul that is in body is asleep and the true getting-up is not
 bodily but from the body: in any movement that takes the body with
 it there is no more than a passage from sleep to sleep, from bed to
 bed; the veritable waking or rising is from corporeal things; for
 these, belonging to the Kind directly opposed to Soul, present to it
 what is directly opposed to its essential existence: their origin,
 their flux, and their perishing are the warning of their exclusion
 from the Kind whose Being is Authentic.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn238.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>