<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn215.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn217.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. What, then, is the spirit [guiding the present life and
 determining the future]?
 
 </p><p>The Spirit of here and now.
 
 </p><p>And the God?
 
 </p><p>The God of here and now.
 
 </p><p>Spirit, God; This in act within us, conducts every life; 
 for, even
 here and now, it is the dominant of our Nature.
 
 </p><p>That is to say that the dominant is the spirit which takes
 possession of the human being at birth?
 
 </p><p>No: the dominant is the Prior of the individual spirit; it
 presides inoperative while its secondary acts: so that if the acting
 force is that of men of the sense-life, the tutelary spirit is the
 Rational Being, while if we live by that Rational Being, our
 tutelary Spirit is the still higher Being, not directly operative
 but assenting to the working principle. The words "You shall
 yourselves choose" are true, then; for by our life we elect our own
 loftier.
 
 </p><p>But how does this spirit come to be the determinant of our fate?
 
 </p><p>It is not when the life is ended that it conducts us here or
 there; it operates during the lifetime; when we cease to live, our
 death hands over to another principle this energy of our own
 personal career.
 
 </p><p>That principle [of the new birth] strives to gain control, and
 if it succeeds it also lives and itself, in turn, possesses a
 guiding spirit [its next higher]: if on the contrary it is weighed
 down by the developed evil in the character, the spirit of the
 previous life pays the penalty: the evil-liver loses grade because
 during his life the active principle of his being took the tilt
 towards the brute by force of affinity. If, on the contrary, the Man
 is able to follow the leading of his higher Spirit, he 
 rises: he lives
 that Spirit; that noblest part of himself to which he is being led
 becomes sovereign in his life; this made his own, he works for the
 next above until he has attained the height.
 
 </p><p>For the Soul is many things, is all, is the Above and the
 Beneath to the totality of life: and each of us is an Intellectual
 Kosmos, linked to this world by what is lowest in us, but, by what
 is the highest, to the Divine Intellect: by all that is intellective
 we are permanently in that higher realm, but at the fringe of the
 Intellectual we are fettered to the lower; it is as if we gave forth
 from it some emanation towards that lower, or, rather some Act,
 which however leaves our diviner part not in itself diminished.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn217.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>