<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn202.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn204.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. The nature of the Reason-Principle is adequately expressed
 in its Act and, therefore, the wider its extension the 
 nearer will its
 productions approach to full contrariety: hence the world of sense
 is less a unity than is its Reason-Principle; it contains a wider
 multiplicity and contrariety: its partial members will, therefore,
 be urged by a closer intention towards fullness of life, a warmer
 desire for unification.
 
 </p><p>But desire often destroys the desired; it seeks its own 
 good, and,
 if the desired object is perishable, the ruin follows: and 
 the partial
 thing straining towards its completing principle draws towards
 itself all it possibly can.
 
 </p><p>Thus, with the good we have the bad: we have the opposed 
 movements
 of a dancer guided by one artistic plan; we recognize in his 
 steps the
 good as against the bad, and see that in the opposition lies 
 the merit
 of the design.
 
 </p><p>But, thus, the wicked disappear?
 
 </p><p>No: their wickedness remains; simply, their role is not of their
 own planning.
 
 </p><p>But, surely, this excuses them?
 
 </p><p>No; excuse lies with the Reason-Principle- and the
 Reason-Principle does not excuse them.
 
 </p><p>No doubt all are members of this Principle but one is a good
 man, another is bad- the larger class, this- and it goes as 
 in a play;
 the poet while he gives each actor a part is also using them as they
 are in their own persons: he does not himself rank the men as
 leading actor, second, third; he simply gives suitable words to
 each, and by that assignment fixes each man's standing.
 
 </p><p>Thus, every man has his place, a place that fits the good man, a
 place that fits the bad: each within the two orders of them makes
 his way, naturally, reasonably, to the place, good or bad, that
 suits him, and takes the position he has made his own. There he
 talks and acts, in blasphemy and crime or in all goodness: for the
 actors bring to this play what they were before it was ever staged.
 
 </p><p>In the dramas of human art, the poet provides the words but the
 actors add their own quality, good or bad- for they have more to do
 than merely repeat the author's words- in the truer drama which
 dramatic genius imitates in its degree, the Soul displays itself in
 a part assigned by the creator of the piece.
 
 </p><p>As the actors of our stages get their masks and their costume,
 robes of state or rags, so a Soul is allotted its fortunes, 
 and not at
 haphazard but always under a Reason: it adapts itself to the
 fortunes assigned to it, attunes itself, ranges itself rightly to
 the drama, to the whole Principle of the piece: then it 
 speaks out its
 business, exhibiting at the same time all that a Soul can express of
 its own quality, as a singer in a song. A voice, a bearing,
 naturally fine or vulgar, may increase the charm of a piece; on the
 other hand, an actor with his ugly voice may make a sorry exhibition
 of himself, yet the drama stands as good a work as ever: the
 dramatist, taking the action which a sound criticism suggests,
 disgraces one, taking his part from him, with perfect 
 justice: another
 man he promotes to more serious roles or to any more 
 important play he
 may have, while the first is cast for whatever minor work there may
 be.
 
 </p><p>Just so the Soul, entering this drama of the Universe, making
 itself a part of the Play, bringing to its acting its personal
 excellence or defect, set in a definite place at the entry and
 accepting from the author its entire role- superimposed upon its own
 character and conduct- just so, it receives in the end its
 punishment and reward.
 
 </p><p>But these actors, Souls, hold a peculiar dignity: they act in a
 vaster place than any stage: the Author has made them masters of all
 this world; they have a wide choice of place; they themselves
 determine the honour or discredit in which they are agents 
 since their
 place and part are in keeping with their quality: they therefore fit
 into the Reason-Principle of the Universe, each adjusted, most
 legitimately, to the appropriate environment, as every string of the
 lyre is set in the precisely right position, determined by the
 Principle directing musical utterance, for the due production of the
 tones within its capacity. All is just and good in the Universe in
 which every actor is set in his own quite appropriate place, 
 though it
 be to utter in the Darkness and in Tartarus the dreadful sounds
 whose utterance there is well.
 
 </p><p>This Universe is good not when the individual is a 
 stone, but when
 everyone throws in his own voice towards a total harmony, singing
 out a life- thin, harsh, imperfect, though it be. The Syrinx does
 not utter merely one pure note; there is a thin obscure sound which
 blends in to make the harmony of Syrinx music: the harmony is made
 up from tones of various grades, all the tones differing, but the
 resultant of all forming one sound.
 
 </p><p>Similarly the Reason-Principle entire is One, but it is broken
 into unequal parts: hence the difference of place found in the
 Universe, better spots and worse; and hence the inequality of Souls,
 finding their appropriate surroundings amid this local 
 inequality. The
 diverse places of this sphere, the Souls of unequal grade and unlike
 conduct, are wen exemplified by the distinction of parts in 
 the Syrinx
 or any other instrument: there is local difference, but from every
 position every string gives forth its own tone, the sound 
 appropriate,
 at once, to its particular place and to the entire plan.
 
 </p><p>What is evil in the single Soul will stand a good thing in the
 universal system; what in the unit offends nature will serve 
 nature in
 the total event- and still remains the weak and wrong tone it is,
 though its sounding takes nothing from the worth of the whole, just
 as, in another order of image, the executioner's ugly office does
 not mar the well-governed state: such an officer is a civic 
 necessity;
 and the corresponding moral type is often serviceable; thus, even as
 things are, all is well.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn204.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>