<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn199.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn201.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. The ordinance of the Kosmos, then, is in keeping with the
 Intellectual Principle. True, no reasoning went to its creation, but
 it so stands that the keenest reasoning must wonder- since no
 reasoning could be able to make it otherwise- at the spectacle
 before it, a product which, even in the Kinds of the partial and
 particular Sphere, displays the Divine Intelligence to a degree in
 which no arranging by reason could express it. Every one of the
 ceaselessly recurrent types of being manifests a creating
 Reason-Principle above all censure. No fault is to be found unless
 on the assumption that everything ought to come into being with all
 the perfection of those that have never known such a coming, the
 Eternals. In that case, things of the Intellectual realm and 
 things of
 the realm of sense must remain one unbroken identity for ever.
 
 </p><p>In this demand for more good than exists, there is implied a
 failure to recognize that the form allotted to each entity is
 sufficient in itself; it is like complaining because one kind of
 animal lacks horns. We ought to understand both that the
 Reason-Principle must extend to every possible existent and, at the
 same time, that every greater must include lesser things, that to
 every whole belong its parts, and that all cannot be equality unless
 all part is to be absent.
 
 </p><p>This is why in the Over-World each entity is all, while here,
 below, the single thing is not all [is not the Universe but 
 a "Self"].
 Thus too, a man, an individual, in so far as he is a part, is not
 Humanity complete: but wheresoever there is associated with the
 parts something that is no part [but a Divine, an 
 Intellectual Being],
 this makes a whole of that in which it dwells. Man, man as partial
 thing, cannot be required to have attained to the very summit of
 goodness: if he had, he would have ceased to be of the partial
 order. Not that there is any grudging in the whole towards the part
 that grows in goodness and dignity; such an increase in value is a
 gain to the beauty of the whole; the lesser grows by being made over
 in the likeness of the greater, by being admitted, as it were, to
 something of that greatness, by sharing in that rank, and thus even
 from this place of man, from man's own self, something gleams forth,
 as the stars shine in the divine firmament, so that all appears one
 great and lovely figure- living or wrought in the furnaces of
 craftsmanship- with stars radiant not only in the ears and 
 on the brow
 but on the breasts too, and wherever else they may be displayed in
 beauty.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn201.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>