<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn278.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn280.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. (A)... How, then, does Unity give rise to Multiplicity?
 
 </p><p>By its omnipresence: there is nowhere where it is not; it
 occupies, therefore, all that is; at once, it is manifold- 
 or, rather,
 it is all things.
 
 </p><p>If it were simply and solely everywhere, all would be this one
 thing alone: but it is, also, in no place, and this gives, in the
 final result, that, while all exists by means of it, in virtue of
 its omnipresence, all is distinct from it in virtue of its being
 nowhere.
 
 </p><p>But why is it not merely present everywhere but in addition
 nowhere-present?
 
 </p><p>Because, universality demands a previous unity. It must,
 therefore, pervade all things and make all, but not be the universe
 which it makes.
 
 </p><p>(B) The Soul itself must exist as Seeing- with the
 Intellectual-Principle as the object of its vision- it is 
 undetermined
 before it sees but is naturally apt to see: in other words, Soul is
 Matter to [its determinant] the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>(C) When we exercise intellection upon ourselves, we are,
 obviously, observing an intellective nature, for otherwise we would
 not be able to have that intellection.
 
 </p><p>We know, and it is ourselves that we know; therefore we know the
 reality of a knowing nature: therefore, before that intellection in
 Act, there is another intellection, one at rest, so to speak.
 
 </p><p>Similarly, that self-intellection is an act upon a reality and
 upon a life; therefore, before the Life and Real-Being concerned in
 the intellection, there must be another Being and Life. In a word,
 intellection is vested in the activities themselves: since, then,
 the activities of self-intellection are intellective-forms, We, the
 Authentic We, are the Intelligibles and self-intellection conveys
 the Image of the Intellectual Sphere.
 
 </p><p>(D) The Primal is a potentiality of Movement and of 
 Repose- and so
 is above and beyond both- its next subsequent has rest and movement
 about the Primal. Now this subsequent is the Intellectual-Principle-
 so characterized by having intellection of something not identical
 with itself whereas the Primal is without intellection. A knowing
 principle has duality [that entailed by being the knower of 
 something)
 and, moreover, it knows itself as deficient since its virtue
 consists in this knowing and not in its own bare Being.
 
 </p><p>(E) In the case of everything which has developed from 
 possibility
 to actuality the actual is that which remains self-identical for its
 entire duration- and this it is which makes perfection possible even
 in things of the corporeal order, as for instance in fire but the
 actual of this kind cannot be everlasting since [by the fact of
 their having once existed only in potentiality] Matter has its place
 in them. In anything, on the contrary, not composite [= never
 touched by Matter or potentiality] and possessing actuality, that
 actual existence is eternal... There is, however, the case, also in
 which a thing, itself existing in actuality, stands as 
 potentiality to
 some other form of Being.
 
 </p><p>(F)... But the First is not to be envisaged as made up from Gods
 of a transcendent order: no; the Authentic Existents constitute the
 Intellectual-Principle with Which motion and rest begin. The Primal
 touches nothing, but is the centre round which those other Beings
 lie in repose and in movement. For Movement is aiming, and the
 Primal aims at nothing; what could the Summit aspire to?
 
 </p><p>Has It, even, no Intellection of Itself?
 
 </p><p>It possesses Itself and therefore is said in general 
 terms to know
 itself... But intellection does not mean self-ownership; it means
 turning the gaze towards the Primal: now the act of intellection is
 itself the Primal Act, and there is therefore no place for 
 any earlier
 one. The Being projecting this Act transcends the Act so that
 Intellection is secondary to the Being in which it resides.
 Intellection is not the transcendently venerable thing- neither
 Intellection in general nor even the Intellection of The Good. Apart
 from and over any Intellection stands The Good itself.
 
 </p><p>The Good therefore needs no consciousness.
 
 </p><p>What sort of consciousness can be conceived in it?
 
 </p><p>Consciousness of the Good as existent or non-existent?
 
 </p><p>If of existent Good, that Good exists before and without any
 such consciousness: if the act of consciousness produces that Good,
 then The Good was not previously in existence- and, at once, the
 very consciousness falls to the ground since it is, no longer
 consciousness of The Good.
 
 </p><p>But would not all this mean that the First does not even live?
 
 </p><p>The First cannot be said to live since it is the source of Life.
 
 </p><p>All that has self-consciousness and self-intellection is
 derivative; it observes itself in order, by that activity, to become
 master of its Being: and if it study itself this can mean only that
 ignorance inheres in it and that it is of its own nature lacking and
 to be made perfect by Intellection.
 
 </p><p>All thinking and knowing must, here, be eliminated: the addition
 introduces deprivation and deficiency.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn280.htm">Next: THE FOURTH ENNEAD</a></center>
 </body>