<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn200.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn202.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. These considerations apply very well to things considered as
 standing alone: but there is a stumbling-block, a new 
 problem, when we
 think of all these forms, permanent and ceaselessly produced, in
 mutual relationship.
 
 </p><p>The animals devour each other: men attack each other: all is war
 without rest, without truce: this gives new force to the question
 how Reason can be author of the plan and how all can be declared
 well done.
 
 </p><p>This new difficulty is not met by the former answer; that all
 stands as well as the nature of things allows; that the blame for
 their condition falls on Matter dragging them down; that, given the
 plan as we know it, evil cannot be eliminated and should not be;
 that the Matter making its presence felt is still not supreme but
 remains an element taken in from outside to contribute to a definite
 total, or rather to be itself brought to order by Reason.
 
 </p><p>The Divine Reason is the beginning and the end; all that comes
 into being must be rational and fall at its coming into an ordered
 scheme reasonable at every point. Where, then, is the necessity of
 this bandit war of man and beast?
 
 </p><p>This devouring of Kind by Kind is necessary as the means to the
 transmutation of living things which could not keep form for 
 ever even
 though no other killed them: what grievance is it that when they
 must go their despatch is so planned as to be serviceable to others?
 
 </p><p>Still more, what does it matter when they are devoured only to
 return in some new form? It comes to no more than the murder 
 of one of
 the personages in a play; the actor alters his make-up and 
 enters in a
 new role. The actor, of course, was not really killed; but 
 if dying is
 but changing a body as the actor changes a costume, or even an exit
 from the body like the exit of the actor from the boards when he has
 no more to say or do, what is there so very dreadful in this
 transformation of living beings one into another?
 
 </p><p>Surely it is much better so than if they had never existed: that
 way would mean the bleak quenching of life, precluded from passing
 outside itself; as the plan holds, life is poured copiously 
 throughout
 a Universe, engendering the universal things and weaving variety
 into their being, never at rest from producing an endless sequence
 of comeliness and shapeliness, a living pastime.
 
 </p><p>Men directing their weapons against each other- under doom of
 death yet neatly lined up to fight as in the pyrrhic sword-dances of
 their sport- this is enough to tell us that all human intentions are
 but play, that death is nothing terrible, that to die in a 
 war or in a
 fight is but to taste a little beforehand what old age has in store,
 to go away earlier and come back the sooner. So for misfortunes that
 may accompany life, the loss of property, for instance; the 
 loser will
 see that there was a time when it was not his, that its possession
 is but a mock boon to the robbers, who will in their turn lose it to
 others, and even that to retain property is a greater loss than to
 forfeit it.
 
 </p><p>Murders, death in all its guises, the reduction and sacking of
 cities, all must be to us just such a spectacle as the 
 changing scenes
 of a play; all is but the varied incident of a plot, costume on and
 off, acted grief and lament. For on earth, in all the succession of
 life, it is not the Soul within but the Shadow outside of the
 authentic man, that grieves and complains and acts out the plot on
 this world stage which men have dotted with stages of their own
 constructing. All this is the doing of man knowing no more than to
 live the lower and outer life, and never perceiving that, in his
 weeping and in his graver doings alike, he is but at play; to handle
 austere matters austerely is reserved for the thoughtful: the other
 kind of man is himself a futility. Those incapable of 
 thinking gravely
 read gravity into frivolities which correspond to their own
 frivolous Nature. Anyone that joins in their trifling and so comes
 to look on life with their eyes must understand that by lending
 himself to such idleness he has laid aside his own character. If
 Socrates himself takes part in the trifling, he trifles in the outer
 Socrates.
 
 </p><p>We must remember, too, that we cannot take tears and laments as
 proof that anything is wrong; children cry and whimper where there
 is nothing amiss.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn202.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>