<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn211.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn213.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. And since the higher exists, there must be the lower as well.
 The Universe is a thing of variety, and how could there be 
 an inferior
 without a superior or a superior without an inferior? We cannot
 complain about the lower in the higher; rather, we must be 
 grateful to
 the higher for giving something of itself to the lower.
 
 </p><p>In a word, those that would like evil driven out from the All
 would drive out Providence itself.
 
 </p><p>What would Providence have to provide for? Certainly not for
 itself or for the Good: when we speak of a Providence above, we mean
 an act upon something below.
 
 </p><p>That which resumes all under a unity is a Principle in which all
 things exist together and the single thing is All. From this
 Principle, which remains internally unmoved, particular things push
 forth as from a single root which never itself emerges. They are a
 branching into part, into multiplicity, each single outgrowth
 bearing its trace of the common source. Thus, phase by 
 phase, there in
 finally the production into this world; some things close 
 still to the
 root, others widely separate in the continuous progression until we
 have, in our metaphor, bough and crest, foliage and fruit. At the
 one side all is one point of unbroken rest, on the other is the
 ceaseless process, leaf and fruit, all the things of process
 carrying ever within themselves the Reason-Principles of the Upper
 Sphere, and striving to become trees in their own minor order and
 producing, if at all, only what is in strict gradation from
 themselves.
 
 </p><p>As for the abandoned spaces in what corresponds to the branches
 these two draw upon the root, from which, despite all their
 variance, they also derive; and the branches again operate upon
 their own furthest extremities: operation is to be traced only from
 point to next point, but, in the fact, there has been both inflow
 and outgo [of creative or modifying force] at the very root which,
 itself again, has its priors.
 
 </p><p>The things that act upon each other are branchings from a
 far-off beginning and so stand distinct; but they derive initially
 from the one source: all interaction is like that of brothers,
 resemblant as drawing life from the same parents.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn213.htm">Next: FOURTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>