<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn262.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn264.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. We are brought thus to the conception of a
 Natural-Principle- Time- a certain expanse [a quantitative phase] of
 the Life of the Soul, a principle moving forward by smooth 
 and uniform
 changes following silently upon each other- a Principle, then, whose
 Act is sequent.
 
 </p><p>But let us conceive this power of the Soul to turn back and
 withdraw from the life-course which it now maintains, from the
 continuous and unending activity of an ever-existent soul not
 self-contained or self-intent but concerned about doing and
 engendering: imagine it no longer accomplishing any Act, setting a
 pause to this work it has inaugurated; let this outgoing phase of
 the Soul become once more, equally with the rest, turned to the
 Supreme, to Eternal Being, to the tranquilly stable.
 
 </p><p>What would then exist but Eternity?
 
 </p><p>All would remain in unity; how could there be any diversity of
 things? What Earlier or Later would there be, what long-lasting or
 short-lasting? What ground would lie ready to the Soul's 
 operation but
 the Supreme in which it has its Being? Or, indeed, what operative
 tendency could it have even to That since a prior separation is the
 necessary condition of tendency?
 
 </p><p>The very sphere of the Universe would not exist; for it cannot
 antedate Time: it, too, has its Being and its Movement in 
 Time; and if
 it ceased to move, the Soul-Act [which is the essence of Time]
 continuing, we could measure the period of its Repose by 
 that standard
 outside it.
 
 </p><p>If, then, the Soul withdrew, sinking itself again into its
 primal unity, Time would disappear: the origin of Time, 
 clearly, is to
 be traced to the first stir of the Soul's tendency towards the
 production of the sensible universe with the consecutive act
 ensuing. This is how "Time"- as we read- "came into Being
 simultaneously" with this All: the Soul begot at once the 
 Universe and
 Time; in that activity of the Soul this Universe sprang into being;
 the activity is Time, the Universe is a content of Time. No doubt it
 will be urged that we read also of the orbit of the Stars being
 Times": but do not forget what follows; "the stars exist," we are
 told, "for the display and delimitation of Time," and "that there
 may be a manifest Measure." No indication of Time could be derived
 from [observation of] the Soul; no portion of it can be seen or
 handled, so it could not be measured in itself, especially when
 there was as yet no knowledge of counting; therefore the Soul brings
 into being night and day; in their difference is given Duality- from
 which, we read, arises the concept of Number.
 
 </p><p>We observe the tract between a sunrise and its return and, as
 the movement is uniform, we thus obtain a Time-interval upon which
 to measure ourselves, and we use this as a standard. We have thus a
 measure of Time. Time itself is not a measure. How would it set to
 work? And what kind of thing is there of which it could say, "I find
 the extent of this equal to such and such a stretch of my 
 own extent?"
 What is this "I"? Obviously something by which measurement is known.
 Time, then, serves towards measurement but is not itself the
 Measure: the Movement of the All will be measured according to Time,
 but Time will not, of its own Nature, be a Measure of Movement:
 primarily a Kind to itself, it will incidentally exhibit the
 magnitudes of that movement.
 
 </p><p>And the reiterated observation of Movement- the same extent
 found to be traversed in such and such a period- will lead to the
 conception of a definite quantity of Time past.
 
 </p><p>This brings us to the fact that, in a certain sense, the 
 Movement,
 the orbit of the universe, may legitimately be said to measure Time-
 in so far as that is possible at all- since any definite stretch of
 that circuit occupies a certain quantity of Time, and this 
 is the only
 grasp we have of Time, our only understanding of it: what 
 that circuit
 measures- by indication, that is- will be Time, manifested by the
 Movement but not brought into being by it.
 
 </p><p>This means that the measure of the Spheric Movement has itself
 been measured by a definite stretch of that Movement and therefore
 is something different; as measure, it is one thing and, as the
 measured, it is another; [its being measure or] its being measured
 cannot be of its essence.
 
 </p><p>We are no nearer knowledge than if we said that the foot-rule
 measures Magnitude while we left the concept Magnitude undefined;
 or, again, we might as well define Movement- whose limitlessness
 puts it out of our reach- as the thing measured by Space; the
 definition would be parallel since we can mark off a certain space
 which the Movement has traversed and say the one is equivalent to
 the other.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn264.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>