<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn295.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn297.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. In view of all this we must now work back from the items to
 the unit, and consider the entire scheme as one enduring thing.
 
 </p><p>We ascend from air, light, sun- or, moon and light and sun- in
 detail, to these things as constituting a total- though a total of
 degrees, primary, secondary, tertiary. Thence we come to the
 [kosmic] Soul, always the one undiscriminated entity. At 
 this point in
 our survey we have before us the over-world and all that follows
 upon it. That suite [the lower and material world] we take to be the
 very last effect that has penetrated to its furthest reach.
 
 </p><p>Our knowledge of the first is gained from the ultimate of all,
 from the very shadow cast by the fire, because this ultimate [the
 material world] itself receives its share of the general light,
 something of the nature of the Forming-Idea hovering over the
 outcast that at first lay in blank obscurity. It is brought under
 the scheme of reason by the efficacy of soul whose entire extension
 latently holds this rationalizing power. As we know, the
 Reason-Principles carried in animal seed fashion and shape living
 beings into so many universes in the small. For whatsoever touches
 soul is moulded to the nature of soul's own Real-Being.
 
 </p><p>We are not to think that the Soul acts upon the object by
 conformity to any external judgement; there is no pause for 
 willing or
 planning: any such procedure would not be an act of sheer nature,
 but one of applied art: but art is of later origin than 
 soul; it is an
 imitator, producing dim and feeble copies- toys, things of no great
 worth- and it is dependent upon all sorts of mechanism by which
 alone its images can be produced. The soul, on the contrary, is
 sovereign over material things by might of Real-Being; their quality
 is determined by its lead, and those elementary things cannot stand
 against its will. On the later level, things are hindered one by the
 other, and thus often fall short of the characteristic shape at
 which their unextended Reason-Principle must be aiming; in that
 other world [under the soul but above the material] the entire shape
 [as well as the idea] comes from soul, and all that is produced
 takes and keeps its appointed place in a unity, so that the 
 engendered
 thing, without labour as without clash, becomes all that it 
 should be.
 In that world the soul has elaborated its creation, the images of
 the gods, dwellings for men, each existing to some peculiar purpose.
 
 </p><p>Soul could produce none but the things which truly represent its
 powers: fire produces warmth; another source produces cold; 
 soul has a
 double efficacy, its act within itself, and its act from within
 outwards towards the new production.
 
 </p><p>In soulless entities, the outgo [natural to everything] remains
 dormant, and any efficiency they have is to bring to their own
 likeness whatever is amenable to their act. All existence has this
 tendency to bring other things to likeness; but the soul has the
 distinction of possessing at once an action of conscious attention
 within itself, and an action towards the outer. It has thus the
 function of giving life to all that does not live by prior right,
 and the life it gives is commensurate with its own; that is to say,
 living in reason, it communicates reason to the body- an image of
 the reason within itself, just as the life given to the body is an
 image of Real-Being- and it bestows, also, upon that material the
 appropriate shapes of which it contains the Reason-Forms.
 
 </p><p>The content of the creative soul includes the Ideal 
 shapes of gods
 and of all else: and hence it is that the kosmos contains all.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn297.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>