<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn254.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn256.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. We must, however, avoid thinking of it as an accidental from
 outside grafted upon that Nature: it is native to it, integral to it.
 
 </p><p>It is discerned as present essentially in that Nature like
 everything else that we can predicate There- all immanent, springing
 from that Essence and inherent to that Essence. For whatsoever has
 primal Being must be immanent to the Firsts and be a First-Eternity
 equally with The Good that is among them and of them and equally
 with the truth that is among them.
 
 </p><p>In one aspect, no doubt, Eternity resides in a partial phase of
 the All-Being; but in another aspect it is inherent in the All taken
 as a totality, since that Authentic All is not a thing patched up
 out of external parts, but is authentically an all because its parts
 are engendered by itself. It is like the truthfulness in the Supreme
 which is not an agreement with some outside fact or being but is
 inherent in each member about which it is the truth. To an authentic
 All it is not enough that it be everything that exists: it must
 possess allness in the full sense that nothing whatever is 
 absent from
 it. Then nothing is in store for it: if anything were to come, that
 thing must have been lacking to it, and it was, therefore, not All.
 And what, of a Nature contrary to its own, could enter into 
 it when it
 is [the Supreme and therefore] immune? Since nothing can 
 accrue to it,
 it cannot seek change or be changed or ever have made its way into
 Being.
 
 </p><p>Engendered things are in continuous process of acquisition;
 eliminate futurity, therefore, and at once they lose their being; if
 the non-engendered are made amenable to futurity they are thrown
 down from the seat of their existence, for, clearly, existence is
 not theirs by their nature if it appears only as a being about to
 be, a becoming, an advancing from stage to stage.
 
 </p><p>The essential existence of generated things seems to lie in
 their existing from the time of their generation to the ultimate of
 time after which they cease to be: but such an existence is 
 compact of
 futurity, and the annulment of that futurity means the 
 stopping of the
 life and therefore of the essential existence.
 
 </p><p>Such a stoppage would be true, also, of the [generated] All in
 so far as it is a thing of process and change: for this reason it
 keeps hastening towards its future, dreading to rest, seeking to
 draw Being to itself by a perpetual variety of production and action
 and by its circling in a sort of ambition after Essential Existence.
 
 </p><p>And here we have, incidentally, lighted upon the cause of the
 Circuit of the All; it is a movement which seeks perpetuity by way
 of futurity.
 
 </p><p>The Primals, on the contrary, in their state of blessedness have
 no such aspiration towards anything to come: they are the whole,
 now; what life may be thought of as their due, they possess entire;
 they, therefore, seek nothing, since there is nothing future to
 them, nothing external to them in which any futurity could find
 lodgement.
 
 </p><p>Thus the perfect and all-comprehensive essence of the Authentic
 Existent does not consist merely in the completeness inherent in its
 members; its essence includes, further, its established immunity
 from all lack with the exclusion, also, of all that is without
 Being- for not only must all things be contained in the All 
 and Whole,
 but it can contain nothing that is, or was ever, non-existent- and
 this State and Nature of the Authentic Existent is Eternity: in our
 very word, Eternity means Ever-Being.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn256.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>