<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn252.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn254.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. What definition are we to give to Eternity?
 
 </p><p>Can it be identified with the [divine or] Intellectual Substance
 itself?
 
 </p><p>This would be like identifying Time with the Universe of Heavens
 and Earth- an opinion, it is true, which appears to have had its
 adherents. No doubt we conceive, we know, Eternity as something most
 august; most august, too, is the Intellectual Kind; and there is no
 possibility of saying that the one is more majestic than the other,
 since no such degrees can be asserted in the Above-World; there is
 therefore a certain excuse for the identification- all the more
 since the Intellectual Substance and Eternity have the one scope and
 content.
 
 </p><p>Still; by the fact of representing the one as contained 
 within the
 other, by making Eternity a predicate to the Intellectual Existents-
 "the Nature of the Exemplar," we read, "is eternal"- we cancel the
 identification; Eternity becomes a separate thing, something
 surrounding that Nature or lying within it or present to it. And the
 majestic quality of both does not prove them identical: it might be
 transmitted from the one to the other. So, too, Eternity and the
 Divine Nature envelop the same entities, yes; but not in the 
 same way:
 the Divine may be thought of as enveloping parts, Eternity as
 embracing its content in an unbroken whole, with no implication of
 part, but merely from the fact that all eternal things are so by
 conforming to it.
 
 </p><p>May we, perhaps, identify Eternity with Repose-There as Time has
 been identified with Movement-Here?
 
 </p><p>This would bring on the counter-question whether Eternity is
 presented to us as Repose in the general sense or as the Repose that
 envelops the Intellectual Essence.
 
 </p><p>On the first supposition we can no more talk of Repose being
 eternal than of Eternity being eternal: to be eternal is to
 participate in an outside thing, Eternity.
 
 </p><p>Further, if Eternity is Repose, what becomes of Eternal
 Movement, which, by this identification, would become a thing of
 Repose?
 
 </p><p>Again, the conception of Repose scarcely seems to include that
 of perpetuity- I am speaking of course not of perpetuity in the
 time-order (which might follow on absence of movement) but of that
 which we have in mind when we speak of Eternity.
 
 </p><p>If, on the other hand, Eternity is identified with the Repose of
 the divine Essence, all species outside of the divine are put
 outside of Eternity.
 
 </p><p>Besides, the conception of Eternity requires not merely 
 Repose but
 also unity- and, in order to keep it distinct from Time, a unity
 including interval- but neither that unity nor that absence of
 interval enters into the conception of Repose as such.
 
 </p><p>Lastly, this unchangeable Repose in unity is a predicate
 asserted of Eternity, which, therefore, is not itself Repose, the
 absolute, but a participant in Repose.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn254.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>