<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn224.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn226.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. But what is the Nature of this Spirit- of the Supernals in
 general?
 
 </p><p>The Spirit-Kind is treated in the Symposium where, with 
 much about
 the others, we learn of Eros- Love- born to Penia- Poverty- 
 and Poros-
 Possession- who is son of Metis- Resource- at Aphrodite's 
 birth feast.
 
 </p><p>But to take Plato as meaning, by Eros, this Universe- and not
 simply the Love native within it- involves much that is
 self-contradictory.
 
 </p><p>For one thing, the universe is described as a blissful god and
 as self-sufficing, while this "Love" is confessedly neither 
 divine nor
 self-sufficing but in ceaseless need.
 
 </p><p>Again, this Kosmos is a compound of body and soul; but Aphrodite
 to Plato is the Soul itself, therefore Aphrodite would 
 necessarily- he
 a constituent part of Eros, dominant member! A man is the man's
 Soul, if the world is, similarly, the world's Soul, then Aphrodite,
 the Soul, is identical with Love, the Kosmos! And why should this
 one spirit, Love, be the Universe to the exclusion of all the
 others, which certainly are sprung from the same Essential-Being?
 Our only escape would be to make the Kosmos a complex of Supernals.
 
 </p><p>Love, again, is called the Dispenser of beautiful children: does
 this apply to the Universe? Love is represented as homeless, bedless
 and barefooted: would not that be a shabby description of the Kosmos
 and quite out of the truth?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn226.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>