<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn287.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn289.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. To this our first answer is that to place certain things
 under one identical class- by admitting an identical range of
 operation- is to make them of one common species, and puts an end to
 all mention of part; the reasonable conclusion would be, on the
 contrary, that there is one identical soul, every separate
 manifestation being that soul complete.
 
 </p><p>Our opponents after first admitting the unity go on to make our
 soul dependent on something else, something in which we have 
 no longer
 the soul of this or that, even of the universe, but a soul 
 of nowhere,
 a soul belonging neither to the kosmos, nor to anything else, and
 yet vested with all the function inherent to the kosmic soul and to
 that of every ensouled thing.
 
 </p><p>The soul considered as an entirety cannot be a soul of any one
 given thing- since it is an Essence [a divine Real-Being]- or, at
 least, there must be a soul which is not exclusively the soul of any
 particular thing, and those attached to particulars must so belong
 merely in some mode of accident.
 
 </p><p>In such questions as this it is important to clarify the
 significance of "part."
 
 </p><p>Part, as understood of body- uniform or varied- need not detain
 us; it is enough to indicate that, when part is mentioned in respect
 of things whose members are alike, it refers to mass and not to
 ideal-form [specific idea]: take for example, whiteness: the 
 whiteness
 in a portion of milk is not a part of the whiteness of milk in
 general: we have the whiteness of a portion not a portion of
 whiteness; for whiteness is utterly without magnitude; has nothing
 whatever to do with quantity.
 
 </p><p>That is all we need say with regard to part in material things;
 but part in the unembodied may be taken in various ways. We may
 think of it in the sense familiar in numbers, "two" a part of the
 standard "ten"- in abstract numbers of course- or as we think of a
 segment of a circle, or line [abstractly considered], or, again, of
 a section or branch of knowledge.
 
 </p><p>In the case of the units of reckoning and of geometrical figure,
 exactly as in that of corporeal masses, partition must diminish the
 total; the part must be less than the whole; for these are things of
 quantity, and have their being as things of quantity; and- since
 they are not the ideal-form Quantity- they are subject to 
 increase and
 decrease.
 
 </p><p>Now in such a sense as this, part cannot be affirmed of the soul.
 
 </p><p>The soul is not a thing of quantity; we are not to 
 conceive of the
 All-Soul as some standard ten with particular souls as its 
 constituent
 units.
 
 </p><p>Such a conception would entail many absurdities:
 
 </p><p>The Ten could not be [essentially] a unity [the Soul would be an
 aggregation, not a self-standing Real-Being] and, further- unless
 every one of the single constituents were itself an All-Soul- the
 All-Soul would be formed of non-souls.
 
 </p><p>Again, it is admitted that the particular soul- this "part of
 the All-Soul- is of one ideal-form with it, but this does not entail
 the relation of part to whole, since in objects formed of continuous
 parts there is nothing inevitably making any portion uniform with
 the total: take, for example, the parts of a circle or square; we
 may divide it in different ways so as to get our part; a 
 triangle need
 not be divided into triangles; all sorts of different figures are
 possible: yet an absolute uniformity is admitted to reign throughout
 soul.
 
 </p><p>In a line, no doubt, the part is inevitably a line; but even
 here there is a necessary difference in size; and if, in the case of
 the soul we similarly called upon magnitude as the 
 distinction between
 constituents and collective soul, then soul, thus classed by 
 magnitude
 becomes quantitative, and is simply body.
 
 </p><p>But it is admitted that all souls are alike and are entireties;
 clearly, soul is not subject to part in the sense in which
 magnitudes are: our opponents themselves would not consent to the
 notion of the All-Soul being whittled down into fragments, 
 yet this is
 what they would be doing, annulling the All-Soul- if any collective
 soul existed at all- making it a mere piece of terminology, thinking
 of it like wine separated into many portions, each portion, in its
 jar, being described as a portion of the total thing, wine.
 
 </p><p>Next there is the conception of the individual soul as a part in
 the sense in which we speak of some single proposition as a part of
 the science entire.
 
 </p><p>The theorem is separate, but the science stands as one undivided
 thing, the expression and summed efficiency [energy] of each
 constituent notion: this is partition without severance; each item
 potentially includes the whole science, which itself remains an
 unbroken total.
 
 </p><p>Is this the appropriate parallel?
 
 </p><p>No; in such a relationship the All-Soul, of which the particular
 souls are to be a part, would not be the soul of any definite thing,
 but an entity standing aloof; that means that it would not 
 even be the
 soul of the Kosmos; it would, in fact, be, itself, one of those
 partial souls; thus all alike would be partial and of one 
 nature; and,
 at that, there would be no reason for making any such distinction.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn289.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>