<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn229.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn231.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. "Our way of speaking"- for myths, if they are to serve their
 purpose, must necessarily import time-distinctions into their
 subject and will often present as separate, Powers which exist in
 unity but differ in rank and faculty; they will relate the births of
 the unbegotten and discriminate where all is one substance; the
 truth is conveyed in the only manner possible, it is left to our
 good sense to bring all together again.
 
 </p><p>On this principle we have, here, Soul dwelling with the divine
 Intelligence, breaking away from it, and yet again being filled to
 satiety with the divine Ideas- the beautiful abounding in all
 plenty, so that every splendour become manifest in it with the
 images of whatever is lovely- Soul which, taken as one all, is
 Aphrodite, while in it may be distinguished the Reason-Principles
 summed under the names of Plenty and Possession, produced by the
 downflow of the Nectar of the over realm. The splendours contained
 in Soul are thought of as the garden of Zeus with reference to their
 existing within Life; and Poros sleeps in this garden in the sense
 of being sated and heavy with its produce. Life is eternally 
 manifest,
 an eternal existent among the existences, and the banqueting of the
 gods means no more than that they have their Being in that vital
 blessedness. And Love- "born at the banquet of the gods"- has of
 necessity been eternally in existence, for it springs from the
 intention of the Soul towards its Best, towards the Good; as long as
 Soul has been, Love has been.
 
 </p><p>Still this Love is of mixed quality. On the one hand there is in
 it the lack which keeps it craving: on the other, it is not entirely
 destitute; the deficient seeks more of what it has, and certainly
 nothing absolutely void of good would ever go seeking the good.
 
 </p><p>It is said then to spring from Poverty and Possession in 
 the sense
 that Lack and Aspiration and the Memory of the Ideal Principles, all
 present together in the Soul, produce that Act towards The Good
 which is Love. Its Mother is Poverty, since striving is for 
 the needy;
 and this Poverty is Matter, for Matter is the wholly poor: the very
 ambition towards the good is a sign of existing 
 indetermination; there
 is a lack of shape and of Reason in that which must aspire 
 towards the
 Good, and the greater degree of effort implies the lower depth of
 materiality. A thing aspiring towards the Good is an Ideal-principle
 only when the striving [with attainment] will leave it still 
 unchanged
 in Kind: when it must take in something other than itself, its
 aspiration is the presentment of Matter to the incoming power.
 
 </p><p>Thus Love is at once, in some degree a thing of Matter and at
 the same time a Celestial, sprung of the Soul; for Love 
 lacks its Good
 but, from its very birth, strives towards It.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn231.htm">Next: SIXTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>