<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn225.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn227.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. What then, in sum, is to be thought of Love and of his
 "birth" as we are told of it?
 
 </p><p>Clearly we have to establish the significance, here, of Poverty
 and Possession, and show in what way the parentage is appropriate:
 we have also to bring these two into line with the other Supernals
 since one spirit nature, one spirit essence, must characterize all
 unless they are to have merely a name in common.
 
 </p><p>We must, therefore, lay down the grounds on which we distinguish
 the Gods from the Celestials- that is, when we emphasize the
 separate nature of the two orders and are not, as often in practice,
 including these Spirits under the common name of Gods.
 
 </p><p>It is our teaching and conviction that the Gods are immune to
 all passion while we attribute experience and emotion to the
 Celestials which, though eternal Beings and directly next to 
 the Gods,
 are already a step towards ourselves and stand between the divine
 and the human.
 
 </p><p>But by what process was the immunity lost? What in their nature
 led them downwards to the inferior?
 
 </p><p>And other questions present themselves.
 
 </p><p>Does the Intellectual Realm include no member of this spirit
 order, not even one? And does the Kosmos contain only these spirits,
 God being confined to the Intellectual? Or are there Gods in the
 sub-celestial too, the Kosmos itself being a God, the third, as is
 commonly said, and the Powers down to the Moon being all 
 Gods as well?
 
 </p><p>It is best not to use the word "Celestial" of any Being of that
 Realm; the word "God" may be applied to the Essential-Celestial- the
 autodaimon- and even to the Visible Powers of the Universe of Sense
 down to the Moon; Gods, these too, visible, secondary, sequent upon
 the Gods of the Intellectual Realm, consonant with Them, held about
 Them, as the radiance about the star.
 
 </p><p>What, then, are these spirits?
 
 </p><p>A Celestial is the representative generated by each Soul when it
 enters the Kosmos.
 
 </p><p>And why, by a Soul entering the Kosmos?
 
 </p><p>Because Soul pure of the Kosmos generates not a Celestial Spirit
 but a God; hence it is that we have spoken of Love, offspring of
 Aphrodite the Pure Soul, as a God.
 
 </p><p>But, first what prevents every one of the Celestials 
 from being an
 Eros, a Love? And why are they not untouched by Matter like the Gods?
 
 </p><p>On the first question: Every Celestial born in the 
 striving of the
 Soul towards the good and beautiful is an Eros; and all the Souls
 within the Kosmos do engender this Celestial; but other 
 Spirit-Beings,
 equally born from the Soul of the All, but by other faculties of
 that Soul, have other functions: they are for the direct service of
 the All, and administer particular things to the purpose of the
 Universe entire. The Soul of the All must be adequate to all that is
 and therefore must bring into being spirit powers serviceable not
 merely in one function but to its entire charge.
 
 </p><p>But what participation can the Celestials have in Matter, and in
 what Matter?
 
 </p><p>Certainly none in bodily Matter; that would make them simply
 living things of the order of sense. And if, even, they are to
 invest themselves in bodies of air or of fire, the nature must have
 already been altered before they could have any contact with the
 corporeal. The Pure does not mix, unmediated, with body- though many
 think that the Celestial-Kind, of its very essence, comports a body
 aerial or of fire.
 
 </p><p>But why should one order of Celestial descend to body and
 another not? The difference implies the existence of some cause or
 medium working upon such as thus descend. What would 
 constitute such a
 medium?
 
 </p><p>We are forced to assume that there is a Matter of the 
 Intellectual
 Order, and that Beings partaking of it are thereby enabled to enter
 into the lower Matter, the corporeal.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn227.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>