<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn207.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn209.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. For, even though the I is sovereign in choosing, yet by the
 fact of the choice the thing done takes its place in the ordered
 total. Your personality does not come from outside into the
 universal scheme; you are a part of it, you and your personal
 disposition.
 
 </p><p>But what is the cause of this initial personality?
 
 </p><p>This question resolves itself into two: are we to make the
 Creator, if Creator there is, the cause of the moral quality of the
 individual or does the responsibility lie with the creature?
 
 </p><p>Or is there, perhaps, no responsibility? After all, none is
 charged in the case of plants brought into being without the
 perceptive faculties; no one is blamed because animals are not all
 that men are- which would be like complaining that men are not all
 that gods are. Reason acquits plant and animal and, their maker; how
 can it complain because men do not stand above humanity?
 
 </p><p>If the reproach simply means that Man might improve by bringing
 from his own stock something towards his betterment we must 
 allow that
 the man failing in this is answerable for his own inferiority: but
 if the betterment must come not from within the man but from
 without, from his Author, it is folly to ask more than has 
 been given,
 as foolish in the case of man as in plant and animal.
 
 </p><p>The question is not whether a thing is inferior to something
 else but whether in its own Kind it suffices to its own part;
 universal equality there cannot be.
 
 </p><p>Then the Reason-Principle has measured things out with the set
 purpose of inequality?
 
 </p><p>Certainly not: the inequality is inevitable by the nature of
 things: the Reason-Principle of this Universe follows upon a phase
 of the Soul; the Soul itself follows upon an Intellectual Principle,
 and this Intellectual Principle is not one among the things of the
 Universe but is all things; in all things, there is implied 
 variety of
 things; where there is variety and not identity there must 
 be primals,
 secondaries, tertiaries and every grade downward. Forms of 
 life, then,
 there must be that are not pure Soul but the dwindling of Souls
 enfeebled stage by stage of the process. There is, of course, a Soul
 in the Reason-Principle constituting a living being, but it 
 is another
 Soul [a lesser phase], not that [the Supreme Soul] from which the
 Reason-Principle itself derives; and this combined vehicle of life
 weakens as it proceeds towards matter, and what it engenders is
 still more deficient. Consider how far the engendered stands from
 its origin and yet, what a marvel!
 
 </p><p>In sum nothing can secure to a thing of process the 
 quality of the
 prior order, loftier than all that is product and amenable to no
 charge in regard to it: the wonder is, only, that it reaches 
 and gives
 to the lower at all, and that the traces of its presence should be
 so noble. And if its outgiving is greater than the lower can
 appropriate, the debt is the heavier; all the blame must 
 fall upon the
 unreceptive creature, and Providence be the more exalted.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn209.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>