<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn233.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn235.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. But how do we explain likings and aversions? Sorrow, too, and
 anger and pleasure, desire and fear- are these not changes,
 affectings, present and stirring within the Soul?
 
 </p><p>This question cannot be ignored. To deny that changes take place
 and are intensely felt is in sharp contradiction to obvious facts.
 But, while we recognize this, we must make very sure what it is that
 changes. To represent the Soul or Mind as being the seat of these
 emotions is not far removed from making it blush or turn pale; it is
 to forget that while the Soul or Mind is the means, the effect takes
 place in the distinct organism, the animated body.
 
 </p><p>At the idea of disgrace, the shame is in the Soul; but 
 the body is
 occupied by the Soul- not to trouble about words- is, at any rate,
 close to it and very different from soulless matter; and so, is
 affected in the blood, mobile in its nature. Fear begins in the
 mind; the pallor is simply the withdrawal of the blood inwards. So
 in pleasure, the elation is mental, but makes itself felt in 
 the body;
 the purely mental phase has not reached the point of sensation: the
 same is true of pain. So desire is ignored in the Soul where the
 impulse takes its rise; what comes outward thence, the Sensibility
 knows.
 
 </p><p>When we speak of the Soul or Mind being moved- as in desire,
 reasoning, judging- we do not mean that it is driven into its act;
 these movements are its own acts.
 
 </p><p>In the same way when we call Life a movement we have no idea of
 a changing substance; the naturally appropriate act of each member
 of the living thing makes up the Life, which is, therefore, not a
 shifting thing.
 
 </p><p>To bring the matter to the point: put it that life, tendency,
 are no changements; that memories are not forms stamped upon 
 the mind,
 that notions are not of the nature of impressions on sealing-wax; we
 thence draw the general conclusion that in all such states and
 movements the Soul, or Mind, is unchanged in substance and 
 in essence,
 that virtue and vice are not something imported into the 
 Soul- as heat
 and cold, blackness or whiteness are importations into body- 
 but that,
 in all this relation, matter and spirit are exactly and
 comprehensively contraries.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn235.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>