<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn234.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn236.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. We have, however, still to examine what is called the 
 affective
 phase of the Soul. This has, no doubt, been touched upon above where
 we dealt with the passions in general as grouped about the
 initiative phase of the Soul and the desiring faculty in its 
 effort to
 shape things to its choice: but more is required; we must begin by
 forming a clear idea of what is meant by this affective 
 faculty of the
 Soul.
 
 </p><p>In general terms it means the centre about which we recognize
 the affections to be grouped; and by affections we mean those states
 upon which follow pleasure and pain.
 
 </p><p>Now among these affections we must distinguish. Some are pivoted
 upon judgements; thus, a Man judging his death to be at hand may
 feel fear; foreseeing some fortunate turn of events, he is happy:
 the opinion lies in one sphere; the affection is stirred in another.
 Sometimes the affections take the lead and automatically bring in
 the notion which thus becomes present to the appropriate faculty:
 but as we have explained, an act of opinion does not introduce any
 change into the Soul or Mind: what happens is that from the notion
 of some impending evil is produced the quite separate thing, 
 fear, and
 this fear, in turn, becomes known in that part of the Mind which is
 said under such circumstances to harbour fear.
 
 </p><p>But what is the action of this fear upon the Mind?
 
 </p><p>The general answer is that it sets up trouble and 
 confusion before
 an evil anticipated. It should, however, be quite clear that the
 Soul or Mind is the seat of all imaginative representation- both the
 higher representation known as opinion or judgement and the lower
 representation which is not so much a judgement as a vague notion
 unattended by discrimination, something resembling the action by
 which, as is believed, the "Nature" of common speech produces,
 unconsciously, the objects of the partial sphere. It is equally
 certain that in all that follows upon the mental act or state, the
 disturbance, confined to the body, belongs to the sense-order;
 trembling, pallor, inability to speak, have obviously nothing to do
 with the spiritual portion of the being. The Soul, in fact, 
 would have
 to be described as corporeal if it were the seat of such symptoms:
 besides, in that case the trouble would not even reach the body
 since the only transmitting principle, oppressed by sensation,
 jarred out of itself, would be inhibited.
 
 </p><p>None the less, there is an affective phase of the Soul 
 or Mind and
 this is not corporeal; it can be, only, some kind of Ideal-form.
 
 </p><p>Now Matter is the one field of the desiring faculty, as of the
 principles of nutrition growth and engendering, which are root and
 spring to desire and to every other affection known to this
 Ideal-form. No Ideal-form can be the victim of disturbance or be in
 any way affected: it remains in tranquillity; only the Matter
 associated with it can be affected by any state or experience
 induced by the movement which its mere presence suffices to set up.
 Thus the vegetal Principle induces vegetal life but it does not,
 itself, pass through the processes of vegetation; it gives growth
 but it does not grow; in no movement which it originates is it moved
 with the motion it induces; it is in perfect repose, or, at 
 least, its
 movement, really its act, is utterly different from what it causes
 elsewhere.
 
 </p><p>The nature of an Ideal-form is to be, of itself, an activity; it
 operates by its mere presence: it is as if Melody itself plucked the
 strings. The affective phase of the Soul or Mind will be the 
 operative
 cause of all affection; it originates the movement either under the
 stimulus of some sense-presentment or independently- and it is a
 question to be examined whether the judgement leading to the
 movement operates from above or not- but the affective phase itself
 remains unmoved like Melody dictating music. The causes originating
 the movement may be likened to the musician; what is moved 
 is like the
 strings of his instrument, and once more, the Melodic 
 Principle itself
 is not affected, but only the strings, though, however much the
 musician desired it, he could not pluck the strings except under
 dictation from the principle of Melody.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn236.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>