<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn286.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn288.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. The soul: what dubious questions concerning it admit of
 solution, or where we must abide our doubt- with, at least, the gain
 of recognizing the problem that confronts us- this is matter well
 worth attention. On what subject can we more reasonably expend the
 time required by minute discussion and investigation? Apart from
 much else, it is enough that such an enquiry illuminates two grave
 questions: of what sphere the soul is the principle, and whence the
 soul itself springs. Moreover, we will be only obeying the ordinance
 of the God who bade us know ourselves.
 
 </p><p>Our general instinct to seek and learn, our longing to possess
 ourselves of whatsoever is lovely in the vision will, in all reason,
 set us enquiring into the nature of the instrument with which we
 search.
 
 </p><p>Now even in the universal Intellect [Divine Mind] there was
 duality, so that we would expect differences of condition in 
 things of
 part: how some things rather than others come to be 
 receptacles of the
 divine beings will need to be examined; but all this we may leave
 aside until we are considering the mode in which soul comes to
 occupy body. For the moment we return to our argument against those
 who maintain our souls to be offshoots from the soul of the universe
 [parts and an identity modally parted].
 
 </p><p>Our opponents will probably deny the validity of our arguments
 against the theory that the human soul is a mere segment of the
 All-Soul- the considerations, namely, that it is of identical scope,
 and that it is intellective in the same degree, supposing them,
 even, to admit that equality of intellection.
 
 </p><p>They will object that parts must necessarily fall under one
 ideal-form with their wholes. And they will adduce Plato as 
 expressing
 their view where, in demonstrating that the All is ensouled, he says
 "As our body is a portion of the body of the All, so our soul is a
 portion of the soul of the All." It is admitted on clear 
 evidence that
 we are borne along by the Circuit of the All; we will be told that-
 taking character and destiny from it, strictly inbound with it- we
 must derive our souls, also, from what thus bears us up, and that as
 within ourselves every part absorbs from our soul so, analogically,
 we, standing as parts to the universe, absorb from the Soul 
 of the All
 as parts of it. They will urge also that the dictum "The collective
 soul cares for all the unensouled," carries the same implication and
 could be uttered only in the belief that nothing whatever of later
 origin stands outside the soul of the universe, the only soul there
 can be there to concern itself with the unensouled.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn288.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>