<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn218.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn220.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. What, then, is the achieved Sage?
 
 </p><p>One whose Act is determined by the higher phase of the Soul.
 
 </p><p>It does not suffice to perfect virtue to have only this Spirit
 [equivalent in all men] as cooperator in the life: the 
 acting force in
 the Sage is the Intellective Principle [the diviner phase of 
 the human
 Soul] which therefore is itself his presiding spirit or is 
 guided by a
 presiding spirit of its own, no other than the very Divinity.
 
 </p><p>But this exalts the Sage above the Intellectual Principle as
 possessing for presiding spirit the Prior to the Intellectual
 Principle: how then does it come about that he was not, from the
 very beginning, all that he now is?
 
 </p><p>The failure is due to the disturbance caused by birth- though,
 before all reasoning, there exists the instinctive movement reaching
 out towards its own.
 
 </p><p>On instinct which the Sage finally rectifies in every respect?
 
 </p><p>Not in every respect: the Soul is so constituted that its
 life-history and its general tendency will answer not merely to its
 own nature but also to the conditions among which it acts.
 
 </p><p>The presiding Spirit, as we read, conducting a Soul to the
 Underworld ceases to be its guardian- except when the Soul 
 resumes [in
 its later choice] the former state of life.
 
 </p><p>But, meanwhile, what happens to it?
 
 </p><p>From the passage [in the Phaedo] which tells how it presents the
 Soul to judgement we gather that after the death it resumes the form
 it had before the birth, but that then, beginning again, it 
 is present
 to the Souls in their punishment during the period of their renewed
 life- a time not so much of living as of expiation.
 
 </p><p>But the Souls that enter into brute bodies, are they 
 controlled by
 some thing less than this presiding Spirit? No: theirs is still a
 Spirit, but an evil or a foolish one.
 
 </p><p>And the Souls that attain to the highest?
 
 </p><p>Of these higher Souls some live in the world of Sense, some
 above it: and those in the world of Sense inhabit the Sun or another
 of the planetary bodies; the others occupy the fixed Sphere 
 [above the
 planetary] holding the place they have merited through having lived
 here the superior life of reason.
 
 </p><p>We must understand that, while our Souls do contain an
 Intellectual Kosmos they also contain a subordination of 
 various forms
 like that of the Kosmic Soul. The world Soul is distributed so as to
 produce the fixed sphere and the planetary circuits corresponding to
 its graded powers: so with our Souls; they must have their provinces
 according to their different powers, parallel to those of the World
 Soul: each must give out its own special act; released, each will
 inhabit there a star consonant with the temperament and 
 faculty in act
 within and constituting the principle of the life; and this star or
 the next highest power will stand to them as God or more exactly as
 tutelary spirit.
 
 </p><p>But here some further precision is needed.
 
 </p><p>Emancipated Souls, for the whole period of their sojourn there
 above, have transcended the Spirit-nature and the entire fatality of
 birth and all that belongs to this visible world, for they have
 taken up with them that Hypostasis of the Soul in which the desire
 of earthly life is vested. This Hypostasis may be described as the
 distributable Soul, for it is what enters bodily forms and
 multiplies itself by this division among them. But its 
 distribution is
 not a matter of magnitudes; wherever it is present, there is the
 same thing present entire; its unity can always be 
 reconstructed: when
 living things- animal or vegetal- produce their constant 
 succession of
 new forms, they do so in virtue of the self-distribution of 
 this phase
 of the Soul, for it must be as much distributed among the 
 new forms as
 the propagating originals are. In some cases it communicates 
 its force
 by permanent presence the life principle in plants for instance- in
 other cases it withdraws after imparting its virtue- for instance
 where from the putridity of dead animal or vegetable matter a
 multitudinous birth is produced from one organism.
 
 </p><p>A power corresponding to this in the All must reach down and
 co-operate in the life of our world- in fact the very same power.
 
 </p><p>If the Soul returns to this Sphere it finds itself under the
 same Spirit or a new, according to the life it is to live. With this
 Spirit it embarks in the skiff of the universe: the "spindle of
 Necessity" then takes control and appoints the seat for the voyage,
 the seat of the lot in life.
 
 </p><p>The Universal circuit is like a breeze, and the voyager, still
 or stirring, is carried forward by it. He has a hundred varied
 experiences, fresh sights, changing circumstances, all sorts of
 events. The vessel itself furnishes incident, tossing as it 
 drives on.
 And the voyager also acts of himself in virtue of that individuality
 which he retains because he is on the vessel in his own person and
 character. Under identical circumstances individuals answer very
 differently in their movements and acts: hence it comes 
 about that, be
 the occurrences and conditions of life similar or dissimilar, the
 result may differ from man to man, as on the other hand a similar
 result may be produced by dissimilar conditions: this 
 (personal answer
 to incident) it is that constitutes destiny.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn220.htm">Next: FIFTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>