<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn242.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn244.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. This is Plato's conception: to him participation does not,
 in the case of Matter, comport any such presence of an 
 Ideal-form in a
 Substance to be shaped by it as would produce one compound thing
 made up of the two elements changing at the same moment, merging
 into one another, modified each by the other.
 
 </p><p>In his haste to his purpose he raises many difficult questions,
 but he is determined to disown that view; he labours to indicate in
 what mode Matter can receive the Ideal-forms without being, itself,
 modified. The direct way is debarred since it is not easy to point
 to things actually present in a base and yet leaving that base
 unaffected: he therefore devises a metaphor for participation
 without modification, one which supports, also, his thesis that all
 appearing to the senses is void of substantial existence and that
 the region of mere seeming is vast.
 
 </p><p>Holding, as he does, that it is the patterns displayed 
 upon Matter
 that cause all experience in living bodies while the Matter itself
 remains unaffected, he chooses this way of stating its immutability,
 leaving us to make out for ourselves that those very patterns
 impressed upon it do not comport any experience, any modification,
 in itself.
 
 </p><p>In the case, no doubt, of the living bodies that take one
 pattern or shape after having borne another, it might be said that
 there was a change, the variation of shape being made verbally
 equivalent to a real change: but since Matter is essentially without
 shape or magnitude, the appearing of shape upon it can by no freedom
 of phrase be described as a change within it. On this point one must
 have "a rule for thick and thin" one may safely say that the
 underlying Kind contains nothing whatever in the mode commonly
 supposed.
 
 </p><p>But if we reject even the idea of its really containing at least
 the patterns upon it, how is it, in any sense, a recipient?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that in the metaphor cited we have some reasonably
 adequate indication of the impassibility of Matter coupled with the
 presence upon it of what may be described as images of things not
 present.
 
 </p><p>But we cannot leave the point of its impassibility without a
 warning against allowing ourselves to be deluded by sheer custom of
 speech.
 
 </p><p>Plato speaks of Matter as becoming dry, wet, inflamed, 
 but we must
 remember the words that follow: "and taking the shape of air and of
 water": this blunts the expressions "becoming wet, becoming 
 inflamed";
 once we have Matter thus admitting these shapes, we learn that it
 has not itself become a shaped thing but that the shapes remain
 distinct as they entered. We see, further, that the expression
 "becoming inflamed" is not to be taken strictly: it is rather a case
 of becoming fire. Becoming fire is very different from becoming
 inflamed, which implies an outside agency and, therefore,
 susceptibility to modification. Matter, being itself a portion of
 fire, cannot be said to catch fire. To suggest that the fire not
 merely permeates the matter, but actually sets it on fire is like
 saying that a statue permeates its bronze.
 
 </p><p>Further, if what enters must be an Ideal-Principle how could it
 set Matter aflame? But what if it is a pattern or condition? No: the
 object set aflame is so in virtue of the combination of Matter and
 condition.
 
 </p><p>But how can this follow on the conjunction when no unity has
 been produced by the two?
 
 </p><p>Even if such a unity had been produced, it would be a unity of
 things not mutually sharing experiences but acting upon each other.
 And the question would then arise whether each was effective upon
 the other or whether the sole action was not that of one (the form)
 preventing the other [the Matter] from slipping away?
 
 </p><p>But when any material thing is severed, must not the Matter be
 divided with it? Surely the bodily modification and other experience
 that have accompanied the sundering, must have occurred,
 identically, within the Matter?
 
 </p><p>This reasoning would force the destructibility of Matter upon
 us: "the body is dissolved; then the Matter is dissolved." We would
 have to allow Matter to be a thing of quantity, a magnitude. 
 But since
 it is not a magnitude it could not have the experiences that 
 belong to
 magnitude and, on the larger scale, since it is not body it cannot
 know the experiences of body.
 
 </p><p>In fact those that declare Matter subject to modification may as
 well declare it body right out.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn244.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>