<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn248.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn250.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. The Ideal Principle possessing the Intellection [= Idea,
 Noesis] of Magnitude- assuming that this Intellection is of 
 such power
 as not merely to subsist within itself but to be urged outward as it
 were by the intensity of its life- will necessarily realize itself
 in a Kind [= Matter] not having its being in the Intellective
 Principle, not previously possessing the Idea of Magnitude or any
 trace of that Idea or any other.
 
 </p><p>What then will it produce [in this Matter] by virtue of that
 power?
 
 </p><p>Not horse or cow: these are the product of other Ideas.
 
 </p><p>No: this Principle comes from the source of Magnitude [= 
 is primal
 "Magnitude"] and therefore Matter can have no extension, in which to
 harbour the Magnitude of the Principle, but can take in only its
 reflected appearance.
 
 </p><p>To the thing which does not enjoy Magnitude in the sense 
 of having
 mass-extension in its own substance and parts, the only 
 possibility is
 that it present some partial semblance of Magnitude, such as being
 continuous, not here and there and everywhere, that its parts be
 related within it and ungapped. An adequate reflection of a 
 great mass
 cannot be produced in a small space- mere size prevents- but the
 greater, pursuing the hope of that full self-presentment, makes
 progress towards it and brings about a nearer approach to adequate
 mirroring in the parallel from which it can never withhold its
 radiation: thus it confers Magnitude upon that [= Matter] which has
 none and cannot even muster up the appearance of having any, and the
 visible resultant exhibits the Magnitude of mass.
 
 </p><p>Matter, then, wears Magnitude as a dress thrown about it by its
 association with that Absolute Magnitude to whose movement it must
 answer; but it does not, for that, change its Kind; if the Idea
 which has clothed it were to withdraw, it would once again be what
 it permanently is, what it is by its own strength, or it would have
 precisely the Magnitude lent to it by any other form that happens to
 be present in it.
 
 </p><p>The [Universal] Soul- containing the Ideal Principles of
 Real-Beings, and itself an Ideal Principle- includes all in
 concentration within itself, just as the Ideal Principle of each
 particular entity is complete and self-contained: it, therefore,
 sees these principles of sensible things because they are turned, as
 it were, towards it and advancing to it: but it cannot 
 harbour them in
 their plurality, for it cannot depart from its Kind; it sees them,
 therefore, stripped of Mass. Matter, on the contrary, destitute of
 resisting power since it has no Act of its own and is a mere shadow,
 can but accept all that an active power may choose to send. 
 In what is
 thus sent, from the Reason-Principle in the Intellectual Realm,
 there is already contained a degree of the partial object that is to
 be formed: in the image-making impulse within the Reason-Principle
 there is already a step [towards the lower manifestation] or we may
 put it that the downward movement from the Reason-Principle 
 is a first
 form of the partial: utter absence of partition would mean 
 no movement
 but [sterile] repose. Matter cannot be the home of all things in
 concentration as the Soul is: if it were so, it would belong to the
 Intellective Sphere. It must be all-recipient but not in 
 that partless
 mode. It is to be the Place of all things, and it must therefore
 extend universally, offer itself to all things, serve to all 
 interval:
 thus it will be a thing unconfined to any moment [of space or time]
 but laid out in submission to all that is to be.
 
 </p><p>But would we not expect that some one particularized form should
 occupy Matter [at once] and so exclude such others as are not able
 to enter into combination?
 
 </p><p>No: for there is no first Idea except the Ideal Principle of the
 Universe- and, by this Idea, Matter is [the seat of] all things at
 once and of the particular thing in its parts- for the Matter of a
 living being is disparted according to the specific parts of the
 organism: if there were no such partition nothing would exist but
 the Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn250.htm">Next: Section 19</a></center>
 </body>