<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn263.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn265.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. The Spheral Circuit, then, performed in Time, indicates it:
 but when we come to Time itself there is no question of its being
 "within" something else: it must be primary, a thing "within
 itself." It is that in which all the rest happens, in which all
 movement and rest exist smoothly and under order; something
 following a definite order is necessary to exhibit it and to 
 make it a
 subject of knowledge- though not to produce it- it is known by order
 whether in rest or in motion; in motion especially, for Movement
 better moves Time into our ken than rest can, and it is easier to
 estimate distance traversed than repose maintained.
 
 </p><p>This last fact has led to Time being called a measure of Movement
 when it should have been described as something measured by Movement
 and then defined in its essential nature; it is an error to define
 it by a mere accidental concomitant and so to reverse the 
 actual order
 of things. Possibly, however, this reversal was not intended by the
 authors of the explanation: but, at any rate, we do not understand
 them; they plainly apply the term Measure to what is in reality the
 measured and leave us unable to grasp their meaning: our perplexity
 may be due to the fact that their writings- addressed to disciples
 acquainted with their teaching- do not explain what this thing,
 measure, or measured object, is in itself.
 
 </p><p>Plato does not make the essence of Time consist in its being
 either a measure or a thing measured by something else.
 
 </p><p>Upon the point of the means by which it is known, he remarks
 that the Circuit advances an infinitesimal distance for every
 infinitesimal segment of Time so that from that observation it is
 possible to estimate what the Time is, how much it amounts to: but
 when his purpose is to explain its essential nature he tells us that
 it sprang into Being simultaneously with the Heavenly system, a
 reproduction of Eternity, its image in motion, Time necessarily
 unresting as the Life with which it must keep pace: and "coeval with
 the Heavens" because it is this same Life [of the Divine Soul] which
 brings the Heavens also into being; Time and the Heavens are the
 work of the one Life.
 
 </p><p>Suppose that Life, then, to revert- an impossibility- to perfect
 unity: Time, whose existence is in that Life, and the Heavens, no
 longer maintained by that Life, would end at once.
 
 </p><p>It is the height of absurdity to fasten on the succession of
 earlier and later occurring in the life and movement of this 
 sphere of
 ours, to declare that it must be some definite thing and to call it
 Time, while denying the reality of the more truly existent Movement,
 that of the Soul, which has also its earlier and later: it cannot be
 reasonable to recognize succession in the case of the Soulless
 Movement- and so to associate Time with that- while ignoring
 succession and the reality of Time in the Movement from which the
 other takes its imitative existence; to ignore, that is, the very
 Movement in which succession first appears, a self-actuated movement
 which, engendering its own every operation, is the source of all
 that follows upon itself, to all which, it is the cause of
 existence, at once, and of every consequent.
 
 </p><p>But:- we treat the Kosmic Movement as overarched by that of the
 Soul and bring it under Time; yet we do not set under Time that
 Soul-Movement itself with all its endless progression: what is our
 explanation of this paradox?
 
 </p><p>Simply, that the Soul-Movement has for its Prior Eternity which
 knows neither its progression nor its extension. The descent towards
 Time begins with this Soul-Movement; it made Time and 
 harbours Time as
 a concomitant to its Act.
 
 </p><p>And this is how Time is omnipresent: that Soul is absent from no
 fragment of the Kosmos just as our Soul is absent from no particle
 of ourselves. As for those who pronounce Time a thing of no
 substantial existence, of no reality, they clearly belie God Himself
 whenever they say "He was" or "He will be": for the existence
 indicated by the "was and will be" can have only such reality as
 belongs to that in which it is said to be situated:- but this school
 demands another type of argument.
 
 </p><p>Meanwhile we have a supplementary observation to make.
 
 </p><p>Take a man walking and observe the advance he has made; that
 advance gives you the quantity of movement he is employing: and when
 you know that quantity- represented by the ground traversed by his
 feet, for, of course, we are supposing the bodily movement to
 correspond with the pace he has set within himself- you know also
 the movement that exists in the man himself before the feet move.
 
 </p><p>You must relate the body, carried forward during a given 
 period of
 Time, to a certain quantity of Movement causing the progress and to
 the Time it takes, and that again to the Movement, equal in 
 extension,
 within the man's soul.
 
 </p><p>But the Movement within the Soul- to what are you to (relate)
 refer that?
 
 </p><p>Let your choice fall where it may, from this point there is
 nothing but the unextended: and this is the primarily existent, the
 container to all else, having itself no container, brooking none.
 
 </p><p>And, as with Man's Soul, so with the Soul of the All.
 
 </p><p>"Is Time, then, within ourselves as well?"
 
 </p><p>Time in every Soul of the order of the All-Soul, present in like
 form in all; for all the Souls are the one Soul.
 
 </p><p>And this is why Time can never be broken apart, any more than
 Eternity which, similarly, under diverse manifestations, has 
 its Being
 as an integral constituent of all the eternal Existences.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn265.htm">Next: EIGHTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>