<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn268.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn270.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. And Nature, asked why it brings forth its works, might answer
 if it cared to listen and to speak:
 
 
 </p><p>"It would have been more becoming to put no question but to
 learn in silence just as I myself am silent and make no habit of
 talking. And what is your lesson? This; that whatsoever comes into
 being is my is my vision, seen in my silence, the vision that
 belongs to my character who, sprung from vision, am vision-loving
 and create vision by the vision-seeing faculty within me. The
 mathematicians from their vision draw their figures: but I draw
 nothing: I gaze and the figures of the material world take 
 being as if
 they fell from my contemplation. As with my Mother (the All-Soul]
 and the Beings that begot me so it is with me: they are born of a
 Contemplation and my birth is from them, not by their Act 
 but by their
 Being; they are the loftier Reason-Principles, they contemplate
 themselves and I am born."
 
 
 </p><p>Now what does this tell us?
 
 </p><p>It tells: that what we know as Nature is a Soul, offspring of a
 yet earlier Soul of more powerful life; that it possesses,
 therefore, in its repose, a vision within itself; that it has no
 tendency upward nor even downward but is at peace, steadfast, in its
 own Essence; that, in this immutability accompanied by what may be
 called Self-Consciousness, it possesses- within the measure of its
 possibility- a knowledge of the realm of subsequent things perceived
 in virtue of that understanding and consciousness; and, 
 achieving thus
 a resplendent and delicious spectacle, has no further aim.
 
 </p><p>Of course, while it may be convenient to speak of
 "understanding" or "perception" in the Nature-Principle, this is not
 in the full sense applicable to other beings; we are 
 applying to sleep
 a word borrowed from the wake.
 
 </p><p>For the Vision on which Nature broods, inactive, is a
 self-intuition, a spectacle laid before it by virtue of its
 unaccompanied self-concentration and by the fact that in itself it
 belongs to the order of intuition. It is a Vision silent but
 somewhat blurred, for there exists another a clearer of which Nature
 is the image: hence all that Nature produces is weak; the weaker act
 of intuition produces the weaker object.
 
 </p><p>In the same way, human beings, when weak on the side of
 contemplation, find in action their trace of vision and of reason:
 their spiritual feebleness unfits them for contemplation; they are
 left with a void, because they cannot adequately seize the 
 vision; yet
 they long for it; they are hurried into action as their way to the
 vision which they cannot attain by intellection. They act from the
 desire of seeing their action, and of making it visible and sensible
 to others when the result shall prove fairly well equal to the plan.
 Everywhere, doing and making will be found to be either an 
 attenuation
 or a complement of vision-attenuation if the doer was aiming only at
 the thing done; complement if he is to possess something nobler to
 gaze upon than the mere work produced.
 
 </p><p>Given the power to contemplate the Authentic, who would run, of
 choice, after its image?
 
 </p><p>The relation of action to contemplation is indicated in the way
 duller children, inapt to study and speculation, take to crafts and
 manual labour.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn270.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>