<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn205.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn207.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. What is our answer?
 
 </p><p>All events and things, good and evil alike, are included 
 under the
 Universal Reason-Principle of which they are parts- strictly
 "included" for this Universal Idea does not engender them but
 encompasses them.
 
 </p><p>The Reason-Principles are acts or expressions of a 
 Universal Soul;
 its parts [i.e., events good and evil] are expressions of these
 Soulparts.
 
 </p><p>This unity, Soul, has different parts; the Reason-Principles,
 correspondingly, will also have their parts, and so, too, will the
 ultimates of the system, all that they bring into being.
 
 </p><p>The Souls are in harmony with each other and so, too, are their
 acts and effects; but it is harmony in the sense of a resultant
 unity built out of contraries. All things, as they rise from a
 unity, come back to unity by a sheer need of nature; differences
 unfold themselves, contraries are produced, but all is drawn into
 one organized system by the unity at the source.
 
 </p><p>The principle may be illustrated from the different classes of
 animal life: there is one genus, horse, though horses among 
 themselves
 fight and bite and show malice and angry envy: so all the others
 within the unity of their Kind; and so humanity.
 
 </p><p>All these types, again, can be ranged under the one Kind, that
 of living things; objects without life can be thought of under their
 specific types and then be resumed under the one Kind of the
 "non-living"; if we choose to go further yet, living and non-living
 may be included under the one Kind, "Beings," and, further still,
 under the Source of Being.
 
 </p><p>Having attached all to this source, we turn to move down again
 in continuous division: we see the Unity fissuring, as it reaches
 out into Universality, and yet embracing all in one system so that
 with all its differentiation it is one multiple living thing- an
 organism in which each member executes the function of its own
 nature while it still has its being in that One Whole; fire burns;
 horse does horse work; men give, each the appropriate act of the
 peculiar personal quality- and upon the several particular Kinds to
 which each belongs follow the acts, and the good or evil of the life.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn207.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>