<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn258.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn260.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. Movement Time cannot be- whether a definite act of moving is
 meant or a united total made up of all such acts- since movement, in
 either sense, takes place in Time. And, of course, if there is any
 movement not in Time, the identification with Time becomes all the
 less tenable.
 
 </p><p>In a word, Movement must be distinct from the medium in which it
 takes place.
 
 </p><p>And, with all that has been said or is still said, one
 consideration is decisive: Movement can come to rest, can be
 intermittent; Time is continuous.
 
 </p><p>We will be told that the Movement of the All is 
 continuous [and so
 may be identical with Time].
 
 </p><p>But, if the reference is to the Circuit of the heavenly 
 system [it
 is not strictly continuous, or equable, since] the time taken in the
 return path is not that of the outgoing movement; the one is twice
 as long as the other: this Movement of the All proceeds, 
 therefore, by
 two different degrees; the rate of the entire journey is not that of
 the first half.
 
 </p><p>Further, the fact that we hear of the Movement of the outermost
 sphere being the swiftest confirms our theory. Obviously, it is the
 swiftest of movements by taking the lesser time to traverse the
 greater space the very greatest- all other moving things are 
 slower by
 taking a longer time to traverse a mere segment of the same 
 extension:
 in other words, Time is not this movement.
 
 </p><p>And, if Time is not even the movement of the Kosmic Sphere much
 less is it the sphere itself though that has been identified 
 with Time
 on the ground of its being in motion.
 
 </p><p>Is it, then, some phenomenon or connection of Movement?
 
 </p><p>Let us, tentatively, suppose it to be extent, or duration, of
 Movement.
 
 </p><p>Now, to begin with, Movement, even continuous, has no unchanging
 extent [as Time the equable has], since, even in space, it may be
 faster or slower; there must, therefore, be some unit of standard
 outside it, by which these differences are measurable, and this
 outside standard would more properly be called Time. And failing
 such a measure, which extent would be Time, that of the fast 
 or of the
 slow- or rather which of them all, since these speed-differences are
 limitless?
 
 </p><p>Is it the extent of the subordinate Movement [= movement 
 of things
 of earth]?
 
 </p><p>Again, this gives us no unit since the movement is infinitely
 variable; we would have, thus, not Time but Times.
 
 </p><p>The extent of the Movement of the All, then?
 
 </p><p>The Celestial Circuit may, no doubt, be thought of in terms of
 quantity. It answers to measure- in two ways. First there is space;
 the movement is commensurate with the area it passes 
 through, and this
 area is its extent. But this gives us, still, space only, not Time.
 Secondly, the circuit, considered apart from distance traversed, has
 the extent of its continuity, of its tendency not to stop but to
 proceed indefinitely: but this is merely amplitude of 
 Movement; search
 it, tell its vastness, and, still, Time has no more appeared, no
 more enters into the matter, than when one certifies a high pitch of
 heat; all we have discovered is Motion in ceaseless succession, like
 water flowing ceaselessly, motion and extent of motion.
 
 </p><p>Succession or repetition gives us Number- dyad, triad, etc.- and
 the extent traversed is a matter of Magnitude; thus we have Quantity
 of Movement- in the form of number, dyad, triad, decade, or in the
 form of extent apprehended in what we may call the amount of the
 Movement: but, the idea of Time we have not. That definite 
 Quantity is
 merely something occurring within Time, for, otherwise Time is not
 everywhere but is something belonging to Movement which thus would
 be its substratum or basic-stuff: once more, then, we would be
 making Time identical with Movement; for the extent of 
 Movement is not
 something outside it but is simply its continuousness, and 
 we need not
 halt upon the difference between the momentary and the continuous,
 which is simply one of manner and degree. The extended movement and
 its extent are not Time; they are in Time. Those that explain Time
 as extent of Movement must mean not the extent of the movement
 itself but something which determines its extension, something with
 which the movement keeps pace in its course. But what this something
 is, we are not told; yet it is, clearly, Time, that in which all
 Movement proceeds. This is what our discussion has aimed at from the
 first: "What, essentially, is Time?" It comes to this: we 
 ask "What is
 Time?" and we are answered, "Time is the extension of Movement in
 Time!"
 
 </p><p>On the one hand Time is said to be an extension apart from and
 outside that of Movement; and we are left to guess what this 
 extension
 may be: on the other hand, it is represented as the extension of
 Movement; and this leaves the difficulty what to make of the 
 extension
 of Rest- though one thing may continue as long in repose as 
 another in
 motion, so that we are obliged to think of one thing Time that
 covers both Rest and Movements, and, therefore, stands distinct from
 either.
 
 </p><p>What then is this thing of extension? To what order of 
 beings does
 it belong?
 
 </p><p>It obviously is not spatial, for place, too, is something
 outside it.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn260.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>