<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn276.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn278.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. "The Intellectual-Principle" [= the Divine Mind]- we read [in
 the Timaeus]- "looks upon the Ideas indwelling in that Being which
 is the Essentially Living [= according to Plotinus, the Intellectual
 Realm], "and then"- the text proceeds- "the Creator judged that all
 the content of that essentially living Being must find place in this
 lower universe also."
 
 </p><p>Are we meant to gather that the Ideas came into being before the
 Intellectual-Principle so that it "sees them" as previously existent?
 
 </p><p>The first step is to make sure whether the "Living Being" of the
 text is to be distinguished from the Intellectual-Principle 
 as another
 thing than it.
 
 </p><p>It might be argued that the Intellectual-Principle is the
 Contemplator and therefore that the Living-Being contemplated is not
 the Intellectual-Principle but must be described as the Intellectual
 Object so that the Intellectual-Principle must possess the 
 Ideal realm
 as something outside of itself.
 
 </p><p>But this would mean that it possesses images and not the
 realities, since the realities are in the Intellectual Realm which
 it contemplates: Reality- we read- is in the Authentic Existent
 which contains the essential form of particular things.
 
 </p><p>No: even though the Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual
 Object are distinct, they are not apart except for just that
 distinction.
 
 </p><p>Nothing in the statement cited is inconsistent with the 
 conception
 that these two constitute one substance- though, in a unity, 
 admitting
 that distinction, of the intellectual act [as against passivity],
 without which there can be no question of an Intellectual-Principle
 and an Intellectual Object: what is meant is not that the
 contemplatory Being possesses its vision as in some other principle,
 but that it contains the Intellectual Realm within itself.
 
 </p><p>The Intelligible Object is the Intellectual-Principle itself in
 its repose, unity, immobility: the Intellectual-Principle,
 contemplator of that object- of the Intellectual-Principle thus in
 repose is an active manifestation of the same Being, an Act which
 contemplates its unmoved phase and, as thus contemplating, stands as
 Intellectual-Principle to that of which it has the 
 intellection: it is
 Intellectual-Principle in virtue of having that intellection, and at
 the same time is Intellectual Object, by assimilation.
 
 </p><p>This, then, is the Being which planned to create in the lower
 Universe what it saw existing in the Supreme, the four orders of
 living beings.
 
 </p><p>No doubt the passage: [of the Timaeus] seems to imply 
 tacitly that
 this planning Principle is distinct from the other two: but 
 the three-
 the Essentially-Living, the Intellectual-Principle and this planning
 Principle will, to others, be manifestly one: the truth is that, by
 a common accident, a particular trend of thought has occasioned the
 discrimination.
 
 </p><p>We have dealt with the first two; but the third- this Principle
 which decides to work upon the objects [the Ideas] 
 contemplated by the
 Intellectual-Principle within the Essentially-Living, to create
 them, to establish them in their partial existence- what is this
 third?
 
 </p><p>It is possible that in one aspect the Intellectual-Principle is
 the principle of partial existence, while in another aspect 
 it is not.
 
 </p><p>The entities thus particularized from the unity are products of
 the Intellectual-Principle which thus would be, to that extent, the
 separating agent. On the other hand it remains in itself, 
 indivisible;
 division begins with its offspring which, of course, means 
 with Souls:
 and thus a Soul- with its particular Souls- may be the separative
 principle.
 
 </p><p>This is what is conveyed where we are told that the separation
 is the work of the third Principle and begins within the 
 Third: for to
 this Third belongs the discursive reasoning which is no function of
 the Intellectual-Principle but characteristic of its secondary, of
 Soul, to which precisely, divided by its own Kind, belongs the Act
 of division.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn278.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>