<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn296.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn298.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. I think, therefore, that those ancient sages, who sought to
 secure the presence of divine beings by the erection of shrines and
 statues, showed insight into the nature of the All; they perceived
 that, though this Soul is everywhere tractable, its presence will be
 secured all the more readily when an appropriate receptacle is
 elaborated, a place especially capable of receiving some portion or
 phase of it, something reproducing it, or representing it, 
 and serving
 like a mirror to catch an image of it.
 
 </p><p>It belongs to the nature of the All to make its entire content
 reproduce, most felicitously, the Reason-Principles in which it
 participates; every particular thing is the image within matter of a
 Reason-Principle which itself images a pre-material
 Reason-Principle: thus every particular entity is linked to that
 Divine Being in whose likeness it is made, the divine principle
 which the soul contemplated and contained in the act of each 
 creation.
 Such mediation and representation there must have been since it was
 equally impossible for the created to be without share in 
 the Supreme,
 and for the Supreme to descend into the created.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle in the Supreme has ever been 
 the sun of
 that sphere- let us accept that as the type of the creative 
 Logos- and
 immediately upon it follows the Soul depending from it, stationary
 Soul from stationary Intelligence. But the Soul borders also upon
 the sun of this sphere, and it becomes the medium by which all is
 linked to the overworld; it plays the part of an interpreter
 between what emanates from that sphere down to this lower universe,
 and what rises- as far as, through soul, anything can- from the
 lower to the highest.
 
 </p><p>Nothing, in fact, is far away from anything; things are not
 remote: there is, no doubt, the aloofness of difference and 
 of mingled
 natures as against the unmingled; but selfhood has nothing to do
 with spatial position, and in unity itself there may still be
 distinction.
 
 </p><p>These Beings [the Reason-Principles of this sphere] are divine
 in virtue of cleaving to the Supreme, because, by the medium of the
 Soul thought of as descending they remain linked with the 
 Primal Soul,
 and through it are veritably what they are called and possess the
 vision of the Intellectual Principle, the single object of
 contemplation to that soul in which they have their being.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn298.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>