<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn266.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn268.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. There is, obviously, no question here of hands or feet, of
 any implement borrowed or inherent: Nature needs simply the Matter
 which it is to work upon and bring under Form; its 
 productivity cannot
 depend upon mechanical operation. What driving or hoisting goes to
 produce all that variety of colour and pattern?
 
 </p><p>The wax-workers, whose methods have been cited as parallel to
 the creative act of Nature, are unable to make colours; all they can
 do to impose upon their handicraft colours taken from elsewhere.
 None the less there is a parallel which demands attention: 
 in the case
 of workers in such arts there must be something locked within
 themselves, an efficacy not going out from them and yet guiding
 their hands in all their creation; and this observation should have
 indicated a similar phenomenon in Nature; it should be clear 
 that this
 indwelling efficacy, which makes without hands, must exist in
 Nature, no less than in the craftsman- but, there, as a thing
 completely inbound. Nature need possess no outgoing force as against
 that remaining within; the only moved thing is Matter; there 
 can be no
 moved phase in this Nature-Principle; any such moved phase could not
 be the primal mover; this Nature-Principle is no such moved 
 entity; it
 is the unmoved Principle operating in the Kosmos.
 
 </p><p>We may be answered that the Reason-Principle is, no doubt,
 unmoved, but that the Nature-Principle, another being, operates by
 motion.
 
 </p><p>But, if Nature entire is in question here, it is identical with
 the Reason-Principle; and any part of it that is unmoved is the
 Reason-Principle. The Nature-Principle must be an Ideal-Form, not a
 compound of Form and Matter; there is no need for it to possess
 Matter, hot and cold: the Matter that underlies it, on which it
 exercises its creative act, brings all that with it, or, natively
 without quality, becomes hot and cold, and all the rest, when
 brought under Reason: Matter, to become fire, demands the 
 approach not
 of fire but of a Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>This is no slight evidence that in the animal and 
 vegetable realms
 the Reason-Principles are the makers and that Nature is a
 Reason-Principle producing a second Reason-Principle, its offspring,
 which, in turn, while itself, still, remaining intact, communicates
 something to the underlie, Matter.
 
 </p><p>The Reason-Principle presiding over visible Shape is the very
 ultimate of its order, a dead thing unable to produce further: that
 which produces in the created realm is the living Reason-Principle-
 brother no doubt, to that which gives mere shape, but having
 life-giving power.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn268.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>