<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn272.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn274.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. From this basis we proceed:
 
 </p><p>In the advancing stages of Contemplation rising from that in
 Nature, to that in the Soul and thence again to that in the
 Intellectual-Principle itself- the object contemplated becomes
 progressively a more and more intimate possession of the 
 Contemplating
 Beings, more and more one thing with them; and in the advanced Soul
 the objects of knowledge, well on the way towards the
 Intellectual-Principle, are close to identity with their container.
 
 </p><p>Hence we may conclude that, in the Intellectual-Principle
 Itself, there is complete identity of Knower and Known, and this not
 by way of domiciliation, as in the case of even the highest soul,
 but by Essence, by the fact that, there, no distinction 
 exists between
 Being and Knowing; we cannot stop at a principle containing separate
 parts; there must always be a yet higher, a principle above all such
 diversity.
 
 </p><p>The Supreme must be an entity in which the two are one; it will,
 therefore, be a Seeing that lives, not an object of vision 
 like things
 existing in something other than themselves: what exists in 
 an outside
 element is some mode of living-thing; it is not the Self-Living.
 
 </p><p>Now admitting the existence of a living thing that is at once a
 Thought and its object, it must be a Life distinct from the 
 vegetative
 or sensitive life or any other life determined by Soul.
 
 </p><p>In a certain sense no doubt all lives are thoughts- but
 qualified as thought vegetative, thought sensitive and thought
 psychic.
 
 </p><p>What, then, makes them thoughts?
 
 </p><p>The fact that they are Reason-Principles. Every life is some
 form of thought, but of a dwindling clearness like the 
 degrees of life
 itself. The first and clearest Life and the first 
 Intelligence are one
 Being. The First Life, then, is an Intellection and the next form of
 Life is the next Intellection and the last form of Life is the last
 form of Intellection. Thus every Life, of the order strictly so
 called, is an Intellection.
 
 </p><p>But while men may recognize grades in life they reject grade in
 thought; to them there are thoughts [full and perfect] and anything
 else is no thought.
 
 </p><p>This is simply because they do not seek to establish 
 what Life is.
 
 </p><p>The essential is to observe that, here again, all reasoning
 shows that whatever exists is a bye-work of visioning: if, then, the
 truest Life is such by virtue of an Intellection and is 
 identical with
 the truest Intellection, then the truest Intellection is a living
 being; Contemplation and its object constitute a living 
 thing, a Life,
 two inextricably one.
 
 </p><p>The duality, thus, is a unity; but how is this unity also a
 plurality?
 
 </p><p>The explanation is that in a unity there can be no seeing [a
 pure unity has no room for vision and an object]; and in its
 Contemplation the One is not acting as a Unity; if it were, the
 Intellectual-Principle cannot exist. The Highest began as a unity
 but did not remain as it began; all unknown to itself, it became
 manifold; it grew, as it were, pregnant: desiring universal
 possession, it flung itself outward, though it were better had it
 never known the desire by which a Secondary came into being: it is
 like a Circle [in the Idea] which in projection becomes a figure, a
 surface, a circumference, a centre, a system of radii, of upper and
 lower segments. The Whence is the better; the Whither is less good:
 the Whence is not the same as the Whence-followed-by-a-Whither; the
 Whence all alone is greater than with the Whither added to it.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle on the other hand was never merely
 the Principle of an inviolable unity; it was a universal as well
 and, being so, was the Intellectual-Principle of all things. Being,
 thus, all things and the Principle of all, it must 
 essentially include
 this part of itself [this element-of-plurality] which is 
 universal and
 is all things: otherwise, it contains a part which is not
 Intellectual-Principle: it will be a juxtaposition of
 non-Intellectuals, a huddled heap waiting to be made over from the
 mass of things into the Intellectual-Principle!
 
 </p><p>We conclude that this Being is limitless and that, in all the
 outflow from it, there is no lessening either in its emanation,
 since this also is the entire universe, nor in itself, the starting
 point, since it is no assemblage of parts [to be diminished by any
 outgo].
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn274.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>