<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn210.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn212.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. But, if all this be true, how can evil fall within 
 the scope of
 seership? The predictions of the seers are based on 
 observation of the
 Universal Circuit: how can this indicate the evil with the good?
 
 </p><p>Clearly the reason is that all contraries coalesce. Take, for
 example, Shape and Matter: the living being [of the lower order] is
 a coalescence of these two; so that to be aware of the Shape and the
 Reason-Principle is to be aware of the Matter on which the Shape has
 been imposed.
 
 </p><p>The living-being of the compound order is not present 
 [as pure and
 simple Idea] like the living being of the Intellectual order: in the
 compound entity, we are aware, at once, of the 
 Reason-Principle and of
 the inferior element brought under form. Now the Universe is such a
 compound living thing: to observe, therefore, its content is to be
 aware not less of its lower elements than of the Providence which
 operates within it.
 
 </p><p>This Providence reaches to all that comes into being; its scope
 therefore includes living things with their actions and states, the
 total of their history at once overruled by the Reason-Principle and
 yet subject in some degree to Necessity.
 
 </p><p>These, then, are presented as mingled both by their 
 initial nature
 and by the continuous process of their existence; and the Seer is
 not able to make a perfect discrimination setting on the one side
 Providence with all that happens under Providence and on the other
 side what the substrate communicates to its product. Such
 discrimination is not for a man, not for a wise man or a divine man:
 one may say it is the prerogative of a god. Not causes but facts lie
 in the Seer's province; his art is the reading of the scriptures of
 Nature which tell of the ordered and never condescend to the
 disorderly; the movement of the Universe utters its testimony to him
 and, before men and things reveal themselves, brings to light what
 severally and collectively they are.
 
 </p><p>Here conspires with There and There with Here, elaborating
 together the consistency and eternity of a Kosmos and by their
 correspondences revealing the sequence of things to the trained
 observer- for every form of divination turns upon correspondences.
 Universal interdependence, there could not be, but universal
 resemblance there must. This probably is the meaning of the saying
 that Correspondences maintain the Universe.
 
 </p><p>This is a correspondence of inferior with inferior, of superior
 with superior, eye with eye, foot with foot, everything with its
 fellow and, in another order, virtue with right action and vice with
 unrighteousness. Admit such correspondence in the All and we have
 the possibility of prediction. If the one order acts on the 
 other, the
 relation is not that of maker to thing made- the two are 
 coeval- it is
 the interplay of members of one living being; each in its own place
 and way moves as its own nature demands; to every organ its grade
 and task, and to every grade and task its effective organ.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn212.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>