<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn243.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn245.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. Further, they must explain in what sense they hold 
 that Matter
 tends to slip away from its form [the Idea]. Can we conceive it
 stealing out from stones and rocks or whatever else envelops it?
 
 </p><p>And of course they cannot pretend that Matter in some 
 cases rebels
 and sometimes not. For if once it makes away of its own will, why
 should it not always escape? If it is fixed despite itself, 
 it must be
 enveloped by some Ideal-Form for good and all. This, however, leaves
 still the question why a given portion of Matter does not remain
 constant to any one given form: the reason lies mainly in the fact
 that the Ideas are constantly passing into it.
 
 </p><p>In what sense, then, is it said to elude form?
 
 </p><p>By very nature and for ever?
 
 </p><p>But does not this precisely mean that it never ceases to be
 itself, in other words that its one form is an invincible
 formlessness? In no other sense has Plato's dictum any value to
 those that invoke it.
 
 </p><p>Matter [we read] is "the receptacle and nurse of all generation."
 
 </p><p>Now if Matter is such a receptacle and nurse, all generation is
 distinct from it; and since all the changeable lies in the realm of
 generation, Matter, existing before all generation, must exist
 before all change.
 
 </p><p>"Receptacle" and "nurse"; then it "retains its identity; 
 it is not
 subject to modification. Similarly if it is" [as again we read] "the
 ground on which individual things appear and disappear," and so,
 too, if it is a "place, a base." Where Plato describes and
 identifies it as "a ground to the ideas" he is not attributing any
 state to it; he is probing after its distinctive manner of being.
 
 </p><p>And what is that?
 
 </p><p>This which we think of as a Nature-Kind cannot be included among
 Existents but must utterly rebel from the Essence of Real Beings and
 be therefore wholly something other than they- for they are
 Reason-Principles and possess Authentic Existence- it must 
 inevitably,
 by virtue of that difference, retain its integrity to the point of
 being permanently closed against them and, more, of rejecting close
 participation in any image of them.
 
 </p><p>Only on these terms can it be completely different: once it took
 any Idea to hearth and home, it would become a new thing, 
 for it would
 cease to be the thing apart, the ground of all else, the 
 receptacle of
 absolutely any and every form. If there is to be a ceaseless coming
 into it and going out from it, itself must be unmoved and immune in
 all the come and go. The entrant Idea will enter as an image, the
 untrue entering the untruth.
 
 </p><p>But, at least, in a true entry?
 
 </p><p>No: How could there be a true entry into that which, by being
 falsity, is banned from ever touching truth?
 
 </p><p>Is this then a pseudo-entry into a pseudo-entity- 
 something merely
 brought near, as faces enter the mirror, there to remain just as
 long as the people look into it?
 
 </p><p>Yes: if we eliminated the Authentic Existents from this Sphere
 nothing of all now seen in sense would appear one moment longer.
 
 </p><p>Here the mirror itself is seen, for it is itself an Ideal-Form
 of a Kind [has some degree of Real Being]; but bare Matter, which is
 no Idea, is not a visible thing; if it were, it would have been
 visible in its own character before anything else appeared upon it.
 The condition of Matter may be illustrated by that of air penetrated
 by light and remaining, even so, unseen because it is invisible
 whatever happens.
 
 </p><p>The reflections in the mirror are not taken to be real, all the
 less since the appliance on which they appear is seen and remains
 while the images disappear, but Matter is not seen either with the
 images or without them. But suppose the reflections on the mirror
 remaining and the mirror itself not seen, we would never doubt the
 solid reality of all that appears.
 
 </p><p>If, then, there is, really, something in a mirror, we may
 suppose objects of sense to be in Matter in precisely that way: if
 in the mirror there is nothing, if there is only a seeming of
 something, then we may judge that in Matter there is the 
 same delusion
 and that the seeming is to be traced to the Substantial-Existence of
 the Real-Beings, that Substantial-Existence in which the 
 Authentic has
 the real participation while only an unreal participation can belong
 to the unauthentic since their condition must differ from that which
 they would know if the parts were reversed, if the Authentic 
 Existents
 were not and they were.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn245.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>