<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn223.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn225.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. Does each individual Soul, then, contain within itself such a
 Love in essence and substantial reality?
 
 </p><p>Since not only the pure All-Soul but also that of the Universe
 contain such a Love, it would be difficult to explain why 
 our personal
 Soul should not. It must be so, even, with all that has life.
 
 </p><p>This indwelling love is no other than the Spirit which, as we
 are told, walks with every being, the affection dominant in each
 several nature. It implants the characteristic desire; the
 particular Soul, strained towards its own natural objects, brings
 forth its own Eros, the guiding spirit realizing its worth and the
 quality of its Being.
 
 </p><p>As the All-Soul contains the Universal Love, so must the single
 Soul be allowed its own single Love: and as closely as the 
 single Soul
 holds to the All-Soul, never cut off but embraced within it, the two
 together constituting one principle of life, so the single separate
 Love holds to the All-Love. Similarly, the individual love keeps
 with the individual Soul as that other, the great Love, goes with
 the All-Soul; and the Love within the All permeates it throughout so
 that the one Love becomes many, showing itself where it 
 chooses at any
 moment of the Universe, taking definite shape in these its partial
 phases and revealing itself at its will.
 
 </p><p>In the same way we must conceive many Aphrodites in the All,
 Spirits entering it together with Love, all emanating from an
 Aphrodite of the All, a train of particular Aphrodites dependent
 upon the first, and each with the particular Love in attendance:
 this multiplicity cannot be denied, if Soul be the mother of 
 Love, and
 Aphrodite mean Soul, and Love be an act of a Soul seeking good.
 
 </p><p>This Love, then, leader of particular Souls to The Good, is
 twofold: the Love in the loftier Soul would be a god ever linking
 the Soul to the divine; the Love in the mingling Soul will be a
 celestial spirit.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn225.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>