<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn222.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn224.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. That Love is a Hypostasis [a "Person"] a Real-Being 
 sprung from
 a Real-Being- lower than the parent but authentically existent- is
 beyond doubt.
 
 </p><p>For the parent-Soul was a Real-Being sprung directly from the
 Act of the Hypostasis that ranks before it: it had life; it was a
 constituent in the Real-Being of all that authentically is- in the
 Real-Being which looks, rapt, towards the very Highest. That was the
 first object of its vision; it looked towards it as towards its
 good, and it rejoiced in the looking; and the quality of what it saw
 was such that the contemplation could not be void of effect; 
 in virtue
 of that rapture, of its position in regard to its object, of the
 intensity of its gaze, the Soul conceived and brought forth an
 offspring worthy of itself and of the vision. Thus; there is a
 strenuous activity of contemplation in the Soul; there is an 
 emanation
 towards it from the object contemplated; and Eros is born, the Love
 which is an eye filled with its vision, a seeing that bears its
 image with it; Eros taking its name, probably, from the fact that
 its essential being is due to this horasis, this seeing. Of course
 Love, as an emotion, will take its name from Love, the 
 Person, since a
 Real-Being cannot but be prior to what lacks this reality. The
 mental state will be designated as Love, like the Hypostasis, though
 it is no more than a particular act directed towards a particular
 object; but it must not be confused with the Absolute Love, 
 the Divine
 Being. The Eros that belongs to the supernal Soul must be of one
 temper with it; it must itself look aloft as being of the 
 household of
 that Soul, dependent upon that Soul, its very offspring; and 
 therefore
 caring for nothing but the contemplation of the Gods.
 
 </p><p>Once that Soul which is the primal source of light to the
 heavens is recognized as an Hypostasis standing distinct and aloof
 it must be admitted that Love too is distinct and aloof though not,
 perhaps, so loftily celestial a being as the Soul. Our own best we
 conceive as inside ourselves and yet something apart; so, we must
 think of this Love- as essentially resident where the unmingling
 Soul inhabits.
 
 </p><p>But besides this purest Soul, there must be also a Soul of the
 All: at once there is another Love- the eye with which this second
 Soul looks upwards- like the supernal Eros engendered by force of
 desire. This Aphrodite, the secondary Soul, is of this Universe- not
 Soul unmingled alone, not Soul, the Absolute, giving birth, 
 therefore,
 to the Love concerned with the universal life; no, this is the Love
 presiding over marriages; but it, also, has its touch of the upward
 desire; and, in the degree of that striving, it stirs and leads
 upwards the Souls of the young and every Soul with which it is
 incorporated in so far as there is a natural tendency to remembrance
 of the divine. For every Soul is striving towards The Good, even the
 mingling Soul and that of particular beings, for each holds directly
 from the divine Soul, and is its offspring.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn224.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>