<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn240.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn242.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. Further: If Matter were susceptible of modification, it must
 acquire something by the incoming of the new state; it will either
 adopt that state, or, at least, it will be in some way different
 from what it was. Now upon this first incoming quality suppose a
 second to supervene; the recipient is no longer Matter but a
 modification of Matter: this second quality, perhaps, departs, but
 it has acted and therefore leaves something of itself after it; the
 substratum is still further altered. This process proceeding, the
 substratum ends by becoming something quite different from Matter;
 it becomes a thing settled in many modes and many shapes; at once it
 is debarred from being the all-recipient; it will have closed the
 entry against many incomers. In other words, the Matter is no longer
 there: Matter is destructible.
 
 </p><p>No: if there is to be a Matter at all, it must be always
 identically as it has been from the beginning: to speak of Matter as
 changing is to speak of it as not being Matter.
 
 </p><p>Another consideration: it is a general principle that a thing
 changing must remain within its constitutive Idea so that the
 alteration is only in the accidents and not in the essential thing;
 the changing object must retain this fundamental permanence, and the
 permanent substance cannot be the member of it which accepts
 modification.
 
 </p><p>Therefore there are only two possibilities: the first, 
 that Matter
 itself changes and so ceases to be itself, the second that it never
 ceases to be itself and therefore never changes.
 
 </p><p>We may be answered that it does not change in its character as
 Matter: but no one could tell us in what other character it changes;
 and we have the admission that the Matter in itself is not subject
 to change.
 
 </p><p>Just as the Ideal Principles stand immutably in their essence-
 which consists precisely in their permanence- so, since the 
 essence of
 Matter consists in its being Matter [the substratum to all material
 things] it must be permanent in this character; because it is
 Matter, it is immutable. In the Intellectual realm we have the
 immutable Idea; here we have Matter, itself similarly immutable.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn242.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>