<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn221.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn223.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. The existence of such a being is no demand of the 
 ordinary man,
 merely; it is supported by Theologians and, over and over again, by
 Plato to whom Eros is child of Aphrodite, minister of beautiful
 children, inciter of human souls towards the supernal beauty or
 quickener of an already existing impulse thither. All this requires
 philosophical examination. A cardinal passage is that in the 
 Symposium
 where we are told Eros was not a child of Aphrodite but born on the
 day of Aphrodite's birth, Penia, Poverty, being the mother, 
 and Poros,
 Possession, the father.
 
 </p><p>The matter seems to demand some discussion of Aphrodite, since
 in any case Eros is described as being either her son or in some
 association with her. Who then is Aphrodite, and in what 
 sense is Love
 either her child or born with her or in some way both her child and
 her birth-fellow?
 
 </p><p>To us Aphrodite is twofold; there is the heavenly Aphrodite,
 daughter of Ouranos or Heaven: and there is the other the daughter of
 Zeus and Dione, this is the Aphrodite who presides over earthly
 unions; the higher was not born of a mother and has no part in
 marriages for in Heaven there is no marrying.
 
 </p><p>The Heavenly Aphrodite, daughter of Kronos who is no other than
 the Intellectual Principle- must be the Soul at its divinest:
 unmingled as the immediate emanation of the unmingled; remaining
 ever Above, as neither desirous nor capable of descending to this
 sphere, never having developed the downward tendency, a divine
 Hypostasis essentially aloof, so unreservedly an Authentic 
 Being as to
 have no part with Matter- and therefore mythically "the unmothered"
 justly called not Celestial Spirit but God, as knowing no admixture,
 gathered cleanly within itself.
 
 </p><p>Any Nature springing directly from the Intellectual 
 Principle must
 be itself also a clean thing: it will derive a resistance of its own
 from its nearness to the Highest, for all its tendency, no less than
 its fixity, centres upon its author whose power is certainly
 sufficient to maintain it Above.
 
 </p><p>Soul then could never fall from its sphere; it is closer held to
 the divine Mind than the very sun could hold the light it gives
 forth to radiate about it, an outpouring from itself held firmly to
 it, still.
 
 </p><p>But following upon Kronos- or, if you will, upon Heaven, the
 father of Kronos- the Soul directs its Act towards him and holds
 closely to him and in that love brings forth the Eros through whom
 it continues to look towards him. This Act of the Soul has 
 produced an
 Hypostasis, a Real-Being; and the mother and this Hypostasis- her
 offspring, noble Love gaze together upon Divine Mind. Love, thus, is
 ever intent upon that other loveliness, and exists to be the medium
 between desire and that object of desire. It is the eye of the
 desirer; by its power what loves is enabled to see the loved thing.
 But it is first; before it becomes the vehicle of vision, it 
 is itself
 filled with the sight; it is first, therefore, and not even in the
 same order- for desire attains to vision only through the efficacy
 of Love, while Love, in its own Act, harvests the spectacle of
 beauty playing immediately above it.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn223.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>