<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn247.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn249.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. Nor can we, on the other hand, think that matter is simply
 Absolute Magnitude.
 
 </p><p>Magnitude is not, like Matter, a receptacle; it is an
 Ideal-Principle: it is a thing standing apart to itself, not some
 definite Mass. The fact is that the self-gathered content of the
 Intellectual Principle or of the All-Soul, desires expansion [and
 thereby engenders secondaries]: in its images- aspiring and moving
 towards it and eagerly imitating its act- is vested a 
 similar power of
 reproducing their states in their own derivatives. The Magnitude
 latent in the expansive tendency of the Image-making phase [of
 Intellect or All-Soul] runs forth into the Absolute Magnitude of the
 Universe; this in turn enlists into the process the spurious 
 magnitude
 of Matter: the content of the Supreme, thus, in virtue of its own
 prior extension enables Matter- which never possesses a content- to
 exhibit the appearance of Magnitude. It must be understood that
 spurious Magnitude consists in the fact that a thing [Matter] not
 possessing actual Magnitude strains towards it and has the extension
 of that straining. All that is Real Being gives forth a reflection
 of itself upon all else; every Reality, therefore, has 
 Magnitude which
 by this process is communicated to the Universe.
 
 </p><p>The Magnitude inherent in each Ideal-Principle- that of 
 a horse or
 of anything else- combines with Magnitude the Absolute with 
 the result
 that, irradiated by that Absolute, Matter entire takes Magnitude and
 every particle of it becomes a mass; in this way, by virtue 
 at once of
 the totality of Idea with its inherent magnitude and of each several
 specific Idea, all things appear under mass; Matter takes on what we
 conceive as extension; it is compelled to assume a relation 
 to the All
 and, gathered under this Idea and under Mass, to be all 
 things- in the
 degree in which the operating power can lead the really nothing to
 become all.
 
 </p><p>By the conditions of Manifestation, colour rises from non-colour
 [= from the colourless prototype of colour in the Ideal Realm].
 Quality, known by the one name with its parallel in the sphere of
 Primals, rises, similarly, from non-quality: in precisely the same
 mode, the Magnitude appearing upon Matter rises from non-Magnitude
 or from that Primal which is known to us by the same name; so that
 material things become visible through standing midway between bare
 underlie and Pure Idea. All is perceptible by virtue of this 
 origin in
 the Intellectual Sphere but all is falsity since the base in 
 which the
 manifestation takes place is a non-existent.
 
 </p><p>Particular entities thus attain their Magnitude through being
 drawn out by the power of the Existents which mirror themselves and
 make space for themselves in them. And no violence is 
 required to draw
 them into all the diversity of Shapes and Kinds because the 
 phenomenal
 All exists by Matter [by Matter's essential all-receptivity] and
 because each several Idea, moreover, draws Matter its own way by the
 power stored within itself, the power it holds from the Intellectual
 Realm. Matter is manifested in this sphere as Mass by the 
 fact that it
 mirrors the Absolute Magnitude; Magnitude here is the reflection in
 the mirror. The Ideas meet all of necessity in Matter [the 
 Ultimate of
 the emanatory progress]: and Matter, both as one total thing and in
 its entire scope, must submit itself, since it is the Material of
 the entire Here, not of any one determined thing: what is, in its
 own character, no determined thing may become determined by 
 an outside
 force- though, in becoming thus determined, it does not become the
 definite thing in question, for thus it would lose its own
 characteristic indetermination.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn249.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>