<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn336.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn338.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. There remains the question whether the body possesses any
 force of its own- so that, with the incoming of the soul, it lives
 in some individuality- or whether all it has is this Nature we have
 been speaking of, the superior principle which enters into relations
 with it.
 
 </p><p>Certainly the body, container of soul and of nature, cannot even
 in itself be as a soulless form would be: it cannot even be like air
 traversed by light; it must be like air storing heat: the 
 body holding
 animal or vegetive life must hold also some shadow of soul; and it
 is body thus modified that is the seat of corporeal pains and
 pleasures which appear before us, the true human being, in such a
 way as to produce knowledge without emotion. By "us, the true human
 being" I mean the higher soul for, in spite of all, the modified
 body is not alien but attached to our nature and is a concern to us
 for that reason: "attached," for this is not ourselves nor yet are
 we free of it; it is an accessory and dependent of the human being;
 "we" means the master-principle; the conjoint, similarly is 
 in its own
 way an "ours"; and it is because of this that we care for 
 its pain and
 pleasure, in proportion as we are weak rather than strong, gripped
 rather than working towards detachment.
 
 </p><p>The other, the most honourable phase of our being, is what we
 think of as the true man and into this we are penetrating.
 
 </p><p>Pleasure and pain and the like must not be attributed to the
 soul alone, but to the modified body and to something intermediary
 between soul and body and made up of both. A unity is independent:
 thus body alone, a lifeless thing, can suffer no hurt- in its
 dissolution there is no damage to the body, but merely to its unity-
 and soul in similar isolation cannot even suffer dissolution, and by
 its very nature is immune from evil.
 
 </p><p>But when two distinct things become one in an artificial unity,
 there is a probable source of pain to them in the mere fact that
 they were inapt to partnership. This does not, of course, 
 refer to two
 bodies; that is a question of one nature; and I am speaking of two
 natures. When one distinct nature seeks to associate itself with
 another, a different, order of being- the lower participating in the
 higher, but unable to take more than a faint trace of it- then the
 essential duality becomes also a unity, but a unity standing midway
 between what the lower was and what it cannot absorb, and therefore
 a troubled unity; the association is artificial and uncertain,
 inclining now to this side and now to that in ceaseless vacillation;
 and the total hovers between high and low, telling, downward bent,
 of misery but, directed to the above, of longing for unison.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn338.htm">Next: Section 19</a></center>
 </body>