<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn392.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn394.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. (15) That the soul is of the family of the diviner 
 nature, the
 eternal, is clear from our demonstration that it is not material:
 besides it has neither shape or colour nor is it tangible. But there
 are other proofs.
 
 </p><p>Assuming that the divine and the authentically existent
 possesses a life beneficent and wise, we take the next step and
 begin with working out the nature of our own soul.
 
 </p><p>Let us consider a soul, not one that has appropriated the
 unreasoned desires and impulses of the bodily life, or any other
 such emotion and experience, but one that has cast all this 
 aside, and
 as far as possible has no commerce with the bodily. Such a soul
 demonstrates that all evil is accretion, alien, and that in 
 the purged
 soul the noble things are immanent, wisdom and all else that is
 good, as its native store.
 
 </p><p>If this is the soul once it has returned to its self, how deny
 that it is the nature we have identified with all the divine and
 eternal? Wisdom and authentic virtue are divine, and could not be
 found in the chattel mean and mortal: what possesses these must be
 divine by its very capacity of the divine, the token of 
 kinship and of
 identical substance.
 
 </p><p>Hence, too, any one of us that exhibits these qualities will
 differ but little as far as soul is concerned from the Supernals; he
 will be less than they only to the extent in which the soul is, in
 him, associated with body.
 
 </p><p>This is so true that, if every human being were at that stage,
 or if a great number lived by a soul of that degree, no one would be
 so incredulous as to doubt that the soul in man is immortal. It is
 because we see everywhere the spoiled souls of the great mass that
 it becomes difficult to recognize their divinity and immortality.
 
 </p><p>To know the nature of a thing we must observe it in its
 unalloyed state, since any addition obscures the reality. Clear,
 then look: or, rather, let a man first purify himself and then
 observe: he will not doubt his immortality when he sees himself thus
 entered into the pure, the Intellectual. For, what he sees is an
 Intellectual-Principle looking on nothing of sense, nothing of this
 mortality, but by its own eternity having intellection of 
 the eternal:
 he will see all things in this Intellectual substance, himself
 having become an Intellectual Kosmos and all lightsome, 
 illuminated by
 the truth streaming from The Good, which radiates truth upon all
 that stands within that realm of the divine.
 
 </p><p>Thus he will often feel the beauty of that word 
 "Farewell: I am to
 you an immortal God," for he has ascended to the Supreme, and is all
 one strain to enter into likeness with it.
 
 </p><p>If the purification puts the human into knowledge of the
 highest, then, too, the science latent within becomes manifest, the
 only authentic knowing. For it is not by running hither and thither
 outside of itself that the soul understands morality and right
 conduct: it learns them of its own nature, in its contact 
 with itself,
 in its intellectual grasp of itself, seeing deeply impressed upon it
 the images of its primal state; what was one mass of rust from long
 neglect it has restored to purity.
 
 </p><p>Imagine living gold: it files away all that is earthy about it,
 all that kept it in self-ignorance preventing it from knowing itself
 as gold; seen now unalloyed it is at once filled with admiration of
 its worth and knows that it has no need of any other glory than its
 own, triumphant if only it be allowed to remain purely to itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn394.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>