<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn319.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn321.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. What, then, will be the Soul's discourse, what its memories
 in the Intellectual Realm, when at last it has won its way to that
 Essence?
 
 </p><p>Obviously from what we have been saying, it will be in
 contemplation of that order, and have its Act upon the things among
 which it now is; failing such Contemplation and Act, its being is
 not there. Of things of earth it will know nothing; it will not, for
 example, remember an act of philosophic virtue, or even that in its
 earthly career it had contemplation of the Supreme.
 
 </p><p>When we seize anything in the direct intellectual act there is
 room for nothing else than to know and to contemplate the object;
 and in the knowing there is not included any previous knowledge; all
 such assertion of stage and progress belongs to the lower and is a
 sign of the altered; this means that, once purely in the 
 Intellectual,
 no one of us can have any memory of our experience here. Further; if
 all intellection is timeless- as appears from the fact that the
 Intellectual beings are of eternity not of time- there can be no
 memory in the intellectual world, not merely none of earthly things
 but none whatever: all is presence There; for nothing passes away,
 there is no change from old to new.
 
 </p><p>This, however, does not alter the fact that distinction exists
 in that realm- downwards from the Supreme to the Ideas, upward from
 the Ideas to the Universal and to the Supreme. Admitting that the
 Highest, as a self-contained unity, has no outgoing effect, that
 does not prevent the soul which has attained to the Supreme from
 exerting its own characteristic Act: it certainly may have the
 intuition, not by stages and parts, of that Being which is without
 stage and part.
 
 </p><p>But that would be in the nature of grasping a pure unity?
 
 </p><p>No: in the nature of grasping all the intellectual facts 
 of a many
 that constitutes a unity. For since the object of vision has variety
 [distinction within its essential oneness] the intuition must be
 multiple and the intuitions various, just as in a face we see at the
 one glance eyes and nose and all the rest.
 
 </p><p>But is not this impossible when the object to be thus divided
 and treated as a thing of grades, is a pure unity?
 
 </p><p>No: there has already been discrimination within the
 Intellectual-Principle; the Act of the soul is little more than a
 reading of this.
 
 </p><p>First and last is in the Ideas not a matter of time, and so does
 not bring time into the soul's intuition of earlier and later among
 them. There is a grading by order as well: the ordered disposition
 of some growing thing begins with root and reaches to topmost point,
 but, to one seeing the plant as a whole, there is no other first and
 last than simply that of the order.
 
 </p><p>Still, the soul [in this intuition within the divine] looks to
 what is a unity; next it entertains multiplicity, all that is: how
 explain this grasping first of the unity and later of the rest?
 
 </p><p>The explanation is that the unity of this power [the Supreme] is
 such as to allow of its being multiple to another principle [the
 soul], to which it is all things and therefore does not 
 present itself
 as one indivisible object of intuition: its activities do not [like
 its essence] fall under the rule of unity; they are for ever
 multiple in virtue of that abiding power, and in their outgoing they
 actually become all things.
 
 </p><p>For with the Intellectual or Supreme- considered as distinct
 from the One- there is already the power of harbouring that
 Principle of Multiplicity, the source of things not previously
 existent in its superior.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn321.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>