<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn314.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn316.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 29</h4>
 
 <p>29. Are we, then, to refer memory to the perceptive 
 faculty and so
 make one principle of our nature the seat of both awareness and
 remembrance?
 
 </p><p>Now supposing the very Shade, as we were saying in the case of
 Hercules, has memory, then the perceptive faculty is twofold.
 
 </p><p>[(And if (on the same supposition) the faculty that remembers is
 not the faculty that perceives, but some other thing, then the
 remembering faculty is twofold.]
 
 </p><p>And further if the perceptive faculty [= the memory] deals with
 matters learned [as well as with matters of observation and feeling]
 it will be the faculty for the processes of reason also: but 
 these two
 orders certainly require two separate faculties.
 
 </p><p>Must we then suppose a common faculty of apprehension [one
 covering both sense perceptions and ideas] and assign memory in both
 orders to this?
 
 </p><p>The solution might serve if there were one and the same 
 percipient
 for objects of sense and objects of the Intellectual-Kind; but if
 these stand in definite duality, then, for all we can say or do, we
 are left with two separate principles of memory; and, supposing each
 of the two orders of soul to possess both principles, then we have
 four.
 
 </p><p>And, on general grounds, what compelling reason is there that
 the principle by which we perceive should be the principle 
 by which we
 remember, that these two acts should be vested in the one 
 faculty? Why
 must the seat of our intellectual action be also the seat of our
 remembrance of that action? The most powerful thought does not
 always go with the readiest memory; people of equal 
 perception are not
 equally good at remembering; some are especially gifted in 
 perception,
 others, never swift to grasp, are strong to retain.
 
 </p><p>But, once more, admitting two distinct principles, 
 something quite
 separate remembering what sense-perception has first known- 
 still this
 something must have felt what it is required to remember?
 
 </p><p>No; we may well conceive that where there is to be memory of a
 sense-perception, this perception becomes a mere 
 presentment, and that
 to this image-grasping power, a distinct thing, belongs the memory,
 the retention of the object: for in this imaging faculty the
 perception culminates; the impression passes away but the vision
 remains present to the imagination.
 
 </p><p>By the fact of harbouring the presentment of an object that has
 disappeared, the imagination is, at once, a seat of memory: where
 the persistence of the image is brief, the memory is poor; people of
 powerful memory are those in whom the image-holding power is firmer,
 not easily allowing the record to be jostled out of its grip.
 
 </p><p>Remembrance, thus, is vested in the imaging faculty; and memory
 deals with images. Its differing quality or degree from man 
 to man, we
 would explain by difference or similarity in the strength of the
 individual powers, by conduct like or unlike, by bodily conditions
 present or absent, producing change and disorder or not- a 
 point this,
 however, which need not detain us here.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn316.htm">Next: Section 30</a></center>
 </body>