<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn312.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn314.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 27</h4>
 
 <p>27. But of what soul; of that which we envisage as the more
 divine, by which we are human beings, or that other which 
 springs from
 the All?
 
 </p><p>Memory must be admitted in both of these, personal memories and
 shared memories; and when the two souls are together, the memories
 also are as one; when they stand apart, assuming that both exist and
 endure, each soon for gets the other's affairs, retaining 
 for a longer
 time its own. Thus it is that the Shade of Hercules in the lower
 regions- this "Shade," as I take it, being the characteristically
 human part- remembers all the action and experience of the 
 life, since
 that career was mainly of the hero's personal shaping; the 
 other souls
 [soulphases] going to constitute the joint-being could, for all
 their different standing, have nothing to recount but the events of
 that same life, doings which they knew from the time of their
 association: perhaps they would add also some moral judgement.
 
 </p><p>What the Hercules standing outside the Shade spoke of we are not
 told: what can we think that other, the freed and isolated, 
 soul would
 recount?
 
 </p><p>The soul, still a dragged captive, will tell of all the man did
 and felt; but upon death there will appear, as time passes, memories
 of the lives lived before, some of the events of the most recent
 life being dismissed as trivial. As it grows away from the body, it
 will revive things forgotten in the corporeal state, and if it
 passes in and out of one body after another, it will tell over the
 events of the discarded life, it will treat as present that which it
 has just left, and it will remember much from the former existence.
 But with lapse of time it will come to forgetfulness of many things
 that were mere accretion.
 
 </p><p>Then free and alone at last, what will it have to remember?
 
 </p><p>The answer to that question depends on our discovering in what
 faculty of the soul memory resides.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn314.htm">Next: Section 28</a></center>
 </body>