<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn389.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn391.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. D. (12) Soul belongs, then, to another Nature: What 
 is this? Is
 it something which, while distinct from body, still belongs 
 to it, for
 example a harmony or accord?
 
 </p><p>The Pythagorean school holds this view thinking that the soul
 is, with some difference, comparable to the accord in the 
 strings of a
 lyre. When the lyre is strung a certain condition is 
 produced upon the
 strings, and this is known as accord: in the same way our body is
 formed of distinct constituents brought together, and the blend
 produces at once life and that soul which is the condition existing
 upon the bodily total.
 
 </p><p>That this opinion is untenable has already been shown at length.
 The soul is a prior [to body], the accord is a secondary to the
 lyre. Soul rules, guides and often combats the body; as an accord of
 body it could not do these things. Soul is a real being, accord is
 not. That due blending [or accord] of the corporeal materials which
 constitute our frame would be simply health. Each separate 
 part of the
 body, entering as a distinct entity into the total, would require a
 distinct soul [its own accord or note], so that there would be many
 souls to each person. Weightiest of all; before this soul there
 would have to be another soul to bring about the accord as, in the
 case of the musical instrument, there is the musician who 
 produces the
 accord upon the strings by his own possession of the principle on
 which he tunes them: neither musical strings nor human bodies could
 put themselves in tune.
 
 </p><p>Briefly, the soulless is treated as ensouled, the unordered
 becomes orderly by accident, and instead of order being due to soul,
 soul itself owes its substantial existence to order- which is
 self-caused. Neither in the sphere of the partial, nor in that of
 Wholes could this be true. The soul, therefore, is not a harmony or
 accord.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn391.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>