<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn302.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn304.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. Various considerations explain why the Souls going forth
 from the Intellectual proceed first to the heavenly regions. The
 heavens, as the noblest portion of sensible space, would border with
 the least exalted of the Intellectual, and will, therefore, be first
 ensouled first to participate as most apt; while what is of earth is
 at the very extremity of progression, least endowed towards
 participation, remotest from the unembodied.
 
 </p><p>All the souls, then, shine down upon the heavens and spend there
 the main of themselves and the best; only their lower phases
 illuminate the lower realms; and those souls which descend deepest
 show their light furthest down- not themselves the better for the
 depth to which they have penetrated.
 
 </p><p>There is, we may put it, something that is centre; about it, a
 circle of light shed from it; round centre and first circle alike,
 another circle, light from light; outside that again, not another
 circle of light but one which, lacking light of its own, must borrow.
 
 </p><p>The last we may figure to ourselves as a revolving circle, or
 rather a sphere, of a nature to receive light from that third realm,
 its next higher, in proportion to the light which that itself
 receives. Thus all begins with the great light, shining
 self-centred; in accordance with the reigning plan [that of 
 emanation]
 this gives forth its brilliance; the later [divine] existents
 [souls] add their radiation- some of them remaining above, 
 while there
 are some that are drawn further downward, attracted by the splendour
 of the object they illuminate. These last find that their 
 charges need
 more and more care: the steersman of a storm-tossed ship is so
 intent on saving it that he forgets his own interest and never
 thinks that he is recurrently in peril of being dragged down with
 the vessel; similarly the souls are intent upon contriving for their
 charges and finally come to be pulled down by them; they are
 fettered in bonds of sorcery, gripped and held by their concern for
 the realm of Nature.
 
 </p><p>If every living being were of the character of the All-perfect,
 self-sufficing, in peril from no outside influence the soul 
 now spoken
 of as indwelling would not occupy the body; it would infuse 
 life while
 clinging, entire, within the Supreme.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn304.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>