<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn376.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn378.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. With this prologue we come to our discussion of Memory.
 
 </p><p>That the soul, or mind, having taken no imprint, yet achieves
 perception of what it in no way contains need not surprise us; or
 rather, surprising though it is, we cannot refuse to believe in this
 remarkable power.
 
 </p><p>The Soul is the Reason-Principle of the universe, ultimate among
 the Intellectual Beings- its own essential Nature is one of 
 the Beings
 of the Intellectual Realm- but it is the primal Reason-Principle of
 the entire realm of sense.
 
 </p><p>Thus it has dealings with both orders- benefited and quickened
 by the one, but by the other beguiled, falling before resemblances,
 and so led downwards as under spell. Poised midway, it is aware of
 both spheres.
 
 </p><p>Of the Intellectual it is said to have intuition by memory upon
 approach, for it knows them by a certain natural identity with them;
 its knowledge is not attained by besetting them, so to speak, but by
 in a definite degree possessing them; they are its natural vision;
 they are itself in a more radiant mode, and it rises from its duller
 pitch to that greater brilliance in a sort of awakening, a progress
 from its latency to its act.
 
 </p><p>To the sense-order it stands in a similar nearness and to such
 things it gives a radiance out of its own store and, as it were,
 elaborates them to visibility: the power is always ripe and, so to
 say, in travail towards them, so that, whenever it puts out its
 strength in the direction of what has once been present in 
 it, it sees
 that object as present still; and the more intent its effort the
 more durable is the presence. This is why, it is agreed, 
 children have
 long memory; the things presented to them are not constantly 
 withdrawn
 but remain in sight; in their case the attention is limited but not
 scattered: those whose faculty and mental activity are busied upon a
 multitude of subjects pass quickly over all, lingering on none.
 
 </p><p>Now, if memory were a matter of seal-impressions retained, the
 multiplicity of objects would have no weakening effect on the
 memory. Further, on the same hypothesis, we would have no need of
 thinking back to revive remembrance; nor would we be subject to
 forgetting and recalling; all would lie engraved within.
 
 </p><p>The very fact that we train ourselves to remember shows that
 what we get by the process is a strengthening of the mind: just so,
 exercises for feet and hands enable us to do easily acts which in no
 sense contained or laid up in those members, but to which they may
 be fitted by persevering effort.
 
 </p><p>How else can it be explained that we forget a thing heard once
 or twice but remember what is often repeated, and that we recall a
 long time afterwards what at first hearing we failed to hold?
 
 </p><p>It is no answer to say that the parts present themselves sooner
 than the entire imprint- why should they too be forgotten?- [there
 is no question of parts, for] the last hearing, or our effort to
 remember, brings the thing back to us in a flash.
 
 </p><p>All these considerations testify to an evocation of that faculty
 of the soul, or mind, in which remembrance is vested: the mind is
 strengthened, either generally or to this particular purpose.
 
 </p><p>Observe these facts: memory follows upon attention; 
 those who have
 memorized much, by dint of their training in the use of leading
 indications [suggestive words and the like], reach the point of
 being easily able to retain without such aid: must we not conclude
 that the basis of memory is the soul-power brought to full strength?
 
 </p><p>The lingering imprints of the other explanation would tell of
 weakness rather than power; for to take imprint easily is to be
 yielding. An impression is something received passively; the 
 strongest
 memory, then, would go with the least active nature. But what
 happens is the very reverse: in no pursuit to technical 
 exercises tend
 to make a man less the master of his acts and states. It is as with
 sense-perception; the advantage is not to the weak, the weak eye for
 example, but to that which has the fullest power towards its 
 exercise.
 In the old, it is significant, the senses are dulled and so is the
 memory.
 
 </p><p>Sensation and memory, then, are not passivity but power.
 
 </p><p>And, once it is admitted that sensations are not impressions,
 the memory of a sensation cannot consist in the retention of an
 impression that was never made.
 
 </p><p>Yes: but if it is an active power of the mind, a fitness towards
 its particular purpose, why does it not come at once- and not with
 delay- to the recollection of its unchanging objects?
 
 </p><p>Simply because the power needs to be poised and prepared: in
 this it is only like all the others, which have to be readied for
 the task to which their power reaches, some operating very swiftly,
 others only after a certain self-concentration.
 
 </p><p>Quick memory does not in general go with quick wit: the 
 two do not
 fall under the same mental faculty; runner and boxer are not often
 united in one person; the dominant idea differs from man to man.
 
 </p><p>Yet there could be nothing to prevent men of superior 
 faculty from
 reading impressions on the mind; why should one thus gifted be
 incapable of what would be no more than a passive taking and holding?
 
 </p><p>That memory is a power of the Soul [not a capacity for taking
 imprint] is established at a stroke by the consideration 
 that the soul
 is without magnitude.
 
 </p><p>And- one general reflection- it is not extraordinary that
 everything concerning soul should proceed in quite other ways than
 appears to people who either have never enquired, or have hastily
 adopted delusive analogies from the phenomena of sense, and 
 persist in
 thinking of perception and remembrance in terms of characters
 inscribed on plates or tablets; the impossibilities that beset this
 theory escape those that make the soul incorporeal equally with
 those to whom it is corporeal.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn378.htm">Next: SEVENTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>