<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn335.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn337.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. But how comes it that the intuitions and the 
 Reason-Principles
 of the soul are not in the same timeless fashion within 
 ourselves, but
 that here the later of order is converted into a later of time-
 bringing in all these doubts?
 
 </p><p>Is it because in us the governing and the answering 
 principles are
 many and there is no sovereign unity?
 
 </p><p>That condition; and, further, the fact that our mental acts fall
 into a series according to the succession of our needs, being not
 self-determined but guided by the variations of the 
 external: thus the
 will changes to meet every incident as each fresh need arises and as
 the external impinges in its successive things and events.
 
 </p><p>A variety of governing principles must mean variety in the
 images formed upon the representative faculty, images not 
 issuing from
 one internal centre, but, by difference of origin and of acting-
 point, strange to each other, and so bringing compulsion to bear
 upon the movements and efficiencies of the self.
 
 </p><p>When the desiring faculty is stirred, there is a presentment of
 the object- a sort of sensation, in announcement and in picture, of
 the experience- calling us to follow and to attain: the personality,
 whether it resists or follows and procures, is necessarily thrown
 out of equilibrium. The same disturbance is caused by passion urging
 revenge and by the needs of the body; every other sensation or
 experience effects its own change upon our mental attitude; 
 then there
 is the ignorance of what is good and the indecision of a 
 soul [a human
 soul] thus pulled in every direction; and, again, the interaction of
 all these perplexities gives rise to yet others.
 
 </p><p>But do variations of judgement affect that very highest in us?
 
 </p><p>No: the doubt and the change of standard are of the Conjoint [of
 the soul-phase in contact with body]; still, the right reason of
 that highest is weaker by being given over to inhabit this mingled
 mass: not that it sinks in its own nature: it is much as amid the
 tumult of a public meeting the best adviser speaks but fails to
 dominate; assent goes to the roughest of the brawlers and roarers,
 while the man of good counsel sits silent, ineffectual, 
 overwhelmed by
 the uproar of his inferiors.
 
 </p><p>The lowest human type exhibits the baser nature; the man is a
 compost calling to mind inferior political organization: in the
 mid-type we have a citizenship in which some better section sways a
 demotic constitution not out of control: in the superior 
 type the life
 is aristocratic; it is the career of one emancipated from what is a
 base in humanity and tractable to the better; in the finest type,
 where the man has brought himself to detachment, the ruler is one
 only, and from this master principle order is imposed upon the rest,
 so that we may think of a municipality in two sections, the superior
 city and, kept in hand by it, the city of the lower elements.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn337.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>