<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn310.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn312.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 25</h4>
 
 <p>25. Now comes the question, equally calling for an 
 answer, whether
 those souls that have quitted the places of earth retain memory of
 their lives- all souls or some, of all things, or of some 
 things, and,
 again, for ever or merely for some period not very long after their
 withdrawal.
 
 </p><p>A true investigation of this matter requires us to 
 establish first
 what a remembering principle must be- I do not mean what memory is,
 but in what order of beings it can occur. The nature of memory has
 been indicated, laboured even, elsewhere; we still must try to
 understand more clearly what characteristics are present where
 memory exists.
 
 </p><p>Now a memory has to do with something brought into ken from
 without, something learned or something experienced; the
 Memory-Principle, therefore, cannot belong to such beings as are
 immune from experience and from time.
 
 </p><p>No memory, therefore, can be ascribed to any divine being, or to
 the Authentic-Existent or the Intellectual-Principle: these are
 intangibly immune; time does not approach them; they possess
 eternity centred around Being; they know nothing of past and
 sequent; all is an unbroken state of identity, not receptive of
 change. Now a being rooted in unchanging identity cannot entertain
 memory, since it has not and never had a state differing from any
 previous state, or any new intellection following upon a former one,
 so as to be aware of contrast between a present perception and one
 remembered from before.
 
 </p><p>But what prevents such a being [from possessing memory in the
 sense of] perceiving, without variation in itself, such outside
 changes as, for example, the kosmic periods?
 
 </p><p>Simply the fact that following the changes of the 
 revolving kosmos
 it would have perception of earlier and later: intuition and memory
 are distinct.
 
 </p><p>We cannot hold its self-intellections to be acts of memory; this
 is no question of something entering from without, to be grasped and
 held in fear of an escape; if its intellections could slip away from
 it [as a memory might] its very Essence [as the Hypostasis 
 of inherent
 Intellection] would be in peril.
 
 </p><p>For the same reason memory, in the current sense, cannot be
 attributed to the soul in connection with the ideas inherent in its
 essence: these it holds not as a memory but as a possession, though,
 by its very entrance into this sphere, they are no longer 
 the mainstay
 of its Act.
 
 </p><p>The Soul-action which is to be observed seems to have induced
 the Ancients to ascribe memory, and "Recollection," [the Platonic
 Anamnesis] to souls bringing into outward manifestation the 
 ideas they
 contain: we see at once that the memory here indicated is another
 kind; it is a memory outside of time.
 
 </p><p>But, perhaps, this is treating too summarily a matter which
 demands minute investigation. It might be doubted whether that
 recollection, that memory, really belongs to the highest soul and
 not rather to another, a dimmer, or even to the Couplement, the
 Living-Being. And if to that dimmer soul, when and how has it come
 to be present; if to the Couplement, again when and how?
 
 </p><p>We are driven thus to enquire into these several points: in
 which of the constituents of our nature is memory vested- 
 the question
 with which we started- if in the soul, then in what power or part;
 if in the Animate or Couplement- which has been supposed, 
 similarly to
 be the seat of sensation- then by what mode it is present, and how
 we are to define the Couplement; finally whether sensation and
 intellectual acts may be ascribed to one and the same agent, or
 imply two distinct principles.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn312.htm">Next: Section 26</a></center>
 </body>