<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn380.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn382.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Anyone who rejects this view, and holds that either atoms or
 some entities void of part coming together produce soul, is 
 refuted by
 the very unity of soul and by the prevailing sympathy as much as by
 the very coherence of the constituents. Bodily materials, in nature
 repugnant to unification and to sensation, could never produce unity
 or self-sensitiveness, and soul is self-sensitive. And, again,
 constituents void of part could never produce body or bulk.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps we will be asked to consider body as a simple entity
 [disregarding the question of any constituent elements]: they will
 tell us, then, that no doubt, as purely material, it cannot have a
 self-springing life- since matter is without quality- but 
 that life is
 introduced by the fact that the Matter is brought to order under
 Forming-Idea. But if by this Forming-Idea they mean an essential, a
 real being, then it is not the conjoint of body and idea that
 constitutes soul: it must be one of the two items and that one,
 being [by hypothesis] outside of the Matter, cannot be body: to make
 it body would simply force us to repeat our former analysis.
 
 </p><p>If on the contrary they do not mean by this Forming-Idea a real
 being, but some condition or modification of the Matter, they must
 tell us how and whence this modification, with resultant life, can
 have found the way into the Matter: for very certainly 
 Matter does not
 mould itself to pattern or bring itself to life.
 
 </p><p>It becomes clear that since neither Matter nor body in any mode
 has this power, life must be brought upon the stage by some
 directing principle external and transcendent to all that is
 corporeal.
 
 </p><p>In fact, body itself could not exist in any form if 
 soul-power did
 not: body passes; dissolution is in its very nature; all would
 disappear in a twinkling if all were body. It is no help to 
 erect some
 one mode of body into soul; made of the same Matter as the rest,
 this soul body would fall under the same fate: of course it could
 never really exist: the universe of things would halt at the 
 material,
 failing something to bring Matter to shape.
 
 </p><p>Nay more: Matter itself could not exist: the totality of 
 things in
 this sphere is dissolved if it be made to depend upon the 
 coherence of
 a body which, though elevated to the nominal rank of "soul," remains
 air, fleeting breath [the Stoic pneuma, rarefied matter, "spirit" in
 the lower sense], whose very unity is not drawn from itself.
 
 </p><p>All bodies are in ceaseless process of dissolution; how can the
 kosmos be made over to any one of them without being turned into a
 senseless haphazard drift? This pneuma- orderless except under soul-
 how can it contain order, reason, intelligence? But: given soul, all
 these material things become its collaborators towards the coherence
 of the kosmos and of every living being, all the qualities of all
 the separate objects converging to the purposes of the universe:
 failing soul in the things of the universe, they could not 
 even exist,
 much less play their ordered parts.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn382.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>