<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn387.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn389.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. B. (10) If the soul is body and permeates the entire 
 body-mass,
 still even in this entire permeation the blending must be in accord
 with what occurs in all cases of bodily admixing.
 
 </p><p>Now: if in the admixing of bodies neither constituent can retain
 its efficacy, the soul too could no longer be effective within the
 bodies; it could but be latent; it will have lost that by which it
 is soul, just as in an admixture of sweet and bitter the sweet
 disappears: we have, thus, no soul.
 
 </p><p>Two bodies [i.e., by hypothesis, the soul and the human body]
 are blended, each entire through the entirety of the other; where
 the one is, the other is also; each occupies an equal extension and
 each the whole extension; no increase of size has been caused by the
 juncture: the one body thus inblended can have left in the other
 nothing undivided. This is no case of mixing in the sense of
 considerable portions alternating; that would be described as
 collocation; no; the incoming entity goes through the other to the
 very minutest point- an impossibility, of course; the less becoming
 equal to the greater; still, all is traversed throughout and divided
 throughout. Now if, thus, the inblending is to occur point by point,
 leaving no undivided material anywhere, the division of the body
 concerned must have been a division into (geometrical) points: an
 impossibility. The division is an infinite series- any material
 particle may be cut in two- and the infinities are not merely
 potential, they are actual.
 
 </p><p>Therefore body cannot traverse anything as a whole traversing a
 whole. But soul does this. It is therefore incorporeal.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn389.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>