<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn348.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn350.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 30</h4>
 
 <p>30. We have declared acts of memory unnecessary to the stars,
 but we allow them perceptions, hearing as well as seeing; for we
 said that prayers to them were heard- our supplications to the sun,
 and those, even, of certain other men to the stars. It has moreover
 been the belief that in answer to prayer they accomplish many human
 wishes, and this so lightheartedly that they become not 
 merely helpers
 towards good but even accomplices in evil. Since this matter lies in
 our way, it must be considered, for it carries with it grave
 difficulties that very much trouble those who cannot think of divine
 beings as, thus, authors or auxiliaries in unseemliness even 
 including
 the connections of loose carnality.
 
 </p><p>In view of all this it is especially necessary to study the
 question with which we began, that of memory in the heavenly bodies.
 
 </p><p>It is obvious that, if they act on our prayers and if this
 action is not immediate, but with delay and after long periods of
 time, they remember the prayers men address to them. This is 
 something
 that our former argument did not concede; though it appeared 
 plausible
 that, for their better service of mankind, they might have been
 endowed with such a memory as we ascribed to Demeter and 
 Hestia- or to
 the latter alone if only the earth is to be thought of as beneficent
 to man.
 
 </p><p>We have, then, to attempt to show: firstly, how acts implying
 memory in the heavenly bodies are to be reconciled with our system
 as distinguished from those others which allow them memory 
 as a matter
 of course; secondly, what vindication of those gods of the heavenly
 spheres is possible in the matter of seemingly anomalous acts- a
 question which philosophy cannot ignore- then too, since the charge
 goes so far, we must ask whether credence is to be given to those
 who hold that the entire heavenly system can be put under spell by
 man's skill and audacity: our discussion will also deal with the
 spirit-beings and how they may be thought to minister to these ends-
 unless indeed the part played by the Celestials prove to be 
 settled by
 the decision upon the first questions.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn350.htm">Next: Section 31</a></center>
 </body>