<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn394.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn396.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. (17) A further consideration is that if every soul is to be
 held dissoluble the universe must long since have ceased to be: if
 it is pretended that one kind of soul, our own for example, 
 is mortal,
 and another, that of the All, let us suppose, is immortal, we demand
 to know the reason of the difference alleged.
 
 </p><p>Each is a principle of motion, each is self-living, each touches
 the same sphere by the same tentacles, each has intellection of the
 celestial order and of the super-celestial, each is seeking to win
 to what has essential being, each is moving upwards to the primal
 source.
 
 </p><p>Again: the soul's understanding of the Absolute Forms by means
 of the visions stored up in it is effected within itself; such
 perception is reminiscence; the soul then must have its being before
 embodiment, and drawing on an eternal science, must itself 
 be eternal.
 
 </p><p>Every dissoluble entity, that has come to be by way of
 groupment, must in the nature of things be broken apart by that very
 mode which brought it together: but the soul is one and simplex,
 living not in the sense of potential reception of life but by its
 own energy; and this can be no cause of dissolution.
 
 </p><p>But, we will be told, it tends to destruction by having been
 divided (in the body) and so becoming fragmentary.
 
 </p><p>No: the soul, as we have shown, is not a mass, not a quantity.
 
 </p><p>May not it change and so come to destruction?
 
 </p><p>No: the change that destroys annuls the form but leaves the
 underlying substance: and that could not happen to anything except a
 compound.
 
 </p><p>If it can be destroyed in no such ways, it is necessarily
 indestructible.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn396.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>