<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn350.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn352.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 32</h4>
 
 <p>32. If we can trace neither to material agencies [blind
 elements] nor to any deliberate intention the influences from
 without which reach to us and to the other forms of life and to the
 terrestrial in general, what cause satisfactory to reason remains?
 
 </p><p>The secret is: firstly, that this All is one universally
 comprehensive living being, encircling all the living beings within
 it, and having a soul, one soul, which extends to all its members in
 the degree of participant membership held by each; secondly, that
 every separate thing is an integral part of this All by belonging to
 the total material fabric- unrestrictedly a part by bodily 
 membership,
 while, in so far as it has also some participation in the All. Soul,
 it possesses in that degree spiritual membership as well, perfect
 where participation is in the All-Soul alone, partial where there is
 also a union with a lower soul.
 
 </p><p>But, with all this gradation, each several thing is affected by
 all else in virtue of the common participation in the All, and to
 the degree of its own participation.
 
 </p><p>This One-All, therefore, is a sympathetic total and stands as
 one living being; the far is near; it happens as in one animal with
 its separate parts: talon, horn, finger, and any other member are
 not continuous and yet are effectively near; intermediate parts feel
 nothing, but at a distant point the local experience is known.
 Correspondent things not side by side but separated by others placed
 between, the sharing of experience by dint of like condition- this
 is enough to ensure that the action of any distant member be
 transmitted to its distant fellow. Where all is a living 
 thing summing
 to a unity there is nothing so remote in point of place as not to be
 near by virtue of a nature which makes of the one living being a
 sympathetic organism.
 
 </p><p>Where there is similarity between a thing affected and the thing
 affecting it, the affection is not alien; where the 
 affecting cause is
 dissimilar the affection is alien and unpleasant.
 
 </p><p>Such hurtful action of member upon member within one living
 being need not seem surprising: within ourselves, in our own
 activities, one constituent can be harmed by another; bile and
 animal spirit seem to press and goad other members of the 
 human total:
 in the vegetal realm one part hurts another by sucking the moisture
 from it. And in the All there is something analogous to bile and
 animal spirit, as to other such constituents. For visibly it is not
 merely one living organism; it is also a manifold. In virtue of the
 unity the individual is preserved by the All: in virtue of the
 multiplicity of things having various contacts, difference often
 brings about mutual hurt; one thing, seeking its own need, is
 detrimental to another; what is at once related and different is
 seized as food; each thing, following its own natural path, wrenches
 from something else what is serviceable to itself, and destroys or
 checks in its own interest whatever is becoming a menace to it:
 each, occupied with its peculiar function, assists no doubt anything
 able to profit by that, but harms or destroys what is too weak to
 withstand the onslaught of its action, like fire withering things
 round it or greater animals in their march thrusting aside or
 trampling under foot the smaller.
 
 </p><p>The rise of all these forms of being and their modification,
 whether to their loss or gain, all goes to the fulfillment of the
 natural unhindered life of that one living being: for it was not
 possible for the single thing to be as if it stood alone; the final
 purpose could not serve to that only end, intent upon the 
 partial: the
 concern must be for the whole to which each item is member: 
 things are
 different both from each other and in their own stages, therefore
 cannot be complete in one unchanging form of life; nor could
 anything remain utterly without modification if the All is to be
 durable; for the permanence of an All demands varying forms.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn352.htm">Next: Section 33</a></center>
 </body>