<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn365.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn367.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. We undertook to discuss the question whether sight is
 possible in the absence of any intervening medium, such as 
 air or some
 other form of what is known as transparent body: this is the time
 and place.
 
 </p><p>It has been explained that seeing and all sense-perception can
 occur only through the medium of some bodily substance, since in the
 absence of body the soul is utterly absorbed in the Intellectual
 Sphere. Sense-perception being the gripping not of the Intellectual
 but of the sensible alone, the soul, if it is to form any 
 relationship
 of knowledge, or of impression, with objects of sense, must 
 be brought
 in some kind of contact with them by means of whatever may bridge
 the gap.
 
 </p><p>The knowledge, then, is realized by means of bodily organs:
 through these, which [in the embodied soul] are almost of one growth
 with it, being at least its continuations, it comes into something
 like unity with the alien, since this mutual approach brings about a
 certain degree of identity [which is the basis of knowledge].
 
 </p><p>Admitting, then, that some contact with an object is 
 necessary for
 knowing it, the question of a medium falls to the ground in the case
 of things identified by any form of touch; but in the case of sight-
 we leave hearing over for the present- we are still in 
 doubt; is there
 need of some bodily substance between the eye and the illumined
 object?
 
 </p><p>No: such an intervening material may be a favouring
 circumstance, but essentially it adds nothing to seeing power.
 !    Dense bodies, such as clay, actually prevent sight; the less
 material the intervening substance is, the more clearly we see; the
 intervening substance, then, is a hindrance, or, if not 
 that, at least
 not a help.
 
 </p><p>It will be objected that vision implies that whatever intervenes
 between seen and seer must first [and progressively] experience the
 object and be, as it were, shaped to it; we will be reminded that
 [vision is not a direct and single relation between agent and
 object, but is the perception of something radiated since] anyone
 facing to the object from the side opposite to ourselves sees it
 equally; we will be asked to deduce that if all the space
 intervening between seen and seer did not carry the impression of
 the object we could not receive it.
 
 </p><p>But all the need is met when the impression reaches that which
 is adapted to receive it; there is no need for the intervening space
 to be impressed. If it is, the impression will be of quite another
 order: the rod between the fisher's hand and the torpedo fish is not
 affected in the same way as the hand that feels the shock. And yet
 there too, if rod and line did not intervene, the hand would not be
 affected- though even that may be questioned, since after all the
 fisherman, we are told, is numbed if the torpedo merely lies in his
 net.
 
 </p><p>The whole matter seems to bring us back to that sympathy of
 which we have treated. If a certain thing is of a nature to be
 sympathetically affected by another in virtue of some similitude
 between them, then anything intervening, not sharing in that
 similitude, will not be affected, or at least not similarly. If this
 be so, anything naturally disposed to be affected will take the
 impression more vividly in the absence of intervening substance,
 even of some substance capable, itself, of being affected.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn367.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>