<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn379.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn381.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. But of what nature is this sovereign principle?
 
 </p><p>If material, then definitely it must fall apart; for every
 material entity, at least, is something put together.
 
 </p><p>If it is not material but belongs to some other Kind, that new
 substance must be investigated in the same way or by some more
 suitable method.
 
 </p><p>But our first need is to discover into what this material form,
 since such the soul is to be, can dissolve.
 
 </p><p>Now: of necessity life is inherent to soul: this material
 entity, then, which we call soul must have life ingrained within it;
 but [being a composite as by hypothesis, material] it must be made
 up of two or more bodies; that life, then, will be vested, either in
 each and all of those bodies or in one of them to the 
 exclusion of the
 other or others; if this be not so, then there is no life present
 anywhere.
 
 </p><p>If any one of them contains this ingrained life, that one is the
 soul. But what sort of an entity have we there; what is this body
 which of its own nature possesses soul?
 
 </p><p>Fire, air, water, earth, are in themselves soulless- 
 whenever soul
 is in any of them, that life is borrowed- and there are no 
 other forms
 of body than these four: even the school that believes there are has
 always held them to be bodies, not souls, and to be without life.
 
 </p><p>None of these, then, having life, it would be extraordinary if
 life came about by bringing them together; it is impossible, in
 fact, that the collocation of material entities should produce life,
 or mindless entities mind.
 
 </p><p>No one, moreover, would pretend that a mere chance mixing could
 give such results: some regulating principle would be necessary,
 some Cause directing the admixture: that guiding principle would be-
 soul.
 
 </p><p>Body- not merely because it is a composite, but even were it
 simplex- could not exist unless there were soul in the universe, for
 body owes its being to the entrance of a Reason-Principle 
 into Matter,
 and only from soul can a Reason-Principle come.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn381.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>