<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn360.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn362.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 42</h4>
 
 <p>42. It follows that, for the purposes which have induced this
 discussion, the stars have no need of memory or of any sense of
 petitions addressed to them; they give no such voluntary attention
 to prayers as some have thought: it is sufficient that, in virtue
 simply of the nature of parts and of parts within a whole, something
 proceeds from them whether in answer to prayer or without prayer. We
 have the analogy of many powers- as in some one living organism-
 which, independently of plan or as the result of applied method, act
 without any collaboration of the will: one member or function is
 helped or hurt by another in the mere play of natural forces; and
 the art of doctor or magic healer will compel some one centre to
 purvey something of its own power to another centre. just so the
 All: it purveys spontaneously, but it purveys also under spell; some
 entity [acting like the healer] is concerned for a member situated
 within itself and summons the All which, then, pours in its gift; it
 gives to its own part by the natural law we have cited since the
 petitioner is no alien to it. Even though the suppliant be a sinner,
 the answering need not shock us; sinners draw from the 
 brooks; and the
 giver does not know of the gift but simply gives- though we must
 remember that all is one woof and the giving is always consonant
 with the order of the universe. There is, therefore, no necessity by
 ineluctable law that one who has helped himself to what lies open to
 all should receive his deserts then and there.
 
 </p><p>In sum, we must hold that the All cannot be affected; its
 leading principle remains for ever immune whatsoever happens to its
 members; the affection is really present to them, but since nothing
 existent can be at strife with the total of existence, no such
 affection conflicts with its impassivity.
 
 </p><p>Thus the stars, in so far as they are parts, can be affected and
 yet are immune on various counts; their will, like that of 
 the All, is
 untouched, just as their bodies and their characteristic natures are
 beyond all reach of harm; if they give by means of their souls,
 their souls lose nothing; their bodies remain unchanged or, if there
 is ebb or inflow, it is of something going unfelt and coming 
 unawares.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn362.htm">Next: Section 43</a></center>
 </body>