<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn375.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn377.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. But if perception does not go by impression, what is the
 process?
 
 </p><p>The mind affirms something not contained within it: this is
 precisely the characteristic of a power- not to accept 
 impression but,
 within its allotted sphere, to act.
 
 </p><p>Besides, the very condition of the mind being able to exercise
 discrimination upon what it is to see and hear is not, of 
 course, that
 these objects be equally impressions made upon it; on the contrary,
 there must be no impressions, nothing to which the mind is passive;
 there can be only acts of that in which the objects become known.
 
 </p><p>Our tendency is to think of any of the faculties as 
 unable to know
 its appropriate object by its own uncompelled act; to us it seems to
 submit to its environment rather than simply to perceive it, 
 though in
 reality it is the master, not the victim.
 
 </p><p>As with sight, so with hearing. It is the air which takes the
 impression, a kind of articulated stroke which may be compared to
 letters traced upon it by the object causing the sound; but 
 it belongs
 to the faculty, and the soul-essence, to read the imprints thus
 appearing before it, as they reach the point at which they become
 matter of its knowledge.
 
 </p><p>In taste and smell also we distinguish between the impressions
 received and the sensations and judgements; these last are mental
 acts, and belong to an order apart from the experiences upon which
 they are exercised.
 
 </p><p>The knowing of the things belonging to the Intellectual is not
 in any such degree attended by impact or impression: they come
 forward, on the contrary, as from within, unlike the sense-objects
 known as from without: they have more emphatically the character of
 acts; they are acts in the stricter sense, for their origin is in
 the soul, and every concept of this Intellectual order is the soul
 about its Act.
 
 </p><p>Whether, in this self-vision, the soul is a duality and views
 itself as from the outside- while seeing the 
 Intellectual-Principal as
 a unity, and itself with the Intellectual-Principle as a unity- this
 question is investigated elsewhere.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn377.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>