<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn323.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn325.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. But this power which determines memory is it also the 
 principle
 by which the Supreme becomes effective in us?
 
 </p><p>At any time when we have not been in direct vision of 
 that sphere,
 memory is the source of its activity within us; when we have 
 possessed
 that vision, its presence is due to the principle by which we
 enjoyed it: this principle awakens where it wakens; and it alone has
 vision in that order; for this is no matter to be brought to 
 us by way
 of analogy, or by the syllogistic reasoning whose grounds lie
 elsewhere; the power which, even here, we possess of discoursing
 upon the Intellectual Beings is vested, as we show, in that
 principle which alone is capable of their contemplation. 
 That, we must
 awaken, so to speak, and thus attain the vision of the Supreme, as
 one, standing on some lofty height and lifting his eyes, sees what
 to those that have not mounted with him is invisible.
 
 </p><p>Memory, by this account, commences after the soul has left the
 higher spheres; it is first known in the celestial period.
 
 </p><p>A soul that has descended from the Intellectual region to the
 celestial and there comes to rest, may very well be understood to
 recognize many other souls known in its former state supposing that,
 as we have said, it retains recollection of much that it knew here.
 This recognition would be natural if the bodies with which 
 those souls
 are vested in the celestial must reproduce the former appearance;
 supposing the spherical form [of the stars inhabited by souls in the
 mid-realm] means a change of appearance, recognition would go by
 character, by the distinctive quality of personality: this is not
 fantastic; conditions changing need not mean a change of 
 character. If
 the souls have mutual conversation, this too would mean recognition.
 
 </p><p>But those whose descent from the Intellectual is complete, how
 is it with them?
 
 </p><p>They will recall their memories, of the same things, but 
 with less
 force than those still in the celestial, since they have had other
 experiences to remember, and the lapse of time will have utterly
 obliterated much of what was formerly present to them.
 
 </p><p>But what way of remembering the Supreme is left if the souls
 have turned to the sense-known kosmos, and are to fall into this
 sphere of process?
 
 </p><p>They need not fall to the ultimate depth: their downward
 movement may be checked at some one moment of the way; and as long
 as they have not touched the lowest of the region of process [the
 point at which non-being begins] there is nothing to prevent them
 rising once more.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn325.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>