<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn306.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn308.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 21</h4>
 
 <p>21. What does all this come to? What answer do we give 
 to him who,
 with no opinion of his own to assert, asks us to explain this
 presence? And what do we say to the question whether there 
 is one only
 mode of presence of the entire soul or different modes, phase and
 phase?
 
 </p><p>Of the modes currently accepted for the presence of one thing in
 another, none really meets the case of the soul's relation to the
 body. Thus we are given as a parallel the steersman in the ship;
 this serves adequately to indicate that the soul is potentially
 separable, but the mode of presence, which is what we are seeking,
 it does not exhibit.
 
 </p><p>We can imagine it within the body in some incidental way- for
 example, as a voyager in a ship- but scarcely as the steersman: and,
 of course, too, the steersman is not omnipresent to the ship as the
 soul is to the body.
 
 </p><p>May we, perhaps, compare it to the science or skill that acts
 through its appropriate instruments- through a helm, let us 
 say, which
 should happen to be a live thing- so that the soul effecting the
 movements dictated by seamanship is an indwelling directive force?
 
 </p><p>No: the comparison breaks down, since the science is something
 outside of helm and ship.
 
 </p><p>Is it any help to adopt the illustration of the steersman taking
 the helm, and to station the soul within the body as the 
 steersman may
 be thought to be within the material instrument through which he
 works? Soul, whenever and wherever it chooses to operate, 
 does in much
 that way move the body.
 
 </p><p>No; even in this parallel we have no explanation of the mode of
 presence within the instrument; we cannot be satisfied 
 without further
 search, a closer approach.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn308.htm">Next: Section 22</a></center>
 </body>