<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn367.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn369.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. For the most convincing proof that vision does not depend
 upon the transmission of impressions of any kind made upon 
 the air, we
 have only to consider that in the darkness of night we can see a
 fire and the stars and their very shapes.
 
 </p><p>No one will pretend that these forms are reproduced upon the
 darkness and come to us in linked progression; if the fire thus
 rayed out its own form, there would be an end to the darkness. In
 the blackest night, when the very stars are hidden and show no gleam
 of their light, we can see the fire of the beacon-stations and of
 maritime signal-towers.
 
 </p><p>Now if, in defiance of all that the senses tell us, we are to
 believe that in these examples the fire [as light] traverses the
 air, then, in so far as anything is visible, it must be that dimmed
 reproduction in the air, not the fire itself. But if an object can
 be seen on the other side of some intervening darkness, much more
 would it be visible with nothing intervening.
 
 </p><p>We may hold one thing certain: the impossibility of 
 vision without
 an intervening substance does not depend upon that absence in
 itself: the sole reason is that, with the absence, there would be an
 end to the sympathy reigning in the living whole and relating the
 parts to each other in an existent unity.
 
 </p><p>Perception of every kind seems to depend on the fact that our
 universe is a whole sympathetic to itself: that it is so, 
 appears from
 the universal participation in power from member to member, and
 especially in remote power.
 
 </p><p>No doubt it would be worth enquiry- though we pass it for the
 present- what would take place if there were another kosmos, another
 living whole having no contact with this one, and the far ridges of
 our heavens had sight: would our sphere see that other as from a
 mutually present distance, or could there be no dealing at all from
 this to that?
 
 </p><p>To return; there is a further consideration showing that sight
 is not brought about by this alleged modification of the 
 intervenient.
 
 </p><p>Any modification of the air substance would necessarily be
 corporeal: there must be such an impression as is made upon sealing
 wax. But this would require that each part of the object of vision
 be impressed on some corresponding portion of the intervenient: the
 intervenient, however, in actual contact with the eye would be just
 that portion whose dimensions the pupil is capable of receiving. But
 as a matter of fact the entire object appears before the 
 pupil; and it
 is seen entire by all within that air space for a great extent, in
 front, sideways, close at hand, from the back, as long as the line
 of vision is not blocked. This shows that any given portion 
 of the air
 contains the object of vision, in face view so to speak, 
 and, at once,
 we are confronted by no merely corporeal phenomena; the facts are
 explicable only as depending upon the greater laws, the spiritual,
 of a living being one and self-sensitive.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn369.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>