<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn363.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn365.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 45</h4>
 
 <p>45. From this discussion it becomes perfectly clear that the
 individual member of the All contributes to that All in the degree
 of its kind and condition; thus it acts and is acted upon. In any
 particular animal each of the limbs and organs, in the measure of
 its kind and purpose, aids the entire being by service performed and
 counts in rank and utility: it gives what is in it its gift and
 takes from its fellows in the degree of receptive power belonging to
 its kind; there is something like a common sensitiveness linking the
 parts, and in the orders in which each of the parts is also animate,
 each will have, in addition to its rank as part, the very particular
 functions of a living being.
 
 </p><p>We have learned, further, something of our human 
 standing; we know
 that we too accomplish within the All a work not confined to the
 activity and receptivity of body in relation to body; we know that
 we bring to it that higher nature of ours, linked as we are by
 affinities within us towards the answering affinities outside us;
 becoming by our soul and the conditions of our kind thus linked- or,
 better, being linked by Nature- with our next highest in the 
 celestial
 or demonic realm, and thence onwards with those above the
 Celestials, we cannot fail to manifest our quality. Still, we are
 not all able to offer the same gifts or to accept identically: if we
 do not possess good, we cannot bestow it; nor can we ever purvey any
 good thing to one that has no power of receiving good. Anyone that
 adds his evil to the total of things is known for what he is and, in
 accordance with his kind, is pressed down into the evil which he has
 made his own, and hence, upon death, goes to whatever region fits
 his quality- and all this happens under the pull of natural forces.
 
 </p><p>For the good man, the giving and the taking and the changes of
 state go quite the other way; the particular tendencies of 
 the nature,
 we may put it, transpose the cords [so that we are moved by that
 only which, in Plato's metaphor of the puppets, draws towards the
 best].
 
 </p><p>Thus this universe of ours is a wonder of power and wisdom,
 everything by a noiseless road coming to pass according to a 
 law which
 none may elude- which the base man never conceives though it is
 leading him, all unknowingly, to that place in the All where his lot
 must be cast- which the just man knows, and, knowing, sets out to
 the place he must, understanding, even as he begins the 
 journey, where
 he is to be housed at the end, and having the good hope that he will
 be with gods.
 
 </p><p>In a living being of small scope the parts vary but slightly,
 and have but a faint individual consciousness, and, unless 
 possibly in
 a few and for a short time, are not themselves alive. But in a
 living universe, of high expanse, where every entity has vast scope
 and many of the members have life, there must be wider movement and
 greater changes. We see the sun and the moon and the other stars
 shifting place and course in an ordered progression. It is therefore
 within reason that the souls, also, of the All should have their
 changes, not retaining unbrokenly the same quality, but 
 ranged in some
 analogy with their action and experience- some taking rank 
 as head and
 some as foot in a disposition consonant with the Universal 
 Being which
 has its degrees in better and less good. A soul, which 
 neither chooses
 the highest that is here, nor has lent itself to the lowest, is one
 which has abandoned another, a purer, place, taking this sphere in
 free election.
 
 </p><p>The punishments of wrong-doing are like the treatment of
 diseased parts of the body- here, medicines to knit sundered flesh;
 there, amputations; elsewhere, change of environment and condition-
 and the penalties are planned to bring health to the All by settling
 every member in the fitting place: and this health of the 
 All requires
 that one man be made over anew and another, sick here, be taken
 hence to where he shall be weakly no longer.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn365.htm">Next: FIFTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>