<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn329.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn331.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. The administration of the kosmos is to be thought of as that
 of a living unit: there is the action determined by what is
 external, and has to do with the parts, and there is that determined
 by the internal and by the principle: thus a doctor basing his
 treatment on externals and on the parts directly affected will often
 be baffled and obliged to all sorts of calculation, while Nature
 will act on the basis of principle and need no deliberation. 
 And in so
 far as the kosmos is a conducted thing, its administration and its
 administrator will follow not the way of the doctor but the way of
 Nature.
 
 </p><p>And in the case of the universe, the administration is all the
 less complicated from the fact that the soul actually circumscribes,
 as parts of a living unity, all the members which it 
 conducts. For all
 the Kinds included in the universe are dominated by one Kind, upon
 which they follow, fitted into it, developing from it, growing out
 of it, just as the Kind manifested in the bough is related 
 to the Kind
 in the tree as a whole.
 
 </p><p>What place, then, is there for reasoning, for calculation, what
 place for memory, where wisdom and knowledge are eternal,
 unfailingly present, effective, dominant, administering in an
 identical process?
 
 </p><p>The fact that the product contains diversity and difference does
 not warrant the notion that the producer must be subject to
 corresponding variations. On the contrary, the more varied the
 product, the more certain the unchanging identity of the producer:
 even in the single animal the events produced by Nature are many and
 not simultaneous; there are the periods, the developments at fixed
 epochs- horns, beard, maturing breasts, the acme of life, 
 procreation-
 but the principles which initially determined the nature of the
 being are not thereby annulled; there is process of growth, but no
 diversity in the initial principle. The identity underlying all the
 multiplicity is confirmed by the fact that the principle
 constituting the parent is exhibited unchanged, undiminished, in the
 offspring. We have reason, then, for thinking that one and the same
 wisdom envelops both, and that this is the unalterable wisdom of the
 kosmos taken as a whole; it is manifold, diverse and yet simplex,
 presiding over the most comprehensive of living beings, and 
 in no wise
 altered within itself by this multiplicity, but stably one
 Reason-Principle, the concentrated totality of things: if it were
 not thus all things, it would be a wisdom of the later and partial,
 not the wisdom of the Supreme.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn331.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>