<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn317.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn319.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 32</h4>
 
 <p>32. But the memory of friends, children, wife? Country too, and
 all that the better sort of man may reasonably remember?
 
 </p><p>All these, the one [the lower man] retains with emotion, the
 authentic man passively: for the experience, certainly, was 
 first felt
 in that lower phase from which, however, the best of such
 impressions pass over to the graver soul in the degree in which the
 two are in communication.
 
 </p><p>The lower soul must be always striving to attain to memory of
 the activities of the higher: this will be especially so when it is
 itself of a fine quality, for there will always be some that are
 better from the beginning and bettered here by the guidance of the
 higher.
 
 </p><p>The loftier, on the contrary, must desire to come to a happy
 forgetfulness of all that has reached it through the lower: for one
 reason, there is always the possibility that the very excellence of
 the lower prove detrimental to the higher, tending to keep it down
 by sheer force of vitality. In any case the more urgent the
 intention towards the Supreme, the more extensive will be the soul's
 forgetfulness, unless indeed, when the entire living has, even here,
 been such that memory has nothing but the noblest to deal with: in
 this world itself, all is best when human interests have been held
 aloof; so, therefore, it must be with the memory of them. In this
 sense we may truly say that the good soul is the forgetful. It flees
 multiplicity; it seeks to escape the unbounded by drawing all to
 unity, for only thus is it free from entanglement, light-footed,
 self-conducted. Thus it is that even in this world the soul which
 has the desire of the other is putting away, amid its actual 
 life, all
 that is foreign to that order. It brings there very little of what
 it has gathered here; as long as it is in the heavenly regions only,
 it will have more than it can retain.
 
 </p><p>The Hercules of the heavenly regions would still tell of his
 feats: but there is the other man to whom all of that is trivial; he
 has been translated to a holier place; he has won his way to the
 Intellectual Realm; he is more than Hercules, proven in the 
 combats in
 which the combatants are the wise.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn319.htm">Next: FOURTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>