<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn305.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn307.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 20</h4>
 
 <p>20. Here a question rises to which we must find an 
 answer: whether
 these and the other powers which we call "parts" of the Soul are
 situated, all, in place; or whether some have place and standpoint,
 others not; or whether again none are situated in place.
 
 </p><p>The matter is difficult: if we do not allot to each of the parts
 of the Soul some form of Place, but leave all unallocated- no more
 within the body than outside it- we leave the body soulless, and are
 at a loss to explain plausibly the origin of acts performed by means
 of the bodily organs: if, on the other hand, we suppose some of
 those phases to be [capable of situation] in place but others not
 so, we will be supposing that those parts to which we deny place are
 ineffective in us, or, in other words, that we do not possess our
 entire soul.
 
 </p><p>This simply shows that neither the soul entire nor any part of
 it may be considered to be within the body as in a space: space is a
 container, a container of body; it is the home of such things as
 consist of isolated parts, things, therefore, in which at no point
 is there an entirety; now, the soul is not a body and is no more
 contained than containing.
 
 </p><p>Neither is it in body as in some vessel: whether as vessel or as
 place of location, the body would remain, in itself, 
 unensouled. If we
 are to think of some passing-over from the soul- that self-gathered
 thing- to the containing vessel, then soul is diminished by just as
 much as the vessel takes.
 
 </p><p>Space, again, in the strict sense is unembodied, and is not,
 itself, body; why, then, should it need soul?
 
 </p><p>Besides [if the soul were contained as in space] contact would
 be only at the surface of the body, not throughout the entire mass.
 
 </p><p>Many other considerations equally refute the notion that the
 soul is in body as [an object] in space; for example, this 
 space would
 be shifted with every movement, and a thing itself would 
 carry its own
 space about.
 
 </p><p>Of course if by space we understand the interval separating
 objects, it is still less possible that the soul be in body as in
 space: such a separating interval must be a void; but body is not a
 void; the void must be that in which body is placed; body [not soul]
 will be in the void.
 
 </p><p>Nor can it be in the body as in some substratum: anything in a
 substratum is a condition affecting that- a colour, a form- but the
 soul is a separate existence.
 
 </p><p>Nor is it present as a part in the whole; soul is no 
 part of body.
 If we are asked to think of soul as a part in the living total we
 are faced with the old difficulty: How it is in that whole. It is
 certainly not there as the wine is in the wine jar, or as the jar in
 the jar, or as some absolute is self-present.
 
 </p><p>Nor can the presence be that of a whole in its part: It would be
 absurd to think of the soul as a total of which the body should
 represent the parts.
 
 </p><p>It is not present as Form is in Matter; for the Form as in
 Matter is inseparable and, further, is something superimposed upon
 an already existent thing; soul, on the contrary, is that which
 engenders the Form residing within the Matter and therefore 
 is not the
 Form. If the reference is not to the Form actually present, but to
 Form as a thing existing apart from all formed objects, it is hard
 to see how such an entity has found its way into body, and 
 at any rate
 this makes the soul separable.
 
 </p><p>How comes it then that everyone speaks of soul as being in body?
 
 </p><p>Because the soul is not seen and the body is: we perceive the
 body, and by its movement and sensation we understand that it is
 ensouled, and we say that it possesses a soul; to speak of residence
 is a natural sequence. If the soul were visible, an object of the
 senses, radiating throughout the entire life, if it were manifest in
 full force to the very outermost surface, we would no longer speak
 of soul as in body; we would say the minor was within the major, the
 contained within the container, the fleeting within the perdurable.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn307.htm">Next: Section 21</a></center>
 </body>