<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn304.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn306.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 19</h4>
 
 <p>19. Are we to think of the indivisible phase of the soul and the
 divided as making one thing in a coalescence; or is the 
 indivisible in
 a place of its own and under conditions of its own, the divisible
 being a sequent upon it, a separate part of it, as distinct as the
 reasoning phase is from the unreasoning?
 
 </p><p>The answer to this question will emerge when we make plain the
 nature and function to be attributed to each.
 
 </p><p>The indivisible phase is mentioned [in the passage of Plato]
 without further qualification; but not so the divisible; "that soul"
 we read "which becomes divisible in bodies"- and even this last is
 presented as becoming partible, not as being so once for all.
 
 </p><p>"In bodies": we must then, satisfy ourselves as to what form of
 soul is required to produce life in the corporeal, and what 
 there must
 be of soul present throughout such a body, such a completed organism.
 
 </p><p>Now, every sensitive power- by the fact of being sensitive
 throughout- tends to become a thing of parts: present at every
 distinct point of sensitiveness, it may be thought of as divided. In
 the sense, however, that it is present as a whole at every 
 such point,
 it cannot be said to be wholly divided; it "becomes divisible in
 body." We may be told that no such partition is implied in any
 sensations but those of touch; but this is not so; where the
 participant is body [of itself insensitive and non-transmitting]
 that divisibility in the sensitive agent will be a condition of all
 other sensations, though in less degree than in the case of touch.
 Similarly the vegetative function in the soul, with that of growth,
 indicates divisibility; and, admitting such locations as that of
 desire at the liver and emotional activity at the heart, we have the
 same result. It is to be noted, however, as regards these [the less
 corporeal] sensations, that the body may possibly not experience
 them as a fact of the conjoint thing but in another mode, as rising
 within some one of the elements of which it has been participant
 [as inherent, purely, in some phase of the associated soul]:
 reasoning and the act of the intellect, for instance, are not vested
 in the body; their task is not accomplished by means of the 
 body which
 in fact is detrimental to any thinking on which it is allowed to
 intrude.
 
 </p><p>Thus the indivisible phase of the soul stands distinct from the
 divisible; they do not form a unity, but, on the contrary, a whole
 consisting of parts, each part a self-standing thing having its own
 peculiar virtue. None the less, if that phase which becomes
 divisible in body holds indivisibility by communication from the
 superior power, then this one same thing [the soul in body] may be
 at once indivisible and divisible; it will be, as it were, a blend,
 a thing made up of its own divisible self with, in addition, the
 quality that it derives from above itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn306.htm">Next: Section 20</a></center>
 </body>