<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn342.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn344.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 24</h4>
 
 <p>24. The next question is whether perception is concerned 
 only with
 need.
 
 </p><p>The soul, isolated, has no sense-perception; sensations go with
 the body; sensation itself therefore must occur by means of the body
 to which the sensations are due; it must be something 
 brought about by
 association with the body.
 
 </p><p>Thus either sensation occurs in a soul compelled to follow upon
 bodily states- since every graver bodily experience reaches 
 at last to
 soul- or sensation is a device by which a cause is dealt with before
 it becomes so great as actually to injure us or even before it has
 begun to make contact.
 
 </p><p>At this, sense-impressions would aim at utility. They may serve
 also to knowledge, but that could be service only to some being not
 living in knowledge but stupefied as the result of a 
 disaster, and the
 victim of a Lethe calling for constant reminding: they would be
 useless to any being free from either need or forgetfulness. 
 This This
 reflection enlarges the enquiry: it is no longer a question of earth
 alone, but of the whole star-system, all the heavens, the kosmos
 entire. For it would follow that, in the sphere of things not exempt
 from modification, sense-perception would occur in every part having
 relation to any other part: in a whole, however- having relation
 only to itself, immune, universally self-directed and 
 self-possessing-
 what perception could there be?
 
 </p><p>Granted that the percipient must act through an organ and that
 this organ must be different from the object perceived, then the
 universe, as an All, can have [no sensation since it has] no organ
 distinct from object: it can have self-awareness, as we have; but
 sense-perception, the constant attendant of another order, it cannot
 have.
 
 </p><p>Our own apprehension of any bodily condition apart from 
 the normal
 is the sense of something intruding from without: but 
 besides this, we
 have the apprehension of one member by another; why then should not
 the All, by means of what is stationary in it, perceive that 
 region of
 itself which is in movement, that is to say the earth and the
 earth's content?
 
 </p><p>Things of earth are certainly affected by what passes in other
 regions of the All; what, then, need prevent the All from having, in
 some appropriate way, the perception of those changes? In addition
 to that self-contemplating vision vested in its stationary part, may
 it not have a seeing power like that of an eye able to 
 announce to the
 All-Soul what has passed before it? Even granted that it is entirely
 unaffected by its lower, why, still, should it not see like an eye,
 ensouled as it is, all lightsome?
 
 </p><p>Still: "eyes were not necessary to it," we read. If this meant
 simply that nothing is left to be seen outside of the All, 
 still there
 is the inner content, and there can be nothing to prevent it seeing
 what constitutes itself: if the meaning is that such 
 self-vision could
 serve to no use, we may think that it has vision not as a main
 intention for vision's sake but as a necessary concomitant of its
 characteristic nature; it is difficult to conceive why such a body
 should be incapable of seeing.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn344.htm">Next: Section 25</a></center>
 </body>