<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn346.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn348.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 28</h4>
 
 <p>28. Thus much established, we may return on our path: we have to
 discuss the seat of the passionate element in the human being.
 
 </p><p>Pleasures and pains- the conditions, that is, not the perception
 of them- and the nascent stage of desire, we assigned to the 
 body as a
 determined thing, the body brought, in some sense, to life: are we
 entitled to say the same of the nascent stage of passion? Are we to
 consider passion in all its forms as vested in the determined body
 or in something belonging to it, for instance in the heart 
 or the bile
 necessarily taking condition within a body not dead? Or are we to
 think that just as that which bestows the vestige of the soul is a
 distinct entity, so we may reason in this case- the 
 passionate element
 being one distinct thing, itself, and not deriving from any 
 passionate
 or percipient faculty?
 
 </p><p>Now in the first case the soul-principle involved, the vegetal,
 pervades the entire body, so that pain and pleasure and 
 nascent desire
 for the satisfaction of need are present all over it- there is
 possibly some doubt as to the sexual impulse, which, however, it may
 suffice to assign to the organs by which it is executed- but in
 general the region about the liver may be taken to be the starting
 point of desire, since it is the main acting point of the vegetal
 principle which transmits the vestige phase of the soul to the liver
 and body- the seat, because the spring.
 
 </p><p>But in this other case, of passion, we have to settle what it
 is, what form of soul it represents: does it act by communicating a
 lower phase of itself to the regions round the heart, or is it set
 in motion by the higher soul-phase impinging upon the Conjoint [the
 animate-total], or is there, in such conditions no question of
 soul-phase, but simply passion itself producing the act or state of
 [for example] anger?
 
 </p><p>Evidently the first point for enquiry is what passion is.
 
 </p><p>Now we all know that we feel anger not only over our own bodily
 suffering, but also over the conduct of others, as when some of our
 associates act against our right and due, and in general over any
 unseemly conduct. It is at once evident that anger implies some
 subject capable of sensation and of judgement: and this
 consideration suffices to show that the vegetal nature is not its
 source, that we must look for its origin elsewhere.
 
 </p><p>On the other hand, anger follows closely upon bodily states;
 people in whom the blood and the bile are intensely active are as
 quick to anger as those of cool blood and no bile are slow; animals
 grow angry though they pay attention to no outside 
 combinations except
 where they recognize physical danger; all this forces us again to
 place the seat of anger in the strictly corporeal element, the
 principle by which the animal organism is held together. Similarly,
 that anger or its first stirring depends upon the condition of the
 body follows from the consideration that the same people are more
 irritable ill than well, fasting than after food: it would seem that
 the bile and the blood, acting as vehicles of life, produce these
 emotions.
 
 </p><p>Our conclusion [reconciling with these corporeal facts 
 the psychic
 or mental element indicated] will identify, first, some suffering in
 the body answered by a movement in the blood or in the bile: 
 sensation
 ensues and the soul, brought by means of the representative 
 faculty to
 partake in the condition of the affected body, is directed 
 towards the
 cause of the pain: the reasoning soul, in turn, from its place above
 the phase not inbound with body-acts in its own mode when the breach
 of order has become manifest to it: it calls in the alliance of that
 ready passionate faculty which is the natural combatant of the evil
 disclosed.
 
 </p><p>Thus anger has two phases; there is firstly that which, rising
 apart from all process of reasoning, draws reason to itself by the
 medium of the imaging faculty, and secondly that which, rising in
 reason, touches finally upon the specific principle of the emotion.
 Both these depend upon the existence of that principle of 
 vegetal life
 and generation by which the body becomes an organism aware 
 of pleasure
 and pain: this principle it was that made the body a thing 
 of bile and
 bitterness, and thus it leads the indwelling soul-phase to
 corresponding states- churlish and angry under stress of
 environment- so that being wronged itself, it tries, as we 
 may put it,
 to return the wrong upon its surroundings, and bring them to the
 same condition.
 
 </p><p>That this soul-vestige, which determines the movements of
 passion is of one essence [con-substantial] with the other is
 evident from the consideration that those of us less avid of 
 corporeal
 pleasures, especially those that wholly repudiate the body, are the
 least prone to anger and to all experiences not rising from reason.
 
 </p><p>That this vegetal principle, underlying anger, should be present
 in trees and yet passion be lacking in them cannot surprise us since
 they are not subject to the movements of blood and bile. If the
 occasions of anger presented themselves where there is no power of
 sensation there could be no more than a physical ebullition with
 something approaching to resentment [an unconscious reaction]; where
 sensation exists there is at once something more; the recognition of
 wrong and of the necessary defence carries with it the intentional
 act.
 
 </p><p>But the division of the unreasoning phase of the soul into a
 desiring faculty and a passionate faculty- the first identical with
 the vegetal principle, the second being a lower phase of it acting
 upon the blood or bile or upon the entire living organism- such a
 division would not give us a true opposition, for the two would
 stand in the relation of earlier phase to derivative.
 
 </p><p>This difficulty is reasonably met by considering that both
 faculties are derivatives and making the division apply to them in
 so far as they are new productions from a common source; for the
 division applies to movements of desire as such, not to the essence
 from which they rise.
 
 </p><p>That essence is not, of its own nature, desire; it is, however,
 the force which by consolidating itself with the active
 manifestation proceeding from it makes the desire a completed thing.
 And that derivative which culminates in passion may not unreasonably
 be thought of as a vestige-phase lodged about the heart, since the
 heart is not the seat of the soul, but merely the centre to that
 portion of the blood which is concerned in the movements of passion.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn348.htm">Next: Section 29</a></center>
 </body>