<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn349.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn351.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 31</h4>
 
 <p>31. Our problem embraces all act and all experience 
 throughout the
 entire kosmos- whether due to nature, in the current phrase, or
 effected by art. The natural proceeds, we must hold, from the All
 towards its members and from the members to the All, or from 
 member to
 other member: the artificial either remains, as it began, within the
 limit of the art- attaining finality in the artificial product
 alone- or is the expression of an art which calls to its aid natural
 forces and agencies, and so sets up act and experience within the
 sphere of the natural.
 
 </p><p>When I speak of the act and experience of the All I mean 
 the total
 effect of the entire kosmic circuit upon itself and upon its
 members: for by its motion it sets up certain states both within
 itself and upon its parts, upon the bodies that move within it and
 upon all that it communicates to those other parts of it, the things
 of our earth.
 
 </p><p>The action of part upon part is manifest; there are the
 relations and operations of the sun, both towards the other spheres
 and towards the things of earth; and again relations among 
 elements of
 the sun itself, of other heavenly bodies, of earthly things and of
 things in the other stars, demand investigation.
 
 </p><p>As for the arts: Such as look to house building and the like are
 exhausted when that object is achieved; there are again those-
 medicine, farming, and other serviceable pursuits- which deal
 helpfully with natural products, seeking to bring them to natural
 efficiency; and there is a class- rhetoric, music and every other
 method of swaying mind or soul, with their power of modifying for
 better or for worse- and we have to ascertain what these arts come
 to and what kind of power lies in them.
 
 </p><p>On all these points, in so far as they bear on our present
 purpose, we must do what we can to work out some approximate
 explanation.
 
 </p><p>It is abundantly evident that the Circuit is a cause; it 
 modifies,
 firstly, itself and its own content, and undoubtedly also it tells
 on the terrestrial, not merely in accordance with bodily conditions
 but also by the states of the soul it sets up; and each of 
 its members
 has an operation upon the terrestrial and in general upon all the
 lower.
 
 </p><p>Whether there is a return action of the lower upon the 
 higher need
 not trouble us now: for the moment we are to seek, as far as
 discussion can exhibit it, the method by which action takes 
 place; and
 we do not challenge the opinions universally or very generally
 entertained.
 
 </p><p>We take the question back to the initial act of causation. It
 cannot be admitted that either heat or cold and the like what are
 known as the primal qualities of the elements- or any admixture of
 these qualities, should be the first causes we are seeking; equally
 inacceptable, that while the sun's action is all by heat, there is
 another member of the Circuit operating wholly by cold- 
 incongruous in
 the heavens and in a fiery body- nor can we think of some other star
 operating by liquid fire.
 
 </p><p>Such explanations do not account for the differences of things,
 and there are many phenomena which cannot be referred to any of
 these causes. Suppose we allow them to be the occasion of moral
 differences- determined, thus, by bodily composition and
 constitution under a reigning heat or cold- does that give us a
 reasonable explanation of envy, jealously, acts of violence? 
 Or, if it
 does, what, at any rate, are we to think of good and bad 
 fortune, rich
 men and poor, gentle blood, treasure-trove?
 
 </p><p>An immensity of such examples might be adduced, all leading far
 from any corporeal quality that could enter the body and soul of a
 living thing from the elements: and it is equally impossible that
 the will of the stars, a doom from the All, any deliberation among
 them, should be held responsible for the fate of each and 
 all of their
 inferiors. It is not to be thought that such beings engage
 themselves in human affairs in the sense of making men thieves,
 slave-dealers, burglars, temple-strippers, or debased effeminates
 practising and lending themselves to disgusting actions: that is not
 merely unlike gods; it is unlike mediocre men; it is, 
 perhaps, beneath
 the level of any existing being where there is not the least
 personal advantage to be gained.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn351.htm">Next: Section 32</a></center>
 </body>