<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn330.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn332.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. It may be urged that all the multiplicity and development
 are the work of Nature, but that, since there is wisdom within the
 All, there must be also, by the side of such natural operation, acts
 of reasoning and of memory.
 
 </p><p>But this is simply a human error which assumes wisdom to be what
 in fact is unwisdom, taking the search for wisdom to be 
 wisdom itself.
 For what can reasoning be but a struggle, the effort to discover the
 wise course, to attain the principle which is true and derives from
 real-being? To reason is like playing the cithara for the sake of
 achieving the art, like practising with a view to mastery, like any
 learning that aims at knowing. What reasoners seek, the wise hold:
 wisdom, in a word, is a condition in a being that possesses repose.
 Think what happens when one has accomplished the reasoning 
 process: as
 soon as we have discovered the right course, we cease to reason: we
 rest because we have come to wisdom. If then we are to range the
 leading principle of the All among learners, we must allow it
 reasonings, perplexities and those acts of memory which link the
 past with the present and the future: if it is to be considered as a
 knower, then the wisdom within it consists in a rest possessing the
 object [absolved, therefore, from search and from remembrance].
 
 </p><p>Again, if the leading principle of the universe knows the future
 as it must- then obviously it will know by what means that future is
 to come about; given this knowledge, what further need is 
 there of its
 reasoning towards it, or confronting past with present? And, of
 course, this knowledge of things to come- admitting it to exist- is
 not like that of the diviners; it is that of the actual causing
 principles holding the certainty that the thing will exist, the
 certainty inherent in the all-disposers, above perplexity and
 hesitancy; the notion is constituent and therefore unvarying. The
 knowledge of future things is, in a word, identical with that of the
 present; it is a knowledge in repose and thus a knowledge 
 transcending
 the processes of cogitation.
 
 </p><p>If the leading principle of the universe does not know the
 future which it is of itself to produce, it cannot produce with
 knowledge or to purpose; it will produce just what happens to come,
 that is to say by haphazard. As this cannot be, it must 
 create by some
 stable principle; its creations, therefore, will be shaped in the
 model stored up in itself; there can be no varying, for, if there
 were, there could also be failure.
 
 </p><p>The produced universe will contain difference, but its 
 diversities
 spring not from its own action but from its obedience to superior
 principles which, again, spring from the creating power, so that all
 is guided by Reason-Principles in their series; thus the creating
 power is in no sense subjected to experimenting, to perplexity, to
 that preoccupation which to some minds makes the 
 administration of the
 All seem a task of difficulty. Preoccupation would obviously 
 imply the
 undertaking of alien tasks, some business- that would mean- not
 completely within the powers; but where the power is sovereign and
 sole, it need take thought of nothing but itself and its own will,
 which means its own wisdom, since in such a being the will is
 wisdom. Here, then, creating makes no demand, since the wisdom that
 goes to it is not sought elsewhere, but is the creator's very self,
 drawing on nothing outside- not, therefore, on reasoning or 
 on memory,
 which are handlings of the external.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn332.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>