<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn383.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn385.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. It is easy to show that if the Soul were a corporeal entity,
 there could be no sense-perception, no mental act, no knowledge, no
 moral excellence, nothing of all that is noble.
 
 </p><p>There can be no perception without a unitary percipient whose
 identity enables it to grasp an object as an entirety.
 
 </p><p>The several senses will each be the entrance point of 
 many diverse
 perceptions; in any one object there may be many characteristics;
 any one organ may be the channel of a group of objects, as for
 instance a face is known not by a special sense for separate 
 features,
 nose, eyes; etc., but by one sense observing all in one act.
 
 </p><p>When sight and hearing gather their varying information, there
 must be some central unity to which both report. How could there be
 any statement of difference unless all sense-impressions appeared
 before a common identity able to take the sum of all?
 
 </p><p>This there must be, as there is a centre to a circle; the
 sense-impressions converging from every point of occurrence 
 will be as
 lines striking from a circumference to what will be a true centre of
 perception as being a veritable unity.
 
 </p><p>If this centre were to break into separate points- so that the
 sense-impressions fell upon the two ends of a line- then, either it
 must reknit itself to unity and identity, perhaps at the mid-point
 of the line, or all remains unrelated, every end receiving the
 report of its particular field exactly as you and I have our
 distinct sense experiences.
 
 </p><p>Suppose the sense-object be such a unity as a face: all 
 the points
 of observation must be brought together in one visual total, as is
 obvious since there could be no panorama of great expanses unless
 the detail were compressed to the capacity of the pupils.
 
 </p><p>Much more must this be true in the case of thoughts, partless
 entities as they are, impinging upon the centre of 
 consciousness which
 [to receive them] must itself be void of part.
 
 </p><p>Either this or, supposing the centre of consciousness to be a
 thing of quantity and extension, the sensible object will coincide
 with it point by point of their co-expansion so that any given point
 in the faculty will perceive solely what coincides with it in the
 object: and thus nothing in us could perceive any thing as a whole.
 
 </p><p>This cannot be: the faculty entire must be a unity; no such
 dividing is possible; this is no matter in which we can 
 think of equal
 sections coinciding; the centre of consciousness has no such
 relation of equality with any sensible object. The only 
 possible ratio
 of divisibility would be that of the number of diverse 
 elements in the
 impinging sensation: are we then to suppose that each part of the
 soul, and every part of each part, will have perception? Or will the
 part of the parts have none? That is impossible: every part, 
 then, has
 perception; the [hypothetical] magnitude, of soul and each part of
 soul, is infinitely divisible; there will therefore be in 
 each part an
 infinite number of perceptions of the object, and therefore an
 infinitude of representations of it at our centre of consciousness.
 
 </p><p>If the sentient be a material entity sensation could only be of
 the order of seal-impressions struck by a ring on wax, in 
 this case by
 sensible objects on the blood or on the intervenient air.
 
 </p><p>If, at this, the impression is like one made in liquids- as
 would be reasonable- it will be confused and wavering as upon water,
 and there can be no memory. If the impressions are permanent, then
 either no fresh ones can be stamped upon the occupied ground- and
 there can be no change of sensations- or, others being made, the
 former will be obliterated; and all record of the past is done away
 with.
 
 </p><p>If memory implies fresh sensations imposed upon former ones, the
 earlier not barring their way, the soul cannot be a material entity.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn385.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>