<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn340.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn342.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 22</h4>
 
 <p>22. And as regards vegetal forms? Are we to imagine beneath the
 leading principle [the "Nature" phase] some sort of corporeal echo
 of it, something that would be tendency or desire in us and is
 growth in them? Or are we to think that, while the earth [which
 nourishes them] contains the principle of desire by virtue of
 containing soul, the vegetal realm possesses only this latter
 reflection of desire?
 
 </p><p>The first point to be decided is what soul is present in the
 earth.
 
 </p><p>Is it one coming from the sphere of the All, a radiation upon
 earth from that which Plato seems to represent as the only thing
 possessing soul primarily? Or are we to go by that other 
 passage where
 he describes earth as the first and oldest of all the gods within
 the scope of the heavens, and assigns to it, as to the other stars,
 a soul peculiar to itself?
 
 </p><p>It is difficult to see how earth could be a god if it did not
 possess a soul thus distinct: but the whole matter is obscure since
 Plato's statements increase or at least do not lessen the
 perplexity. It is best to begin by facing the question as a matter
 of reasoned investigation.
 
 </p><p>That earth possesses the vegetal soul may be taken as 
 certain from
 the vegetation upon it. But we see also that it produces animals;
 why then should we not argue that it is itself animated? And,
 animated, no small part of the All, must it not be plausible 
 to assert
 that it possesses an Intellectual-Principle by which it 
 holds its rank
 as a god? If this is true of every one of the stars, why 
 should it not
 be so of the earth, a living part of the living All? We cannot think
 of it as sustained from without by an alien soul and incapable of
 containing one appropriate to itself.
 
 </p><p>Why should those fiery globes be receptive of soul, and the
 earthly globe not? The stars are equally corporeal, and they lack
 the flesh, blood, muscle, and pliant material of earth, which,
 besides, is of more varied content and includes every form 
 of body. If
 the earth's immobility is urged in objection, the answer is that
 this refers only to spatial movement.
 
 </p><p>But how can perception and sensation [implied in ensoulment] be
 supposed to occur in the earth?
 
 </p><p>How do they occur in the stars? Feeling does not belong to
 fleshy matter: soul to have perception does not require 
 body; body, on
 the contrary, requires soul to maintain its being and its
 efficiency, judgement [the foundation of perception] belongs to the
 soul which overlooks the body, and, from what is experienced there,
 forms its decisions.
 
 </p><p>But, we will be asked to say what are the experiences, within
 the earth, upon which the earth-soul is thus to form its decisions:
 certainly vegetal forms, in so far as they belong to earth have no
 sensation or perception: in what then, and through what, does such
 sensation take place, for sensation without organs is too rash a
 notion. Besides, what would this sense-perception profit the soul?
 It could not be necessary to knowledge: surely the consciousness of
 wisdom suffices to beings which have nothing to gain from sensation?
 
 </p><p>This argument is not to be accepted: it ignores the
 consideration that, apart from all question of practical utility,
 objects of sense provide occasion for a knowing which brings 
 pleasure:
 thus we ourselves take delight in looking upon sun, stars, sky,
 landscape, for their own sake. But we will deal with this 
 point later:
 for the present we ask whether the earth has perceptions and
 sensations, and if so through what vital members these would take
 place and by what method: this requires us to examine certain
 difficulties, and above all to decide whether earth could have
 sensation without organs, and whether this would be directed to some
 necessary purpose even when incidentally it might bring other
 results as well.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn342.htm">Next: Section 23</a></center>
 </body>