<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn381.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn383.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. Our opponents themselves are driven by stress of fact to
 admit the necessity of a prior to body, a higher thing, some phase
 or form of soul; their "pneuma" [finer-body or spirit] is 
 intelligent,
 and they speak of an "intellectual fire"; this "fire" and "spirit"
 they imagine to be necessary to the existence of the higher order
 which they conceive as demanding some base, though the real
 difficulty, under their theory, is to find a base for material
 things whose only possible base is, precisely, the powers of soul.
 
 </p><p>Besides, if they make life and soul no more than this "pneuma,"
 what is the import of that repeated qualification of theirs "in a
 certain state," their refuge when they are compelled to 
 recognize some
 acting principle apart from body? If not every pneuma is a soul, but
 thousands of them soulless, and only the pneuma in this "certain
 state" is soul, what follows? Either this "certain state," this
 shaping or configuration of things, is a real being or it is nothing.
 
 </p><p>If it is nothing, only the pneuma exists, the "certain state"
 being no more than a word; this leads imperatively to the assertion
 that Matter alone exists, Soul and God mere words, the lowest alone
 is.
 
 </p><p>If on the contrary this "configuration" is really existent-
 something distinct from the underlie or Matter, something residing
 in Matter but itself immaterial as not constructed out of 
 Matter, then
 it must be a Reason-Principle, incorporeal, a separate Nature.
 
 </p><p>There are other equally cogent proofs that the soul cannot be
 any form of body.
 
 </p><p>Body is either warm or cold, hard or soft, liquid or solid,
 black or white, and so on through all the qualities by which one is
 different from another; and, again, if a body is warm it 
 diffuses only
 warmth, if cold it can only chill, if light its presence 
 tells against
 the total weight which if heavy it increases; black, it darkens;
 white, it lightens; fire has not the property of chilling or a cold
 body that of warming.
 
 </p><p>Soul, on the contrary, operates diversely in different living
 beings, and has quite contrary effects in any one: its productions
 contain the solid and the soft, the dense and the sparse, bright and
 dark, heavy and light. If it were material, its quality- and the
 colour it must have- would produce one invariable effect and not the
 variety actually observed.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn383.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>