<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn361.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn363.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 43</h4>
 
 <p>43. And the Proficient [the Sage], how does he stand with regard
 to magic and philtre-spells?
 
 </p><p>In the soul he is immune from magic; his reasoning part cannot
 be touched by it, he cannot be perverted. But there is in him the
 unreasoning element which comes from the [material] All, and in this
 he can be affected, or rather this can be affected in him.
 Philtre-Love, however, he will not know, for that would require the
 consent of the higher soul to the trouble stiffed in the lower. And,
 just as the unreasoning element responds to the call of incantation,
 so the adept himself will dissolve those horrible powers by
 counter-incantations. Death, disease, any experience within the
 material sphere, these may result, yes; for anything that has
 membership in the All may be affected by another member, or by the
 universe of members; but the essential man is beyond harm.
 
 </p><p>That the effects of magic should be not instantaneous but
 developed is only in accord with Nature's way.
 
 </p><p>Even the Celestials, the Daimones, are not on their unreasoning
 side immune: there is nothing against ascribing acts of memory and
 experiences of sense to them, in supposing them to accept 
 the traction
 of methods laid up in the natural order, and to give hearing to
 petitioners; this is especially true of those of them that 
 are closest
 to this sphere, and in the degree of their concern about it.
 
 </p><p>For everything that looks to another is under spell to that:
 what we look to, draws us magically. Only the self-intent go free of
 magic. Hence every action has magic as its source, and the 
 entire life
 of the practical man is a bewitchment: we move to that only which
 has wrought a fascination upon us. This is indicated where we read
 "for the burgher of greathearted Erechtheus has a pleasant face [but
 you should see him naked; then you would be cautious]." For what
 conceivably turns a man to the external? He is drawn, drawn by the
 arts not of magicians but of the natural order which administers the
 deceiving draught and links this to that, not in local contact but
 in the fellowship of the philtre.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn363.htm">Next: Section 44</a></center>
 </body>