<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn313.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn315.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 28</h4>
 
 <p>28. Is memory vested in the faculty by which we perceive and
 learn? Or does it reside in the faculty by which we set things
 before our minds as objects of desire or of anger, the passionate
 faculty?
 
 </p><p>This will be maintained on the ground that there could 
 scarcely be
 both a first faculty in direct action and a second to remember what
 that first experiences. It is certain that the desiring 
 faculty is apt
 to be stirred by what it has once enjoyed; the object presents
 itself again; evidently, memory is at work; why else, the same
 object with the same attraction?
 
 </p><p>But, at that, we might reasonably ascribe to the desiring
 faculty the very perception of the desired objects and then 
 the desire
 itself to the perceptive faculty, and so on all through, and in the
 end conclude that the distinctive names merely indicate the function
 which happens to be uppermost.
 
 </p><p>Yet the perception is very different from faculty to faculty;
 certainly it is sight and not desire that sees the object; desire is
 stirred merely as a result of the seeing, by a transmission; its act
 is not in the nature of an identification of an object seen; all is
 simply blind response [automatic reaction]. Similarly with 
 rage; sight
 reveals the offender and the passion leaps; we may think of 
 a shepherd
 seeing a wolf at his flock, and a dog, seeing nothing, who springs to
 the scent or the sound.
 
 </p><p>In other words the desiring faculty has had the emotion, but the
 trace it keeps of the event is not a memory; it is a condition,
 something passively accepted: there is another faculty that was
 aware of the enjoyment and retains the memory of what has happened.
 This is confirmed by the fact that many satisfactions which the
 desiring faculty has enjoyed are not retained in the memory: 
 if memory
 resided in the desiring faculty, such forgetfulness could not be.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn315.htm">Next: Section 29</a></center>
 </body>