<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn372.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn374.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. Imagine that beyond the heavenly system there existed some
 solid mass, and that from this sphere there was directed to it a
 vision utterly unimpeded and unrestricted: it is a question whether
 that solid form could be perceived by what has no 
 sympathetic relation
 with it, since we have held that sympathetic relation comes about in
 virtue of the nature inherent in some one living being.
 
 </p><p>Obviously, if the sympathetic relationship depends upon the fact
 that percipients and things perceived are all members of one living
 being, no acts of perception could take place: that far body could
 be known only if it were a member of this living universe of ours-
 which condition being met, it certainly would be. But what 
 if, without
 being thus in membership, it were a corporeal entity, 
 exhibiting light
 and colour and the qualities by which we perceive things, and
 belonging to the same ideal category as the organ of vision?
 
 </p><p>If our supposition [of perception by sympathy] is true, there
 would still be no perception- though we may be told that the
 hypothesis is clearly untenable since there is absurdity in
 supposing that sight can fail in grasping an illuminated object
 lying before it, and that the other senses in the presence of their
 particular objects remain unresponsive.
 
 </p><p>[The following passage, to nearly the end, is offered
 tentatively as a possible help to the interpretation of an 
 obscure and
 corrupt place.]
 
 </p><p>[But why does such a failing appear impossible to us? We answer,
 because here and now in all the act and experience of our senses, we
 are within a unity, and members of it. What the conditions would be
 otherwise, remains to be considered: if living sympathy suffices the
 theory is established; if not, there are other considerations to
 support it.
 
 </p><p>That every living being is self-sensitive allows of no doubt; if
 the universe is a living being, no more need be said; and 
 what is true
 of the total must be true of the members, as inbound in that 
 one life.
 
 </p><p>But what if we are invited to accept the theory of knowledge by
 likeness (rejecting knowledge by the self-sensitiveness of a living
 unity)?
 
 </p><p>Awareness must be determined by the nature and character of the
 living being in which it occurs; perception, then, means that the
 likeness demanded by the hypothesis is within this self-identical
 living being (and not in the object)- for the organ by which the
 perception takes place is in the likeness of the living being (is
 merely the agent adequately expressing the nature of the living
 being): thus perception is reduced to a mental awareness by means of
 organs akin to the object.
 
 </p><p>If, then, something that is a living whole perceives not its own
 content but things like to its content, it must perceive them under
 the conditions of that living whole; this means that, in so far as
 it has perception, the objects appear not as its content but as
 related to its content.
 
 </p><p>And the objects are thus perceived as related because the mind
 itself has related them in order to make them amenable to its
 handling: in other words the causative soul or mind in that other
 sphere is utterly alien, and the things there, supposed to be
 related to the content of this living whole, can be nothing to our
 minds.]
 
 </p><p>This absurdity shows that the hypothesis contains a
 contradiction which naturally leads to untenable results. In fact,
 under one and the same heading, it presents mind and no 
 mind, it makes
 things kin and no kin, it confuses similar and dissimilar:
 containing these irreconcilable elements, it amounts to no
 hypothesis at all. At one and the same moment it postulates 
 and denies
 a soul, it tells of an All that is partial, of a something 
 which is at
 once distinct and not distinct, of a nothingness which is no
 nothingness, of a complete thing that is incomplete: the hypothesis
 therefore must be dismissed; no deduction is possible where a thesis
 cancels its own propositions.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn374.htm">Next: SIXTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>