<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn308.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn310.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 23</h4>
 
 <p>23. I explain: A living body is illuminated by soul: each organ
 and member participates in soul after some manner peculiar to
 itself; the organ is adapted to a certain function, and this fitness
 is the vehicle of the soul-faculty under which the function is
 performed; thus the seeing faculty acts through the eyes, the
 hearing faculty through the ears, the tasting faculty through the
 tongue, the faculty of smelling through the nostrils, and the
 faculty of sentient touch is present throughout, since in this
 particular form of perception the entire body is an instrument in
 the soul's service.
 
 </p><p>The vehicles of touch are mainly centred in the nerves- which
 moreover are vehicles of the faculty by which the movements of the
 living being are affected- in them the soul-faculty concerned makes
 itself present; the nerves start from the brain. The brain therefore
 has been considered as the centre and seat of the principle which
 determines feeling and impulse and the entire act of the 
 organism as a
 living thing; where the instruments are found to be linked, there
 the operating faculty is assumed to be situated. But it 
 would be wiser
 to say only that there is situated the first activity of the 
 operating
 faculty: the power to be exercised by the operator- in keeping with
 the particular instrument- must be considered as concentrated at the
 point at which the instrument is to be first applied; or, since the
 soul's faculty is of universal scope the sounder statement 
 is that the
 point of origin of the instrument is the point of origin of the act.
 
 </p><p>Now, the faculty presiding over sensation and impulse is 
 vested in
 the sensitive and representative soul; it draws upon the
 Reason-Principle immediately above itself; downward, it is in
 contact with an inferior of its own: on this analogy the uppermost
 member of the living being was taken by the ancients to be obviously
 its seat; they lodged it in the brain, or not exactly in the 
 brain but
 in that sensitive part which is the medium through which the
 Reason-Principle impinges upon the brain. They saw that 
 something must
 be definitely allocated to body- at the point most receptive of the
 act of reason- while something, utterly isolated from body must be
 in contact with that superior thing which is a form of soul [and not
 merely of the vegetative or other quasi-corporeal forms but] of that
 soul apt to the appropriation of the perceptions originating in the
 Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>Such a linking there must be, since in perception there is some
 element of judging, in representation something intuitional, 
 and since
 impulse and appetite derive from representation and reason. The
 reasoning faculty, therefore, is present where these experiences
 occur, present not as in a place but in the fact that what is there
 draws upon it. As regards perception we have already 
 explained in what
 sense it is local.
 
 </p><p>But every living being includes the vegetal principle, that
 principle of growth and nourishment which maintains the organism by
 means of the blood; this nourishing medium is contained in the
 veins; the veins and blood have their origin in the liver: from
 observation of these facts the power concerned was assigned a place;
 the phase of the soul which has to do with desire was 
 allocated to the
 liver. Certainly what brings to birth and nourishes and gives growth
 must have the desire of these functions. Blood- subtle, light,
 swift, pure- is the vehicle most apt to animal spirit: the heart,
 then, its well-spring, the place where such blood is sifted into
 being, is taken as the fixed centre of the ebullition of the
 passionate nature.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn310.htm">Next: Section 24</a></center>
 </body>