<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn374.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn376.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Perceptions are no imprints, we have said, are not to be
 thought of as seal-impressions on soul or mind: accepting this
 statement, there is one theory of memory which must be definitely
 rejected.
 
 </p><p>Memory is not to be explained as the retaining of information in
 virtue of the lingering of an impression which in fact was 
 never made;
 the two things stand or fall together; either an impression is made
 upon the mind and lingers when there is remembrance, or, denying the
 impression, we cannot hold that memory is its lingering. Since we
 reject equally the impression and the retention we are 
 obliged to seek
 for another explanation of perception and memory, one excluding the
 notions that the sensible object striking upon soul or mind makes a
 mark upon it, and that the retention of this mark is memory.
 
 </p><p>If we study what occurs in the case of the most vivid form of
 perception, we can transfer our results to the other cases, and so
 solve our problem.
 
 </p><p>In any perception we attain by sight, the object is grasped
 there where it lies in the direct line of vision; it is there that
 we attack it; there, then, the perception is formed; the mind looks
 outward; this is ample proof that it has taken and takes no inner
 imprint, and does not see in virtue of some mark made upon it like
 that of the ring on the wax; it need not look outward at all if,
 even as it looked, it already held the image of the object, seeing by
 virtue of an impression made upon itself. It includes with the
 object the interval, for it tells at what distance the vision takes
 place: how could it see as outlying an impression within itself,
 separated by no interval from itself? Then, the point of magnitude:
 how could the mind, on this hypothesis, define the external size of
 the object or perceive that it has any- the magnitude of the sky,
 for instance, whose stamped imprint would be too vast for it to
 contain? And, most convincing of all, if to see is to accept
 imprints of the objects of our vision, we can never see these
 objects themselves; we see only vestiges they leave within us,
 shadows: the things themselves would be very different from 
 our vision
 of them. And, for a conclusive consideration, we cannot see if the
 living object is in contact with the eye, we must look from a
 certain distance; this must be more applicable to the mind;
 supposing the mind to be stamped with an imprint of the object, it
 could not grasp as an object of vision what is stamped upon itself.
 For vision demands a duality, of seen and seeing: the seeing agent
 must be distinct and act upon an impression outside it, not upon one
 occupying the same point with it: sight can deal only with an object
 not inset but outlying.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn376.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>