<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn337.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn339.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 19</h4>
 
 <p>19. Thus what we know as pleasure and pain may be 
 identified: pain
 is our perception of a body despoiled, deprived of the image of the
 soul; pleasure our perception of the living frame in which the image
 of the soul is brought back to harmonious bodily operation. The
 painful experience takes place in that living frame; but the
 perception of it belongs to the sensitive phase of the soul, 
 which, as
 neighbouring the living body, feels the change and makes it known to
 the principle, the imaging faculty, into which the sensations
 finally merge; then the body feels the pain, or at least the body is
 affected: thus in an amputation, when the flesh is cut the cutting
 is an event within the material mass; but the pain felt in that mass
 is there felt because it is not a mass pure and simple, but a mass
 under certain [non-material] conditions; it is to that modified
 substance that the sting of the pain is present, and the 
 soul feels it
 by an adoption due to what we think of as proximity.
 
 </p><p>And, itself unaffected, it feels the corporeal 
 conditions at every
 point of its being, and is thereby enabled to assign every condition
 to the exact spot at which the wound or pain occurs. Being present
 as a whole at every point of the body, if it were itself affected
 the pain would take it at every point, and it would suffer as one
 entire being, so that it could not know, or make known, the spot
 affected; it could say only that at the place of its presence there
 existed pain- and the place of its presence is the entire 
 human being.
 As things are, when the finger pains the man is in pain 
 because one of
 his members is in pain; we class him as suffering, from his finger
 being painful, just as we class him as fair from his eyes being blue.
 
 </p><p>But the pain itself is in the part affected unless we include in
 the notion of pain the sensation following upon it, in which case we
 are saying only that distress implies the perception of distress.
 But [this does not mean that the soul is affected] we cannot
 describe the perception itself as distress; it is the 
 knowledge of the
 distress and, being knowledge, is not itself affected, or it 
 could not
 know and convey a true message: a messenger, affected, overwhelmed
 by the event, would either not convey the message or not convey it
 faithfully.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn339.htm">Next: Section 20</a></center>
 </body>