<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn357.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn359.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 39</h4>
 
 <p>39. We cannot, then, refer all that exists to Reason-Principles
 inherent in the seed of things [Spermatic Reasons]; the 
 universe is to
 be traced further back, to the more primal forces, to the principles
 by which that seed itself takes shape. Such spermatic principles
 cannot be the containers of things which arise independently of
 them, such as what enters from Matter [the reasonless] into 
 membership
 of the All, or what is due to the mere interaction of existences.
 
 </p><p>No: the Reason-Principle of the universe would be better 
 envisaged
 as a wisdom uttering order and law to a state, in full knowledge of
 what the citizens will do and why, and in perfect adaptation 
 of law to
 custom; thus the code is made to thread its way in and out 
 through all
 their conditions and actions with the honour or infamy 
 earned by their
 conduct; and all coalesces by a kind of automatism.
 
 </p><p>The signification which exists is not a first intention; 
 it arises
 incidentally by the fact that in a given collocation the members
 will tell something of each other: all is unity sprung of unity and
 therefore one thing is known by way of another other, a cause in the
 light of the caused, the sequent as rising from its precedent, the
 compound from the constituents which must make themselves 
 known in the
 linked total.
 
 </p><p>If all this is sound, at once our doubts fall and we need no
 longer ask whether the transmission of any evil is due to the gods.
 
 </p><p>For, in sum: Firstly, intentions are not to be considered as the
 operative causes; necessities inherent in the nature of 
 things account
 for all that comes from the other realm; it is a matter of the
 inevitable relation of parts, and, besides, all is the 
 sequence to the
 living existence of a unity. Secondly, there is the large 
 contribution
 made by the individual. Thirdly, each several communication, good in
 itself, takes another quality in the resultant combination.
 Fourthly, the life in the kosmos does not look to the individual but
 to the whole. Finally, there is Matter, the underlie, which being
 given one thing receives it as something else, and is unable to make
 the best of what it takes.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn359.htm">Next: Section 40</a></center>
 </body>