<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn334.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn336.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. But if in the soul thing follows thing, if there is earlier
 and later in its productions, if it engenders or creates in 
 time, then
 it must be looking towards the future; and if towards the 
 future, then
 towards the past as well?
 
 </p><p>No: prior and past are in the things its produces; in itself
 nothing is past; all, as we have said, is one simultaneous 
 grouping of
 Reason-Principles. In the engendered, dissimilarity is not
 compatible with unity, though in the Reason-Principles supporting
 the engendered such unity of dissimilars does occur- hand 
 and foot are
 in unity in the Reason-Principle [of man], but apart in the realm of
 sense. Of course, even in that ideal realm there is apartness, but
 in a characteristic mode, just as in a mode, there is priority.
 
 </p><p>Now, apartness may be explained as simply 
 differentiation: but how
 account for priority unless on the assumption of some ordering
 principle arranging from above, and in that disposal necessarily
 affirming a serial order?
 
 </p><p>There must be such a principle, or all would exist 
 simultaneously;
 but the indicated conclusion does not follow unless order 
 and ordering
 principle are distinct; if the ordering principle is Primal Order,
 there is no such affirmation of series; there is simply making, the
 making of this thing after that thing. The affirmation would imply
 that the ordering principle looks away towards Order and therefore
 is not, itself, Order.
 
 </p><p>But how are Order and this orderer one and the same?
 
 </p><p>Because the ordering principle is no conjoint of matter and idea
 but is soul, pure idea, the power and energy second only to the
 Intellectual-Principle: and because the succession is a fact of the
 things themselves, inhibited as they are from this comprehensive
 unity. The ordering soul remains august, a circle, as we may figure
 it, in complete adaptation to its centre, widening outward, but fast
 upon it still, an outspreading without interval.
 
 </p><p>The total scheme may be summarized in the illustration 
 of The Good
 as a centre, the Intellectual-Principle as an unmoving circle, the
 Soul as a circle in motion, its moving being its aspiration: the
 Intellectual-Principle possesses and has ever embraced that which is
 beyond being; the soul must seek it still: the sphere of the 
 universe,
 by its possession of the soul thus aspirant, is moved to the
 aspiration which falls within its own nature; this is no more than
 such power as body may have, the mode of pursuit possible where the
 object pursued is debarred from entrance; it is the motion of
 coiling about, with ceaseless return upon the same path- in other
 words, it is circuit.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn336.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>