<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn352.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn354.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 34</h4>
 
 <p>34. For ourselves, while whatever in us belongs to the 
 body of the
 All should be yielded to its action, we ought to make sure that we
 submit only within limits, realizing that the entire man is not thus
 bound to it: intelligent servitors yield a part of 
 themselves to their
 masters but in part retain their personality, and are thus less
 absolutely at beck and call, as not being slaves, not utterly
 chattels.
 
 </p><p>The changing configurations within the All could not fail to be
 produced as they are, since the moving bodies are not of equal speed.
 
 </p><p>Now the movement is guided by a Reason-Principle; the 
 relations of
 the living whole are altered in consequence; here in our own 
 realm all
 that happens reacts in sympathy to the events of that higher sphere:
 it becomes, therefore, advisable to ask whether we are to think of
 this realm as following upon the higher by agreement, or to
 attribute to the configurations the powers underlying the events,
 and whether such powers would be vested in the configurations simply
 or in the relations of the particular items.
 
 </p><p>It will be said that one position of one given thing has by no
 means an identical effect- whether of indication or of causation- in
 its relation to another and still less to any group of others, since
 each several being seems to have a natural tendency [or receptivity]
 of its own.
 
 </p><p>The truth is that the configuration of any given group means
 merely the relationship of the several parts, and, changing the
 members, the relationship remains the same.
 
 </p><p>But, this being so, the power will belong, not to the positions
 but to the beings holding those positions?
 
 </p><p>To both taken together. For as things change their relations,
 and as any one thing changes place, there is a change of power.
 
 </p><p>But what power? That of causation or of indication?
 
 </p><p>To this double thing- the particular configuration of particular
 beings- there accrues often the twofold power, that of causation and
 that of indication, but sometimes only that of indication. 
 Thus we are
 obliged to attribute powers both to the configuration and to the
 beings entering into them. In mime dancers each of the hands has its
 own power, and so with all the limbs; the relative positions 
 have much
 power; and, for a third power, there is that of the accessories and
 concomitants; underlying the action of the performers' limbs, there
 are such items as the clutched fingers and the muscles and veins
 following suit.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn354.htm">Next: Section 35</a></center>
 </body>