<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn353.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn355.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 35</h4>
 
 <p>35. But we must give some explanation of these powers. The
 matter requires a more definite handling. How can there be a
 difference of power between one triangular configuration and another?
 
 </p><p>How can there be the exercise of power from man to man; 
 under what
 law, and within what limits?
 
 </p><p>The difficulty is that we are unable to attribute 
 causation either
 to the bodies of the heavenly beings or to their wills: their bodies
 are excluded because the product transcends the causative power of
 body, their will because it would be unseemly to suppose 
 divine beings
 to produce unseemliness.
 
 </p><p>Let us keep in mind what we have laid down:
 
 </p><p>The being we are considering is a living unity and, therefore,
 necessarily self-sympathetic: it is under a law of reason, and
 therefore the unfolding process of its life must be self-accordant:
 that life has no haphazard, but knows only harmony and ordinance:
 all the groupings follow reason: all single beings within it, all
 the members of this living whole in their choral dance are under a
 rule of Number.
 
 </p><p>Holding this in mind we are forced to certain conclusions: in
 the expressive act of the All are comprised equally the 
 configurations
 of its members and these members themselves, minor as well as major
 entering into the configurations. This is the mode of life 
 of the All;
 and its powers work together to this end under the Nature in 
 which the
 producing agency within the Reason-Principles has brought them into
 being. The groupings [within the All] are themselves in the nature
 of Reason-Principles since they are the out-spacing of a 
 living-being,
 its reason-determined rhythms and conditions, and the entities thus
 spaced-out and grouped to pattern are its various members: then
 again there are the powers of the living being- distinct these, too-
 which may be considered as parts of it, always excluding deliberate
 will which is external to it, not contributory to the nature of the
 living All.
 
 </p><p>The will of any organic thing is one; but the distinct powers
 which go to constitute it are far from being one: yet all the
 several wills look to the object aimed at by the one will of the
 whole: for the desire which the one member entertains for 
 another is a
 desire within the All: a part seeks to acquire something outside
 itself, but that external is another part of which it feels the
 need: the anger of a moment of annoyance is directed to something
 alien, growth draws on something outside, all birth and becoming has
 to do with the external; but all this external is inevitably 
 something
 included among fellow members of the system: through these its limbs
 and members, the All is bringing this activity into being while in
 itself it seeks- or better, contemplates- The Good. Right will,
 then, the will which stands above accidental experience, seeks The
 Good and thus acts to the same end with it. When men serve another,
 many of their acts are done under order, but the good servant is the
 one whose purpose is in union with his master's.
 
 </p><p>In all the efficacy of the sun and other stars upon earthly
 matters we can but believe that though the heavenly body is intent
 upon the Supreme yet- to keep to the sun- its warming of terrestrial
 things, and every service following upon that, all springs from
 itself, its own act transmitted in virtue of soul, the vastly
 efficacious soul of Nature. Each of the heavenly bodies, similarly,
 gives forth a power, involuntary, by its mere radiation: all things
 become one entity, grouped by this diffusion of power, and so bring
 about wide changes of condition; thus the very groupings have power
 since their diversity produces diverse conditions; that the grouped
 beings themselves have also their efficiency is clear since they
 produce differently according to the different membership of the
 groups.
 
 </p><p>That configuration has power in itself is within our own
 observation here. Why else do certain groupments, in 
 contradistinction
 to others, terrify at sight though there has been no previous
 experience of evil from them? If some men are alarmed by a
 particular groupment and others by quite a different one, the reason
 can be only that the configurations themselves have efficacy, each
 upon a certain type- an efficacy which cannot fail to reach anything
 naturally disposed to be impressed by it, so that in one groupment
 things attract observation which in another pass without effect.
 
 </p><p>If we are told that beauty is the motive of attraction, does not
 this mean simply that the power of appeal to this or that 
 mind depends
 upon pattern, configuration? How can we allow power to 
 colour and none
 to configuration? It is surely untenable that an entity should have
 existence and yet have no power to effect: existence carries with it
 either acting or answering to action, some beings having 
 action alone,
 others both.
 
 </p><p>At the same time there are powers apart from pattern: and, in
 things of our realm, there are many powers dependent not 
 upon heat and
 cold but upon forces due to differing properties, forces which have
 been shaped to ideal-quality by the action of Reason-Principles and
 communicate in the power of Nature: thus the natural properties of
 stones and the efficacy of plants produce many astonishing results.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn355.htm">Next: Section 36</a></center>
 </body>