<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn311.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn313.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 26</h4>
 
 <p>26. Now if sensations of the active order depend upon the
 Couplement of soul and body, sensation must be of that double
 nature. Hence it is classed as one of the shared acts: the soul, in
 the feeling, may be compared to the workman in such operations as
 boring or weaving, the body to the tool employed: the body is
 passive and menial; the soul is active, reading such impressions as
 are made upon the body or discerned by means of the body, perhaps
 entertaining only a judgement formed as the result of the bodily
 experiences.
 
 </p><p>In such a process it is at once clear that the sensation is a
 shared task; but the memory is not thus made over to the Couplement,
 since the soul has from the first taken over the impression, 
 either to
 retain or to reject.
 
 </p><p>It might be ventured that memory, no less than sensation, is a
 function of the Couplement, on the ground that bodily constitution
 determines our memories good or bad; but the answer would come that,
 whether the body happens or not to be a hindrance, the act of
 remembering would still be an act of the soul. And in the case of
 matters learned [and not merely felt, as corporeal experiences], how
 can we think of the Couplement of soul and body as the remembering
 principle? Here, surely, it must be soul alone?
 
 </p><p>We may be told that the living-being is a Couplement in the
 sense of something entirely distinct formed from the two elements
 [so that it might have memory though neither soul nor body had it].
 But, to begin with, it is absurd to class the living-being as
 neither body nor soul; these two things cannot so change as to make
 a distinct third, nor can they blend so utterly that the soul shall
 become a mere faculty of the animate whole. And, further, supposing
 they could so blend, memory would still be due to the soul just as
 in honey-wine all the sweetness will be due to the honey.
 
 </p><p>It may be suggested the while the soul is perhaps not in itself
 a remembering principle, yet that, having lost its purity 
 and acquired
 some degree of modification by its presence in body, it becomes
 capable of reproducing the imprints of sensible objects and
 experiences, and that, seated, as roughly speaking it is, within the
 body, it may reasonably be thought capable of accepting such
 impressions, and in such a manner as to retain them [thus in some
 sense possessing memory].
 
 </p><p>But, to begin with, these imprints are not magnitudes [are not
 of corporeal nature at all]; there is no resemblance to seal
 impressions, no stamping of a resistant matter, for there is neither
 the down-thrust [as of the seal] nor [the acceptance] as in the wax:
 the process is entirely of the intellect, though exercised 
 upon things
 of sense; and what kind of resistance [or other physical action] can
 be affirmed in matters of the intellectual order, or what need can
 there be of body or bodily quality as a means?
 
 </p><p>Further there is one order of which the memory must obviously
 belong to the soul; it alone can remember its own movements, for
 example its desires and those frustrations of desire in which the
 coveted thing never came to the body: the body can have nothing to
 tell about things which never approached it, and the soul cannot use
 the body as a means to the remembrance of what the body by its
 nature cannot know.
 
 </p><p>If the soul is to have any significance- to be a definite
 principle with a function of its own- we are forced to recognize two
 orders of fact, an order in which the body is a means but all
 culminates in soul, and an order which is of the soul alone. This
 being admitted, aspiration will belong to soul, and so, as a
 consequence, will that memory of the aspiration and of its
 attainment or frustration, without which the soul's nature would
 fall into the category of the unstable [that is to say of the
 undivine, unreal]. Deny this character of the soul and at once we
 refuse it perception, consciousness, any power of comparison, almost
 any understanding. Yet these powers of which, embodied it becomes
 the source cannot be absent from its own nature. On the contrary; it
 possesses certain activities to be expressed in various functions
 whose accomplishment demands bodily organs; at its entry it brings
 with it [as vested in itself alone] the powers necessary for some of
 these functions, while in the case of others it brings the very
 activities themselves.
 
 </p><p>Memory, in point of fact, is impeded by the body: even as things
 are, addition often brings forgetfulness; with thinning and dearing
 away, memory will often revive. The soul is a stability; the
 shifting and fleeting thing which body is can be a cause only of its
 forgetting not of its remembering- Lethe stream may be understood
 in this sense- and memory is a fact of the soul.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn313.htm">Next: Section 27</a></center>
 </body>