<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn388.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn390.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. C. (11) We come to the theory that this pneuma is an earlier
 form, one which on entering the cold and being tempered by 
 it develops
 into soul by growing finer under that new condition. This is 
 absurd at
 the start, since many living beings rise in warmth and have a soul
 that has been tempered by cold: still that is the theory- 
 the soul has
 an earlier form, and develops its true nature by force of external
 accidents. Thus these teachers make the inferior precede the higher,
 and before that inferior they put something still lower, their
 "Habitude." It is obvious that the Intellectual-Principle is last
 and has sprung from the soul, for, if it were first of all, the
 order of the series must be, second the soul, then the
 nature-principle, and always the later inferior, as the system
 actually stands.
 
 </p><p>If they treat God as they do the Intellectual-Principle- 
 as later,
 engendered and deriving intellection from without- soul and
 intellect and God may prove to have no existence: this would 
 follow if
 a potentiality could not come to existence, or does not 
 become actual,
 unless the corresponding actuality exists. And what could lead it
 onward if there were no separate being in previous actuality? Even
 on the absurd supposition that the potentially existent brings
 itself to actuality, it must be looking to some Term, and 
 that must be
 no potentiality but actual.
 
 </p><p>No doubt the eternally self-identical may have 
 potentiality and be
 self-led to self-realization, but even in this case the being
 considered as actualized is of higher order than the being
 considered as merely capable of actualization and moving towards a
 desired Term.
 
 </p><p>Thus the higher is the earlier, and it has a nature other than
 body, and it exists always in actuality: Intellectual-Principle and
 Soul precede Nature: thus, Soul does not stand at the level of
 pneuma or of body.
 
 </p><p>These arguments are sufficient in themselves, though many others
 have been framed, to show that the soul is not to be thought of as a
 body.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn390.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>