<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn452.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn454.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. The Intellectual-Principle, the veritably and essentially
 intellective, can this be conceived as ever falling into error, ever
 failing to think reality?
 
 </p><p>Assuredly no: it would no longer be intelligent and therefore no
 longer Intellectual-Principle: it must know unceasingly- and never
 forget; and its knowledge can be no guesswork, no hesitating assent,
 no acceptance of an alien report. Nor can it call on 
 demonstration or,
 we are told it may at times act by this or, I method, at least there
 must be something patent to it in virtue of its own nature. In
 actual fact reason tells us that all its knowledge is thus 
 inherent to
 it, for there is no means by which to distinguish between the
 spontaneous knowledge and the other. But, in any case, some 
 knowledge,
 it is conceded, is inherent to it. Whence are we to understand the
 certainty of this knowledge to come to it or how do its objects
 carry the conviction of their reality?
 
 </p><p>Consider sense-knowledge: its objects seem most patently
 certified, yet the doubt returns whether the apparent reality may
 not lie in the states of the percipient rather than in the material
 before him; the decision demands intelligence or reasoning. Besides,
 even granting that what the senses grasp is really contained in the
 objects, none the less what is thus known by the senses is an image:
 sense can never grasp the thing itself; this remains for 
 ever outside.
 
 </p><p>Now, if the Intellectual-Principle in its act- that is in
 knowing the intellectual- is to know these its objects as alien, we
 have to explain how it makes contact with them: obviously it might
 never come upon them, and so might never know them; or it might know
 them only upon the meeting: its knowing, at that, would not be an
 enduring condition. If we are told that the 
 Intellectual-Principle and
 the Intellectual Objects are linked in a standing unity, we 
 demand the
 description of this unity.
 
 </p><p>Next, the intellections would be impressions, that is to say not
 native act but violence from without: now how is such impressing
 possible and what shape could the impressions bear?
 
 </p><p>Intellection, again, becomes at this a mere handling of the
 external, exactly like sense-perception. What then distinguishes it
 unless that it deals with objects of less extension? And what
 certitude can it have that its knowledge is true? Or what enables it
 to pronounce that the object is good, beautiful, or just, 
 when each of
 these ideas is to stand apart from itself? The very principles of
 judgement, by which it must be guided, would be [as Ideas] excluded:
 with objects and canons alike outside it, so is truth.
 
 </p><p>Again; either the objects of the Intellectual-Principle are
 senseless and devoid of life and intellect or they are in possession
 of Intellect.
 
 </p><p>Now, if they are in possession of Intellect, that realm 
 is a union
 of both and is Truth. This combined Intellectual realm will be the
 Primal Intellect: we have only then to examine how this reality,
 conjoint of Intellectual-Principle and its object, is to be
 understood, whether as combining self-united identity with 
 yet duality
 and difference, or what other relation holds between them.
 
 </p><p>If on the contrary the objects of Intellectual-Principle are
 without intelligence and life, what are they? They cannot be 
 premises,
 axioms or predicates: as predicates they would not have real
 existence; they would be affirmations linking separate entities, as
 when we affirm that justice is good though justice and good are
 distinct realities.
 
 </p><p>If we are told that they are self-standing entities- the
 distinct beings Justice and Good- then [supposing them to be
 outside] the Intellectual Realm will not be a unity nor be 
 included in
 any unity: all is sundered individuality. Where, then, are they and
 what spatial distinction keeps them apart? How does the
 Intellectual-Principle come to meet with them as it travels round;
 what keeps each true to its character; what gives them enduring
 identity; what conceivable shape or character can they have? They
 are being presented to us as some collection of figures, in gold or
 some other material substance, the work of some unknown sculptor or
 graver: but at once the Intellectual-Principle which 
 contemplates them
 becomes sense-perception; and there still remains the 
 question how one
 of them comes to be Justice and another something else.
 
 </p><p>But the great argument is that if we are to allow that these
 objects of Intellection are in the strict sense outside the
 Intellectual-Principle, which, therefore, must see them as external,
 then inevitably it cannot possess the truth of them.
 
 </p><p>In all it looks upon, it sees falsely; for those objects must be
 the authentic things; yet it looks upon them without containing them
 and in such knowledge holds only their images; that is to say, not
 containing the authentic, adopting phantasms of the true, it 
 holds the
 false; it never possesses reality. If it knows that it possesses the
 false, it must confess itself excluded from the truth; if it fails
 of this knowledge also, imagining itself to possess the truth which
 has eluded it, then the doubled falsity puts it the deeper 
 into error.
 
 </p><p>It is thus, I suppose, that in sense-perception we have belief
 instead of truth; belief is our lief; we satisfy ourselves with
 something very different from the original which is the occasion of
 perception.
 
 </p><p>In fine, there would be on the hypothesis no truth in the
 Intellectual-Principle. But such an Intellectual-Principle would not
 be truth, nor truly an Intellectual-Principle. There would be no
 Intellectual-Principle at all [no Divine Mind]: yet elsewhere truth
 cannot be.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn454.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>