<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn437.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn439.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. The contemplating of God, we might answer.
 
 </p><p>But to admit its knowing God is to be compelled to admit its
 self-knowing. It will know what it holds from God, what God has
 given forth or may; with this knowledge, it knows itself at the
 stroke, for it is itself one of those given things- in fact is all
 of them. Knowing God and His power, then, it knows itself, since it
 comes from Him and carries His power upon it; if, because 
 here the act
 of vision is identical with the object, it is unable to see God
 clearly, then all the more, by the equation of seeing and 
 seen, we are
 driven back upon that self-seeing and self-knowing in which 
 seeing and
 thing seen are undistinguishably one thing.
 
 </p><p>And what else is there to attribute to it?
 
 </p><p>Repose, no doubt; but, to an Intellectual-Principle, 
 Repose is not
 an abdication from intellect; its Repose is an Act, the act of
 abstention from the alien: in all forms of existence repose from the
 alien leaves the characteristic activity intact, especially where
 the Being is not merely potential but fully realized.
 
 </p><p>In the Intellectual-Principle, the Being is an Act and in the
 absence of any other object it must be self-directed; by this
 self-intellection it holds its Act within itself and upon itself;
 all that can emanate from it is produced by this self-centering and
 self-intention; first- self-gathered, it then gives itself or gives
 something in its likeness; fire must first be self-centred and be
 fire, true to fire's natural Act; then it may reproduce itself
 elsewhere.
 
 </p><p>Once more, then; the Intellectual-Principle is a self-intent
 activity, but soul has the double phase, one inner, intent upon the
 Intellectual-Principle, the other outside it and facing to the
 external; by the one it holds the likeness to its source; by the
 other, even in its unlikeness, it still comes to likeness in this
 sphere, too, by virtue of action and production; in its action it
 still contemplates, and its production produces Ideal-forms- divine
 intellections perfectly wrought out- so that all its creations are
 representations of the divine Intellection and of the divine
 Intellect, moulded upon the archetype, of which all are 
 emanations and
 images, the nearer more true, the very latest preserving some faint
 likeness of the source.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn439.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>