<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn464.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn466.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. The Supreme, as the Absolute Good and not merely a good
 being or thing, can contain nothing, since there is nothing 
 that could
 be its good.
 
 </p><p>Anything it could contain must be either good to it or not good;
 but in the supremely and primally Good there can be nothing not
 good; nor can the Absolute Good be a container to the Good:
 containing, then, neither the good nor the not good it contains
 nothing and, containing nothing, it is alone: it is void of all but
 itself.
 
 </p><p>If the rest of being either is good- without being the absolute
 good- or is not good, while on the other hand the Supreme contains
 neither what is good nor what is not good, then, containing nothing,
 it is The Good by that very absence of content.
 
 </p><p>Thus we rob it of its very being as The Absolute Good if we
 ascribe anything to it, existence or intellect or goodness. The only
 way is to make every denial and no assertion, to feign no quality or
 content there but to permit only the "It is" in which we 
 pretend to no
 affirmation of non-existent attribute: there is an ignorant praise
 which, missing the true description, drags in qualities beneath the
 real worth and so abases; philosophy must guard against attaching to
 the Supreme what is later and lower: moving above all that order, it
 is the cause and source of all these, and is none of them.
 
 </p><p>For, once more, the nature of the Good is not such as to make it
 all things or a thing among all: that would range it under the same
 classification with them all and it would differ, thus, only by its
 individual quality, some specialty, some addition. At once it
 becomes not a unity but a duality; there is one common element not
 good and another element that is good; but a combination so 
 made up of
 good and not good cannot be the purely good, the primarily good; the
 primarily good must be that principle in which the better element
 has more effectively participated and so attained its goodness. Any
 good thing has become so by communion; but that in which it has
 communion is not a thing among the things of the all; therefore the
 Good is not a thing of the All.
 
 </p><p>Since there is this Good in any good thing- the specific
 difference by which the combination becomes good- it must enter from
 elsewhere than the world of things: that source must be a Good
 absolute and isolated.
 
 </p><p>Thus is revealed to us the Primarily existent, the Good, 
 above all
 that has being, good unalloyed, containing nothing in itself,
 utterly unmingling, all-transcending, cause of all.
 
 </p><p>Certainly neither Being nor Beauty springs from evil or from the
 neutral; the maker, as the more consummate, must surpass the made.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn466.htm">Next: SIXTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>