<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn409.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn411.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Now to begin with, the unity of soul, mine and another's, is
 not enough to make the two totals of soul and body identical. An
 identical thing in different recipients will have different
 experiences; the identity Man, in me as I move and you at rest,
 moves in me and is stationary in you: there is nothing stranger,
 nothing impossible, in any other form of identity between you and
 me; nor would it entail the transference of my emotion to any
 outside point: when in any one body a hand is in pain, the 
 distress is
 felt not in the other but in the hand as represented in the
 centralizing unity.
 
 </p><p>In order that my feelings should of necessity be yours, the
 unity would have to be corporeal: only if the two recipient bodies
 made one, would the souls feel as one.
 
 </p><p>We must keep in mind, moreover, that many things that happen
 even in one same body escape the notice of the entire being,
 especially when the bulk is large: thus in huge sea-beasts, it is
 said, the animal as a whole will be quite unaffected by some
 membral accident too slight to traverse the organism.
 
 </p><p>Thus unity in the subject of any experience does not imply that
 the resultant sensation will be necessarily felt with any force upon
 the entire being and at every point of it: some transmission of the
 experience may be expected, and is indeed undeniable, but a full
 impression on the sense there need not be.
 
 </p><p>That one identical soul should be virtuous in me and vicious in
 someone else is not strange: it is only saying that an 
 identical thing
 may be active here and inactive there.
 
 </p><p>We are not asserting the unity of soul in the sense of a
 complete negation of multiplicity- only of the Supreme can that be
 affirmed- we are thinking of soul as simultaneously one and many,
 participant in the nature divided in body, but at the same time a
 unity by virtue of belonging to that Order which suffers no division.
 
 </p><p>In myself some experience occurring in a part of the 
 body may take
 no effect upon the entire man but anything occurring in the higher
 reaches would tell upon the partial: in the same way any influx from
 the All upon the individual will have manifest effect since 
 the points
 of sympathetic contact are numerous- but as to any operation from
 ourselves upon the All there can be no certainty.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn411.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>