<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn446.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn448.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. We have, of course, already seen that a secondary must
 follow upon the First, and that this is a power immeasurably 
 fruitful;
 and we indicated that this truth is confirmed by the entire order of
 things since there is nothing, not even in the lowest ranks, void of
 the power of generating. We have now to add that, since things
 engendered tend downwards and not upwards and, especially, move
 towards multiplicity, the first principle of all must be less a
 manifold than any.
 
 </p><p>That which engenders the world of sense cannot itself be a
 sense-world; it must be the Intellect and the Intellectual world;
 similarly, the prior which engenders the Intellectual-Principle and
 the Intellectual world cannot be either, but must be 
 something of less
 multiplicity. The manifold does not rise from the manifold: the
 intellectual multiplicity has its source in what is not manifold; by
 the mere fact of being manifold, the thing is not the first 
 principle:
 we must look to something earlier.
 
 </p><p>All must be grouped under a unity which, as standing outside of
 all multiplicity and outside of any ordinary simplicity, is the
 veritably and essentially simplex.
 
 </p><p>Still, how can a Reason-Principle [the Intellectual],
 characteristically a manifold, a total, derive from what is
 obviously no Reason-Principle?
 
 </p><p>But how, failing such origin in the simplex, could we 
 escape [what
 cannot be accepted] the derivation of a Reason-Principle from a
 Reason-Principle?
 
 </p><p>And how does the secondarily good [the imaged Good] derive from
 The Good, the Absolute? What does it hold from the Absolute Good to
 entitle it to the name?
 
 </p><p>Similarity to the prior is not enough, it does not help towards
 goodness; we demand similarity only to an actually existent Good:
 the goodness must depend upon derivation from a Prior of 
 such a nature
 that the similarity is desirable because that Prior is good, just as
 the similarity would be undesirable if the Prior were not good.
 
 </p><p>Does the similarity with the Prior consist, then, in a voluntary
 resting upon it?
 
 </p><p>It is rather that, finding its condition satisfying, it seeks
 nothing: the similarity depends upon the all-sufficiency of what it
 possesses; its existence is agreeable because all is present to it,
 and present in such a way as not to be even different from it
 [Intellectual-Principle is Being].
 
 </p><p>All life belongs to it, life brilliant and perfect; thus 
 all in it
 is at once life-principle and Intellectual-Principle, nothing in it
 aloof from either life or intellect: it is therefore self-sufficing
 and seeks nothing: and if it seeks nothing this is because it has in
 itself what, lacking, it must seek. It has, therefore, its 
 Good within
 itself, either by being of that order- in what we have 
 called its life
 and intellect- or in some other quality or character going to
 produce these.
 
 </p><p>If this [secondary principle] were The Good [The Absolute],
 nothing could transcend these things, life and intellect: but, given
 the existence of something higher, this Intellectual-Principle must
 possess a life directed towards that Transcendent, dependent upon
 it, deriving its being from it, living towards it as towards its
 source. The First, then, must transcend this principle of life and
 intellect which directs thither both the life in itself, a 
 copy of the
 Reality of the First, and the intellect in itself which is again a
 copy, though of what original there we cannot know.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn448.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>