<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn477.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn479.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. It is a principle with us that one who has attained to the
 vision of the Intellectual Beauty and grasped the beauty of the
 Authentic Intellect will be able also to come to understand 
 the Father
 and Transcendent of that Divine Being. It concerns us, then, 
 to try to
 see and say, for ourselves and as far as such matters may be 
 told, how
 the Beauty of the divine Intellect and of the Intellectual Kosmos
 may be revealed to contemplation.
 
 </p><p>Let us go to the realm of magnitudes: Suppose two blocks of
 stone lying side by side: one is unpatterned, quite untouched by
 art; the other has been minutely wrought by the craftsman's 
 hands into
 some statue of god or man, a Grace or a Muse, or if a human 
 being, not
 a portrait but a creation in which the sculptor's art has 
 concentrated
 all loveliness.
 
 </p><p>Now it must be seen that the stone thus brought under 
 the artist's
 hand to the beauty of form is beautiful not as stone- for so 
 the crude
 block would be as pleasant- but in virtue of the form or idea
 introduced by the art. This form is not in the material; it is in
 the designer before ever it enters the stone; and the artificer
 holds it not by his equipment of eyes and hands but by his
 participation in his art. The beauty, therefore, exists in a far
 higher state in the art; for it does not come over 
 integrally into the
 work; that original beauty is not transferred; what comes over is a
 derivative and a minor: and even that shows itself upon the 
 statue not
 integrally and with entire realization of intention but only 
 in so far
 as it has subdued the resistance of the material.
 
 </p><p>Art, then, creating in the image of its own nature and content,
 and working by the Idea or Reason-Principle of the beautiful 
 object it
 is to produce, must itself be beautiful in a far higher and purer
 degree since it is the seat and source of that beauty, indwelling in
 the art, which must naturally be more complete than any comeliness
 of the external. In the degree in which the beauty is diffused by
 entering into matter, it is so much the weaker than that
 concentrated in unity; everything that reaches outwards is the less
 for it, strength less strong, heat less hot, every power less
 potent, and so beauty less beautiful.
 
 </p><p>Then again every prime cause must be, within itself, 
 more powerful
 than its effect can be: the musical does not derive from an
 unmusical source but from music; and so the art exhibited in the
 material work derives from an art yet higher.
 
 </p><p>Still the arts are not to be slighted on the ground that they
 create by imitation of natural objects; for, to begin with, these
 natural objects are themselves imitations; then, we must recognise
 that they give no bare reproduction of the thing seen but go back to
 the Ideas from which Nature itself derives, and, furthermore, that
 much of their work is all their own; they are holders of beauty and
 add where nature is lacking. Thus Pheidias wrought the Zeus upon no
 model among things of sense but by apprehending what form Zeus must
 take if he chose to become manifest to sight.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn479.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>