<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn435.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn437.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. Does it all come down, then, to one phase of the self knowing
 another phase?
 
 </p><p>That would be a case of knower distinguished from known, 
 and would
 not be self-knowing.
 
 </p><p>What, then, if the total combination were supposed to be of one
 piece, knower quite undistinguished from known, so that, seeing any
 given part of itself as identical with itself, it sees 
 itself by means
 of itself, knower and known thus being entirely without
 differentiation?
 
 </p><p>To begin with, the distinction in one self thus suggested is a
 strange phenomenon. How is the self to make the partition? The thing
 cannot happen of itself. And, again, which phase makes it? The phase
 that decides to be the knower or that which is to be the known? Then
 how can the knowing phase know itself in the known when it has
 chosen to be the knower and put itself apart from the known? In such
 self-knowledge by sundering it can be aware only of the 
 object, not of
 the agent; it will not know its entire content, or itself as an
 integral whole; it knows the phase seen but not the seeing phase and
 thus has knowledge of something else, not self-knowledge.
 
 </p><p>In order to perfect self-knowing it must bring over from itself
 the knowing phase as well: seeing subject and seen objects must be
 present as one thing. Now if in this coalescence of seeing subject
 with seen objects, the objects were merely representations of the
 reality, the subject would not possess the realities: if it is to
 possess them it must do so not by seeing them as the result of any
 self-division but by knowing them, containing them, before any
 self-division occurs.
 
 </p><p>At that, the object known must be identical with the knowing act
 [or agent], the Intellectual-Principle, therefore, identical with
 the Intellectual Realm. And in fact, if this identity does not
 exist, neither does truth; the Principle that should contain 
 realities
 is found to contain a transcript, something different from the
 realities; that constitutes non-Truth; Truth cannot apply to 
 something
 conflicting with itself; what it affirms it must also be.
 
 </p><p>Thus we find that the Intellectual-Principle, the Intellectual
 Realm and Real Being constitute one thing, which is the Primal
 Being; the primal Intellectual-Principle is that which contains the
 realities or, rather, which is identical with them.
 
 </p><p>But taking Primal Intellection and its intellectual 
 object to be a
 unity, how does that give an Intellective Being knowing itself? An
 intellection enveloping its object or identical with it is far from
 exhibiting the Intellectual-Principle as self-knowing.
 
 </p><p>All turns on the identity. The intellectual object is itself an
 activity, not a mere potentiality; it is not lifeless; nor are the
 life and intellection brought into it as into something naturally
 devoid of them, some stone or other dead matter; no, the
 intellectual object is essentially existent, the primal 
 reality. As an
 active force, the first activity, it must be, also itself, 
 the noblest
 intellection, intellection possessing real being since it is
 entirely true; and such an intellection, primal and primally 
 existent,
 can be no other than the primal principle of Intellection: for that
 primal principle is no potentiality and cannot be an agent distinct
 from its act and thus, once more, possessing its essential being as
 a mere potentiality. As an act- and one whose very being is 
 an act- it
 must be undistinguishably identical with its act: but Being and the
 Intellectual object are also identical with that act; therefore the
 Intellectual-Principle, its exercise of intellection and the 
 object of
 intellection all are identical. Given its intellection identical
 with intellectual object and the object identical with the Principle
 itself, it cannot but have self-knowledge: its intellection operates
 by the intellectual act which is itself upon the intellectual object
 which similarly is itself. It possesses self-knowing, thus, on every
 count; the act is itself; and the object seen in that act- self, is
 itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn437.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>