<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn480.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn482.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. To "live at ease" is There; and, to these divine 
 beings, verity
 is mother and nurse, existence and sustenance; all that is not of
 process but of authentic being they see, and themselves in all: for
 all is transparent, nothing dark, nothing resistant; every being is
 lucid to every other, in breadth and depth; light runs through
 light. And each of them contains all within itself, and at the same
 time sees all in every other, so that everywhere there is 
 all, and all
 is all and each all, and infinite the glory. Each of them is great;
 the small is great; the sun, There, is all the stars; and every
 star, again, is all the stars and sun. While some one manner of
 being is dominant in each, all are mirrored in every other.
 
 </p><p>Movement There is pure [as self-caused] for the moving principle
 is not a separate thing to complicate it as it speeds.
 
 </p><p>So, too, Repose is not troubled, for there is no admixture of
 the unstable; and the Beauty is all beauty since it is not merely
 resident [as an attribute or addition] in some beautiful object.
 Each There walks upon no alien soil; its place is its essential
 self; and, as each moves, so to speak, towards what is Above, it is
 attended by the very ground from which it starts: there is no
 distinguishing between the Being and the Place; all is Intellect,
 the Principle and the ground on which it stands, alike. Thus we
 might think that our visible sky [the ground or place of the stars],
 lit, as it is, produces the light which reaches us from it, though
 of course this is really produced by the stars [as it were, by the
 Principles of light alone, not also by the ground as the 
 analogy would
 require].
 
 </p><p>In our realm all is part rising from part and nothing can be
 more than partial; but There each being is an eternal product of a
 whole and is at once a whole and an individual manifesting as part
 but, to the keen vision There, known for the whole it is.
 
 </p><p>The myth of Lynceus seeing into the very deeps of the earth
 tells us of those eyes in the divine. No weariness overtakes this
 vision, which yet brings no such satiety as would call for 
 its ending;
 for there never was a void to be filled so that, with the fulness
 and the attainment of purpose, the sense of sufficiency be induced:
 nor is there any such incongruity within the divine that one Being
 there could be repulsive to another: and of course all There are
 unchangeable. This absence of satisfaction means only a satisfaction
 leading to no distaste for that which produces it; to see is to look
 the more, since for them to continue in the contemplation of an
 infinite self and of infinite objects is but to acquiesce in the
 bidding of their nature.
 
 </p><p>Life, pure, is never a burden; how then could there be weariness
 There where the living is most noble? That very life is wisdom, not
 a wisdom built up by reasonings but complete from the beginning,
 suffering no lack which could set it enquiring, a wisdom primal,
 unborrowed, not something added to the Being, but its very 
 essence. No
 wisdom, thus, is greater; this is the authentic knowing, assessor to
 the divine Intellect as projected into manifestation simultaneously
 with it; thus, in the symbolic saying, Justice is assessor to Zeus.
 
 </p><p>[Perfect wisdom] for all the Principles of this order, dwelling
 There, are as it were visible images protected from themselves, so
 that all becomes an object of contemplation to contemplators
 immeasurably blessed. The greatness and power of the wisdom There we
 may know from this, that is embraces all the real Beings, 
 and has made
 all, and all follow it, and yet that it is itself those beings,
 which sprang into being with it, so that all is one, and the essence
 There is wisdom. If we have failed to understand, it is that we have
 thought of knowledge as a mass of theorems and an accumulation of
 propositions, though that is false even for our sciences of the
 sense-realm. But in case this should be questioned, we may leave our
 own sciences for the present, and deal with the knowing in 
 the Supreme
 at which Plato glances where he speaks of "that knowledge 
 which is not
 a stranger in something strange to it"- though in what sense, he
 leaves us to examine and declare, if we boast ourselves worthy of
 the discussion. This is probably our best starting-point.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn482.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>