<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn455.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn457.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. We have said that all must be brought back to a unity: this
 must be an authentic unity, not belonging to the order in which
 multiplicity is unified by participation in what is truly a One; we
 need a unity independent of participation, not a combination in
 which multiplicity holds an equal place: we have exhibited, also,
 the Intellectual Realm and the Intellectual-Principle as more
 closely a unity than the rest of things, so that there is nothing
 closer to The One. Yet even this is not The purely One.
 
 </p><p>This purely One, essentially a unity untouched by the multiple,
 this we now desire to penetrate if in any way we may.
 
 </p><p>Only by a leap can we reach to this One which is to be 
 pure of all
 else, halting sharp in fear of slipping ever so little aside and
 impinging on the dual: for if we fail of the centre, we are in a
 duality which does not even include The authentic One but belongs on
 both sides, to the later order. The One does not bear to be numbered
 in with anything else, with a one or a two or any such quantity; it
 refuses to take number because it is measure and not the measured;
 it is no peer of other entities to be found among them; for thus, it
 and they alike would be included in some container and this would be
 its prior, the prior it cannot have. Not even essential [ideal or
 abstract] number can belong to The One and certainly not the still
 later number applying to quantities; for essential number first
 appears as providing duration to the divine Intellection, while
 quantitative number is that [still later and lower] which furnishes
 the Quantity found in conjunction with other things or which
 provides for Quantity independent of things, if this is to be
 thought of as number at all. The Principle which in objects having
 quantitative number looks to the unity from which they spring is a
 copy [or lower phase] of the Principle which in the earlier order of
 number [in essential or ideal number] looks to the veritable One;
 and it attains its existence without in the least degree dissipating
 or shattering that prior unity: the dyad has come into being, but
 the precedent monad still stands; and this monad is quite distinct
 within the dyad from either of the two constituent unities, since
 there is nothing to make it one rather than the other: being
 neither, but simply that thing apart, it is present without being
 inherent.
 
 </p><p>But how are the two unities distinct and how is the dyad a
 unity, and is this unity the same as the unity by which each of the
 constituents is one thing?
 
 </p><p>Our answer must be that the unity is that of a participation in
 the primal unity with the participants remaining distinct 
 from that in
 which they partake; the dyad, in so far as it is one thing, has this
 participation, but in a certain degree only; the unity of an army is
 not that of a single building; the dyad, as a thing of extension, is
 not strictly a unit either quantitatively or in manner of being.
 
 </p><p>Are we then to take it that the monads in the pentad and decad
 differ while the unity in the pentad is the same as that in the
 decad?
 
 </p><p>Yes, in the sense in which, big and little, ship is one 
 with ship,
 army with army, city with city; otherwise, no. But certain
 difficulties in this matter will be dealt with later.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn457.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>