<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn447.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn449.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. But what can it be which is loftier than that existence- a
 life compact of wisdom, untouched by struggle and error, or than
 this Intellect which holds the Universe with all there is of life
 and intellect?
 
 </p><p>If we answer "The Making Principle," there comes the question,
 "making by what virtue?" and unless we can indicate something higher
 there than in the made, our reasoning has made no advance: we rest
 where we were.
 
 </p><p>We must go higher- if it were only for the reason that the maker
 of all must have a self-sufficing existence outside of all things-
 since all the rest is patently indigent- and that everything has
 participated in The One and, as drawing on unity, is itself 
 not unity.
 
 </p><p>What then is this in which each particular entity participates,
 the author of being to the universe and to each item of the total?
 
 </p><p>Since it is the author of all that exists, and since the
 multiplicity in each thing is converted into a self-sufficing
 existence by this presence of The One, so that even the particular
 itself becomes self-sufficing, then clearly this principle, author
 at once of Being and of self-sufficingness, is not itself a Being but
 is above Being and above even self-sufficing.
 
 </p><p>May we stop, content, with that? No: the Soul is yet, and even
 more, in pain. Is she ripe, perhaps, to bring forth, now that in her
 pangs she has come so close to what she seeks? No: we must call upon
 yet another spell if anywhere the assuagement is to be found.
 Perhaps in what has already been uttered, there lies the 
 charm if only
 we tell it over often? No: we need a new, a further, incantation.
 All our effort may well skim over every truth and through all the
 verities in which we have part, and yet the reality escape us when
 we hope to affirm, to understand: for the understanding, in order to
 its affirmation must possess itself of item after item; only so does
 it traverse all the field: but how can there be any such 
 peregrination
 of that in which there is no variety?
 
 </p><p>All the need is met by a contact purely intellective. At the
 moment of touch there is no power whatever to make any affirmation;
 there is no leisure; reasoning upon the vision is for afterwards. We
 may know we have had the vision when the Soul has suddenly taken
 light. This light is from the Supreme and is the Supreme; we may
 believe in the Presence when, like that other God on the call of a
 certain man, He comes bringing light: the light is the proof of the
 advent. Thus, the Soul unlit remains without that vision; lit, it
 possesses what it sought. And this is the true end set before the
 Soul, to take that light, to see the Supreme by the Supreme 
 and not by
 the light of any other principle- to see the Supreme which 
 is also the
 means to the vision; for that which illumines the Soul is that which
 it is to see just as it is by the sun's own light that we 
 see the sun.
 
 </p><p>But how is this to be accomplished?
 
 </p><p>Cut away everything.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn449.htm">Next: FOURTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>