<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn417.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn419.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. The Soul once seen to be thus precious, thus divine, you may
 hold the faith that by its possession you are already nearing God:
 in the strength of this power make upwards towards Him: at no great
 distance you must attain: there is not much between.
 
 </p><p>But over this divine, there is still a diviner: grasp the upward
 neighbour of the soul, its prior and source.
 
 </p><p>Soul, for all the worth we have shown to belong to it, is yet a
 secondary, an image of the Intellectual-Principle: reason uttered is
 an image of the reason stored within the soul, and in the same way
 soul is an utterance of the Intellectual-Principle: it is even the
 total of its activity, the entire stream of life sent forth by that
 Principle to the production of further being; it is the forthgoing
 heat of a fire which has also heat essentially inherent. But within
 the Supreme we must see energy not as an overflow but in the double
 aspect of integral inherence with the establishment of a new being.
 Sprung, in other words, from the Intellectual-Principle, Soul is
 intellective, but with an intellection operation by the method of
 reasonings: for its perfecting it must look to that Divine 
 Mind, which
 may be thought of as a father watching over the development of his
 child born imperfect in comparison with himself.
 
 </p><p>Thus its substantial existence comes from the
 Intellectual-Principle; and the Reason within it becomes Act 
 in virtue
 of its contemplation of that prior; for its thought and act are its
 own intimate possession when it looks to the Supreme Intelligence;
 those only are soul-acts which are of this intellective 
 nature and are
 determined by its own character; all that is less noble is foreign
 [traceable to Matter] and is accidental to the soul in the course of
 its peculiar task.
 
 </p><p>In two ways, then, the Intellectual-Principle enhances the
 divine quality of the soul, as father and as immanent presence;
 nothing separates them but the fact that they are not one and the
 same, that there is succession, that over against a recipient there
 stands the ideal-form received; but this recipient, Matter to the
 Supreme Intelligence, is also noble as being at once informed by
 divine intellect and uncompounded.
 
 </p><p>What the Intellectual-Principle must be is carried in the single
 word that Soul, itself so great, is still inferior.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn419.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>