<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn404.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn406.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. Something besides a unity there must be or all would be
 indiscernibly buried, shapeless within that unbroken whole: none of
 the real beings [of the Intellectual Kosmos] would exist if 
 that unity
 remained at halt within itself: the plurality of these beings,
 offspring of the unity, could not exist without their own nexts
 taking the outward path; these are the beings holding the rank of
 souls.
 
 </p><p>In the same way the outgoing process could not end with 
 the souls,
 their issue stifled: every Kind must produce its next; it must
 unfold from some concentrated central principle as from a 
 seed, and so
 advance to its term in the varied forms of sense. The prior in its
 being will remain unalterably in the native seat; but there is the
 lower phase, begotten to it by an ineffable faculty of its being,
 native to soul as it exists in the Supreme.
 
 </p><p>To this power we cannot impute any halt, any limit of jealous
 grudging; it must move for ever outward until the universe stands
 accomplished to the ultimate possibility. All, thus, is 
 produced by an
 inexhaustible power giving its gift to the universe, no part of
 which it can endure to see without some share in its being.
 
 </p><p>There is, besides, no principle that can prevent anything from
 partaking, to the extent of its own individual receptivity in the
 Nature of Good. If therefore Matter has always existed, that 
 existence
 is enough to ensure its participation in the being which, 
 according to
 each receptivity, communicates the supreme good universally: 
 if on the
 contrary, Matter has come into being as a necessary sequence of the
 causes preceding it, that origin would similarly prevent it standing
 apart from the scheme as though it were out of reach of the
 principle to whose grace it owes its existence.
 
 </p><p>In sum: The loveliness that is in the sense-realm is an index of
 the nobleness of the Intellectual sphere, displaying its 
 power and its
 goodness alike: and all things are for ever linked; the one order
 Intellectual in its being, the other of sense; one self-existent,
 the other eternally taking its being by participation in that first,
 and to the full of its power reproducing the Intellectual nature.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn406.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>