<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn484.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn486.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. This then is Beauty primally: it is entire and omnipresent as
 an entirety; and therefore in none of its parts or members lacking
 in beauty; beautiful thus beyond denial. Certainly it cannot be
 anything [be, for example, Beauty] without being wholly that 
 thing; it
 can be nothing which it is to possess partially or in which 
 it utterly
 fails [and therefore it must entirely be Beauty entire].
 
 </p><p>If this principle were not beautiful, what other could be? Its
 prior does not deign to be beautiful; that which is the first to
 manifest itself- Form and object of vision to the intellect- cannot
 but be lovely to see. It is to indicate this that Plato, drawing on
 something well within our observation, represents the Creator as
 approving the work he has achieved: the intention is to make us feel
 the lovable beauty of the autotype and of the Divine Idea; for to
 admire a representation is to admire the original upon which it was
 made.
 
 </p><p>It is not surprising if we fail to  recognise what is passing
 within us: lovers, and those in general that admire beauty here, do
 not stay to reflect that it is to be traced, as of course it must
 be, to the Beauty There. That the admiration of the Demiurge is to
 be referred to the Ideal Exemplar is deliberately made evident by
 the rest of the passage: "He admired; and determined to 
 bring the work
 into still closer likeness with the Exemplar": he makes us feel the
 magnificent beauty of the Exemplar by telling us that the Beauty
 sprung from this world is, itself, a copy from That.
 
 </p><p>And indeed if the divine did not exist, the transcendently
 beautiful, in a beauty beyond all thought, what could be 
 lovelier than
 the things we see? Certainly no reproach can rightly be brought
 against this world save only that it is not That.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn486.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>