<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn420.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn422.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. But how and what does the Intellectual-Principle see and,
 especially, how has it sprung from that which is to become the
 object of its vision?
 
 </p><p>The mind demands the existence of these Beings, but it 
 is still in
 trouble over the problem endlessly debated by the most ancient
 philosophers: from such a unity as we have declared The One 
 to be, how
 does anything at all come into substantial existence, any
 multiplicity, dyad, or number? Why has the Primal not remained
 self-gathered so that there be none of this profusion of the
 manifold which we observe in existence and yet are compelled to
 trace to that absolute unity?
 
 </p><p>In venturing an answer, we first invoke God Himself, not in loud
 word but in that way of prayer which is always within our power,
 leaning in soul towards Him by aspiration, alone towards the alone.
 But if we seek the vision of that great Being within the Inner
 Sanctuary- self-gathered, tranquilly remote above all else- we begin
 by considering the images stationed at the outer precincts, or, more
 exactly to the moment, the first image that appears. How the Divine
 Mind comes into being must be explained:
 
 </p><p>Everything moving has necessarily an object towards which it
 advances; but since the Supreme can have no such object, we may not
 ascribe motion to it: anything that comes into being after it can be
 produced only as a consequence of its unfailing self-intention; and,
 of course, we dare not talk of generation in time, dealing as we are
 with eternal Beings: where we speak of origin in such 
 reference, it is
 in the sense, merely, of cause and subordination: origin from the
 Supreme must not be taken to imply any movement in it: that 
 would make
 the Being resulting from the movement not a second principle but a
 third: the Movement would be the second hypostasis.
 
 </p><p>Given this immobility in the Supreme, it can neither have
 yielded assent nor uttered decree nor stirred in any way towards the
 existence of a secondary.
 
 </p><p>What happened then? What are we to conceive as rising in the
 neighbourhood of that immobility?
 
 </p><p>It must be a circumradiation- produced from the Supreme but from
 the Supreme unaltering- and may be compared to the brilliant light
 encircling the sun and ceaselessly generated from that unchanging
 substance.
 
 </p><p>All existences, as long as they retain their character, produce-
 about themselves, from their essence, in virtue of the power which
 must be in them- some necessary, outward-facing hypostasis
 continuously attached to them and representing in image the
 engendering archetypes: thus fire gives out its heat; snow 
 is cold not
 merely to itself; fragrant substances are a notable instance; for,
 as long as they last, something is diffused from them and perceived
 wherever they are present.
 
 </p><p>Again, all that is fully achieved engenders: therefore the
 eternally achieved engenders eternally an eternal being. At the same
 time, the offspring is always minor: what then are we to think of
 the All-Perfect but that it can produce nothing less than the very
 greatest that is later than itself. The greatest, later than the
 divine unity, must be the Divine Mind, and it must be the second of
 all existence, for it is that which sees The One on which alone it
 leans while the First has no need whatever of it. The 
 offspring of the
 prior to Divine Mind can be no other than that Mind itself 
 and thus is
 the loftiest being in the universe, all else following upon it- the
 soul, for example, being an utterance and act of the
 Intellectual-Principle as that is an utterance and act of 
 The One. But
 in soul the utterance is obscured, for soul is an image and must
 look to its own original: that Principle, on the contrary, looks to
 the First without mediation- thus becoming what it is- and has that
 vision not as from a distance but as the immediate next with nothing
 intervening, close to the One as Soul to it.
 
 </p><p>The offspring must seek and love the begetter; and especially so
 when begetter and begotten are alone in their sphere; when, in
 addition, the begetter is the highest good, the offspring
 [inevitably seeking its Good] is attached by a bond of sheer
 necessity, separated only in being distinct.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn422.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>