<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn494.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn496.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. But, soul reached, why need we look higher; why not make this
 The First?
 
 </p><p>A main reason is that the Intellectual-Principle is at once
 something other and something more powerful than Soul and that the
 more powerful is in the nature of things the prior. For it is
 certainly not true, as people imagine, that the soul, brought to
 perfection, produces Intellect. How could that potentiality come to
 actuality unless there be, first, an effective principle to 
 induce the
 actualization which, left to chance, might never occur?
 
 </p><p>The Firsts must be supposed to exist in actuality, looking to
 nothing else, self-complete. Anything incomplete must be sequent
 upon these, and take its completion from the principles 
 engendering it
 which, like fathers, labour in the improvement of an offspring born
 imperfect: the produced is a Matter to the producing principle and
 is worked over by it into a shapely perfection.
 
 </p><p>And if, further, soul is passible while something 
 impassible there
 must be or by the mere passage of time all wears away, here 
 too we are
 led to something above soul.
 
 </p><p>Again there must be something prior to Soul because Soul 
 is in the
 world and there must be something outside a world in which, all
 being corporeal and material, nothing has enduring reality: failing
 such a prior, neither man nor the Ideas would be eternal or have
 true identity.
 
 </p><p>These and many other considerations establish the necessary
 existence of an Intellectual-Principle prior to Soul.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn496.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>