<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn486.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn488.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. This is why Zeus, although the oldest of the gods and their
 sovereign, advances first [in the Phaidros myth] towards that
 vision, followed by gods and demigods and such souls as are of
 strength to see. That Being appears before them from some 
 unseen place
 and rising loftily over them pours its light upon all things, so
 that all gleams in its radiance; it upholds some beings, and 
 they see;
 the lower are dazzled and turn away, unfit to gaze upon that sun,
 the trouble falling the more heavily on those most remote.
 
 </p><p>Of those looking upon that Being and its content, and 
 able to see,
 all take something but not all the same vision always: intently
 gazing, one sees the fount and principle of Justice, another 
 is filled
 with the sight of Moral Wisdom, the original of that quality 
 as found,
 sometimes at least, among men, copied by them in their 
 degree from the
 divine virtue which, covering all the expanse, so to speak, of the
 Intellectual Realm is seen, last attainment of all, by those who
 have known already many splendid visions.
 
 </p><p>The gods see, each singly and all as one. So, too, the 
 souls; they
 see all There in right of being sprung, themselves, of that universe
 and therefore including all from beginning to end and having their
 existence There if only by that phase which belongs inherently to
 the Divine, though often too they are There entire, those of 
 them that
 have not incurred separation.
 
 </p><p>This vision Zeus takes, and it is for such of us, also, as share
 his love and appropriate our part in the Beauty There, the final
 object of all seeing, the entire beauty upon all things; for 
 all There
 sheds radiance, and floods those that have found their way thither
 so that they too become beautiful; thus it will often happen that
 men climbing heights where the soil has taken a yellow glow will
 themselves appear so, borrowing colour from the place on which they
 move. The colour flowering on that other height we speak of 
 is Beauty;
 or rather all There is light and beauty, through and through, for
 the beauty is no mere bloom upon the surface.
 
 </p><p>To those that do not see entire, the immediate 
 impression is alone
 taken into account; but those drunken with this wine, filled with
 the nectar, all their soul penetrated by this beauty, cannot remain
 mere gazers: no longer is there a spectator outside gazing on an
 outside spectacle; the clear-eyed hold the vision within themselves,
 though, for the most part, they have no idea that it is within but
 look towards it as to something beyond them and see it as an 
 object of
 vision caught by a direction of the will.
 
 </p><p>All that one sees as a spectacle is still external; one 
 must bring
 the vision within and see no longer in that mode of separation but
 as we know ourselves; thus a man filled with a god- possessed by
 Apollo or by one of the Muses- need no longer look outside for his
 vision of the divine being; it is but finding the strength to see
 divinity within.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn488.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>