<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn445.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn447.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. Conferring- but how? As itself possessing them or 
 not? How can
 it convey what it does not possess, and yet if it does possess how
 is it simplex? And if, again, it does not, how is it the 
 source of the
 manifold?
 
 </p><p>A single, unmanifold emanation we may very well allow- how even
 that can come from a pure unity may be a problem, but we may always
 explain it on the analogy of the irradiation from a luminary- but a
 multitudinous production raises question.
 
 </p><p>The explanation is that what comes from the Supreme cannot be
 identical with it and assuredly cannot be better than it- what could
 be better than The One or the utterly transcendent? The emanation,
 then, must be less good, that is to say, less 
 self-sufficing: now what
 must that be which is less self-sufficing than The One? Obviously
 the Not-One, that is to say, multiplicity, but a 
 multiplicity striving
 towards unity; that is to say, a One-that-is-many.
 
 </p><p>All that is not One is conserved by virtue of the One, and from
 the One derives its characteristic nature: if it had not 
 attained such
 unity as is consistent with being made up of multiplicity we 
 could not
 affirm its existence: if we are able to affirm the nature of single
 things, this is in virtue of the unity, the identity even, which
 each of them possesses. But the all-transcendent, utterly void of
 multiplicity, has no mere unity of participation but is unity's
 self, independent of all else, as being that from which, by whatever
 means, all the rest take their degree of unity in their 
 standing, near
 or far, towards it.
 
 </p><p>In virtue of the unity manifested in its variety it 
 exhibits, side
 by side, both an all-embracing identity and the existence of the
 secondary: all the variety lies in the midst of a sameness, and
 identity cannot be separated from diversity since all stands as one;
 each item in that content, by the fact of participating in life, is
 a One-many: for the item could not make itself manifest as a
 One-and-all.
 
 </p><p>Only the Transcendent can be that; it is the great beginning,
 and the beginning must be a really existent One, wholly and 
 truly One,
 while its sequent, poured down in some way from the One, is all, a
 total which has participation in unity and whose every member is
 similarly all and one.
 
 </p><p>What then is the All?
 
 </p><p>The total of which the Transcendent is the Source.
 
 </p><p>But in what way is it that source? In the sense, perhaps, of
 sustaining things as bestower of the unity of each single item?
 
 </p><p>That too; but also as having established them in being.
 
 </p><p>But how? As having, perhaps, contained them previously?
 
 </p><p>We have indicated that, thus, the First would be a manifold.
 
 </p><p>May we think, perhaps, that the First contained the 
 universe as an
 indistinct total whose items are elaborated to distinct existence
 within the Second by the Reason-Principle there? That Second is
 certainly an Activity; the Transcendent would contain only the
 potentiality of the universe to come.
 
 </p><p>But the nature of this contained potentiality would have to be
 explained: it cannot be that of Matter, a receptivity, for thus the
 Source becomes passive- the very negation of production.
 
 </p><p>How then does it produce what it does not contain? Certainly not
 at haphazard and certainly not by selection. How then?
 
 </p><p>We have observed that anything that may spring from the One must
 be different from it. Differing, it is not One, since then 
 it would be
 the Source. If unity has given place to duality, from that moment
 there is multiplicity; for here is variety side by side with 
 identity,
 and this imports quality and all the rest.
 
 </p><p>We may take it as proved that the emanation of the Transcendent
 must be a Not-One something other than pure unity, but that it is a
 multiplicity, and especially that it is such a multiplicity as is
 exhibited in the sequent universe, this is a statement worthy of
 deliberation: some further enquiry must be made, also, as to the
 necessity of any sequel to the First.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn447.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>