<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn473.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn475.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. We have to examine the question whether there exists an ideal
 archetype of individuals, in other words whether I and every other
 human being go back to the Intellectual, every [living] thing having
 origin and principle There.
 
 </p><p>If Socrates, Socrates' soul, is external then the Authentic
 Socrates- to adapt the term- must be There; that is to say, the
 individual soul has an existence in the Supreme as well as in this
 world. If there is no such permanent endurance and what was Socrates
 may with change of time become another soul and be Pythagoras or
 someone else- then the individual Socrates has not that existence in
 the Divine.
 
 </p><p>But if the Soul of the individual contains the Reason-Principles
 of all that it traverses, once more all men have their [archetypic]
 existence There: and it is our doctrine that every soul contains all
 the Reason-Principles that exist in the Kosmos: since then the
 Kosmos contains the Reason-Principles not merely of man, but also of
 all individual living things, so must the Soul. Its content of
 Reason-Principles, then, must be limitless, unless there be a
 periodical renovation bounding the boundlessness by the return of a
 former series.
 
 </p><p>But if [in virtue of this periodic return] each archetype may be
 reproduced by numerous existents, what need is there that there be
 distinct Reason-Principles and archetypes for each existent 
 in any one
 period? Might not one [archetypal] man suffice for all, and
 similarly a limited number of souls produce a limitless 
 number of men?
 
 </p><p>No: one Reason-Principle cannot account for distinct and 
 differing
 individuals: one human being does not suffice as the 
 exemplar for many
 distinct each from the other not merely in material constituents but
 by innumerable variations of ideal type: this is no question of
 various pictures or images reproducing an original Socrates; the
 beings produced differ so greatly as to demand distinct
 Reason-Principles. The entire soul-period conveys with it all the
 requisite Reason-Principles, and so too the same existents 
 appear once
 more under their action.
 
 </p><p>There is no need to baulk at this limitlessness in the
 Intellectual; it is an infinitude having nothing to do with number
 or part; what we may think of it as its outgoing is no other than
 its characteristic Act.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn475.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>