<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn440.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn442.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. This matter need not be elaborated at present: it suffices
 to say that if the created were all, these ultimates [the 
 higher] need
 not exist: but the Supreme does include primals, the primals because
 the producers. In other words, there must be, with the made, the
 making source; and, unless these are to be identical, there will be
 need of some link between them. Similarly, this link which is the
 Intellectual-Principle demands yet a Transcendent. If we are 
 asked why
 this Transcendent also should not have self-vision, our 
 answer is that
 it has no need of vision; but this we will discuss later: for the
 moment we go back, since the question at issue is gravely important.
 
 </p><p>We repeat that the Intellectual-Principle must have, 
 actually has,
 self-vision, firstly because it has multiplicity, next because it
 exists for the external and therefore must be a seeing power, one
 seeing that external; in fact its very essence is vision. Given some
 external, there must be vision; and if there be nothing external the
 Intellectual-Principle [Divine Mind] exists in vain. Unless there is
 something beyond bare unity, there can be no vision: vision must
 converge with a visible object. And this which the seer is to see
 can be only a multiple, no undistinguishable unity; nor could a
 universal unity find anything upon which to exercise any 
 act; all, one
 and desolate, would be utter stagnation; in so far as there 
 is action,
 there is diversity. If there be no distinctions, what is there to
 do, what direction in which to move? An agent must either 
 act upon the
 extern or be a multiple and so able to act upon itself: making no
 advance towards anything other than itself, it is motionless 
 and where
 it could know only blank fixity it can know nothing.
 
 </p><p>The intellective power, therefore, when occupied with the
 intellectual act, must be in a state of duality, whether one of the
 two elements stand actually outside or both lie within: the
 intellectual act will always comport diversity as well as the
 necessary identity, and in the same way its characteristic objects
 [the Ideas] must stand to the Intellectual-Principle as at once
 distinct and identical. This applies equally to the single object;
 there can be no intellection except of something containing
 separable detail and, since the object is a Reason-principle [a
 discriminated Idea] it has the necessary element of multiplicity.
 The Intellectual-Principle, thus, is informed of itself by 
 the fact of
 being a multiple organ of vision, an eye receptive of many 
 illuminated
 objects. If it had to direct itself to a memberless unity, 
 it would be
 dereasoned: what could it say or know of such an object? The
 self-affirmation of [even] a memberless unity implies the
 repudiation of all that does not enter into the character: in other
 words, it must be multiple as a preliminary to being itself.
 
 </p><p>Then, again, in the assertion "I am this particular 
 thing," either
 the "particular thing" is distinct from the assertor- and there is a
 false statement- or it is included within it, and, at once,
 multiplicity is asserted: otherwise the assertion is "I am 
 what I am,"
 or "I am I."
 
 </p><p>If it be no more than a simple duality able to say "I and that
 other phase," there is already multiplicity, for there is
 distinction and ground of distinction, there is number with all its
 train of separate things.
 
 </p><p>In sum, then, a knowing principle must handle distinct items:
 its object must, at the moment of cognition, contain diversity;
 otherwise the thing remains unknown; there is mere 
 conjunction, such a
 contact, without affirmation or comprehension, as would precede
 knowledge, the intellect not yet in being, the impinging agent not
 percipient.
 
 </p><p>Similarly the knowing principle itself cannot remain simplex,
 especially in the act of self-knowing: all silent though its
 self-perception be, it is dual to itself. Of course it has no need
 of minute self-handling since it has nothing to learn by its
 intellective act; before it is [effectively] Intellect, it holds
 knowledge of its own content. Knowledge implies desire, for it is,
 so to speak, discovery crowning a search; the utterly 
 undifferentiated
 remains self-centred and makes no enquiry about that self: anything
 capable of analysing its content, must be a manifold.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn442.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>