<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn411.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn413.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. These reflections should show that there is nothing strange
 in that reduction of all souls to one. But it is still necessary to
 enquire into the mode and conditions of the unity.
 
 </p><p>Is it the unity of origin in a unity? And if so, is the one
 divided or does it remain entire and yet produce variety? and how
 can an essential being, while remaining its one self, bring forth
 others?
 
 </p><p>Invoking God to become our helper, let us assert, that the very
 existence of many souls makes certain that there is first one from
 which the many rise.
 
 </p><p>Let us suppose, even, the first soul to be corporeal.
 
 </p><p>Then [by the nature of body] the many souls could result 
 only from
 the splitting up of that entity, each an entirely different 
 substance:
 if this body-soul be uniform in kind, each of the resultant 
 souls must
 be of the one kind; they will all carry the one Form undividedly and
 will differ only in their volumes. Now, if their being souls
 depended upon their volumes they would be distinct; but if it is
 ideal-form that makes them souls, then all are, in virtue of this
 Idea, one.
 
 </p><p>But this is simply saying that there is one identical soul
 dispersed among many bodies, and that, preceding this, there is yet
 another not thus dispersed, the source of the soul in 
 dispersion which
 may be thought of as a widely repeated image of the soul in unity-
 much as a multitude of seals bear the impression of one ring. By
 that first mode the soul is a unit broken up into a variety 
 of points:
 in the second mode it is incorporeal. Similarly if the soul were a
 condition or modification of body, we could not wonder that this
 quality- this one thing from one source- should be present in many
 objects. The same reasoning would apply if soul were an effect [or
 manifestation] of the Conjoint.
 
 </p><p>We, of course, hold it to be bodiless, an essential existence.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn413.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>