<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn459.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn461.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. So that we are left wondering whence it came, from within or
 without; and when it has gone, we say, "It was here. Yet no; it was
 beyond!" But we ought not to question whence; there is no whence, no
 coming or going in place; now it is seen and now not seen. 
 We must not
 run after it, but fit ourselves for the vision and then wait
 tranquilly for its appearance, as the eye waits on the rising of the
 sun, which in its own time appears above the horizon- out of the
 ocean, as the poets say- and gives itself to our sight.
 
 </p><p>This Principle, of which the sun is an image, where has it its
 dawning, what horizon does it surmount to appear?
 
 </p><p>It stands immediately above the contemplating Intellect which
 has held itself at rest towards the vision, looking to nothing else
 than the good and beautiful, setting its entire being to that in a
 perfect surrender, and now tranquilly filled with power and taking a
 new beauty to itself, gleaming in the light of that presence.
 
 </p><p>This advent, still, is not by expectation: it is a coming
 without approach; the vision is not of something that must enter but
 of something present before all else, before the Intellect 
 itself made
 any movement. Yet it is the Intellect that must move, to come and to
 go- going because it has not known where it should stay and 
 where that
 presence stays, the nowhere contained.
 
 </p><p>And if the Intellect, too, could hold itself in that nowhere-
 not that it is ever in place; it too is uncontained, utterly 
 unplaced-
 it would remain for ever in the vision of its prior, or, indeed, not
 in vision but in identity, all duality annulled. But it is Intellect
 [having a sphere of its own] and, when it is to see, it must see by
 that in it which is not Intellect [by its divinest power].
 
 </p><p>No doubt it is wonderful that The First should thus be present
 without any coming, and that, while it is nowhere, nowhere is it
 not; but wonderful though this be in itself, the contrary would be
 more wonderful to those who know. Of course neither this contrary
 nor the wonder at it can be entertained. But we must explain:
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn461.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>