<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn399.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn401.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Many times it has happened: Lifted out of the body 
 into myself;
 becoming external to all other things and self-encentered; 
 beholding a
 marvellous beauty; then, more than ever, assured of 
 community with the
 loftiest order; enacting the noblest life, acquiring 
 identity with the
 divine; stationing within It by having attained that activity;
 poised above whatsoever within the Intellectual is less than the
 Supreme: yet, there comes the moment of descent from intellection to
 reasoning, and after that sojourn in the divine, I ask myself how it
 happens that I can now be descending, and how did the soul ever
 enter into my body, the soul which, even within the body, is the
 high thing it has shown itself to be.
 
 </p><p>Heraclitus, who urges the examination of this matter, tells of
 compulsory alternation from contrary to contrary, speaks of 
 ascent and
 descent, says that "change reposes," and that "it is 
 weariness to keep
 toiling at the same things and always beginning again"; but he seems
 to teach by metaphor, not concerning himself about making 
 his doctrine
 clear to us, probably with the idea that it is for us to seek within
 ourselves as he sought for himself and found.
 
 </p><p>Empedocles- where he says that it is law for faulty souls to
 descend to this sphere, and that he himself was here because 
 he turned
 a deserter, wandered from God, in slavery to a raving 
 discord- reveals
 neither more nor less than Pythagoras and his school seem to me to
 convey on this as on many other matters; but in his case,
 versification has some part in the obscurity.
 
 </p><p>We have to fall back on the illustrious Plato, who uttered many
 noble sayings about the soul, and has in many places dwelt upon its
 entry into body so that we may well hope to get some light from him.
 
 </p><p>What do we learn from this philosopher?
 
 </p><p>We will not find him so consistent throughout that it is easy to
 discover his mind.
 
 </p><p>Everywhere, no doubt, he expresses contempt for all that is of
 sense, blames the commerce of the soul with body as an 
 enchainment, an
 entombment, and upholds as a great truth the saying of the Mysteries
 that the soul is here a prisoner. In the Cavern of Plato and in the
 Cave of Empedocles, I discern this universe, where the 
 breaking of the
 fetters and the ascent from the depths are figures of the wayfaring
 toward the Intellectual Realm.
 
 </p><p>In the Phaedrus he makes a failing of the wings the cause of the
 entry to this realm: and there are Periods which send back the soul
 after it has risen; there are judgements and lots and fates and
 necessities driving other souls down to this order.
 
 </p><p>In all these explanations, he finds guilt in the arrival of the
 soul at body, But treating, in the Timaeus, of our universe he
 exalts the kosmos and entitles it a blessed god, and holds that the
 soul was given by the goodness of the creator to the end that the
 total of things might be possessed of intellect, for thus 
 intellectual
 it was planned to be, and thus it cannot be except through 
 soul. There
 is a reason, then, why the soul of this All should be sent into it
 from God: in the same way the soul of each single one of us is sent,
 that the universe may be complete; it was necessary that all 
 beings of
 the Intellectual should be tallied by just so many forms of living
 creatures here in the realm of sense.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn401.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>