<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn475.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn477.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. In the case of twin birth among human beings how can we make
 out the Reason-Principles to be different; and still more 
 when we turn
 to the animals and especially those with litters?
 
 </p><p>Where the young are precisely alike, there is one
 Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>But this would mean that after all there are not as many Reason
 Principles as separate beings?
 
 </p><p>As many as there are of differing beings, differing by something
 more than a mere failure in complete reproduction of their Idea.
 
 </p><p>And why may not this [sharing of archetype] occur also in beings
 untouched by differentiation, if indeed there be any such?
 
 </p><p>A craftsman even in constructing an object identical with a
 model must envisage that identity in a mental 
 differentiation enabling
 him to make a second thing by bringing in some difference 
 side by side
 with the identity: similarly in nature, where the thing comes about
 not by reasoning but in sole virtue of Reason-Principles, that
 differentiation must be included in the archetypal idea, though it
 is not in our power to perceive the difference.
 
 </p><p>The consideration of Quantity brings the same result:
 
 </p><p>If production is undetermined in regard to Quantity, each thing
 has its distinct Reason-Principle: if there is a measured system the
 Quantity has been determined by the unrolling and unfolding of the
 Reason-Principles of all the existences.
 
 </p><p>Thus when the universe has reached its term, there will 
 be a fresh
 beginning, since the entire Quantity which the Kosmos is to exhibit,
 every item that is to emerge in its course, all is laid up from the
 first in the Being that contains the Reason-Principles.
 
 </p><p>Are we, then, looking to the brute realm, to hold that there are
 as many Reason-Principles as distinct creatures born in a litter?
 
 </p><p>Why not? There is nothing alarming about such limitlessness in
 generative forces and in Reason-Principles, when Soul is there to
 sustain all.
 
 </p><p>As in Soul [principle of Life] so in Divine Mind [principle of
 Idea] there is this infinitude of recurring generative powers; the
 Beings there are unfailing.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn477.htm">Next: EIGHTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>