<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn438.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn440.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. Now comes the question what sort of thing does the
 Intellectual-Principle see in seeing the Intellectual Realm and what
 in seeing itself?
 
 </p><p>We are not to look for an Intellectual realm reminding us of the
 colour or shape to be seen on material objects: the intellectual
 antedates all such things; and even in our sphere the production is
 very different from the Reason-Principle in the seeds from 
 which it is
 produced. The seed principles are invisible and the beings of the
 Intellectual still more characteristically so; the Intellectuals are
 of one same nature with the Intellectual Realm which contains them,
 just as the Reason-Principle in the seed is identical with the soul,
 or life-principle, containing it.
 
 </p><p>But the Soul (considered as apart from the 
 Intellectual-Principle)
 has no vision of what it thus contains, for it is not the producer
 but, like the Reason-Principles also, an image of its source: that
 source is the brilliant, the authentic, the primarily existent, the
 thing self-sprung and self-intent; but its image, soul, is a thing
 which can have no permanence except by attachment, by living in that
 other; the very nature of an image is that, as a secondary, it shall
 have its being in something else, if at all it exist apart from its
 original. Hence this image (soul) has not vision, for it has not the
 necessary light, and, if it should see, then, as finding its
 completion elsewhere, it sees another, not itself.
 
 </p><p>In the pure Intellectual there is nothing of this: the vision
 and the envisioned are a unity; the seen is as the seeing and seeing
 as seen.
 
 </p><p>What, then, is there that can pronounce upon the nature of this
 all-unity?
 
 </p><p>That which sees: and to see is the function of the
 Intellectual-Principle. Even in our own sphere [we have a parallel
 to this self-vision of a unity], our vision is light or 
 rather becomes
 one with light, and it sees light for it sees colours. In the
 intellectual, the vision sees not through some medium but by and
 through itself alone, for its object is not external: by one light
 it sees another not through any intermediate agency; a light sees a
 light, that is to say a thing sees itself. This light shining within
 the soul enlightens it; that is, it makes the soul intellective,
 working it into likeness with itself, the light above.
 
 </p><p>Think of the traces of this light upon the soul, then say to
 yourself that such, and more beautiful and broader and more radiant,
 is the light itself; thus you will approach to the nature of the
 Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual Realm, for it is this
 light, itself lit from above, which gives the soul its brighter life.
 
 </p><p>It is not the source of the generative life of the soul which,
 on the contrary, it draws inward, preserving it from such diffusion,
 holding it to the love of the splendour of its Prior.
 
 </p><p>Nor does it give the life of perception and sensation, for that
 looks to the external and to what acts most vigorously upon 
 the senses
 whereas one accepting that light of truth may be said no 
 longer to see
 the visible, but the very contrary.
 
 </p><p>This means in sum that the life the soul takes thence is an
 intellective life, a trace of the life in the [divine] Intellect, in
 which alone the authentic exists.
 
 </p><p>The life in the Divine Intellect is also an Act: it is the
 primal light outlamping to itself primarily, its own torch;
 light-giver and lit at once; the authentic intellectual object,
 knowing at once and known, seen to itself and needing no other than
 itself to see by, self-sufficing to the vision, since what it sees
 it is; known to us by that very same light, our knowledge of it
 attained through itself, for from nowhere else could we find 
 the means
 of telling of it. By its nature, its self-vision is the clearer but,
 using it as our medium, we too may come to see by it.
 
 </p><p>In the strength of such considerations we lead up our own soul
 to the Divine, so that it poses itself as an image of that Being,
 its life becoming an imprint and a likeness of the Highest, its
 every act of thought making it over into the Divine and the
 Intellectual.
 
 </p><p>If the soul is questioned as to the nature of that
 Intellectual-Principle- the perfect and all-embracing, the primal
 self-knower- it has but to enter into that Principle, or to sink all
 its activity into that, and at once it shows itself to be in 
 effective
 possession of those priors whose memory it never lost: thus, as an
 image of the Intellectual-Principle, it can make itself the medium
 by which to attain some vision of it; it draws upon that 
 within itself
 which is most closely resemblant, as far as resemblance is possible
 between divine Intellect and any phase of soul.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn440.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>