<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn478.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn480.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. But let us leave the arts and consider those works produced
 by Nature and admitted to be naturally beautiful which the creations
 of art are charged with imitating, all reasoning life and
 unreasoning things alike, but especially the consummate among them,
 where the moulder and maker has subdued the material and given the
 form he desired. Now what is the beauty here? It has nothing to do
 with the blood or the menstrual process: either there is 
 also a colour
 and form apart from all this, or there is nothing unless sheer
 ugliness or a bare recipient, as it were the mere Matter of beauty.
 
 </p><p>Whence shone forth the beauty of Helen, battle-sought; or of all
 those women like in loveliness to Aphrodite; or of Aphrodite
 herself; or of any human being that has been perfect in beauty; or
 of any of these gods manifest to sight, or unseen but carrying what
 would be beauty if we saw?
 
 </p><p>In all these is it not the Idea, something of that realm but
 communicated to the produced from within the producer just 
 as in works
 of art, we held, it is communicated from the arts to their
 creations? Now we can surely not believe that, while the made thing
 and the Idea thus impressed upon Matter are beautiful, yet the Idea
 not so alloyed but resting still with the creator- the Idea primal,
 immaterial, firmly a unity- is not Beauty.
 
 </p><p>If material extension were in itself the ground of beauty, then
 the creating principle, being without extension, could not be
 beautiful: but beauty cannot be made to depend upon magnitude since,
 whether in a large object or a small, the one Idea equally moves and
 forms the mind by its inherent power. A further indication is that
 as long as the object remains outside us we know nothing of it; it
 affects us by entry; but only as an Idea can it enter 
 through the eyes
 which are not of scope to take an extended mass: we are, no doubt,
 simultaneously possessed of the magnitude which, however, we take in
 not as mass but by an elaboration upon the presented form.
 
 </p><p>Then again the principle producing the beauty must be, itself,
 ugly, neutral or beautiful: ugly, it could not produce the opposite;
 neutral, why should its product be the one rather than the other?
 The Nature, then, which creates things so lovely must be itself of a
 far earlier beauty; we, undisciplined in discernment of the inward,
 knowing nothing of it, run after the outer, never understanding that
 it is the inner which stirs us; we are in the case of one 
 who sees his
 own reflection but not realizing whence it comes goes in pursuit of
 it.
 
 </p><p>But that the thing we are pursuing is something 
 different and that
 the beauty is not in the concrete object is manifest from the beauty
 there is in matters of study, in conduct and custom; briefly in soul
 or mind. And it is precisely here that the greater beauty lies,
 perceived whenever you look to the wisdom in a man and delight in
 it, not wasting attention on the face, which may be hideous, but
 passing all appearance by and catching only at the inner comeliness,
 the truly personal; if you are still unmoved and cannot acknowledge
 beauty under such conditions, then looking to your own inner 
 being you
 will find no beauty to delight you and it will be futile in 
 that state
 to seek the greater vision, for you will be questing it through the
 ugly and impure.
 
 </p><p>This is why such matters are not spoken of to everyone; you, if
 you are conscious of beauty within, remember.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn480.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>