<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn410.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn412.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Yet, looking at another set of facts, reflection tells us
 that we are in sympathetic relation to each other, suffering,
 overcome, at the sight of pain, naturally drawn to forming
 attachments; and all this can be due only to some unity among us.
 
 </p><p>Again, if spells and other forms of magic are efficient even at
 a distance to attract us into sympathetic relations, the 
 agency can be
 no other than the one soul.
 
 </p><p>A quiet word induces changes in a remote object, and makes
 itself heard at vast distances- proof of the oneness of all things
 within the one soul.
 
 </p><p>But how reconcile this unity with the existence of a reasoning
 soul, an unreasoning, even a vegetal soul?
 
 </p><p>[It is a question of powers]: the indivisible phase is classed
 as reasoning because it is not in division among bodies, but there
 is the later phase, divided among bodies, but still one thing and
 distinct only so as to secure sense-perception throughout; this is
 to be classed as yet another power; and there is the forming and
 making phase which again is a power. But a variety of powers does
 not conflict with unity; seed contains many powers and yet it is one
 thing, and from that unity rises, again, a variety which is also a
 unity.
 
 </p><p>But why are not all the powers of this unity present everywhere?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that even in the case of the individual soul
 described, similarly, as permeating its body, sensation is 
 not equally
 present in all the parts, reason does not operate at every point,
 the principle of growth is at work where there is no sensation- and
 yet all these powers join in the one soul when the body is 
 laid aside.
 
 </p><p>The nourishing faculty as dependent from the All belongs also to
 the All-Soul: why then does it not come equally from ours?
 
 </p><p>Because what is nourished by the action of this power is a
 member of the All, which itself has sensation passively; but the
 perception, which is an intellectual judgement, is individual and
 has no need to create what already exists, though it would have done
 so had the power not been previously included, of necessity, in
 the nature of the All.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn412.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>