<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn488.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn490.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. We have told how this vision is to be procured, 
 whether by the
 mode of separation or in identity: now, seen in either way, what
 does it give to report?
 
 </p><p>The vision has been of God in travail of a beautiful offspring,
 God engendering a universe within himself in a painless labour and-
 rejoiced in what he has brought into being, proud of his children-
 keeping all closely by Him, for pleasure He has in his 
 radiance and in
 theirs.
 
 </p><p>Of this offspring- all beautiful, but most beautiful those that
 have remained within- only one has become manifest without; from him
 [Zeus, sovereign over the visible universe] the youngest born, we
 may gather, as from some image, the greatness of the Father 
 and of the
 Brothers that remain within the Father's house.
 
 </p><p>Still the manifested God cannot think that he has come forth in
 vain from the father; for through him another universe has arisen,
 beautiful as the image of beauty, and it could not be' lawful that
 Beauty and Being should fail of a beautiful image.
 
 </p><p>This second Kosmos at every point copies the archetype: it has
 life and being in copy, and has beauty as springing from that
 diviner world. In its character of image it holds, too, that divine
 perpetuity without which it would only at times be truly
 representative and sometimes fail like a construction of art; for
 every image whose existence lies in the nature of things must stand
 during the entire existence of the archetype.
 
 </p><p>Hence it is false to put an end to the visible sphere as long as
 the Intellectual endures, or to found it upon a decision taken by
 its maker at some given moment.
 
 </p><p>That teaching shirks the penetration of such a making as is here
 involved: it fails to see that as long as the Supreme is 
 radiant there
 can be no failing of its sequel but, that existing, all exists. And-
 since the necessity of conveying our meaning compels such terms- the
 Supreme has existed for ever and for ever will exist.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn490.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>