<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn432.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn434.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. We begin with the soul, asking whether it is to be allowed
 self-knowledge and what the knowing principle in it would be and how
 operating.
 
 </p><p>The sense-principle in it we may at once decide, takes
 cognisance only of the external; even in any awareness of events
 within the body it occupies, this is still the perception of 
 something
 external to a principle dealing with those bodily conditions not as
 within but as beneath itself.
 
 </p><p>The reasoning-principle in the Soul acts upon the
 representations standing before it as the result of
 sense-perception; these it judges, combining, distinguishing: or it
 may also observe the impressions, so to speak, rising from the
 Intellectual-Principle, and has the same power of handling these;
 and reasoning will develop to wisdom where it recognizes the new and
 late-coming impressions [those of sense] and adapts them, so 
 to speak,
 to those it holds from long before- the act which may be described
 as the soul's Reminiscence.
 
 </p><p>So far as this, the efficacy of the Intellectual-Principle in
 the Soul certainly reaches; but is there also introversion and
 self-cognition or is that power to be reserved strictly for 
 the Divine
 Mind?
 
 </p><p>If we accord self-knowing to this phase of the soul we make it
 an Intellectual-Principle and will have to show what distinguishes
 it from its prior; if we refuse it self-knowing, all our thought
 brings us step by step to some principle which has this power, and
 we must discover what such self-knowing consists in. If, again, we
 do allow self-knowledge in the lower we must examine the question of
 degree; for if there is no difference of degree, then the reasoning
 principle in soul is the Intellectual-Principle unalloyed.
 
 </p><p>We ask, then, whether the understanding principle in the soul
 has equally the power of turning inwards upon itself or 
 whether it has
 no more than that of comprehending the impressions, superior and
 inferior, which it receives.
 
 </p><p>The first stage is to discover what this comprehension is.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn434.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>