<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn412.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn414.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. How then can a multitude of essential beings be really one?
 
 </p><p>Obviously either the one essence will be entire in all, or the
 many will rise from a one which remains unaltered and yet 
 includes the
 one- many in virtue of giving itself, without 
 self-abandonment, to its
 own multiplication.
 
 </p><p>It is competent thus to give and remain, because while it
 penetrates all things it can never itself be sundered: this is an
 identity in variety.
 
 </p><p>There is no reason for dismissing this explanation: we may think
 of a science with its constituents standing as one total, the source
 of all those various elements: again, there is the seed, a whole,
 producing those new parts in which it comes to its division; each of
 the new growths is a whole while the whole remains undiminished:
 only the material element is under the mode of part, and all the
 multiplicity remains an entire identity still.
 
 </p><p>It may be objected that in the case of science the constituents
 are not each the whole.
 
 </p><p>But even in the science, while the constituent selected for
 handling to meet a particular need is present actually and takes the
 lead, still all the other constituents accompany it in a potential
 presence, so that the whole is in every part: only in this sense [of
 particular attention] is the whole science distinguished from the
 part: all, we may say, is here simultaneously effected: each part is
 at your disposal as you choose to take it; the part invites the
 immediate interest, but its value consists in its approach to the
 whole.
 
 </p><p>The detail cannot be considered as something separate from the
 entire body of speculation: so treated it would have no technical or
 scientific value; it would be childish divagation. The one detail,
 when it is a matter of science, potentially includes all. 
 Grasping one
 such constituent of his science, the expert deduces the rest by
 force of sequence.
 
 </p><p>[As a further illustration of unity in plurality] the
 geometrician, in his analysis, shows that the single proposition
 includes all the items that go to constitute it and all the
 propositions which can be developed from it.
 
 </p><p>It is our feebleness that leads to doubt in these matters; the
 body obscures the truth, but There all stands out clear and separate.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn414.htm">Next: THE FIFTH ENNEAD</a></center>
 </body>