<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn422.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn424.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. This is the explanation of Plato's Triplicity, in the passage
 where he names as the Primals the Beings gathered about the King of
 All, and establishes a Secondary containing the Secondaries, and a
 Third containing the Tertiaries.
 
 </p><p>He teaches, also, that there is an author of the Cause, 
 that is of
 the Intellectual-Principle, which to him is the Creator who made the
 Soul, as he tells us, in the famous mixing bowl. This author of the
 causing principle, of the divine mind, is to him the Good, that
 which transcends the Intellectual-Principle and transcends Being:
 often too he uses the term "The Idea" to indicate Being and 
 the Divine
 Mind. Thus Plato knows the order of generation- from the Good, the
 Intellectual-Principle; from the Intellectual-Principle, the Soul.
 These teachings are, therefore, no novelties, no inventions of
 today, but long since stated, if not stressed; our doctrine here is
 the explanation of an earlier and can show the antiquity of these
 opinions on the testimony of Plato himself.
 
 </p><p>Earlier, Parmenides made some approach to the doctrine in
 identifying Being with Intellectual-Principle while separating Real
 Being from the realm of sense.
 
 </p><p>"Knowing and Being are one thing he says, and this unity 
 is to him
 motionless in spite of the intellection he attributes to it: to
 preserve its unchanging identity he excludes all bodily movement
 from it; and he compares it to a huge sphere in that it holds and
 envelops all existence and that its intellection is not an outgoing
 act but internal. Still, with all his affirmation of unity, his own
 writings lay him open to the reproach that his unity turns 
 out to be a
 multiplicity.
 
 </p><p>The Platonic Parmenides is more exact; the distinction is made
 between the Primal One, a strictly pure Unity, and a secondary One
 which is a One-Many and a third which is a One-and-many; thus he too
 is in accordance with our thesis of the Three Kinds.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn424.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>