<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn436.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn438.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. Thus we have shown that there exists that which in the
 strictest sense possesses self-knowing.
 
 </p><p>This self-knowing agent, perfect in the 
 Intellectual-Principle, is
 modified in the Soul.
 
 </p><p>The difference is that, while the soul knows itself as within
 something else, the Intellectual-Principle knows itself as
 self-depending, knows all its nature and character, and 
 knows by right
 of its own being and by simple introversion. When it looks upon the
 authentic existences it is looking upon itself; its vision as its
 effective existence, and this efficacy is itself since the
 Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual Act are one: this is an
 integral seeing itself by its entire being, not a part seeing by a
 part.
 
 </p><p>But has our discussion issued in an Intellectual-Principle
 having a persuasive activity [furnishing us with probability]?
 
 </p><p>No: it brings compulsion not persuasion; compulsion 
 belongs to the
 Intellectual-Principle, persuasion to the soul or mind, and 
 we seem to
 desire to be persuaded rather than to see the truth in the pure
 intellect.
 
 </p><p>As long as we were Above, collected within the Intellectual
 nature, we were satisfied; we were held in the intellectual act; we
 had vision because we drew all into unity- for the thinker in us was
 the Intellectual-Principle telling us of itself- and the soul or
 mind was motionless, assenting to that act of its prior. But now
 that we are once more here- living in the secondary, the 
 soul- we seek
 for persuasive probabilities: it is through the image we desire to
 know the archetype.
 
 </p><p>Our way is to teach our soul how the Intellectual-Principle
 exercises self-vision; the phase thus to be taught is that which
 already touches the intellective order, that which we call the
 understanding or intelligent soul, indicating by the very 
 name that it
 is already of itself in some degree an Intellectual-Principle or
 that it holds its peculiar power through and from that 
 Principle. This
 phase must be brought to understand by what means it has knowledge
 of the thing it sees and warrant for what it affirms: if it became
 what it affirms, it would by that fact possess self-knowing. All its
 vision and affirmation being in the Supreme or deriving from 
 it- There
 where itself also is- it will possess self-knowledge by its 
 right as a
 Reason-Principle, claiming its kin and bringing all into accord with
 the divine imprint upon it.
 
 </p><p>The soul therefore [to attain self-knowledge] has only 
 to set this
 image [that is to say, its highest phase] alongside the veritable
 Intellectual-Principle which we have found to be identical with the
 truths constituting the objects of intellection, the world of
 Primals and Reality: for this Intellectual-Principle, by very
 definition, cannot be outside of itself, the Intellectual Reality:
 self-gathered and unalloyed, it is Intellectual-Principle through
 all the range of its being- for unintelligent intelligence is not
 possible- and thus it possesses of necessity self-knowing, as a
 being immanent to itself and one having for function and 
 essence to be
 purely and solely Intellectual-Principle. This is no doer; the doer,
 not self-intent but looking outward, will have knowledge, in some
 kind, of the external, but, if wholly of this practical order, need
 have no self-knowledge; where, on the contrary, there is no action-
 and of course the pure Intellectual-Principle cannot be straining
 after any absent good- the intention can be only towards the self;
 at once self-knowing becomes not merely plausible but 
 inevitable; what
 else could living signify in a being immune from action and existing
 in Intellect?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn438.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>