<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn495.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn497.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. This Intellectual-Principle, if the term is to convey the
 truth, must be understood to be not a principle merely potential and
 not one maturing from unintelligence to intelligence- that would
 simply send us seeking, once more, a necessary prior- but a
 principle which is intelligence in actuality and in eternity.
 
 </p><p>Now a principle whose wisdom is not borrowed must derive from
 itself any intellection it may make; and anything it may possess
 within itself it can hold only from itself: it follows that,
 intellective by its own resource and upon its own content, it is
 itself the very things on which its intellection acts.
 
 </p><p>For supposing its essence to be separable from its intellection
 and the objects of its intellection to be not itself, then 
 its essence
 would be unintellectual; and it would be intellectual not 
 actually but
 potentially. The intellection and its object must then be 
 inseparable-
 however the habit induced by our conditions may tempt us to
 distinguish, There too, the thinker from the thought.
 
 </p><p>What then is its characteristic Act and what the intellection
 which makes knower and known here identical?
 
 </p><p>Clearly, as authentic Intellection, it has authentic
 intellection of the authentically existent, and establishes their
 existence. Therefore it is the Authentic Beings.
 
 </p><p>Consider: It must perceive them either somewhere else or within
 itself as its very self: the somewhere else is impossible- 
 where could
 that be?- they are therefore itself and the content of itself.
 
 </p><p>Its objects certainly cannot be the things of sense, as people
 think; no First could be of the sense-known order; for in things of
 sense the Idea is but an image of the authentic, and every Idea thus
 derivative and exiled traces back to that original and is no 
 more than
 an image of it.
 
 </p><p>Further, if the Intellectual-Principle is to be the maker of
 this All, it cannot make by looking outside itself to what does not
 yet exist. The Authentic Beings must, then, exist before this All,
 no copies made on a model but themselves archetypes, primals, and
 the essence of the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>We may be told that Reason-Principles suffice [to the
 subsistence of the All]: but then these, clearly, must be 
 eternal; and
 if eternal, if immune, then they must exist in an
 Intellectual-Principle such as we have indicated, a principle
 earlier than condition, than nature, than soul, than anything whose
 existence is potential for contingent].
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle, therefore, is itself the authentic
 existences, not a knower knowing them in some sphere foreign to it.
 The Authentic Beings, thus, exist neither before nor after it: it is
 the primal legislator to Being or, rather, is itself the law 
 of Being.
 Thus it is true that "Intellectual and Being are identical"; in the
 immaterial the knowledge of the thing is the thing. And this is the
 meaning of the dictum "I sought myself," namely as one of the
 Beings: it also bears on reminiscence.
 
 </p><p>For none of the Beings is outside the 
 Intellectual-Principle or in
 space; they remain for ever in themselves, accepting no change, no
 decay, and by that are the authentically existent. Things that arise
 and fall away draw on real being as something to borrow 
 from; they are
 not of the real; the true being is that on which they draw.
 
 </p><p>It is by participation that the sense-known has the being we
 ascribe to it; the underlying nature has taken its shape from
 elsewhere; thus bronze and wood are shaped into what we see by means
 of an image introduced by sculpture or carpentry; the craft
 permeates the materials while remaining integrally apart from the
 material and containing in itself the reality of statue or couch.
 And it is so, of course, with all corporeal things.
 
 </p><p>This universe, characteristically participant in images, 
 shows how
 the image differs from the authentic beings: against the variability
 of the one order, there stands the unchanging quality of the other,
 self-situate, not needing space because having no magnitude, holding
 an existent intellective and self-sufficing. The body-kind seeks its
 endurance in another kind; the Intellectual-Principle, sustaining by
 its marvellous Being, the things which of themselves must fall, does
 not itself need to look for a staying ground.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn497.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>