<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn408.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn410.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. That the Soul of every individual is one thing we deduce from
 the fact that it is present entire at every point of the body- the
 sign of veritable unity- not some part of it here and another part
 there. In all sensitive beings the sensitive soul is an omnipresent
 unity, and so in the forms of vegetal life the vegetal soul is
 entire at each several point throughout the organism.
 
 </p><p>Now are we to hold similarly that your soul and mine and all are
 one, and that the same thing is true of the universe, the soul in
 all the several forms of life being one soul, not parcelled out in
 separate items, but an omnipresent identity?
 
 </p><p>If the soul in me is a unity, why need that in the universe be
 otherwise seeing that there is no longer any question of 
 bulk or body?
 And if that, too, is one soul and yours, and mine, belongs 
 to it, then
 yours and mine must also be one: and if, again, the soul of the
 universe and mine depend from one soul, once more all must be one.
 
 </p><p>What then in itself is this one soul?
 
 </p><p>First we must assure ourselves of the possibility of all souls
 being one as that of any given individual is.
 
 </p><p>It must, no doubt, seem strange that my soul and that of any and
 everybody else should be one thing only: it might mean my feelings
 being felt by someone else, my goodness another's too, my desire,
 his desire, all our experience shared with each other and with the
 (one-souled) universe, so that the very universe itself would feel
 whatever I felt.
 
 </p><p>Besides how are we to reconcile this unity with the 
 distinction of
 reasoning soul and unreasoning, animal soul and vegetal?
 
 </p><p>Yet if we reject that unity, the universe itself ceases to be
 one thing and souls can no longer be included under any one 
 principle.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn410.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>