<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn479.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn481.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. Thus there is in the Nature-Principle itself an Ideal 
 archetype
 of the beauty that is found in material forms and, of that archetype
 again, the still more beautiful archetype in Soul, source of that in
 Nature. In the proficient soul this is brighter and of more advanced
 loveliness: adorning the soul and bringing to it a light from that
 greater light which is beauty primally, its immediate presence sets
 the soul reflecting upon the quality of this prior, the archetype
 which has no such entries, and is present nowhere but remains in
 itself alone, and thus is not even to be called a 
 Reason-Principle but
 is the creative source of the very first Reason-Principle 
 which is the
 Beauty to which Soul serves as Matter.
 
 </p><p>This prior, then, is the Intellectual-Principle, the veritable,
 abiding and not fluctuant since not taking intellectual quality from
 outside itself. By what image thus, can we represent it? We have
 nowhere to go but to what is less. Only from itself can we take an
 image of it; that is, there can be no representation of it, except
 in the sense that we represent gold by some portion of gold- 
 purified,
 either actually or mentally, if it be impure- insisting at the same
 time that this is not the total thing-gold, but merely the
 particular gold of a particular parcel. In the same way we learn in
 this matter from the purified Intellect in ourselves or, if you
 like, from the Gods and the glory of the Intellect in them.
 
 </p><p>For assuredly all the Gods are august and beautiful in a beauty
 beyond our speech. And what makes them so? Intellect; and especially
 Intellect operating within them [the divine sun and stars] to
 visibility. It is not through the loveliness of their 
 corporeal forms:
 even those that have body are not gods by that beauty; it is 
 in virtue
 of Intellect that they, too, are gods, and as gods beautiful. They
 do not veer between wisdom and folly: in the immunity of Intellect
 unmoving and pure, they are wise always, all-knowing, taking
 cognisance not of the human but of their own being and of all that
 lies within the contemplation of Intellect. Those of them whose
 dwelling is in the heavens, are ever in this meditation- what task
 prevents them?- and from afar they look, too, into that 
 further heaven
 by a lifting of the head. The Gods belonging to that higher Heaven
 itself, they whose station is upon it and in it, see and know in
 virtue of their omnipresence to it. For all There is heaven; earth
 is heaven, and sea heaven; and animal and plant and man; all is the
 heavenly content of that heaven: and the Gods in it, 
 despising neither
 men nor anything else that is there where all is of the heavenly
 order, traverse all that country and all space in peace.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn481.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>