<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn443.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn445.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. Thus The One is in truth beyond all statement: any 
 affirmation
 is of a thing; but the all-transcending, resting above even the most
 august divine Mind, possesses alone of all true being, and is not a
 thing among things; we can give it no name because that would imply
 predication: we can but try to indicate, in our own feeble way,
 something concerning it: when in our perplexity we object, 
 "Then it is
 without self-perception, without self-consciousness, ignorant of
 itself"; we must remember that we have been considering it 
 only in its
 opposites.
 
 </p><p>If we make it knowable, an object of affirmation, we make it a
 manifold; and if we allow intellection in it we make it at that
 point indigent: supposing that in fact intellection accompanies it,
 intellection by it must be superfluous.
 
 </p><p>Self-intellection- which is the truest- implies the entire
 perception of a total self formed from a variety converging into an
 integral; but the Transcendent knows neither separation of part nor
 any such enquiry; if its intellectual act were directed upon 
 something
 outside, then, the Transcendent would be deficient and the
 intellection faulty.
 
 </p><p>The wholly simplex and veritable self-sufficing can be lacking
 at no point: self-intellection begins in that principle which,
 secondarily self-sufficing, yet needs itself and therefore needs to
 know itself: this principle, by its self-presence, achieves its
 sufficiency in virtue of its entire content [it is the all]: it
 becomes thus competent from the total of its being, in the act of
 living towards itself and looking upon itself.
 
 </p><p>Consciousness, as the very word indicates, is a conperception, an
 act exercised upon a manifold: and even intellection, earlier
 [nearer to the divine] though it is, implies that the agent 
 turns back
 upon itself, upon a manifold, then. If that agent says no 
 more than "I
 am a being," it speaks [by the implied dualism] as a 
 discoverer of the
 extern; and rightly so, for being is a manifold; when it 
 faces towards
 the unmanifold and says, "I am that being," it misses both itself
 and the being [since the simplex cannot be thus divided into knower
 and known]: if it is [to utter] truth it cannot indicate by "being"
 something like a stone; in the one phrase multiplicity is asserted;
 for the being thus affirmed- [even] the veritable, as distinguished
 from such a mere container of some trace of being as ought not to be
 called a being since it stands merely as image to archetype- 
 even this
 must possess multiplicity.
 
 </p><p>But will not each item in that multiplicity be an object of
 intellection to us?
 
 </p><p>Taken bare and single, no: but Being itself is manifold within
 itself, and whatever else you may name has Being.
 
 </p><p>This accepted, it follows that anything that is to be thought of
 as the most utterly simplex of all cannot have self-intellection; to
 have that would mean being multiple. The Transcendent, thus, neither
 knows itself nor is known in itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn445.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>