<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn434.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn436.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. But we, too, are king when we are moulded to the
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>That correspondence may be brought about in two ways: either the
 radii from that centre are traced upon us to be our law or we are
 filled full of the Divine Mind, which again may have become to us a
 thing seen and felt as a presence.
 
 </p><p>Hence our self-knowing comes to the knowing of all the 
 rest of our
 being in virtue of this thing patently present; or by that power
 itself communicating to us its own power of self-knowing; or by our
 becoming identical with that principle of knowledge.
 
 </p><p>Thus the self-knower is a double person: there is the one that
 takes cognisance of the principle in virtue of which understanding
 occurs in the soul or mind; and there is the higher, knowing himself
 by the Intellectual-Principle with which he becomes identical: this
 latter knows the self as no longer man but as a being that has
 become something other through and through: he has thrown himself as
 one thing over into the superior order, taking with him only that
 better part of the soul which alone is winged for the 
 Intellectual Act
 and gives the man, once established There, the power to appropriate
 what he has seen.
 
 </p><p>We can scarcely suppose this understanding faculty to be unaware
 that it has understanding; that it takes cognisance of things
 external; that in its judgements it decides by the rules and 
 standards
 within itself held directly from the Intellectual-Principle; that
 there is something higher than itself, something which, moreover, it
 has no need to seek but fully possesses. What can we conceive to
 escape the self-knowledge of a principle which admittedly knows the
 place it holds and the work it has to do? It affirms that it springs
 from Intellectual-Principle whose second and image it is, that it
 holds all within itself, the universe of things, engraved, so to
 say, upon it as all is held There by the eternal engraver. Aware so
 far of itself, can it be supposed to halt at that? Are we to suppose
 that all we can do is to apply a distinct power of our 
 nature and come
 thus to awareness of that Intellectual-Principle as aware of itself?
 Or may we not appropriate that principle- which belongs to 
 us as we to
 it- and thus attain to awareness, at once, of it and of ourselves?
 Yes: this is the necessary way if we are to experience the
 self-knowledge vested in the Intellectual-Principle. And a 
 man becomes
 Intellectual-Principle when, ignoring all other phases of his being,
 he sees through that only and sees only that and so knows himself by
 means of the self- in other words attains the self-knowledge 
 which the
 Intellectual-Principle possesses.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn436.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>