<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn453.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn455.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Thus we may not look for the Intellectual objects [the Ideas]
 outside of the Intellectual-Principle, treating them as 
 impressions of
 reality upon it: we cannot strip it of truth and so make its objects
 unknowable and non-existent and in the end annul the
 Intellectual-Principle itself. We must provide for knowledge and for
 truth; we must secure reality; being must become knowable
 essentially and not merely in that knowledge of quality which could
 give us a mere image or vestige of the reality in lieu of
 possession, intimate association, absorption.
 
 </p><p>The only way to this is to leave nothing out side of the 
 veritable
 Intellectual-Principle which thus has knowledge in the true knowing
 [that of identification with the object], cannot forget, need not go
 wandering in search. At once truth is there, this is the seat of the
 authentic Existents, it becomes living and intellective: 
 these are the
 essentials of that most lofty Principle; and, failing them, where is
 its worth, its grandeur?
 
 </p><p>Only thus [by this inherence of the Ideas] is it dispensed from
 demonstration and from acts of faith in the truth of its 
 knowledge: it
 is its entire self, self-perspicuous: it knows a prior by
 recognising its own source; it knows a sequent to that prior by its
 self-identity; of the reality of this sequent, of the fact that it
 is present and has authentic existence, no outer entity can bring it
 surer conviction.
 
 </p><p>Thus veritable truth is not accordance with an external; it is
 self-accordance; it affirms and is nothing other than itself and is
 nothing other; it is at once existence and self-affirmation. What
 external, then, can call it to the question, and from what source of
 truth could the refutation be brought? Any counter affirmation [of
 truth] must fall into identity with the truth which first uttered
 itself; brought forward as new, it has to appear before the
 Principle which made the earlier statement and to show itself
 identical with that: for there is no finding anything truer than the
 true.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn455.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>