<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn429.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn431.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. To resume: there is from the first principle to ultimate an
 outgoing in which unfailingly each principle retains its own seat
 while its offshoot takes another rank, a lower, though on the other
 hand every being is in identity with its prior as long as it holds
 that contact.
 
 </p><p>In the case of soul entering some vegetal form, what is there is
 one phase, the more rebellious and less intellectual, outgone to
 that extreme; in a soul entering an animal, the faculty of sensation
 has been dominant and brought it there; in soul entering man, the
 movement outward has either been wholly of its reasoning part or has
 come from the Intellectual-Principle in the sense that the soul,
 possessing that principle as immanent to its being, has an inborn
 desire of intellectual activity and of movement in general.
 
 </p><p>But, looking more minutely into the matter, when shoots 
 or topmost
 boughs are lopped from some growing thing, where goes the soul that
 was present in them? Simply, whence it came: soul never knew spatial
 separation and therefore is always within the source. If you cut the
 root to pieces, or burn it, where is the life that was present
 there? In the soul, which never went outside of itself.
 
 </p><p>No doubt, despite this permanence, the soul must have been in
 something if it reascends; and if it does not, it is still somewhere;
 it is in some other vegetal soul: but all this means merely 
 that it is
 not crushed into some one spot; if a Soul-power reascends, it is
 within the Soul-power preceding it; that in turn can be only in the
 soul-power prior again, the phase reaching upwards to the
 Intellectual-Principle. Of course nothing here must be understood
 spatially: Soul never was in space; and the Divine Intellect, again,
 is distinguished from soul as being still more free.
 
 </p><p>Soul thus is nowhere but in the Principle which has that
 characteristic existence at once nowhere and everywhere.
 
 </p><p>If the soul on its upward path has halted midway before wholly
 achieving the supreme heights, it has a mid-rank life and has
 centred itself upon the mid-phase of its being. All in that 
 mid-region
 is Intellectual-Principle not wholly itself- nothing else because
 deriving thence [and therefore of that name and rank], yet not that
 because the Intellectual-Principle in giving it forth is not merged
 into it.
 
 </p><p>There exists, thus, a life, as it were, of huge 
 extension, a total
 in which each several part differs from its next, all making a
 self-continuous whole under a law of discrimination by which the
 various forms of things arise with no effacement of any prior in its
 secondary.
 
 </p><p>But does this Soul-phase in the vegetal order, produce nothing?
 
 </p><p>It engenders precisely the Kind in which it is thus present:
 how, is a question to be handled from another starting-point.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn431.htm">Next: THIRD TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>