<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn487.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn489.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. Similarly any one, unable to see himself, but possessed by
 that God, has but to bring that divine- within before his
 consciousness and at once he sees an image of himself, himself
 lifted to a better beauty: now let him ignore that image, lovely
 though it is, and sink into a perfect self-identity, no such
 separation remaining; at once he forms a multiple unity with the God
 silently present; in the degree of his power and will, the two
 become one; should he turn back to the former duality, still he is
 pure and remains very near to the God; he has but to look again and
 the same presence is there.
 
 </p><p>This conversion brings gain: at the first stage, that of
 separation, a man is aware of self; but, retreating inwards, he
 becomes possessor of all; he puts sense away behind him in dread of
 the separated life and becomes one in the Divine; if he plans to see
 in separation, he sets himself outside.
 
 </p><p>The novice must hold himself constantly under some image of the
 Divine Being and seek in the light of a clear conception; knowing
 thus, in a deep conviction, whither he is going- into what a 
 sublimity
 he penetrates- he must give himself forthwith to the inner and,
 radiant with the Divine Intellections [with which he is now one], be
 no longer the seer but, as that place has made him, the seen.
 
 </p><p>Still, we will be told, one cannot be in beauty and yet fail to
 see it. The very contrary: to see the divine as something external
 is to be outside of it; to become it is to be most truly in beauty:
 since sight deals with the external, there can here be no vision
 unless in the sense of identification with the object.
 
 </p><p>And this identification amounts to a self-knowing, a
 self-consciousness, guarded by the fear of losing the self in the
 desire of a too wide awareness.
 
 </p><p>It must be remembered that sensations of the ugly and 
 evil impress
 us more violently than those of what is agreeable and yet leave less
 knowledge as the residue of the shock: sickness makes the rougher
 mark, but health, tranquilly present, explains itself 
 better; it takes
 the first place, it is the natural thing, it belongs to our being;
 illness is alien, unnatural and thus makes itself felt by its very
 incongruity, while the other conditions are native and we take no
 notice. Such being our nature, we are most completely aware of
 ourselves when we are most completely identified with the object of
 our knowledge.
 
 </p><p>This is why in that other sphere, when we are deepest in that
 knowledge by intellection, we are aware of none; we are 
 expecting some
 impression on sense, which has nothing to report since it has seen
 nothing and never could in that order see anything. The unbelieving
 element is sense; it is the other, the Intellectual-Principle, that
 sees; and if this too doubted, it could not even credit its own
 existence, for it can never stand away and with bodily eyes
 apprehend itself as a visible object.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn489.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>