<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn493.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn495.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. We will have to examine this Nature, the Intellectual, which
 our reasoning identifies as the authentically existent and the
 veritable essential: but first we must take another path and make
 certain that such a principle does necessarily exist.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps it is ridiculous to set out enquiring whether an
 Intellectual-Principle has place in the total of being: but there
 may be some to hesitate even as to this and certainly there will be
 the question whether it is as we describe it, whether it is 
 a separate
 existence, whether it actually is the real beings, whether it is the
 seat of the Ideas; to this we now address ourselves.
 
 </p><p>All that we see, and describe as having existence, we know to be
 compound; hand-wrought or compacted by nature, nothing is 
 simplex. Now
 the hand-wrought, with its metal or stone or wood, is not 
 realized out
 of these materials until the appropriate craft has produced statue,
 house or bed, by imparting the particular idea from its own content.
 Similarly with natural forms of being; those including several
 constituents, compound bodies as we call them, may be analysed into
 the materials and the Idea imposed upon the total; the human being,
 for example, into soul and body; and the human body into the four
 elements. Finding everything to be a compound of Matter and shaping
 principle- since the Matter of the elements is of itself shapeless-
 you will enquire whence this forming idea comes; and you will ask
 whether in the soul we recognise a simplex or whether this also has
 constituents, something representing Matter and something else- the
 Intellectual-Principle in it- representing Idea, the one 
 corresponding
 to the shape actually on the statue, the other to the artist giving
 the shape.
 
 </p><p>Applying the same method to the total of things, here too we
 discover the Intellectual-Principle and this we set down as
 veritably the maker and creator of the All. The underly has adopted,
 we see, certain shapes by which it becomes fire, water, air, earth;
 and these shapes have been imposed upon it by something else. This
 other is Soul which, hovering over the Four [the elements], imparts
 the pattern of the Kosmos, the Ideas for which it has itself
 received from the Intellectual-Principle as the soul or mind of the
 craftsman draws upon his craft for the plan of his work.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle is in one phase the Form of the soul,
 its shape; in another phase it is the giver of the shape- the
 sculptor, possessing inherently what is given- imparting to soul
 nearly the authentic reality while what body receives is but 
 image and
 imitation.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn495.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>