<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn441.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn443.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. Thus the Intellectual-Principle, in the act of knowing the
 Transcendent, is a manifold. It knows the Transcendent in 
 very essence
 but, with all its effort to grasp that prior as a pure unity, it
 goes forth amassing successive impressions, so that, to it, 
 the object
 becomes multiple: thus in its outgoing to its object it is not
 [fully realised] Intellectual-Principle; it is an eye that 
 has not yet
 seen; in its return it is an eye possessed of the multiplicity which
 it has itself conferred: it sought something of which it found the
 vague presentment within itself; it returned with something else,
 the manifold quality with which it has of its own act invested the
 simplex.
 
 </p><p>If it had not possessed a previous impression of the 
 Transcendent,
 it could never have grasped it, but this impression, originally of
 unity, becomes an impression of multiplicity; and the
 Intellectual-Principle, in taking cognisance of that multiplicity,
 knows the Transcendent and so is realized as an eye possessed of its
 vision.
 
 </p><p>It is now Intellectual-Principle since it actually holds its
 object, and holds it by the act of intellection: before, it was no
 more than a tendance, an eye blank of impression: it was in motion
 towards the transcendental; now that it has attained, it has become
 Intellectual-Principle henceforth absorbed; in virtue of this
 intellection it holds the character of Intellectual-Principle, of
 Essential Existence and of Intellectual Act where, previously, not
 possessing the Intellectual Object, it was not Intellectual
 Perception, and, not yet having exercised the Intellectual 
 Act, it was
 not Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>The Principle before all these principles is no doubt the first
 principle of the universe, but not as immanent: immanence is not for
 primal sources but for engendering secondaries; that which stands as
 primal source of everything is not a thing but is distinct from all
 things: it is not, then, a member of the total but earlier than all,
 earlier, thus, than the Intellectual-Principle- which in 
 fact envelops
 the entire train of things.
 
 </p><p>Thus we come, once more, to a Being above the
 Intellectual-Principle and, since the sequent amounts to no less
 than the All, we recognise, again, a Being above the All. This
 assuredly cannot be one of the things to which it is prior. 
 We may not
 call it "Intellect"; therefore, too, we may not call it "the 
 Good," if
 "the Good" is to be taken in the sense of some one member of the
 universe; if we mean that which precedes the universe of things, the
 name may be allowed.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle is established in multiplicity; its
 intellection, self-sprung though it be, is in the nature of
 something added to it [some accidental dualism] and makes it 
 multiple:
 the utterly simplex, and therefore first of all beings, must, then,
 transcend the Intellectual-Principle; and, obviously, if this had
 intellection it would no longer transcend the Intellectual-Principle
 but be it, and at once be a multiple.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn443.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>