<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn498.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn500.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. If, then, the Intellection is an act upon the inner 
 content [of
 a perfect unity], that content is at once the Idea [as object:
 eidos] and the Idea itself [as concept: idea].
 
 </p><p>What, then, is that content?
 
 </p><p>An Intellectual-Principle and an Intellective Essence, no
 concept distinguishable from the Intellectual-Principle, 
 each actually
 being that Principle. The Intellectual-Principle entire is the total
 of the Ideas, and each of them is the [entire]
 Intellectual-Principle in a special form. Thus a science 
 entire is the
 total of the relevant considerations each of which, again, 
 is a member
 of the entire science, a member not distinct in space yet having its
 individual efficacy in a total.
 
 </p><p>This Intellectual-Principle, therefore, is a unity while by that
 possession of itself it is, tranquilly, the eternal abundance.
 
 </p><p>If the Intellectual-Principle were envisaged as preceding Being,
 it would at once become a principle whose expression, its 
 intellectual
 Act, achieves and engenders the Beings: but, since we are 
 compelled to
 think of existence as preceding that which knows it, we can but
 think that the Beings are the actual content of the knowing
 principle and that the very act, the intellection, is inherent to
 the Beings, as fire stands equipped from the beginning with
 fire-act; in this conception, the Beings contain the
 Intellectual-Principle as one and the same with themselves, as their
 own activity. Thus, Being is itself an activity: there is one
 activity, then, in both or, rather, both are one thing.
 
 </p><p>Being, therefore, and the Intellectual-Principle are one Nature:
 the Beings, and the Act of that which is, and the
 Intellectual-Principle thus constituted, all are one: and the
 resultant Intellections are the Idea of Being and its shape and its
 act.
 
 </p><p>It is our separating habit that sets the one order before the
 other: for there is a separating intellect, of another order than
 the true, distinct from the intellect, inseparable and unseparating,
 which is Being and the universe of things.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn500.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>