<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn401.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn403.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. The Human Soul, next;
 
 </p><p>Everywhere we hear of it as in bitter and miserable durance in
 body, a victim to troubles and desires and fears and all forms of
 evil, the body its prison or its tomb, the kosmos its cave or cavern.
 
 </p><p>Now this does not clash with the first theory [that of the
 impassivity of soul as in the All]; for the descent of the human
 Soul has not been due to the same causes [as that of the All-Soul.]
 
 </p><p>All that is Intellectual-Principle has its being- whole and all-
 in the place of Intellection, what we call the Intellectual Kosmos:
 but there exist, too, the intellective powers included in its being,
 and the separate intelligences- for the Intellectual-Principle is
 not merely one; it is one and many. In the same way there 
 must be both
 many souls and one, the one being the source of the differing many
 just as from one genus there rise various species, better and worse,
 some of the more intellectual order, others less effectively so.
 
 </p><p>In the Intellectual-Principle a distinction is to be made: there
 is the Intellectual-Principle itself, which like some huge living
 organism contains potentially all the other forms; and there are the
 forms thus potentially included now realized as individuals. We may
 think of it as a city which itself has soul and life, and includes,
 also, other forms of life; the living city is the more perfect and
 powerful, but those lesser forms, in spite of all, share in the one
 same living quality: or, another illustration, from fire, the
 universal, proceed both the great fire and the minor fires; yet all
 have the one common essence, that of fire the universal, or, more
 exactly, participate in that from which the essence of the universal
 fire proceeds.
 
 </p><p>No doubt the task of the soul, in its more emphatically
 reasoning phase, is intellection: but it must have another 
 as well, or
 it would be undistinguishable from the Intellectual-Principle. To
 its quality of being intellective it adds the quality by which it
 attains its particular manner of being: remaining, therefore, an
 Intellectual-Principle, it has thenceforth its own task too, as
 everything must that exists among real beings.
 
 </p><p>It looks towards its higher and has intellection; towards itself
 and conserves its peculiar being; towards its lower and orders,
 administers, governs.
 
 </p><p>The total of things could not have remained stationary in the
 Intellectual Kosmos, once there was the possibility of continuous
 variety, of beings inferior but as necessarily existent as their
 superiors.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn403.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>