<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn449.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn451.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Anything existing after The First must necessarily arise from
 that First, whether immediately or as tracing back to it through
 intervenients; there must be an order of secondaries and tertiaries,
 in which any second is to be referred to The First, any third to the
 second.
 
 </p><p>Standing before all things, there must exist a Simplex,
 differing from all its sequel, self-gathered not inter-blended with
 the forms that rise from it, and yet able in some mode of its own to
 be present to those others: it must be authentically a unity, not
 merely something elaborated into unity and so in reality no more
 than unity's counterfeit; it will debar all telling and 
 knowing except
 that it may be described as transcending Being- for if there were
 nothing outside all alliance and compromise, nothing authentically
 one, there would be no Source. Untouched by multiplicity, it will be
 wholly self-sufficing, an absolute First, whereas any not-first
 demands its earlier, and any non-simplex needs the 
 simplicities within
 itself as the very foundations of its composite existence.
 
 </p><p>There can be only one such being: if there were another, the two
 [as indiscernible] would resolve into one, for we are not 
 dealing with
 two corporal entities.
 
 </p><p>Our One-First is not a body: a body is not simplex and, 
 as a thing
 of process cannot be a First, the Source cannot be a thing of
 generation: only a principle outside of body, and utterly 
 untouched by
 multiplicity, could be The First.
 
 </p><p>Any unity, then, later than The First must be no longer simplex;
 it can be no more than a unity in diversity.
 
 </p><p>Whence must such a sequent arise?
 
 </p><p>It must be an offspring of The First; for suppose it the product
 of chance, that First ceases to be the Principle of All.
 
 </p><p>But how does it arise from The First?
 
 </p><p>If The First is perfect, utterly perfect above all, and is the
 beginning of all power, it must be the most powerful of all that is,
 and all other powers must act in some partial imitation of it. Now
 other beings, coming to perfection, are observed to 
 generate; they are
 unable to remain self-closed; they produce: and this is true not
 merely of beings endowed with will, but of growing things where
 there is no will; even lifeless objects impart something of
 themselves, as far as they may; fire warms, snow chills, drugs have
 their own outgoing efficacy; all things to the utmost of their power
 imitate the Source in some operation tending to eternity and to
 service.
 
 </p><p>How then could the most perfect remain self-set- the First Good,
 the Power towards all, how could it grudge or be powerless to give
 of itself, and how at that would it still be the Source?
 
 </p><p>If things other than itself are to exist, things 
 dependent upon it
 for their reality, it must produce since there is no other 
 source. And
 further this engendering principle must be the very highest in
 worth; and its immediate offspring, its secondary, must be 
 the best of
 all that follows.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn451.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>