<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn461.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn463.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. Still, do not, I urge you, look for The Good through any of
 these other things; if you do, you will see not itself but its
 trace: you must form the idea of that which is to be grasped cleanly
 standing to itself not in any combination, the unheld in which all
 have hold: for no other is such, yet one such there must be.
 
 </p><p>Now it is clear that we cannot possess ourselves of the power of
 this principle in its concentrated fulness: so to do one must be
 identical with it: but some partial attainment is within our reach.
 
 </p><p>You who make the venture will throw forward all your 
 being but you
 will never tell it entire- for that, you must yourself be the divine
 Intellect in Act- and at your utmost success it will still pass from
 you or, rather, you from it. In ordinary vision you may think to see
 the object entire: in this intellective act, all, less or more, that
 you can take to mind you may set down as The Good.
 
 </p><p>It is The Good since, being a power [being effective outwardly],
 it is the cause of the intelligent and intellective life as of life
 and intellect: for these grow from it as from the source of essence
 and of existence, the Source as being One, simplex and first because
 before it was nothing. All derives from this: it is the origin of
 the primal movement which it does not possess and of the repose
 which is but its absence of need; for neither rest nor movement can
 belong to that which has no place in which either could 
 occur; centre,
 object, ground, all are alike unknown to it, for it is 
 before all. Yet
 its Being is not limited; what is there to set bounds to it? Nor, on
 the other hand, is it infinite in the sense of magnitude; what place
 can there be to which it must extend, or why should there be
 movement where there is no lacking? All its infinitude resides in
 its power: it does not change and will not fail; and in it 
 all that is
 unfailing finds duration.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn463.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>