<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn442.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn444.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. But why, after all, should it not be such a manifold as long
 as it remains one substantial existence, having the multiplicity not
 of a compound being but of a unity with a variety of activities?
 
 </p><p>Now, no doubt, if these various activities are not themselves
 substantial existences- but merely manifestations of latent
 potentiality- there is no compound; but, on the other hand, 
 it remains
 incomplete until its substantial existence be expressed in 
 act. If its
 substantial existence consists in its Act, and this Act constitutes
 multiplicity, then its substantial existence will be strictly
 proportioned to the extent of the multiplicity.
 
 </p><p>We allow this to be true for the Intellectual-Principle to which
 we have allotted [the multiplicity of] self-knowing; but for 
 the first
 principle of all, never. Before the manifold, there must be The One,
 that from which the manifold rises: in all numerical series, the
 unit is the first.
 
 </p><p>But- we will be answered- for number, well and good, since the
 suite makes a compound; but in the real beings why must there be a
 unit from which the multiplicity of entities shall proceed?
 
 </p><p>Because [failing such a unity] the multiplicity would consist of
 disjointed items, each starting at its own distinct place and moving
 accidentally to serve to a total.
 
 </p><p>But, they will tell us, the Activities in question do 
 proceed from
 a unity, from the Intellectual-Principle, a simplex.
 
 </p><p>By that they admit the existence of a simplex prior to the
 Activities; and they make the Activities perdurable and class them
 as substantial existences [hypostases]; but as Hypostases 
 they will be
 distinct from their source, which will remain simplex; while its
 product will in its own nature be manifold and dependent upon it.
 
 </p><p>Now if these activities arise from some unexplained 
 first activity
 in that principle, then it too contains the manifold: if, on the
 contrary, they are the very earliest activities and the source and
 cause of any multiple product and the means by which that 
 Principle is
 able, before any activity occurs, to remain self-centred, then they
 are allocated to the product of which they are the cause; for this
 principle is one thing, the activities going forth from it are
 another, since it is not, itself, in act. If this be not so, 
 the first
 act cannot be the Intellectual-Principle: the One does not 
 provide for
 the existence of an Intellectual-Principle which thereupon appears;
 that provision would be something [an Hypostasis] intervening
 between the One and the Intellectual-Principle, its offspring. There
 could, in fact, be no such providing in The One, for it was never
 incomplete; and such provision could name nothing that ought to be
 provided. It cannot be thought to possess only some part of its
 content, and not the whole; nor did anything exist to which it could
 turn in desire. Clearly anything that comes into being after it,
 arises without shaking to its permanence in its own habit. It is
 essential to the existence of any new entity that the First remain
 in self-gathered repose throughout: otherwise, it moved before there
 was motion and had intellectual act before any intellection- unless,
 indeed, that first act [as motionless and without intelligence] was
 incomplete, nothing more than a tendency. And what can we imagine it
 lights upon to become the object of such a tendency?
 
 </p><p>The only reasonable explanation of act flowing from it 
 lies in the
 analogy of light from a sun. The entire intellectual order may be
 figured as a kind of light with the One in repose at its 
 summit as its
 King: but this manifestation is not cast out from it: we may think,
 rather, of the One as a light before the light, an eternal 
 irradiation
 resting upon the Intellectual Realm; this, not identical with its
 source, is yet not severed from it nor of so remote a nature as to
 be less than Real-Being; it is no blind thing, but is seeing and
 knowing, the primal knower.
 
 </p><p>The One, as transcending Intellect, transcends knowing: above
 all need, it is above the need of the knowing which pertains 
 solely to
 the Secondary Nature. Knowing is a unitary thing, but defined: the
 first is One, but undefined: a defined One would not be the
 One-absolute: the absolute is prior to the definite.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn444.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>