<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn485.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn487.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. Let us, then, make a mental picture of our universe: each
 member shall remain what it is, distinctly apart; yet all is to
 form, as far as possible, a complete unity so that whatever 
 comes into
 view shall show as if it were the surface of the orb over all,
 bringing immediately with it the vision, on the one plane, of the
 sun and of all the stars with earth and sea and all living things as
 if exhibited upon a transparent globe.
 
 </p><p>Bring this vision actually before your sight, so that there
 shall be in your mind the gleaming representation of a sphere, a
 picture holding sprung, themselves, of that universe and repose or
 some at rest, some in motion. Keep this sphere before you, 
 and from it
 imagine another, a sphere stripped of magnitude and of spatial
 differences; cast out your inborn sense of Matter, taking care not
 merely to attenuate it: call on God, maker of the sphere whose image
 you now hold, and pray Him to enter. And may He come bringing His
 own Universe with all the Gods that dwell in it- He who is 
 the one God
 and all the gods, where each is all, blending into a unity, distinct
 in powers but all one god in virtue of that one divine power of many
 facets.
 
 </p><p>More truly, this is the one God who is all the gods; for, in the
 coming to be of all those, this, the one, has suffered no 
 diminishing.
 He and all have one existence while each again is distinct. It is
 distinction by state without interval: there is no outward 
 form to set
 one here and another there and to prevent any from being an entire
 identity; yet there is no sharing of parts from one to 
 another. Nor is
 each of those divine wholes a power in fragment, a power totalling
 to the sum of the measurable segments: the divine is one all-power,
 reaching out to infinity, powerful to infinity; and so great is God
 that his very members are infinites. What place can be named to
 which He does not reach?
 
 </p><p>Great, too, is this firmament of ours and all the powers
 constellated within it, but it would be greater still, unspeakably,
 but that there is inbound in it something of the petty power of
 body; no doubt the powers of fire and other bodily substances might
 themselves be thought very great, but in fact, it is through their
 failure in the true power that we see them burning, destroying,
 wearing things away, and slaving towards the production of life;
 they destroy because they are themselves in process of destruction,
 and they produce because they belong to the realm of the produced.
 
 </p><p>The power in that other world has merely Being and Beauty of
 Being. Beauty without Being could not be, nor Being voided of
 Beauty: abandoned of Beauty, Being loses something of its essence.
 Being is desirable because it is identical with Beauty; and Beauty
 is loved because it is Being. How then can we debate which is the
 cause of the other, where the nature is one? The very 
 figment of Being
 needs some imposed image of Beauty to make it passable and even to
 ensure its existence; it exists to the degree in which it has taken
 some share in the beauty of Idea; and the more deeply it has drawn
 on this, the less imperfect it is, precisely because the nature
 which is essentially the beautiful has entered into it the more
 intimately.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn487.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>