<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn483.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn485.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Consider the universe: we are agreed that its 
 existence and its
 nature come to it from beyond itself; are we, now, to 
 imagine that its
 maker first thought it out in detail- the earth, and its necessary
 situation in the middle; water and, again, its position as lying
 upon the earth; all the other elements and objects up to the sky in
 due place and order; living beings with their appropriate forms as
 we know them, their inner organs and their outer limbs- and that
 having thus appointed every item beforehand, he then set about the
 execution?
 
 </p><p>Such designing was not even possible; how could the plan for a
 universe come to one that had never looked outward? Nor could he
 work on material gathered from elsewhere as our craftsmen do, using
 hands and tools; feet and hands are of the later order.
 
 </p><p>One way, only, remains: all things must exist in something else;
 of that prior- since there is no obstacle, all being 
 continuous within
 the realm of reality- there has suddenly appeared a sign, an image,
 whether given forth directly or through the ministry of soul or of
 some phase of soul, matters nothing for the moment: thus the entire
 aggregate of existence springs from the divine world, in greater
 beauty There because There unmingled but mingled here.
 
 </p><p>From the beginning to end all is gripped by the Forms of the
 Intellectual Realm: Matter itself is held by the Ideas of 
 the elements
 and to these Ideas are added other Ideas and others again, so that
 it is hard to work down to crude Matter beneath all that sheathing
 of Idea. Indeed since Matter itself is in its degree, an Idea- the
 lowest- all this universe is Idea and there is nothing that is not
 Idea as the archetype was. And all is made silently, since 
 nothing had
 part in the making but Being and Idea further reason why 
 creation went
 without toil. The Exemplar was the Idea of an All, and so an All
 must come into being.
 
 </p><p>Thus nothing stood in the way of the Idea, and even now it
 dominates, despite all the clash of things: the creation is not
 hindered on its way even now; it stands firm in virtue of being All.
 To me, moreover, it seems that if we ourselves were 
 archetypes, Ideas,
 veritable Being, and the Idea with which we construct here were our
 veritable Essence, then our creative power too would 
 toillessly effect
 its purpose: as man now stands, he does not produce in his 
 work a true
 image of himself: become man, he has ceased to be the All: ceasing
 to be man- we read- "he soars aloft and administers the Kosmos
 entire"; restored to the All he is maker of the All.
 
 </p><p>But- to our immediate purpose- it is possible to give a 
 reason why
 the earth is set in the midst and why it is round and why 
 the ecliptic
 runs precisely as it does, but, looking to the creating principle,
 we cannot say that because this was the way therefore things were so
 planned: we can say only that because the All is what it is, 
 therefore
 there is a total of good; the causing principle, we might put it,
 reached the conclusion before all formal reasoning and not from any
 premises, not by sequence or plan but before either, since 
 all of that
 order is later, all reason, demonstration, persuasion.
 
 </p><p>Since there is a Source, all the created must spring from it and
 in accordance with it; and we are rightly told not to go seeking the
 causes impelling a Source to produce, especially when this is the
 perfectly sufficient Source and identical with the Term: a Source
 which is Source and Term must be the All-Unity, complete in itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn485.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>