<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn471.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn473.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. If this reasoning is valid, The Good has no scope whatever
 for intellection which demands something attractive from outside.
 The Good, then, is without Act. What Act indeed, could be vested in
 Activity's self? No activity has yet again an activity; and whatever
 we may add to such Activities as depend from something else, at
 least we must leave the first Activity of them all, that from which
 all depend, as an uncontaminated identity, one to which no such
 addition can be made.
 
 </p><p>That primal Activity, then, is not an intellection, for there is
 nothing upon which it could Exercise intellection since it is The
 First; besides, intellection itself does not exercise the 
 intellective
 act; this belongs to some principle in which intellection is vested.
 There is, we repeat, duality in any thinking being; and the First is
 wholly above the dual.
 
 </p><p>But all this may be made more evident by a clearer recognition
 of the twofold principle at work wherever there is intellection:
 
 </p><p>When we affirm the reality of the Real Beings and their 
 individual
 identity of being and declare that these Real Beings exist in the
 Intellectual Realm, we do not mean merely that they remain
 unchangeably self-identical by their very essence, as contrasted
 with the fluidity and instability of the sense-realm; the
 sense-realm itself may contain the enduring. No; we mean rather that
 these principles possess, as by their own virtue, the consummate
 fulness of being. The Essence described as the primally existent
 cannot be a shadow cast by Being, but must possess Being entire; and
 Being is entire when it holds the form and idea of 
 intellection and of
 life. In a Being, then, the existence, the intellection, the life
 are present as an aggregate. When a thing is a Being, it is also an
 Intellectual-Principle, when it is an Intellectual-Principle it is a
 Being; intellection and Being are co-existents. Therefore 
 intellection
 is a multiple not a unitary and that which does not belong to this
 order can have no Intellection. And if we turn to the partial and
 particular, there is the Intellectual form of man, and there is man,
 there is the Intellectual form of horse and there is horse, the
 Intellectual form of Justice, and Justice.
 
 </p><p>Thus all is dual: the unit is a duality and yet again the dual
 reverts to unity.
 
 </p><p>That, however, which stands outside all this category can be
 neither an individual unity nor an aggregate of all the duals or in
 any way a duality. How the duals rose from The One is treated
 elsewhere.
 
 </p><p>What stands above Being stands above intellection: it is no
 weakness in it not to know itself, since as pure unity it contains
 nothing which it needs to explore. But it need not even spend any
 knowing upon things outside itself: this which was always the Good
 of all gives them something greater and better than its knowledge of
 them in giving them in their own identity to cling, in whatever
 measure be possible, to a principle thus lofty.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn473.htm">Next: SEVENTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>