<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn538.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn540.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. In asserting that Being is not a unity, we do not 
 mean to imply
 a definite number of existences; the number may well be infinite: we
 mean simply that it is many as well as one, that it is, so 
 to speak, a
 diversified unity, a plurality in unity.
 
 </p><p>It follows that either the unity so regarded is a unity of genus
 under which the Existents, involving as they do plurality as well as
 unity, stand as species; or that while there are more genera 
 than one,
 yet all are subordinate to a unity; or there may be more genera than
 one, though no one genus is subordinate to any other, but all with
 their own subordinates- whether these be lesser genera, or species
 with individuals for their subordinates- all are elements in one
 entity, and from their totality the Intellectual realm- that which
 we know as Being- derives its constitution.
 
 </p><p>If this last is the truth, we have here not merely genera, but
 genera which are at the same time principles of Being. They 
 are genera
 because they have subordinates- other genera, and 
 successively species
 and individuals; they are also principles, since from this plurality
 Being takes its rise, constituted in its entirety from these its
 elements.
 
 </p><p>Suppose, however, a greater number of origins which by their
 mere totality comprised, without possessing any subordinates, the
 whole of Being; these would be first-principles but not genera: it
 would be as if one constructed the sensible world from the four
 elements- fire and the others; these elements would be first
 principles, but they would not be genera, unless the term "genus" is
 to be used equivocally.
 
 </p><p>But does this assertion of certain genera which are at the same
 time first-principles imply that by combining the genera, each with
 its subordinates, we find the whole of Being in the resultant
 combination? But then, taken separately, their existence will not be
 actual but only potential, and they will not be found in isolation.
 
 </p><p>Suppose, on the other hand, we ignore the genera and combine the
 particulars: what then becomes of the ignored genera? They will,
 surely, exist in the purity of their own isolation, and the mixtures
 will not destroy them. The question of how this result is 
 achieved may
 be postponed.
 
 </p><p>For the moment we take it as agreed that there are genera as
 distinct from principles of Being and that, on another plane,
 principles [elements] are opposed to compounds. We are thus 
 obliged to
 show in what relation we speak of genera and why we distinguish them
 instead of summing them under a unity; for otherwise we imply that
 their coalescence into a unity is fortuitous, whereas it 
 would be more
 plausible to dispense with their separate existence.
 
 </p><p>If all the genera could be species of Being, all individuals
 without exception being immediately subordinate to these 
 species, then
 such a unification becomes feasible. But that supposition bespeaks
 annihilation for the genera: the species will no longer be species;
 plurality will no longer be subordinated to unity; everything must
 be the unity, unless there exist some thing or things outside the
 unity. The One never becomes many- as the existence of species
 demands- unless there is something distinct from it: it cannot of
 itself assume plurality, unless we are to think of it as being
 broken into pieces like some extended body: but even so, the force
 which breaks it up must be distinct from it: if it is itself 
 to effect
 the breaking up- or whatever form the division may take- then it is
 itself previously divided.
 
 </p><p>For these and many other reasons we must abstain from positing a
 single genus, and especially because neither Being nor Substance can
 be the predicate of any given thing. If we do predicate Being, it is
 only as an accidental attribute; just as when we predicate whiteness
 of a substance, we are not predicating the Absolute Whiteness.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn540.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>