<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn540.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn542.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. If we had to ascertain the nature of body and the place it
 holds in the universe, surely we should take some sample of body,
 say stone, and examine into what constituents it may be 
 divided. There
 would be what we think of as the substrate of stone, its quantity-
 in this case, a magnitude; its quality- for example, the colour of
 stone. As with stone, so with every other body: we should see that
 in this thing, body, there are three distinguishable
 characteristics- the pseudo-substance, the quantity, the quality-
 though they all make one and are only logically trisected, the three
 being found to constitute the unit thing, body. If motion 
 were equally
 inherent in its constitution, we should include this as well, and
 the four would form a unity, the single body depending upon them all
 for its unity and characteristic nature.
 
 </p><p>The same method must be applied in examining the Intellectual
 Substance and the genera and first-principles of the Intellectual
 sphere.
 
 </p><p>But we must begin by subtracting what is peculiar to body, its
 coming-to-be, its sensible nature, its magnitude- that is to say,
 the characteristics which produce isolation and mutual separation.
 It is an Intellectual Being we have to consider, an Authentic
 Existent, possessed of a unity surpassing that of any sensible thing.
 
 </p><p>Now the wonder comes how a unity of this type can be many as
 well as one. In the case of body it was easy to concede
 unity-with-plurality; the one body is divisible to infinity; its
 colour is a different thing from its shape, since in fact they are
 separated. But if we take Soul, single, continuous, without 
 extension,
 of the highest simplicity- as the first effort of the mind makes
 manifest- how can we expect to find multiplicity here too? 
 We believed
 that the division of the living being into body and soul was final:
 body indeed was manifold, composite, diversified; but in soul we
 imagined we had found a simplex, and boldly made a halt, supposing
 that we had come to the limit of our course.
 
 </p><p>Let us examine this soul, presented to us from the Intellectual
 realm as body from the Sensible. How is its unity a plurality? How
 is its plurality a unity? Clearly its unity is not that of a 
 composite
 formed from diverse elements, but that of a single nature 
 comprising a
 plurality.
 
 </p><p>This problem attacked and solved, the truth about the genera
 comprised in Being will thereby, as we asserted, be elucidated also.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn542.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>