<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn592.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn594.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. But how explain beings by the side of Being, and the 
 variety of
 intelligences and of souls, when Being has the unity of omnipresent
 identity and not merely that of a species, and when 
 intellect and soul
 are likewise numerically one? We certainly distinguish between the
 soul of the All and the particular souls.
 
 </p><p>This seems to conflict with our view which, moreover, for all
 its logical necessity, scarcely carries conviction against our
 mental reluctance to the notion of unity identically omnipresent. It
 would appear more plausible to suppose a partition of the All-the
 original remaining undiminished- or, in a more legitimate phrase, an
 engendering from the All.
 
 </p><p>Thus the Authentic would be left self-gathered, while what we
 think of as the parts- the separate souls- would come into being to
 produce the multiple total of the universe.
 
 </p><p>But if the Authentic Being is to be kept unattached in order to
 remove the difficulty of integral omnipresence, the same
 considerations must apply equally to the souls; we would 
 have to admit
 that they cannot be integrally omnipresent in the bodies they are
 described as occupying; either, soul must be distributed, part to
 body's part, or it is lodged entire at some one point in the body
 giving forth some of its powers to the other points; and these very
 powers, again, present the same difficulty.
 
 </p><p>A further objection is that some one spot in the body will hold
 the soul, the others no more than a power from it.
 
 </p><p>Still, how account for the many souls, many intelligences, the
 beings by the side of the Being?
 
 </p><p>No doubt the beings proceed from the Priors in the mode only of
 numerical distinction and not as concrete masses, but the difficulty
 remains as to how they come to constitute the plenitude of the
 material universe.
 
 </p><p>This explanation by progression does not clear the problem.
 
 </p><p>We are agreed that diversity within the Authentic 
 depends not upon
 spatial separation but sheerly upon differentiation; all Being,
 despite this plurality, is a unity still; "Being neighbours Being";
 all holds together; and thus the Intellectual-Principle [which is
 Being and the Beings] remains an integral, multiple by
 differentiation, not by spatial distinction.
 
 </p><p>Soul too? Souls too. That principle distributed over material
 masses we hold to be in its own nature incapable of distribution;
 the magnitude belongs to the masses; when this soul-principle enters
 into them- or rather they into it- it is thought of as distributable
 only because, within the discrimination of the corporeal, the
 animating force is to be recognised at any and every point. For soul
 is not articulated, section of soul to section of body; there is
 integral omnipresence manifesting the unity of that principle, its
 veritable partlessness.
 
 </p><p>Now as in soul unity does not debar variety, so with 
 Being and the
 Beings; in that order multiplicity does not conflict with unity.
 Multiplicity. This is not due to the need of flooding the universe
 with life; nor is the extension of the corporeal the cause of the
 multiplicity of souls; before body existed, soul was one and 
 many; the
 many souls fore-existed in the All not potentially but each
 effectively; that one collective soul is no bar to the variety; the
 variety does not abrogate the unity; the souls are apart without
 partition, present each to all as never having been set in 
 opposition;
 they are no more hedged off by boundaries than are the multiple
 items of knowledge in one mind; the one soul so exists as to include
 all souls; the nature of such a principle must be utterly free of
 boundary.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn594.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>