<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn532.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn534.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 27</h4>
 
 <p>27. On other grounds also, it is indefensible not to 
 have reserved
 the high place for the true first-principle of things but to have
 set up in its stead the formless, passive and lifeless, the
 irrational, dark and indeterminate, and to have made this the source
 of Being. In this theory God is introduced merely for the sake of
 appearance: deriving existence from Matter he is a composite, a
 derivative, or, worse, a mere state of Matter.
 
 </p><p>Another consideration is that, if Matter is a substrate, there
 must be something outside it, which, acting on it and distinct from
 it, makes it the substrate of what is poured into it. But if God is
 lodged in Matter and by being involved in Matter is himself no more
 than a substrate, he will no longer make Matter a substrate nor be
 himself a substrate in conjunction with Matter. For of what will
 they be substrates, when that which could make them substrates is
 eliminated? This so-called substrate turns out to have swallowed up
 all that is; but a substrate must be relative, and relative 
 not to its
 content but to something which acts upon it as upon a datum.
 
 </p><p>Again, the substrate comports a relation to that which is not
 substrate; hence, to something external to it: there must, then, be
 something apart from the substrate. If nothing distinct and external
 is considered necessary, but the substrate itself can become
 everything and adopt every character, like the versatile 
 dancer in the
 pantomime, it ceases to be a substrate: it is, essentially,
 everything. The mime is not a substrate of the characters he puts
 on; these are in fact the realisation of his own personality:
 similarly, if the Matter with which this theory presents us comports
 in its own being all the realities, it is no longer the substrate of
 all: on the contrary, the other things can have no reality whatever,
 if they are no more than states of Matter in the sense that the
 poses of the mime are states through which he passes.
 
 </p><p>Then, those other things not existing, Matter will not be a
 substrate, nor will it have a place among the Existents; it will be
 Matter bare, and for that reason not even Matter, since Matter is a
 relative. The relative is relative to something else: it must,
 further, be homogeneous with that something else: double is relative
 to half, but not Substance to double.
 
 </p><p>How then can an Existent be relative to a Non-existent, except
 accidentally? But the True-Existent, or Matter, is related (to what
 emerges from it) as Existent to Non-Existent. For if potentiality is
 that which holds the promise of existence and that promise does not
 constitute Reality, the potentiality cannot be a Reality. In sum,
 these very teachers who deprecate the production of Realities from
 Nonrealities, themselves produce Non-reality from Reality; 
 for to them
 the universe as such is not a Reality.
 
 </p><p>But is it not a paradox that, while Matter, the Substrate, is to
 them an existence, bodies should not have more claim to 
 existence, the
 universe yet more, and not merely a claim grounded on the reality of
 one of its parts?
 
 </p><p>It is no less paradoxical that the living form should owe
 existence not to its soul but to its Matter only, the soul being but
 an affection of Matter and posterior to it. From what source then
 did Matter receive ensoulment? Whence, in short, is soul's entity
 derived? How does it occur that Matter sometimes turns into bodies,
 while another part of it turns into Soul? Even supposing that Form
 might come to it from elsewhere, that accession of Quality to Matter
 would account not for Soul, but simply for organized body soulless.
 If, on the contrary, there is something which both moulds Matter and
 produces Soul, then prior to the produced there must be Soul the
 producer.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn534.htm">Next: Section 28</a></center>
 </body>