<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn569.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn571.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. Another method of division is possible: substances may be
 classed as hot-dry, dry-cold, cold-moist, or however we 
 choose to make
 the coupling. We may then proceed to the combination and blending of
 these couples, either halting at that point and going no further
 than the compound, or else subdividing by habitation- on the 
 earth, in
 the earth- or by form and by the differences exhibited by living
 beings, not qua living, but in their bodies viewed as instruments of
 life.
 
 </p><p>Differentiation by form or shape is no more out of place than a
 division based on qualities- heat, cold and the like. If it be
 objected that qualities go to make bodies what they are, then, we
 reply, so do blendings, colours, shapes. Since our discussion is
 concerned with Sensible Substance, it is not strange that it should
 turn upon distinctions related to sense-perception: this Substance
 is not Being pure and simple, but the Sensible Being which 
 we call the
 Universe.
 
 </p><p>We have remarked that its apparent subsistence is in fact an
 assemblage of Sensibles, their existence guaranteed to us by
 sense-perception. But since their combination is unlimited, our
 division must be guided by the Form-Ideas of living beings, as for
 example the Form-Idea of Man implanted in Body; the particular Form
 acts as a qualification of Body, but there is nothing unreasonable
 in using qualities as a basis of division.
 
 </p><p>We may be told that we have distinguished between simple and
 composite bodies, even ranking them as opposites. But our 
 distinction,
 we reply, was between material and organic bodies and raised no
 question of the composite. In fact, there exists no means of
 opposing the composite to the simple; it is necessary to 
 determine the
 simples in the first stage of division, and then, combining them on
 the basis of a distinct underlying principle, to differentiate the
 composites in virtue of their places and shapes, distinguishing for
 example the heavenly from the earthly.
 
 </p><p>These observations will suffice for the Being [Substance], or
 rather the Becoming, which obtains in the Sensible realm.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn571.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>