<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn557.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn559.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 21</h4>
 
 <p>21. How then does the universal Intellect produce the
 particulars while, in virtue of its Reason-Principle, remaining a
 unity? In other words, how do the various grades of Being, as we
 call them, arise from the four primaries? Here is this great, this
 infinite Intellect, not given to idle utterance but to sheer
 intellection, all-embracing, integral, no part, no 
 individual: how, we
 ask, can it possibly be the source of all this plurality?
 
 </p><p>Number at all events it possesses in the objects of its
 contemplation: it is thus one and many, and the many are powers,
 wonderful powers, not weak but, being pure, supremely great 
 and, so to
 speak, full to overflowing powers in very truth, knowing no limit,
 so that they are infinite, infinity, Magnitude-Absolute.
 
 </p><p>As we survey this Magnitude with the beauty of Being 
 within it and
 the glory and light around it, all contained in Intellect, we see,
 simultaneously, Quality already in bloom, and along with the
 continuity of its Act we catch a glimpse of Magnitude at Rest. Then,
 with one, two and three in Intellect, Magnitude appears as of three
 dimensions, with Quantity entire. Quantity thus given and Quality,
 both merging into one and, we may almost say, becoming one, there is
 at once shape. Difference slips in to divide both Quantity and
 Quality, and so we have variations in shape and differences of
 Quality. Identity, coming in with Difference, creates equality,
 Difference meanwhile introducing into Quantity inequality, whether
 in number or in magnitude: thus are produced circles and squares,
 and irregular figures, with number like and unlike, odd and even.
 
 </p><p>The life of Intellect is intelligent, and its activity [Act] has
 no failing-point: hence it excludes none of the constituents we have
 discovered within it, each one of which we now see as an
 intellectual function, and all of them possessed by virtue of its
 distinctive power and in the mode appropriate to Intellect.
 
 </p><p>But though Intellect possesses them all by way of 
 thought, this is
 not discursive thought: nothing it lacks that is capable of 
 serving as
 Reason-Principle, while it may itself be regarded as one great and
 perfect Reason-Principle, holding all the Principles as one and
 proceeding from its own Primaries, or rather having eternally
 proceeded, so that "proceeding" is never true of it. It is a 
 universal
 rule that whatever reasoning discovers to exist in Nature is to be
 found in Intellect apart from all ratiocination: we conclude that
 Being has so created Intellect that its reasoning is after a mode
 similar to that of the Principles which produce living 
 beings; for the
 Reason-Principles, prior to reasoning though they are, act
 invariably in the manner which the most careful reasoning would
 adopt in order to attain the best results.
 
 </p><p>What conditions, then, are we to think of as existing in that
 realm which is prior to Nature and transcends the Principles of
 Nature? In a sphere in which Substance is not distinct from 
 Intellect,
 and neither Being nor Intellect is of alien origin, it is 
 obvious that
 Being is best served by the domination of Intellect, so that Being
 is what Intellect wills and is: thus alone can it be authentic and
 primary Being; for if Being is to be in any sense derived, its
 derivation must be from Intellect.
 
 </p><p>Being, thus, exhibits every shape and every quality; it is not
 seen as a thing determined by some one particular quality; 
 there could
 not be one only, since the principle of Difference is there; 
 and since
 Identity is equally there, it must be simultaneously one and 
 many. And
 so Being is; such it always was: unity-with-plurality appears in all
 its species, as witness all the variations of magnitude, shape and
 quality. Clearly nothing may legitimately be excluded [from Being],
 for the whole must be complete in the higher sphere which,
 otherwise, would not be the whole.
 
 </p><p>Life, too, burst upon Being, or rather was inseparably bound up
 with it; and thus it was that all living things of necessity came to
 be. Body too was there, since Matter and Quality were present.
 
 </p><p>Everything exists forever, unfailing, involved by very existence
 in eternity. Individuals have their separate entities, but are at
 one in the [total] unity. The complex, so to speak, of them all,
 thus combined, is Intellect; and Intellect, holding all existence
 within itself, is a complete living being, and the essential Idea of
 Living Being. In so far as Intellect submits to contemplation by its
 derivative, becoming an Intelligible, it gives that derivative the
 right also to be called "living being."
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn559.htm">Next: Section 22</a></center>
 </body>