<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn567.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn569.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. The division into elements must, in short, be abandoned,
 especially in regard to Sensible Substance, known 
 necessarily by sense
 rather than by reason. We must no longer look for help in
 constituent parts, since such parts will not be substances, or at
 any rate not sensible substances.
 
 </p><p>Our plan must be to apprehend what is constant in stone, earth,
 water and the entities which they compose- the vegetal and animal
 forms, considered purely as sensibles- and to confine this constant
 within a single genus. Neither Matter nor Form will thus be
 overlooked, for Sensible Substance comports them; fire and earth and
 the two intermediaries consist of Matter and Form, while composite
 things are actually many substances in one. They all, moreover, have
 that common property which distinguishes them from other things:
 serving as subjects to these others, they are never 
 themselves present
 in a subject nor predicated of any other thing. Similarly, all the
 characteristics which we have ascribed to Substance find a place in
 this classification.
 
 </p><p>But Sensible Substance is never found apart from magnitude and
 quality: how then do we proceed to separate these accidents? If we
 subtract them- magnitude, figure, colour, dryness, moistness- what
 is there left to be regarded as Substance itself? All the substances
 under consideration are, of course, qualified.
 
 </p><p>There is, however, something in relation to which whatever turns
 Substance into qualified Substance is accidental: thus, the whole of
 fire is not Substance, but only a part of it- if the term "part" be
 allowed.
 
 </p><p>What then can this "part" be? Matter may be suggested. But are
 we actually to maintain that the particular sensible substance
 consists of a conglomeration of qualities and Matter, while Sensible
 Substance as a whole is merely the sum of these coagulations in the
 uniform Matter, each one separately forming a quale or a quantum or
 else a thing of many qualities? Is it true to say that everything
 whose absence leaves subsistence incomplete is a part of the
 particular substance, while all that is accidental to the substance
 already existent takes independent rank and is not submerged in the
 mixture which constitutes this so-called substance?
 
 </p><p>I decline to allow that whatever combines in this way with
 anything else is Substance if it helps to produce a single 
 mass having
 quantity and quality, whereas taken by itself and divorced from this
 complementary function it is a quality: not everything which
 composes the amalgam is Substance, but only the amalgam as a whole.
 
 </p><p>And let no one take exception on the ground that we produce
 Sensible Substance from non-substances. The whole amalgam itself is
 not True Substance; it is merely an imitation of that True Substance
 which has Being apart from its concomitants, these indeed being
 derived from it as the possessor of True Being. In the lower 
 realm the
 case is different: the underlying ground is sterile, and from its
 inability to produce fails to attain to the status of Being; it
 remains a shadow, and on this shadow is traced a sketch- the world
 of Appearance.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn569.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>