<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn518.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn520.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. With regard to Date:
 
 </p><p>If "yesterday," "to-morrow," "last year" and similar terms
 denote parts of time, why should they not be included in the same
 genus as time? It would seem only reasonable to range under time the
 past, present and future, which are its species. But time is
 referred to Quantity; what then is the need for a separate 
 category of
 Date?
 
 </p><p>If we are told that past and future- including under past such
 definite dates as yesterday and last year which must clearly be
 subordinate to past time- and even the present "now" are not merely
 time but time- when, we reply, in the first place, that the notion
 of time- when involves time; that, further, if "yesterday" is
 time-gone-by, it will be a composite, since time and gone-by are
 distinct notions: we have two categories instead of the single one
 required.
 
 </p><p>But suppose that Date is defined not as time but as that which
 is in time; if by that which is in time is meant the 
 subject- Socrates
 in the proposition "Socrates existed last year"- that subject is
 external to the notion of time, and we have again a duality.
 
 </p><p>Consider, however, the proposition "Socrates- or some action-
 exists at this time"; what can be the meaning here other than "in a
 part of time"? But if, admitted that Date is "a part of time," it be
 felt that the part requires definition and involves something more
 than mere time, that we must say the part of time gone by, several
 notions are massed in the proposition: we have the part 
 which qua part
 is a relative; and we have "gone-by" which, if it is to have any
 import at all, must mean the past: but this "past," we have shown,
 is a species of time.
 
 </p><p>It may be urged that "the past" is in its nature 
 indefinite, while
 "yesterday" and "last year" are definite. We reply, first, that we
 demand some place in our classification for the past: secondly, that
 "yesterday," as definite past, is necessarily definite time. But
 definite time implies a certain quantity of time: therefore, if time
 is quantitative, each of the terms in question must signify 
 a definite
 quantity.
 
 </p><p>Again, if by "yesterday" we are expected to understand that this
 or that event has taken Place at a definite time gone by, we 
 have more
 notions than ever. Besides, if we must introduce fresh categories
 because one thing acts in another- as in this case something acts in
 time- we have more again from its acting upon another in 
 another. This
 point will be made plain by what follows in our discussion of Place.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn520.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>