<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn575.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn577.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. When each of the entities bound up with the pseudo-substance
 is taken apart from the rest, the name of Quality is given 
 to that one
 among them, by which without pointing to essence or quantity 
 or motion
 we signify the distinctive mark, the type or aspect of a thing- for
 example, the beauty or ugliness of a body. This beauty- need we
 say?- is identical in name only with Intellectual Beauty: it follows
 that the term "Quality" as applied to the Sensible and the
 Intellectual is necessarily equivocal; even blackness and whiteness
 are different in the two spheres.
 
 </p><p>But the beauty in the germ, in the particular 
 Reason-Principle- is
 this the same as the manifested beauty, or do they coincide only in
 name? Are we to assign this beauty- and the same question applies to
 deformity in the soul- to the Intellectual order, or to the
 Sensible? That beauty is different in the two spheres is by 
 now clear.
 If it be embraced in Sensible Quality, then virtue must also be
 classed among the qualities of the lower. But merely some 
 virtues will
 take rank as Sensible, others as Intellectual qualities.
 
 </p><p>It may even be doubted whether the arts, as 
 Reason-Principles, can
 fairly be among Sensible qualities; Reason-Principles, it is 
 true, may
 reside in Matter, but "matter" for them means Soul. On the 
 other hand,
 their being found in company with Matter commits them in some degree
 to the lower sphere. Take the case of lyrical music: it is performed
 upon strings; melody, which may be termed a part of the art, is
 sensuous sound- though, perhaps, we should speak here not of 
 parts but
 of manifestations [Acts]: yet, called manifestations, they are
 nonetheless sensuous. The beauty inherent in body is similarly
 bodiless; but we have assigned it to the order of things 
 bound up with
 body and subordinate to it.
 
 </p><p>Geometry and arithmetic are, we shall maintain, of a twofold
 character; in their earthly types they rank with Sensible 
 Quality, but
 in so far as they are functions of pure Soul, they necessarily
 belong to that other world in close proximity to the Intellectual.
 This, too, is in Plato's view the case with music and astronomy.
 
 </p><p>The arts concerned with material objects and making use of
 perceptible instruments and sense-perception must be classed with
 Sensible Quality, even though they are dispositions of the Soul,
 attendant upon its apostasy.
 
 </p><p>There is also every reason for consigning to this category the
 practical virtues whose function is directed to a social 
 end: these do
 not isolate Soul by inclining it towards the higher; their
 manifestation makes for beauty in this world, a beauty 
 regarded not as
 necessary but as desirable.
 
 </p><p>On this principle, the beauty in the germ, and still more the
 blackness and whiteness in it, will be included among Sensible
 Qualities.
 
 </p><p>Are we, then, to rank the individual soul, as containing these
 Reason-Principles, with Sensible Substance? But we do not even
 identify the Principles with body; we merely include them in
 Sensible Quality on the ground that they are connected with body and
 are activities of body. The constituents of Sensible Substance have
 already been specified; we have no intention whatever of adding to
 them Substance bodiless.
 
 </p><p>As for Qualities, we hold that they are invariably 
 bodiless, being
 affections arising within Soul; but, like the 
 Reason-Principles of the
 individual soul, they are associated with Soul in its apostasy, and
 are accordingly counted among the things of the lower realm: such
 affections, torn between two worlds by their objects and their
 abode, we have assigned to Quality, which is indeed not bodily but
 manifested in body.
 
 </p><p>But we refrain from assigning Soul to Sensible Substance, on the
 ground that we have already referred to Quality [which is Sensible]
 those affections of Soul which are related to body. On the contrary,
 Soul, conceived apart from affection and Reason-Principle, we have
 restored to its origin, leaving in the lower realm no substance
 which is in any sense Intellectual.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn577.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>