<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn543.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn545.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. What, then, are the several entities observable in this
 plurality?
 
 </p><p>We have found Substance [Essence] and life simultaneously
 present in Soul. Now, this Substance is a common property of 
 Soul, but
 life, common to all souls, differs in that it is a property of
 Intellect also.
 
 </p><p>Having thus introduced Intellect and its life we make a single
 genus of what is common to all life, namely, Motion. 
 Substance and the
 Motion, which constitutes the highest life, we must consider as two
 genera; for even though they form a unity, they are separable to
 thought which finds their unity not a unity; otherwise, it could not
 distinguish them.
 
 </p><p>Observe also how in other things Motion or life is clearly
 separated from Being- a separation impossible, doubtless, in True
 Being, but possible in its shadow and namesake. In the portrait of a
 man much is left out, and above all the essential thing, life: the
 "Being" of sensible things just such a shadow of True Being, an
 abstraction from that Being complete which was life in the
 Archetype; it is because of this incompleteness that we are able in
 the Sensible world to separate Being from life and life from Being.
 
 </p><p>Being, then, containing many species, has but one genus. Motion,
 however, is to be classed as neither a subordinate nor a 
 supplement of
 Being but as its concomitant; for we have not found Being serving as
 substrate to Motion. Motion is being Act; neither is separated from
 the other except in thought; the two natures are one; for Being is
 inevitably actual, not potential.
 
 </p><p>No doubt we observe Motion and Being separately, Motion as
 contained in Being and Being as involved in Motion, and in the
 individual they may be mutually exclusive; but the dualism is an
 affirmation of our thought only, and that thought sees either form
 as a duality within a unity.
 
 </p><p>Now Motion, thus manifested in conjunction with Being, does not
 alter Being's nature- unless to complete its essential character-
 and it does retain for ever its own peculiar nature: at 
 once, then, we
 are forced to introduce Stability. To reject Stability would be more
 unreasonable than to reject Motion; for Stability is 
 associated in our
 thought and conception with Being even more than with Motion;
 unalterable condition, unchanging mode, single 
 Reason-Principle- these
 are characteristics of the higher sphere.
 
 </p><p>Stability, then, may also be taken as a single genus. Obviously
 distinct from Motion and perhaps even its contrary, that it is also
 distinct from Being may be shown by many considerations. We may
 especially observe that if Stability were identical with Being, so
 also would Motion be, with equal right. Why identity in the case of
 Stability and not in that of Motion, when Motion is 
 virtually the very
 life and Act both of Substance and of Absolute Being? However, on
 the very same principle on which we separated Motion from Being with
 the understanding that it is the same and not the same- that they
 are two and yet one- we also separate Stability from Being, holding
 it, yet, inseparable; it is only a logical separation entailing the
 inclusion among the Existents of this other genus. To identify
 Stability with Being, with no difference between them, and 
 to identify
 Being with Motion, would be to identify Stability with Motion
 through the mediation of Being, and so to make Motion and Stability
 one and the same thing.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn545.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>