<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn519.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn521.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. The Academy and the Lyceum are places, and parts of Place,
 just as "above," "below," "here" are species or parts of Place; the
 difference is of minuter delimitation.
 
 </p><p>If then "above," "below," "the middle" are places- Delphi, for
 example, is the middle [of the earth]- and "near-the-middle" 
 is also a
 place- Athens, and of course the Lyceum and the other places usually
 cited, are near the middle- what need have we to go further and seek
 beyond Place, admitting as we do that we refer in every instance to
 a place?
 
 </p><p>If, however, we have in mind the presence of one thing 
 in another,
 we are not speaking of a single entity, we are not 
 expressing a single
 notion.
 
 </p><p>Another consideration: when we say that a man is here, we
 present a relation of the man to that in which he is, a relation of
 the container to the contained. Why then do we not class as 
 a relative
 whatever may be produced from this relation?
 
 </p><p>Besides, how does "here" differ from "at Athens"? The
 demonstrative "here" admittedly signifies place; so, then, does "at
 Athens": "at Athens" therefore belongs to the category of Place.
 
 </p><p>Again, if "at Athens" means "is at Athens," then the "is" as
 well as the place belongs to the predicate; but this cannot be
 right: we do not regard "is a quality" as predicate, but "a quality."
 
 </p><p>Furthermore, if "in time," "in place" are to be ranged under a
 category other than that applying to time and place, why not a
 separate category for "in a vessel"? Why not distinct categories for
 "in Matter," "in a subject," "a part in a whole," "a whole in its
 parts," "a genus in its species," "a species in a genus"? We are
 certainly on the way to a goodly number of categories.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn521.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>