<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn562.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn564.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. How then do we go to work?
 
 </p><p>Let us begin by distinguishing Matter, Form, the Mixture of
 both, and the Attributes of the Mixture. The Attributes may be
 subdivided into those which are mere predicates, and those serving
 also as accidents. The accidents may be either inclusive or
 included; they may, further, be classified as activities, 
 experiences,
 consequents.
 
 </p><p>Matter will be found common to all substances, not however as a
 genus, since it has no differentiae- unless indeed differentiae be
 ascribed to it on the ground of its taking such various forms as
 fire and air.
 
 </p><p>It may be held that Matter is sufficiently constituted a genus
 by the fact that the things in which it appears hold it in common,
 or in that it presents itself as a whole of parts. In this sense
 Matter will indeed be a genus, though not in the accepted 
 sense of the
 term. Matter, we may remark, is also a single element, if the
 element as such is able to constitute a genus.
 
 </p><p>Further, if to a Form be added the qualification "bound up with,
 involved in Matter," Matter separates that Form from other Forms: it
 does not however embrace the whole of Substantial Form [as, to be
 the genus of Form, it must].
 
 </p><p>We may, again, regard Form as the creator of Substance and make
 the Reason-Principle of Substance dependent upon Form: yet we do not
 come thereby to an understanding of the nature of Substance.
 
 </p><p>We may, also, restrict Substance to the Composite. 
 Matter and Form
 then cease to be substances. If they are Substance equally with the
 Composite, it remains to enquire what there is common to all three.
 
 </p><p>The "mere predicates" fall under the category of Relation: such
 are cause and element. The accidents included in the composite
 substances ire found to be either Quality or Quantity; those 
 which are
 inclusive are of the nature of Space and Time. Activities and
 experiences comprise Motions; consequents Space and Time, which are
 consequents respectively of the Composites and of Motion.
 
 </p><p>The first three entities [Matter, Form, Composite] go, as we
 have discovered, to make a single common genus, the Sensible
 counterpart of Substance. Then follow in order Relation, Quantity,
 Quality, Time-during-which, Place-in-which, Motion; though, with
 Time and Space already included [under Relation], Time-during-which
 and Place-in-which become superfluous.
 
 </p><p>Thus we have five genera, counting the first three entities as
 one. If the first three are not massed into a unity, the series will
 be Matter, Form, Composite, Relation, Quantity, Quality, Motion. The
 last three may, again, be included in Relation, which is capable of
 bearing this wider extension.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn564.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>