<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn509.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn511.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. But perhaps we should rather speak of some single category,
 embracing Intellectual Substance, Matter, Form, and the Composite of
 Matter and Form. One might refer to the family of the Heraclids as a
 unity in the sense, not of a common element in all its 
 members, but of
 a common origin: similarly, Intellectual Substance would be
 Substance in the first degree, the others being substances by
 derivation and in a lower degree.
 
 </p><p>But what is the objection to including everything in a single
 category, all else of which existence is predicated being 
 derived from
 that one thing, Existence or Substance? Because, granted that things
 be no more than modifications of Substance, there is a distinct
 grading of substances themselves. Moreover, the single category does
 not put us in a position to build on Substance, or to grasp it in
 its very truth as the plausible source of the other substances.
 
 </p><p>Supposing we grant that all things known as substances are
 homogeneous as possessing something denied to the other genera, what
 precisely is this something, this individuality, this 
 subject which is
 never a predicate, this thing not present in any thing as in a
 subject, this thing which does not owe its essential character to
 any other thing, as a quality takes character from a body and a
 quantity from a substance, as time is related to motion and motion
 to the moved?
 
 </p><p>The Second Substance is, it is true, a predicate. But
 predication in this case signifies a different relation from 
 that just
 considered; it reveals the genus inherent in the subject and the
 subject's essential character, whereas whiteness is predicated of a
 thing in the sense of being present in the thing.
 
 </p><p>The properties adduced may indeed be allowed to distinguish
 Substance from the other Existents. They afford a means of grouping
 substances together and calling them by a common name. They do not
 however establish the unity of a genus, and they do not 
 bring to light
 the concept and the nature of Substance.
 
 </p><p>These considerations are sufficient for our purpose: let us now
 proceed to investigate the nature of Quantity.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn511.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>