<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn561.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn563.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Our first observations must be directed to what passes in the
 Sensible realm for Substance. It is, we shall agree, only by analogy
 that the nature manifested in bodies is designated as Substance, and
 by no means because such terms as Substance or Being tally with the
 notion of bodies in flux; the proper term would be Becoming.
 
 </p><p>But Becoming is not a uniform nature; bodies comprise under the
 single head simples and composites, together with accidentals or
 consequents, these last themselves capable of separate 
 classification.
 
 </p><p>Alternatively, Becoming may be divided into Matter and the Form
 imposed upon Matter. These may be regarded each as a separate genus,
 or else both may be brought under a single category and receive
 alike the name of Substance.
 
 </p><p>But what, we may ask, have Matter and Form in common? In what
 sense can Matter be conceived as a genus, and what will be its
 species? What is the differentia of Matter? In which genus, Matter or
 Form, are we to rank the composite of both? It may be this very
 composite which constitutes the Substance manifested in bodies,
 neither of the components by itself answering to the conception of
 Body: how, then, can we rank them in one and the same genus as the
 composite? How can the elements of a thing be brought within the
 same genus as the thing itself? Yet if we begin with bodies, our
 first-principles will be compounds.
 
 </p><p>Why not resort to analogy? Admitted that the 
 classification of the
 Sensible cannot proceed along the identical lines marked out for the
 Intellectual: is there any reason why we should not for
 Intellectual-Being substitute Matter, and for Intellectual Motion
 substitute Sensible Form, which is in a sense the life and
 consummation of Matter? The inertia of Matter would correspond with
 Stability, while the Identity and Difference of the 
 Intellectual would
 find their counterparts in the similarity and diversity which obtain
 in the Sensible realm.
 
 </p><p>But, in the first place, Matter does not possess or acquire Form
 as its life or its Act; Form enters it from without, and remains
 foreign to its nature. Secondly, Form in the Intellectual is an Act
 and a motion; in the Sensible Motion is different from Form and
 accidental to it: Form in relation to Matter approximates rather to
 Stability than to Motion; for by determining Matter's
 indetermination it confers upon it a sort of repose.
 
 </p><p>In the higher realm Identity and Difference presuppose a unity
 at once identical and different: a thing in the lower is different
 only by participation in Difference and in relation to some other
 thing; Identity and Difference are here predicated of the
 particular, which is not, as in that realm, a posterior.
 
 </p><p>As for Stability, how can it belong to Matter, which is
 distorted into every variety of mass, receiving its forms from
 without, and even with the aid of these forms incapable of offspring.
 
 </p><p>This mode of division must accordingly be abandoned.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn563.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>