<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn504.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn506.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. There is, thus, a Nature comprehending in the 
 Intellectual all
 that exists, and this Principle must be the source of all. But how,
 seeing that the veritable source must be a unity, simplex utterly?
 
 </p><p>The mode by which from the unity arises the multiple, 
 how all this
 universe comes to be, why the Intellectual-Principle is all 
 and whence
 it springs, these matters demand another approach.
 
 </p><p>But on the question as to whether the repulsive and the products
 of putridity have also their Idea- whether there is an Idea of filth
 and mud- it is to be observed that all that the 
 Intellectual-Principle
 derived from The First is of the noblest; in those Ideas the base is
 not included: these repulsive things point not to the
 Intellectual-Principle but to the Soul which, drawing upon the
 Intellectual-Principle, takes from Matter certain other things, and
 among them these.
 
 </p><p>But all this will be more clearly brought out, when we 
 turn to the
 problem of the production of multiplicity from unity. Compounds, we
 shall see- as owing existence to hazard and not to the
 Intellectual-Principle, having been fused into objects of sense by
 their own impulse- are not to be included under Ideas.
 
 </p><p>The products of putrefaction are to be traced to the Soul's
 inability to bring some other thing to being- something in the order
 of nature, which, else, it would- but producing where it may. In the
 matter of the arts and crafts, all that are to be traced to the
 needs of human nature are laid up in the Absolute Man.
 
 </p><p>And before the particular Soul there is another Soul, a 
 universal,
 and, before that, an Absolute-Soul, which is the Life existing in
 the Intellectual-Principle before Soul came to be and therefore
 rightly called [as the Life in the Divine] the Absolute-Soul.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn506.htm">Next: THE SIXTH ENNEAD</a></center>
 </body>