<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn565.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn567.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. Granted, it may be urged, that these observations upon the
 nature of Substance are sound, we have not yet arrived at a
 statement of its essence. Our critic doubtless expects to see this
 "Sensible": but its essence, its characteristic being, 
 cannot be seen.
 
 </p><p>Do we infer that fire and water are not Substance? They
 certainly are not Substance because they are visible. Why, then?
 Because they possess Matter? No. Or Form? No. Nor because 
 they involve
 a Couplement of Matter and Form. Then why are they Substance? By
 existing. But does not Quantity exist, and Quality? This 
 anomaly is to
 be explained by an equivocation in the term "existence."
 
 </p><p>What, then, is the meaning of "existence" as applied to fire,
 earth and the other elements? What is the difference between this
 existence and existence in the other categories? It is the
 difference between being simply- that which merely is- and being
 white. But surely the being qualified by "white" is the same as that
 having no qualification? It is not the same: the latter is Being in
 the primary sense, the former is Being only by participation and in
 a secondary degree. Whiteness added to Being produces a being white;
 Being added to whiteness produces a white being: thus, whiteness
 becomes an accident of Being, and Being an accident of whiteness.
 
 </p><p>The case is not equivalent to predicating white of Socrates and
 Socrates of white: for Socrates remains the same, though white would
 appear to have a different meaning in the two propositions, since in
 predicating Socrates of white we include Socrates in the [whole]
 sphere of whiteness, whereas in the proposition "Socrates is white"
 whiteness is plainly an attribute of Socrates.
 
 </p><p>"Being is white" implies, similarly, that Being possesses
 whiteness as an attribute, while in the proposition "whiteness is
 Being [or, is a being]" Being is regarded as comprising whiteness in
 its own extension.
 
 </p><p>In sum, whiteness has existence because it is bound up with
 Being and present in it: Being is, thus, the source of its
 existence. Being is Being on its own account, but the white is due
 to whiteness- not because it is "present in" whiteness, but because
 whiteness is present in it.
 
 </p><p>The Being of the Sensible resembles the white in not originating
 in itself. It must therefore be regarded as dependent for its being
 upon the Authentic Being, as white is dependent upon the Authentic
 Whiteness, and the Authentic Whiteness dependent for its whiteness
 upon participation in that Supreme Being whose existence is 
 underived.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn567.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>