<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn521.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn523.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. If it be urged that Motion is but imperfect Act, there would
 be no objection to giving priority to Act and subordinating to it
 Motion with its imperfection as a species: Act would thus be
 predicated of Motion, but with the qualification "imperfect."
 
 </p><p>Motion is thought of as imperfect, not because it is not an Act,
 but because, entirely an Act, it yet entails repetition [lacks
 finality]. It repeats, not in order that it may achieve actuality-
 it is already actual- but that it may attain a goal distinct from
 itself and posterior: it is not the motion itself that is then
 consummated but the result at which it aims. Walking is walking from
 the outset; when one should traverse a racecourse but has 
 not yet done
 so, the deficiency lies not in the walking- not in the motion- but
 in the amount of walking accomplished; no matter what the amount, it
 is walking and motion already: a moving man has motion and a cutter
 cuts before there is any question of Quantity. And just as we can
 speak of Act without implying time, so we can of Motion, 
 except in the
 sense of motion over a defined area; Act is timeless, and so 
 is Motion
 pure and simple.
 
 </p><p>Are we told that Motion is necessarily in time, inasmuch as it
 involves continuity? But, at this, sight, never ceasing to see, will
 also be continuous and in time. Our critic, it is true, may find
 support in that principle of proportion which states that 
 you may make
 a division of no matter what motion, and find that neither the
 motion nor its duration has any beginning but that the 
 division may be
 continued indefinitely in the direction of the motion's origin: this
 would mean that a motion just begun has been in progress from an
 infinity of time, that it is infinite as regards its beginning.
 
 </p><p>Such then is the result of separating Act from Motion: Act, we
 aver, is timeless; yet we are forced to maintain not only 
 that time is
 necessary to quantitative motion, but, unreservedly, that Motion is
 quantitative in its very nature; though indeed, if it were a case of
 motion occupying a day or some other quantity of time, the exponents
 of this view would be the first to admit that Quantity is present to
 Motion only by way of accident.
 
 </p><p>In sum, just as Act is timeless, so there is no reason why
 Motion also should not primarily be timeless, time attaching to it
 only in so far as it happens to have such and such an extension.
 
 </p><p>Timeless change is sanctioned in the expression, "as if change
 could not take place all at once"; if then change is 
 timeless, why not
 Motion also?- Change, be it noted, is here distinguished from the
 result of change, the result being unnecessary to establish 
 the change
 itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn523.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>