<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn515.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn517.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. As regards Quality, the source of what we call a "quale," we
 must in the first place consider what nature it possesses in
 accordance with which it produces the "qualia," and whether, 
 remaining
 one and the same in virtue of that common ground, it has also
 differences whereby it produces the variety of species. If 
 there is no
 common ground and the term Quality involves many connotations, there
 cannot be a single genus of Quality.
 
 </p><p>What then will be the common ground in habit, 
 disposition, passive
 quality, figure, shape? In light, thick and lean?
 
 </p><p>If we hold this common ground to be a power adapting 
 itself to the
 forms of habits, dispositions and physical capacities, a power which
 gives the possessor whatever capacities he has, we have no plausible
 explanation of incapacities. Besides, how are figure and the shape
 of a given thing to be regarded as a power?
 
 </p><p>Moreover, at this, Being will have no power qua Being but only
 when Quality has been added to it; and the activities of those
 substances which are activities in the highest degree, will be
 traceable to Quality, although they are autonomous and owe their
 essential character to powers wholly their own!
 
 </p><p>Perhaps, however, qualities are conditioned by powers which are
 posterior to the substances as such [and so do not interfere with
 their essential activities]. Boxing, for example, is not a power of
 man qua man; reasoning is: therefore reasoning, on this 
 hypothesis, is
 not quality but a natural possession of the mature human being; it
 therefore is called a quality only by analogy. Thus, Quality is a
 power which adds the property of being qualia to substances already
 existent.
 
 </p><p>The differences distinguishing substances from each other are
 called qualities only by analogy; they are, more strictly, Acts and
 Reason-Principles, or parts of Reason-Principles, and though they
 may appear merely to qualify the substance, they in fact indicate
 its essence.
 
 </p><p>Qualities in the true sense- those, that is, which determine
 qualia- being in accordance with our definition powers, will 
 in virtue
 of this common ground be a kind of Reason-Principle; they 
 will also be
 in a sense Forms, that is, excellences and imperfections whether of
 soul or of body.
 
 </p><p>But how can they all be powers? Beauty or health of soul or
 body, very well: but surely not ugliness, disease, weakness,
 incapacity. In a word, is powerlessness a power?
 
 </p><p>It may be urged that these are qualities in so far as qualia are
 also named after them: but may not the qualia be so called 
 by analogy,
 and not in the strict sense of the single principle? Not only may
 the term be understood in the four ways [of Aristotle], but each of
 the four may have at least a twofold significance.
 
 </p><p>In the first place, Quality is not merely a question of 
 action and
 passion, involving a simple distinction between the 
 potentially active
 [quality] and the passive: health, disposition and habit, disease,
 strength and weakness are also classed as qualities. It follows that
 the common ground is not power, but something we have still to seek.
 
 </p><p>Again, not all qualities can be regarded as Reason-Principles:
 chronic disease cannot be a Reason-Principle. Perhaps, however, we
 must speak in such cases of privations, restricting the term
 "Quantities" to Ideal-Forms and powers. Thus we shall have, not a
 single genus, but reference only to the unity of a category. 
 Knowledge
 will be regarded as a Form and a power, ignorance as a privation and
 powerlessness.
 
 </p><p>On the other hand, powerlessness and disease are a kind of Form;
 disease and vice have many powers though looking to evil.
 
 </p><p>But how can a mere failure be a power? Doubtless the 
 truth is that
 every quality performs its own function independently of a standard;
 for in no case could it produce an effect outside of its power.
 
 </p><p>Even beauty would seem to have a power of its own. Does 
 this apply
 to triangularity?
 
 </p><p>Perhaps, after all, it is not a power we must consider, but a
 disposition. Thus, qualities will be determined by the forms and
 characteristics of the object qualified: their common element, then,
 will be Form and ideal type, imposed upon Substance and posterior to
 it.
 
 </p><p>But then, how do we account for the powers? We may doubtless
 remark that even the natural boxer is so by being constituted in a
 particular way; similarly, with the man unable to box: to
 generalize, the quality is a characteristic non-essential. 
 Whatever is
 seen to apply alike to Being and to non-Being, as do heat and
 whiteness and colours generally, is either different from Being- is,
 for example, an Act of Being- or else is some secondary of Being,
 derived from it, contained in it, its image and likeness.
 
 </p><p>But if Quality is determined by formation and characteristic and
 Reason-Principle, how explain the various cases of powerlessness and
 deformity? Doubtless we must think of Principles imperfectly
 present, as in the case of deformity. And disease- how does 
 that imply
 a Reason-Principle? Here, no doubt, we must think of a principle
 disturbed, the Principle of health.
 
 </p><p>But it is not necessary that all qualities involve a
 Reason-Principle; it suffices that over and above the 
 various kinds of
 disposition there exist a common element distinct from Substance,
 and it is what comes after the substance that constitutes Quality in
 an object.
 
 </p><p>But triangularity is a quality of that in which it is present;
 it is however no longer triangularity as such, but the triangularity
 present in that definite object and modified in proportion to its
 success in shaping that object.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn517.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>