<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn582.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn584.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 23</h4>
 
 <p>23. The Motion which acts upon Sensible objects enters from
 without, and so shakes, drives, rouses and thrusts its participants
 that they may neither rest nor preserve their identity- and 
 all to the
 end that they may be caught into that restlessness, that flustering
 excitability which is but an image of Life.
 
 </p><p>We must avoid identifying Motion with the objects moved: by
 walking we do not mean the feet but the activity springing from a
 potentiality in the feet. Since the potentiality is invisible, we
 see of necessity only the active feet- that is to say, not feet
 simply, as would be the case if they were at rest, but something
 besides feet, something invisible but indirectly seen as an
 accompaniment by the fact that we observe the feet to be in
 ever-changing positions and no longer at rest. We infer 
 alteration, on
 the other hand, from the qualitative change in the thing altered.
 
 </p><p>Where, then, does Motion reside, when there is one thing that
 moves and another that passes from an inherent potentiality to
 actuality? In the mover? How then will the moved, the patient,
 participate in the motion? In the moved? Then why does not Motion
 remain in it, once having come? It would seem that Motion 
 must neither
 be separated from the active principle nor allowed to reside 
 in it; it
 must proceed from agent to patient without so inhering in the latter
 as to be severed from the former, passing from one to the 
 other like a
 breath of wind.
 
 </p><p>Now, when the potentiality of Motion consists in an ability to
 walk, it may be imagined as thrusting a man forward and 
 causing him to
 be continually adopting a different position; when it lies in the
 capacity to heat, it heats; when the potentiality takes hold 
 of Matter
 and builds up the organism, we have growth; and when another
 potentiality demolishes the structure, the result is decay, 
 that which
 has the potentiality of demolition experiencing the decay. Where the
 birth-giving principle is active, we find birth; where it is
 impotent and the power to destroy prevails, destruction takes place-
 not the destruction of what already exists, but that which
 intervenes upon the road to existence.
 
 </p><p>Health comes about in the same way- when the power which
 produces health is active and predominant; sickness is the result of
 the opposite power working in the opposite direction.
 
 </p><p>Thus, Motion is conditioned, not only by the objects in which it
 occurs, but also by its origins and its course, and it is a
 distinctive mark of Motion to be always qualified and to take its
 quality from the moved.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn584.htm">Next: Section 24</a></center>
 </body>