<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn571.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn573.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. It follows that we must allow contrariety to Quantity:
 whenever we speak of great and small, our notions acknowledge this
 contrariety by evolving opposite images, as also when we 
 refer to many
 and few; indeed, "few" and "many" call for similar treatment to
 "small" and "great."
 
 </p><p>"Many," predicated of the inhabitants of a house, does duty for
 "more": "few" people are said to be in the theatre instead of "less."
 
 </p><p>"Many," again, necessarily involves a large numerical plurality.
 This plurality can scarcely be a relative; it is simply an expansion
 of number, its contrary being a contraction.
 
 </p><p>The same applies to the continuous [magnitude], the notion of
 which entails prolongation to a distant point.
 
 </p><p>Quantity, then, appears whenever there is a progression from the
 unit or the point: if either progression comes to a rapid halt, we
 have respectively "few" and "small"; if it goes forward and does not
 quickly cease, "many" and "great."
 
 </p><p>What, we may be asked, is the limit of this progression? What,
 we retort, is the limit of beauty, or of heat? Whatever limit you
 impose, there is always a "hotter"; yet "hotter" is accounted a
 relative, "hot" a pure quality.
 
 </p><p>In sum, just as there is a Reason-Principle of Beauty, so there
 must be a Reason-Principle of greatness, participation in which
 makes a thing great, as the Principle of beauty makes it beautiful.
 
 </p><p>To judge from these instances, there is contrariety in Quantity.
 Place we may neglect as not strictly coming under the category of
 Quantity; if it were admitted, "above" could only be a contrary if
 there were something in the universe which was "below": as referring
 to the partial, the terms "above" and "below" are used in a purely
 relative sense, and must go with "right" and "left" into the
 category of Relation.
 
 </p><p>Syllable and discourse are only indirectly quantities or
 substrates of Quantity; it is voice that is quantitative: 
 but voice is
 a kind of Motion; it must accordingly in any case [quantity or no
 quantity] be referred to Motion, as must activity also.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn573.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>