<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn522.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn524.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. We may be told that neither Act nor Motion requires a genus
 for itself, but that both revert to Relation, Act belonging to the
 potentially active, Motion to the potentially motive. Our reply is
 that Relation produces relatives as such, and not the mere reference
 to an external standard; given the existence of a thing, whether
 attributive or relative, it holds its essential character 
 prior to any
 relationship: so then must Act and Motion, and even such an
 attribute as habit; they are not prevented from being prior to any
 relationship they may occupy, or from being conceivable in 
 themselves.
 Otherwise, everything will be relative; for anything you think of-
 even Soul- bears some relationship to something else.
 
 </p><p>But, to return to activity proper and the action, is there any
 reason why these should be referred to Relation? They must in every
 instance be either Motion or Act.
 
 </p><p>If however activity is referred to Relation and the action made
 a distinct genus, why is not Motion referred to Relation and the
 movement made a distinct genus? Why not bisect the unity, Motion,
 and so make Action and Passion two species of the one thing, ceasing
 to consider Action and Passion as two genera?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn524.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>