<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn548.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn550.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. Enough upon that side of the question. But how does the
 perfection [goodness] of numbers, lifeless things, depend upon their
 particular unity? Just as all other inanimates find their perfection
 in their unity.
 
 </p><p>If it should be objected that numbers are simply non-existent,
 we should point out that our discussion is concerned [not with units
 as such, but] with beings considered from the aspect of their unity.
 
 </p><p>We may again be asked how the point- supposing its independent
 existence granted- participates in perfection. If the point is
 chosen as an inanimate object, the question applies to all such
 objects: but perfection does exist in such things, for example in a
 circle: the perfection of the circle will be perfection for 
 the point;
 it will aspire to this perfection and strive to attain it, as far as
 it can, through the circle.
 
 </p><p>But how are the five genera to be regarded? Do they form
 particulars by being broken up into parts? No; the genus exists as a
 whole in each of the things whose genus it is.
 
 </p><p>But how, at that, can it remain a unity? The unity of a 
 genus must
 be considered as a whole-in-many.
 
 </p><p>Does it exist then only in the things participating in it? No;
 it has an independent existence of its own as well. But this will,
 no doubt, become clearer as we proceed.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn550.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>