<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn535.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn537.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 30</h4>
 
 <p>30. With regard to States:
 
 </p><p>It may seem strange that States should be set up as a 
 third class-
 or whatever class it is- since all States are referable to Matter.
 We shall be told that there is a difference among States, and that a
 State as in Matter has definite characteristics 
 distinguishing it from
 all other States and further that, whereas Qualities are States of
 Matter, States properly so-called belong to Qualities. But if
 Qualities are nothing but States of Matter, States [in the strict
 sense of the term] are ultimately reducible to Matter, and under
 Matter they must be classed.
 
 </p><p>Further, how can States constitute a single genus, when there is
 such manifold diversity among them? How can we group together three
 yards long" and "white"- Quantity and Quality respectively? Or again
 Time and Place? How can "yesterday," "last year," "in the 
 Lyceum," "in
 the Academy," be States at all? How can Time be in any sense a
 State? Neither is Time a State nor the events in Time, neither the
 objects in Space nor Space itself.
 
 </p><p>And how can Action be a State? One acting is not in a state of
 being but in a state of Action, or rather in Action simply: no state
 is involved. Similarly, what is predicated of the patient is not a
 state of being but a state of Passion, or strictly, Passion
 unqualified by state.
 
 </p><p>But it would seem that State was the right category at least for
 cases of Situation and Possession: yet Possession does not imply
 possession of some particular state, but is Possession absolute.
 
 </p><p>As for the Relative State, if the theory does not include it in
 the same genus as the other States, another question arises: we must
 enquire whether any actuality is attributed to this 
 particular type of
 relation, for to many types actuality is denied.
 
 </p><p>It is, moreover, absurd that an entity which depends upon the
 prior existence of other entities should be classed in the same
 genus with those priors: one and two must, clearly, exist, 
 before half
 and double can.
 
 </p><p>The various speculations on the subject of the Existents and the
 principles of the Existents, whether they have entailed an 
 infinite or
 a finite number, bodily or bodiless, or even supposed the 
 Composite to
 be the Authentic Existent, may well be considered separately with
 the help of the criticisms made by the ancients upon them.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn537.htm">Next: SECOND TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>