<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn511.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn513.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. In considering Relation we must enquire whether it possesses
 the community of a genus, or whether it may on other grounds be
 treated as a unity.
 
 </p><p>Above all, has Relation- for example, that of right and left,
 double and half- any actuality? Has it, perhaps, actuality in some
 cases only, as for instance in what is termed "posterior" but not in
 what is termed "prior"? Or is its actuality in no case conceivable?
 
 </p><p>What meaning, then, are we to attach to double and half and all
 other cases of less and more; to habit and disposition, reclining,
 sitting, standing; to father, son, master, slave; to like, unlike,
 equal, unequal; to active and passive, measure and measured; or
 again to knowledge and sensation, as related respectively to the
 knowable and the sensible?
 
 </p><p>Knowledge, indeed, may be supposed to entail in relation to the
 known object some actual entity corresponding to that object's Ideal
 Form, and similarly with sensation as related to the 
 sense-object. The
 active will perform some constant function in relation to 
 the passive,
 as will the measure in relation to the measured.
 
 </p><p>But what will emerge from the relation of like to like? Nothing
 will emerge. Likeness is the inherence of qualitative identity; its
 entire content is the quality present in the two objects.
 
 </p><p>From equality, similarly, nothing emerges. The relation merely
 presupposes the existence of a quantitative identity;- is nothing
 but our judgement comparing objects essentially independent and
 concluding, "This and that have the same magnitude, the same
 quality; this has produced that; this is superior to that."
 
 </p><p>Again, what meaning can sitting and standing have apart from
 sitter and stander? The term "habit" either implies a 
 having, in which
 case it signifies possession, or else it arises from something had,
 and so denotes quality; and similarly with disposition.
 
 </p><p>What then in these instances can be the meaning of correlatives
 apart from our conception of their juxtaposition? "Greater" may
 refer to very different magnitudes; "different" to all sorts of
 objects: the comparison is ours; it does not lie in the things
 themselves.
 
 </p><p>Right and left, before and behind, would seem to belong less to
 the category of Relation than to that of Situation. Right means
 "situated at one point," left means "situated at another." But the
 right and left are in our conception, nothing of them in the things
 themselves.
 
 </p><p>Before and after are merely two times; the relation is again of
 our making.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn513.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>