<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn551.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn553.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. How then do the four genera complete Substance without
 qualifying it or even particularizing it?
 
 </p><p>It has been observed that Being is primary, and it is clear that
 none of the four- Motion, Stability, Difference, Identity- 
 is distinct
 from it. That this Motion does not produce Quality is doubtless also
 clear, but a word or two will make it clearer still.
 
 </p><p>If Motion is the Act of Substance, and Being and the Primaries
 in general are its Act, then Motion is not an accidental 
 attribute: as
 the Act of what is necessarily actual [what necessarily 
 involves Act],
 it is no longer to be considered as the complement of 
 Substance but as
 Substance itself. For this reason, then, it has not been 
 assigned to a
 posterior class, or referred to Quality, but has been made
 contemporary with Being.
 
 </p><p>The truth is not that Being first is and then takes Motion,
 first is and then acquires Stability: neither Stability nor Motion
 is a mere modification of Being. Similarly, Identity and Difference
 are not later additions: Being did not grow into plurality; its very
 unity was a plurality; but plurality implies Difference, and
 unity-in-plurality involves Identity.
 
 </p><p>Substance [Real Being] requires no more than these five
 constituents; but when we have to turn to the lower sphere, we find
 other principles giving rise no longer to Substance (as such) but to
 quantitative Substance and qualitative: these other principles may
 be regarded as genera but not primary genera.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn553.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>