<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn549.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn551.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. We turn to ask why Quantity is not included among the
 primary genera, and Quality also.
 
 </p><p>Quantity is not among the primaries, because these are 
 permanently
 associated with Being. Motion is bound up with Actual Being
 [Being-in-Act], since it is its life; with Motion, Stability too
 gained its foothold in Reality; with these are associated Difference
 and Identity, so that they also are seen in conjunction with Being.
 But number [the basis of Quantity] is a posterior. It is 
 posterior not
 only with regard to these genera but also within itself; in 
 number the
 posterior is divided from the prior; this is a sequence in which the
 posteriors are latent in the priors [and do not appear
 simultaneously]. Number therefore cannot be included among 
 the primary
 genera; whether it constitutes a genus at all remains to be examined.
 
 </p><p>Magnitude [extended quantity] is in a still higher degree
 posterior and composite, for it contains within itself number, line
 and surface. Now if continuous magnitude derives its quantity from
 number, and number is not a genus, how can magnitude hold 
 that status?
 Besides, magnitudes, like numbers, admit of priority and 
 posteriority.
 
 </p><p>If, then, Quantity be constituted by a common element in both
 number and magnitude, we must ascertain the nature of this common
 element, and consider it, once discovered, as a posterior genus, not
 as one of the Primaries: thus failing of primary status, it must be
 related, directly or indirectly, to one of the Primaries.
 
 </p><p>We may take it as clear that it is the nature of Quantity to
 indicate a certain quantum, and to measure the quantum of the
 particular; Quantity is moreover, in a sense, itself a 
 quantum. But if
 the quantum is the common element in number and magnitude, either we
 have number as a primary with magnitude derived from it, or else
 number must consist of a blending of Motion and Stability, while
 magnitude will be a form of Motion or will originate in 
 Motion, Motion
 going forth to infinity and Stability creating the unit by checking
 that advance.
 
 </p><p>But the problem of the origin of number and magnitude, or rather
 of how they subsist and are conceived, must be held over. It may,
 thus, be found that number is among the primary genera, while
 magnitude is posterior and composite; or that number belongs to the
 genus Stability, while magnitude must be consigned to Motion. But we
 propose to discuss all this at a later stage.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn551.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>