<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn531.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn533.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 26</h4>
 
 <p>26. But the error in this theory is fundamental. To set 
 Matter the
 potential above everything, instead of recognising the primacy of
 actuality, is in the highest degree perverse. If the potential holds
 the primacy among the Existents, its actualization becomes 
 impossible;
 it certainly cannot bring itself into actuality: either the actual
 exists previously, and so the potential is not the first-principle,
 or, if the two are to be regarded as existing simultaneously, the
 first-principles must be attributed to hazard. Besides, if they are
 simultaneous, why is not actuality given the primacy? Why is the
 potential more truly real than the actual?
 
 </p><p>Supposing however that the actual does come later than the
 potential, how must the theory proceed? Obviously Matter does not
 produce Form: the unqualified does not produce Quality, nor does
 actuality take its origin in the potential; for that would mean that
 the actual was inherent in the potential, which at once 
 becomes a dual
 thing.
 
 </p><p>Furthermore, God becomes a secondary to Matter, inasmuch as even
 he is regarded as a body composed of Matter and Form- though how he
 acquires the Form is not revealed. If however he be admitted to
 exist apart from Matter in virtue of his character as a principle
 and a rational law [logos], God will be bodiless, the Creative Power
 bodiless. If we are told that he is without Matter but is 
 composite in
 essence by the fact of being a body, this amounts to introducing
 another Matter, the Matter of God.
 
 </p><p>Again, how can Matter be a first-principle, seeing that it is
 body? Body must necessarily be a plurality, since all bodies are
 composite of Matter and Quality. If however body in this 
 case is to be
 understood in some different way, then Matter is identified with
 body only by an equivocation.
 
 </p><p>If the possession of three dimensions is given as the
 characteristic of body, then we are dealing simply with mathematical
 body. If resistance is added, we are no longer considering a unity:
 besides, resistance is a quality or at least derived from Quality.
 
 </p><p>And whence is this resistance supposed to come? Whence the three
 dimensions? What is the source of their existence? Matter is not
 comprised in the concept of the three-dimensional, nor the
 three-dimensional in the concept of Matter; if Matter 
 partakes thus of
 extension, it can no longer be a simplex.
 
 </p><p>Again, whence does Matter derive its unifying power? It is
 assuredly not the Absolute Unity, but has only that of participation
 in Unity.
 
 </p><p>We inevitably conclude that Mass or Extension cannot be ranked
 as the first of things; Non-Extension and Unity must be 
 prior. We must
 begin with the One and conclude with the Many, proceed to magnitude
 from that which is free from magnitude: a One is necessary to the
 existence of a Many, Non-Magnitude to that of Magnitude. Magnitude
 is a unity not by being Unity-Absolute, but by participation 
 and in an
 accidental mode: there must be a primary and absolute preceding the
 accidental, or the accidental relation is left unexplained.
 
 </p><p>The manner of this relation demands investigation. Had this been
 undertaken, the thinkers of this school would probably have lighted
 upon that Unity which is not accidental but essential and underived.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn533.htm">Next: Section 27</a></center>
 </body>