<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn527.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn529.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 22</h4>
 
 <p>22. Passivity, thus, implies the existence within of a motion
 functioning somehow or other in the direction of alteration. Action
 too implies motion within, whether the motion be aimless or 
 whether it
 be driven by the impulse comported by the term "Action" to find its
 goal in an external object. There is Motion in both Action and
 Passion, but the differentia distinguishing Action from Passion keeps
 Action impassive, while Passion is recognised by the fact that a new
 state replaces the old, though nothing is added to the essential
 character of the patient; whenever Being [essential Being] is
 produced, the patient remains distinct.
 
 </p><p>Thus, what is Action in one relation may be Passion in another.
 One same motion will be Action from the point of view of A, Passion
 from that of B; for the two are so disposed that they might well be
 consigned to the category of Relation- at any rate in the cases
 where the Action entails a corresponding Passion: neither
 correlative is found in isolation; each involves both Action and
 Passion, though A acts as mover and B is moved: each then 
 involves two
 categories.
 
 </p><p>Again, A gives motion to B, B receives it, so that we have a
 giving and a receiving- in a word, a relation.
 
 </p><p>But a recipient must possess what it has received. A thing is
 admitted to possess its natural colour: why not its motion also?
 Besides, independent motions such as walking and thought do, in
 fact, involve the possession of the powers respectively to 
 walk and to
 think.
 
 </p><p>We are reminded to enquire whether thought in the form of
 providence constitutes Action; to be subject to providence is
 apparently Passion, for such thought is directed to an external, the
 object of the providential arrangement. But it may well be that
 neither is the exercise of providence an action, even though the
 thought is concerned with an external, nor subjection to it 
 a Passion.
 Thought itself need not be an action, for it does not go outward
 towards its object but remains self-gathered. It is not always an
 activity; all Acts need not be definable as activities, for they
 need not produce an effect; activity belongs to Act only 
 accidentally.
 
 </p><p>Does it follow that if a man as he walks produces footprints, he
 cannot be considered to have performed an action? Certainly as a
 result of his existing something distinct from himself has come into
 being. Yet perhaps we should regard both action and Act as merely
 accidental, because he did not aim at this result: it would be as we
 speak of Action even in things inanimate- "fire heats," "the drug
 worked."
 
 </p><p>So much for Action and Passion.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn529.htm">Next: Section 23</a></center>
 </body>