<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn516.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn518.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. But if these considerations are sound, why has Quality more
 than one species? What is the ground for distinguishing between
 habit and disposition, seeing that no differentia of Quality is
 involved in permanence and non-permanence? A disposition of any kind
 is sufficient to constitute a quality; permanence is a mere external
 addition. It might however be urged that dispositions are but
 incomplete "forms"- if the term may pass- habits being complete
 ones. But incomplete, they are not qualities; if already qualities,
 the permanence is an external addition.
 
 </p><p>How do physical powers form a distinct species? If they are
 classed as qualities in virtue of being powers, power, we have seen,
 is not a necessary concomitant of qualities. If, however, we 
 hold that
 the natural boxer owes his quality to a particular disposition,
 power is something added and does not contribute to the 
 quality, since
 power is found in habits also.
 
 </p><p>Another point: why is natural ability to be distinguished from
 that acquired by learning? Surely, if both are qualities, they
 cannot be differentiae of Quality: gained by practice or given in
 nature, it is the same ability; the differentia will be external to
 Quality; it cannot be deduced from the Ideal Form of boxing. Whether
 some qualities as distinguished from others are derived from
 experience is immaterial; the source of the quality makes no
 difference- none, I mean, pointing to variations and differences of
 Quality.
 
 </p><p>A further question would seem to be involved: If certain 
 qualities
 are derived from experience but here is a discrepancy in the manner
 and source of the experience, how are they to be included in the
 same species? And again, if some create the experience, others are
 created by it, the term Quality as applied to both classes will be
 equivocal.
 
 </p><p>And what part is played by the individual form? If it
 constitutes the individual's specific character, it is not a
 quality; if, however, it is what makes an object beautiful or ugly
 after the specific form has been determined, then it involves a
 Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>Rough and smooth, tenuous and dense may rightly be classed as
 qualities. It is true that they are not determined by distances and
 approximations, or in general by even or uneven dispositions, of
 parts; though, were they so determined, they might well even then be
 qualities.
 
 </p><p>Knowledge of the meaning of "light" and "heavy" will reveal
 their place in the classification. An ambiguity will however 
 be latent
 in the term "light," unless it be determined by comparative 
 weight: it
 would then implicate leanness and fineness, and involve another
 species distinct from the four [of Aristotle].
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn518.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>