<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn530.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn532.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 25</h4>
 
 <p>25. There are those who lay down four categories and make a
 fourfold division into Substrates, Qualities, States, and Relative
 States, and find in these a common Something, and so include
 everything in one genus.
 
 </p><p>Against this theory there is much to be urged, but particularly
 against this posing of a common Something and a single all-embracing
 genus. This Something, it may be submitted, is unintelligible to
 themselves, is indefinable, and does not account either for bodies
 or for the bodiless. Moreover, no room is left for a differentia by
 which this Something may be distinguished. Besides, this common
 Something is either existent or non-existent: if existent, it must
 be one or other of its [four] species;- if non-existent, the
 existent is classed under the non-existent. But the objections are
 countless; we must leave them for the present and consider 
 the several
 heads of the division.
 
 </p><p>To the first genus are assigned Substrates, including Matter, to
 which is given a priority over the others; so that what is ranked as
 the first principle comes under the same head with things which must
 be posterior to it since it is their principle.
 
 </p><p>First, then: the prior is made homogeneous with the subsequent.
 Now this is impossible: in this relation the subsequent owes its
 existence to the prior, whereas among things belonging to one same
 genus each must have, essentially, the equality implied by the
 genus; for the very meaning of genus is to be predicated of the
 species in respect of their essential character. And that Matter is
 the basic source of all the rest of things, this school, we may
 suppose, would hardly deny.
 
 </p><p>Secondly: since they treat the Substrate as one thing, 
 they do not
 enumerate the Existents; they look instead for principles of the
 Existents. There is however a difference between speaking of the
 actual Existents and of their principles.
 
 </p><p>If Matter is taken to be the only Existent, and all other things
 as modifications of Matter, it is not legitimate to set up a single
 genus to embrace both the Existent and the other things; consistency
 requires that Being [Substance] be distinguished from its
 modifications and that these modifications be duly classified.
 
 </p><p>Even the distinction which this theory makes between Substrates
 and the rest of things is questionable. The Substrate is 
 [necessarily]
 one thing and admits of no differentia- except perhaps in so far as
 it is split up like one mass into its various parts; and yet not
 even so, since the notion of Being implies continuity: it would be
 better, therefore, to speak of the Substrate, in the singular.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn532.htm">Next: Section 26</a></center>
 </body>