<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn547.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn549.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. We are bound however to enquire under what mode unity is
 contained in Being. How is what is termed the "dividing" effected-
 especially the dividing of the genera Being and unity? Is it the
 same division, or is it different in the two cases?
 
 </p><p>First then: In what sense, precisely, is any given particular
 called and known to be a unity? Secondly: Does unity as used of
 Being carry the same connotation as in reference to the Absolute?
 
 </p><p>Unity is not identical in all things; it has a different
 significance according as it is applied to the Sensible and the
 Intellectual realms- Being too, of course, comports such a 
 difference-
 and there is a difference in the unity affirmed among sensible
 things as compared with each other; the unity is not the same in the
 cases of chorus, camp, ship, house; there is a difference again as
 between such discrete things and the continuous. 
 Nevertheless, all are
 representations of the one exemplar, some quite remote, others more
 effective: the truer likeness is in the Intellectual; Soul 
 is a unity,
 and still more is Intellect a unity and Being a unity.
 
 </p><p>When we predicate Being of a particular, do we thereby predicate
 of it unity, and does the degree of its unity tally with that of its
 being? Such correspondence is accidental: unity is not proportionate
 to Being; less unity need not mean less Being. An army or a choir
 has no less Being than a house, though less unity.
 
 </p><p>It would appear, then, that the unity of a particular is related
 not so much to Being as to a standard of perfection: in so far as
 the particular attains perfection, so far it is a unity; and the
 degree of unity depends on this attainment. The particular 
 aspires not
 simply to Being, but to Being-in-perfection: it is in this strain
 towards their perfection that such beings as do not possess unity
 strive their utmost to achieve it.
 
 </p><p>Things of nature tend by their very nature to coalesce with each
 other and also to unify each within itself; their movement 
 is not away
 from but towards each other and inwards upon themselves. Souls,
 moreover, seem to desire always to pass into a unity over and above
 the unity of their own substance. Unity in fact confronts them on
 two sides: their origin and their goal alike are unity; from unity
 they have arisen, and towards unity they strive. Unity is thus
 identical with Goodness [is the universal standard of 
 perfection]; for
 no being ever came into existence without possessing, from that very
 moment, an irresistible tendency towards unity.
 
 </p><p>From natural things we turn to the artificial. Every art in all
 its operation aims at whatsoever unity its capacity and its models
 permit, though Being most achieves unity since it is closer at the
 start.
 
 </p><p>That is why in speaking of other entities we assert the 
 name only,
 for example man; when we say "one man," we have in mind more 
 than one;
 and if we affirm unity of him in any other connection, we 
 regard it as
 supplementary [to his essence]: but when we speak of Being as a
 whole we say it is one Being without presuming that it is 
 anything but
 a unity; we thereby show its close association with Goodness.
 
 </p><p>Thus for Being, as for the others, unity turns out to be, in
 some sense, Principle and Term, not however in the same sense as for
 things of the physical order- a discrepancy leading us to infer that
 even in unity there are degrees of priority.
 
 </p><p>How, then, do we characterize the unity [thus diverse] in Being?
 Are we to think of it as a common property seen alike in all its
 parts? In the first place, the point is common to lines and 
 yet is not
 their genus, and this unity we are considering may also be common to
 numbers and not be their genus- though, we need hardly say, the
 unity of Unity-Absolute is not that of the numbers, one, two and the
 rest. Secondly, in Being there is nothing to prevent the existence
 of prior and posterior, simple and composite: but unity, 
 even if it be
 identical in all the manifestations of Being, having no
 differentiae can produce no species; but producing no species it
 cannot be a genus.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn549.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>