<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn501.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn503.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. Now as to the arts and crafts and their productions:
 
 </p><p>The imitative arts- painting, sculpture, dancing, pantomimic
 gesturing- are, largely, earth-based; on an earthly base; they
 follow models found in sense, since they copy forms and movements
 and reproduce seen symmetries; they cannot therefore be referred to
 that higher sphere except indirectly, through the Reason-Principle
 in humanity.
 
 </p><p>On the other hand any skill which, beginning with the
 observation of the symmetry of living things, grows to the 
 symmetry of
 all life, will be a portion of the Power There which observes and
 meditates the symmetry reigning among all beings in the Intellectual
 Kosmos. Thus all music- since its thought is upon melody and rhythm-
 must be the earthly representation of the music there is in 
 the rhythm
 of the Ideal Realm.
 
 </p><p>The crafts, such as building and carpentry which give us 
 Matter in
 wrought forms, may be said, in that they draw on pattern, to take
 their principles from that realm and from the thinking There: but in
 that they bring these down into contact with the 
 sense-order, they are
 not wholly in the Intellectual: they are founded in man. So
 agriculture, dealing with material growths: so medicine watching
 over physical health; so the art which aims at corporeal strength
 and well-being: power and well-being mean something else There, the
 fearlessness and self-sufficing quality of all that lives.
 
 </p><p>Oratory and generalship, administration and sovereignty- 
 under any
 forms in which their activities are associated with Good and 
 when they
 look to that- possess something derived thence and building up their
 knowledge from the knowledge There.
 
 </p><p>Geometry, the science of the Intellectual entities, holds place
 There: so, too, philosophy, whose high concern is Being.
 
 </p><p>For the arts and products of art, these observations may suffice.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn503.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>