<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn553.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn555.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. Why are not beauty, goodness and the virtues, together with
 knowledge and intelligence, included among the primary genera?
 
 </p><p>If by goodness we mean The First- what we call the Principle of
 Goodness, the Principle of which we can predicate nothing, giving it
 this name only because we have no other means of indicating it- then
 goodness, clearly, can be the genus of nothing: this principle is
 not affirmed of other things; if it were, each of these would be
 Goodness itself. The truth is that it is prior to Substance, not
 contained in it. If, on the contrary, we mean goodness as a quality,
 no quality can be ranked among the primaries.
 
 </p><p>Does this imply that the nature of Being is not good? 
 Not good, to
 begin with, in the sense in which The First is good, but in another
 sense of the word: moreover, Being does not possess its goodness as
 a quality but as a constituent.
 
 </p><p>But the other genera too, we said, are constituents of Being,
 and are regarded as genera because each is a common property found
 in many things. If then goodness is similarly observed in every part
 of Substance or Being, or in most parts, why is goodness not a
 genus, and a primary genus? Because it is not found identical in all
 the parts of Being, but appears in degrees, first, second and
 subsequent, whether it be because one part is derived from another-
 posterior from prior- or because all are posterior to the 
 transcendent
 Unity, different parts of Being participating in it in 
 diverse degrees
 corresponding to their characteristic natures.
 
 </p><p>If however we must make goodness a genus as well [as a
 transcendent source], it will be a posterior genus, for goodness is
 posterior to Substance and posterior to what constitutes the generic
 notion of Being, however unfailingly it be found associated with
 Being; but the Primaries, we decided, belong to Being as such, and
 go to form Substance.
 
 </p><p>This indeed is why we posit that which transcends Being, since
 Being and Substance cannot but be a plurality, necessarily
 comprising the genera enumerated and therefore forming a 
 one-and-many.
 
 </p><p>It is true that we do not hesitate to speak of the goodness
 inherent in Being" when we are thinking of that Act by which Being
 tends, of its nature, towards the One: thus, we affirm goodness of
 it in the sense that it is thereby moulded into the likeness of The
 Good. But if this "goodness inherent in Being" is an Act directed
 toward The Good, it is the life of Being: but this life is 
 Motion, and
 Motion is already one of the genera.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn555.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>