<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn524.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn526.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 19</h4>
 
 <p>19. We have to ask ourselves whether there are not certain Acts
 which without the addition of a time-element will be thought of as
 imperfect and therefore classed with motions. Take for 
 instance living
 and life. The life of a definite person implies a certain adequate
 period, just as his happiness is no merely instantaneous thing. Life
 and happiness are, in other words, of the nature ascribed to Motion:
 both therefore must be treated as motions, and Motion must 
 be regarded
 as a unity, a single genus; besides the quantity and quality 
 belonging
 to Substance we must take count of the motion manifested in it.
 
 </p><p>We may further find desirable to distinguish bodily from psychic
 motions or spontaneous motions from those induced by external
 forces, or the original from the derivative, the original motions
 being activities, whether externally related or independent, 
 while the
 derivative will be Passions.
 
 </p><p>But surely the motions having external tendency are actually
 identical with those of external derivation: the cutting issuing
 from the cutter and that effected in the object are one, 
 though to cut
 is not the same as to be cut.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps however the cutting issuing from the cutter and 
 that which
 takes place in the cut object are in fact not one, but "to cut"
 implies that from a particular Act and motion there results a
 different motion in the object cut. Or perhaps the 
 difference [between
 Action and Passion] lies not in the fact of being cut, but in the
 distinct emotion supervening, pain for example: passivity has this
 connotation also.
 
 </p><p>But when there is no pain, what occurs? Nothing, surely, but the
 Act of the agent upon the patient object: this is all that 
 is meant in
 such cases by Action. Action, thus, becomes twofold: there is that
 which occurs in the external, and that which does not. The duality
 of Action and Passion, suggested by the notion that Action [always]
 takes place in an external, is abandoned.
 
 </p><p>Even writing, though taking place upon an external object, does
 not call for passivity, since no effect is produced, upon the tablet
 beyond the Act of the writer, nothing like pain; we may be told that
 the tablet has been inscribed, but this does not suffice for
 passivity.
 
 </p><p>Again, in the case of walking there is the earth trodden 
 upon, but
 no one thinks of it as having experienced Passion [or suffering].
 Treading on a living body, we think of suffering, because we reflect
 not upon the walking but upon the ensuing pain: otherwise we should
 think of suffering in the case of the tablet as well.
 
 </p><p>It is so in every case of Action: we cannot but think of it as
 knit into a unity with its opposite, Passion. Not that this later
 "Passion" is the opposite of Action in the way in which being burned
 is the opposite of burning: by Passion in this sense we mean the
 effect supervening upon the combined facts of the burning and the
 being burned, whether this effect be pain or some such process as
 withering.
 
 </p><p>Suppose this Passion to be treated as of itself producing pain:
 have we not still the duality of agent and patient, two results from
 the one Act? The Act may no longer include the will to cause 
 pain; but
 it produces something distinct from itself, a pain-causing medium
 which enters into the object about to experience pain: this medium,
 while retaining its individuality, produces something yet different,
 the feeling of pain.
 
 </p><p>What does this suggest? Surely that the very medium- the act of
 hearing, for instance- is, even before it produces pain or without
 producing pain at all, a Passion of that into which it enters.
 
 </p><p>But hearing, with sensation in general, is in fact not a
 Passion. Yet to feel pain is to experience a Passion- a Passion
 however which is not opposed to Action.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn526.htm">Next: Section 20</a></center>
 </body>