<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn572.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn574.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. It has been remarked that the continuous is effectually
 distinguished from the discrete by their possessing the one a
 common, the other a separate, limit.
 
 </p><p>The same principle gives rise to the numerical 
 distinction between
 odd and even; and it holds good that if there are differentiae
 found in both contraries, they are either to be abandoned to the
 objects numbered, or else to be considered as differentiae of the
 abstract numbers, and not of the numbers manifested in the sensible
 objects. If the numbers are logically separable from the 
 objects, that
 is no reason why we should not think of them as sharing the same
 differentiae.
 
 </p><p>But how are we to differentiate the continuous, comprising as it
 does line, surface and solid? The line may be rated as of one
 dimension, the surface as of two dimensions, the solid as of 
 three, if
 we are only making a calculation and do not suppose that we are
 dividing the continuous into its species; for it is an 
 invariable rule
 that numbers, thus grouped as prior and posterior, cannot be brought
 into a common genus; there is no common basis in first, second and
 third dimensions. Yet there is a sense in which they would appear to
 be equal- namely, as pure measures of Quantity: of higher and lower
 dimensions, they are not however more or less quantitative.
 
 </p><p>Numbers have similarly a common property in their being numbers
 all; and the truth may well be, not that One creates two, and two
 creates three, but that all have a common source.
 
 </p><p>Suppose, however, that they are not derived from any source
 whatever, but merely exist; we at any rate conceive them as being
 derived, and so may be assumed to regard the smaller as taking
 priority over the greater: yet, even so, by the mere fact of their
 being numbers they are reducible to a single type.
 
 </p><p>What applies to numbers is equally true of magnitudes; 
 though here
 we have to distinguish between line, surface and solid- the last
 also referred to as "body"- in the ground that, while all are
 magnitudes, they differ specifically.
 
 </p><p>It remains to enquire whether these species are themselves to be
 divided: the line into straight, circular, spiral; the surface into
 rectilinear and circular figures; the solid into the various solid
 figures- sphere and polyhedra: whether these last should be
 subdivided, as by the geometers, into those contained by triangular
 and quadrilateral planes: and whether a further division of 
 the latter
 should be performed.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn574.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>