<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn596.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn598.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. The light of our world can be allocated because it 
 springs from
 a corporeal mass of known position, but conceive an 
 immaterial entity,
 independent of body as being of earlier nature than all 
 body, a nature
 firmly self-based or, better, without need of base: such a
 principle, incorporeal, autonomous, having no source for its rising,
 coming from no place, attached to no material mass, this cannot be
 allotted part here and part there: that would be to give it both a
 previous position and a present attachment. Finally, anything
 participating in such a principle can participate only as entirety
 with entirety; there can be no allotment and no partition.
 
 </p><p>A principle attached to body might be exposed, at least by way
 of accident, to such partition and so be definable as passive and
 partible in view of its close relationship with the body of which it
 is so to speak a state or a Form; but that which is not inbound with
 body, which on the contrary body must seek, will of necessity go
 utterly free of every bodily modification and especially of the very
 possibility of partition which is entirely a phenomenon of body,
 belonging to its very essence. As partibility goes with body, so
 impartibility with the bodiless: what partition is possible where
 there is no magnitude? If a thing of magnitude participates to any
 degree in what has no magnitude, it must be by a 
 participation without
 division; divisibility implies magnitude.
 
 </p><p>When we affirm unity in multiplicity, we do not mean that the
 unity has become the multiples; we link the variety in the multiples
 with the unity which we discern, undivided, in them; and the unity
 must be understood as for ever distinct from them, from separate
 item and from total; that unity remains true to itself, remains
 itself, and so long as it remains itself cannot fail within its own
 scope [and therefore does reach over the multiple], yet it is not to
 be thought of as coextensive with the material universe or with any
 member of the All; utterly outside of the quantitative, it cannot be
 coextensive with anything.
 
 </p><p>Extension is of body; what is not of body, but of the opposed
 order, must be kept free of extension; but where there is no 
 extension
 there is no spatial distinction, nothing of the here and there which
 would end its freedom of presence. Since, then, partition goes with
 place- each part occupying a place of its own- how can the placeless
 be parted? The unity must remain self-concentrated, immune from
 part, however much the multiple aspire or attain to contact with it.
 This means that any movement towards it is movement towards its
 entirety, and any participation attained is participation in its
 entirety. Its participants, then, link with it as with something
 unparticipated, something never appropriated: thus only can it
 remain intact within itself and within the multiples in which it is
 manifested. And if it did not remain thus intact, it would 
 cease to be
 itself; any participation, then, would not be in the object of quest
 but in something never quested.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn598.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>