<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn544.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn546.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. We cannot indeed escape positing these three, Being, Motion,
 Stability, once it is the fact that the Intellect discerns them as
 separates; and if it thinks of them at all, it posits them by that
 very thinking; if they are thought, they exist. Things whose 
 existence
 is bound up with Matter have no being in the Intellect: these three
 principles are however free of Matter; and in that which goes free
 of Matter to be thought is to be.
 
 </p><p>We are in the presence of Intellect undefiled. Fix it firmly,
 but not with the eyes of the body. You are looking upon the hearth
 of Reality, within it a sleepless light: you see how it holds to
 itself, and how it puts apart things that were together, how it
 lives a life that endures and keeps a thought acting not upon any
 future but upon that which already is, upon an eternal present- a
 thought self-centred, bearing on nothing outside of itself.
 
 </p><p>Now in the Act of Intellect there are energy and motion; in its
 self-intellection Substance and Being. In virtue of its Being it
 thinks, and it thinks of itself as Being, and of that as Being, upon
 which it is, so to speak, pivoted. Not that its Act self-directed
 ranks as Substance, but Being stands as the goal and origin of that
 Act, the object of its contemplation though not the contemplation
 itself: and yet this Act too involves Being, which is its motive and
 its term. By the fact that its Being is actual and not merely
 potential, Intellect bridges the dualism [of agent and patient] and
 abjures separation: it identifies itself with Being and Being with
 itself.
 
 </p><p>Being, the most firmly set of all things, that in virtue of
 which all other things receive Stability, possesses this 
 Stability not
 as from without but as springing within, as inherent. 
 Stability is the
 goal of intellection, a Stability which had no beginning, and the
 state from which intellection was impelled was Stability, though
 Stability gave it no impulsion; for Motion neither starts from
 Motion nor ends in Motion. Again, the Form-Idea has Stability, since
 it is the goal of Intellect: intellection is the Form's Motion.
 
 </p><p>Thus all the Existents are one, at once Motion and Stability;
 Motion and Stability are genera all-pervading, and every 
 subsequent is
 a particular being, a particular stability and a particular motion.
 
 </p><p>We have caught the radiance of Being, and beheld it in its three
 manifestations: Being, revealed by the Being within ourselves; the
 Motion of Being, revealed by the motion within ourselves; and its
 Stability revealed by ours. We accommodate our being, motion,
 stability to those [of the Archetypal], unable however to draw any
 distinction but finding ourselves in the presence of entities
 inseparable and, as it were, interfused. We have, however, 
 in a sense,
 set them a little apart, holding them down and viewing them in
 isolation; and thus we have observed Being, Stability, Motion- these
 three, of which each is a unity to itself; in so doing, have we not
 regarded them as being different from each other? By this posing of
 three entities, each a unity, we have, surely, found Being to
 contain Difference.
 
 </p><p>Again, inasmuch as we restore them to an all-embracing unity,
 identifying all with unity, do we not see in this amalgamation
 Identity emerging as a Real Existent?
 
 </p><p>Thus, in addition to the other three [Being, Motion, Stability],
 we are obliged to posit the further two, Identity and Difference, so
 that we have in all five genera. In so doing, we shall not withhold
 Identity and Difference from the subsequents of the Intellectual
 order; the thing of Sense has, it is clear, a particular identity
 and a particular difference, but Identity and Difference have the
 generic status independently of the particular.
 
 </p><p>They will, moreover, be primary genera, because nothing can be
 predicated of them as denoting their essential nature. Nothing, of
 course we mean, but Being; but this Being is not their genus, since
 they cannot be identified with any particular being as such.
 Similarly, Being will not stand as genus to Motion or Stability, for
 these also are not its species. Beings [or Existents] comprise not
 merely what are to be regarded as species of the genus 
 Being, but also
 participants in Being. On the other hand, Being does not participate
 in the other four principles as its genera: they are not prior to
 Being; they do not even attain to its level.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn546.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>