<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn563.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn565.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. What, then, we have to ask, is the constant element in the
 first three entities? What is it that identifies them with their
 inherent Substance?
 
 </p><p>Is it the capacity to serve as a base? But Matter, we maintain,
 serves as the base and seat of Form: Form, thus, will be 
 excluded from
 the category of Substance. Again, the Composite is the base and seat
 of attributes: hence, Form combined with Matter will be the basic
 ground of Composites, or at any rate of all posteriors of the
 Composite- Quantity, Quality, Motion, and the rest.
 
 </p><p>But perhaps we may think Substance validly defined as that which
 is not predicated of anything else. White and black are predicated
 of an object having one or other of these qualities; double
 presupposes something distinct from itself- we refer not to the
 half, but to the length of wood of which doubleness is affirmed.
 father qua father is a predicate; knowledge is predicated of the
 subject in whom the knowledge exists; space is the limit of 
 something,
 time the measure of something. Fire, on the other hand, is
 predicated of nothing; wood as such is predicated of nothing; and so
 with man, Socrates, and the composite substance in general.
 
 </p><p>Equally the Substantial Form is never a predicate, since it
 never acts as a modification of anything. Form is not an attribute
 of Matter hence, is not predicable of Matter it is simply a
 constituent of the Couplement. On the other hand, the Form 
 of a man is
 not different from the man himself [and so does not "modify" the
 Couplement].
 
 </p><p>Matter, similarly, is part of a whole, and belongs to something
 else only as to a whole and not as to a separate thing of which it
 is predicated. White, on the contrary, essentially belongs to
 something distinct from itself.
 
 </p><p>We conclude that nothing belonging to something else and
 predicated of it can be Substance. Substance is that which belongs
 essentially to itself, or, in so far as it is a part of the
 differentiated object, serves only to complete the Composite. Each
 or either part of the Composite belongs to itself, and is only
 affirmed of the Composite in a special sense: only qua part of the
 whole is it predicated of something else; qua individual it is never
 in its essential nature predicated of an external.
 
 </p><p>It may be claimed as a common element in Matter, Form and the
 Couplement that they are all substrates. But the mode in which
 Matter is the substrate of Form is different from that in which Form
 and the Couplement are substrates of their modifications.
 
 </p><p>And is it strictly true to say that Matter is the substrate of
 Form? Form is rather the completion which Matter's nature as pure
 potentiality demands.
 
 </p><p>Moreover, Form cannot be said to reside in Matter [as in a
 substrate]. When one thing combines with another to form a unity,
 the one does not reside in the other; both alike are substrates of a
 third: thus, Man [the Form] and a man [the Composite] are substrates
 of their experiences, and are prior to their activities and
 consequents.
 
 </p><p>Substance, then, is that from which all other things proceed and
 to which they owe their existence; it is the centre of passivity and
 the source of action.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn565.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>