<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn542.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn544.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. But must it not draw on some source external to its 
 essence, if
 it is to be conditioned, not only by Being, but by being an entity
 of a particular character? But if it is conditioned by a particular
 character, and this character is external to its essence, its
 essence does not comprise all that makes it Soul; its individuality
 will determine it; a part of Soul will be essence, but not Soul
 entire.
 
 </p><p>Furthermore, what being will it have when we separate it from
 its other components? The being of a stone? No: the being must be a
 form of Being appropriate to a source, so to speak, and a
 first-principle, or rather must take the forms appropriate 
 to all that
 is comprised in Soul's being: the being here must, that is, be life,
 and the life and the being must be one.
 
 </p><p>One, in the sense of being one Reason-Principle? No; it is the
 substrate of Soul that is one, though one in such a way as to be
 also two or more- as many as are the Primaries which constitute
 Soul. Either, then, it is life as well as Substance, or else it
 possesses life.
 
 </p><p>But if life is a thing possessed, the essence of the possessor
 is not inextricably bound up with life. If, on the contrary, this is
 not possession, the two, life and Substance, must be a unity.
 
 </p><p>Soul, then, is one and many- as many as are manifested in that
 oneness- one in its nature, many in those other things. A single
 Existent, it makes itself many by what we may call its motion: it is
 one entire, but by its striving, so to speak, to contemplate itself,
 it is a plurality; for we may imagine that it cannot bear to be a
 single Existent, when it has the power to be all that it in fact is.
 The cause of its appearing as many is this contemplation, and its
 purpose is the Act of the Intellect; if it were manifested as a bare
 unity, it could have no intellection, since in that simplicity it
 would already be identical with the object of its thought.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn544.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>