<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn555.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn557.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 19</h4>
 
 <p>19. Having established our four primary genera, it remains for
 us to enquire whether each of them of itself alone produces species.
 And especially, can Being be divided independently, that is without
 drawing upon the other genera? Surely not: the differentiae must come
 from outside the genus differentiated: they must be differentiae of
 Being proper, but cannot be identical with it.
 
 </p><p>Where then is it to find them? Obviously not in non-beings. If
 then in beings, and the three genera are all that is left, clearly
 it must find them in these, by conjunction and couplement with
 these, which will come into existence simultaneously with itself.
 
 </p><p>But if all come into existence simultaneously, what else is
 produced but that amalgam of all Existents which we have just
 considered [Intellect]? How can other things exist over and 
 above this
 all-including amalgam? And if all the constituents of this 
 amalgam are
 genera, how do they produce species? How does Motion produce species
 of Motion? Similarly with Stability and the other genera.
 
 </p><p>A word of warning must here be given against sinking the various
 genera in their species; and also against reducing the genus 
 to a mere
 predicate, something merely seen in the species. The genus must
 exist at once in itself and in its species; it blends, but it must
 also be pure; in contributing along with other genera to form
 Substance, it must not destroy itself. There are problems here that
 demand investigation.
 
 </p><p>But since we identified the amalgam of the Existents [or primary
 genera] with the particular intellect, Intellect as such being found
 identical with Being or Substance, and therefore prior to all the
 Existents, which may be regarded as its species or members, we may
 infer that the intellect, considered as completely unfolded, is a
 subsequent.
 
 </p><p>Our treatment of this problem may serve to promote our
 investigation; we will take it as a kind of example, and with it
 embark upon our enquiry.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn557.htm">Next: Section 20</a></center>
 </body>