<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn558.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn560.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 22</h4>
 
 <p>22. We may here adduce the pregnant words of Plato: "Inasmuch as
 Intellect perceives the variety and plurality of the Forms present
 in the complete Living Being...." The words apply equally to Soul;
 Soul is subsequent to Intellect, yet by its very nature it involves
 Intellect in itself and perceives more clearly in that 
 prior. There is
 Intellect in our intellect also, which again perceives more 
 clearly in
 its prior, for while of itself it merely perceives, in the prior it
 also perceives its own perception.
 
 </p><p>This intellect, then, to which we ascribe perception, though not
 divorced from the prior in which it originates, evolves plurality
 out of unity and has bound up with it the principle of Difference:
 it therefore takes the form of a plurality-in-unity. A
 plurality-in-unity, it produces the many intellects by the dictate
 of its very nature.
 
 </p><p>It is certainly no numerical unity, no individual thing; for
 whatever you find in that sphere is a species, since it is divorced
 from Matter. This may be the import of the difficult words of Plato,
 that Substance is broken up into an infinity of parts. So long as
 the division proceeds from genus to species, infinity is not
 reached; a limit is set by the species generated: the lowest
 species, however- that which is not divided into further species-
 may be more accurately regarded as infinite. And this is the meaning
 of the words: "to relegate them once and for all to infinity 
 and there
 abandon them." As for particulars, they are, considered in 
 themselves,
 infinite, but come under number by being embraced by the [total]
 unity.
 
 </p><p>Now Soul has Intellect for its prior, is therefore circumscribed
 by number down to its ultimate extremity; at that point infinity is
 reached. The particular intellect, though all-embracing, is a
 partial thing, and the collective Intellect and its various
 manifestations [all the particular intellects] are in actuality
 parts of that part. Soul too is a part of a part, though in the
 sense of being an Act [actuality] derived from it. When the Act of
 Intellect is directed upon itself, the result is the manifold
 [particular] intellects; when it looks outwards, Soul is produced.
 
 </p><p>If Soul acts as a genus or a species, the various [particular]
 souls must act as species. Their activities [Acts] will be twofold:
 the activity upward is Intellect; that which looks downward
 constitutes the other powers imposed by the particular
 Reason-Principle [the Reason-Principle of the being ensouled]; the
 lowest activity of Soul is in its contact with Matter to which it
 brings Form.
 
 </p><p>This lower part of Soul does not prevent the rest from being
 entirely in the higher sphere: indeed what we call the lower part is
 but an image of Soul: not that it is cut off from Soul; it 
 is like the
 reflection in the mirror, depending upon the original which stands
 outside of it.
 
 </p><p>But we must keep in mind what this "outside" means. Up to the
 production of the image, the Intellectual realm is wholly and
 exclusively composed of Intellectual Beings: in the same way the
 Sensible world, representing that in so far as it is able to retain
 the likeness of a living being, is itself a living being: 
 the relation
 is like that of a portrait or reflection to the original which is
 regarded as prior to the water or the painting reproducing it.
 
 </p><p>The representation, notice, in the portrait or on the 
 water is not
 of the dual being, but of the one element [Matter] as formed by the
 other [Soul]. Similarly, this likeness of the Intellectual realm
 carries images, not of the creative element, but of the entities
 contained in that creator, including Man with every other living
 being: creator and created are alike living beings, though of a
 different life, and both coexist in the Intellectual realm.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn560.htm">Next: THIRD TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>