<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn598.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn600.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. We may be told that an image need not be thus 
 closely attached
 to its archetype, that we know images holding in the absence of
 their archetype and that a warmed object may retain its heat when
 the fire is withdrawn.
 
 </p><p>To begin with the image and archetype: If we are reminded of an
 artist's picture we observe that here the image was produced by the
 artist, not by his subject; even in the case of a self-portrait, the
 picture is no "image of archetype," since it is not produced by the
 painter's body, the original represented: the reproduction is due to
 the effective laying on of the colours.
 
 </p><p>Nor is there strictly any such making of image as we see in
 water or in mirrors or in a shadow; in these cases the 
 original is the
 cause of the image which, at once, springs from it and cannot exist
 apart from it. Now, it is in this sense that we are to understand
 the weaker powers to be images of the Priors. As for the
 illustration from the fire and the warmed object, the warmth 
 cannot be
 called an image of the fire unless we think of warmth as containing
 fire so that the two are separate things. Besides, the fire removed,
 the warmth does sooner or later disappear, leaving the object cold.
 
 </p><p>If we are told that these powers fade out similarly, we are left
 with only one imperishable: the souls, the Intellectual-Principle,
 become perishable; then since Being [identical with the
 Intellectual-Principle] becomes transitory, so also must the Beings,
 its productions. Yet the sun, so long as it holds its station in the
 universe, will pour the same light upon the same places; to think
 its light may be lessened is to hold its mass perishable. But it has
 been abundantly stated that the emanants of the First are not
 perishable, that the souls, and the Intellectual-Principle with all
 its content, cannot perish.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn600.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>