<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn550.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn552.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 14</h4>
 
 <p>14. Why is Quality, again, not included among the Primaries?
 Because like Quantity it is a posterior, subsequent to Substance.
 Primary Substance must necessarily contain Quantity and 
 Quality as its
 consequents; it cannot owe its subsistence to them, or require them
 for its completion: that would make it posterior to Quality and
 Quantity.
 
 </p><p>Now in the case of composite substances- those constituted from
 diverse elements- number and qualities provide a means of
 differentiation: the qualities may be detached from the common core
 around which they are found to group themselves. But in the primary
 genera there is no distinction to be drawn between simples and
 composites; the difference is between simples and those 
 entities which
 complete not a particular substance but Substance as such. A
 particular substance may very well receive completion from Quality,
 for though it already has Substance before the accession of Quality,
 its particular character is external to Substance. But in Substance
 itself all the elements are substantial.
 
 </p><p>Nevertheless, we ventured to assert elsewhere that while the
 complements of Substance are only by analogy called qualities, yet
 accessions of external origin and subsequent to Substance are really
 qualities; that, further, the properties which inhere in substances
 are their activities [Acts], while those which are subsequent are
 merely modifications [or Passions]: we now affirm that the
 attributes of the particular substance are never complementary to
 Substance [as such]; an accession of Substance does not come to the
 substance of man qua man; he is, on the contrary, Substance in a
 higher degree before he arrives at differentiation, just as he is
 already "living being" before he passes into the rational species.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn552.htm">Next: Section 15</a></center>
 </body>