<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn514.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn516.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. It follows that in the cases specified above- agent,
 knowledge and the rest- the relation must be considered as in actual
 operation, and the Act and the Reason-Principle in the Act must be
 assumed to be real: in all other cases there will be simply
 participation in an Ideal-Form, in a Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>If Reality implied embodiment, we should indeed be forced to
 deny Reality to these conditions called relative; if however 
 we accord
 the pre-eminent place to the unembodied and to the
 Reason-Principles, and at the same time maintain that relations are
 Reason-Principles and participate in Ideal-Forms, we are 
 bound to seek
 their causes in that higher sphere. Doubleness, it is clear, is the
 cause of a thing being double, and from it is derived halfness.
 
 </p><p>Some correlatives owe their designations to the same Form,
 others to opposite Forms; it is thus that two objects are
 simultaneously double and half of each other, and one great and the
 other small. It may happen that both correlatives exist in one
 object-likeness and unlikeness, and, in general, identity and
 difference, so that the same thing will be at once like and unlike,
 identical and different.
 
 </p><p>The question arises here whether sharing in the same Form could
 make one man depraved and another more depraved. In the case of
 total depravity, clearly the two are made equal by the absence of a
 Form. Where there is a difference of degree, the one has
 participated in a Form which has failed to predominate, the 
 other in a
 Form which has failed still more: or, if we choose the negative
 aspect, we may think of them both as failing to participate in a
 Form which naturally belonged to them.
 
 </p><p>Sensation may be regarded as a Form of double origin [determined
 both by the sense-organ and by the sensible object]; and similarly
 with knowledge.
 
 </p><p>Habit is an Act directed upon something had [some experience
 produced by habit] and binding it as it were with the subject having
 [experiencing], as the Act of production binds producer and product.
 
 </p><p>Measurement is an Act of the measurer upon the measured 
 object: it
 too is therefore a kind of Reason-Principle.
 
 </p><p>Now if the condition of being related is regarded as a 
 Form having
 a generic unity, Relation must be allowed to be a single genus owing
 its reality to a Reason-Principle involved in all instances. If
 however the Reason-Principles [governing the correlatives] stand
 opposed and have the differences to which we have referred, there
 may perhaps not be a single genus, but this will not prevent all
 relatives being expressed in terms of a certain likeness and falling
 under a single category.
 
 </p><p>But even if the cases of which we have spoken can be subsumed
 under a single head, it is nevertheless impossible to include in a
 single genus all that goes with them in the one common category: for
 the category includes negations and derivatives- not only, for
 example, double but also its negative, the resultant doubleness and
 the act of doubling. But we cannot include in one genus both 
 the thing
 and its negative- double and not-double, relative and not-relative-
 any more than in dealing with the genus animal we can insert 
 in it the
 nonanimal. Moreover, doubleness and doubling have only the relation
 to double that whiteness has to white; they cannot be classed as
 identical with it.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn516.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>