<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn534.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn536.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 29</h4>
 
 <p>29. Qualities must be for this school distinct from Substrates.
 This in fact they acknowledge by counting them as the second 
 category.
 If then they form a distinct category, they must be simplex; that is
 to say they are not composite; that is to say that as qualities,
 pure and simple, they are devoid of Matter: hence they are bodiless
 and active, since Matter is their substrate- a relation of passivity.
 
 </p><p>If however they hold Qualities to be composite, that is a
 strange classification which first contrasts simple and composite
 qualities, then proceeds to include them in one genus, and finally
 includes one of the two species [simple] in the other [composite];
 it is like dividing knowledge into two species, the first comprising
 grammatical knowledge, the second made up of grammatical and other
 knowledge.
 
 </p><p>Again, if they identify Qualities with qualifications of Matter,
 then in the first place even their Seminal Principles [Logoi] will
 be material and will not have to reside in Matter to produce a
 composite, but prior to the composite thus produced they will
 themselves be composed of Matter and Form: in other words, they will
 not be Forms or Principles. Further, if they maintain that 
 the Seminal
 Principles are nothing but Matter in a certain state, they evidently
 identify Qualities with States, and should accordingly classify them
 in their fourth genus. If this is a state of some peculiar kind,
 what precisely is its differentia? Clearly the state by its
 association with Matter receives an accession of Reality: yet if
 that means that when divorced from Matter it is not a 
 Reality, how can
 State be treated as a single genus or species? Certainly one genus
 cannot embrace the Existent and the Non-existent.
 
 </p><p>And what is this state implanted in Matter? It is either real,
 or unreal: if real, absolutely bodiless: if unreal, it is introduced
 to no purpose; Matter is all there is; Quality therefore is nothing.
 The same is true of State, for that is even more unreal; the alleged
 Fourth Category more so.
 
 </p><p>Matter then is the sole Reality. But how do we come to know
 this? Certainly not from Matter itself. How, then? From 
 Intellect? But
 Intellect is merely a state of Matter, and even the "state" is an
 empty qualification. We are left after all with Matter alone 
 competent
 to make these assertions, to fathom these problems. And if its
 assertions were intelligent, we must wonder how it thinks 
 and performs
 the functions of Soul without possessing either Intellect or 
 Soul. If,
 then, it were to make foolish assertions, affirming itself to be
 what it is not and cannot be, to what should we ascribe this folly?
 Doubtless to Matter, if it was in truth Matter that spoke. But
 Matter does not speak; anyone who says that it does proclaims the
 predominance of Matter in himself; he may have a soul, but he is
 utterly devoid of Intellect, and lives in ignorance of himself and
 of the faculty alone capable of uttering the truth in these things.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn536.htm">Next: Section 30</a></center>
 </body>