<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn594.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn596.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. But why does not one same soul enter more than one body?
 
 </p><p>Because any second body must approach, if it might; but the
 first has approached and received and keeps.
 
 </p><p>Are we to think that this second body, in keeping its soul with
 a like care, is keeping the same soul as the first?
 
 </p><p>Why not: what difference is there? Merely some additions 
 [from the
 experiences of life, none in the soul itself].
 
 </p><p>We ask further why one soul in foot and hand and not one soul in
 the distinct members of the universe.
 
 </p><p>Sensations no doubt differ from soul to soul but only as do the
 conditions and experiences; this is difference not in the judging
 principle but in the matters coming to judgement; the judge 
 is one and
 the same soul pronouncing upon various events, and these not its own
 but belonging to a particular body; it is only as a man pronounces
 simultaneously upon a pleasant sensation in his finger and a pain in
 his head.
 
 </p><p>But why is not the soul in one man aware, then, of the judgement
 passed by another?
 
 </p><p>Because it is a judgement made, not a state set up; besides, the
 soul that has passed the judgement does not pronounce but simply
 judges: similarly a man's sight does not report to his 
 hearing, though
 both have passed judgement; it is the reason above both that
 reports, and this is a principle distinct from either. Often, as it
 happens, reason does become aware of a verdict formed in another
 reason and takes to itself an alien experience: but this has been
 dealt with elsewhere.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn596.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>