<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn568.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn570.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. So much for one of the genera- the "Substance," so called, of
 the Sensible realm.
 
 </p><p>But what are we to posit as its species? how divide this genus?
 
 </p><p>The genus as a whole must be identified with body. Bodies may be
 divided into the characteristically material and the organic: the
 material bodies comprise fire, earth, water, air; the organic the
 bodies of plants and animals, these in turn admitting of formal
 differentiation.
 
 </p><p>The next step is to find the species of earth and of the other
 elements, and in the case of organic bodies to distinguish plants
 according to their forms, and the bodies of animals either by their
 habitations- on the earth, in the earth, and similarly for the other
 elements- or else as light, heavy and intermediate. Some bodies, we
 shall observe, stand in the middle of the universe, others
 circumscribe it from above, others occupy the middle sphere: in each
 case we shall find bodies different in shape, so that the bodies of
 the living beings of the heavens may be differentiated from those of
 the other elements.
 
 </p><p>Once we have classified bodies into the four species, we 
 are ready
 to combine them on a different principle, at the same time
 intermingling their differences of place, form and constitution; the
 resultant combinations will be known as fiery or earthy on the basis
 of the excess or predominance of some one element.
 
 </p><p>The distinction between First and Second Substances, between
 Fire and a given example of fire, entails a difference of a peculiar
 kind- the difference between universal and particular. This 
 however is
 not a difference characteristic of Substance; there is also 
 in Quality
 the distinction between whiteness and the white object, between
 grammar and some particular grammar.
 
 </p><p>The question may here be asked: "What deficiency has grammar
 compared with a particular grammar, and science as a whole in
 comparison with a science?" Grammar is certainly not posterior to
 the particular grammar: on the contrary, the grammar as in 
 you depends
 upon the prior existence of grammar as such: the grammar as in you
 becomes a particular by the fact of being in you; it is otherwise
 identical with grammar the universal.
 
 </p><p>Turn to the case of Socrates: it is not Socrates who bestows
 manhood upon what previously was not Man, but Man upon Socrates; the
 individual man exists by participation in the universal.
 
 </p><p>Besides, Socrates is merely a particular instance of Man; this
 particularity can have no effect whatever in adding to his essential
 manhood.
 
 </p><p>We may be told that Man [the universal] is Form alone, Socrates
 Form in Matter. But on this very ground Socrates will be less fully
 Man than the universal; for the Reason-Principle will be less
 effectual in Matter. If, on the contrary, Man is not determined by
 Form alone, but presupposes Matter, what deficiency has Man in
 comparison with the material manifestation of Man, or the
 Reason-Principle in isolation as compared with its embodiment in a
 unit of Matter?
 
 </p><p>Besides, the more general is by nature prior; hence, the 
 Form-Idea
 is prior to the individual: but what is prior by nature is prior
 unconditionally. How then can the Form take a lower rank? The
 individual, it is true, is prior in the sense of being more readily
 accessible to our cognisance; this fact, however, entails no 
 objective
 difference.
 
 </p><p>Moreover, such a difference, if established, would be 
 incompatible
 with a single Reason-Principle of Substance; First and Second
 Substance could not have the same Principle, nor be brought under a
 single genus.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn570.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>