<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn578.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn580.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 19</h4>
 
 <p>19. With Quality we have undertaken to group the 
 dependent qualia,
 in so far as Quality is bound up with them; we shall not however
 introduce into this category the qualified objects [qua 
 objects], that
 we may not be dealing with two categories at once; we shall pass
 over the objects to that which gives them their [specific] name.
 
 </p><p>But how are we to classify such terms as "not white"? If "not
 white" signifies some other colour, it is a quality. But if it is
 merely a negation of an enumeration of things not white, it will be
 either a meaningless sound, or else a name or definition of
 something actual: if a sound, it is a kind of motion; if a name or
 definition, it is a relative, inasmuch as names and definitions are
 significant. But if not only the things enumerated are in some one
 genus, but also the propositions and terms in question must 
 be each of
 them significative of some genus, then we shall assert that negative
 propositions and terms posit certain things within a restricted
 field and deny others. Perhaps, however, it would be better, in view
 of their composite nature, not to include the negations in the same
 genus as the affirmations.
 
 </p><p>What view, then, shall we take of privations? If they are
 privations of qualities, they will themselves be qualities:
 "toothless" and "blind," for example, are qualities. "Naked" and
 "dothed," on the other hand, are neither of them qualities 
 but states:
 they therefore comport a relation to something else.
 
 </p><p>[With regard to passive qualities:]
 
 </p><p>Passivity, while it lasts, is not a quality but a motion; when
 it is a past experience remaining in one's possession, it is a
 quality; if one ceases to possess the experience then regarded as a
 finished occurrence, one is considered to have been moved- in other
 words, to have been in Motion. But in none of these cases is it
 necessary to conceive of anything but Motion; the idea of time
 should be excluded; even present time has no right to be introduced.
 
 </p><p>"Well" and similar adverbial expressions are to be 
 referred to the
 single generic notion [of Quality].
 
 </p><p>It remains to consider whether blushing should be referred to
 Quality, even though the person blushing is not included in this
 category. The fact of becoming flushed is rightly not referred to
 Quality; for it involves passivity- in short, Motion. But if one has
 ceased to become flushed and is actually red, this is surely 
 a case of
 Quality, which is independent of time. How indeed are we to define
 Quality but by the aspect which a substance presents? By predicating
 of a man redness, we clearly ascribe to him a quality.
 
 </p><p>We shall accordingly maintain that states alone, and not
 dispositions, constitute qualities: thus, "hot" is a quality but not
 "growing hot," "ill" but not "turning ill."
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn580.htm">Next: Section 20</a></center>
 </body>