<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn523.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn525.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. There are other questions calling for consideration:
 
 </p><p>First: Are both Acts and motions to be included in the 
 category of
 Action, with the distinction that Acts are momentary while Motions,
 such as cutting, are in time? Or will both be regarded as motions or
 as involving Motion?
 
 </p><p>Secondly: Will all activities be related to passivity, or will
 some- for example, walking and speaking- be considered as
 independent of it?
 
 </p><p>Thirdly: Will all those related to passivity be classed 
 as motions
 and the independent as Acts, or will the two classes 
 overlap? Walking,
 for instance, which is an independent, would, one supposes, be a
 motion; thinking, which also does not essentially involve 
 "passivity,"
 an Act: otherwise we must hold that thinking and walking are not
 even actions. But if they are not in the category of Action, where
 then in our classification must they fall?
 
 </p><p>It may perhaps be urged that the act of thinking, together with
 the faculty of thought, should be regarded as relative to the
 thought object; for is not the faculty of sensation treated as
 relative to the sensible object? If then, we may ask, in the
 analogue the faculty of sensation is treated as relative to the
 sensible object, why not the sensory act as well? The fact is that
 even sensation, though related to an external object, has something
 besides that relation: it has, namely, its own status of being
 either an Act or a Passion. Now the Passion is separable from the
 condition of being attached to some object and caused by some
 object: so, then, is the Act a distinct entity. Walking is similarly
 attached and caused, and yet has besides the status of being 
 a motion.
 It follows that thought, in addition to its relationship, will have
 the status of being either a motion or an Act.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn525.htm">Next: Section 19</a></center>
 </body>