<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn539.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn541.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. We assert, then, a plurality of Existents, but a plurality
 not fortuitous and therefore a plurality deriving from a unity.
 
 </p><p>But even admitting this derivation from a unity- a unity however
 not predicated of them in respect of their essential being- there
 is, surely, no reason why each of these Existents, distinct in
 character from every other, should not in itself stand as a separate
 genus.
 
 </p><p>Is, then, this unity external to the genera thus produced, this
 unity which is their source though it cannot be predicated of them
 in respect of their essence? it is indeed external; the One 
 is beyond;
 it cannot, therefore, be included among the genera: it is the
 [transcendent] source, while they stand side by side as genera. Yet
 surely the one must somehow be included [among the genera]? No: it
 is the Existents we are investigating, not that which is beyond
 Existence.
 
 </p><p>We pass on, then, to consider that which is included, and find
 to our surprise the cause included with the things it causes: it is
 surely strange that causes and effects should be brought 
 into the same
 genus.
 
 </p><p>But if the cause is included with its effects only in 
 the sense in
 which a genus is included with its subordinates, the subordinates
 being of a different order, so that it cannot be predicated of them
 whether as their genus or in any other relation, these subordinates
 are obviously themselves genera with subordinates of their own: you
 may, for example, be the cause of the operation of walking, but the
 walking is not subordinate to you in the relation of species 
 to genus;
 and if walking had nothing prior to it as its genus, but had
 posteriors, then it would be a [primary] genus and rank among the
 Existents.
 
 </p><p>Perhaps, however, it must be utterly denied that unity 
 is even the
 cause of other things; they should be considered rather as its parts
 or elements- if the terms may be allowed,- their totality 
 constituting
 a single entity which our thinking divides. All unity though 
 it be, it
 goes by a wonderful power out into everything; it appears as many
 and becomes many when there is a motion; the fecundity of its nature
 causes the One to be no longer one, and we, displaying what we call
 its parts, consider them each as a unity and make them into
 "genera," unaware of our failure to see the whole at once. We
 display it, then, in parts, though, unable to restrain their natural
 tendency to coalesce, we bring these parts together again, 
 resign them
 to the whole and allow them to become a unity, or rather to be a
 unity.
 
 </p><p>All this will become clearer in the light of further
 consideration- when, that is to say, we have ascertained the 
 number of
 the genera; for thus we shall also discover their causes. It is not
 enough to deny; we must advance by dint of thought and
 comprehension. The way is clear:
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn541.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>