<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn564.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn566.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. These are incontrovertible facts in regard to the
 pseudo-substance of the Sensible realm: if they apply also in some
 degree to the True Substance of the Intellectual, the coincidence
 is, doubtless, to be attributed to analogy and ambiguity of terms.
 
 </p><p>We are aware that "the first" is so called only in 
 relation to the
 things which come after it: "first" has no absolute significance;
 the first of one series is subsequent to the last of another.
 "Substrate," similarly, varies in meaning [as applied to the higher
 and to the lower], while as for passivity its very existence in the
 Intellectual is questionable; if it does exist there, it is not the
 passivity of the Sensible.
 
 </p><p>It follows that the fact of "not being present in a subject [or
 substrate] is not universally true of Substance, unless presence in
 a subject be stipulated as not including the case of the part
 present in the whole or of one thing combining with another to form
 a distinct unity; a thing will not be present as in a subject in
 that with which it co-operates in the information of a composite
 substance. Form, therefore, is not present in Matter as in a
 subject, nor is Man so present in Socrates, since Man is part of
 Socrates.
 
 </p><p>Substance, then, is that which is not present in a 
 subject. But if
 we adopt the definition "neither present in a subject nor predicated
 of a subject," we must add to the second "subject" the qualification
 "distinct," in order that we may not exclude the case of Man
 predicated of a particular man. When I predicate Man of Socrates, it
 is as though I affirmed, not that a piece of wood is white, but that
 whiteness is white; for in asserting that Socrates is a man, I
 predicate Man [the universal] of a particular man, I affirm 
 Man of the
 manhood in Socrates; I am really saying only that Socrates is
 Socrates, or that this particular rational animal is an animal.
 
 </p><p>It may be objected that non-presence in a subject is not
 peculiar to Substance, inasmuch as the differentia of a substance
 is no more present in a subject than the substance itself; but this
 objection results from taking a part of the whole substance, such as
 "two-footed" in our example, and asserting that this part is not
 present in a subject: if we take, not "two-footed" which is merely
 an aspect of Substance, but "two-footedness" by which we signify not
 Substance but Quality, we shall find that this "two-footedness" is
 indeed present in a subject.
 
 </p><p>We may be told that neither Time nor Place is present in a
 subject. But if the definition of Time as the measure of Motion be
 regarded as denoting something measured, the "measure" will 
 be present
 in Motion as in a subject, while Motion will be present in the
 moved: if, on the contrary, it be supposed to signify a principle of
 measurement, the "measure" will be present in the measurer.
 
 </p><p>Place is the limit of the surrounding space, and thus is present
 in that space.
 
 </p><p>The truth is, however, that the "Substance" of our enquiry may
 be apprehended in directly opposite ways: it may be determined by
 one of the properties we have been discussing, by more than one, by
 all at once, according as they answer to the notions of Matter, Form
 and the Couplement.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn566.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>