<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn584.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn586.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 25</h4>
 
 <p>25. The nature of integration and disintegrations calls for
 scrutiny. Are they different from the motions above mentioned, from
 coming-to-be and passing-away, from growth and decay, from change of
 place and from alteration? or must they be referred to these? or,
 again, must some of these be regarded as types of integration and
 disintegration?
 
 </p><p>If integration implies that one element proceeds towards
 another, implies in short an approach, and disintegration, on the
 other hand, a retreat into the background, such motions may be
 termed local; we have clearly a case of two things moving in the
 direction of unity, or else making away from each other.
 
 </p><p>If however the things achieve a sort of fusion, mixture, 
 blending,
 and if a unity comes into being, not when the process of combination
 is already complete, but in the very act of combining, to 
 which of our
 specified motions shall we refer this type? There will certainly be
 locomotion at first, but it will be succeeded by something
 different; just as in growth locomotion is found at the 
 outset, though
 later it is supplanted by quantitative motion. The present case is
 similar: locomotion leads the way, but integration or disintegration
 does not inevitably follow; integration takes place only when the
 impinging elements become intertwined, disintegration only when they
 are rent asunder by the contact.
 
 </p><p>On the other hand, it often happens that locomotion follows
 disintegration, or else occurs simultaneously, though the experience
 of the disintegrated is not conceived in terms of locomotion: so too
 in integration a distinct experience, a distinct unification,
 accompanies the locomotion and remains separate from it.
 
 </p><p>Are we then to posit a new species for these two motions, adding
 to them, perhaps, alteration? A thing is altered by becoming 
 dense- in
 other words, by integration; it is altered again by being rarefied-
 that is, by disintegration. When wine and water are mixed, something
 is produced different from either of the pre-existing elements:
 thus, integration takes place, resulting in alteration.
 
 </p><p>But perhaps we should recall a previous distinction, and while
 holding that integrations and disintegrations precede alterations,
 should maintain that alterations are nonetheless distinct 
 from either;
 that, further, not every alteration is of this type [presupposing,
 that is to say, integration or disintegration], and, in particular,
 rarefication and condensation are not identical with disintegration
 and integration, nor in any sense derived from them: to suppose that
 they were would involve the admission of a vacuum.
 
 </p><p>Again, can we use integration and disintegration to explain
 blackness and whiteness? But to doubt the independent existence of
 these qualities means that, beginning with colours, we may end by
 annihilating almost all qualities, or rather all without exception;
 for if we identify every alteration, or qualitative change, with
 integration and disintegration, we allow nothing whatever to 
 come into
 existence; the same elements persist, nearer or farther apart.
 
 </p><p>Finally, how is it possible to class learning and being taught
 as integrations?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn586.htm">Next: Section 26</a></center>
 </body>