<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn560.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn562.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. We have now explained our conception of Reality [True Being]
 and considered how far it agrees with the teaching of Plato. We have
 still to investigate the opposed principle [the principle of
 Becoming].
 
 </p><p>There is the possibility that the genera posited for the
 Intellectual sphere will suffice for the lower also; possibly with
 these genera others will be required; again, the two series 
 may differ
 entirely; or perhaps some of the sensible genera will be identical
 with their intellectual prototypes, and others different- 
 "identical,"
 however, being understood to mean only analogous and in possession
 of a common name, as our results will make dear.
 
 </p><p>We must begin on these lines:
 
 </p><p>The subject of our discussion is the Sensible realm: Sensible
 Existence is entirely embraced by what we know as the Universe: our
 duty, then, would seem to be clear enough- to take this Universe and
 analyse its nature, classifying its constituent parts and arranging
 them by species. Suppose that we were making a division of speech:
 we should reduce its infinity to finite terms, and from the identity
 appearing in many instances evolve a unity, then another and
 another, until we arrived at some definite number; each such unit we
 should call a species if imposed upon individuals, a genus if
 imposed upon species. Thus, every species of speech- and 
 similarly all
 phenomena- might be referred to a unity; speech- or element- might
 be predicated of them all.
 
 </p><p>This procedure however is as we have already shown, impossible
 in dealing with the subject of our present enquiry. New 
 genera must be
 sought for this Universe-genera distinct from those of the
 Intellectual, inasmuch as this realm is different from that, 
 analogous
 indeed but never identical, a mere image of the higher. True, it
 involves the parallel existence of Body and Soul, for the Universe
 is a living form: essentially however Soul is of the Intellectual
 and does not enter into the structure of what is called Sensible
 Being.
 
 </p><p>Remembering this fact, we must- however great the difficulty-
 exclude Soul from the present investigation, just as in a census of
 citizens, taken in the interests of commerce and taxation, we should
 ignore the alien population. As for the experiences to which Soul is
 indirectly subject in its conjunction with Body and by reason of
 Body's presence, their classification must be attempted at a later
 stage, when we enquire into the details of Sensible Existence.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn562.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>