<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn541.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn543.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. A first point demanding consideration:
 
 </p><p>Bodies- those, for example, of animals and plants- are each a
 multiplicity founded on colour and shape and magnitude, and on the
 forms and arrangement of parts: yet all these elements spring from a
 unity. Now this unity must be either Unity-Absolute or some 
 unity less
 thorough-going and complete, but necessarily more complete than that
 which emerges, so to speak, from the body itself; this will 
 be a unity
 having more claim to reality than the unity produced from it, for
 divergence from unity involves a corresponding divergence from
 Reality. Since, thus, bodies take their rise from unity, but not
 "unity" in the sense of the complete unity or 
 Unity-Absolute- for this
 could never yield discrete plurality- it remains that they be
 derived from a unity Pluralized. But the creative principle [in
 bodies] is Soul: Soul therefore is a pluralized unity.
 
 </p><p>We then ask whether the plurality here consists of the
 Reason-Principles of the things of process. Or is this unity not
 something different from the mere sum of these Principles? Certainly
 Soul itself is one Reason-Principle, the chief of the
 Reason-Principles, and these are its Act as it functions in 
 accordance
 with its essential being; this essential being, on the other hand,
 is the potentiality of the Reason-Principles. This is the mode in
 which this unity is a plurality, its plurality being revealed by the
 effect it has upon the external.
 
 </p><p>But, to leave the region of its effect, suppose we take it at
 the higher non-effecting part of Soul; is not plurality of powers to
 be found in this part also? The existence of this higher 
 part will, we
 may presume, be at once conceded.
 
 </p><p>But is this existence to be taken as identical with that of the
 stone? Surely not. Being in the case of the stone is not Being pure
 and simple, but stone-being: so here; Soul's being denotes not
 merely Being but Soul-being.
 
 </p><p>Is then that "being" distinct from what else goes to complete
 the essence [or substance] of Soul? Is it to be identified with
 Bring [the Absolute], while to some differentia of Being is
 ascribed the production of Soul? No doubt Soul is in a sense Being,
 and this is not as a man "is" white, but from the fact of its being
 purely an essence: in other words, the being it possesses it holds
 from no source external to its own essence.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn543.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>