<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn533.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn535.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 28</h4>
 
 <p>28. Many as are the objections to this theory, we pass 
 on for fear
 of the ridicule we might incur by arguing against a position 
 itself so
 manifestly ridiculous. We may be content with pointing out that it
 assigns the primacy to the Non-existent and treats it as the very
 summit of Existence: in short, it places the last thing first. The
 reason for this procedure lies in the acceptance of sense-perception
 as a trustworthy guide to first-principles and to all other entities.
 
 </p><p>This philosophy began by identifying the Real with body; then,
 viewing with apprehension the transmutations of bodies, decided that
 Reality was that which is permanent beneath the superficial changes-
 which is much as if one regarded space as having more title 
 to Reality
 than the bodies within it, on the principle that space does 
 not perish
 with them. They found a permanent in space, but it was a 
 fault to take
 mere permanence as in itself a sufficient definition of the Real;
 the right method would have been to consider what properties must
 characterize Reality, by the presence of which properties it has
 also that of unfailing permanence. Thus if a shadow had permanence,
 accompanying an object through every change, that would not make it
 more real than the object itself. The sensible universe, as
 including the Substrate and a multitude of attributes, will thus
 have more claim to be Reality entire than has any one of its 
 component
 entities (such as Matter): and if the sensible were in very truth
 the whole of Reality, Matter, the mere base and not the total, could
 not be that whole.
 
 </p><p>Most surprising of all is that, while they make sense-perception
 their guarantee of everything, they hold that the Real cannot be
 grasped by sensation;- for they have no right to assign to 
 Matter even
 so much as resistance, since resistance is a quality. If however
 they profess to grasp Reality by Intellect, is it not a strange
 Intellect which ranks Matter above itself, giving Reality to Matter
 and not to itself? And as their "Intellect" has, thus, no
 Real-Existence, how can it be trustworthy when it speaks of things
 higher than itself, things to which it has no affinity whatever?
 
 </p><p>But an adequate treatment of this entity [Matter] and of
 substrates will be found elsewhere.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn535.htm">Next: Section 29</a></center>
 </body>