<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn631.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn633.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. It cannot reasonably be thought that the notion of unity is
 derived from the object since this is physical- man, animal, even
 stone, a presentation of that order is something very different from
 unity [which must be a thing of the Intellectual]; if that
 presentation were unity, the mind could never affirm unity unless of
 that given thing, man, for example.
 
 </p><p>Then again, just as in the case of "On the right" or other such
 affirmation of relation, the mind does not affirm in some caprice
 but from observation of contrasted position, so here it affirms
 unity in virtue of perceiving something real; assuredly the
 assertion of unity is not a bare attitude towards something
 non-existent. It is not enough that a thing be alone and be 
 itself and
 not something else: and that very "something else" tells of another
 unity. Besides Otherness and Difference are later; unless 
 the mind has
 first rested upon unity it cannot affirm Otherness or 
 Difference; when
 it affirms Aloneness it affirms unity-with-aloneness; thus unity is
 presupposed in Aloneness.
 
 </p><p>Besides, that in us which asserts unity of some object is first
 a unity, itself; and the object is a unity before any outside
 affirmation or conception.
 
 </p><p>A thing must be either one thing or more than one, manifold: and
 if there is to be a manifold there must be a precedent unity. To
 talk of a manifold is to talk of what has something added to 
 unity; to
 think of an army is to think of a multitude under arms and brought
 to unity. In refusing to allow the manifold to remain manifold, the
 mind makes the truth clear; it draws a separate many into one,
 either supplying a unity not present or keen to perceive the unity
 brought about by the ordering of the parts; in an army, even, the
 unity is not a fiction but as real as that of a building erected
 from many stones, though of course the unity of the house is more
 compact.
 
 </p><p>If, then, unity is more pronounced in the continuous, and more
 again where there is no separation by part, this is clearly because
 there exists, in real existence, something which is a Nature or
 Principle of Unity. There cannot be a greater and less in the
 non-existent: as we predicate Substance of everything in sense, but
 predicate it also of the Intellectual order and more strictly there-
 since we hold that the greater and more sovereign substantiality
 belongs to the Real Beings and that Being is more marked in 
 Substance,
 even sensible Substance, than in the other Kinds- so, 
 finding unity to
 exhibit degree of more and less, differing in sense-things as well
 as in the Intellectual, we must similarly admit that Unity exists
 under all forms though still by reference, only, to that 
 primal Unity.
 
 </p><p>As Substance and Real Being, despite the participation of the
 sensible, are still of the Intellectual and not the sensible 
 order, so
 too the unity observed present in things of sense by participation
 remains still an Intellectual and to be grasped by an Intellectual
 Act. The mind, from a thing present to it, comes to knowledge of
 something else, a thing not presented; that is, it has a prior
 knowledge. By this prior knowledge it recognises Being in a 
 particular
 being; similarly when a thing is one it can affirm unity as it can
 affirm also duality and multiplicity.
 
 </p><p>It is impossible to name or conceive anything not making one or
 two or some number; equally impossible that the thing should 
 not exist
 without which nothing can possibly be named or conceived; impossible
 to deny the reality of that whose existence is a necessary condition
 of naming or affirming anything; what is a first need, 
 universally, to
 the formation of every concept and every proposition must 
 exist before
 reasoning and thinking; only as an existent can it be cited 
 to account
 for the stirring of thought. If Unity is necessary to the
 substantial existence of all that really is- and nothing exists
 which is not one- Unity must precede Reality and be its author. It
 is therefore, an existent Unity, not an existent that develops
 Unity; considered as Being-with-Unity it would be a manifold,
 whereas in the pure Unity there is no Being save in so far as Unity
 attends to producing it. As regards the word "This," it is nat a
 bare word; it affirms an indicated existence without using the name,
 it tells of a certain presence, whether a substance or some other
 existent; any This must be significant; it is no attitude of the
 mind applying itself to a non-existent; the This shows a thing
 present, as much as if we used the strict name of the object.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn633.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>