<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn690.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn692.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. The upholder of Happening must be asked how this false
 happening can be supposed to have come about, taking it that it did,
 and haw the happening, then, is not universally prevalent. 
 If there is
 to be a natural scheme at all, it must be admitted that this 
 happening
 does not and cannot exist: for if we attribute to chance the 
 Principle
 which is to eliminate chance from all the rest, how can there ever
 be anything independent of chance? And this Nature does take away
 the chanced from the rest, bringing in form and limit and shape. In
 the case of things thus conformed to reason the cause cannot be
 identified with chance but must lie in that very reason; chance must
 be kept for what occurs apart from choice and sequence and is purely
 concurrent. When we come to the source of all reason, order 
 and limit,
 how can we attribute the reality there to chance? Chance is no doubt
 master of many things but is not master of Intellectual-Principle,
 of reason, of order, so as to bring them into being. How 
 could chance,
 recognised as the very opposite of reason, be its Author? And if it
 does not produce Intellectual-Principle, then certainly not 
 that which
 precedes and surpasses that Principle. Chance, besides, has no means
 of producing, has no being at all, and, assuredly, none in the
 Eternal.
 
 </p><p>Since there is nothing before Him who is the First, we 
 must call a
 halt; there is nothing to say; we may enquire into the origin of his
 sequents but not of Himself who has no origin.
 
 </p><p>But perhaps, never having come to be but being as He is, He is
 still not master of his own essence: not master of his essence but
 being as He is, not self-originating but acting out of his nature as
 He finds it, must He not be of necessity what He is, inhibited from
 being otherwise?
 
 </p><p>No: What He is, He is not because He could not be otherwise but
 because so is best. Not everything has power to move towards the
 better though nothing is prevented by any external from 
 moving towards
 the worse. But that the Supreme has not so moved is its own doing:
 there has been no inhibition; it has not moved simply because it is
 That which does not move; in this stability the inability to
 degenerate is not powerlessness; here permanence is very Act, a
 self-determination. This absence of declination comports the fulness
 of power; it is not the yielding of a being held and controlled but
 the Act of one who is necessity, law, to all.
 
 </p><p>Does this indicate a Necessity which has brought itself into
 existence? No: there has been no coming into being in any 
 degree; This
 is that by which being is brought to all the rest, its 
 sequents. Above
 all origins, This can owe being neither to an extern nor to itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn692.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>