<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn673.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn675.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 36</h4>
 
 <p>36. We need not carry this matter further; we turn to a question
 already touched but demanding still some brief consideration.
 
 </p><p>Knowledge of The Good or contact with it, is the all-important:
 this- we read- is the grand learning, the learning we are to
 understand, not of looking towards it but attaining, first, some
 knowledge of it. We come to this learning by analogies, by
 abstractions, by our understanding of its subsequents, of all that
 is derived from The Good, by the upward steps towards it. 
 Purification
 has The Good for goal; so the virtues, all right ordering, ascent
 within the Intellectual, settlement therein, banqueting upon the
 divine- by these methods one becomes, to self and to all 
 else, at once
 seen and seer; identical with Being and Intellectual-Principle 
 and the
 entire living all, we no longer see the Supreme as an 
 external; we are
 near now, the next is That and it is close at hand, radiant above
 the Intellectual.
 
 </p><p>Here, we put aside all the learning; disciplined to this pitch,
 established in beauty, the quester holds knowledge still of 
 the ground
 he rests on but, suddenly, swept beyond it all by the very crest of
 the wave of Intellect surging beneath, he is lifted and sees, never
 knowing how; the vision floods the eyes with light, but it is not a
 light showing some other object, the light is itself the vision. No
 longer is there thing seen and light to show it, no longer Intellect
 and object of Intellection; this is the very radiance that brought
 both Intellect and Intellectual object into being for the later use
 and allowed them to occupy the quester's mind. With This he himself
 becomes identical, with that radiance whose Act is to engender
 Intellectual-Principle, not losing in that engendering but for ever
 unchanged, the engendered coming to be simply because that Supreme
 exists. If there were no such principle above change, no derivative
 could rise.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn675.htm">Next: Section 37</a></center>
 </body>