<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn630.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn632.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. We may be told that unity and monad have no real existence,
 that the only unity is some definite object that is one 
 thing, so that
 all comes to an attitude of the mind towards things 
 considered singly.
 
 </p><p>But, to begin with, why at this should not the affirmation of
 Being pass equally as an attitude of mind so that Being too must
 disappear? No doubt Being strikes and stings and gives the
 impression of reality; but we find ourselves just as vividly struck
 and impressed in the presence of unity. Besides, is this attitude,
 this concept itself, a unity or a manifold? When we deny the unity
 of an object, clearly the unity mentioned is not supplied by the
 object, since we are saying it has none; the unity therefore 
 is within
 ourselves, something latent in our minds independently of 
 any concrete
 one thing.
 
 </p><p>[An objector speaks-] "But the unity we thus possess comes by
 our acceptance of a certain idea or impression from things external;
 it is a notion derived from an object. Those that take the notion of
 numbers and of unity to be but one species of the notions held to be
 inherent in the mind must allow to numbers and to unity the reality
 they ascribe to any of the others, and upon occasion they 
 must be met;
 but no such real existence can be posited when the concept 
 is taken to
 be an attitude or notion rising in us as a by-product of the
 objects; this happens when we say "This," "What," and still more
 obviously in the affirmations "Crowd," "Festival," "Army,"
 "Multiplicity." As multiplicity is nothing apart from certain
 constituent items and the festival nothing apart from the people
 gathered happily at the rites, so when we affirm unity we are not
 thinking of some Oneness self-standing, unrelated. And there are
 many other such cases; for instance "on the right," "Above" and
 their opposites; what is there of reality about this
 "On-the-right-ness" but the fact that two different positions are
 occupied? So with "Above": "Above" and "Below" are a mere matter of
 position and have no significance outside of this sphere.
 
 </p><p>Now in answer to this series of objections our first remark is
 that there does exist an actuality implicit in each one of the
 relations cited; though this is not the same for all or the same for
 correlatives or the same for every reference to unity.
 
 </p><p>But these objections must be taken singly.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn632.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>