<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn655.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn657.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. But in what way is the content of Intellectual-Principle
 participant in good? Is it because each member of it is an Idea or
 because of their beauty or how?
 
 </p><p>Anything coming from The Good carries the image and type 
 belonging
 to that original or deriving from it, as anything going back 
 to warmth
 or sweetness carries the memory of those originals: Life entered
 into Intellectual-Principle from The Supreme, for its origin 
 is in the
 Activity streaming Thence; Intellectual-Principle springs from the
 Supreme, and with it the beauty of the Ideas; at once all 
 these, Life,
 Intellectual-Principle, Idea, must inevitably have goodness.
 
 </p><p>But what is the common element in them? Derivation from the
 First is not enough to procure identical quality; there must be some
 element held in common by the things derived: one source may produce
 many differing things as also one outgoing thing may take difference
 in various recipients: what enters into the First Act is different
 from what that Act transmits and there is difference, again, in the
 effect here. Nonetheless every item may be good in a degree of its
 own. To what, then, is the highest degree due?
 
 </p><p>But first we must ask whether Life is a good, bare Life, or only
 the Life streaming Thence, very different from the Life known here?
 Once more, then, what constitutes the goodness of Life?
 
 </p><p>The Life of The Good, or rather not its Life but that given
 forth from it.
 
 </p><p>But if in that higher Life there must be something from That,
 something which is the Authentic Life, we must admit that since
 nothing worthless can come Thence Life in itself is good; so too we
 must admit, in the case of Authentic Intellectual-Principle, that
 its Life because good derives from that First; thus it becomes clear
 that every Idea is good and informed by the Good. The Ideas must
 have something of good, whether as a common property or as a
 distinct attribution or as held in some distinct measure.
 
 </p><p>Thus it is established that the particular Idea contains in its
 essence something of good and thereby becomes a good thing; for Life
 we found to be good not in the bare being but in its derivation from
 the Authentic, the Supreme whence it sprung: and the same is true of
 Intellectual-Principle: we are forced therefore admit a certain
 identity.
 
 </p><p>When, with all their differences, things may be affirmed 
 to have a
 measure of identity, the matter of the identity may very well be
 established in their very essence and yet be mentally 
 abstracted; thus
 life in man or horse yields the notion of animal; from water or fire
 we may get that of warmth; the first case is a definition of 
 Kind, the
 other two cite qualities, primary and secondary respectively. Both
 or one part of Intellect, then, would be called by the one term good.
 
 </p><p>Is The Good, then, inherent in the Ideas essentially? 
 Each of them
 is good but the goodness is not that of the Unity-Good. How, then,
 is it present?
 
 </p><p>By the mode of parts.
 
 </p><p>But The Good is without parts?
 
 </p><p>No doubt The Good is a unity; but here it has become
 particularized. The First Activity is good and anything determined
 in accord with it is good as also is any resultant. There is the
 good that is good by origin in The First, the good that is in an
 ordered system derived from that earlier, and the good that is in
 the actualization [in the thing participant]. Derived, then, not
 identical- like the speech and walk and other characteristics of one
 man, each playing its due part.
 
 </p><p>Here, it is obvious, goodness depends upon order, 
 rhythm, but what
 equivalent exists There?
 
 </p><p>We might answer that in the case of the sense-order, 
 too, the good
 is imposed since the ordering is of things different from the
 Orderer but that There the very things are good.
 
 </p><p>But why are they thus good in themselves? We cannot be content
 with the conviction of their goodness on the ground of their 
 origin in
 that realm: we do not deny that things deriving Thence are good, but
 our subject demands that we discover the mode by which they come to
 possess that goodness.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn657.htm">Next: Section 19</a></center>
 </body>