<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn669.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn671.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 32</h4>
 
 <p>32. Where, then? where exists the author of this beauty and
 life, the begetter of the veritable?
 
 </p><p>You see the splendour over the things of the universe 
 with all the
 variety begotten of the Ideas; well might we linger here: 
 but amid all
 these things of beauty we cannot but ask whence they come and whence
 the beauty. This source can be none of the beautiful objects; were
 it so, it too would be a thing of parts. It can be no shape, 
 no power,
 nor the total of powers and shapes that have had the 
 becoming that has
 set them here; it must stand above all the powers, all the patterns.
 The origin of all this must be the formless- formless not as lacking
 shape but as the very source of even shape Intellectual.
 
 </p><p>In the realm of process anything coming to be must come to be
 something; to every thing its distinctive shape: but what shape can
 that have which no one has shaped? It can be none of existing
 things; yet it is all: none, in that beings are later; all, as the
 wellspring from which they flow. That which can make all can have,
 itself, no extension; it must be limitless and so without magnitude;
 magnitude itself is of the Later and cannot be an element in that
 which is to bring it into being. The greatness of the 
 Authentic cannot
 be a greatness of quantity; all extension must belong to the
 subsequent: the Supreme is great in the sense only that there can be
 nothing mightier, nothing to equal it, nothing with anything 
 in common
 with it: how then could anything be equal to any part of its
 content? Its eternity and universal reach entail neither measure nor
 measurelessness; given either, how could it be the measure of
 things? So with shape: granted beauty, the absence of shape 
 or form to
 be grasped is but enhancement of desire and love; the love will be
 limitless as the object is, an infinite love.
 
 </p><p>Its beauty, too, will be unique, a beauty above beauty: it
 cannot be beauty since it is not a thing among things. It is lovable
 and the author of beauty; as the power to all beautiful 
 shape, it will
 be the ultimate of beauty, that which brings all loveliness to be;
 it begets beauty and makes it yet more beautiful by the excess of
 beauty streaming from itself, the source and height of beauty. As
 the source of beauty it makes beautiful whatsoever springs from it.
 And this conferred beauty is not itself in shape; the thing 
 that comes
 to be is without shape, though in another sense shaped; what is
 denoted by shape is, in itself, an attribute of something else,
 shapeless at first. Not the beauty but its participant takes the
 shape.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn671.htm">Next: Section 33</a></center>
 </body>