<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn617.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn619.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. To return: How is that Power present to the universe?
 
 </p><p>As a One Life.
 
 </p><p>Consider the life in any living thing; it does not reach only to
 some fixed point, unable to permeate the entire being; it is
 omnipresent. If on this again we are asked How, we appeal to the
 character of this power, not subject to quantity but such that
 though you divide it mentally for ever you still have the same
 power, infinite to the core; in it there is no Matter to make it
 grow less and less according to the measured mass.
 
 </p><p>Conceive it as a power of an ever-fresh infinity, a principle
 unfailing, inexhaustible, at no point giving out, brimming over with
 its own vitality. If you look to some definite spot and seek 
 to fasten
 on some definite thing, you will not find it. The contrary is your
 only way; you cannot pass on to where it is not; you will never halt
 at a dwindling point where it fails at last and can no longer give;
 you will always be able to move with it- better, to be in its
 entirety- and so seek no further; denying it, you have 
 strayed away to
 something of another order and you fall; looking elsewhere you do
 not see what stands there before you.
 
 </p><p>But supposing you do thus "seek no further," how do you 
 experience
 it?
 
 </p><p>In that you have entered into the All, no longer content with
 the part; you cease to think of yourself as under limit but, laying
 all such determination aside, you become an All. No doubt you were
 always that, but there has been an addition and by that addition you
 are diminished; for the addition was not from the realm of Being-
 you can add nothing to Being- but from non-Being. It is not by some
 admixture of non-Being that one becomes an entire, but by putting
 non-Being away. By the lessening of the alien in you, you increase.
 Cast it aside and there is the All within you; engaged in the alien,
 you will not find the All. Not that it has to come and so be present
 to you; it is you that have turned from it. And turn though you may,
 you have not severed yourself; it is there; you are not in some far
 region: still there before it, you have faced to its contrary.
 
 </p><p>It is so with the lesser gods; of many standing in their
 presence it is often one alone that sees them; that one alone was
 alone in the power to see. These are the gods who "in many 
 guises seek
 our cities"; but there is That Other whom the cities seek, 
 and all the
 earth and heaven, everywhere with God and in Him, possessing through
 Him their Being and the Real Beings about them, down to soul 
 and life,
 all bound to Him and so moving to that unity which by its 
 very lack of
 extension is infinite.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn619.htm">Next: SIXTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>