<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn682.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn684.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. A cardinal question is where we are to place the freedom of
 action ascribed to us.
 
 </p><p>It must be founded in impulse or in some appetite, as when we
 act or omit in lust or rage or upon some calculation of advantage
 accompanied by desire.
 
 </p><p>But if rage or desire implied freedom we must allow freedom to
 animals, infants, maniacs, the distraught, the victims of
 malpractice producing incontrollable delusions. And if freedom turns
 on calculation with desire, does this include faulty calculation?
 Sound calculation, no doubt, and sound desire; but then comes the
 question whether the appetite stirs the calculation or the 
 calculation
 the appetite.
 
 </p><p>Where the appetites are dictated by the very nature they are the
 desires of the conjoint of soul and body and then soul lies under
 physical compulsions: if they spring in the soul as an independent,
 then much that we take to be voluntary is in reality outside of our
 free act. Further, every emotion is preceded by some meagre 
 reasoning;
 how then can a compelling imagination, an appetite drawing 
 us where it
 will, be supposed to leave us masters in the ensuing act? Need,
 inexorably craving satisfaction, is not free in face of that to
 which it is forced: and how at all can a thing have efficiency of
 its own when it rises from an extern, has an extern for very
 principle, thence taking its Being as it stands? It lives by that
 extern, lives as it has been moulded: if this be freedom, there is
 freedom in even the soulless; fire acts in accordance with its
 characteristic being.
 
 </p><p>We may be reminded that the Living Form and the soul know what
 they do. But, if this is knowledge by perception, it does not help
 towards the freedom of the act; perception gives awareness, not
 mastery: if true knowing is meant, either this is the knowing of
 something happening- once more awareness- with the motive- 
 force still
 to seek, or the reasoning and knowledge have acted to quell the
 appetite; then we have to ask to what this repression is to be
 referred and where it has taken place. If it is that the mental
 process sets up an opposing desire we must assure ourselves 
 how; if it
 merely stills the appetite with no further efficiency and this is
 our freedom, then freedom does not depend upon act but is a thing of
 the mind- and in truth all that has to do with act, the very most
 reasonable, is still of mixed value and cannot carry freedom.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn684.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>