<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn606.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn608.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. The integral omnipresence of a unity numerically identical is
 in fact universally received; for all men instinctively 
 affirm the god
 in each of us to be one, the same in all. It would be taken 
 as certain
 if no one asked How or sought to bring the conviction to the test of
 reasoning; with this effective in their thought, men would 
 be at rest,
 finding their stay in that oneness and identity, so that 
 nothing would
 wrench them from this unity. This principle, indeed, is the most
 solidly established of all, proclaimed by our very souls; we do not
 piece it up item by item, but find it within beforehand; it precedes
 even the principle by which we affirm unquestionably that all things
 seek their good; for this universal quest of good depends on the
 fact that all aim at unity and possess unity and that universally
 effort is towards unity.
 
 </p><p>Now this unity in going forth, so far as it may, towards 
 the Other
 Order must become manifest as multiplicity and in some sense become
 multiple; but the primal nature and the appetition of the good,
 which is appetition of unity, lead back to what is authentically
 one; to this every form of Being is urged in a movement towards its
 own reality. For the good to every nature possessing unity is to be
 self-belonging, to be itself, and that means to be a unity.
 
 </p><p>In virtue of that unity the Good may be regarded as truly
 inherent. Hence the Good is not to be sought outside; it could not
 have fallen outside of what is; it cannot possibly be found in
 non-Being; within Being the Good must lie, since it is never a
 non-Being.
 
 </p><p>If that Good has Being and is within the realm of Being, then it
 is present, self-contained, in everything: we, therefore, need not
 look outside of Being; we are in it; yet that Good is not
 exclusively ours: therefore all beings are one.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn608.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>