<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn671.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn673.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 34</h4>
 
 <p>34. No longer can we wonder that the principle evoking such
 longing should be utterly free from shape. The very soul, once it
 has conceived the straining love towards this, lays aside all the
 shape it has taken, even to the Intellectual shape that has informed
 it. There is no vision, no union, for those handling or acting by
 any thing other; the soul must see before it neither evil 
 nor good nor
 anything else, that alone it may receive the Alone.
 
 </p><p>Suppose the soul to have attained: the highest has come 
 to her, or
 rather has revealed its presence; she has turned away from all about
 her and made herself apt, beautiful to the utmost, brought into
 likeness with the divine by those preparings and adornings which
 come unbidden to those growing ready for the vision- she has 
 seen that
 presence suddenly manifesting within her, for there is nothing
 between: here is no longer a duality but a two in one; for, 
 so long as
 the presence holds, all distinction fades: it is as lover and
 beloved here, in a copy of that union, long to blend; the 
 soul has now
 no further awareness of being in body and will give herself 
 no foreign
 name, not "man," not "living being," not "being," not "all"; any
 observation of such things falls away; the soul has neither time nor
 taste for them; This she sought and This she has found and 
 on This she
 looks and not upon herself; and who she is that looks she has not
 leisure to know. Once There she will barter for This nothing the
 universe holds; not though one would make over the heavens entire to
 her; than This there is nothing higher, nothing of more good; above
 This there is no passing; all the rest, however lofty, lies on the
 downgoing path: she is of perfect judgement and knows that This was
 her quest, that nothing higher is. Here can be no deceit; where
 could she come upon truer than the truth? and the truth she affirms,
 that she is, herself; but all the affirmation is later and is
 silent. In this happiness she knows beyond delusion that she 
 is happy;
 for this is no affirmation of an excited body but of a soul become
 again what she was in the time of her early joy. All that she had
 welcomed of old-office, power, wealth, beauty, knowledge of all she
 tells her scorn as she never could had she not found their better;
 linked to This she can fear no disaster nor even know it; let all
 about her fall to pieces, so she would have it that she may be
 wholly with This, so huge the happiness she has won to.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn673.htm">Next: Section 35</a></center>
 </body>