<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn619.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn621.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. It is suggested that multiplicity is a falling away from The
 Unity, infinity being the complete departure, an innumerable
 multiplicity, and that this is why unlimit is an evil and we evil at
 the stage of multiplicity.
 
 </p><p>A thing, in fact, becomes a manifold when, unable to remain
 self-centred, it flows outward and by that dissipation takes
 extension: utterly losing unity it becomes a manifold since there is
 nothing to bind part to part; when, with all this outflowing, it
 becomes something definite, there is a magnitude.
 
 </p><p>But what is there so grievous in magnitude?
 
 </p><p>Given consciousness, there will be, since the thing must feel
 its exile, its sundrance from its essence. Everything seeks not the
 alien but itself; in that outward moving there is frustration or
 compulsion; a thing most exists not when it takes multiplicity or
 extension but when it holds to its own being, that is when its
 movement is inward. Desire towards extension is ignorance of the
 authentically great, a movement not on the appropriate path but
 towards the strange; to the possession of the self the way is inward.
 
 </p><p>Consider the thing that has taken extension; broken into so many
 independent items, it is now those several parts and not the thing
 it was; if that original is to persist, the members must stand
 collected to their total; in other words, a thing is itself not by
 being extended but by remaining, in its degree, a unity: through
 expansion and in the measure of the expansion, it is less itself;
 retaining unity, it retains its essential being.
 
 </p><p>Yet the universe has at once extension and beauty?
 
 </p><p>Yes; because it has not been allowed to slip away into the
 limitless but is held fast by unity; and it has beauty in virtue of
 Beauty not of Magnitude; it needed Beauty to parry that magnitude;
 in the degree of its extension it was void of beauty and to that
 degree ugly. Thus extension serves as Matter to Beauty since what
 calls for its ordering is a multiplicity. The greater the expansion,
 the greater the disorder and ugliness.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn621.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>