<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn634.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn636.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. But here we may be questioned about these numbers which we
 describe as the primal and authentic:
 
 </p><p>"Where do you place these numbers, in what genus among Beings?
 To everyone they seem to come under Quantity and you have certainly
 brought Quantity in, where you say that discrete Quantity 
 equally with
 the continuous holds place among Beings; but you go on to say that
 there are the numbers belonging to the Firsts and then talk of other
 numbers quite distinct, those of reckoning; tell us how you arrange
 all this, for there is difficulty here. And then, the unity in
 sense-things- is that a quantity or is quantity here just so many
 units brought together, the unity being the starting-point 
 of quantity
 but not quantity itself? And, if the starting-point, is it a kindred
 thing or of another genus? All this you owe it to us to make clear."
 
 </p><p>Be it so; we begin by pointing out a distinction:
 
 </p><p>You take one thing with another- for we must first deal with
 objects of sense- a dog and a man, or two men; or you take a 
 group and
 affirm ten, a decad of men: in this case the number affirmed is not a
 Reality, even as Reality goes in the sphere of sense, but is purely
 Quantity: similarly when you resolve into units, breaking up the
 decad, those units are your principle of Quantity since the single
 individual is not a unity absolute.
 
 </p><p>But the case is different when you consider one man in 
 himself and
 affirm a certain number, duality, for example, in that he is at once
 living and reasoning.
 
 </p><p>By this analysis and totalling, you get quantity; but there are
 two objects under consideration and each of these is one; each of
 the unities contributes to the complete being and the oneness is
 inherent in each; this is another kind of number; number essential;
 even the duality so formed is no posterior; it does not signify a
 quantity apart from the thing but the quantity in the essence which
 holds the thing together. The number here is no mere result of your
 detailing; the things exist of themselves and are not 
 brought together
 by your reckoning, but what has it to do with essential reality that
 you count one man in with another? There is here no resultant unity
 such as that of a choir- the decad is real only to you who count
 the ten; in the ten of your reckoning there cannot be a decad without
 a unitary basis; it is you that make the ten by your counting, by
 fixing that tenness down to quantity; in choir and army there is
 something more than that, something not of your placing.
 
 </p><p>But how do you come to have a number to place?
 
 </p><p>The Number inherent apart from any enumeration has its own
 manner of being, but the other, that resulting upon the appearance
 of an external to be appraised by the Number within yourself, is
 either an Act of these inherent numbers or an Act in accordance with
 them; in counting we produce number and so bring quantity into being
 just as in walking we bring a certain movement into being.
 
 </p><p>But what of that "Number within us having its own manner of
 being"?
 
 </p><p>It is the Number of our essence. "Our essence" we read "partakes
 of Number and harmony and, also, is Number and harmony." 
 "Neither body
 nor magnitude," someone says: soul, then, is Number since it is
 essence. The number belonging to body is an essence of the order of
 body; the number belonging to soul constitutes the essences of souls.
 
 </p><p>In the Intellectuals, all, if the Absolute Living-Form, 
 there is a
 multiple- a triad, let us say- that Triad of the Living-Form 
 is of the
 nature of essence: and the Triad prior to any living thing, Triad in
 the realm of Being, is a principle of essence.
 
 </p><p>When you enumerate two things- say, animal and beauty- each of
 these remains one thing; the number is your production; it lay
 within yourself; it is you that elaborate quantity, here the 
 dyad. But
 when you declare virtue to be a Tetrad, you are affirming a Tetrad
 which does actually exist; the parts, so to speak, make one 
 thing; you
 are taking as the object of your act a Unity- Tetrad to which you
 accommodate the Tetrad within yourself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn636.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>