<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn633.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn635.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. We must repeat: The Collective Being, the Authentic, 
 There, is
 at once Being and Intellectual-Principle and the Complete 
 Living Form;
 thus it includes the total of living things; the Unity There is
 reproduced by the unity of this living universe in the 
 degree possible
 to it- for the sense-nature as such cannot compass that 
 transcendental
 unity- thus that Living-All is inevitably Number-Entire: if 
 the Number
 were not complete, the All would be deficient to the extent of some
 number, and if every number applicable to living things were not
 contained in it, it would not be the all-comprehending Life-Form.
 Therefore, Number exists before every living thing, before the
 collective Life-Form.
 
 </p><p>Again: Man exists in the Intellectual and with him all other
 living things, both by possession of Real-Being and because that is
 the Life-Form Complete. Even the man of this sphere is a 
 member of the
 Intellectual since that is the Life-Form Complete; every living
 thing by virtue of having life, is There, There in the Life-form,
 and man is There also, in the Intellectual, in so far as he is
 intellect, for all intelligences are severally members of That. Now
 all this means Number There. Yet even in Intellect Number is not
 present primally; its presence There is the reckoning of the Acts of
 Intellectual-Principle; it tallies with the justice in
 Intellectual-Principle, its moral wisdom, its virtues, its
 knowledge, all whose possession makes That Principle what it is.
 
 </p><p>But knowledge- must not this imply presence to the alien? No;
 knowledge, known and knower are an identity; so with all the rest;
 every member of Intellectual-Principle is therefore present to it
 primally; justice, for example, is not accidental to it as to soul
 in its character as soul, where these virtues are mainly potential
 becoming actual by the intention towards Intellectual-Principle and
 association with it.
 
 </p><p>Next we come to Being, fully realized, and this is the seat of
 Number; by Number, Being brings forth the Beings; its movement is
 planned to Number; it establishes the numbers of its offspring
 before bringing them to be, in the same way as it establishes its
 own unity by linking pure Being to the First: the numbers do not
 link the lower to the First; it suffices that Being is so linked;
 for Being, in taking form as Number, binds its members to 
 itself. As a
 unity, it suffers no division, remaining self-constant; as a thing
 of division, containing its chosen total of members, it knows that
 total and so brings forth Number, a phase therefore of its content:
 its development of part is ruled by the powers of Number, and the
 Beings it produces sum to that Number. Thus Number, the primal and
 true, is Principle and source of actuality to the Beings.
 
 </p><p>Hence it is that in our sphere, also, Number accompanies the
 coming to be of particular things and to suppose another number than
 the actual is to suppose the production of something else or of
 nothing.
 
 </p><p>These then are the primal numbers; they are numerable; 
 the numbers
 of the other order are of a double character; as derived from the
 first numbers they are themselves numerable but as acting for those
 first they are measures of the rest of things, numbering numbers and
 numerables. For how could they declare a Decad save in the light of
 numbers within themselves?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn635.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>