<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn698.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn700.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. Seeking Him, seek nothing of Him outside; within is to be
 sought what follows upon Him; Himself do not attempt. He is,
 Himself, that outer, He the encompassment and measure of all things;
 or rather He is within, at the innermost depth; the outer, circling
 round Him, so to speak, and wholly dependent upon Him, is
 Reason-Principle and Intellectual-Principle-or becomes
 Intellectual-Principle by contact with Him and in the degree of that
 contact and dependence; for from Him it takes the being 
 which makes it
 Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>A circle related in its path to a centre must be admitted to owe
 its scope to that centre: it has something of the nature of that
 centre in that the radial lines converging on that one central point
 assimilate their impinging ends to that point of convergence and of
 departure, the dominant of radii and terminals: the terminals are of
 one nature with the centre, separate reproductions of it, since the
 centre is, in a certain sense, the total of terminals and radii
 impinging at every point upon it; these lines reveal the centre;
 they are the development of that undeveloped.
 
 </p><p>In the same way we are to take Intellectual-Principle and Being.
 This combined power springs from the Supreme, an outflow and as it
 were development from That and remaining dependent upon that
 Intellective nature, showing forth That which, in the purity of its
 oneness, is not Intellectual-Principle since it is no 
 duality. No more
 than in the circle are the lines or circumference to be identified
 with that Centre which is the source of both: radii and circle are
 images given forth by indwelling power and, as products of a certain
 vigour in it, not cut off from it.
 
 </p><p>Thus the Intellective power circles in its multiple unity around
 the Supreme which stands to it as archetype to image; the 
 image in its
 movement round about its prior has produced the multiplicity by
 which it is constituted Intellectual-Principle: that prior has no
 movement; it generates Intellectual-Principle by its sheer wealth.
 
 </p><p>Such a power, author of Intellectual-Principle, author of being-
 how does it lend itself to chance, to hazard, to any "So it 
 happened"?
 
 </p><p>What is present in Intellectual-Principle is present, though in
 a far transcendent mode, in the One: so in a light diffused afar
 from one light shining within itself, the diffused is vestige, the
 source is the true light; but Intellectual-Principle, the 
 diffused and
 image light, is not different in kind from its prior; and it is not
 a thing of chance but at every point is reason and cause.
 
 </p><p>The Supreme is cause of the cause: it is cause 
 preeminently, cause
 as containing cause in the deepest and truest mode; for in it lie
 the Intellective causes which are to be unfolded from it, 
 author as it
 is not of the chance- made but of what the divine willed: and this
 willing was not apart from reason, was not in the realm of hazard
 and of what happened to present itself.
 
 </p><p>Thus Plato, seeking the best account of the necessary and
 appropriate, says they are far removed from hazard and that what
 exists is what must exist: if thus the existence is as it must be it
 does not exist without reason: if its manner of being is the
 fitting, it is the utterly self-disposing in comparison with its
 sequents and, before that, in regard to itself: thus it is not "as
 it happened to be" but as it willed to be: all this, on the 
 assumption
 that God wills what should be and that it is impossible to separate
 right from realization and that this Necessary is not to God an
 outside thing but is, itself, His first Activity manifesting 
 outwardly
 in the exactly representative form. Thus we must speak of 
 God since we
 cannot tell Him as we would.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn700.htm">Next: Section 19</a></center>
 </body>