<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn635.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn637.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. But what of the Infinite Number we hear of; does not all
 this reasoning set it under limit?
 
 </p><p>And rightly so if the thing is to be a number; limitlessness and
 number are in contradiction.
 
 </p><p>How, then, do we come to use the term? Is it that we think of
 Number as we think of an infinite line, not with the idea that any
 such lire exists but that even the very greatest- that of 
 the [path of
 the] universe, for example- may be thought of as still greater? So
 it might be with number; let it be fixed, yet we still are free to
 think of its double, though not of course to produce the doubled
 quantity since it is impossible to join to the actual what is no
 more than a conception, a phantasm, private to ourselves.
 
 </p><p>It is our view that there does exist an infinite line, among the
 Intellectual Beings: for There a line would not be quantitative and
 being without quantity could be numerically infinite. This however
 would be in another mode than that of limitless extension. In what
 mode then? In that the conception of the Absolute Line does not
 include the conception of limit.
 
 </p><p>But what sort of thing is the Line in the Intellectual and what
 place does it hold?
 
 </p><p>It is later than Number since unity is observed in it; 
 it rises at
 one point and traverses one course and simply lacks the quantity
 that would be the measure of the distance.
 
 </p><p>But where does this thing lie? Is it existent only in 
 the defining
 thought, so to speak?
 
 </p><p>No; it is also a thing, though a thing of the Intellectual. All
 that belongs to that order is at once an Intellectual and in some
 degree the concrete thing. There is a position, as well as a 
 manner of
 being, for all configurations, for surface, for solid. And certainly
 the configurations are not of our devising; for example, the
 configurations of the universe are obviously antecedent to
 ourselves; so it must be with all the configurations of the things
 of nature; before the bodily reproductions all must exist There,
 without configuration, primal configurations. For these primals are
 not shapes in something; self-belonging, they are perfect without
 extension; only the extended needs the external. In the sphere of
 Real-Being the configuration is always a unity; it becomes discrete
 either in the Living-Form or immediately before: I say "becomes
 discrete" not in the sense that it takes magnitude There but that it
 is broken apart for the purpose of the Living-Form and is allotted
 to the bodies within that Form- for instance, to Fire There, the
 Intellectual Pyramid. And because the Ideal-Form is There, 
 the fire of
 this sphere seeks to produce that configuration against the check of
 Matter: and so of all the rest as we read in the account of the
 realm of sense.
 
 </p><p>But does the Life-Form contain the configurations by the 
 mere fact
 of its life?
 
 </p><p>They are in the Intellectual-Principle previously but they also
 exist in the Living-Form; if this be considered as including the
 Intellectual-Principle, then they are primally in the Life-Form, but
 if that Principle comes first then they are previously in 
 that. And if
 the Life-Form entire contains also souls, it must certainly be
 subsequent to the Intellectual-Principle.
 
 </p><p>No doubt there is the passage "Whatever Intellect sees in the
 entire Life-Form"; thus seeing, must not the 
 Intellectual-Principle be
 the later?
 
 </p><p>No; the seeing may imply merely that the reality comes into being
 by the fact of that seeing; the Intellectual-Principle is 
 not external
 to the Life-Form; all is one; the Act of the Intellectual-Principle
 possesses itself of bare sphere, while the Life-Form holds the
 sphere as sphere of a living total.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn637.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>