<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn691.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn693.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. But this Unoriginating, what is it?
 
 </p><p>We can but withdraw, silent, hopeless, and search no 
 further. What
 can we look for when we have reached the furthest? Every enquiry
 aims at a first and, that attained, rests.
 
 </p><p>Besides, we must remember that all questioning deals with the
 nature of a thing, its quality, its cause or its essential being. In
 this case the being- in so far as we can use the word- is knowable
 only by its sequents: the question as to cause asks for a principle
 beyond, but the principle of all has no principle; the question as
 to quality would be looking for an attribute in that which has none:
 the question as to nature shows only that we must ask 
 nothing about it
 but merely take it into the mind if we may, with the knowledge
 gained that nothing can be permissibly connected with it.
 
 </p><p>The difficulty this Principle presents to our mind in so 
 far as we
 can approach to conception of it may be exhibited thus:
 
 </p><p>We begin by posing space, a place, a Chaos; into this existing
 container, real or fancied, we introduce God and proceed to enquire:
 we ask, for example, whence and how He comes to be there: we
 investigate the presence and quality of this new-comer projected
 into the midst of things here from some height or depth. But the
 difficulty disappears if we eliminate all space before we attempt to
 conceive God: He must not be set in anything either as enthroned in
 eternal immanence or as having made some entry into things: He is to
 be conceived as existing alone, in that existence which the
 necessity of discussion forces us to attribute to Him, with space
 and all the rest as later than Him- space latest of all. Thus we
 conceive as far as we may, the spaceless; we abolish the 
 notion of any
 environment: we circumscribe Him within no limit; we attribute no
 extension to Him; He has no quality since no shape, even shape
 Intellectual; He holds no relationship but exists in and for Himself
 before anything is.
 
 </p><p>How can we think any longer of that "Thus He happened to be"?
 How make this one assertion of Him of whom all other assertion can
 be no more than negation? It is on the contrary nearer the truth to
 say "Thus He has happened not to be": that contains at least 
 the utter
 denial of his happening.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn693.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>