<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn650.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn652.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. For Intellectual-Principle is not a simplex, nor is the soul
 that proceeds from it: on the contrary things include variety in the
 degree of their simplicity, that is to say in so far as they are not
 compounds but Principles and Activities;- the activity of the lowest
 is simple in the sense of being a fading-out, that of the 
 First as the
 total of all activity. Intellectual-Principle is moved in a movement
 unfailingly true to one course, but its unity and identity are not
 those of the partial; they are those of its universality; and indeed
 the partial itself is not a unity but divides to infinity.
 
 </p><p>We know that Intellectual-Principle has a source and advances to
 some term as its ultimate; now, is the intermediate between 
 source and
 term to thought of as a line or as some distinct kind of body
 uniform and unvaried?
 
 </p><p>Where at that would be its worth? it had no change, if no
 differentiation woke it into life, it would not be a Force; that
 condition would in no way differ from mere absence of power and,
 even calling it movement, it would still be the movement of 
 a life not
 all-varied but indiscriminate; now it is of necessity that life be
 all-embracing, covering all the realms, and that nothing 
 fail of life.
 Intellectual-Principle, therefore, must move in every direction upon
 all, or more precisely must ever have so moved.
 
 </p><p>A simplex moving retains its character; either there is 
 no change,
 movement has been null, or if there has been advance it still
 remains a simplex and at once there is a permanent duality: 
 if the one
 member of this duality is identical with the other, then it is still
 as it was, there has been no advance; if one member differs from the
 other, it has advanced with differentiation, and, out of a certain
 identity and difference, it has produced a third unity. This
 production, based on Identity and Difference, must be in its nature
 identical and different; it will be not some particular different
 thing but Collective Difference, as its Identity is Collective
 Identity.
 
 </p><p>Being, thus, at once Collective Identity and Collective
 Difference, Intellectual-Principle must reach over all different
 things; its very nature then is to modify into a universe. If the
 realm of different things existed before it, these different things
 must have modified it from the beginning; if they did not, this
 Intellectual-Principle produced all, or, rather, was all.
 
 </p><p>Beings could not exist save by the activity of
 Intellectual-Principle; wandering down every way it produces thing
 after thing, but wandering always within itself in such self-bound
 wandering as authentic Intellect may know; this wandering 
 permitted to
 its nature is among real beings which keep pace with its 
 movement; but
 it is always itself; this is a stationary wandering, a wandering
 within the Meadow of Truth from which it does not stray.
 
 </p><p>It holds and covers the universe which it has made the space, so
 to speak, of its movement, itself being also that universe which is
 space to it. And this Meadow of Truth is varied so that movement
 through it may be possible; suppose it not always and everywhere
 varied, the failing of diversity is a failure of movement; failure
 in movement would mean a failing of the Intellectual Act; halting,
 it has ceased to exercise its Intellectual Act; this ceasing, it
 ceases to be.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual-Principle is the Intellectual Act; its movement
 is complete, filling Being complete; And the entire of Being is the
 Intellectual Act entire, comprehending all life and the unfailing
 succession of things. Because this Principle contains Identity and
 Difference its division is ceaselessly bringing the different things
 to light. Its entire movement is through life and among 
 living things.
 To a traveller over land, all is earth but earth abounding in
 difference: so in this journey the life through which
 Intellectual-Principle passes is one life but, in its ceaseless
 changing, a varied life.
 
 </p><p>Throughout this endless variation it maintains the one course
 because it is not, itself, subject to change but on the contrary is
 present as identical and unvarying Being to the rest of 
 things. For if
 there be no such principle of unchanging identity to things, all is
 dead, activity and actuality exist nowhere. These "other things"
 through which it passes are also Intellectual-Principle itself;
 otherwise it is not the all-comprehending principle: if it is to be
 itself, it must be all-embracing; failing that, it is not itself. If
 it is complete in itself, complete because all-embracing, 
 and there is
 nothing which does not find place in this total, then there can be
 nothing belonging to it which is not different; only by 
 difference can
 there be such co-operation towards a total. If it knew no otherness
 but was pure identity its essential Being would be the less for that
 failure to fulfil the specific nature which its completion requires.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn652.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>