<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn668.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn670.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 31</h4>
 
 <p>31. But since Thence come the beauty and light in all, it is
 Thence that Intellectual-Principle took the brilliance of the
 Intellectual Energy which flashed Nature into being; Thence soul
 took power towards life, in virtue of that fuller life streaming
 into it. Intellectual-Principle was raised thus to that Supreme and
 remains with it, happy in that presence. Soul too, that soul which
 as possessing knowledge and vision was capable, clung to what it
 saw; and as its vision so its rapture; it saw and was stricken; but
 having in itself something of that principle it felt its kinship and
 was moved to longing like those stirred by the image of the 
 beloved to
 desire of the veritable presence. Lovers here mould themselves to
 the beloved; they seek to increase their attraction of person and
 their likeness of mind; they are unwilling to fall short in moral
 quality or in other graces lest they be distasteful to those
 possessing such merit- and only among such can true love be. In the
 same way the soul loves the Supreme Good, from its very beginnings
 stirred by it to love. The soul which has never strayed from 
 this love
 waits for no reminding from the beauty of our world: holding that
 love- perhaps unawares- it is ever in quest, and, in its 
 longing to be
 borne Thither, passes over what is lovely here and with one glance
 at the beauty of the universe dismisses all; for it sees that all is
 put together of flesh and Matter, befouled by its housing, made
 fragmentary by corporal extension, not the Authentic Beauty which
 could never venture into the mud of body to be soiled, annulled.
 
 </p><p>By only noting the flux of things it knows at once that from
 elsewhere comes the beauty that floats upon them and so it is urged
 Thither, passionate in pursuit of what it loves: never- 
 unless someone
 robs it of that love- never giving up till it attain.
 
 </p><p>There indeed all it saw was beautiful and veritable; it grew in
 strength by being thus filled with the life of the True; itself
 becoming veritable Being and attaining veritable knowledge, it
 enters by that neighbouring into conscious possession of what it has
 long been seeking.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn670.htm">Next: Section 32</a></center>
 </body>