<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn666.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn668.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 29</h4>
 
 <p>29. Suppose, however, that pleasure did not result from the good
 but there were something preceding pleasure and accounting for it,
 would not this be a thing to be embraced?
 
 </p><p>But when we say "to be embraced" we say "pleasure."
 
 </p><p>But what if accepting its existence, we think of that 
 existence as
 leaving still the possibility that it were not a thing to be 
 embraced?
 
 </p><p>This would mean the good being present and the sentient
 possessor failing, nonetheless, to perceive it.
 
 </p><p>It would seem possible, however, to perceive and yet be 
 unmoved by
 the possession; this is quite likely in the case of the wiser and
 least dependent- and indeed it is so with the First, immune 
 not merely
 because simplex, but because pleasure by acquisition implies lack.
 
 </p><p>But all this will become clear on the solution of our remaining
 difficulties and the rebuttal of the argument brought up against us.
 This takes the form of the question: "What gain is there in the Good
 to one who, fully conscious, feels nothing when he hears of these
 things, whether because he has no grasp of them but takes merely the
 words or because he holds to false values, perhaps being all 
 in search
 of sense, finding his good in money or such things?"
 
 </p><p>The answer is that even in his disregard of the good proposed he
 is with us in setting a good before him but fails to see how the
 good we define fits into his own conception. It is impossible to say
 "Not that" if one is utterly without experience or conception of the
 "That"; there will generally have been, even, some inkling 
 of the good
 beyond Intellection. Besides, one attaining or approaching the good,
 but not recognising it, may assure himself in the light of its
 contraries; otherwise he will not even hold ignorance an evil though
 everyone prefers to know and is proud of knowing so that our very
 sensations seek to ripen into knowledge.
 
 </p><p>If the knowing principle- and specially primal
 Intellectual-Principle- is valuable and beautiful, what must be
 present to those of power to see the Author and Father of Intellect?
 Anyone thinking slightingly of this principle of Life and 
 Being brings
 evidence against himself and all his state: of course, distaste for
 the life that is mingled with death does not touch that Life
 Authentic.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn668.htm">Next: Section 30</a></center>
 </body>