<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn693.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn695.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. Our enquiry obliges us to use terms not strictly applicable:
 we insist, once more, that not even for the purpose of forming the
 concept of the Supreme may we make it a duality; if now we do, it is
 merely for the sake of conveying conviction, at the cost of verbal
 accuracy.
 
 </p><p>If, then, we are to allow Activities in the Supreme and make
 them depend upon will- and certainly Act cannot There be 
 will-less and
 these Activities are to be the very essence, then will and essence
 in the Supreme must be identical. This admitted, as He 
 willed to be so
 He is; it is no more true to say that He wills and acts as His
 nature determines than that His essence is as He wills and acts.
 Thus He is wholly master of Himself and holds His very being at His
 will.
 
 </p><p>Consider also that every being in its pursuit of its 
 good seeks to
 be that good rather than what it is it judges itself most truly to
 be when it partakes of its good: in so far as it thus draws on its
 good its being is its choice: much more, then, must the very
 Principle, The Good, be desirable in itself when any 
 fragment of it is
 very desirable to the extern and becomes the chosen essence
 promoting that extern's will and identical with the will 
 that gave the
 existence?
 
 </p><p>As long as a thing is apart from its good it seeks 
 outside itself;
 when it holds its good it itself as it is: and this is no matter of
 chance; the essence now is not outside of the will; by the good it
 is determined, by the good it is in self-possession.
 
 </p><p>If then this Principle is the means of determination to 
 everything
 else, we see at once that self-possession must belong primally to
 it, so that, through it, others in their turn may be self-belonging:
 what we must call its essence comports its will to possess such a
 manner of being; we can form no idea of it without including 
 in it the
 will towards itself as it is. It must be a consistent self 
 willing its
 being and being what it wills; its will and itself must be one
 thing, all the more one from the absence of distinction between a
 given nature and one which would be preferred. What could The Good
 have wished to be other than what it is? Suppose it had the choice
 of being what it preferred, power to alter the nature, it could not
 prefer to be something else; it could have no fault to find with
 anything in its nature, as if that nature were imposed by force; The
 Good is what from always it wished and wishes to be. For the really
 existent Good is a willing towards itself, towards a good not gained
 by any wiles or even attracted to it by force of its nature; The
 Good is what it chose to be and, in fact, there was never anything
 outside it to which it could be drawn.
 
 </p><p>It may be added that nothing else contains in its essence the
 principle of its own satisfaction; there will be inner discord: but
 this hypostasis of the Good must necessarily have self-option, the
 will towards the self; if it had not, it could not bring
 satisfaction to the beings whose contentment demands participation
 in it or imagination of it.
 
 </p><p>Once more, we must be patient with language; we are forced to
 apply to the Supreme terms which strictly are ruled out; 
 everywhere we
 must read "So to speak." The Good, then, exists; it holds its
 existence through choice and will, conditions of its very being: yet
 it cannot be a manifold; therefore the will and the essential being
 must be taken as one identity; the act of the will must be
 self-determined and the being self-caused; thus reason shows the
 Supreme to be its own Author. For if the act of will springs from
 God Himself and is as it were His operation and the same will is
 identical with His essence, He must be self-established. He is not,
 therefore, "what He has happened to be" but what He has willed to be.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn695.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>