<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn656.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn658.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 19</h4>
 
 <p>19. Are we to rest all on pursuit and on the soul? Is it 
 enough to
 put faith in the soul's choice and call that good which the soul
 pursues, never asking ourselves the motive of its choice? We marshal
 demonstration as to the nature of everything else; is the good to be
 dismissed as choice?
 
 </p><p>Several absurdities would be entailed. The good becomes a mere
 attribute of things; objects of pursuit are many and 
 different so that
 mere choice gives no assurance that the thing chosen is the best; in
 fact, we cannot know the best until we know the good.
 
 </p><p>Are we to determine the good by the respective values of things?
 
 </p><p>This is to make Idea and Reason-Principle the test: all 
 very well;
 but arrived at these, what explanation have we to give as to why
 Idea and Reason-Principle themselves are good? In the lower, we
 recognise goodness- in its less perfect form- by comparison with
 what is poorer still; we are without a standard There where no evil
 exists, the Bests holding the field alone. Reason demands to 
 know what
 constitutes goodness; those principles are good in their own nature
 and we are left in perplexity because cause and fact are identical:
 and even though we should state a cause, the doubt still 
 remains until
 our reason claims its rights There. But we need not abandon the
 search; another path may lead to the light.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn658.htm">Next: Section 20</a></center>
 </body>