<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn646.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn648.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. Admitted, then- it will be said- for the nobler forms of
 life; but how can the divine contain the mean, the unreasoning? The
 mean is the unreasoning, since value depends upon reason and 
 the worth
 of the intellective implies worthlessness where intellection is
 lacking. Yet how can there be question of the unreasoning or
 unintellective when all particulars exist in the divine and 
 come forth
 from it?
 
 </p><p>In taking up the refutation of these objections, we must insist
 upon the consideration that neither man nor animals here can be
 thought of as identical with the counterparts in the higher realm;
 those ideal forms must be taken in a larger way. And again the
 reasoning thing is not of that realm: here the reasoning, There the
 pre-reasoning.
 
 </p><p>Why then does man alone reason here, the others remaining
 reasonless?
 
 </p><p>Degrees of reasoning here correspond to degrees of 
 Intellection in
 that other sphere, as between man and the other living beings There;
 and those others do in some measure act by understanding.
 
 </p><p>But why are they not at man's level of reason: why also the
 difference from man to man?
 
 </p><p>We must reflect that, since the many forms of lives are 
 movements-
 and so with the Intellections- they cannot be identical: 
 there must be
 different lives, distinct intellections, degrees of lightsomeness
 and clarity: there must be firsts, seconds, thirds, determined by
 nearness to the Firsts. This is how some of the Intellections are
 gods, others of a secondary order having what is here known 
 as reason,
 while others again belong to the so-called unreasoning: but what we
 know here as unreasoning was There a Reason-Principle; the
 unintelligent was an Intellect; the Thinker of Horse was 
 Intellect and
 the Thought, Horse, was an Intellect.
 
 </p><p>But [it will be objected] if this were a matter of mere thinking
 we might well admit that the intellectual concept, remaining
 concept, should take in the unintellectual, but where concept is
 identical with thing how can the one be an Intellection and the
 other without intelligence? Would not this be Intellect making
 itself unintelligent?
 
 </p><p>No: the thing is not unintelligent; it is Intelligence in a
 particular mode, corresponding to a particular aspect of Life; and
 just as life in whatever form it may appear remains always life, so
 Intellect is not annulled by appearing in a certain mode.
 Intellectual-Principle adapted to some particular living being does
 not cease to be the Intellectual-Principle of all, including 
 man: take
 it where you will, every manifestation is the whole, though in some
 special mode; the particular is produced but the possibility is of
 all. In the particular we see the Intellectual-Principle in
 realization; the realized is its latest phase; in one case the last
 aspect is "horse"; at "horse" ended the progressive outgoing towards
 the lesser forms of life, as in another case it will end at
 something lower still. The unfolding of the powers of this Principle
 is always attended by some abandonment in regard to the highest; the
 outgoing is by loss, and by this loss the powers become one thing or
 another according to the deficiency of the life-form produced by the
 failing principle; it is then that they find the means of adding
 various requisites; the safeguards of the life becoming inadequate
 there appear nail, talon, fang, horn. Thus the
 Intellectual-Principle by its very descent is directed towards the
 perfect sufficiency of the natural constitution, finding there
 within itself the remedy of the failure.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn648.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>