<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn636.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn638.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 18</h4>
 
 <p>18. It appears then that Number in that realm is definite; it is
 we that can conceive the "More than is present"; the infinity lies
 in our counting: in the Real is no conceiving more than has been
 conceived; all stands entire; no number has been or could be omitted
 to make addition possible. It might be described as infinite in the
 sense that it has not been measured- who is there to measure it?-
 but it is solely its own, a concentrated unit, entire, not ringed
 round by any boundary; its manner of being is settled for it 
 by itself
 alone. None of the Real-Beings is under limit; what is limited,
 measured, is what needs measure to prevent it running away into the
 unbounded. There every being is Measure; and therefore it is that
 all is beautiful. Because that is a living thing it is beautiful,
 holding the highest life, the complete, a life not tainted towards
 death, nothing mortal there, nothing dying. Nor is the life of that
 Absolute Living-Form some feeble flickering; it is primal, the
 brightest, holding all that life has of radiance; it is that first
 light which the souls There draw upon for their life and bring with
 them when they come here. It knows for what purpose it lives,
 towards What it lives, from Whence it lives; for the Whence of its
 life is the Whither... and close above it stands the wisdom of all,
 the collective Intellectual-Principle, knit into it, one with it,
 colouring it to a higher goodness, by kneading wisdom into it,
 making its beauty still more august. Even here the august and
 veritably beautiful life is the life in wisdom, here dimly 
 seen, There
 purely. For There wisdom gives sight to the seer and power for the
 fuller living and in that tenser life both to see and to become what
 is seen.
 
 </p><p>Here attention is set for the most part upon the unliving and,
 in the living, upon what is lifeless in them; the inner life is
 taken only with alloy: There, all are Living Beings, living wholly,
 unalloyed; however you may choose to study one of them apart from
 its life, in a moment that life is flashed out upon you: 
 once you have
 known the Essence that pervades them, conferring that unchangeable
 life upon them, once you perceive the judgement and wisdom and
 knowledge that are theirs, you can but smile at all the lower nature
 with its pretention to Reality.
 
 </p><p>In virtue of this Essence it is that life endures, that the
 Intellectual-Principle endures, that the Beings stand in their
 eternity; nothing alters it, turns it, moves it; nothing, indeed, is
 in being besides it to touch it; anything that is must be 
 its product;
 anything opposed to it could not affect it. Being itself could not
 make such an opposite into Being; that would require a prior to both
 and that prior would then be Being; so that Parmenides was right
 when he taught the identity of Being and Unity. Being is thus beyond
 contact not because it stands alone but because it is Being. 
 For Being
 alone has Being in its own right.
 
 </p><p>How then can we deny to it either Being or anything at all that
 may exist effectively, anything that may derive from it?
 
 </p><p>As long as it exists it produces: but it exists for ever; so,
 therefore, do its products. And so great is it in power and beauty
 that it remains the allurer, all things of the universe 
 depending from
 it and rejoicing to hold their trace of it and through that to seek
 their good. To us, existence is before the good; all this world
 desires life and wisdom in order to Being; every soul and every
 intellect seeks to be its Being, but Being is sufficient to itself.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn638.htm">Next: SEVENTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>