<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn624.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn626.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. Granted, then, that there exist, apart from things, a unity
 absolute and a decad absolute in other words, that the Intellectual
 beings, together with their characteristic essence have also their
 order, Henads, Dyads, Triads, what is the nature of these numerical
 entities and how does it come into being? We cannot but think that
 some reason accounts for their origin.
 
 </p><p>As a beginning, what is the origin of the Ideas in general? It
 is not that the thinking principle thought of each Idea and by that
 act of thought procured their several existences; not because
 Justice and Movement were thus thought did they come to be; 
 that would
 imply that while the thought is later than the thing- the concept of
 Justice must be later than Justice itself- yet the thought precedes
 what, as founded on the thinking, owes its existence to it. Besides,
 if justice is only a certain definite thought we have the absurdity
 that Justice is nothing more than a definition of Justice. 
 Thinking of
 Justice or Movement is but grasping their nature; this would mean
 grasping the non-existent, an impossibility.
 
 </p><p>We may be reminded that in immaterial objects the knowledge is
 identical with the thing; but we must not misapply that statement;
 it does not say that the knowledge is the thing known, or that the
 reason surveying the thing is the thing, but that the immaterial
 thing, being an Intellectual object is also a thought; this does not
 imply a definition or conception of the object; the thing itself, as
 belonging to the Intellectual, can be nothing else than Intellect or
 knowledge. This is not a case of knowledge self-directed; it is that
 the thing in the Intellectual transmutes the knowledge, which is not
 fixed like the knowledge of material things; in other words it makes
 it true knowledge, that is to say no image of the thing but the
 thing directly.
 
 </p><p>Thus it is not the conception of movement that brings movement
 to be; movement absolute produces that conception; it produces
 itself as at once movement and the concept of movement, for movement
 as it exists There, bound up with Being, is a concept. It is
 movement absolute because it is the first movement- there can be
 none till this exist- and it is the authentic Movement since 
 it is not
 accidental to something else but is the activity of actual Being in
 motion. Thus it is a real existent, though the notion of Being is
 different.
 
 </p><p>Justice therefore is not the thought of Justice but, as 
 we may put
 it, a state of the Intellectual-Principle, or rather an activity of
 it- an appearance so lovely that neither evening nor dawn is so
 fair, nor anything else in all the realm of sense, an Intellectual
 manifestation self-rising, self-seen, or, rather, self-being.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn626.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>