<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn681.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn683.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. Can there be question as to whether the gods have voluntary
 action? Or are we to take it that, while we may well enquire in the
 case of men with their combination of powerlessness and hesitating
 power, the gods must be declared omnipotent, not merely some things
 but all lying at their nod? Or is power entire, freedom of action in
 all things, to be reserved to one alone, of the rest some being
 powerful, others powerless, others again a blend of power and
 impotence?
 
 </p><p>All this must come to the test: we must dare it even of 
 the Firsts
 and of the All-Transcendent and, if we find omnipotence 
 possible, work
 out how far freedom extends. The very notion of power must be
 scrutinized lest in this ascription we be really making power
 identical with Essential Act, and even with Act not yet achieved.
 
 </p><p>But for the moment we may pass over these questions to deal with
 the traditional problem of freedom of action in ourselves.
 
 </p><p>To begin with, what must be intended when we assert that 
 something
 is in our power; what is the conception here?
 
 </p><p>To establish this will help to show whether we are to ascribe
 freedom to the gods and still more to God, or to refuse it, or
 again, while asserting it, to question still, in regard both to the
 higher and lower- the mode of its presence.
 
 </p><p>What then do we mean when we speak of freedom in 
 ourselves and why
 do we question it?
 
 </p><p>My own reading is that, moving as we do amid adverse fortunes,
 compulsions, violent assaults of passion crushing the soul, feeling
 ourselves mastered by these experiences, playing slave to them,
 going where they lead, we have been brought by all this to doubt
 whether we are anything at all and dispose of ourselves in any
 particular.
 
 </p><p>This would indicate that we think of our free act as one which
 we execute of our own choice, in no servitude to chance or necessity
 or overmastering passion, nothing thwarting our will; the 
 voluntary is
 conceived as an event amenable to will and occurring or not as our
 will dictates. Everything will be voluntary that is produced under
 no compulsion and with knowledge; our free act is what we are
 masters to perform.
 
 </p><p>Differing conceptually, the two conditions will often 
 coincide but
 sometimes will clash. Thus a man would be master to kill, but the
 act will not be voluntary if in the victim he had failed to
 recognise his own father. Perhaps however that ignorance is not
 compatible with real freedom: for the knowledge necessary to a
 voluntary act cannot be limited to certain particulars but must
 cover the entire field. Why, for example, should killing be
 involuntary in the failure to recognise a father and not so in the
 failure to recognise the wickedness of murder? If because the killer
 ought to have learned, still ignorance of the duty of 
 learning and the
 cause of that ignorance remain alike involuntary.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn683.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>