<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn616.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn618.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. But how can the unextended reach over the defined 
 extension of
 the corporeal? How can it, so, maintain itself as a unity, an
 identity?
 
 </p><p>This is a problem often raised and reason calls vehemently for a
 solution of the difficulties involved. The fact stands abundantly
 evident, but there is still the need of intellectual satisfaction.
 
 </p><p>We have, of course, no slight aid to conviction, indeed the very
 strongest, in the exposition of the character of that 
 principle. It is
 not like a stone, some vast block lying where it lies, covering the
 space of its own extension, held within its own limits, 
 having a fixed
 quantity of mass and of assigned stone-power. It is a First 
 Principle,
 measureless, not bounded within determined size- such measurement
 belongs to another order- and therefore it is all-power, 
 nowhere under
 limit. Being so, it is outside of Time.
 
 </p><p>Time in its ceaseless onward sliding produces parted interval;
 Eternity stands in identity, pre-eminent, vaster by unending power
 than Time with all the vastness of its seeming progress; Time is
 like a radial line running out apparently to infinity but dependent
 upon that, its centre, which is the pivot of all its movement; as it
 goes it tells of that centre, but the centre itself is the unmoving
 principle of all the movement.
 
 </p><p>Time stands, thus, in analogy with the principle which holds
 fast in unchanging identity of essence: but that principle 
 is infinite
 not only in duration but also in power: this infinity of power must
 also have its counterpart, a principle springing from that infinite
 power and dependent upon it; this counterpart will, after its own
 mode, run a course- corresponding to the course of Time- in keeping
 with that stationary power which is its greater as being its source:
 and in this too the source is present throughout the full 
 extension of
 its lower correspondent.
 
 </p><p>This secondary of Power, participating as far as it may in that
 higher, must be identified.
 
 </p><p>Now the higher power is present integrally but, in the 
 weakness of
 the recipient material, is not discerned as every point; it 
 is present
 as an identity everywhere not in the mode of the material triangle-
 identical though, in many representations, numerically multiple, but
 in the mode of the immaterial, ideal triangle which is the source of
 the material figures. If we are asked why the omnipresence of the
 immaterial triangle does not entail that of the material figure, we
 answer that not all Matter enters into the participation necessary;
 Matter accepts various forms and not all Matter is apt for all form;
 the First Matter, for example, does not lend itself to all but is
 for the First Kinds first and for the others in due order, though
 these, too, are omnipresent.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn618.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>