<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn603.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn605.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. But how did this intruder find entrance?
 
 </p><p>It had a certain aptitude and it grasped at that to which it was
 apt. In its nature it was capable of soul: but what is unfitted to
 receive soul entire- present entire but not for it- takes what share
 it may; such are the members of the animal and vegetal order.
 Similarly, of a significant sound, some forms of being take sound
 and significance together, others only the sound, the blank impact.
 
 </p><p>A living thing comes into existence containing soul, 
 present to it
 from the Authentic, and by soul is inbound with Reality entire; it
 possesses also a body; but this body is not a husk having no part in
 soul, not a thing that earlier lay away in the soulless; the body
 had its aptitude and by this draws near: now it is not body merely,
 but living body. By this neighboring it is enhanced with some
 impress of soul- not in the sense of a portion of soul entering into
 it, but that it is warmed and lit by soul entire: at once 
 there is the
 ground of desire, pleasure, pain; the body of the living 
 form that has
 come to be was certainly no unrelated thing.
 
 </p><p>The soul, sprung from the divine, lay self-enclosed at 
 peace, true
 to its own quality; but its neighbour, in uproar through weakness,
 instable of its own nature and beaten upon from without, cries, at
 first to itself and afterwards upon the living total, spreading the
 disorder at large. Thus, at an assembly the Elders may sit 
 in tranquil
 meditation, but an unruly populace, crying for food and casting up a
 host of grievances, will bring the whole gathering into ugly
 turmoil; when this sort of people hold their peace so that a 
 word from
 a man of sense may reach them, some passable order is 
 restored and the
 baser part ceases to prevail; otherwise the silence of the better
 allows the rabble to rule, the distracted assembly unable to take
 the word from above.
 
 </p><p>This is the evil of state and of council: and this is the evil
 of man; man includes an inner rabble- pleasures, desires, fears- and
 these become masters when the man, the manifold, gives them play.
 
 </p><p>But one that has reduced his rabble and gone back to the Man he
 was, lives to that and is that Man again, so that what he allows to
 the body is allowed as to something separate.
 
 </p><p>There is the man, too, that lives partly in the one 
 allegiance and
 partly in the other; he is a blend of the good that is himself with
 the evil that is alien.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn605.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>