<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn609.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn611.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. Then consider this god [in man] whom we cannot think to be
 absent at some point and present at another. All that have insight
 into the nature of the divine beings hold the omnipresence 
 of this god
 and of all the gods, and reason assures us that so it must be.
 
 </p><p>Now all-pervasion is inconsistent with partition; that would
 mean no longer the god throughout but part of the god at one 
 point and
 part at another; the god ceases to be one god, just as a mass cut up
 ceases to be a mass, the parts no longer giving the first total.
 Further, the god becomes corporeal.
 
 </p><p>If all this is impossible, the disputed doctrine presents itself
 again; holding the god to pervade the Being of man, we hold the
 omnipresence of an integral identity.
 
 </p><p>Again, if we think of the divine nature as infinite- and 
 certainly
 it is confined by no bounds- this must mean that it nowhere 
 fails; its
 presence must reach to everything; at the point to which it does not
 reach, there it has failed; something exists in which it is not.
 
 </p><p>Now, admitting any sequent to the absolute unity, that sequent
 must be bound up with the absolute; any third will be about that
 second and move towards it, linked to it as its offspring. 
 In this way
 all participants in the Later will have share in the First. 
 The Beings
 of the Intellectual are thus a plurality of firsts and seconds and
 thirds attached like one sphere to one centre, not separated by
 interval but mutually present; where, therefore, the Intellectual
 tertiaries are present, the secondaries and firsts are present too.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn611.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>