<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn686.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn688.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. How then did we come to place freedom in the will when we
 made out free action to be that produced- or as we also indicated,
 suppressed- at the dictate of will?
 
 </p><p>If what we have been saying is true and our former statement is
 consistent with it, the case must stand thus:
 
 </p><p>Virtue and Intellectual-Principle are sovereign and must be held
 the sole foundation of our self-disposal and freedom; both then are
 free; Intellectual-Principle is self-confined: Virtue, in its
 government of the soul which it seeks to lift into goodness, would
 wish to be free; in so far as it does so it is free and confers
 freedom; but inevitably experiences and actions are forced upon it
 by its governance: these it has not planned for, yet when they do
 arise it will watch still for its sovereignty calling these also to
 judgement. Virtue does not follow upon occurrences as a saver of the
 emperilled; at its discretion it sacrifices a man; it may decree the
 jettison of life, means, children, country even; it looks to its own
 high aim and not to the safeguarding of anything lower. Thus our
 freedom of act, our self-disposal, must be referred not to the
 doing, not to the external thing done but to the inner activity, to
 the Intellection, to virtue's own vision.
 
 </p><p>So understood, virtue is a mode of Intellectual-Principle, a
 mode not involving any of the emotions or passions controlled by its
 reasonings, since such experiences, amenable to morality and
 discipline, touch closely- we read- on body.
 
 </p><p>This makes it all the more evident that the unembodied is the
 free; to this our self-disposal is to be referred; herein lies our
 will which remains free and self-disposing in spite of any orders
 which it may necessarily utter to meet the external. All then that
 issues from will and is the effect of will is our free action; and
 in the highest degree all that lies outside of the corporeal 
 is purely
 within the scope of will, all that will adopts and brings,
 unimpeded, into existence.
 
 </p><p>The contemplating Intellect, the first or highest, has
 self-disposal to the point that its operation is utterly
 independent; it turns wholly upon itself; its very action is itself;
 at rest in its good it is without need, complete, and may be said to
 live to its will; there the will is intellection: it is called will
 because it expresses the Intellectual-Principle in the willing-phase
 and, besides, what we know as will imitates this operation taking
 place within the Intellectual-Principle. Will strives 
 towards the good
 which the act of Intellectual-Principle realizes. Thus that
 principle holds what will seeks, that good whose attainment 
 makes will
 identical with Intellection.
 
 </p><p>But if self-disposal is founded thus on the will aiming at the
 good, how can it possibly be denied to that principle permanently
 possessing the good, sole object of the aim?
 
 </p><p>Any one scrupulous about setting self-disposal so high may find
 some loftier word.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn688.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>