<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn642.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn644.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. Man, thus, must be some Reason-Principle other than soul. But
 why should he not be some conjoint- a soul in a certain
 Reason-Principle- the Reason-Principle being, as it were, a definite
 activity which however could not exist without that which acts?
 
 </p><p>This is the case with the Reason-Principles in seed which are
 neither soulless nor entirely soul. For these productive principles
 cannot be devoid of soul and there is nothing surprising in such
 essences being Reason-Principles.
 
 </p><p>But these principles producing other forms than man, of 
 what phase
 of soul are they activities? Of the vegetal soul? Rather of 
 that which
 produces animal life, a brighter soul and therefore one more 
 intensely
 living.
 
 </p><p>The soul of that order, the soul that has entered into Matter of
 that order, is man by having, apart from body, a certain
 disposition; within body it shapes all to its own fashion, producing
 another form of Man, man reduced to what body admits, just as an
 artist may make a reduced image of that again.
 
 </p><p>It is soul, then, that holds the pattern and Reason-Principles
 of Man, the natural tendencies, the dispositions and powers- all
 feeble since this is not the Primal Man- and it contains also the
 Ideal-Forms of other senses, Forms which themselves are 
 senses, bright
 to all seeming but images, and dim in comparison with those of the
 earlier order.
 
 </p><p>The higher Man, above this sphere, rises from the more godlike
 soul, a soul possessed of a nobler humanity and brighter
 perceptions. This must be the Man of Plato's definition ["Man is
 Soul"], where the addition "Soul as using body" marks the
 distinction between the soul which uses body directly and the soul,
 poised above, which touches body only through that intermediary.
 
 </p><p>The Man of the realm of birth has sense-perception: the higher
 soul enters to bestow a brighter life, or rather does not so much
 enter as simply impart itself; for soul does not leave the
 Intellectual but, maintaining that contact, holds the lower life as
 pendant from it, blending with it by the natural link of
 Reason-Principle to Reason-Principle: and man, the dimmer, brightens
 under that illumination.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn644.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>