<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn687.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn689.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. Soul becomes free when it moves, through
 Intellectual-Principle, towards The Good; what it does in that
 spirit is its free act; Intellectual-Principle is free in its own
 right. That principle of Good is the sole object of desire and the
 source of self-disposal to the rest, to soul when it fully 
 attains, to
 Intellectual-Principle by connate possession.
 
 </p><p>How then can the sovereign of all that august sequence- the
 first in place, that to which all else strives to mount, all 
 dependent
 upon it and taking from it their powers even to this power of
 self-disposal- how can This be brought under the freedom belonging
 to you and me, a conception applicable only by violence to
 Intellectual-Principle itself?
 
 </p><p>It is rash thinking drawn from another order that would imagine
 a First Principle to be chance- made what it is, controlled by a
 manner of being imposed from without, void therefore of freedom or
 self-disposal, acting or refraining under compulsion. Such a 
 statement
 is untrue to its subject and introduces much difficulty; it utterly
 annuls the principle of freewill with the very conception of our own
 voluntary action, so that there is no longer any sense in discussion
 upon these terms, empty names for the non-existent. Anyone upholding
 this opinion would be obliged to say not merely that free act exists
 nowhere but that the very word conveys nothing to him. To admit
 understanding the word is to be easily brought to confess that the
 conception of freedom does apply where it is denied. No doubt a
 concept leaves the reality untouched and unappropriated, for nothing
 can produce itself, bring itself into being; but thought insists
 upon distinguishing between what is subject to others and what is
 independent, bound under no allegiance, lord of its own act.
 
 </p><p>This state of freedom belongs in the absolute degree to the
 Eternals in right of that eternity and to other beings in so far as
 without hindrance they possess or pursue The Good which, standing
 above them all, must manifestly be the only good they can reasonably
 seek.
 
 </p><p>To say that The Good exists by chance must be false; chance
 belongs to the later, to the multiple; since the First has never
 come to be, we cannot speak of it either as coming by chance into
 being or as not master of its being. Absurd also the 
 objection that it
 acts in accordance with its being if this is to suggest that freedom
 demands act or other expression against the nature. Neither does its
 nature as the unique annul its freedom when this is the result of no
 compulsion but means only that The Good is no other than itself, is
 self-complete and has no higher.
 
 </p><p>The objection would imply that where there is most good there is
 least freedom. If this is absurd, still more absurd to deny 
 freedom to
 The Good on the ground that it is good and self-concentred, not
 needing to lean upon anything else but actually being the Term to
 which all tends, itself moving to none.
 
 </p><p>Where- since we must use such words- the essential act is
 identical with the being- and this identity must obtain in The Good
 since it holds even in Intellectual-Principle- there the act is no
 more determined by the Being than the Being by the Act. Thus
 "acting according to its nature" does not apply; the Act, the Life,
 so to speak, cannot be held to issue from the Being; the Being
 accompanies the Act in an eternal association: from the two 
 [Being and
 Act] it forms itself into The Good, self-springing and unspringing.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn689.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>