<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn639.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn641.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. Thus we have even here the means of knowing the nature of the
 Intellectual-Principle, though, seeing it more closely than anything
 else, we still see it at less than its worth. We know that it exists
 but its cause we do not see, or, if we do, we see that cause as
 something apart. We see a man- or an eye, if you like- but this is
 an image or part of an image; what is in that Principle is 
 at once Man
 and the reason of his being; for There man- or eye- must be, itself,
 an intellective thing and a cause of its being; it could not exist
 at all unless it were that cause, whereas here, everything partial
 is separate and so is the cause of each. In the Intellectual, all is
 at one so that the thing is identical with the cause.
 
 </p><p>Even here the thing and its cause are often identical- an
 eclipse furnishes an example- what then is there to prevent other
 things too being identical with their cause and this cause being the
 essence of the thing? It must be so; and by this search after the
 cause the thing's essence is reached, for the essence of a thing is
 its cause. I am not here saying that the informing Idea is the cause
 of the thing- though this is true- but that the Idea itself, 
 unfolded,
 reveals the cause inherent in it.
 
 </p><p>A thing of inactivity, even though alive, cannot include its own
 cause; but where could a Forming-Idea, a member of the
 Intellectual-Principle, turn in quest of its cause? We may 
 be answered
 "In the Intellectual-Principle"; but the two are not distinct; the
 Idea is the Intellectual-Principle; and if that Principle 
 must contain
 the Ideas complete, their cause must be contained in them. The
 Intellectual-Principle itself contains every cause of the things of
 its content; but these of its content are identically
 Intellectual-Principle, each of them Intellectual-Principle; none of
 them, thus, can lack its own cause; each springs into being carrying
 with it the reason of its being. No result of chance, each must rise
 complete with its cause; it is an integral and so includes the
 excellence bound up with the cause. This is how all participants in
 the Idea are put into possession of their cause.
 
 </p><p>In our universe, a coherent total of multiplicity, the several
 items are linked each to the other, and by the fact that it is an
 all every cause is included in it: even in the particular thing the
 part is discernibly related to the whole, for the parts do not come
 into being separately and successively but are mutually cause and
 caused at one and the same moment. Much more in the higher realm
 must all the singles exist for the whole and each for itself: if
 then that world is the conjoint reality of all, of an all not
 chance-ruled and not sectional, the cause There must include the
 causes: every item must hold, in its very nature, the uncaused
 possession of its cause; uncaused, independent and standing 
 apart from
 cause, they must be self-contained, cause and all.
 
 </p><p>Further, since nothing There is chance-sprung, and the
 multiplicity in each comprehends the entire content, then 
 the cause of
 every member can be named; the cause was present from the beginning,
 inherent, not a cause but a fact of the being; or, rather, cause and
 manner of being were one. What could an Idea have, as cause, over
 and above the Intellectual-Principle? It is a thought of that
 Principle and cannot, at that, be considered as anything but 
 a perfect
 product. If it is thus perfect we cannot speak of anything 
 in which it
 is lacking nor cite any reason for such lack. That thing must be
 present, and we can say why. The why is inherent, therefore, in the
 entity, that is to say in every thought and activity of the
 Intellectual-Principle. Take for example the Idea of Man; Man entire
 is found to contribute to it; he is in that Idea in all his fulness
 including everything that from the beginning belonged to Man. If Man
 were not complete There, so that there were something to be added to
 the Idea, that additional must belong to a derivative; but Man
 exists from eternity and must therefore be complete; the man born is
 the derivative.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn641.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>