<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn685.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn687.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 5</h4>
 
 <p>5. Are we, however, to make freedom and self-disposal 
 exclusive to
 Intellectual-Principle as engaged in its characteristic Act,
 Intellectual-Principle unassociated, or do they belong also to soul
 acting under that guidance and performing act of virtue?
 
 </p><p>If freedom is to be allowed to soul in its Act, it certainly
 cannot be allowed in regard to issue, for we are not master 
 of events:
 if in regard to fine conduct and all inspired by
 Intellectual-Principle, that may very well be freedom; but is the
 freedom ours?
 
 </p><p>Because there is war, we perform some brave feat; how is that
 our free act since had there been no war it could not have been
 performed? So in all cases of fine conduct; there is always some
 impinging event leading out our quality to show itself in 
 this or that
 act. And suppose virtue itself given the choice whether to find
 occasion for its exercise- war evoking courage; wrong, so that it
 may establish justice and good order; poverty that it may show
 independence- or to remain inactive, everything going well, it would
 choose the peace of inaction, nothing calling for its intervention,
 just as a physician like Hippocrates would prefer no one to stand in
 need of his skill.
 
 </p><p>If thus virtue whose manifestation requires action becomes
 inevitably a collaborator under compulsion, how can it have
 untrammelled self-disposal?
 
 </p><p>Should we, perhaps, distinguish between compulsion in the act
 and freedom in the preceding will and reasoning?
 
 </p><p>But in setting freedom in those preceding functions, we 
 imply that
 virtue has a freedom and self-disposal apart from all act; then we
 must state what is the reality of the self-disposal attributed to
 virtue as state or disposition. Are we to put it that virtue comes
 in to restore the disordered soul, taming passions and appetites? In
 what sense, at that, can we hold our goodness to be our own free
 act, our fine conduct to be uncompelled? In that we will and 
 adopt, in
 that this entry of virtue prepares freedom and self-disposal, ending
 our slavery to the masters we have been obeying. If then 
 virtue is, as
 it were, a second Intellectual-Principle, and heightens the soul to
 Intellectual quality, then, once more, our freedom is found 
 to lie not
 in act but in Intellectual-Principle immune from act.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn687.htm">Next: Section 6</a></center>
 </body>