<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn648.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn650.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 11</h4>
 
 <p>11. The very heavens, patently multiple, cannot be thought to
 disdain any form of life since this universe holds 
 everything. Now how
 do these things come to be here? Does the higher realm contain all
 of the lower?
 
 </p><p>All that has been shaped by Reason-Principle and 
 conforms to Idea.
 
 </p><p>But, having fire [warmth] and water, it will certainly have
 vegetation; how does vegetation exist There? Earth, too? either
 these are alive or they are There as dead things and then not
 everything There has life. How in sum can the things of this realm
 be also There?
 
 </p><p>Vegetal life we can well admit, for the plant is a
 Reason-Principle established in life. If in the plant the
 Reason-Principle, entering Matter and constituting the plant, is a
 certain form of life, a definite soul, then, since every
 Reason-Principle is a unity, then either this of plant-life is the
 primal or before it there is a primal plant, source of its 
 being: that
 first plant would be a unity; those here, being multiple, must
 derive from a unity. This being so, that primal must have much the
 truer life and be the veritable plant, the plants here deriving from
 it in the secondary and tertiary degree and living by a 
 vestige of its
 life.
 
 </p><p>But earth; how is there earth There: what is the being of earth
 and how are we to represent to ourselves the living earth of that
 realm?
 
 </p><p>First, what is it, what the mode of its being?
 
 </p><p>Earth, here and There alike, must possess shape and a
 Reason-Principle. Now in the case of the vegetal, the 
 Reason-Principle
 of the plant here was found to be living in that higher realm: is
 there such a Reason-Principle in our earth?
 
 </p><p>Take the most earthy of things found shaped in earth and they
 exhibit, even they, the indwelling earth-principle. The growing and
 shaping of stones, the internal moulding of mountains as they rise,
 reveal the working of an ensouled Reason-Principle fashioning them
 from within and bringing them to that shape: this, we must 
 take it, is
 the creative earth-principle corresponding to what we call the
 specific principle of a tree; what we know as earth is like the wood
 of the tree; to cut out a stone is like lopping a twig from a tree,
 except of course that there is no hurt done, the stone remaining a
 member of the earth as the twig, uncut, of the tree.
 
 </p><p>Realizing thus that the creative force inherent in our earth is
 life within a Reason-Principle, we are easily convinced that 
 the earth
 There is much more primally alive, that it is a reasoned
 Earth-Livingness, the earth of Real-Being, earth primally, the
 source of ours.
 
 </p><p>Fire, similarly, with other such things, must be a
 Reason-Principle established in Matter: fire certainly does not
 originate in the friction to which it may be traced; the friction
 merely brings out a fire already existent in the scheme and
 contained in the materials rubbed together. Matter does not 
 in its own
 character possess this fire-power: the true cause is something
 informing the Matter, that is to say, a Reason-Principle, obviously
 therefore a soul having the power of bringing fire into being; that
 is, a life and a Reason-Principle in one.
 
 </p><p>It is with this in mind that Plato says there is soul in
 everything of this sphere. That soul is the cause of the fire of the
 sense-world; the cause of fire here is a certain Life of fiery
 character, the more authentic fire. That transcendent fire being
 more truly fire will be more veritably alive; the fire absolute
 possesses life. And the same principles apply to the other elements,
 water and air.
 
 </p><p>Why, then, are water and air not ensouled as earth is?
 
 </p><p>Now, it is quite certain that these are equally within the
 living total, parts of the living all; life does not appear 
 visibly in
 them; but neither does it in the case of the earth where its
 presence is inferred by what earth produces: but there are living
 things in fire and still more manifestly in water and there are
 systems of life in the air. The particular fire, rising only to be
 quenched, eludes the soul animating the universe; it slips away from
 the magnitude which would manifest the soul within it; so 
 with air and
 water. If these Kinds could somehow be fastened down to 
 magnitude they
 would exhibit the soul within them, now concealed by the fact that
 their function requires them to be loose or flowing. It is much as
 in the case of the fluids within ourselves; the flesh and all that
 is formed out of the blood into flesh show the soul within, but the
 blood itself, not bringing us any sensation, seems not to have soul;
 yet it must; the blood is not subject to blind force; its nature
 obliges it to abstain from the soul which nonetheless is 
 indwelling in
 it. This must be the case with the three elements; it is the 
 fact that
 the living beings formed from the close conglomeration of air [the
 stars] are not susceptible to suffering. But just as air, so long as
 it remains itself, eludes the light which is and remains unyielding,
 so too, by the effect of its circular movement, it eludes soul- and,
 in another sense, does not. And so with fire and water.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn650.htm">Next: Section 12</a></center>
 </body>