<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn662.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn664.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 25</h4>
 
 <p>25. It is in view, probably, of this difficulty that 
 Plato, in the
 Philebus, makes pleasure an element in the Term; the good is not
 defined as a simplex or set in Intellectual-Principle alone; while
 he rightly refrains from identifying the good with the pleasant, yet
 he does not allow Intellectual-Principle, foreign to pleasure, to be
 The Good, since he sees no attractive power in it. He may also have
 had in mind that the good, to answer to its name, must be a thing of
 delight and that an object of pursuit must at least hold 
 some pleasure
 for those that acquire and possess it, so that where there is no joy
 the good too is absent, further that pleasure, implying pursuit,
 cannot pertain to the First and that therefore good cannot.
 
 </p><p>All this was very well; there the enquiry was not as to 
 the Primal
 Good but as to ours; the good dealt with in that passage pertains to
 very different beings and therefore is a different good; it is a
 good falling short of that higher; it is a mingled thing; we are to
 understand that good does not hold place in the One and Alone whose
 being is too great and different for that.
 
 </p><p>The good must, no doubt, be a thing pursued, not, however, good
 because it is pursued but pursued because it is good.
 
 </p><p>The solution, it would seem, lies in priority:
 
 </p><p>To the lowest of things the good is its immediate higher; each
 step represents the good to what stands lower so long as the
 movement does not tend awry but advances continuously towards the
 superior: thus there is a halt at the Ultimate, beyond which 
 no ascent
 is possible: that is the First Good, the authentic, the supremely
 sovereign, the source of good to the rest of things.
 
 </p><p>Matter would have Forming-Idea for its good, since, were it
 conscious, it would welcome that; body would look to soul, without
 which it could not be or endure; soul must look to virtue; still
 higher stands Intellectual-Principle; above that again is the
 principle we call the Primal. Each of these progressive priors must
 have act upon those minors to which they are, respectively, the
 good: some will confer order and place, others life, others 
 wisdom and
 the good life: Intellectual-Principle will draw upon the Authentic
 Good which we hold to be coterminous with it, both as being an
 Activity put forth from it and as even now taking light from it.
 This good we will define later.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn664.htm">Next: Section 26</a></center>
 </body>