<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn697.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn699.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 17</h4>
 
 <p>17. Or consider it another way: We hold the universe, with its
 content entire, to be as all would be if the design of the maker had
 so willed it, elaborating it with purpose and prevision by
 reasonings amounting to a Providence. All is always so and all is
 always so reproduced: therefore the reason-principles of things must
 lie always within the producing powers in a still more perfect form;
 these beings of the divine realm must therefore be previous to
 Providence and to preference; all that exists in the order of being
 must lie for ever There in their Intellectual mode. If this regime
 is to be called Providence it must be in the sense that before our
 universe there exists, not expressed in the outer, the
 Intellectual-Principle of all the All, its source and archetype.
 
 </p><p>Now if there is thus an Intellectual-Principle before all
 things, their founding principle, this cannot be a thing 
 lying subject
 to chance- multiple, no doubt, but a concordance, ordered so to
 speak into oneness. Such a multiple- the co-ordination of all
 particulars and consisting of all the Reason-Principles of the
 universe gathered into the closest union- this cannot be a thing of
 chance, a thing "happening so to be." It must be of a very different
 nature, of the very contrary nature, separated from the other by all
 the difference between reason and reasonless chance. And if 
 the Source
 is precedent even to this, it must be continuous with this reasoned
 secondary so that the two be correspondent; the secondary must
 participate in the prior, be an expression of its will, be a power
 of it: that higher therefore [as above the ordering of reason] is
 without part or interval [implied by reasoned arrangement], is a
 one- all Reason-Principle, one number, a One greater than 
 its product,
 more powerful, having no higher or better. Thus the Supreme 
 can derive
 neither its being nor the quality of its being. God Himself,
 therefore, is what He is, self-related, self-tending; otherwise He
 becomes outward-tending, other-seeking- who cannot but be wholly
 self-poised.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn699.htm">Next: Section 18</a></center>
 </body>