<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn677.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn679.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 40</h4>
 
 <p>40. That there can be no intellection in the First will be
 patent to those that have had such contact; but some further
 confirmation is desirable, if indeed words can carry the matter; we
 need overwhelming persuasion.
 
 </p><p>It must be borne in mind that all intellection rises in some
 principle and takes cognisance of an object. But a distinction is to
 be made:
 
 </p><p>There is the intellection that remains within its place 
 of origin;
 it has that source as substratum but becomes a sort of addition to
 it in that it is an activity of that source perfecting the
 potentiality there, not by producing anything but as being a
 completing power to the principle in which it inheres. There is also
 the intellection inbound with Being- Being's very author- and this
 could not remain confined to the source since there it could produce
 nothing; it is a power to production; it produces therefore 
 of its own
 motion and its act is Real-Being and there it has its dwelling. In
 this mode the intellection is identical with Being; even in its
 self-intellection no distinction is made save the logical
 distinction of thinker and thought with, as we have often observed,
 the implication of plurality.
 
 </p><p>This is a first activity and the substance it produces is
 Essential Being; it is an image, but of an original so great that
 the very copy stands a reality. If instead of moving outward it
 remained with the First, it would be no more than some 
 appurtenance of
 that First, not a self-standing existent.
 
 </p><p>At the earliest activity and earliest intellection, it can be
 preceded by no act or intellection: if we pass beyond this being and
 this intellection we come not to more being and more intellection
 but to what overpasses both, to the wonderful which has neither,
 asking nothing of these products and standing its unaccompanied self.
 
 </p><p>That all-transcending cannot have had an activity by which to
 produce this activity- acting before act existed- or have had
 thought in order to produce thinking- applying thought before
 thought exists- all intellection, even of the Good, is beneath it.
 
 </p><p>In sum, this intellection of the Good is impossible: I 
 do not mean
 that it is impossible to have intellection of the Good- we may admit
 the possibility but there can be no intellection by The Good itself,
 for this would be to include the inferior with the Good.
 
 </p><p>If intellection is the lower, then it will be bound up 
 with Being;
 if intellection is the higher, its object is lower. Intellection,
 then, does not exist in the Good; as a lesser, taking its worth
 through that Good, it must stand apart from it, leaving the Good
 unsoiled by it as by all else. Immune from intellection the Good
 remains incontaminably what it is, not impeded by the presence of
 the intellectual act which would annul its purity and unity.
 
 </p><p>Anyone making the Good at once Thinker and Thought identifies it
 with Being and with the Intellection vested in Being so that it must
 perform that act of intellection: at once it becomes 
 necessary to find
 another principle, one superior to that Good: for either this act,
 this intellection, is a completing power of some such principle,
 serving as its ground, or it points, by that duality, to a prior
 principle having intellection as a characteristic. It is 
 because there
 is something before it that it has an object of intellection; even
 in its self-intellection, it may be said to know its content by its
 vision of that prior.
 
 </p><p>What has no prior and no external accompaniment could have no
 intellection, either of itself or of anything else. What could it
 aim at, what desire? To essay its power of knowing? But this would
 make the power something outside itself; there would be, I mean, the
 power it grasped and the power by which it grasped: if there is but
 the one power, what is there to grasp at?
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn679.htm">Next: Section 41</a></center>
 </body>