<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn689.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn691.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 9</h4>
 
 <p>9. If we cannot but speak of Happening we must not halt at the
 word but look to the intention. And what is that? That the Supreme
 by possession of a certain nature and power is the Principle.
 Obviously if its nature were other it would be that other and if the
 difference were for the worse it would manifest itself as that
 lesser being. But we must add in correction that, as 
 Principle of All,
 it could not be some chance product; it is not enough to say that it
 could not be inferior; it could not even be in some way good, for
 instance in some less perfect degree; the Principle of All must be
 of higher quality than anything that follows it. It is therefore in
 a sense determined- determined, I mean, by its uniqueness and not in
 any sense of being under compulsion; compulsion did not co-exist
 with the Supreme but has place only among secondaries and even there
 can exercise no tyranny; this uniqueness is not from outside.
 
 </p><p>This, then, it is; This and no other; simply what it must be; it
 has not "happened" but is what by a necessity prior to all 
 necessities
 it must be. We cannot think of it as a chance existence; it is not
 what it chanced to be but what it must be- and yet without a "Must."
 
 </p><p>All the rest waits for the appearing of the king to hail him for
 himself, not a being of accident and happening but 
 authentically king,
 authentically Principle, The Good authentically, not a being 
 that acts
 in conformity with goodness- and so, recognisably, a secondary- but
 the total unity that he is, no moulding upon goodness but the very
 Good itself.
 
 </p><p>Even Being is exempt from happening: of course, anything 
 happening
 happens to Being, but Being itself has not happened nor is the
 manner of its Being a thing of happening, of derivation; it is the
 very nature of Being to be; how then can we think that this
 happening can attach to the Transcendent of Being, That in 
 whose power
 lay the very engendering of Being?
 
 </p><p>Certainly this Transcendent never happened to be what it 
 is; it is
 so, just as Being exists in complete identity with its own essential
 nature and that of Intellectual-Principle. Certainly that which has
 never passed outside of its own orbit, unbendingly what it 
 is, its own
 unchangeably, is that which may most strictly be said to possess its
 own being: what then are we to say when we mount and contemplate
 that which stands yet higher; can we conceivably say "Thus, as we
 see it, thus has it happened to be"? Neither thus nor in any mode
 did it happen to be; there is no happening; there is only a "Thus
 and No Otherwise than Thus." And even "Thus" is false; it would
 imply limit, a defined form: to know This is to be able to 
 reject both
 the "Thus" and the "Not-Thus," either of which classes among 
 Beings to
 which alone Manner of Being can attach.
 
 </p><p>A "Thus" is something that attaches to everything in the world
 of things: standing before the indefinable you may name any of these
 sequents but you must say This is none of them: at most it is to be
 conceived as the total power towards things, supremely
 self-concentred, being what it wills to be or rather projecting into
 existence what it wills, itself higher than all will, will a thing
 beneath it. In a word it neither willed its own "Thus"- as something
 to conform to- nor did any other make it "Thus."
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn691.htm">Next: Section 10</a></center>
 </body>