<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn649.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn651.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 12</h4>
 
 <p>12. Or take it another way: Since in our view this 
 universe stands
 to that as copy to original, the living total must exist There
 beforehand; that is the realm of complete Being and everything must
 exist There.
 
 </p><p>The sky There must be living and therefore not bare of 
 stars, here
 known as the heavens- for stars are included in the very meaning of
 the word. Earth too will be There, and not void but even more
 intensely living and containing all that lives and moves upon our
 earth and the plants obviously rooted in life; sea will be There and
 all waters with the movement of their unending life and all 
 the living
 things of the water; air too must be a member of that universe with
 the living things of air as here.
 
 </p><p>The content of that living thing must surely be alive- as in
 this sphere- and all that lives must of necessity be There. 
 The nature
 of the major parts determines that of the living forms they
 comprise; by the being and content of the heaven There are
 determined all the heavenly forms of life; if those lesser forms
 were not There, that heaven itself would not be.
 
 </p><p>To ask how those forms of life come to be There is simply asking
 how that heaven came to be; it is asking whence comes life, 
 whence the
 All-Life, whence the All-Soul, whence collective Intellect: and the
 answer is that There no indigence or impotence can exist but all
 must be teeming, seething, with life. All flows, so to 
 speak, from one
 fount not to be thought of as one breath or warmth but rather as one
 quality englobing and safeguarding all qualities- sweetness with
 fragrance, wine- quality and the savours of everything that may be
 tasted, all colours seen, everything known to touch, all that ear
 may hear, all melodies, every rhythm.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn651.htm">Next: Section 13</a></center>
 </body>