<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn688.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn690.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. But it is not, in our view, as an attribute that this freedom
 is present in the First. In the light of free acts, from which we
 eliminate the contraries, we recognise There self-determination,
 self-directed and, failing more suitable terms, we apply to it the
 lesser terms brought over from lesser things and so tell it 
 as best we
 may: no words could ever be adequate or even applicable to that from
 which all else- the noble, the august- is derived. For This is
 principle of all, or, more strictly, unrelated to all and, in this
 consideration, cannot be made to possess such laters as even freedom
 and self-disposal, which in fact indicate manifestation upon the
 extern- unhindered but implying the existence of other beings whose
 opposition proves ineffective.
 
 </p><p>We cannot think of the First as moving towards any 
 other; He holds
 his own manner of being before any other was; even Being we withhold
 and therefore all relation to beings.
 
 </p><p>Nor may we speak of any "conforming to the nature"; this again
 is of the later; if the term be applicable at all in that realm it
 applies only to the secondaries- primally to Essential Existence as
 next to this First. And if a "nature" belongs only to things of
 time, this conformity to nature does not apply even to Essential
 Existence. On the other hand, we are not to deny that it is derived
 from Essential Existence for that would be to take away its
 existence and would imply derivation from something else.
 
 </p><p>Does this mean that the First is to be described as happening to
 be?
 
 </p><p>No; that would be just as false; nothing "happens" to the First;
 it stands in no such relationship; happening belongs only to the
 multiple where, first, existence is given and then something 
 is added.
 And how could the Source "happen to be"? There has been no coming so
 that you can put it to the question "How does this come to be? What
 chance brought it here, gave it being?" Chance did not yet exist;
 there was no "automatic action": these imply something before
 themselves and occur in the realm of process.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn690.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>