<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn652.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn654.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 15</h4>
 
 <p>15. That Life, the various, the all-including, the 
 primal and one,
 who can consider it without longing to be of it, disdaining all the
 other?
 
 </p><p>All other life is darkness, petty and dim and poor; it is
 unclean and polluting the clean for if you do but look upon it you
 no longer see nor live this life which includes all living, in which
 there is nothing that does not live and live in a life of purity
 void of all that is ill. For evil is here where life is in copy and
 Intellect in copy; There is the archetype, that which is good in the
 very Idea- we read- as holding The Good in the pure Idea. That
 Archetype is good; Intellectual-Principle is good as holding its
 life by contemplation of the archetype; and it sees also as good the
 objects of its contemplation because it holds them in its act of
 contemplating the Principle of Good. But these objects come to it
 not as they are There but in accord with its own condition, for it
 is their source; they spring thence to be here, and
 Intellectual-Principle it is that has produced them by its vision
 There. In the very law, never, looking to That, could it fail of
 Intellectual Act; never, on the other hand, could it produce what is
 There; of itself it could not produce; Thence it must draw its power
 to bring forth, to teem with offspring of itself; from the Good it
 takes what itself did not possess. From that Unity came multiplicity
 to Intellectual-Principle; it could not sustain the power poured
 upon it and therefore broke it up; it turned that one power into
 variety so as to carry it piecemeal.
 
 </p><p>All its production, effected in the power of The Good, contains
 goodness; it is good, itself, since it is constituted by these
 things of good; it is Good made diverse. It might be likened to a
 living sphere teeming with variety, to a globe of faces radiant with
 faces all living, to a unity of souls, all the pure souls, not
 faulty but the perfect, with Intellect enthroned over all so that
 the place entire glows with Intellectual splendour.
 
 </p><p>But this would be to see it from without, one thing seeing
 another; the true way is to become Intellectual-Principle and be,
 our very selves, what we are to see.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn654.htm">Next: Section 16</a></center>
 </body>