<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn615.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn617.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. It remains, then, poised in wisdom within itself; it 
 could not
 enter into any other; those others look to it and in their longing
 find it where it is. This is that "Love Waiting at the Door," ever
 coming up from without, striving towards the beautiful, happy when
 to the utmost of its power it attains. Even here the lover 
 does not so
 much possess himself of the beauty he has loved as wait before it;
 that Beauty is abidingly self-enfolded but its lovers, the Many,
 loving it as an entire, possess it as an entire when they attain,
 for it was an entire that they loved. This seclusion does not
 prevent its sufficing to all, but is the very reason for its 
 adequacy;
 because it is thus entire for all it can be The Good to all.
 
 </p><p>Similarly wisdom is entire to all; it is one thing; it is not
 distributed parcelwise; it cannot be fixed to place; it is not
 spread about like a colouring, for it is not corporeal; in any true
 participation in wisdom there must be one thing acting as unit upon
 unit. So must it be in our participation in the One; we 
 shall not take
 our several portions of it, nor you some separate entire and I
 another. Think of what happens in Assemblies and all kinds of
 meetings; the road to sense is the road to unity; singly the members
 are far from wise; as they begin to grow together, each, in that
 true growth, generates wisdom while he recognizes it. There 
 is nothing
 to prevent our intelligences meeting at one centre from their
 several positions; all one, they seem apart to us as when without
 looking we touch one object or sound one string with 
 different fingers
 and think we feel several. Or take our souls in their possession of
 good; it is not one good for me and another for you; it is the same
 for both and not in the sense merely of distinct products of an
 identical source, the good somewhere above with something streaming
 from it into us; in any real receiving of good, giver is in contact
 with taker and gives not as to a recipient outside but to one in
 intimate contact.
 
 </p><p>The Intellectual giving is not an act of transmission; 
 even in the
 case of corporeal objects, with their local separation, the mutual
 giving [and taking] is of things of one order and their 
 communication,
 every effect they produce, is upon their like; what is corporeal in
 the All acts and is acted upon within itself, nothing external
 impinging upon it. Now if in body, whose very nature is partition,
 there is no incursion of the alien, how can there be any in the
 order in which no partition exists?
 
 </p><p>It is therefore by identification that we see the good and touch
 it, brought to it by becoming identical with what is of the
 Intellectual within ourselves. In that realm exists what is far more
 truly a kosmos of unity; otherwise there will be two sensible
 universes, divided into correspondent parts; the Intellectual
 sphere, if a unity only as this sphere is, will be undistinguishable
 from it- except, indeed, that it will be less worthy of respect
 since in the nature of things extension is appropriate in the lower
 while the Intellectual will have wrought out its own 
 extension with no
 motive, in a departure from its very character.
 
 </p><p>And what is there to hinder this unification? There is 
 no question
 of one member pushing another out as occupying too much space, any
 more than happens in our own minds where we take in the entire fruit
 of our study and observation, all uncrowded.
 
 </p><p>We may be told that this unification is not possible in Real
 Beings; it certainly would not be possible, if the Reals had
 extension.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn617.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>