<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn622.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn624.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. We have to enquire into the existence of the Numbers in the
 Intellectual. Are they Ideas added to the other Ideas? Or are they
 no more than necessary concomitants to the Ideas?
 
 </p><p>In the latter case, Being, as the first [in the Intellectual]
 would give us the conception of the Monad; then since Being produces
 motion and rest, Three exists; and so on for all the other members
 of the realm of Being. Or perhaps there is one monad for each
 member, or a monad for the first, with a dyad for its next, since
 there exists a series, and a corresponding number for every 
 successive
 total, decad for ten, and so on.
 
 </p><p>If, on the contrary, Number is a direct production of the
 Intellectual-Principle [an Idea in itself], there is the question
 whether it preceded or followed the other Ideas.
 
 </p><p>Plato, where he says that men arrived at the conception of
 Number by way of the changes of day and night- thus making 
 the concept
 depend upon variation among things- seems to hold that the things
 numerable precede and by their differences produce number: 
 Number then
 would consist in a process within the human mind passing onwards
 from thing to thing; it results by the fact that the mind 
 takes count,
 that is when the mind traverses things and reports their
 differences; observing pure identity unbroken by difference, it says
 One. But there is the passage where he tells us that the veritable
 Number has Being, is a Being; this is the opposed view that Number
 is no product of the reckoning mind but a reality in itself, the
 concept of which is reawakened in the mind by changes in things of
 sense.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn624.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>