<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn663.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn665.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 26</h4>
 
 <p>26. Any conscious being, if the good come to him, will know the
 good and affirm his possession of it.
 
 </p><p>But what if one be deceived?
 
 </p><p>In that case there must be some resemblance to account for the
 error: the good will be the original which the delusion
 counterfeited and whenever the true presents itself we turn from the
 spurious.
 
 </p><p>All the striving, all the pain, show that to everything
 something is a good: the lifeless finds its share in 
 something outside
 itself; where there is life the longing for good sets up pursuit;
 the very dead are cared for and mourned for by the living; the
 living plan for their own good. The witness of attainment is
 betterment, cleaving to state, satisfaction, settlement, 
 suspension of
 pursuit. Here pleasure shows itself inadequate; its choice does not
 hold; repeated, it is no longer the same; it demands endless
 novelty. The good, worthy of the name, can be no such tasting of the
 casual; anyone that takes this kind of thing for the good goes
 empty, carrying away nothing but an emotion which the good might
 have produced. No one could be content to take his pleasure 
 thus in an
 emotion over a thing not possessed any more than over a child not
 there; I cannot think that those setting their good in bodily
 satisfactions find table-pleasure without the meal, or love-pleasure
 without intercourse with their chosen, or any pleasure where nothing
 is done.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn665.htm">Next: Section 27</a></center>
 </body>