<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn613.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn615.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. For my part I am satisfied that anyone considering the mode
 in which Matter participates in the Ideas will be ready enough to
 accept this tenet of omnipresence in identity, no longer rejecting
 it as incredible or even difficult. This because it seems reasonable
 and imperative to dismiss any notion of the Ideas lying apart with
 Matter illumined from them as from somewhere above- a meaningless
 conception, for what have distance and separation to do here?
 
 </p><p>This participation cannot be thought of as elusive or very
 perplexing; on the contrary, it is obvious, accessible in many
 examples.
 
 </p><p>Note, however, that when we sometimes speak of the Ideas
 illuminating Matter this is not to suggest the mode in which
 material light pours down on a material object; we use the phrase in
 the sense only that, the material being image while the Ideas are
 archetypes, the two orders are distinguished somewhat in the 
 manner of
 illuminant and illuminated. But it is time to be more exact.
 
 </p><p>We do not mean that the Idea, locally separate, shows itself in
 Matter like a reflection in water; the Matter touches the Idea at
 every point, though not in a physical contact, and, by dint of
 neighbourhood- nothing to keep them apart- is able to absorb thence
 all that lies within its capacity, the Idea itself not penetrating,
 not approaching, the Matter, but remaining self-locked.
 
 </p><p>We take it, then, that the Idea, say of Fire- for we had 
 best deal
 with Matter as underlying the elements- is not in the Matter. The
 Ideal Fire, then, remaining apart, produces the form of fire
 throughout the entire enfired mass. Now let us suppose- and the same
 method will apply to all the so-called elements- that this 
 Fire in its
 first material manifestation is a multiple mass. That single Fire is
 seen producing an image of itself in all the sensible fires; 
 yet it is
 not spatially separate; it does not, then, produce that image in the
 manner of our visible light; for in that case all this sensible
 fire, supposing that it were a whole of parts [as the analogy would
 necessitate], must have generated spatial positions out of itself,
 since the Idea or Form remains in a non-spatial world; for a 
 principle
 thus pluralized must first have departed from its own character in
 order to be present in that many and participate many times 
 in the one
 same Form.
 
 </p><p>The Idea, impartible, gives nothing of itself to the Matter; its
 unbreaking unity, however, does not prevent it shaping that multiple
 by its own unity and being present to the entirety of the multiple,
 bringing it to pattern not by acting part upon part but by presence
 entire to the object entire. It would be absurd to introduce a
 multitude of Ideas of Fire, each several fire being shaped by a
 particular idea; the Ideas of fire would be infinite. Besides, how
 would these resultant fires be distinct, when fire is a continuous
 unity? and if we apply yet another fire to certain matter and
 produce a greater fire, then the same Idea must be allowed to have
 functioned in the same way in the new matter as in the old;
 obviously there is no other Idea.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn615.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>