<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn601.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn603.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 13</h4>
 
 <p>13. But how account, at this, for its extension over all the
 heavens and all living beings?
 
 </p><p>There is no such extension. Sense-perception, by insistence upon
 which we doubt, tells of Here and There; but reason 
 certifies that the
 Here and There do not attach to that principle; the extended has
 participated in that kosmos of life which itself has no extension.
 
 </p><p>Clearly no participant can participate in itself;
 self-participation would be merely identity. Body, then, as
 participant does not participate in body; body it has; its
 participation must be in what is not body. So too magnitude does not
 participate in magnitude; it has it: not even in addition of
 quantity does the initial magnitude participate in magnitude: the
 two cubits do not themselves become three cubits; what occurs is
 that an object totalling to a certain quantity now totals to
 another: for magnitude to participate in magnitude the actual two
 cubits must themselves become the new three [which cannot occur].
 
 </p><p>If, then, the divided and quantitatively extended is to
 participate in another Kind, is to have any sort of participation,
 it can participate only in something undivided, unextended, wholly
 outside of quantity. Therefore, that which is to be introduced by
 the participation must enter as itself an omnipresent indivisible.
 
 </p><p>This indivisibility must, of course, not be taken in any sense
 of littleness: littleness would be still divisible, could not cover
 the extension of the participant and could not maintain integral
 presence against that expansion. Nor is it the indivisibility of a
 geometric point: the participant mass is no single point but
 includes an infinity of points; so that on the theory this principle
 must be an infinity of points, not a simultaneous entire, and so,
 again, will fail to cover the participant.
 
 </p><p>If, then, the participant mass in its entirety is to contain
 that principle entire, the universe must hold that one soul 
 present at
 its every point.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn603.htm">Next: Section 14</a></center>
 </body>