<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn638.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn640.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. God, or some one of the gods, in sending the souls to their
 birth, placed eyes in the face to catch the light and 
 allotted to each
 sense the appropriate organ, providing thus for the safety 
 which comes
 by seeing and hearing in time and, seeking or avoiding under
 guidance of touch.
 
 </p><p>But what led to this provision?
 
 </p><p>It cannot be that other forms of being were produced first and
 that, these perishing in the absence of the senses, the maker at
 last supplied the means by which men and other living beings might
 avert disaster.
 
 </p><p>We may be told that it lay within the divine knowledge 
 that animal
 life would be exposed to heat and cold and other such experiences
 incident to body and that in this knowledge he provided the 
 senses and
 the organs apt to their activity in order that the living total
 might not fall an easy prey.
 
 </p><p>Now, either he gave these organs to souls already possessing the
 sensitive powers or he gave senses and organs alike.
 
 </p><p>But if the souls were given the powers as well as the organs,
 then, souls though they were, they had no sensation before that
 giving. If they possessed these powers from the moment of being
 souls and became souls in order to their entry into process, then it
 is of their very nature to belong to process, unnatural to them to
 be outside of process and within the Intellectual: they were made in
 the intent that they should belong to the alien and have their being
 amid evil; the divine provision would consist in holding 
 them to their
 disaster; this is God's reasoned purpose, this the plan entire.
 
 </p><p>Now what is the foundation of reasoned plan?
 
 </p><p>Precedent planning, it may be; but still we are forced back to
 some thing or things determining it. What would these be here?
 
 </p><p>Either sense-perception or intellect. But sense-perception it
 cannot in this case be: intellect is left; yet, starting from
 intellect, the conclusion will be knowledge, not therefore the
 handling of the sensible; what begins with the intellectual and
 proceeds to the intellectual can certainly not end in dealings with
 the sensible. Providence, then, whether over living beings 
 or over any
 part of the universe was never the outcome of plan.
 
 </p><p>There is in fact no planning There; we speak of reasoned purpose
 in the world of things only to convey that the universe is of the
 character which in the later order would point to a wise purposing;
 Providence implies that things are as, in the later order, a 
 competent
 foreplanning would produce them. Reasoning serves, in beings not of
 the order above that need, to supply for the higher power; foresight
 is necessary in the lack of power which could dispense with it; it
 labours towards some one occurrence in preference to another and it
 goes in a sort of dread of the unfitting; where only the fitting can
 occur, there is no foreseeing. So with planning; where one 
 only of two
 things can be, what place is there for plan? The alone and one and
 utterly simplex cannot involve a "this to avert that": if the "this"
 could not be, the "that" must; the serviceable thing appeared and at
 once approved itself so.
 
 </p><p>But surely this is foreseeing, deliberating: are we not back at
 what was said at the beginning, that God did to this end 
 give both the
 senses and the powers, however perplexing that giving be?
 
 </p><p>No: all turns on the necessary completeness of Act; we cannot
 think anything belonging to God to be other than a whole and all and
 therefore in anything of God's that all must be contained; God
 therefore must take in the future, present beforehand. 
 Certainly there
 is no later in the divine; what is There as present is future for
 elsewhere. If then the future is present, it must be present 
 as having
 been foreconceived for later coming to be; at that divine stage
 therefore it lacks nothing and therefore can never lack; all
 existed, eternally and in such a way that at the later stage any
 particular thing may be said to exist for this or that purpose; the
 All, in its extension and so to speak unfolding, is able to present
 succession while yet it is simultaneous; this is because it contains
 the cause of all as inherent to itself.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn640.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>