<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn653.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn655.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 16</h4>
 
 <p>16. But even there we are not to remain always, in that beauty
 of the multiple; we must make haste yet higher, above this heaven of
 ours and even that; leaving all else aside we ask in awe 
 "Who produced
 that realm and how?" Everything There is a single Idea in an
 individual impression and, informed by The Good, possesses the
 universal good transcendent over all. Each possessing that Being
 above, possesses also the total Living-Form in virtue of that
 transcendent life, possesses, no doubt, much else as well.
 
 </p><p>But what is the Nature of this Transcendent in view of which and
 by way of which the Ideas are good?
 
 </p><p>The best way of putting the question is to ask whether, when
 Intellectual-Principle looked towards The Good, it had 
 Intellection of
 that unity as a multiplicity and, itself a unity, plied its Act by
 breaking into parts what it was too feeble to know as a whole.
 
 </p><p>No: that would not be Intellection looking upon the 
 Good; it would
 be a looking void of Intellection. We must think of it not as
 looking but as living; dependent upon That, it kept itself turned
 Thither; all the tendance taking place There and upon That must be a
 movement teeming with life and must so fill the looking Principle;
 there is no longer bare Act, there is a filling to saturation.
 Forthwith Intellectual-Principle becomes all things, knows that fact
 in virtue of its self-knowing and at once becomes
 Intellectual-Principle, filled so as to hold within itself 
 that object
 of its vision, seeing all by the light from the Giver and bearing
 that Giver with it.
 
 </p><p>In this way the Supreme may be understood to be the cause at
 once of essential reality and of the knowing of reality. The sun,
 cause of the existence of sense-things and of their being seen, is
 indirectly the cause of sight, without being either the 
 faculty or the
 object: similarly this Principle, The Good, cause of Being and
 Intellectual-Principle, is a light appropriate to what is to be seen
 There and to their seer; neither the Beings nor the
 Intellectual-Principle, it is their source and by the light it sheds
 upon both makes them objects of Intellection. This filling procures
 the existence; after the filling, the being; the existence achieved,
 the seeing followed: the beginning is that state of not yet having
 been filled, though there is, also, the beginning which 
 means that the
 Filling Principle was outside and by that act of filling 
 gave shape to
 the filled.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn655.htm">Next: Section 17</a></center>
 </body>