<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn674.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn676.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 37</h4>
 
 <p>37. Those ascribing Intellection to the First have not supposed
 him to know the lesser, the emanant- though, indeed, some 
 have thought
 it impossible that he should not know everything. But those denying
 his knowing of the lesser have still attributed self-knowing to him,
 because they find nothing nobler; we are to suppose that so he is
 the more august, as if Intellection were something nobler than his
 own manner of being not something whose value derives from him.
 
 </p><p>But we ask in what must his grandeur lie, in his Intellection or
 in himself. If in the Intellection, he has no worth or the 
 less worth;
 if in himself, he is perfect before the Intellection, not 
 perfected by
 it. We may be told that he must have Intellection because he is an
 Act, not a potentiality. Now if this means that he is an essence
 eternally intellective, he is represented as a duality- essence and
 Intellective Act- he ceases to be a simplex; an external has been
 added: it is just as the eyes are not the same as their sight,
 though the two are inseparable. If on the other hand by this
 actualization it is meant that he is Act and Intellection, then as
 being Intellection he does not exercise it, just as movement is not
 itself in motion.
 
 </p><p>But do not we ourselves assert that the Beings There are essence
 and Act?
 
 </p><p>The Beings, yes, but they are to us manifold and differentiated:
 the First we make a simplex; to us Intellection begins with the
 emanant in its seeking of its essence, of itself, of its author;
 bent inward for this vision and having a present thing to know,
 there is every reason why it should be a principle of Intellection;
 but that which, never coming into being, has no prior but is 
 ever what
 it is, how could that have motive to Intellection? As Plato rightly
 says, it is above Intellect.
 
 </p><p>An Intelligence not exercising Intellection would be
 unintelligent; where the nature demands knowing, not to know is to
 fail of intelligence; but where there is no function, why import one
 and declare a defect because it is not performed? We might as well
 complain because the Supreme does not act as a physician. He has no
 task, we hold, because nothing can present itself to him to be done;
 he is sufficient; he need seek nothing beyond himself, he who is
 over all; to himself and to all he suffices by simply being what he
 is.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn676.htm">Next: Section 38</a></center>
 </body>