<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn706.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn708.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 4</h4>
 
 <p>4. The main part of the difficulty is that awareness of this
 Principle comes neither by knowing nor by the Intellection that
 discovers the Intellectual Beings but by a presence overpassing all
 knowledge. In knowing, soul or mind abandons its unity; it cannot
 remain a simplex: knowing is taking account of things; that 
 accounting
 is multiple; the mind, thus plunging into number and multiplicity,
 departs from unity.
 
 </p><p>Our way then takes us beyond knowing; there may be no wandering
 from unity; knowing and knowable must all be left aside; every
 object of thought, even the highest, we must pass by, for all that
 is good is later than This and derives from This as from the sun all
 the light of the day.
 
 </p><p>"Not to be told; not to be written": in our writing and 
 telling we
 are but urging towards it: out of discussion we call to vision: to
 those desiring to see, we point the path; our teaching is of the
 road and the travelling; the seeing must be the very act of one that
 has made this choice.
 
 </p><p>There are those that have not attained to see. The soul has not
 come to know the splendour There; it has not felt and clutched to
 itself that love-passion of vision known to lover come to rest where
 he loves. Or struck perhaps by that authentic light, all the soul
 lit by the nearness gained, we have gone weighted from beneath; the
 vision is frustrate; we should go without burden and we go carrying
 that which can but keep us back; we are not yet made over into unity.
 
 </p><p>From none is that Principle absent and yet from all: present, it
 remains absent save to those fit to receive, disciplined into some
 accordance, able to touch it closely by their likeness and by that
 kindred power within themselves through which, remaining as it was
 when it came to them from the Supreme, they are enabled to see in so
 far as God may at all be seen.
 
 </p><p>Failure to attain may be due to such impediment or to lack of
 the guiding thought that establishes trust; impediment we must
 charge against ourselves and strive by entire renunciation to become
 emancipate; where there is distrust for lack of convincing reason,
 further considerations may be applied:
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn708.htm">Next: Section 5</a></center>
 </body>