<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn709.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn711.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 7</h4>
 
 <p>7. If the mind reels before something thus alien to all we know,
 we must take our stand on the things of this realm and strive thence
 to see. But, in the looking, beware of throwing outward; this
 Principle does not lie away somewhere leaving the rest void; to
 those of power to reach, it is present; to the inapt, absent. In our
 daily affairs we cannot hold an object in mind if we have given
 ourselves elsewhere, occupied upon some other matter; that very
 thing must be before us to be truly the object of 
 observation. So here
 also; preoccupied by the impress of something else, we are withheld
 under that pressure from becoming aware of The Unity; a mind gripped
 and fastened by some definite thing cannot take the print of the
 very contrary. As Matter, it is agreed, must be void of quality in
 order to accept the types of the universe, so and much more must the
 soul be kept formless if there is to be no infixed impediment to
 prevent it being brimmed and lit by the Primal Principle.
 
 </p><p>In sum, we must withdraw from all the extern, pointed wholly
 inwards; no leaning to the outer; the total of things ignored, first
 in their relation to us and later in the very idea; the self put out
 of mind in the contemplation of the Supreme; all the commerce so
 closely There that, if report were possible, one might become to
 others reporter of that communion.
 
 </p><p>Such converse, we may suppose, was that of Minos, thence known
 as the Familiar of Zeus; and in that memory he established the laws
 which report it, enlarged to that task by his vision There. Some, on
 the other hand, there will be to disdain such citizen service,
 choosing to remain in the higher: these will be those that have seen
 much.
 
 </p><p>God- we read- is outside of none, present unperceived to all; we
 break away from Him, or rather from ourselves; what we turn from we
 cannot reach; astray ourselves, we cannot go in search of another; a
 child distraught will not recognise its father; to find ourselves is
 to know our source.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn711.htm">Next: Section 8</a></center>
 </body>