<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn701.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn703.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 21</h4>
 
 <p>21. Could He then have made Himself otherwise than as He did?
 
 </p><p>If He could we must deny Him the power to produce goodness for
 He certainly cannot produce evil. Power, There, is no producer of
 the inapt; it is that steadfast constant which is most 
 decidedly power
 by inability to depart from unity: ability to produce the inapt
 inability to hold by the fitting; that self-making must be definite
 once for all since it is the right; besides, who could upset what is
 made by the will of God and is itself that will?
 
 </p><p>But whence does He draw that will seeing that essence, source of
 will, is inactive in Him?
 
 </p><p>The will was included in the essence; they were identical: or
 was there something, this will for instance, not existing in Him?
 All was will, nothing unwilled in Him. There is then nothing before
 that will: God and will were primally identical.
 
 </p><p>God, therefore, is what He willed, is such as He willed; and all
 that ensued upon that willing was what that definite willing
 engendered: but it engendered nothing new; all existed from 
 the first.
 
 </p><p>As for his "self-containing," this rightly understood can mean
 only that all the rest is maintained in virtue of Him by means of a
 certain participation; all traces back to the Supreme; God Himself,
 self-existing always, needs no containing, no participating; all in
 Him belongs to Him or rather He needs nothing from them in order to
 being Himself.
 
 </p><p>When therefore you seek to state or to conceive Him, put all
 else aside; abstracting all, keep solely to Him; see that you add
 nothing; be sure that your theory of God does not lessen 
 Him. Even you
 are able to take contact with Something in which there is no 
 more than
 That Thing itself to affirm and know, Something which lies away
 above all and is- it alone- veritably free, subject not even to its
 own law, solely and essentially That One Thing, while all else is
 thing and something added.
 
 </p><p></p>
 
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn703.htm">Next: NINTH TRACTATE</a></center>
 </body>