<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn710.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn712.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 8</h4>
 
 <p>8. Every soul that knows its history is aware, also, that its
 movement, unthwarted, is not that of an outgoing line; its natural
 course may be likened to that in which a circle turns not upon some
 external but on its own centre, the point to which it owes its rise.
 The soul's movement will be about its source; to this it will hold,
 poised intent towards that unity to which all souls should move and
 the divine souls always move, divine in virtue of that movement; for
 to be a god is to be integral with the Supreme; what stands away is
 man still multiple, or beast.
 
 </p><p>Is then this "centre" of our souls the Principle for which we
 are seeking?
 
 </p><p>We must look yet further: we must admit a Principle in which all
 these centres coincide: it will be a centre by analogy with 
 the centre
 of the circle we know. The soul is not a circle in the sense of the
 geometric figure but in that it at once contains the Primal 
 Nature [as
 centre] and is contained by it [as circumference], that it owes its
 origin to such a centre and still more that the soul,
 uncontaminated, is a self-contained entity.
 
 </p><p>In our present state- part of our being weighed down by the
 body, as one might have the feet under water with all the rest
 untouched- we bear- ourselves aloft by that- intact part 
 and, in that,
 hold through our own centre to the centre of all the centres, just
 as the centres of the great circles of a sphere coincide with that
 of the sphere to which all belong. Thus we are secure.
 
 </p><p>If these circles were material and not spiritual, the link with
 the centres would be local; they would lie round it where it lay at
 some distant point: since the souls are of the Intellectual, and the
 Supreme still loftier, we understand that contact is otherwise
 procured, that is by those powers which connect Intellectual agent
 with Intellectual Object; this all the more, since the Intellect
 grasps the Intellectual object by the way of similarity, identity,
 in the sure link of kindred. Material mass cannot blend into other
 material mass: unbodied beings are not under this bodily limitation;
 their separation is solely that of otherness, of differentiation; in
 the absence of otherness, it is similars mutually present.
 
 </p><p>Thus the Supreme as containing no otherness is ever present with
 us; we with it when we put otherness away. It is not that the
 Supreme reaches out to us seeking our communion: we reach towards
 the Supreme; it is we that become present. We are always before it:
 but we do not always look: thus a choir, singing set in due order
 about the conductor, may turn away from that centre to which all
 should attend: let it but face aright and it sings with beauty,
 present effectively. We are ever before the Supreme- cut off is
 utter dissolution; we can no longer be- but we do not always attend:
 when we look, our Term is attained; this is rest; this is the end of
 singing ill; effectively before Him, we lift a choral song full of
 God.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn712.htm">Next: Section 9</a></center>
 </body>