<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn705.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn707.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 3</h4>
 
 <p>3. What then must The Unity be, what nature is left for it?
 
 </p><p>No wonder that to state it is not easy; even Being and Form are
 not easy, though we have a way, an approach through the Ideas.
 
 </p><p>The soul or mind reaching towards the formless finds itself
 incompetent to grasp where nothing bounds it or to take impression
 where the impinging reality is diffuse; in sheer dread of holding to
 nothingness, it slips away. The state is painful; often it seeks
 relief by retreating from all this vagueness to the region of sense,
 there to rest as on solid ground, just as the sight distressed by
 the minute rests with pleasure on the bold.
 
 </p><p>Soul must see in its own way; this is by coalescence, 
 unification;
 but in seeking thus to know the Unity it is prevented by that very
 unification from recognising that it has found; it cannot
 distinguish itself from the object of this intuition. Nonetheless,
 this is our one resource if our philosophy is to give us knowledge
 of The Unity.
 
 </p><p>We are in search of unity; we are to come to know the 
 principle of
 all, the Good and First; therefore we may not stand away from the
 realm of Firsts and lie prostrate among the lasts: we must strike
 for those Firsts, rising from things of sense which are the lasts.
 Cleared of all evil in our intention towards The Good, we must
 ascend to the Principle within ourselves; from many, we must become
 one; only so do we attain to knowledge of that which is Principle
 and Unity. We shape ourselves into Intellectual-Principle; we make
 over our soul in trust to Intellectual-Principle and set it firmly
 in That; thus what That sees the soul will waken to see; it 
 is through
 the Intellectual-Principle that we have this vision of The Unity; it
 must be our care to bring over nothing whatever from sense, to allow
 nothing even of soul to enter into Intellectual-Principle: with
 Intellect pure, and with the summit of Intellect, we are to see the
 All-Pure.
 
 </p><p>If quester has the impression of extension or shape or mass
 attaching to That Nature he has not been led by 
 Intellectual-Principle
 which is not of the order to see such things; the activity 
 has been of
 sense and of the judgement following upon sense: only
 Intellectual-Principle can inform us of the things of its scope; its
 competence is upon its priors, its content and its issue: 
 but even its
 content is outside of sense; and still purer, still less touched by
 multiplicity, are its priors, or rather its Prior.
 
 </p><p>The Unity, then, is not Intellectual-Principle but something
 higher still: Intellectual-Principle is still a being but that First
 is no being but precedent to all Being; it cannot be a being, for a
 being has what we may call the shape of its reality but The Unity is
 without shape, even shape Intellectual.
 
 </p><p>Generative of all, The Unity is none of all; neither thing nor
 quantity nor quality nor intellect nor soul; not in motion, not at
 rest, not in place, not in time: it is the self-defined, unique in
 form or, better, formless, existing before Form was, or Movement or
 Rest, all of which are attachments of Being and make Being the
 manifold it is.
 
 </p><p>But how, if not in movement, can it be otherwise than at rest?
 
 </p><p>The answer is that movement and rest are states pertaining to
 Being, which necessarily has one or the other or both. Besides,
 anything at rest must be so in virtue of Rest as something distinct:
 Unity at rest becomes the ground of an attribute and at once 
 ceases to
 be a simplex.
 
 </p><p>Note, similarly, that, when we speak of this First as Cause, we
 are affirming something happening not to it but to us, the fact that
 we take from this Self-Enclosed: strictly we should put 
 neither a This
 nor a That to it; we hover, as it were, about it, seeking the
 statement of an experience of our own, sometimes nearing 
 this Reality,
 sometimes baffled by the enigma in which it dwells.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn707.htm">Next: Section 4</a></center>
 </body>