<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn712.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn714.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 10</h4>
 
 <p>10. But how comes the soul not to keep that ground?
 
 </p><p>Because it has not yet escaped wholly: but there will be the
 time of vision unbroken, the self hindered no longer by any
 hindrance of body. Not that those hindrances beset that in us which
 has veritably seen; it is the other phase of the soul that 
 suffers and
 that only when we withdraw from vision and take to knowing by proof,
 by evidence, by the reasoning processes of the mental habit. Such
 logic is not to be confounded with that act of ours in the vision;
 it is not our reason that has seen; it is something greater than
 reason, reason's Prior, as far above reason as the very 
 object of that
 thought must be.
 
 </p><p>In our self-seeing There, the self is seen as belonging to that
 order, or rather we are merged into that self in us which has the
 quality of that order. It is a knowing of the self restored to its
 purity. No doubt we should not speak of seeing; but we cannot help
 talking in dualities, seen and seer, instead of, boldly, the
 achievement of unity. In this seeing, we neither hold an object nor
 trace distinction; there is no two. The man is changed, no longer
 himself nor self-belonging; he is merged with the Supreme, 
 sunken into
 it, one with it: centre coincides with centre, for on this higher
 plane things that touch at all are one; only in separation is there
 duality; by our holding away, the Supreme is set outside. This is
 why the vision baffles telling; we cannot detach the Supreme to
 state it; if we have seen something thus detached we have failed of
 the Supreme which is to be known only as one with ourselves.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn714.htm">Next: Section 11</a></center>
 </body>