<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn700.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn702.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 20</h4>
 
 <p>20. The difficulty will be raised that God would seem to have
 existed before thus coming into existence; if He makes Himself, then
 in regard to the self which He makes He is not yet in being and as
 maker He exists before this Himself thus made.
 
 </p><p>The answer is that we utterly must not speak of Him as made but
 sheerly as maker; the making must be taken as absolved from all
 else; no new existence is established; the Act here is not 
 directed to
 an achievement but is God Himself unalloyed: here is no duality but
 pure unity. Let no one suspect us of asserting that the 
 first Activity
 is without Essence; on the contrary the Activity is the very
 reality. To suppose a reality without activity would be to make the
 Principle of all principles deficient; the supremely complete
 becomes incomplete. To make the Activity something superadded to
 the essence is to shatter the unity. If then Activity is a more
 perfect thing than essence and the First is all perfect, then the
 Activity is the First.
 
 </p><p>By having acted, He is what He is and there is no question of
 "existing before bringing Himself into existence"; when He acted He
 was not in some state that could be described as "before 
 existing." He
 was already existent entirely.
 
 </p><p>Now assuredly an Activity not subjected essence is utterly free;
 God's selfhood, then, is of his own Act. If his being has to be
 ensured by something else, He is no longer the self-existent 
 First: if
 it be true to say that He is his own container, then He inducts
 Himself; for all that He contains is his own production from the
 beginning since from the beginning He caused the being of all that
 by nature He contains.
 
 </p><p>If there had been a moment from which He began to be, it would
 be possible assert his self-making in the literal sense; but, since
 what He is He is from before all time, his self-making is to be
 understood as simultaneous with Himself; the being is one 
 and the same
 with the making and eternal "coming into existence."
 
 </p><p>This is the source also of his self-disposal- strictly
 applicable if there were a duality, but conveying, in the case of a
 unity, a disposing without a disposed, an abstract disposing. But
 how a disposer with nothing to dispose? In that there is here a
 disposer looking to a prior when there is none: since there is no
 prior, This is the First- but a First not in order but in 
 sovereignty,
 in power purely self-controlled. Purely; then nothing can be There
 that is under any external disposition; all in God is self-willing.
 What then is there of his content that is not Himself, what that is
 not in Act, what not his work? Imagine in Him anything not of his
 Act and at once His existence ceases to be pure; He is not
 self-disposing, not all-powerful: in that at least of whose doing He
 is not master He would be impotent.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn702.htm">Next: Section 21</a></center>
 </body>