<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn708.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn710.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 6</h4>
 
 <p>6. In what sense, then, do we assert this Unity, and how is it
 to be adjusted to our mental processes?
 
 </p><p>Its oneness must not be entitled to that of monad and point: for
 these the mind abstracts extension and numerical quantity and rests
 upon the very minutest possible, ending no doubt in the partless but
 still in something that began as a partible and is always lodged in
 something other than itself. The Unity was never in any other and
 never belonged to the partible: nor is its impartibility that of
 extreme minuteness; on the contrary it is great beyond 
 anything, great
 not in extension but in power, sizeless by its very greatness as
 even its immediate sequents are impartible not in mass but in might.
 We must therefore take the Unity as infinite not in measureless
 extension or numerable quantity but in fathomless depths of power.
 
 </p><p>Think of The One as Mind or as God, you think too meanly; use
 all the resources of understanding to conceive this Unity and,
 again, it is more authentically one than God, even though you reach
 for God's unity beyond the unity the most perfect you can conceive.
 For This is utterly a self-existent, with no concomitant whatever.
 This self-sufficing is the essence of its unity. Something there
 must be supremely adequate, autonomous, all-transcending, 
 most utterly
 without need.
 
 </p><p>Any manifold, anything beneath The Unity, is dependent; combined
 from various constituents, its essential nature goes in need 
 of unity;
 but unity cannot need itself; it stands unity accomplished. Again, a
 manifold depends upon all its factors; and furthermore each of those
 factors in turn- as necessarily inbound with the rest and not
 self-standing- sets up a similar need both to its associates and to
 the total so constituted.
 
 </p><p>The sovranly self-sufficing principle will be Unity-Absolute, for
 only in this Unity is there a nature above all need, whether within
 itself or in regard to the rest of things. Unity seeks 
 nothing towards
 its being or its well-being or its safehold upon existence; cause to
 all, how can it acquire its character outside of itself or know any
 good outside? The good of its being can be no borrowing: This is The
 Good. Nor has it station; it needs no standing ground as if 
 inadequate
 to its own sustaining; what calls for such underpropping is the
 soulless, some material mass that must be based or fall. This is
 base to all, cause of universal existence and of ordered station.
 All that demands place is in need; a First cannot go in need of its
 sequents: all need is effort towards a first principle; the First,
 principle to all, must be utterly without need. If the Unity be
 seeking, it must inevitably be seeking to be something other than
 itself; it is seeking its own destroyer. Whatever may be 
 said to be in
 need of a good is needing a preserver; nothing can be a good to The
 Unity, therefore.
 
 </p><p>Neither can it have will to anything; it is a Beyond-Good, not
 even to itself a good but to such beings only as may be of quality
 to have part with it. Nor has it Intellection; that would comport
 diversity: nor Movement; it is prior to Movement as to Intellection.
 
 </p><p>To what could its Intellection be directed? To itself? But that
 would imply a previous ignorance; it would be dependent upon that
 Intellection in order to knowledge of itself; but it is the
 self-sufficing. Yet this absence of self-knowing does not comport
 ignorance; ignorance is of something outside- a knower ignorant of a
 knowable- but in the Solitary there is neither knowing nor anything
 unknown. Unity, self-present, it has no need of self-intellection:
 indeed this "self-presence" were better left out, the more surely to
 preserve the unity; we must eliminate all knowing and all 
 association,
 all intellection whether internal or external. It is not to be
 though of as having but as being Intellection; Intellection does not
 itself perform the intellective act but is the cause of the act in
 something else, and cause is not to be identified with caused: most
 assuredly the cause of all is not a thing within that all.
 
 </p><p>This Principle is not, therefore, to be identified with the good
 of which it is the source; it is good in the unique mode of being
 The Good above all that is good.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn710.htm">Next: Section 7</a></center>
 </body>