<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn703.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn705.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 1</h4>
 
 <p>1. It is in virtue of unity that beings are beings.
 
 </p><p>This is equally true of things whose existence is primal and of
 all that are in any degree to be numbered among beings. What could
 exist at all except as one thing? Deprived of unity, a thing 
 ceases to
 be what it is called: no army unless as a unity: a chorus, a flock,
 must be one thing. Even house and ship demand unity, one house, one
 ship; unity gone, neither remains thus even continuous magnitudes
 could not exist without an inherent unity; break them apart and
 their very being is altered in the measure of the breach of unity.
 
 </p><p>Take plant and animal; the material form stands a unity; fallen
 from that into a litter of fragments, the things have lost their
 being; what was is no longer there; it is replaced by quite other
 things- as many others, precisely, as possess unity.
 
 </p><p>Health, similarly, is the condition of a body acting as a
 co-ordinate unity. Beauty appears when limbs and features are
 controlled by this principle, unity. Moral excellence is of a soul
 acting as a concordant total, brought to unity.
 
 </p><p>Come thus to soul- which brings all to unity, making, moulding,
 shaping, ranging to order- there is a temptation to say "Soul is the
 bestower of unity; soul therefore is the unity." But soul bestows
 other characteristics upon material things and yet remains distinct
 from its gift: shape, Ideal-Form and the rest are all distinct from
 the giving soul; so, clearly, with this gift of unity; soul to make
 things unities looks out upon the unity just as it makes man by
 looking upon Man, realizing in the man the unity belonging to Man.
 
 </p><p>Anything that can be described as a unity is so in the precise
 degree in which it holds a characteristic being; the less or more
 the degree of the being, the less or more the unity. Soul, while
 distinct from unity's very self, is a thing of the greater unity in
 proportion as it is of the greater, the authentic, being. Absolute
 unity it is not: it is soul and one soul, the unity in some sense a
 concomitant; there are two things, soul and soul's unity as there is
 body with body's unity. The looser aggregates, such as a choir, are
 furthest from unity, the more compact are the nearer; soul is nearer
 yet but still a participant.
 
 </p><p>Is soul to be identified with unity on the ground that unless it
 were one thing it could not be soul? No; unity is equally 
 necessary to
 every other thing, yet unity stands distinct from them; body 
 and unity
 are not identical; body, too; is still a participant.
 
 </p><p>Besides, the soul, even the collective soul for all its 
 absence of
 part, is a manifold: it has diverse powers- reasoning, desiring,
 perceiving- all held together by this chain of unity. Itself a
 unity, soul confers unity, but also accepts it.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn705.htm">Next: Section 2</a></center>
 </body>