<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Classics</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="enn704.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="enn706.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 
 <h4 align="CENTER">Section 2</h4>
 
 <p>2. It may be suggested that, while in the unities of the partial
 order the essence and the unity are distinct, yet in collective
 existence, in Real Being, they are identical, so that when we have
 grasped Being we hold unity; Real Being would coincide with Unity.
 Thus, taking the Intellectual-Principle as Essential Being, that
 principle and the Unity Absolute would be at once Primal Being and
 Pure Unity, purveying, accordingly, to the rest of things 
 something of
 Being and something, in proportion, of the unity which is itself.
 
 </p><p>There is nothing with which the unity would be more plausibly
 identified than with Being; either it is Being as a given man is man
 or it will correspond to the Number which rules in the realm of the
 particular; it will be a number applying to a certain unique thing
 as the number two applies to others.
 
 </p><p>Now if Number is a thing among things, then clearly so this
 unity must be; we would have to discover what thing of things it is.
 If Number is not a thing but an operation of the mind moving out to
 reckon, then the unity will not be a thing.
 
 </p><p>We found that anything losing unity loses its being; we are
 therefore obliged to enquire whether the unity in particulars is
 identical with the being, and unity absolute identical with 
 collective
 being.
 
 </p><p>Now the being of the particular is a manifold; unity cannot be a
 manifold; there must therefore be a distinction between Being and
 Unity. Thus a man is at once a reasoning living being and a total of
 parts; his variety is held together by his unity; man therefore and
 unity are different- man a thing of parts against unity 
 partless. Much
 more must Collective Being, as container of all existence, be a
 manifold and therefore distinct from the unity in which it is but
 participant.
 
 </p><p>Again, Collective Being contains life and intelligence- it is no
 dead thing- and so, once more, is a manifold.
 
 </p><p>If Being is identical with Intellectual-Principle, even 
 at that it
 is a manifold; all the more so when count is taken of the Ideal
 Forms in it; for the Idea, particular or collective, is, after all,
 a numerable agglomeration whose unity is that of a kosmos.
 
 </p><p>Above all, unity is The First: but Intellectual-Principle, Ideas
 and Being, cannot be so; for any member of the realm of Forms is an
 aggregation, a compound, and therefore- since components must
 precede their compound- is a later.
 
 </p><p>Other considerations also go to show that the
 Intellectual-Principle cannot be the First. Intellect must be above
 the Intellectual Act: at least in its higher phase, that not 
 concerned
 with the outer universe, it must be intent upon its Prior; its
 introversion is a conversion upon the Principle.
 
 </p><p>Considered as at once Thinker and Object of its Thought, it is
 dual, not simplex, not The Unity: considered as looking 
 beyond itself,
 it must look to a better, to a prior: looking simultaneously upon
 itself and upon its Transcendent, it is, once more, not a First.
 
 </p><p>There is no other way of stating Intellectual-Principle than as
 that which, holding itself in the presence of The Good and First and
 looking towards That, is self-present also, self-knowing and Knowing
 itself as All-Being: thus manifold, it is far from being The Unity.
 
 </p><p>In sum: The Unity cannot be the total of beings, for so its
 oneness is annulled; it cannot be the Intellectual-Principle, for so
 it would be that total which the Intellectual-Principle is; nor is
 it Being, for Being is the manifold of things.
 
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="enn706.htm">Next: Section 3</a></center>
 </body>