<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr08.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr10.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Goojaree</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 001</h2></center>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Raag Goojaree, First Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:<br>
  I would make Your Name the sandalwood, and my mind the stone to rub it on;<br>
  for saffron, I would offer good deeds; thus, I perform worship and adoration within my heart. ||1||<br>
  Perform worship and adoration by meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; without the Name, there is no worship and adoration. ||1||Pause||<br>
  If one were to wash his heart inwardly, like the stone idol which is washed on the outside,<br>
  his filth would be removed, his soul would be cleansed, and he would be liberated when he departs. ||2||<br>
  Even beasts have value, as they eat grass and give milk.<br>
  Without the Naam, the mortal's life is cursed, as are the actions he performs. ||3||<br>
  The Lord is hear at hand - do not think that He is far away. He always cherishes us, and remembers us.<br>
  Whatever He gives us, we eat; says Nanak, He is the True Lord. ||4||1||<br>
  Goojaree, First Mehl:<br>
  From the lotus of Vishnu's navel, Brahma was born; He chanted the Vedas with a melodious voice.<br>
  He could not find the Lord's limits, and he remained in the darkness of coming and going. ||1||<br>
  Why should I forget my Beloved? He is the support of my very breath of life.<br>
  The perfect beings perform devotional worship to Him. The silent sages serve Him through the Guru's Teachings. ||1||Pause||<br>
  His lamps are the sun and the moon; the One Light of the Destroyer of ego fills the three worlds.<br>
  One who becomes Gurmukh remains immaculately pure, day and night, while the self-willed manmukh is enveloped by the darkness of night. ||2||<br>
  The Siddhas in Samaadhi are continually in conflict; what can they see with their two eyes?<br>
  One who has the Divine Light within his heart, and is awakened to the melody of the Word of the Shabad - the True Guru settles his conflicts. ||3||<br>
  O Lord of angels and men, infinite and unborn, Your True Mansion is incomparable.<br>
  Nanak merges imperceptibly into the Life of the world; shower Your mercy upon him, and save him. ||4||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 002</h2></center>
  Raag Goojaree, Third Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Cursed is that life, in which the Lord's Love is not obtained.<br>
  Cursed is that occupation, in which the Lord is forgotten, and one becomes attached to duality. ||1||<br>
  Serve such a True Guru, O my mind, that by serving Him, God's Love may be produced, and all others may be forgotten.<br>
  Your consciousness shall remain attached to the Lord; there shall be no fear of old age, and the supreme status shall be obtained. ||1||Pause||<br>
  A divine peace wells up from God's Love; behold, it comes from devotional worship.<br>
  When my identity consumed my identical identity, then my mind became immaculately pure, and my light was blended with the Divine Light. ||2||<br>
  Without good fortune, such a True Guru cannot be found, no matter how much all may yearn for Him.<br>
  If the veil of falsehood is removed from within, then lasting peace is obtained. ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, what service can the servant perform for such a True Guru? He should offer his life, his very soul, to the Guru.<br>
  If he focuses his consciousness on the Will of the True Guru, then the True Guru Himself will bless him. ||4||1||3||<br>
  Goojaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  Serve the Lord; do not serve anyone else.<br>
  Serving the Lord, you shall obtain the fruits of your heart's desires; serving another, your life shall pass away in vain. ||1||<br>
  The Lord is my Love, the Lord is my way of life, the Lord is my speech and conversation.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, my mind is saturated with the Lord's Love; this is what makes up my service. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord is my Simritees, the Lord is my Shaastras; the Lord is my relative and the Lord is my brother.<br>
  I am hungry for the Lord; my mind is satisfied with the Name of the Lord. The Lord is my relation, my helper in the end. ||2||<br>
  Without the Lord, other assets are false. They do not go with the mortal when he departs.<br>
  The Lord is my wealth, which shall go with me; wherever I go, it will go. ||3||<br>
  One who is attached to falsehood is false; false are the deeds he does.<br>
  Says Nanak, everything happens according to the Will of the Lord; no one has any say in this at all. ||4||2||4||<br>
  Goojaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  It is so difficult to obtain the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in this age; only the Gurmukh obtains it.<br>
  Without the Name, no one is liberated; let anyone make other efforts, and see. ||1||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to my Guru; I am forever a sacrifice to Him.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and one remains absorbed in Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When God instills His fear, a balanced detachment springs up in the mind.<br>
  Through this detachment, the Lord is obtained, and one remains absorbed in the Lord. ||2||<br>
  He alone is liberated, who conquers his mind; Maya does not stick to him again.<br>
  He dwells in the Tenth Gate, and obtains the understanding of the three worlds. ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, through the Guru, one becomes the Guru; behold, His Wondrous Will.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 003</h2></center>
  This deed was done by the Creator Lord; one's light merges into the Light. ||4||3||5||<br>
  Goojaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  Everyone chants the Lord's Name, Raam, Raam; but by such chanting, the Lord is not obtained.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and then, the fruits are obtained. ||1||<br>
  One who enshrines love for God within his mind,<br>
  never forgets the Lord; he continually chants the Lord's Name, Har, Har, in his conscious mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those whose hearts are filled with hypocrisy, who are called saints only for their outward show<br>
  - their desires are never satisfied, and they depart grieving in the end. ||2||<br>
  Although one may bathe at many places of pilgrimage, still, his ego never departs.<br>
  That man, whose sense of duality does not depart - the Righteous Judge of Dharma shall punish him. ||3||<br>
  That humble being, unto whom God showers His Mercy, obtains Him; how few are the Gurmukhs who understand Him.<br>
  O Nanak, if one conquers his ego within, then he comes to meet the Lord. ||4||4||6||<br>
  Goojaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  That humble being who eliminates his ego is at peace; he is blessed with an ever-stable intellect.<br>
  That humble being is immaculately pure, who, as Gurmukh, understands the Lord, and focuses his consciousness on the Lord's Feet. ||1||<br>
  O my unconscious mind, remain conscious of the Lord, and you shall obtain the fruits of your desires.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, you shall obtain the sublime elixir of the Lord; by continually drinking it in, you shall have eternal peace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When one meets the True Guru, he becomes the philosopher's stone, with the ability to transform others, inspiring them to worship the Lord.<br>
  One who worships the Lord in adoration, obtains his rewards; instructing others, he reveals the Truth. ||2||<br>
  Without becoming the philosopher's stone, he does not inspire others to worship the Lord; without instructing his own mind, how can he instruct others?<br>
  The ignorant, blind man calls himself the guru, but to whom can he show the way? ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, without His Mercy, nothing can be obtained. One upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace, obtains Him.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, God bestows greatness, and projects the Word of His Shabad. ||4||5||7||<br>
  Goojaree, Third Mehl, Panch-Padas:<br>
  Wisdom is not produced in Benares, nor is wisdom lost in Benares.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, wisdom is produced, and then, one obtains this understanding. ||1||<br>
  Listen to the sermon of the Lord, O mind, and enshrine the Shabad of His Word within your mind.<br>
  If your intellect remains stable and steady, then doubt shall depart from within you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Enshrine the Lord's lotus feet within your heart, and your sins shall be erased.<br>
  If your soul overcomes the five elements, then you shall come to have a home at the true place of pilgrimage. ||2||<br>
  This mind of the self-centered manmukh is so stupid; it does not obtain any understanding at all.<br>
  It does not understand the Name of the Lord; it departs repenting in the end. ||3||<br>
  In this mind are found Benares, all sacred shrines of pilgrimage and the Shaastras; the True Guru has explained this.<br>
  The sixty-eight places of pilgrimage remain with one, whose heart is filled with the Lord. ||4||<br>
  O Nanak, upon meeting the True Guru, the Order of the Lord's Will is understood, and the One Lord comes to dwell in the mind.<br>
  Those who are pleasing to You, O True Lord, are true. They remain absorbed in You. ||5||6||8||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 004</h2></center>
  Goojaree, Third Mehl:<br>
  The One Name is the treasure, O Pandit. Listen to these True Teachings.<br>
  No matter what you read in duality, reading and contemplating it, you shall only continue to suffer. ||1||<br>
  So grasp the Lord's lotus feet; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you shall come to understand.<br>
  With your tongue, taste the sublime elixir of the Lord, and your mind shall be rendered immaculately pure. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, the mind becomes content, and then, hunger and desire will not trouble you any longer.<br>
  Obtaining the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one does not go knocking at other doors. ||2||<br>
  The self-willed manmukh babbles on and on, but he does not understand.<br>
  One whose heart is illumined, by Guru's Teachings, obtains the Name of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  You may listen to the Shaastras, but you do not understand, and so you wander from door to door.<br>
  He is a fool, who does not understand his own self, and who does not enshrine love for the True Lord. ||4||<br>
  The True Lord has fooled the world - no one has any say in this at all.<br>
  O Nanak, He does whatever He pleases, according to His Will. ||5||7||9||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Raag Goojaree, Fourth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:<br>
  O Servant of the Lord, O True Guru, O True Primal Being, I offer my prayers to You, O Guru.<br>
  I am an insect and a worm; O True Guru, I seek Your Sanctuary; please, be merciful and bestow upon me the Light of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O my Best Friend, O Divine Guru, please illuminate me with the Light of the Lord.<br>
  By Guru's Instructions, the Naam is my breath of life, and the Praise of the Lord is my occupation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord's servants have the greatest good fortune; they have faith in the Lord, Har, Har, and a thirst for the Lord.<br>
  Obtaining the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, they are satisfied; joining the Company of the Holy, their virtues shine forth. ||2||<br>
  Those who have not obtained the essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are most unfortunate; they are taken away by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  Those who have not sought the Sanctuary of the True Guru and the Company of the Holy - cursed are their lives, and cursed are their hopes of life. ||3||<br>
  Those humble servants of the Lord, who have obtained the Company of the True Guru, have such pre-ordained destiny written on their foreheads.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, where the sublime essence of the Lord is obtained. Meeting with His humble servant, O Nanak, the Naam shines forth. ||4||1||<br>
  Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord, the Lord of the Universe is the Beloved of the minds of those who join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. The Shabad of His Word fascinates their minds.<br>
  Chant, and meditate on the Lord, the Lord of the Universe; God is the One who gives gifts to all. ||1||<br>
  O my Siblings of Destiny, the Lord of the Universe, Govind, Govind, Govind, has enticed and fascinated my mind.<br>
  I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, Govind, Govind, Govind; joining the Holy Society of the Guru, Your humble servant is beautified. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Devotional worship to the Lord is an ocean of peace; through the Guru's Teachings, wealth, prosperity and the spiritual powers of the Siddhas fall at our feet.<br>
  The Lord's Name is the Support of His humble servant; he chants the Lord's Name, and with the Lord's Name he is adorned. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 005</h2></center>
  Evil-minded, unfortunate and shallow-minded are those who feel anger in their minds, when they hear the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  You may place ambrosial nectar before crows and ravens, but they will be satisfied only by eating manure and dung with their mouths. ||3||<br>
  The True Guru, the Speaker of Truth, is the pool of Ambrosial Nectar; bathing within it, the crow becomes a swan.<br>
  O Nanak, blessed, blessed and very fortunate are those who, through the Guru's Teachings, with the Naam, wash away the filth of their hearts. ||4||2||<br>
  Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The humble servants of the Lord are exalted, and exalted is their speech. With their mouths, they speak for the benefit of others.<br>
  Those who listen to them with faith and devotion, are blessed by the Lord; showering His Mercy, He saves them. ||1||<br>
  Lord, please, let me meet the beloved servants of the Lord.<br>
  The True Guru, the Perfect Guru, is my Beloved, my very breath of life; the Guru has saved me, the sinner. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Gurmukhs are fortunate, so very fortunate; their Support is the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  They obtain the Ambrosial Nectar of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; through the Guru's Teachings, they obtain this treasure-house of devotional worship. ||2||<br>
  Those who do not obtain the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the True Guru, the True Primal Being, are most unfortunate; they are destroyed by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  They are like dogs, pigs and jackasses; they are cast into the womb of reincarnation, and the Lord strikes them down as the worst of murderers. ||3||<br>
  O Lord, Kind to the poor, please shower Your mercy upon Your humble servant, and save him.<br>
  Servant Nanak has entered the Lord's Sanctuary; if it pleases You, Lord, please save him. ||4||3||<br>
  Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Be Merciful and attune my mind, so that I might meditate continually on the Lord's Name, night and day.<br>
  The Lord is all peace, all virtue and all wealth; remembering Him, all misery and hunger depart. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, the Lord's Name is my companion and brother.<br>
  Under Guru's Instruction, I sing the Praises of the Lord's Name; it shall be my help and support in the end, and it shall deliver me in the Court of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You Yourself are the Giver, O God, Inner-knower, Searcher of hearts; by Your Grace, You have infused longing for You in my mind.<br>
  My mind and body long for the Lord; God has fulfilled my longing. I have entered the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  Human birth is obtained through good actions; without the Name, it is cursed, totally cursed, and it passes away in vain.<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one obtains only suffering for his delicacies to eat. His mouth is insipid, and his face is spat upon, again and again. ||3||<br>
  Those humble beings, who have entered the Sanctuary of the Lord God, Har, Har, are blessed with glory in the Court of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Blessed, blessed and congratulations, says God to His humble servant. O servant Nanak, He embraces him, and blends him with Himself. ||4||4||<br>
  Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O Gurmukhs, O my friends and companions, give me the gift of the Lord's Name, the life of my very life.<br>
  I am the slave, the servant of the Guru's Sikhs, who meditate on the Lord God, the Primal Being, night and day. ||1||<br>
  Within my mind and body, I have enshrined love for the feet of the Guru's Sikhs.<br>
  O my life-mates, O Sikhs of the Guru, O Siblings of Destiny, instruct me in the Teachings, that I might merge in the Lord's Merger. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 006</h2></center>
  When it pleases the Lord God, he causes us to meet the Gurmukhs; the Hymns of the Guru, the True Guru, are very sweet to their minds.<br>
  Very fortunate are the beloved Sikhs of the Guru; through the Lord, they attain the supreme state of Nirvaanaa. ||2||<br>
  The Sat Sangat, the True Congregation of the Guru, is loved by the Lord. The Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is sweet and pleasing to their minds.<br>
  One who does not obtain the Association of the True Guru, is a most unfortunate sinner; he is consumed by the Messenger of Death. ||3||<br>
  If God, the Kind Master, Himself shows His kindness, then the Lord causes the Gurmukh to merge into Himself.<br>
  Servant Nanak chants the Glorious Words of the Guru's Bani; through them, one is absorbed into the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||5||<br>
  Goojaree, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One who has found the Lord God through the True Guru, has made the Lord seem so sweet to me, through the His Teachings.<br>
  My mind and body have been cooled and soothed, and totally rejuvenated; by great good fortune, I meditate on the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O Siblings of Destiny, let anyone who can implant the Lord's Name within me, come and meet with me.<br>
  Unto my Beloved, I give my mind and body, and my very breath of life. He speaks to me of the sermon of my Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, I have obtained courage, faith and the Lord. He keeps my mind focused continually on the Lord, and the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Words of the True Guru's Teachings are Ambrosial Nectar; this Amrit trickles into the mouth of the one who chants them. ||2||<br>
  Immaculate is the Naam, which cannot be stained by filth. Through the Guru's Teachings, chant the Naam with love.<br>
  That man who has not found the wealth of the Naam is most unfortunate; he dies over and over again. ||3||<br>
  The source of bliss, the Life of the world, the Great Giver brings bliss to all who meditate on the Lord.<br>
  You are the Great Giver, all beings belong to You. O servant Nanak, You forgive the Gurmukhs, and merge them into Yourself. ||4||6||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Goojaree, Fourth Mehl, Third House:<br>
  Mother, father and sons are all made by the Lord;<br>
  the relationships of all are established by the Lord. ||1||<br>
  I have given up all my strength, O my brother.<br>
  The mind and body belong to the Lord, and the human body is entirely under His control. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord Himself infuses devotion into His humble devotees.<br>
  In the midst of family life, they remain unattached. ||2||<br>
  When inner love is established with the Lord,<br>
  then whatever one does, is pleasing to my Lord God. ||3||<br>
  I do those deeds and tasks which the Lord has set me to;<br>
  I do that which He makes me to do. ||4||<br>
  Those whose devotional worship is pleasing to my God<br>
  - O Nanak, those humble beings center their minds lovingly on the Lord's Name. ||5||1||7||16||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 007</h2></center>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Why, O mind, do you contrive your schemes, when the Dear Lord Himself provides for your care?<br>
  From rocks and stones, He created the living beings, and He places before them their sustenance. ||1||<br>
  O my Dear Lord of Souls, one who meets with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is saved.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, he obtains the supreme status, and the dry branch blossoms forth in greenery. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Mother, father, friends, children, and spouse - no one is the support of any other.<br>
  For each and every individual, the Lord and Master provides sustenance; why do you fear, O my mind? ||2||<br>
  The flamingoes fly hundreds of miles, leaving their young ones behind.<br>
  Who feeds them, and who teaches them to feed themselves? Have you ever thought of this in your mind? ||3||<br>
  All treasures and the eighteen supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas are held by the Lord and Master in the palm of His hand.<br>
  Servant Nanak is devoted, dedicated, and forever a sacrifice to You - Your vast expanse has no limit. ||4||1||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  They perform the four rituals and six religious rites; the world is engrossed in these.<br>
  They are not cleansed of the filth of their ego within; without the Guru, they lose the game of life. ||1||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, please, grant Your Grace and preserve me.<br>
  Out of millions, hardly anyone is a servant of the Lord. All the others are mere traders. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have searched all the Shaastras, the Vedas and the Simritees, and they all affirm one thing:<br>
  without the Guru, no one obtains liberation; see, and reflect upon this in your mind. ||2||<br>
  Even if one takes cleansing baths at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, and wanders over the whole planet,<br>
  and performs all the rituals of purification day and night, still, without the True Guru, there is only darkness. ||3||<br>
  Roaming and wandering around, I have travelled over the whole world, and now, I have arrived at the Lord's Door.<br>
  The Lord has eliminated my evil-mindedness, and enlightened my intellect; O servant Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved. ||4||1||2||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The wealth of the Lord is my chanting, the wealth of the Lord is my deep meditation; the wealth of the Lord is the food I enjoy.<br>
  I do not forget the Lord, Har, Har, from my mind, even for an instant; I have found Him in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||<br>
  O mother, your son has returned home with a profit:<br>
  the wealth of the Lord while walking, the wealth of the Lord while sitting, and the wealth of the Lord while waking and sleeping. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The wealth of the Lord is my cleansing bath, the wealth of the Lord is my wisdom; I center my meditation on the Lord.<br>
  The wealth of the Lord is my raft, the wealth of the Lord is my boat; the Lord, Har, Har, is the ship to carry me across. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 008</h2></center>
  Through the wealth of the Lord, I have forgotten my anxiety; through the wealth of the Lord, my doubt has been dispelled.<br>
  From the wealth of the Lord, I have obtained the nine treasures; the true essence of the Lord has come into my hands. ||3||<br>
  No matter how much I eat and expend this wealth, it is not exhausted; here and hereafter, it remains with me.<br>
  Loading the treasure, Guru Nanak has given it, and this mind is imbued with the Lord's Love. ||4||2||3||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Remembering Him, all sins are erased, and ones generations are saved.<br>
  So meditate continually on the Lord, Har, Har; He has no end or limitation. ||1||<br>
  O son, this is your mother's hope and prayer,<br>
  that you may never forget the Lord, Har, Har, even for an instant. May you ever vibrate upon the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause||<br>
  May the True Guru be kind to you, and may you love the Society of the Saints.<br>
  May the preservation of your honor by the Transcendent Lord be your clothes, and may the singing of His Praises be your food. ||2||<br>
  So drink in forever the Ambrosial Nectar; may you live long, and may the meditative remembrance of the Lord give you infinite delight.<br>
  May joy and pleasure be yours; may your hopes be fulfilled, and may you never be troubled by worries. ||3||<br>
  Let this mind of yours be the bumble bee, and let the Lord's feet be the lotus flower.<br>
  Says servant Nanak, attach your mind to them, and blossom forth like the song-bird, upon finding the rain-drop. ||4||3||4||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He decides to go to the west, but the Lord leads him away to the east.<br>
  In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes; He holds all matters in His hands. ||1||<br>
  Cleverness is of no use at all.<br>
  Whatever my Lord and Master deems to be right - that alone comes to pass. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In his desire to acquire land and accumulate wealth, one's breath escapes him.<br>
  He must leave all his armies, assistants and servants; rising up, he departs to the City of Death. ||2||<br>
  Believing himself to be unique, he clings to his stubborn mind, and shows himself off.<br>
  That food, which the blameless people have condemned and discarded, he eats again and again. ||3||<br>
  One, unto whom the Lord shows His natural mercy, has the noose of Death cut away from him.<br>
  Says Nanak, one who meets the Perfect Guru, is celebrated as a householder as well as a renunciate. ||4||4||5||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Those humble beings who chant the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, have their bonds broken.<br>
  Sexual desirer, anger, the poison of Maya and egotism - they are rid of these afflictions. ||1||<br>
  One who joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and chants the Praises of the Lord,<br>
  has his mind purified, by Guru's Grace, and he obtains the joy of all joys. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whatever the Lord does, he sees that as good; such is the devotional service he performs.<br>
  He sees friends and enemies as all the same; this is the sign of the Way of Yoga. ||2||<br>
  The all-pervading Lord is fully filling all places; why should I go anywhere else?<br>
  He is permeating and pervading within each and every heart; I am immersed in His Love, dyed in the color of His Love. ||3||<br>
  When the Lord of the Universe becomes kind and compassionate, then one enters the home of the Fearless Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 009</h2></center>
  His troubles and worries are ended in an instant; O Nanak, he merges in celestial peace. ||4||5||6||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Whoever I approach to ask for help, I find him full of his own troubles.<br>
  One who worships in his heart the Supreme Lord God, crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||<br>
  No one, except the Guru-Lord, can dispel our pain and sorrow.<br>
  Forsaking God, and serving another, one's honor, dignity and reputation are decreased. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Relatives, relations and family bound through Maya are of no avail.<br>
  The Lord's servant, although of lowly birth, is exalted. Associating with him, one obtains the fruits of his mind's desires. ||2||<br>
  Through corruption, one may obtain thousands and millions of enjoyments, but even so, his desires are not satisfied through them.<br>
  Remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord, millions of lights appear, and the incomprehensible is understood. ||3||<br>
  Wandering and roaming around, I have come to Your Door, Destroyer of fear, O Lord King.<br>
  Servant Nanak yearns for the dust of the feet of the Holy; in it, he finds peace. ||4||6||7||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Panch-Pada, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  First, he came to dwell in his mother's womb; leaving it, he came into the world.<br>
  Splendid mansions, beautiful gardens and palaces - none of these shall go with him. ||1||<br>
  All other greeds of the greedy are false.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has given me the Name of the Lord, which my soul has come to treasure. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Surrounded by dear friends, relatives, children, siblings and spouse, he laughs playfully.<br>
  But when the very last moment arrives, Death seizes him, while they merely look on. ||2||<br>
  By continual oppression and exploitation, he accumulates wealth, gold, silver and money,<br>
  but the load-bearer gets only paltry wages, while the rest of the money passes on to others. ||3||<br>
  He grabs and collects horses, elephants and chariots, and claims them as his own.<br>
  But when he sets out on the long journey, they will not go even one step with him. ||4||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my wealth; the Naam is my princely pleasure; the Naam is my family and helper.<br>
  The Guru has given Nanak the wealth of the Naam; it neither perishes, nor comes or goes. ||5||1||8||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Ti-Padas, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  My sorrows are ended, and I am filled with peace. The fire of desire within me has been quenched.<br>
  The True Guru has implanted the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me; it neither dies, nor goes anywhere. ||1||<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, the bonds of Maya are cut away.<br>
  When my God becomes kind and compassionate, one joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and is emancipated. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 010</h2></center>
  Twenty-four hours a day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, absorbed in loving devotional worship.<br>
  He remains unaffected by both fortune and misfortune, and he recognizes the Creator Lord. ||2||<br>
  The Lord saves those who belong to Him, and all pathways are opened to them.<br>
  Says Nanak, the value of the Merciful Lord God cannot be described. ||3||1||9||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Lord has sanctified the sinners and made them His own; all bow in reverence to Him.<br>
  No one asks about their ancestry and social status; instead, they yearn for the dust of their feet. ||1||<br>
  O Lord Master, such is Your Name.<br>
  You are called the Lord of all creation; You give Your unique support to Your servant. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak has obtained understanding; singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is his only support.<br>
  The Lord's servants, Naam Dayv, Trilochan, Kabeer and Ravi Daas the shoe-maker have been liberated. ||2||1||10||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  No one understands the Lord; who can understand His plans?<br>
  Shiva, Brahma and all the silent sages cannot understand the state of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  God's sermon is profound and unfathomable.<br>
  He is heard to be one thing, but He is understood to be something else again; He is beyond description and explanation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He Himself is the devotee, and He Himself is the Lord and Master; He is imbued with Himself.<br>
  Nanak's God is pervading and permeating everywhere; wherever he looks, He is there. ||2||2||11||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord has no plans, politics or other clever tricks.<br>
  Whenever the occasion arises, there, he meditates on the Lord. ||1||<br>
  It is the very nature of God to love His devotees;<br>
  He cherishes His servant, and caresses him as His own child. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord's servant sings the Kirtan of His Praises as his worship, deep meditation, self-discipline and religious observances.<br>
  Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of his Lord and Master, and has received the blessings of fearlessness and peace. ||2||3||12||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Worship the Lord in adoration, day and night, O my dear - do not delay for a moment.<br>
  Serve the Saints with loving faith, and set aside your pride and stubbornness. ||1||<br>
  The fascinating, playful Lord is my very breath of life and honor.<br>
  He abides in my heart; beholding His playful games, my mind is fascinated. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Remembering Him, my mind is in bliss, and the rust of my mind is removed.<br>
  The great honor of meeting the Lord cannot be described; O Nanak, it is infinite, beyond measure. ||2||4||13||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  They call themselves silent sages, Yogis and scholars of the Shaastras, but Maya has has them all under her control.<br>
  The three gods, and the 330,000,000 demi-gods, were astonished. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 011</h2></center>
  The power of Maya is pervading everywhere.<br>
  Her secret is known only by Guru's Grace - no one else knows it. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Conquering and conquering, she has conquered everywhere, and she clings to the whole world.<br>
  Says Nanak, she surrenders to the Holy Saint; becoming his servant, she falls at his feet. ||2||5||14||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  With my palms pressed together, I offer my prayer, meditating on my Lord and Master.<br>
  Giving me His hand, the Transcendent Lord has saved me, and erased all my sins. ||1||<br>
  The Lord and Master Himself has become merciful.<br>
  I have been emancipated, the embodiment of bliss; I am the child of the Lord of the Universe - He has carried me across. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meeting her Husband, the soul-bride sings the songs of joy, and celebrates her Lord and Master.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who has emancipated everyone. ||2||6||15||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Mother, father, siblings, children and relatives - their power is insignificant.<br>
  I have seen the many pleasures of Maya, but none goes with them in the end. ||1||<br>
  O Lord Master, other than You, no one is mine.<br>
  I am a worthless orphan, devoid of merit; I long for Your Support. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Your lotus feet; here and hereafter, Yours is the only power.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak has obtained the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; my obligations to all others are annulled. ||2||7||16||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He rids us of entanglements, doubt and emotional attachment, and leads us to love God.<br>
  He implants this instruction in our minds, for us to sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, in peace and poise. ||1||<br>
  O friend, the Saintly Guru is such a helper.<br>
  Meeting Him, the bonds of Maya are released, and one never forgets the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Practicing, practicing various actions in so many ways, I came to recognize this as the best way.<br>
  Joining the Company of the Holy, Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||8||17||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes; His value cannot be described.<br>
  He turns the king into a beggar in an instant, and He infuses splendor into the lowly. ||1||<br>
  Meditate forever on Your Lord.<br>
  Why should I feel worry or anxiety, when I am here for only a short time. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are my support, O my Perfect True Guru; my mind has taken to the protection of Your Sanctuary.<br>
  Nanak, I am a foolish and ignorant child; reach out to me with Your hand, Lord, and save me. ||2||9||18||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You are the Giver of all beings; please, come to dwell within my mind.<br>
  That heart, within which Your lotus feet are enshrined, suffers no darkness or doubt. ||1||<br>
  O Lord Master, wherever I remember You, there I find You.<br>
  Show Mercy to me, O God, Cherisher of all, that I may sing Your Praises forever. ||1||Pause||<br>
  With each and every breath, I contemplate Your Name; O God, I long for You alone.<br>
  O Nanak, my support is the Creator Lord; I have renounced all other hopes. ||2||10||19||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 012</h2></center>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Show Mercy to me, and grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. I sing Your Praises night and day.<br>
  With my hair, I wash the feet of Your slave; this is my life's purpose. ||1||<br>
  O Lord and Master, without You, there is no other at all.<br>
  O Lord, in my mind I remain conscious of You; with my tongue I worship You, and with my eyes, I gaze upon You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Merciful Lord, O Lord and Master of all, with my palms pressed together I pray to You.<br>
  Nanak, Your slave, chants Your Name, and is redeemed in the twinkling of an eye. ||2||11||20||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Overwhelming the realm of Brahma, the realm of Shiva and the realm of Indra, Maya has come running here.<br>
  But she cannot touch the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; she washes and massages their feet. ||1||<br>
  Now, I have come and entered the Lord's Sanctuary.<br>
  This awful fire has burned so many; the True Guru has cautioned me about it. ||1||Pause||<br>
  It clings to the necks of the Siddhas, and the seekers, the demi-gods, angels and mortals.<br>
  Servant Nanak has the support of God the Creator, who has millions of slaves like her. ||2||12||21||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  His bad reputation is erased, he is acclaimed all over the world, and he obtains a seat in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  The fear of death is removed in an instant, and he goes to the Lord's House in peace and bliss. ||1||<br>
  His works do not go in vain.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, remember your God in meditation; meditate on Him continually in your mind and body. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary, O Destroyer of the pains of the poor; whatever You give me, God, that is what I receive.<br>
  Nanak is imbued with the love of Your lotus feet; O Lord, please preserve the honor of Your slave. ||2||13||22||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The all-sustaining Lord is the Giver of all beings; His devotional worship is an overflowing treasure.<br>
  Service to Him is not wasted; in an instant, He emancipates. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, immerse yourself in the Lord's lotus feet.<br>
  Seek from Him, who is worshipped by all beings. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary, O Creator Lord; You, O God, are the support of my breath of life.<br>
  He who is protected by You, O Helper Lord - what can the world do to him? ||2||14||23||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord Himself has protected the honor of His humble servant.<br>
  The Guru has given the medicine of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, and all afflictions are gone. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Transcendent Lord, in His Mercy, has preserved Har Gobind.<br>
  The disease is over, and there is joy all around; we ever contemplate the Glories of God. ||1||<br>
  My Creator Lord has made me His own; such is the glorious greatness of the Perfect Guru.<br>
  Guru Nanak laid the immovable foundation, which grows higher and higher each day. ||2||15||24||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You never focused your consciousness on the Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 013</h2></center>
  You have spent your life engaged in worldly pursuits; you have not sung the Glorious Praises of the treasure of the Naam. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Shell by shell, you accumulate money; in various ways, you work for this.<br>
  Forgetting God, you suffer awful pain beyond measure, and you are consumed by the Great Enticer, Maya. ||1||<br>
  Show Mercy to me, O my Lord and Master, and do not hold me to account for my actions.<br>
  O merciful and compassionate Lord God, ocean of peace, Nanak has taken to Your Sanctuary, Lord. ||2||16||25||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  With your tongue, chant the Lord's Name, Raam, Raam.<br>
  Renounce other false occupations, and vibrate forever on the Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The One Name is the support of His devotees; in this world, and in the world hereafter, it is their anchor and support.<br>
  In His mercy and kindness, the Guru has given me the divine wisdom of God, and a discriminating intellect. ||1||<br>
  The all-powerful Lord is the Creator, the Cause of causes; He is the Master of wealth - I seek His Sanctuary.<br>
  Liberation and worldly success come from the dust of the feet of the Holy Saints; Nanak has obtained the Lord's treasure. ||2||17||26||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House, Chau-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Give up all your clever tricks, and seek the Sanctuary of the Holy Saint.<br>
  Sing the Glorious Praises of the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord. ||1||<br>
  O my consciousness, contemplate and adore the Lotus Feet of the Lord.<br>
  You shall obtain total peace and salvation, and all troubles shall depart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Mother, father, children, friends and siblings - without the Lord, none of them are real.<br>
  Here and hereafter, He is the companion of the soul; He is pervading everywhere. ||2||<br>
  Millions of plans, tricks, and efforts are of no use, and serve no purpose.<br>
  In the Sanctuary of the Holy, one becomes immaculate and pure, and obtains salvation, through the Name of God. ||3||<br>
  God is profound and merciful, lofty and exalted; He gives Sanctuary to the Holy.<br>
  He alone obtains the Lord, O Nanak, who is blessed with such pre-ordained destiny to meet Him. ||4||1||27||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Serve your Guru forever, and chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  With each and every breath, worship the Lord, Har, Har, in adoration, and the anxiety of your mind will be dispelled. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, chant the Name of God.<br>
  You shall be blessed with peace, poise and pleasure, and you shall find the immaculate place. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, redeem your mind, and adore the Lord, twenty-four hours a day.<br>
  Sexual desire, anger and egotism will be dispelled, and all troubles shall end. ||2||<br>
  The Lord Master is immovable, immortal and inscrutable; seek His Sanctuary.<br>
  Worship in adoration the lotus feet of the Lord in your heart, and center your consciousness lovingly on Him alone. ||3||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God has shown mercy to me, and He Himself has forgiven me.<br>
  The Lord has given me His Name, the treasure of peace; O Nanak, meditate on that God. ||4||2||28||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I meditate on God, and my doubts are gone.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 014</h2></center>
  Pain, ignorance and fear have left me, and my sins have been dispelled. ||1||<br>
  My mind is filled with love for the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Meeting the Holy Saint, under His Instruction, I meditate on the Lord of the Universe, in the most immaculate way. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Chanting, deep meditation and various rituals are contained in the fruitful meditative remembrance of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Showing His Mercy, the Lord Himself has protected me, and all my works have been brought to fruition. ||2||<br>
  With each and every breath, may I never forget You, O God, Almighty Lord and Master.<br>
  How can my tongue describe Your countless virtues? They are uncountable, and forever indescribable. ||3||<br>
  You are the Remover of the pains of the poor, the Savior, the Compassionate Lord, the Bestower of Mercy.<br>
  Remembering the Naam in meditation, the state of eternal dignity is obtained; Nanak has grasped the protection of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||3||29||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Intellectual egotism and great love for Maya are the most serious chronic diseases.<br>
  The Lord's Name is the medicine, which is potent to cure everything. The Guru has given me the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  My mind and body yearn for the dust of the Lord's humble servants.<br>
  With it, the sins of millions of incarnations are obliterated. O Lord of the Universe, please fulfill my desire. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, one is hounded by dreadful desires.<br>
  Through the Guru's spiritual wisdom, we sing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and the noose of death is cut away. ||2||<br>
  Those who are cheated by sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment suffer reincarnation forever.<br>
  By loving devotional worship to God, and meditative remembrance of the Lord of the World, one's wandering in reincarnation is ended. ||3||<br>
  Friends, children, spouses and well-wishers are burnt by the three fevers.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, one's miseries are ended, as one meets the Saintly servants of the Lord. ||4||<br>
  Wandering around in all directions, they cry out, "Nothing can save us!"<br>
  Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Lotus Feet of the Infinite Lord; he holds fast to their Support. ||5||4||30||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House, Du-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Worship and adore the Lord of wealth, the fulfilling vision, the Almighty Cause of causes.<br>
  Uttering His Praises, and hearing of His infinite glory, you shall never suffer separation from Him again. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, worship the Lord's Lotus Feet.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance, strife and sorrow are ended, and the noose of the Messenger of Death is snapped. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, and your enemies shall be consumed; there is no other way.<br>
  Show Mercy, O my God, and bestow upon Nanak the taste of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||1||31||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You are the Almighty Lord, the Giver of Sanctuary, the Destroyer of pain, the King of happiness.<br>
  Troubles depart, and fear and doubt are dispelled, singing the Glorious Praises of the Immaculate Lord God. ||1||<br>
  O Lord of the Universe, without You, there is no other place.<br>
  Show Mercy to me, O Supreme Lord Master, that I may chant Your Name. ||Pause||<br>
  Serving the True Guru, I am attached to the Lord's Lotus Feet; by great good fortune, I have embraced love for Him.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 015</h2></center>
  My heart lotus blossoms forth in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; I have renounced evil-mindedness and intellectualism. ||2||<br>
  One who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, twenty-four hours a day, and remembers the Lord in meditation, who is Kind to the poor,<br>
  saves himself, and redeems all his generations; all of his bonds are released. ||3||<br>
  I take the Support of Your Feet, O God, O Lord and Master; you are with me through and through, God.<br>
  Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary, God; giving him His hand, the Lord has protected him. ||4||2||32||<br>
  Goojaree, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  In the one village of the body, live the five thieves; they have been warned, but they still go out stealing.<br>
  One who keeps his assets safe from the three modes and the ten passions, O Nanak, attains liberation and emancipation. ||1||<br>
  Center your mind on the all-pervading Lord, the Wearer of garlands of the jungles.<br>
  Let your rosary be the chanting of the Lord's Name in your heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Its roots extend upwards, and its branches reach down; the four Vedas are attached to it.<br>
  He alone reaches this tree with ease, O Nanak, who remains wakeful in the Love of the Supreme Lord God. ||2||<br>
  The Elysian Tree is the courtyard of my house; in it are the flowers, leaves and stems of reality.<br>
  Meditate on the self-existent, immaculate Lord, whose Light is pervading everywhere; renounce all your worldly entanglements. ||3||<br>
  Listen, O seekers of Truth - Nanak begs you to renounce the traps of Maya.<br>
  Reflect within your mind, that by enshrining love for the One Lord, you shall not be subject to birth and death again. ||4||<br>
  He alone is said to be a Guru, he alone is said to be a Sikh, and he alone is said to be a physician, who knows the patient's illness.<br>
  He is not affected by actions, responsibilities and entanglements; in the entanglements of his household, he maintains the detachment of Yoga. ||5||<br>
  He renounces sexual desire, anger, egotism, greed, attachment and Maya.<br>
  Within his mind, he meditates on the reality of the Imperishable Lord; by Guru's Grace he finds Him. ||6||<br>
  Spiritual wisdom and meditation are all said to be God's gifts; all of the demons are turned white before him.<br>
  He enjoys the taste of the honey of God's lotus; he remains awake, and does not fall asleep. ||7||<br>
  This lotus is very deep; its leaves are the nether regions, and it is connected to the whole universe.<br>
  Under Guru's Instruction, I shall not have to enter the womb again; I have renounced the poison of corruption, and I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||8||1||<br>
  Goojaree, First Mehl:<br>
  Those who beg of God the Great Giver - their numbers cannot be counted.<br>
  You, Almighty True Lord, fulfill the desires within their hearts. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord, chanting, deep meditation, self-discipline and truth are my foundations.<br>
  Bless me with Your Name, Lord, that I may find peace. Your devotional worship is a treasure over-flowing. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Some remain absorbed in Samaadhi, their minds fixed lovingly on the One Lord; they reflect only on the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  In that state, there is no water, land, earth or sky; only the Creator Lord Himself exists. ||2||<br>
  There is no intoxication of Maya there, and no shadow, nor the infinite light of the sun or the moon.<br>
  The eyes within the mind which see everything - with one glance, they see the three worlds. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 016</h2></center>
  He created air, water and fire, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva - the whole creation.<br>
  All are beggars; You alone are the Great Giver, God. You give Your gifts according to Your own considerations. ||4||<br>
  Three hundred thirty million gods beg of God the Master; even as He gives, His treasures are never exhausted.<br>
  Nothing can be contained in a vessel turned upside-down; Ambrosial Nectar pours into the upright one. ||5||<br>
  The Siddhas in Samaadhi beg for wealth and miracles, and proclaim His victory.<br>
  As is the thirst within their minds, so is the water which You give to them. ||6||<br>
  The most fortunate ones serve their Guru; there is no difference between the Divine Guru and the Lord.<br>
  The Messenger of Death cannot see those who come to realize within their minds the contemplative meditation of the Word of the Shabad. ||7||<br>
  I shall never ask anything else of the Lord; please, bless me with the Love of Your Immaculate Name.<br>
  Nanak, the song-bird, begs for the Ambrosial Water; O Lord, shower Your Mercy upon him, and bless him with Your Praise. ||8||2||<br>
  Goojaree, First Mehl:<br>
  O Dear One, he is born, and then dies; he continues coming and going; without the Guru, he is not emancipated.<br>
  Those mortals who become Gurmukhs are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Name, they obtain salvation and honor. ||1||<br>
  O Siblings of Destiny, focus your consciousness lovingly on the Lord's Name.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, one begs of the Lord God; such is the glorious greatness of the Naam. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Dear One, so many wear various religious robes, for begging and filling their bellies.<br>
  Without devotional worship to the Lord, O mortal, there can be no peace. Without the Guru, pride does not depart. ||2||<br>
  O Dear One, death hangs constantly over his head. Incarnation after incarnation, it is his enemy.<br>
  Those who are attuned to the True Word of the Shabad are saved. The True Guru has imparted this understanding. ||3||<br>
  In the Guru's Sanctuary, the Messenger of Death cannot see the mortal, or torture him.<br>
  I am imbued with the Imperishable and Immaculate Lord Master, and lovingly attached to the Fearless Lord. ||4||<br>
  O Dear One, implant the Naam within me; lovingly attached to the Naam, I lean on the True Guru's Support.<br>
  Whatever pleases Him, He does; no one can erase His actions. ||5||<br>
  O Dear One, I have hurried to the Sanctuary of the Guru; I have no love for any other except You.<br>
  I constantly call upon the One Lord; since the very beginning, and throughout the ages, He has been my help and support. ||6||<br>
  O Dear One, please preserve the Honor of Your Name; I am hand and glove with You.<br>
  Bless me with Your Mercy, and reveal to me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Guru. Through the Word of the Shabad, I have burnt away my ego. ||7||<br>
  O Dear One, what should I ask of You? Nothing appears permanent; whoever comes into this world shall depart.<br>
  Bless Nanak with the wealth of the Naam, to adorn his heart and neck. ||8||3||<br>
  Goojaree, First Mehl:<br>
  O Dear One, I am not high or low or in the middle. I am the Lord's slave, and I seek the Lord's Sanctuary.<br>
  Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am detached from the world; I have forgotten sorrow, separation and disease. ||1||<br>
  O Siblings of Destiny, by Guru's Grace, I perform devotional worship to my Lord and Master.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 017</h2></center>
  One whose heart is filled with the Hymns of the True Guru, obtains the Pure Lord. He is not under the power of the Messenger of Death, nor does he owe Death anything. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord with his tongue, and abides with God; he does whatever pleases the Lord.<br>
  Without the Lord's Name, life passes in vain in the world, and every moment is useless. ||2||<br>
  The false have no place of rest, either inside or outside; the slanderer does not find salvation.<br>
  Even if one is resentful, God does not withhold His blessings; day by day, they increase. ||3||<br>
  No one can take away the Guru's gifts; my Lord and Master Himself has given them.<br>
  The black-faced slanderers, with slander in their mouths, do not appreciate the Guru's gifts. ||4||<br>
  God forgives and blends with Himself those who take to His Sanctuary; He does not delay for an instant.<br>
  He is the source of bliss, the Greatest Lord; through the True Guru, we are united in His Union. ||5||<br>
  Through His Kindness, the Kind Lord pervades us; through Guru's Teachings, our wanderings cease.<br>
  Touching the philosopher's stone, metal is transformed into gold. Such is the glorious greatness of the Society of the Saints. ||6||<br>
  The Lord is the immaculate water; the mind is the bather, and the True Guru is the bath attendant, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  That humble being who joins the Sat Sangat shall not be consigned to reincarnation again; his light merges into the Light. ||7||<br>
  You are the Great Primal Lord, the infinite tree of life; I am a bird perched on Your branches.<br>
  Grant to Nanak the Immaculate Naam; throughout the ages, he sings the Praises of the Shabad. ||8||4||<br>
  Goojaree, First Mehl, Fourth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The devotees worship the Lord in loving adoration. They thirst for the True Lord, with infinite affection.<br>
  They tearfully beg and implore the Lord; in love and affection, their consciousness is at peace. ||1||<br>
  Chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O my mind, and take to His Sanctuary.<br>
  The Lord's Name is the boat to cross over the world-ocean. Practice such a way of life. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O mind, even death wishes you well, when you remember the Lord through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  The intellect receives the treasure, the knowledge of reality and supreme bliss, by repeating the Lord's Name in the mind. ||2||<br>
  The fickle consciousness wanders around chasing after wealth; it is intoxicated with worldly love and emotional attachment.<br>
  Devotion to the Naam is permanently implanted within the mind, when it is attuned to the Guru's Teachings and His Shabad. ||3||<br>
  Wandering around, doubt is not dispelled; afflicted by reincarnation, the world is being ruined.<br>
  The Lord's eternal throne is free of this affliction; he is truly wise, who takes the Naam as his deep meditation. ||4||<br>
  This world is engrossed in attachment and transitory love; it suffers the terrible pains of birth and death.<br>
  Run to the Sanctuary of the True Guru, chant the Lord's Name in your heart, and you shall swim across. ||5||<br>
  Following the Guru's Teaching, the mind becomes stable; the mind accepts it, and reflects upon it in peaceful poise.<br>
  That mind is pure, which enshrines Truth within, and the most excellent jewel of spiritual wisdom. ||6||<br>
  By the Fear of God, and Love of God, and by devotion, man crosses over the terrifying world-ocean, focusing his consciousness on the Lord's Lotus Feet.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 018</h2></center>
  The Name of the Lord, the most pure and sacred, is within my heart; this body is Your Sanctuary, Lord. ||7||<br>
  The waves of greed and avarice are subdued, by treasuring the Lord's Name in the mind.<br>
  Subdue my mind, O Pure Immaculate Lord; says Nanak, I have entered Your Sanctuary. ||8||1||5||<br>
  Goojaree, Third Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I dance, and make this mind dance as well.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I eliminate my self-conceit.<br>
  One who keeps his consciousness focused on the Lord is liberated; he obtains the fruits of his desires. ||1||<br>
  So dance, O mind, before your Guru.<br>
  If you dance according to the Guru's Will, you shall obtain peace, and in the end, the fear of death shall leave you. ||Pause||<br>
  One whom the Lord Himself causes to dance, is called a devotee. He Himself links us to His Love.<br>
  He Himself sings, He Himself listens, and He puts this blind mind on the right path. ||2||<br>
  One who dances night and day, and banishes Shakti's Maya, enters the House of the Lord Shiva, where there is no sleep.<br>
  The world is asleep in Maya, the house of Shakti; it dances, jumps and sings in duality. The self-willed manmukh has no devotion. ||3||<br>
  The angels, mortals, renunciates, ritualists, silent sages and beings of spiritual wisdom dance.<br>
  The Siddhas and seekers, lovingly focused on the Lord, dance, as do the Gurmukhs, whose minds dwell in reflective meditation. ||4||<br>
  The planets and solar systems dance in the three qualities, as do those who bear love for You, Lord.<br>
  The beings and creatures all dance, and the four sources of creation dance. ||5||<br>
  They alone dance, who are pleasing to You, and who, as Gurmukhs, embrace love for the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  They are devotees, with the essence of spiritual wisdom, who obey the Hukam of His Command. ||6||<br>
  This is devotional worship, that one loves the True Lord; without service, one cannot be a devotee.<br>
  If one remains dead while yet alive, he reflects upon the Shabad, and then, he obtains the True Lord. ||7||<br>
  So many people dance for the sake of Maya; how rare are those who contemplate reality.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, that humble being obtains You, Lord, upon whom You show Mercy. ||8||<br>
  If I forget the True Lord, even for an instant, that time passes in vain.<br>
  With each and every breath, constantly remember the Lord; He Himself shall forgive you, according to His Will. ||9||<br>
  They alone dance, who are pleasing to Your Will, and who, as Gurmukhs, contemplate the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Says Nanak, they alone find celestial peace, whom You bless with Your Grace. ||10||1||6||<br>
  Goojaree, Fourth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Without the Lord, my soul cannot survive, like an infant without milk.<br>
  The inaccessible and incomprehensible Lord God is obtained by the Gurmukh; I am a sacrifice to my True Guru. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is a boat to carry you across.<br>
  The Gurmukhs obtain the Ambrosial Water of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. You bless them with Your Grace. ||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 019</h2></center>
  Sanak, Sanandan and Naarad the sage serve You; night and day, they continue to chant Your Name, O Lord of the jungle.<br>
  Slave Prahlaad sought Your Sanctuary, and You saved his honor. ||2||<br>
  The One unseen immaculate Lord is pervading everywhere, as is the Light of the Lord.<br>
  All are beggars, You alone are the Great Giver. Reaching out our hands, we beg from You. ||3||<br>
  The speech of the humble devotees is sublime; they sing continually the wondrous, Unspoken Speech of the Lord.<br>
  Their lives become fruitful; they save themselves, and all their generations. ||4||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in duality and evil-mindedness; within them is the darkness of attachment.<br>
  They do not love the sermon of the humble Saints, and they are drowned along with their families. ||5||<br>
  By slandering, the slanderer washes the filth off others; he is an eater of filth, and a worshipper of Maya.<br>
  He indulges in the slander of the humble Saints; he is neither on this shore, nor the shore beyond. ||6||<br>
  All this worldly drama is set in motion by the Creator Lord; He has infused His almighty strength into all.<br>
  The thread of the One Lord runs through the world; when He pulls out this thread, the One Creator alone remains. ||7||<br>
  With their tongues, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and savor Them. They place the sublime essence of the Lord upon their tongues, and savor it.<br>
  O Nanak, other than the Lord, I ask for nothing else; I am in love with the Love of the Lord's sublime essence. ||8||1||7||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Among kings, You are called the King. Among land-lords, You are the Land-lord.<br>
  Among masters, You are the Master. Among tribes, Yours is the Supreme Tribe. ||1||<br>
  My Father is wealthy, deep and profound.<br>
  What praises should I chant, O Creator Lord? Beholding You, I am wonder-struck. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Among the peaceful, You are called the Peaceful One. Among givers, You are the Greatest Giver.<br>
  Among the glorious, You are said to be the Most Glorious. Among revellers, You are the Reveller. ||2||<br>
  Among warriors, You are called the Warrior. Among indulgers, You are the Indulger.<br>
  Among householders, You are the Great Householder. Among yogis, You are the Yogi. ||3||<br>
  Among creators, You are called the Creator. Among the cultured, You are the Cultured One.<br>
  Among bankers, You are the True Banker. Among merchants, You are the Merchant. ||4||<br>
  Among courts, Yours is the Court. Yours is the Most Sublime of Sanctuaries.<br>
  The extent of Your wealth cannot be determined. Your Coins cannot be counted. ||5||<br>
  Among names, Your Name, God, is the most respected. Among the wise, You are the Wisest.<br>
  Among ways, Yours, God, is the Best Way. Among purifying baths, Yours is the Most Purifying. ||6||<br>
  Among spiritual powers, Yours, O God, are the Spiritual Powers. Among actions, Yours are the Greatest Actions.<br>
  Among wills, Your Will, God, is the Supreme Will. Of commands, Yours is the Supreme Command. ||7||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 020</h2></center>
  As You cause me to speak, so do I speak, O Lord Master. What other power do I have?<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, sing His Praises; they are so very dear to God. ||8||1||8||<br>
  Goojaree, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O Lord, Man-lion Incarnate, Companion to the poor, Divine Purifier of sinners;<br>
  O Destroyer of fear and dread, Merciful Lord Master, Treasure of Excellence, fruitful is Your service. ||1||<br>
  O Lord, Cherisher of the World, Guru-Lord of the Universe.<br>
  I seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet, O Merciful Lord. Carry me across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Dispeller of sexual desire and anger, Eliminator of intoxication and attachment, Destroyer of ego, Honey of the mind;<br>
  set me free from birth and death, O Sustainer of the earth, and preserve my honor, O Embodiment of supreme bliss. ||2||<br>
  The many waves of desire for Maya are burnt away, when the Guru's spiritual wisdom is enshrined in the heart, through the Guru's Mantra.<br>
  Destroy my egotism, O Merciful Lord; dispel my anxiety, O Infinite Primal Lord. ||3||<br>
  Remember in meditation the Almighty Lord, every moment and every instant; meditate on God in the celestial peace of Samaadhi.<br>
  O Merciful to the meek, perfectly blissful Lord, I beg for the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||4||<br>
  Emotional attachment is false, desire is filthy, and longing is corrupt.<br>
  Please, preserve my faith, dispel these doubts from my mind, and save me, O Formless Lord. ||5||<br>
  They have become wealthy, loaded with the treasures of the Lord's riches; they were lacking even clothes.<br>
  The idiotic, foolish and senseless people have become virtuous and patient, receiving the Gracious Glance of the Lord of wealth. ||6||<br>
  Become Jivan-Mukta, liberated while yet alive, by meditating on the Lord of the Universe, O mind, and maintaining faith in Him in your heart.<br>
  Show kindness and mercy to all beings, and realize that the Lord is pervading everywhere; this is the way of life of the enlightened soul, the supreme swan. ||7||<br>
  He grants the Blessed Vision of His Darshan to those who listen to His Praises, and who, with their tongues, chant His Name.<br>
  They are part and parcel, life and limb with the Lord God; O Nanak, they feel the Touch of God, the Savior of sinners. ||8||1||2||5||1||1||2||57||<br>
  Goojaree Ki Vaar, Third Mehl, Sung In The Tune Of The Vaar Of Sikandar &amp; Biraahim:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  This world perishing in attachment and possessiveness; no one knows the way of life.<br>
  One who walks in harmony with the Guru's Will, obtains the supreme status of life.<br>
  Those humble beings who focus their consciousness on the Lord's Feet, live forever and ever.<br>
  O Nanak, by His Grace, the Lord abides in the minds of the Gurmukhs, who merge in celestial bliss. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Within the self is the pain of doubt; engrossed in worldly affairs, they are killing themselves.<br>
  Asleep in the love of duality, they never wake up; they are in love with, and attached to Maya.<br>
  They do not think of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and they do not contemplate the Word of the Shabad. This is the conduct of the self-willed manmukhs.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 021</h2></center>
  They do not obtain the Lord's Name, and they waste away their lives in vain; O Nanak, the Messenger of Death punishes and dishonors them. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He created Himself - at that time, there was no other.<br>
  He consulted Himself for advice, and what He did came to pass.<br>
  At that time, there were no Akaashic Ethers, no nether regions, nor the three worlds.<br>
  At that time, only the Formless Lord Himself existed - there was no creation.<br>
  As it pleased Him, so did He act; without Him, there was no other. ||1||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  My Master is eternal. He is seen by practicing the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  He never perishes; He does not come or go in reincarnation.<br>
  So serve Him, forever and ever; He is contained in all.<br>
  Why serve another who is born, and then dies?<br>
  Fruitless is the life of those who do not know their Lord and Master, and who center their consciousness on others.<br>
  O Nanak, it cannot be known, how much punishment the Creator shall inflict on them. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Meditate on the True Name; the True Lord is pervading everywhere.<br>
  O Nanak, by understanding the Hukam of the Lord's Command, one becomes acceptable, and then obtains the fruit of Truth.<br>
  He wanders around babbling and speaking, but he does not understand the Lord's Command at all. He is blind, the falsest of the false. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Creating union and separation, He laid the foundations of the Universe.<br>
  By His Command, the Lord of Light fashioned the Universe, and infused His Divine Light into it.<br>
  From the Lord of Light, all light originates. The True Guru proclaims the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, under the influence of the three dispositions, were put to their tasks.<br>
  He created the root of Maya, and the peace obtained in the fourth state of consciousness. ||2||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  That alone is chanting, and that alone is deep meditation, which is pleasing to the True Guru.<br>
  Pleasing the True Guru, glorious greatness is obtained.<br>
  O Nanak, renouncing self-conceit, one merges into the Guru. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  How rare are those who receive the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  O Nanak, he alone receives it, whom the Lord Himself blesses with glorious greatness. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Emotional attachment to Maya is spiritual darkness; it is very difficult and such a heavy load.<br>
  Loaded with so very many stones of sin, how can the boat cross over?<br>
  Those who are attuned to the Lord's devotional worship night and day are carried across.<br>
  Under the Instruction of the Guru's Shabad, one sheds egotism and corruption, and the mind becomes immaculate.<br>
  Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; the Lord, Har, Har, is our Saving Grace. ||3||<br>
  Shalok:<br>
  O Kabeer, the gate of liberation is narrow, less than one-tenth of a mustard seed.<br>
  The mind has become as big as an elephant; how can it pass through this gate?<br>
  If one meets such a True Guru, by His Pleasure, He shows His Mercy.<br>
  Then, the gate of liberation becomes wide open, and the soul easily passes through. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, the gate of liberation is very narrow; only the very tiny can pass through.<br>
  Through egotism, the mind has become bloated. How can it pass through?<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, egotism departs, and one is filled with the Divine Light.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 022</h2></center>
  Then, this soul is liberated forever, and it remains absorbed in celestial bliss. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  God created the Universe, and He keeps it under His power.<br>
  God cannot be obtained by counting; the mortal wanders in doubt.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, one remains dead while yet alive; understanding Him, he is absorbed in the Truth.<br>
  Through the Word of the Shabad, egotism is eradicated, and one is united in the Lord's Union.<br>
  He knows everything, and Himself does everything; beholding His Creation, He rejoices. ||4||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  One who has not focused his consciousness on the True Guru, and into whose mind the Naam does not come<br>
  - cursed is such a life. What has he gained by coming into the world?<br>
  Maya is false capital; in an instant, its false covering falls off.<br>
  When it slips from his hand, his body turns black, and his face withers away.<br>
  Those who focus their consciousness on the True Guru - peace comes to abide in their minds.<br>
  They meditate on the Name of the Lord with love; they are lovingly attuned to the Name of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the True Guru has bestowed upon them the wealth, which remains contained within their hearts.<br>
  They are imbued with supreme love; its color increases day by day. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Maya is a serpent, clinging to the world.<br>
  Whoever serves her, she ultimately devours.<br>
  The Gurmukh is a snake-charmer; he has trampled her and thrown her down, and crushed her underfoot.<br>
  O Nanak, they alone are saved, who remain lovingly absorbed in the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The minstrel cries out, and God hears him.<br>
  He is comforted within his mind, and he obtains the Perfect Lord.<br>
  Whatever destiny is pre-ordained by the Lord, those are the deeds he does.<br>
  When the Lord and Master becomes Merciful, then one obtains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence as his home.<br>
  That God of mine is so very great; as Gurmukh, I have met Him. ||5||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  There is One Lord God of all; He remains ever-present.<br>
  O Nanak, if one does not obey the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then within one's own home, the Lord seems far away.<br>
  They alone obey the Lord's Command, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace.<br>
  Obeying His Command, one obtains peace, and becomes the happy, loving soul-bride. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  She who does not love her Husband Lord, burns and wastes away all through the night of her life.<br>
  O Nanak, the soul-brides dwell in peace; they have the Lord, their King, as their Husband. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Roaming over the entire world, I have seen that the Lord is the only Giver.<br>
  The Lord cannot be obtained by any device at all; He is the Architect of Karma.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and the Lord is easily revealed within.<br>
  The fire of desire within is quenched, and one bathes in the Lord's Pool of Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  The great greatness of the great Lord God - the Gurmukh speaks of this. ||6||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  What love is this between the body and soul, which ends when the body falls?<br>
  Why feed it by telling lies? When you leave, it does not go with you.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 023</h2></center>
  The body is merely blind dust; go, and ask the soul.<br>
  The soul answers, "I am enticed by Maya, and so I come and go, again and again."<br>
  O Nanak, I do not know my Lord and Master's Command, by which I would merge in the Truth. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the only permanent wealth; all other wealth comes and goes.<br>
  Thieves cannot steal this wealth, nor can robbers take it away.<br>
  This wealth of the Lord is embedded in the soul, and with the soul, it shall depart.<br>
  It is obtained from the Perfect Guru; the self-willed manmukhs do not receive it.<br>
  Blessed are the traders, O Nanak, who have come to earn the wealth of the Naam. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  My Master is so very great, true, profound and unfathomable.<br>
  The whole world is under His power; everything is the projection of Him.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the eternal wealth is obtained, bringing peace and patience to the mind.<br>
  By His Grace, the Lord dwells in the mind, and one meets the Brave Guru.<br>
  The virtuous praise the ever-stable, permanent, perfect Lord. ||7||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Cursed is the life of those who forsake and throw away the peace of the Lord's Name, and suffer pain instead by practicing ego and sin.<br>
  The ignorant self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in the love of Maya; they have no understanding at all.<br>
  In this world and in the world beyond, they do not find peace; in the end, they depart regretting and repenting.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, one may meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and egotism departs from within him.<br>
  O Nanak, one who has such pre-ordained destiny, comes and falls at the Guru's Feet. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The self-willed manmukh is like the inverted lotus; he has neither devotional worship, nor the Lord's Name.<br>
  He remains engrossed in material wealth, and his efforts are false.<br>
  His consciousness is not softened within, and the words from his mouth are insipid.<br>
  He does not mingle with the righteous; within him are falsehood and selfishness.<br>
  O Nanak, the Creator Lord has arranged things, so that the self-willed manmukhs are drowned by telling lies, while the Gurmukhs are saved by chanting the Lord's Name. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Without understanding, one must wander around the cycle of reincarnation, and continue coming and going.<br>
  One who has not served the True Guru, shall depart regretting and repenting in the end.<br>
  But if the Lord shows His Mercy, one finds the Guru, and ego is banished from within.<br>
  Hunger and thirst depart from within, and peace comes to dwell in the mind.<br>
  Forever and ever, praise Him with love in your heart. ||8||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  One who serves his True Guru, is worshipped by everyone.<br>
  Of all efforts, the supreme effort is the attainment of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Peace and tranquility come to dwell within the mind; meditating within the heart, there comes a lasting peace.<br>
  The Ambrosial Amrit is his food, and the Ambrosial Amrit is his clothes; O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, greatness is obtained. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  O mind, listen to the Guru's Teachings, and you shall obtain the treasure of virtue.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 024</h2></center>
  The Lord, the Giver of peace, shall dwell in your mind, and your egotism and pride shall depart.<br>
  O Nanak, when the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, then, night and day, one centers his meditation on the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Gurmukh is totally truthful, content and pure.<br>
  Deception and wickedness have departed from within him, and he easily conquers his mind.<br>
  There, the Divine Light and the essence of bliss are manifest, and ignorance is eliminated.<br>
  Night and day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and manifests the excellence of the Lord.<br>
  The One Lord is the Giver of all; the Lord alone is our friend. ||9||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  One who understands God, who lovingly centers his mind on the Lord night and day, is called a Brahmin.<br>
  Consulting the True Guru, he practices Truth and self-restraint, and he is rid of the disease of ego.<br>
  He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and gathers in His Praises; his light is blended with the Light.<br>
  In this world, one who knows God is very rare; eradicating ego, he is absorbed in God.<br>
  O Nanak, meeting him, peace is obtained; night and day, he meditates on the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Within the ignorant self-willed manmukh is deception; with his tongue, he speaks lies.<br>
  Practicing deception, he does not please the Lord God, who always sees and hears with natural ease.<br>
  In the love of duality, he goes to instruct the world, but he is engrossed in the poison of Maya and attachment to pleasure.<br>
  By doing so, he suffers in constant pain; he is born and then dies, and comes and goes again and again.<br>
  His doubts do not leave him at all, and he rots away in manure.<br>
  One, unto whom my Lord Master shows His Mercy, listens to the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  He meditates on the Lord's Name, and sings the Lord's Name; in the end, the Lord's Name will deliver him. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Those who obey the Hukam of the Lord's Command, are the perfect persons in the world.<br>
  They serve their Lord Master, and reflect upon the Perfect Word of the Shabad.<br>
  They serve the Lord, and love the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
  They attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, as they eradicate egotism from within.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs remain united with Him, chanting the Name of the Lord, and enshrining it within their hearts. ||10||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Gurmukh meditates on the Lord; the celestial sound-current resounds within him, and he focuses his consciousness on the True Name.<br>
  The Gurmukh remains imbued with the Lord's Love, night and day; his mind is pleased with the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Gurmukh beholds the Lord, the Gurmukh speaks of the Lord, and the Gurmukh naturally loves the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh attains spiritual wisdom, and the pitch-black darkness of ignorance is dispelled.<br>
  One who is blessed by the Perfect Lord's Grace - as Gurmukh, he meditates on the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who do not serve the True Guru do not embrace love for the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  They do not meditate on the Celestial Naam, the Name of the Lord - why did they even bother to come into the world?<br>
  Time and time again, they are reincarnated, and they rot away forever in manure.<br>
  They are attached to false greed; they are not on this shore, nor on the one beyond.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 025</h2></center>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved; the Creator Lord unites them with Himself. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The devotees look beauteous in the True Court of the Lord; they abide in the True Word of the Shabad.<br>
  The Lord's Love wells up in them; they are attracted by the Lord's Love.<br>
  They abide in the Lord's Love, they remain imbued with the Lord's Love forever, and with their tongues, they drink in the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  Fruitful are the lives of those Gurmukhs who recognize the Lord and enshrine Him in their hearts.<br>
  Without the Guru, they wander around crying out in misery; in the love of duality, they are ruined. ||11||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the devotees earn the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; they obtain the supreme status of the Lord.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, they enshrine the Lord's Name in their minds, and they meditate on the Naam, night and day.<br>
  Within the home of their own selves, they remain unattached, through the Guru's Teachings; they burn away egotism and emotional attachment.<br>
  They save themselves, and they save the whole world. Blessed are the mothers who gave birth to them.<br>
  He alone finds such a True Guru, upon whose forehead the Lord inscribed such pre-ordained destiny.<br>
  Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to his Guru; when he was wandering in doubt, He placed him on the Path. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Beholding Maya with her three dispositions, he goes astray; he is like the moth, which sees the flame, and is consumed.<br>
  The mistaken, deluded Pandits gaze upon Maya, and watch to see whether anyone has offered them something.<br>
  In the love of duality, they read continually about sin, while the Lord has withheld His Name from them.<br>
  The Yogis, the wandering hermits and the Sannyaasees have gone astray; their egotism and arrogance have increased greatly.<br>
  They do not accept the true donations of clothes and food, and their lives are ruined by their stubborn minds.<br>
  Among these, he alone is a man of poise, who, as Gurmukh, meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Unto whom should servant Nanak speak and complain? All act as the Lord causes them to act. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Emotional attachment to Maya, sexual desire, anger and egotism are demons.<br>
  Because of them, mortals are subject to death; above their heads hangs the heavy club of the Messenger of Death.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs, in love with duality, are led onto the path of Death.<br>
  In the City of Death, they are tied up and beaten, and no one hears their cries.<br>
  One who is blessed by the Lord's Grace meets the Guru; as Gurmukh, he is emancipated. ||12||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  By egotism and pride, the self-willed manmukhs are enticed, and consumed.<br>
  Those who center their consciousness on duality are caught in it, and remain stuck.<br>
  But when it is burnt away by the Word of the Guru's Shabad, only then does it depart from within.<br>
  The body and mind become radiant and bright, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to dwell within the mind.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord's Name is the antidote to Maya; the Gurmukh obtains it. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  This mind has wandered through so many ages; it has not remained stable - it continues coming and going.<br>
  When it is pleasing to the Lord's Will, then He causes the soul to wander; He has set the world-drama in motion.<br>
  When the Lord forgives, then one meets the Guru, and becoming stable, he remains absorbed in the Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 026</h2></center>
  O Nanak, through the mind, the mind is satisfied, and then, nothing comes or goes. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The body is the fortress of the Infinite Lord; it is obtained only by destiny.<br>
  The Lord Himself dwells within the body; He Himself is the Enjoyer of pleasures.<br>
  He Himself remains detached and unaffected; while unattached, He is still attached.<br>
  He does whatever He pleases, and whatever He does, comes to pass.<br>
  The Gurmukh meditates on the Lord's Name, and separation from the Lord is ended. ||13||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! The Lord Himself causes us to praise Him, through the True Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! is His Eulogy and Praise; how rare are the Gurmukhs who understand this.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! is the True Word of His Bani, by which we meet our True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, chanting Waaho! Waaho! God is attained; by His Grace, He is obtained. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Chanting Waaho! Waaho! the tongue is adorned with the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Through the Perfect Shabad, one comes to meet God.<br>
  How very fortunate are those, who with their mouths, chant Waaho! Waaho!<br>
  How beautiful are those persons who chant Waaho! Waaho! ; people come to venerate them.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! is obtained by His Grace; O Nanak, honor is obtained at the Gate of the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Within the fortress of body, are the hard and rigid doors of falsehood, deception and pride.<br>
  Deluded by doubt, the blind and ignorant self-willed manmukhs cannot see them.<br>
  They cannot be found by any efforts; wearing their religious robes, the wearers have grown weary of trying.<br>
  The doors are opened only by the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and then, one chants the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Dear Lord is the Tree of Ambrosial Nectar; those who drink in this Nectar are satisfied. ||14||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Chanting Waaho! Waaho! the night of one's life passes in peace.<br>
  Chanting Waaho! Waaho! I am in eternal bliss, O my mother!<br>
  Chanting Waaho! Waaho!, I have fallen in love with the Lord.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Through the karma of good deeds, I chant it, and inspire others to chant it as well.<br>
  Chanting Waaho! Waaho!, one obtains honor.<br>
  O Nanak, Waaho! Waaho! is the Will of the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! is the Bani of the True Word. Searching, the Gurmukhs have found it.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! They chant the Word of the Shabad. Waaho! Waaho! They enshrine it in their hearts.<br>
  Chanting Waaho! Waaho! the Gurmukhs easily obtain the Lord, after searching.<br>
  O Nanak, very fortunate are those who reflect upon the Lord, Har, Har, within their hearts. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  O my utterly greedy mind, you are constantly engrossed in greed.<br>
  In your desire for the enticing Maya, you wander in the ten directions.<br>
  Your name and social status shall not go with you hereafter; the self-willed manmukh is consumed by pain.<br>
  Your tongue does not taste the sublime essence of the Lord; it utters only insipid words.<br>
  Those Gurmukhs who drink in the Ambrosial Nectar are satisfied. ||15||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Chant Waaho! Waaho! to the Lord, who is True, profound and unfathomable.<br>
  Chant Waaho! Waaho! to the Lord, who is the Giver of virtue, intelligence and patience.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 027</h2></center>
  Chant Waaho! Waaho! to the Lord, who is permeating and pervading in all.<br>
  Chant Waaho! Waaho! to the Lord, who is the Giver of sustenance to all.<br>
  O Nanak, Waaho! Waaho! - praise the One Lord, revealed by the True Guru. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! The Gurmukhs praise the Lord continually, while the self-willed manmukhs eat poison and die.<br>
  They have no love for the Lord's Praises, and they pass their lives in misery.<br>
  The Gurmukhs drink in the Ambrosial Nectar, and they center their consciousness on the Lord's Praises.<br>
  O Nanak, those who chant Waaho! Waaho! are immaculate and pure; they obtain the knowledge of the three worlds. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  By the Lord's Will, one meets the Guru, serves Him, and worships the Lord.<br>
  By the Lord's Will, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and one easily drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  By the Lord's Will, one finds peace, and continually earns the Lord's Profit.<br>
  He is seated on the Lord's throne, and he dwells continually in the home of his own being.<br>
  He alone surrenders to the Lord's Will, who meets the Guru. ||16||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Those humble beings ever praise the Lord, unto whom the Lord Himself grants understanding.<br>
  Chanting Waaho! Waaho!, the mind is purified, and egotism departs from within.<br>
  The Gurmukh who continually chants Waaho! Waaho! attains the fruits of his heart's desires.<br>
  Beauteous are those humble beings who chant Waaho! Waaho! O Lord, let me join them!<br>
  Within my heart, I chant Waaho! Waaho!, and with my mouth, Waaho! Waaho!<br>
  O Nanak, those who chant Waaho! Waaho! - unto them I dedicate my body and mind. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! is the True Lord Master; His Name is Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  Those who serve the Lord are blessed with the fruit; I am a sacrifice to them.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! is the treasure of virtue; he alone tastes it, who is so blessed.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! The Lord is pervading and permeating the oceans and the land; the Gurmukh attains Him.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Let all the Gursikhs continually praise Him. Waaho! Waaho! The Perfect Guru is pleased with His Praises.<br>
  O Nanak, one who chants Waaho! Waaho! with his heart and mind - the Messenger of Death does not approach him. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Dear Lord is the Truest of the True; True is the Word of the Guru's Bani.<br>
  Through the True Guru, the Truth is realized, and one is easily absorbed in the True Lord.<br>
  Night and day, they remain awake, and do not sleep; in wakefulness, the night of their lives passes.<br>
  Those who taste the sublime essence of the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings, are the most worthy persons.<br>
  Without the Guru, no one has obtained the Lord; the ignorant rot away and die. ||17||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! is the Bani, the Word, of the Formless Lord. There is no other as great as He is.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! The Lord is unfathomable and inaccessible. Waaho! Waaho! He is the True One.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! He is the self-existent Lord. Waaho! Waaho! As He wills, so it comes to pass.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! is the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, obtained by the Gurmukh.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! This is realized by His Grace, as He Himself grants His Grace.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 028</h2></center>
  O Nanak, Waaho! Waaho! This is obtained by the Gurmukhs, who hold tight to the Naam, night and day. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Without serving the True Guru, peace is not obtained, and the sense of duality does not depart.<br>
  No matter how much one may wish, without the Lord's Grace, He is not found.<br>
  Those who are filled with greed and corruption are ruined by the love of duality.<br>
  They cannot escape birth and death, and with egotism within them, they suffer in misery.<br>
  Those who center their consciousness on the True Guru, never go empty-handed.<br>
  They are not summoned by the Messenger of Death, and they do not suffer in pain.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved; they merge in the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He alone is called a minstrel, who enshrines love for his Lord and Master.<br>
  Standing at the Lord's Door, he serves the Lord, and reflects upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  The minstrel attains the Lord's Gate and Mansion, and he keeps the True Lord clasped to his heart.<br>
  The status of the minstrel is exalted; he loves the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The service of the minstrel is to meditate on the Lord; he is emancipated by the Lord. ||18||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The milkmaid's status is very low, but she attains her Husband Lord<br>
  when she reflects upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and chants the Lord's Name, night and day.<br>
  She who meets the True Guru, lives in the Fear of God; she is a woman of noble birth.<br>
  She alone realizes the Hukam of her Husband Lord's Command, who is blessed by the Creator Lord's Mercy.<br>
  She who is of little merit and ill-mannered, is discarded and forsaken by her Husband Lord.<br>
  By the Fear of God, filth is washed off, and the body becomes immaculately pure.<br>
  The soul is enlightened, and the intellect is exalted, meditating on the Lord, the ocean of excellence.<br>
  One who dwells in the Fear of God, lives in the Fear of God, and acts in the Fear of God.<br>
  He obtains peace and glorious greatness here, in the Lord's Court, and at the Gate of Salvation.<br>
  Through the Fear of God, the Fearless Lord is obtained, and one's light merges in the Infinite Light.<br>
  O Nanak, that bride alone is good, who is pleasing to her Lord and Master, and whom the Creator Lord Himself forgives. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Praise the Lord, forever and ever, and make yourself a sacrifice to the True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, let that tongue be burnt, which renounces the One Lord, and attaches itself to another. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  From a single particle of His greatness, He created His incarnations, but they indulged in the love of duality.<br>
  They ruled like kings, and fought for pleasure and pain.<br>
  Those who serve Shiva and Brahma do not find the limits of the Lord.<br>
  The Fearless, Formless Lord is unseen and invisible; He is revealed only to the Gurmukh.<br>
  There, one does not suffer sorrow or separation; he becomes stable and immortal in the world. ||19||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  All these things come and go, all these things of the world.<br>
  One who knows this written account is acceptable and approved.<br>
  O Nanak, anyone who takes pride in himself is foolish and unwise. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The mind is the elephant, the Guru is the elephant-driver, and knowledge is the whip. Wherever the Guru drives the mind, it goes.<br>
  O Nanak, without the whip, the elephant wanders into the wilderness, again and again. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  I offer my prayer to the One, from whom I was created.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 029</h2></center>
  Serving my True Guru, I have obtained all the fruits.<br>
  I meditate continually on the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, I am rid of my pain and suffering.<br>
  O Nanak, I have become care-free; I have obtained the imperishable wealth of the Lord. ||20||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Raising the embankments of the mind's field, I gaze at the heavenly mansion.<br>
  When devotion comes to the mind of the soul-bride, she is visited by the friendly guest.<br>
  O clouds, if you are going to rain, then go ahead and rain; why rain after the season has passed?<br>
  Nanak is a sacrifice to those Gurmukhs who obtain the Lord in their minds. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  That which is pleasing is sweet, and one who is sincere is a friend.<br>
  O Nanak, he is known as a Gurmukh, whom the Lord Himself enlightens. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  O God, Your humble servant offers his prayer to You; You are my True Master.<br>
  You are my Protector, forever and ever; I meditate on You.<br>
  All the beings and creatures are Yours; You are pervading and permeating in them.<br>
  One who slanders Your slave is crushed and destroyed.<br>
  Falling at Your Feet, Nanak has renounced his cares, and has become care-free. ||21||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Building up its hopes, the world dies, but its hopes do not die or depart.<br>
  O Nanak, hopes are fulfilled only by attaching one's consciousness to the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Hopes and desires shall die only when He, who created them, takes them away.<br>
  O Nanak, nothing is permanent, except the Name of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He Himself created the world, with His perfect workmanship.<br>
  He Himself is the true banker, He Himself is the merchant, and He Himself is the store.<br>
  He Himself is the ocean, He Himself is the boat, and He Himself is the boatman.<br>
  He Himself is the Guru, He Himself is the disciple, and He Himself shows the destination.<br>
  O servant Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and all your sins shall be eradicated. ||22||1||SUDH||<br>
  Raag Goojaree, Vaar, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Deep within yourself, worship the Guru in adoration, and with your tongue, chant the Guru's Name.<br>
  Let your eyes behold the True Guru, and let your ears hear the Guru's Name.<br>
  Attuned to the True Guru, you shall receive a place of honor in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Says Nanak, this treasure is bestowed on those who are blessed with His Mercy.<br>
  In the midst of the world, they are known as the most pious - they are rare indeed. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Savior Lord, save us and take us across.<br>
  Falling at the feet of the Guru, our works are embellished with perfection.<br>
  You have become kind, merciful and compassionate; we do not forget You from our minds.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, we are carried across the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  In an instant, You have destroyed the faithless cynics and slanderous enemies.<br>
  That Lord and Master is my Anchor and Support; O Nanak, hold firm in your mind.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 030</h2></center>
  Remembering Him in meditation, happiness comes, and all sorrows and pains simply vanish. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  He is without relatives, immaculate, all-powerful, unapproachable and infinite.<br>
  Truly, the True Lord is seen to be the Truest of the True.<br>
  Nothing established by You appears to be false.<br>
  The Great Giver gives sustenance to all those He has created.<br>
  He has strung all on only one thread; He has infused His Light in them.<br>
  By His Will, some drown in the terrifying world-ocean, and by His Will, some are carried across.<br>
  O Dear Lord, he alone meditates on You, upon whose forehead such blessed destiny is inscribed.<br>
  Your condition and state cannot be known; I am a sacrifice to You. ||1||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  When You are pleased, O Merciful Lord, you automatically come to dwell within my mind.<br>
  When You are pleased, O Merciful Lord, I find the nine treasures within the home of my own self.<br>
  When You are pleased, O Merciful Lord, I act according to the Guru's Instructions.<br>
  When You are pleased, O Merciful Lord, then Nanak is absorbed in the True One. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Many sit on thrones, to the sounds of musical instruments.<br>
  O Nanak, without the True Name, no one's honor is safe. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The followers of the Vedas, the Bible and the Koran, standing at Your Door, meditate on You.<br>
  Uncounted are those who fall at Your Door.<br>
  Brahma meditates on You, as does Indra on his throne.<br>
  Shiva and Vishnu, and their incarnations, chant the Lord's Praise with their mouths,<br>
  as do the Pirs, the spiritual teachers, the prophets and the Shaykhs, the silent sages and the seers.<br>
  Through and through, the Formless Lord is woven into each and every heart.<br>
  One is destroyed through falsehood; through righteousness, one prospers.<br>
  Whatever the Lord links him to, to that he is linked. ||2||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He is reluctant to do good, but eager to practice evil.<br>
  O Nanak, today or tomorrow, the feet of the careless fool shall fall into the trap. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  No matter how evil my ways are, still, Your Love for me is not concealed.<br>
  Nanak: You, O Lord, conceal my short-comings and dwell within my mind; You are my true friend. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  I beg of You, O Merciful Lord: please, make me the slave of Your slaves.<br>
  I obtain the nine treasures and royalty; chanting Your Name, I live.<br>
  The great ambrosial treasure, the Nectar of the Naam, is in the home of the Lord's slaves.<br>
  In their company, I am in ecstasy, listening to Your Praises with my ears.<br>
  Serving them, my body is purified.<br>
  I wave the fans over them, and carry water for them; I grind the corn for them, and washing their feet, I am over-joyed.<br>
  By myself, I can do nothing; O God, bless me with Your Glance of Grace.<br>
  I am worthless - please, bless me with a seat in the place of worship of the Saints. ||3||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Friend, I pray that I may remain forever the dust of Your Feet.<br>
  Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary, and beholds You ever-present. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Countless sinners become pure, by fixing their minds on the Feet of the Lord.<br>
  The Name of God is the sixty-eight holy places of pilgrimage, O Nanak, for one who has such destiny written upon his forehead. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  With every breath and morsel of food, chant the Name of the Lord, the Cherisher.<br>
  The Lord does not forget one upon whom He has bestowed His Grace.<br>
  He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself destroys.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 031</h2></center>
  The Knower knows everything; He understands and contemplates.<br>
  By His creative power, He assumes numerous forms in an instant.<br>
  One whom the Lord attaches to the Truth is redeemed.<br>
  One who has God on his side is never conquered.<br>
  His Court is eternal and imperishable; I humbly bow to Him. ||4||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Renounce sexual desire, anger and greed, and burn them in the fire.<br>
  As long as you are alive, O Nanak, meditate continually on the True Name. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance on my God, I have obtained all the fruits.<br>
  O Nanak, I worship the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the Perfect Guru has united me with the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  One who has been instructed by the Guru is liberated in this world.<br>
  He avoids disaster, and his anxiety is dispelled.<br>
  Beholding the blessed vision of his Darshan, the world is over-joyed.<br>
  In the company of the Lord's humble servants, the world is over-joyed, and the filth of sin is washed away.<br>
  There, they meditate on the Ambrosial Nectar of the True Name.<br>
  The mind becomes content, and its hunger is satisfied.<br>
  One whose heart is filled with the Name, has his bonds cut away.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, some rare person earns the wealth of the Lord's Name. ||5||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Within my mind, I think thoughts of always rising early, and making the effort.<br>
  O Lord, my Friend, please bless Nanak with the habit of singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Casting His Glance of Grace, God has saved me; my mind and body are imbued with the Primal Being.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are pleasing to God, have their cries of suffering taken away. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  When your soul is feeling sad, offer your prayers to the Guru.<br>
  Renounce all your cleverness, and dedicate your mind and body to Him.<br>
  Worship the Feet of the Guru, and your evil-mindedness shall be burnt away.<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall cross over the terrifying and difficult world-ocean.<br>
  Serve the True Guru, and in the world hereafter, you shall not die of fear.<br>
  In an instant, he shall make you happy, and the empty vessel shall be filled to overflowing.<br>
  The mind becomes content, meditating forever on the Lord.<br>
  He alone dedicates himself to the Guru's service, unto whom the Lord has granted His Grace. ||6||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am attached to the right place; the Uniter has united me.<br>
  O Nanak, there are hundreds and thousands of waves, but my Husband Lord does not let me drown. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In the dreadful wilderness, I have found the one and only companion; the Name of the Lord is the Destroyer of distress.<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Beloved Saints, O Nanak; through them, my affairs have been brought to fulfillment. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  All treasures are obtained, when we are attuned to Your Love.<br>
  One does not have to suffer regret and repentance, when he meditates on You.<br>
  No one can equal Your humble servant, who has Your Support.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! How wonderful is the Perfect Guru! Cherishing Him in my mind, I obtain peace.<br>
  The treasure of the Lord's Praise comes from the Guru; by His Mercy, it is obtained.<br>
  When the True Guru bestows His Glance of Grace, one does not wander any more.<br>
  The Merciful Lord preserves him - He makes him His own slave.<br>
  Listening, hearing the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, I live. ||7||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 032</h2></center>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Husband Lord, You have given me the silk gown of Your Love to cover and protect my honor.<br>
  You are all-wise and all-knowing, O my Master; Nanak: I have not appreciated Your value, Lord. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  By Your meditative remembrance, I have found everything; nothing seems difficult to me.<br>
  One whose honor the True Lord Master has preserved - O Nanak, no one can dishonor him. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Meditating on the Lord, there comes a great peace.<br>
  Multitudes of illnesses vanish, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Utter peace pervades within, when God comes to mind.<br>
  One's hopes are fulfilled, when one's mind is filled with the Name.<br>
  No obstacles stand in the way, when one eliminates his self-conceit.<br>
  The intellect attains the blessing of spiritual wisdom from the Guru.<br>
  He receives everything, unto whom the Lord Himself gives.<br>
  You are the Lord and Master of all; all are under Your Protection. ||8||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Crossing the stream, my foot does not get stuck - I am filled with love for You.<br>
  O Lord, my heart is attached to Your Feet; the Lord is Nanak's raft and boat. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The sight of them banishes my evil-mindedness; they are my only true friends.<br>
  I have searched the whole world; O servant Nanak, how rare are such persons! ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You come to mind, O Lord and Master, when I behold Your devotees.<br>
  The filth of my mind is removed, when I dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  The fear of birth and death is dispelled, meditating on the Word of His humble servant.<br>
  The Saints untie the bonds, and all the demons are dispelled.<br>
  They inspire us to love Him, the One who established the entire universe.<br>
  The seat of the inaccessible and infinite Lord is the highest of the high.<br>
  Night and day, with your palms pressed together, with each and every breath, meditate on Him.<br>
  When the Lord Himself becomes merciful, then we attain the Society of His devotees. ||9||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In this wondrous forest of the world, there is chaos and confusion; shrieks emanate from the highways.<br>
  I am in love with You, O my Husband Lord; O Nanak, I cross the jungle joyfully. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The true society is the company of those who meditate on the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Do not associate with those, O Nanak, who look out only for their own interests. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Approved is that time, when one meets the True Guru.<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he does not suffer pain again.<br>
  When he attains the eternal place, he does not have to enter the womb again.<br>
  He comes to see the One God everywhere.<br>
  He focuses his meditation on the essence of spiritual wisdom, and withdraws his attention from other sights.<br>
  All chants are chanted by one who chants them with his mouth.<br>
  Realizing the Hukam of the Lord's Command, he becomes happy, and he is filled with peace and tranquility.<br>
  Those who are assayed, and placed in the Lord's treasury, are not declared counterfeit again. ||10||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The pincers of separation are so painful to endure.<br>
  If only the Master would come to meet me! O Nanak, I would then obtain all the true comforts. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 033</h2></center>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The earth is in the water, and the fire is contained in the wood.<br>
  O Nanak, yearn for that Lord, who is the Support of all. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The works which You have done, O Lord, could only have been performed by You.<br>
  That alone happens in the world, which You, O Master, have done.<br>
  I am wonderstruck beholding the wonder of Your Almighty Creative Power.<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary - I am Your slave; if it is Your Will, I shall be emancipated.<br>
  The treasure is in Your Hands; according to Your Will, You bestow it.<br>
  One, upon whom You have bestowed Your Mercy, is blessed with the Lord's Name.<br>
  You are unapproachable, unfathomable and infinite; Your limits cannot be found.<br>
  One, unto whom You have been compassionate, meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||11||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The ladles cruise through the food, but they do not know the taste of it.<br>
  I long to see the faces of those, O Nanak, who are imbued with the essence of the Lord's Love. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Through the Tracker, I discovered the tracks of those who ruined my crops.<br>
  You, O Lord, have put up the fence; O Nanak, my fields shall not be plundered again. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Worship in adoration that True Lord; everything is under His Power.<br>
  He Himself is the Master of both ends; in an instant, He adjusts our affairs.<br>
  Renounce all your efforts, and hold fast to His Support.<br>
  Run to His Sanctuary, and you shall obtain the comfort of all comforts.<br>
  The karma of good deeds, the righteousness of Dharma and the essence of spiritual wisdom are obtained in the Society of the Saints.<br>
  Chanting the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, no obstacle shall block your way.<br>
  The Lord abides in the mind of one who is blessed by His Kindness.<br>
  All treasures are obtained, when the Lord and Master is pleased. ||12||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have found the object of my search - my Beloved took pity on me.<br>
  There is One Creator; O Nanak, I do not see any other. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Take aim with the arrow of Truth, and shoot down sin.<br>
  Cherish the Words of the Guru's Mantra, O Nanak, and you shall not suffer in pain. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! The Creator Lord Himself has brought about peace and tranquility.<br>
  He is Kind to all beings and creatures; meditate forever on Him.<br>
  The all-powerful Lord has shown Mercy, and my cries of suffering are ended.<br>
  My fevers, pains and diseases are gone, by the Grace of the Perfect Guru.<br>
  The Lord has established me, and protected me; He is the Cherisher of the poor.<br>
  He Himself has delivered me, breaking all my bonds.<br>
  My thirst is quenched, my hopes are fulfilled, and my mind is contented and satisfied.<br>
  The greatest of the great, the Infinite Lord and Master - He is not affected by virtue and vice. ||13||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  They alone meditate on the Lord God, Har, Har, unto whom the Lord is Merciful.<br>
  O Nanak, they enshrine love for the Lord, meeting the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Contemplate the Lord, O very fortunate ones; He is pervading in the water, the land and the sky.<br>
  O Nanak, worshipping the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal encounters no misfortune. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The speech of the devotees is approved; it is accepted in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Your devotees take to Your Support; they are imbued with the True Name.<br>
  One unto whom You are Merciful, has his sufferings depart.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 034</h2></center>
  O Merciful Lord, You bless Your devotees with Your Grace.<br>
  Suffering, pain, terrible disease and Maya do not afflict them.<br>
  This is the Support of the devotees, that they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Forever and ever, day and night, they meditate on the One and Only Lord.<br>
  Drinking in the Ambrosial Amrit of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, His humble servants remain satisfied with the Naam. ||14||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Millions of obstacles stand in the way of one who forgets the Name.<br>
  O Nanak, night and day, he croaks like a raven in a deserted house. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Beauteous is that season, when I am united with my Beloved.<br>
  I do not forget Him for a moment or an instant; O Nanak, I contemplate Him constantly. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Even brave and mighty men cannot withstand the powerful and overwhelming army which the five passions have gathered.<br>
  The ten organs of sensation attach even detached renunciates to sensory pleasures.<br>
  They seek to conquer and overpower them, and so increase their following.<br>
  The world of the three dispositions is under their influence; no one can stand against them.<br>
  So tell me - how can the fort of doubt and the moat of Maya be overcome?<br>
  Worshipping the Perfect Guru, this awesome force is subdued.<br>
  I stand before Him, day and night, with my palms pressed together. ||15||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  All sins are washed away, by continually singing the Lord's Glories.<br>
  Millions of afflictions are produced, O Nanak, when the Name is forgotten. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, one comes to know the Perfect Way.<br>
  While laughing, playing, dressing and eating, he is liberated. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, who has demolished the fortress of doubt.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! - Hail! Hail! to the True Guru, who has united me with the Lord.<br>
  The Guru has given me the medicine of the inexhaustible treasure of the Naam.<br>
  He has banished the great and terrible disease.<br>
  I have obtained the great treasure of the wealth of the Naam.<br>
  I have obtained eternal life, recognizing my own self.<br>
  The Glory of the all-powerful Divine Guru cannot be described.<br>
  The Guru is the Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, infinite, unseen and unknowable. ||16||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Make the effort, and you shall live; practicing it, you shall enjoy peace.<br>
  Meditating, you shall meet God, O Nanak, and your anxiety shall vanish. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Bless me with sublime thoughts, O Lord of the Universe, and contemplation in the immaculate Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  O Nanak, may I never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, for even an instant; be merciful to me, Lord God. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Whatever happens is according to Your Will, so why should I be afraid?<br>
  Meeting Him, I meditate on the Name - I offer my soul to Him.<br>
  When the Infinite Lord comes to mind, one is enraptured.<br>
  Who can touch one who has the Formless Lord on his side?<br>
  Everything is under His control; no one is beyond Him.<br>
  He, the True Lord, dwells in the minds of His devotees.<br>
  Your slaves meditate on You; You are the Savior, the Protector Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 035</h2></center>
  You are the Almighty Overlord of all; You bless us with Your Glance of Grace. ||17||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Take away my sexual desire, anger, pride, greed, emotional attachment and evil desires.<br>
  Protect me, O my God; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  By eating and eating, the mouth is worn out; by wearing clothes, the limbs grow weary.<br>
  O Nanak, cursed are the lives of those who are not attuned to the Love of the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  As is the Hukam of Your Command, so do things happen.<br>
  Wherever You keep me, there I go and stand.<br>
  With the Love of Your Name, I wash away my evil-mindedness.<br>
  By continually meditating on You, O Formless Lord, my doubts and fears are dispelled.<br>
  Those who are attuned to Your Love, shall not be trapped in reincarnation.<br>
  Inwardly and outwardly, they behold the One Lord with their eyes.<br>
  Those who recognize the Lord's Command never weep.<br>
  O Nanak, they are blessed with the gift of the Name, woven into the fabric of their minds. ||18||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Those who do not remember the Lord while they are alive, shall mix with the dust when they die.<br>
  O Nanak, the foolish and filthy faithless cynic passes his life engrossed in the world. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who remembers the Lord while he is alive, shall be imbued with the Lord's Love when he dies.<br>
  The precious gift of his life is redeemed, O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  From the beginning, and through the ages, You have been our Protector and Preserver.<br>
  True is Your Name, O Creator Lord, and True is Your Creation.<br>
  You do not lack anything; You are filling each and every heart.<br>
  You are merciful and all-powerful; You Yourself cause us to serve You.<br>
  Those whose minds in which You dwell are forever at peace.<br>
  Having created the creation, You Yourself cherish it.<br>
  You Yourself are everything, O infinite, endless Lord.<br>
  Nanak seeks the Protection and Support of the Perfect Guru. ||19||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In the beginning, in the middle and in the end, the Transcendent Lord has saved me.<br>
  The True Guru has blessed me with the Lord's Name, and I have tasted the Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day.<br>
  I have obtained all my objectives, and I shall not wander in reincarnation again.<br>
  Everything is in the Hands of the Creator; He does what is done.<br>
  Nanak begs for the gift of the dust of the feet of the Holy, which shall deliver him. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Enshrine Him in your mind, the One who created you.<br>
  Whoever meditates on the Lord and Master obtains peace.<br>
  Fruitful is the birth, and approved is the coming of the Gurmukh.<br>
  One who realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command shall be blessed - so has the Lord and Master ordained.<br>
  One who is blessed with the Lord's Mercy does not wander.<br>
  Whatever the Lord and Master gives him, with that he is content.<br>
  O Nanak, one who is blessed with the kindness of the Lord, our Friend, realizes the Hukam of His Command.<br>
  But those whom the Lord Himself causes to wander, continue to die, and take reincarnation again. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The slanderers are destroyed in an instant; they are not spared for even a moment.<br>
  God will not endure the sufferings of His slaves, but catching the slanderers, He binds them to the cycle of reincarnation.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 036</h2></center>
  Grabbing them by the hair on their heads, the Lord throws them down, and leaves them on the path of Death.<br>
  They cry out in pain, in the darkest of hells.<br>
  But hugging His slaves close to His Heart, O Nanak, the True Lord saves them. ||20||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditate on the Lord, O fortunate ones; He is pervading the waters and the earth.<br>
  O Nanak, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and no misfortune shall strike you. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Millions of misfortunes block the way of one who forgets the Name of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, like a crow in a deserted house, he cries out, night and day. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance of the Great Giver, one's heart's desires are fulfilled.<br>
  The hopes and desires of the mind are realized, and sorrows are forgotten.<br>
  The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained; I have searched for it for so long.<br>
  My light is merged into the Light, and my labors are over.<br>
  I abide in that house of peace, poise and bliss.<br>
  My comings and goings have ended - there is no birth or death there.<br>
  The Master and the servant have become one, with no sense of separation.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, Nanak is absorbed in the True Lord. ||21||1||2||SUDH||<br>
  Raag Goojaree, The Words Of The Devotees:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Chau-Padas Of Kabeer Jee, Second House:<br>
  With four feet, two horns and a mute mouth, how could you sing the Praises of the Lord?<br>
  Standing up and sitting down, the stick shall still fall on you, so where will you hide your head? ||1||<br>
  Without the Lord, you are like a stray ox;<br>
  with your nose torn, and your shoulders injured, you shall have only the straw of coarse grain to eat. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All day long, you shall wander in the forest, and even then, your belly will not be full.<br>
  You did not follow the advice of the humble devotees, and so you shall obtain the fruits of your actions. ||2||<br>
  Enduring pleasure and pain, drowned in the great ocean of doubt, you shall wander in numerous reincarnations.<br>
  You have lost the jewel of human birth by forgetting God; when will you have such an opportunity again? ||3||<br>
  You turn on the wheel of reincarnation, like an ox at the oil-press; the night of your life passes away without salvation.<br>
  Says Kabeer, without the Name of the Lord, you shall pound your head, and regret and repent. ||4||1||<br>
  GOOJAREE, THIRD HOUSE:<br>
  Kabeer's mother sobs, cries and bewails<br>
  - O Lord, how will my grandchildren live? ||1||<br>
  Kabeer has given up all his spinning and weaving,<br>
  and written the Name of the Lord on his body. ||1||Pause||<br>
  As long as I pass the thread through the bobbin,<br>
  I forget the Lord, my Beloved. ||2||<br>
  My intellect is lowly - I am a weaver by birth,<br>
  but I have earned the profit of the Name of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, listen, O my mother<br>
  - the Lord alone is the Provider, for me and my children. ||4||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 037</h2></center>
  Goojaree, Padas Of Naam Dayv Jee, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  If You gave me an empire, then what glory would be in it for me?<br>
  If You made me beg for charity, what would it take away from me? ||1||<br>
  Meditate and vibrate upon the Lord, O my mind, and you shall obtain the state of Nirvaanaa.<br>
  You shall not have to come and go in reincarnation any longer. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You created all, and You lead them astray in doubt.<br>
  They alone understand, unto whom You give understanding. ||2||<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, doubt is dispelled.<br>
  Who else should I worship? I can see no other. ||3||<br>
  One stone is lovingly decorated,<br>
  while another stone is walked upon.<br>
  If one is a god, then the other must also be a god.<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, I serve the Lord. ||4||1||<br>
  GOOJAREE, FIRST HOUSE:<br>
  He does not have even a trace of impurity - He is beyond impurity. He is fragrantly scented - He has come to take His Seat in my mind.<br>
  No one saw Him come - who can know Him, O Siblings of Destiny? ||1||<br>
  Who can describe Him? Who can understand Him? The all-pervading Lord has no ancestors, O Siblings of Destiny. ||1||Pause||<br>
  As the path of a bird's flight across the sky cannot be seen,<br>
  and the path of a fish through the water cannot be seen;||2||<br>
  As the mirage leads one to mistake the sky for a pitcher filled with water<br>
  - so is God, the Lord and Master of Naam Dayv, who fits these three comparisons. ||3||2||<br>
  Goojaree, Padas Of Ravi Daas Jee, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The calf has contaminated the milk in the teats.<br>
  The bumble bee has contaminated the flower, and the fish the water. ||1||<br>
  O mother, where shall I find any offering for the Lord's worship?<br>
  I cannot find any other flowers worthy of the incomparable Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The snakes encircle the sandalwood trees.<br>
  Poison and nectar dwell there together. ||2||<br>
  Even with incense, lamps, offerings of food and fragrant flowers,<br>
  how are Your slaves to worship You? ||3||<br>
  I dedicate and offer my body and mind to You.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I attain the immaculate Lord. ||4||<br>
  I cannot worship You, nor offer You flowers.<br>
  Says Ravi Daas, what shall my condition be hereafter? ||5||1||<br>
  Goojaree, Padas Of Trilochan Jee, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  You have not cleansed the filth from within yourself, although outwardly, you wear the dress of a renunciate.<br>
  In the heart-lotus of your self, you have not recognized God - why have you become a Sannyaasee? ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 09 - Raag Goojaree - Part 038</h2></center>
  Deluded by doubt, O Jai Chand,<br>
  you have not realized the Lord, the embodiment of supreme bliss. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You eat in each and every house, fattening your body; you wear the patched coat and the ear-rings of the beggar, for the sake of wealth.<br>
  You apply the ashes of cremation to your body, but without a Guru, you have not found the essence of reality. ||2||<br>
  Why bother to chant your spells? Why bother to practice austerities? Why bother to churn water?<br>
  Meditate on the Lord of Nirvaanaa, who has created the 8.4 million species of beings. ||3||<br>
  Why bother to carry the water-pot, O saffron-robed Yogi? Why bother to visit the sixty-eight holy places of pilgrimage?<br>
  Says Trilochan, listen, mortal: you have no corn - what are you trying to thresh? ||4||1||<br>
  GOOJAREE:<br>
  At the very last moment, one who thinks of wealth, and dies in such thoughts,<br>
  shall be reincarnated over and over again, in the form of serpents. ||1||<br>
  O sister, do not forget the Name of the Lord of the Universe. ||Pause||<br>
  At the very last moment, he who thinks of women, and dies in such thoughts,<br>
  shall be reincarnated over and over again as a prostitute. ||2||<br>
  At the very last moment, one who thinks of his children, and dies in such thoughts,<br>
  shall be reincarnated over and over again as a pig. ||3||<br>
  At the very last moment, one who thinks of mansions, and dies in such thoughts,<br>
  shall be reincarnated over and over again as a goblin. ||4||<br>
  At the very last moment, one who thinks of the Lord, and dies in such thoughts,<br>
  says Trilochan, that man shall be liberated; the Lord shall abide in his heart. ||5||2||<br>
  Goojaree, Padas Of Jai Dayv Jee, Fourth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  In the very beginning, was the Primal Lord, unrivalled, the Lover of Truth and other virtues.<br>
  He is absolutely wonderful, transcending creation; remembering Him, all are emancipated. ||1||<br>
  Dwell only upon the beauteous Name of the Lord,<br>
  the embodiment of ambrosial nectar and reality.<br>
  Remembering Him in meditation, the fear of birth, old age and death will not trouble you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  If you desire to escape the fear of the Messenger of Death, then praise the Lord joyfully, and do good deeds.<br>
  In the past, present and future, He is always the same; He is the embodiment of supreme bliss. ||2||<br>
  If you seek the path of good conduct, forsake greed, and do not look upon other men's property and women.<br>
  Renounce all evil actions and evil inclinations, and hurry to the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Worship the immaculate Lord, in thought, word and deed.<br>
  What is the good of practicing Yoga, giving feasts and charity, and practicing penance? ||4||<br>
  Meditate on the Lord of the Universe, the Lord of the Universe, O man; He is the source of all the spiritual powers of the Siddhas.<br>
  Jai Dayv has openly come to Him; He is the salvation of all, in the past, present and future. ||5||1||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr10.htm">Next: Raag Dayv</a></center>
 </body>