<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr23.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr25.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Maale Gaaura</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 24 - Raag Maale Gaaura - Part 001</h2></center>
  Raag Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Countless have tried, but none have found the Lord's limit.<br>
  The Lord is inaccessible, unapproachable and unfathomable; I humbly bow to the Lord God, my King. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment bring continual conflict and strife.<br>
  Save me, save me, I am your humble creature, O Lord; I have come to Your Sanctuary, O my Lord God. ||1||<br>
  You protect and preserve those who take to Your Sanctuary, God; You are called the Lover of Your devotees.<br>
  Prahlaad, Your humble servant, was caught by Harnaakhash; but You saved Him and carried him across, Lord. ||2||<br>
  Remember the Lord, O mind, and rise up to the Mansion of His Presence; the Sovereign Lord is the Destroyer of pain.<br>
  Our Lord and Master takes away the fear of birth and death; following the Guru's Teachings, the Lord God is found. ||3||<br>
  The Name of the Lord, our Lord and Master, is the Purifier of sinners; I sing of the Lord, the Destroyer of the fears of His devotees.<br>
  One who wears the necklace of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in his heart, O servant Nanak, merges in the Naam. ||4||1||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, the Giver of peace.<br>
  One who joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and enjoys the sublime taste of the Lord, as Gurmukh, comes to realize God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  By great good fortune, one obtains the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan; meeting with the Guru, the Lord God is known.<br>
  The filth of evil-mindedness is totally washed away, bathing in the Lord's ambrosial pool of nectar. ||1||<br>
  Blessed, blessed are the Holy, who have found their Lord God; I ask them to tell me the stories of the Lord.<br>
  I fall at their feet, and always pray to them, to mercifully unite me with my Lord, the Architect of Destiny. ||2||<br>
  Through the destiny written on my forehead, I have found the Holy Guru; my mind and body are imbued with the Guru's Word.<br>
  The Lord God has come to meet me; I have found peace, and I am rid of all the sins. ||3||<br>
  Those who follow the Guru's Teachings find the Lord, the source of nectar; their words are sublime and exalted.<br>
  By great good fortune, one is blessed with the dust of their feet; servant Nanak falls at their feet. ||4||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 24 - Raag Maale Gaaura - Part 002</h2></center>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  All the Siddhas, seekers and silent sages, with their minds full of love, meditate on the Lord.<br>
  The Supreme Lord God, my Lord and Master, is limitless; the Guru has inspired me to know the unknowable Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am low, and I commit evil actions; I have not remembered my Sovereign Lord.<br>
  The Lord has led me to meet the True Guru; in an instant, He liberated me from bondage. ||1||<br>
  Such is the destiny God wrote on my forehead; following the Guru's Teachings, I enshrine love for the Lord.<br>
  The Panch Shabad, the five primal sounds, vibrate and resound in the Court of the Lord; meeting the Lord, I sing the songs of joy. ||2||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Purifier of sinners; the unfortunate wretches do not like this.<br>
  They rot away in the womb of reincarnation; they fall apart like salt in water. ||3||<br>
  Please bless me with such understanding, O Inaccessible Lord God, my Lord and Master, that my mind may remain attached to the Guru's feet.<br>
  Servant Nanak remains attached to the Name of the Lord; he is merged in the Naam. ||4||3||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  My mind is addicted to the juice of the Lord's Name.<br>
  My heart-lotus has blossomed forth, and I have found the Guru. Meditating on the Lord, my doubts and fears have run away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the Fear of God, my heart is committed in loving devotion to Him; following the Guru's Teachings, my sleeping mind has awakened.<br>
  All my sins have been erased, and I have found peace and tranquility; I have enshrined the Lord within my heart, by great good fortune. ||1||<br>
  The self-willed manmukh is like the false color of the safflower, which fades away; its color lasts for only a few days.<br>
  He perishes in an instant; he is tormented, and punished by the Righteous Judge of Dharma. ||2||<br>
  The Lord's Love, found in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is absolutely permanent, and colorfast.<br>
  The cloth of the body may be torn to shreds, but still, this beautiful color of the Lord's Love does not fade away. ||3||<br>
  Meeting with the Blessed Guru, one is dyed in the color of the Lord's Love, imbued with this deep crimson color.<br>
  Servant Nanak washes the feet of that humble being, who is attached to the feet of the Lord. ||4||4||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, meditate, vibrate upon the Name of the Lord, the Lord of the World, Har, Har.<br>
  My mind and body are merged in the Lord's Name, and through the Guru's Teachings, my intellect is imbued with the Lord, the source of nectar. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Follow the Guru's Teachings, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. Chant, and meditate, on the beads of the mala of the Lord.<br>
  Those who have such destiny inscribed upon their foreheads, meet with the Lord, adorned with garlands of flowers. ||1||<br>
  Those who meditate on the Name of the Lord - all their entanglements are ended.<br>
  The Messenger of Death does not even approach them; the Guru, the Savior Lord, saves them. ||2||<br>
  I am a child; I know nothing at all. The Lord cherishes me, as my mother and father.<br>
  I continually put my hands into the fire of Maya, but the Guru saves me; He is merciful to the meek. ||3||<br>
  I was filthy, but I have become immaculate. Singing the Lord's Praises, all sins have been burnt to ashes.<br>
  My mind is in esctasy, having found the Guru; servant Nanak is enraptured through the Word of the Shabad. ||4||5||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fourth Mehl:<br>
 <center><h2>Section 24 - Raag Maale Gaaura - Part 003</h2></center>
  O my mind, meditate, vibrate on the Lord, and all sins will be eradicated.<br>
  The Guru has enshried the Lord, Har, Har, within my heart; I place my head on the Guru's Path. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whoever tells me the stories of my Lord God, I would cut my mind into slices, and dedicate it to him.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has united me with the Lord, my Friend; I have sold myself at each and every store for the Guru's Word. ||1||<br>
  One may give donations in charity at Prayaag, and cut the body in two at Benares,<br>
  but without the Lord's Name, no one attains liberation, even though one may give away huge amounts of gold. ||2||<br>
  When one follows the Guru's Teachings, and sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, the doors of the mind, held shut by deception, are thrown open again.<br>
  The three qualities are shattered, doubt and fear run away, and the clay pot of public opinion is broken. ||3||<br>
  They alone find the Perfect Guru in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, upon whose foreheads such pre-ordained destiny is inscribed.<br>
  Servant Nanak drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar; all his hunger and thirst are quenched. ||4||6||<br>
  Set of Six Hymns 1||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O mind, true peace comes from serving the Lord.<br>
  Other services are false, and as punishment for them, the Messenger of Death bashes in one's head. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They alone join the Sangat, the Congregation, upon whose forehead such destiny is inscribed.<br>
  They are carried across the terrifying world-ocean by the Saints of the Infinite, Primal Lord God. ||1||<br>
  Serve forever at the feet of the Holy; renounce greed, emotional attachment and corruption.<br>
  Abandon all other hopes, and rest your hopes in the One Formless Lord. ||2||<br>
  Some are faithless cynics, deluded by doubt; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.<br>
  Whatever is pre-ordained, comes to pass; no one can erase it. ||3||<br>
  The beauty of the Lord of the Universe is profound and unfathomable; the Names of the Infinite Lord are immunerable.<br>
  Blessed, blessed are those humble beings, O Nanak, who enshrine the Lord's Name in their hearts. ||4||1||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I humbly bow to the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Chanting it, one is saved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditating on Him in remembrance, conflicts are ended.<br>
  Meditating on Him, one's bonds are untied.<br>
  Meditating on Him, the fool becomes wise.<br>
  Meditating on Him, one's ancestors are saved. ||1||<br>
  Meditating on Him, fear and pain are taken away.<br>
  Meditating on Him, misfortune is avoided.<br>
  Meditating on Him, sins are erased.<br>
  Meditating on Him, agony is ended. ||2||<br>
  Meditating on Him, the heart blossoms forth.<br>
  Meditating on Him, Maya becomes one's slave.<br>
  Meditating on Him, one is blessed with the treasures of wealth.<br>
  Meditating on Him, one crosses over in the end. ||3||<br>
  The Name of the Lord is the Purifier of sinners.<br>
  It saves millions of devotees.<br>
  I am meek; I seek the Sanctuary of the slaves of the Lord's slaves.<br>
  Nanak lays his forehead on the feet of the Saints. ||4||2||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  This is the sort of helper the Name of the Lord is.<br>
  Meditating in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one's affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  It is like a boat to a drowning man.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 24 - Raag Maale Gaaura - Part 004</h2></center>
  It is like oil to the lamp whose flame is dying out.<br>
  It is like water poured on the burning fire.<br>
  It is like milk poured into the baby's mouth. ||1||<br>
  As one's brother becomes a helper on the field of battle;<br>
  as one's hunger is satisfied by food;<br>
  as the cloudburst saves the crops;<br>
  as one is protected in the tiger's lair;||2||<br>
  As with the magic spell of Garuda the eagle upon one's lips, one does not fear the snake;<br>
  as the cat cannot eat the parrot in its cage;<br>
  as the bird cherishes her eggs in her heart;<br>
  as the grains are spared, by sticking to the central post of the mill;||3||<br>
  Your Glory is so great; I can describe only a tiny bit of it.<br>
  O Lord, You are inaccessible, unapproachable and unfathomable.<br>
  You are lofty and high, utterly great and infinite.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, O Nanak, one is carried across. ||4||3||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Please let my works be rewarding and fruitful.<br>
  Please cherish and exalt Your slave. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I lay my forehead on the feet of the Saints,<br>
  and with my eyes, I gaze upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, day and night.<br>
  With my hands, I work for the Saints.<br>
  I dedicate my breath of life, my mind and wealth to the Saints. ||1||<br>
  My mind loves the Society of the Saints.<br>
  The Virtues of the Saints abide within my consciousness.<br>
  The Will of the Saints is sweet to my mind.<br>
  Seeing the Saints, my heart-lotus blossoms forth. ||2||<br>
  I dwell in the Society of the Saints.<br>
  I have such a great thirst for the Saints.<br>
  The Words of the Saints are the Mantras of my mind.<br>
  By the Grace of the Saints, my corruption is taken away. ||3||<br>
  This way of liberation is my treasure.<br>
  O Merciful God, please bless me with this gift.<br>
  O God, shower Your Mercy upon Nanak.<br>
  I have enshrined the feet of the Saints within my heart. ||4||4||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He is with all; He is not far away.<br>
  He is the Cause of causes, ever-present here and now. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Hearing His Name, one comes to life.<br>
  Pain is dispelled; peace and tranquility come to dwell within.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, is all treasure.<br>
  The silent sages serve Him. ||1||<br>
  Everything is contained in His home.<br>
  No one is turned away empty-handed.<br>
  He cherishes all beings and creatures.<br>
  Forever and ever, serve the Merciful Lord. ||2||<br>
  Righteous justice is dispensed in His Court forever.<br>
  He is carefree, and owes allegiance to no one.<br>
  He Himself, by Himself, does everything.<br>
  O my mind, meditate on Him. ||3||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Joining them, I am saved.<br>
  My mind and body are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  God has blessed Nanak with this gift. ||4||5||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I seek the Sanctuary of the all-powerful Lord.<br>
  My soul, body, wealth and capital belong to the One God, the Cause of causes. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance on Him, I have found everlasting peace. He is the source of life.<br>
  He is all-pervading, permeating all places; He is in subtle essence and manifest form. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 24 - Raag Maale Gaaura - Part 005</h2></center>
  Abandon all your entanglements and corruption; sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever.<br>
  With palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this blessing; please bless me with Your Name. ||2||1||6||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  God is all-powerful, divine and infinite.<br>
  Who knows Your wondrous plays? You have no end or limitation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In an instant, You establish and disestablish; You create and destroy, O Creator Lord.<br>
  As many beings as You created, God, so many You bless with Your blessings. ||1||<br>
  I have come to Your Sanctuary, Lord; I am Your slave, O Inaccessible Lord God.<br>
  Lift me up and pull me out of the terrifying, treacherous world-ocean; servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||2||2||7||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord of the World abides in my mind and body.<br>
  Friend of the meek, Lover of His devotees, forever and ever merciful. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the beginning, in the end and in the middle, You alone exist, God; there is none other than You.<br>
  He is totally permeating and pervading all worlds; He is the One and only Lord and Master. ||1||<br>
  With my ears I hear God's Praises, and with my eyes I behold the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; with my tongue I sing the Lord's Glorious Praises.<br>
  Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You; please, bless me with Your Name. ||2||3||8||6||14||<br>
  Maalee Gauraa, The Word Of Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Blessed, blessed is that flute which the Lord plays.<br>
  The sweet, sweet unstruck sound current sings forth. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the wool of the sheep;<br>
  blessed, blessed is the blanket worn by Krishna. ||1||<br>
  Blessed, blessed are you, O mother Dayvakee;<br>
  into your home the Lord was born. ||2||<br>
  Blessed, blessed are the forests of Brindaaban;<br>
  the Supreme Lord plays there. ||3||<br>
  He plays the flute, and herds the cows;<br>
  Naam Dayv's Lord and Master plays happily. ||4||1||<br>
  O my Father, Lord of wealth, blessed are You, long-haired, dark-skinned, my darling. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You hold the steel chakra in Your hand; You came down from Heaven, and saved the life of the elephant.<br>
  In the court of Duhsaasan, You saved the honor of Dropati, when her clothes were being removed. ||1||<br>
  You saved Ahliyaa, the wife of Gautam; how many have You purified and carried across?<br>
  Such a lowly outcaste as Naam Dayv has come seeking Your Sanctuary. ||2||2||<br>
  Within all hearts, the Lord speaks, the Lord speaks.<br>
  Who else speaks, other than the Lord? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Out of the same clay, the elephant, the ant, and the many sorts of species are formed.<br>
  In stationary life forms, moving beings, worms, moths and within each and every heart, the Lord is contained. ||1||<br>
  Remember the One, Infinite Lord; abandon all other hopes.<br>
  Naam Dayv prays, I have become dispassionate and detached; who is the Lord and Master, and who is the slave? ||2||3||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr25.htm">Next: Raag Maaroo</a></center>
 </body>