<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr26.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr28.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Kaydaaraa</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 001</h2></center>
  Kaydaaraa, Fourth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O my mind, sing continually the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The Inaccessible, Unfathomable Lord cannot be seen; meeting with the Perfect Guru, He is seen. ||Pause||<br>
  That person, upon whom my Lord and Master showers His Mercy - the Lord attunes that one to Himself.<br>
  Everyone worships the Lord, but only that person who is pleasing to the Lord is accepted. ||1||<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is priceless. It rests with the Lord. If the Lord bestows it, then we meditate on the Naam.<br>
  That person, whom my Lord and Master blesses with His Name - his entire account is forgiven. ||2||<br>
  Those humble beings who worship and adore the Lord's Name, are said to be blessed. Such is the good destiny written on their foreheads.<br>
  Gazing upon them, my mind blossoms forth, like the mother who meets with her son and hugs him close. ||3||<br>
  I am a child, and You, O my Lord God, are my Father; please bless me with such understanding, that I may find the Lord.<br>
  Like the cow, which is happy upon seeing her calf, O Lord, please hug Nanak close in Your Embrace. ||4||1||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fourth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O my mind, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Wash the Feet of the True Guru, and worship them. In this way, you shall find my Lord God. ||Pause||<br>
  Sexual desire, anger, greed, attachment, egotism and corrupt pleasures - stay away from these.<br>
  Join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and speak with the Holy People about the Lord. The Love of the Lord is the healing remedy; the Name of the Lord is the healing remedy. Chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 002</h2></center>
  So you think that the egotistical pride in power which you harbor deep within is everything. Let it go, and restrain your self-conceit.<br>
  Please be kind to servant Nanak, O Lord, my Lord and Master; please make him the dust of the Feet of the Saints. ||2||1||2||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O mother, I have awakened in the Society of the Saints.<br>
  Seeing the Love of my Beloved, I chant His Name, the greatest treasure||Pause||<br>
  I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. my eyes are focused on Him;<br>
  I have forgotten other thirsts. ||1||<br>
  Now, I have found my Peace-giving Guru with ease; seeing His Darshan, my mind clings to Him.<br>
  Seeing my Lord, joy has welled up in my mind; O Nanak, the speech of my Beloved is so sweet! ||2||1||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Please listen to the prayers of the humble, O Merciful Lord.<br>
  The five thieves and the three dispositions torment my mind.<br>
  O Merciful Lord, Master of the masterless, please save me from them. ||Pause||<br>
  I make all sorts of efforts and go on pilgrimages;<br>
  I perform the six rituals, and meditate in the right way.<br>
  I am so tired of making all these efforts, but the horrible demons still do not leave me. ||1||<br>
  I seek Your Sanctuary, and bow to You, O Compassionate Lord.<br>
  You are the Destroyer of fear, O Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har.<br>
  You alone are Merciful to the meek.<br>
  Nanak takes the Support of God's Feet.<br>
  I have been rescued from the ocean of doubt,<br>
  holding tight to the feet and the robes of the Saints. ||2||1||2||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I have come to Your Sanctuary, O Lord, O Supreme Treasure.<br>
  Love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is enshrined within my mind; I beg for the gift of Your Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Pefect Transcendent Lord, Giver of Peace, please grant Your Grace and save my honor.<br>
  Please bless me with such love, O my Lord and Master, that in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I may chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord with my tongue. ||1||<br>
  O Lord of the World, Merciful Lord of the Universe, Your sermon and spiritual wisdom are immaculate and pure.<br>
  Please attune Nanak to Your Love, O Lord, and focus his meditation on Your Lotus Feet. ||2||1||3||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind yearns for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.<br>
  Please grant Your Grace, and unite me with the Society of the Saints; please bless me with Your Name. ||Pause||<br>
  I serve my True Beloved Lord. Wherever I hear His Praise, there my mind is in ecstasy.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 003</h2></center>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever devoted to You. Your place is incomparably beautiful! ||1||<br>
  You cherish and nurture all; You take care of all, and Your shade covers all.<br>
  You are the Primal Creator, the God of Nanak; I behold You in each and every heart. ||2||2||4||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I love the Love of my Beloved.<br>
  My mind is intoxicated with delight, and my consciousness is filled with hope; my eyes are drenched with Your Love. ||Pause||<br>
  Blessed is that day, that hour, minute and second when the heavy, rigid shutters are opened, and desire is quenched.<br>
  Seeing the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I live. ||1||<br>
  What is the method, what is the effort, and what is the service, which inspires me to contemplate You?<br>
  Abandon your egotistical pride and attachment; O Nanak, you shall be saved in the Society of the Saints. ||2||3||5||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.<br>
  Have Mercy on me, O Life of the World, O Lord of the Universe, that I may chant Your Name. ||Pause||<br>
  Please lift me up, God, out of vice and corruption, and attach my mind to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Doubt, fear and attachment are eradicated from that person who follows the Guru's Teachings, and gazes on the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1||<br>
  Let my mind become the dust of all; may I abandon my egotistical intellect.<br>
  Please bless me with Your devotional worship, O Merciful Lord; by great good fortune, O Nanak, I have found the Lord. ||2||4||6||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Without the Lord, life is useless.<br>
  Those who forsake the Lord, and become engrossed in other pleasures - false and useless are the clothes they wear, and the food they eat. ||Pause||<br>
  The pleasures of wealth, youth, property and comforts will not stay with you, O mother.<br>
  Seeing the mirage, the madman is entangled in it; he is imbued with pleasures that pass away, like the shade of a tree. ||1||<br>
  Totally intoxicated with the wine of pride and attachment, he has fallen into the pit of sexual desire and anger.<br>
  O Dear God, please be the Help and Support of servant Nanak; please take me by the hand, and uplift me. ||2||5||7||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Nothing goes along with the mortal, except for the Lord.<br>
  He is the Master of the meek, the Lord of Mercy, my Lord and Master, the Master of the masterless. ||Pause||<br>
  Children, possessions and the enjoyment of corrupt pleasures do not go along with the mortal on the path of Death.<br>
  Singing the Glorious Praises of the treasure of the Naam, and the Lord of the Universe, the mortal is carried across the deep ocean. ||1||<br>
  In the Sanctuary of the All-powerful, Indescribable, Unfathomable Lord, meditate in remembrance on Him, and your pains shall vanish.<br>
  Nanak longs for the dust of the feet of the Lord's humble servant; he shall obtain it only if such pre-ordained destiny is written on his forehead. ||2||6||8||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I do not forget the Lord in my mind.<br>
  This love has now become very strong; it has burnt away other corruption. ||Pause||<br>
  How can the rainbird forsake the rain-drop? The fish cannot survive without water, even for an instant.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 004</h2></center>
  My tongue chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World; this has become part of my very nature. ||1||<br>
  The deer is fascinated by the sound of the bell, and so it is shot with the sharp arrow.<br>
  God's Lotus Feet are the Source of Nectar; O Nanak, I am tied to them by a knot. ||2||1||9||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My Beloved dwells in the cave of my heart.<br>
  Shatter the wall of doubt, O my Lord and Master; please grab hold of me, and lift me up towards Yourself. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The world-ocean is so vast and deep; please be kind, lift me up and place me on the shore.<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, the Lord's Feet are the boat to carry us across. ||1||<br>
  The One who placed you in the womb of your mother's belly - no one else shall save you in the wilderness of corruption.<br>
  The power of the Lord's Sanctuary is all-powerful; Nanak does not rely on any other. ||2||2||10||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  With your tongue, chant the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, day and night, your sins shall be eradicated. ||Pause||<br>
  You shall have to leave behind all your riches when you depart. Death is hanging over your head - know this well!<br>
  Transitory attachments and evil hopes are false. Surely you must believe this! ||1||<br>
  Within your heart, focus your meditation on the True Primal Being, Akaal Moorat, the Undying Form.<br>
  Only this profitable merchandise, the treasure of the Naam, O Nanak, shall be accepted. ||2||3||11||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I take only the Support of the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Suffering and conflict do not afflict me; I deal only with the Society of the Saints. ||Pause||<br>
  Showering His Mercy on me, the Lord Himself has saved me, and no evil thoughts arise within me.<br>
  Whoever receives this Grace, contemplates Him in meditation; he is not burned by the fire of the world. ||1||<br>
  Peace, joy and bliss come from the Lord, Har, Har. God's Feet are sublime and excellent.<br>
  Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; he is the dust of the feet of Your Saints. ||2||4||12||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Without the Name of the Lord, one's ears are cursed.<br>
  Those who forget the Embodiment of Life - what is the point of their lives? ||Pause||<br>
  One who eats and drinks countless delicacies is no more than a donkey, a beast of burden.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, he endures terrible suffering, like the bull, chained to the oil-press. ||1||<br>
  Forsaking the Life of the World, and attached to another, they weep and wail in so many ways.<br>
  With his palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this gift; O Lord, please keep me strung around Your Neck. ||2||5||13||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I take the dust of the feet of the Saints and apply it to my face.<br>
  Hearing of the Imperishable, Eternally Perfect Lord, pain does not afflict me, even in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||Pause||<br>
  Through the Guru's Word, all affairs are resolved, and the mind is not tossed about here and there.<br>
  Whoever sees the One God to be pervading in all the many beings, does not burn in the fire of corruption. ||1||<br>
  The Lord grasps His slave by the arm, and his light merges into the Light.<br>
  Nanak, the orphan, has come seeking the Sanctuary of God's Feet; O Lord, he walks with You. ||2||6||14||<br>
  Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:<br>
 <center><h2>Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 005</h2></center>
  My mind is filled with yearning for the Name of the Lord.<br>
  I am totally filled with tranquility and bliss; the burning desire within has been quenched. ||Pause||<br>
  Walking on the path of the Saints, millions of mortal sinners have been saved.<br>
  One who applies the dust of the feet of the humble to his forehead, is purified, as if he has bathed at countless sacred shrines. ||1||<br>
  Meditating on His Lotus Feet deep within, one realizes the Lord and Master in each and every heart.<br>
  In the Sanctuary of the Divine, Infinite Lord, Nanak shall never again be tortured by the Messenger of Death. ||2||7||15||<br>
  Kaydaaraa Chhant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Please meet me, O my Dear Beloved. ||Pause||<br>
  He is All-pervading amongst all, the Architect of Destiny.<br>
  The Lord God has created His Path, which is known in the Society of the Saints.<br>
  The Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny, is known in the Society of the Saints; You are seen in each and every heart.<br>
  One who comes to His Sanctuary, finds absolute peace; not even a bit of his work goes unnoticed.<br>
  One who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue, is easily, naturally intoxicated with the supreme, sublime essence of divine love.<br>
  Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; You are the Perfect Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny. ||1||<br>
  The Lord's humble servant is pierced through with loving devotion to Him; where else can he go?<br>
  The fish cannot endure separation, and without water, it will die.<br>
  Without the Lord, how can I survive? How can I endure the pain? I am like the rainbird, thirsty for the rain-drop.<br>
  "When will the night pass?," asks the chakvi bird. "I shall find peace only when the rays of the sun shine on me."<br>
  My mind is attached to the Blessed Vision of the Lord. Blessed are the nights and days, when I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord,<br>
  Slave Nanak utters this prayer; without the Lord, how can the breath of life continue to flow through me? ||2||<br>
  Without the breath, how can the body obtain glory and fame?<br>
  Without the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, the humble, holy person does not find peace, even for an instant.<br>
  Those who are without the Lord suffer in hell; my mind is pierced through with the Lord's Feet.<br>
  The Lord is both sensual and unattached; lovingly attune yourself to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. No one can ever deny Him.<br>
  Go and meet with the Lord, and dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; no one can contain that peace within his being.<br>
  Please be kind to me, O Lord and Master of Nanak, that I may merge in You. ||3||<br>
  Searching and searching, I have met with my Lord God, who has showered me with His Mercy.<br>
  I am unworthy, a lowly orphan, but He does not even consider my faults.<br>
  He does not consider my faults; He has blessed me with Perfect Peace. It is said that it is His Way to purify us.<br>
  Hearing that He is the Love of His devotees, I have grasped the hem of His robe. He is totally permeating each and every heart.<br>
  I have found the Lord, the Ocean of Peace, with intuitive ease; the pains of birth and death are gone.<br>
  Taking him by the hand, the Lord has saved Nanak, His slave; He has woven the garland of His Name into his heart. ||4||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 006</h2></center>
  Raag Kaydaaraa, The Word Of Kabeer Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Those who ignore both praise and slander, who reject egotistical pride and conceit,<br>
  who look alike upon iron and gold - they are the very image of the Lord God. ||1||<br>
  Hardly anyone is a humble servant of Yours, O Lord.<br>
  Ignoring sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment, such a person becomes aware of the Lord's Feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Raajas, the quality of energy and activity; Taamas, the quality of darkness and inertia; and Satvas, the quality of purity and light, are all called the creations of Maya, Your illusion.<br>
  That man who realizes the fourth state - he alone obtains the supreme state. ||2||<br>
  Amidst pilgrimages, fasting, rituals, purification and self-discipline, he remains always without thought of reward.<br>
  Thirst and desire for Maya and doubt depart, remembering the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||3||<br>
  When the temple is illuminated by the lamp, its darkness is dispelled.<br>
  The Fearless Lord is All-pervading. Doubt has run away, says Kabeer, the Lord's humble slave. ||4||1||<br>
  Some deal in bronze and copper, some in cloves and betel nuts.<br>
  The Saints deal in the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe. Such is my merchandise as well. ||1||<br>
  I am a trader in the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The priceless diamond has come into my hands. I have left the world behind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When the True Lord attached me, then I was attached to Truth. I am a trader of the True Lord.<br>
  I have loaded the commodity of Truth; It has reached the Lord, the Treasurer. ||2||<br>
  He Himself is the pearl, the jewel, the ruby; He Himself is the jeweller.<br>
  He Himself spreads out in the ten directions. The Merchant is Eternal and Unchanging. ||3||<br>
  My mind is the bull, and meditation is the road; I have filled my packs with spiritual wisdom, and loaded them on the bull.<br>
  Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints: my merchandise has reached its destination! ||4||2||<br>
  You barbaric brute, with your primitive intellect - reverse your breath and turn it inward.<br>
  Let your mind be intoxicated with the stream of Ambrosial Nectar which trickles down from the furnace of the Tenth Gate. ||1||<br>
  O Siblings of Destiny, call on the Lord.<br>
  O Saints, drink in this wine forever; it is so difficult to obtain, and it quenches your thirst so easily. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the Fear of God, is the Love of God. Only those few who understand His Love obtain the sublime essence of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  As many hearts as there are - in all of them, is His Ambrosial Nectar; as He pleases, He causes them to drink it in. ||2||<br>
  There are nine gates to the one city of the body; restrain your mind from escaping through them.<br>
  When the knot of the three qualities is untied, then the Tenth Gate opens up, and the mind is intoxicated, O Siblings of Destiny. ||3||<br>
  When the mortal fully realizes the state of fearless dignity, then his sufferings vanish; so says Kabeer after careful deliberation.<br>
  Turning away from the world, I have obtained this wine, and I am intoxicated with it. ||4||3||<br>
  You are engrossed with unsatisfied sexual desire and unresolved anger; you do not know the State of the One Lord.<br>
  Your eyes are blinded, and you see nothing at all. You drown and die without water. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 007</h2></center>
  Why do you walk in that crooked, zig-zag way?<br>
  You are nothing more than a bundle of bones, wrapped in skin, filled with manure; you give off such a rotten smell! ||1||Pause||<br>
  You do not meditate on the Lord. What doubts have confused and deluded you? Death is not far away from you!<br>
  Making all sorts of efforts, you manage to preserve this body, but it shall only survive until its time is up. ||2||<br>
  By one's own efforts, nothing is done. What can the mere mortal accomplish?<br>
  When it pleases the Lord, the mortal meets the True Guru, and chants the Name of the One Lord. ||3||<br>
  You live in a house of sand, but you still puff up your body - you ignorant fool!<br>
  Says Kabeer, those who do not remember the Lord may be very clever, but they still drown. ||4||4||<br>
  Your turban is crooked, and you walk crooked; and now you have started chewing betel leaves.<br>
  You have no use at all for loving devotional worship; you say you have business in court. ||1||<br>
  In your egotistical pride, you have forgotten the Lord.<br>
  Gazing upon your gold, and your very beautiful wife, you believe that they are permanent. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are engrossed in greed, falsehood, corruption and great arrogance. Your life is passing away.<br>
  Says Kabeer, at the very last moment, death will come and seize you, you fool! ||2||5||<br>
  The mortal beats the drum for a few days, and then he must depart.<br>
  With so much wealth and cash and buried treasure, still, he cannot take anything with him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Sitting on the threshhold, his wife weeps and wails; his mother accompanies him to the outer gate.<br>
  All the people and relatives together go to the crematorium, but the swan-soul must go home all alone. ||1||<br>
  Those children, that wealth, that city and town - he shall not come to see them again.<br>
  Says Kabeer, why do you not meditate on the Lord? Your life is uselessly slipping away! ||2||6||<br>
  Raag Kaydaaraa, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  One who performs the six religious rituals and comes from a good family, but who does not have devotion to the Lord in his heart,<br>
  one who does not appreciate talk of the Lord's Lotus Feet, is just like an outcaste, a pariah. ||1||<br>
  Be conscious, be conscious, be conscious, O my unconscious mind.<br>
  Why do you not look at Baalmeek?<br>
  From such a low social status, what a high status he obtained! Devotional worship to the Lord is sublime! ||1||Pause||<br>
  The killer of dogs, the lowest of all, was lovingly embraced by Krishna.<br>
  See how the poor people praise him! His praise extends throughout the three worlds. ||2||<br>
  Ajaamal, Pingulaa, Lodhia and the elephant went to the Lord.<br>
  Even such evil-minded beings were emancipated. Why should you not also be saved, O Ravi Daas? ||3||1||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr28.htm">Next: Raag Bhairao</a></center>
 </body>