<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr29.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr31.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Saarang</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 001</h2></center>
  Raag Saarang, Chau-Padas, First Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  I am the hand-maiden of my Lord and Master.<br>
  I have grasped the Feet of God, the Life of the world. He has killed and eradicated my egotism. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is the Perfect, Supreme Light, the Supreme Lord God, my Beloved, my Breath of Life.<br>
  The Fascinating Lord has fascinated my mind; contemplating the Word of the Shabad, I have come to understand. ||1||<br>
  The worthless self-willed manmukh, with false and shallow understanding - his mind and body are held in pain's grip.<br>
  Since I came to be imbued with the Love of my Beautiful Lord, I meditate on the Lord, and my mind is encouraged. ||2||<br>
  Abandoning egotism, I have become detached. And now, I absorb true intuitive understanding.<br>
  The mind is pleased and appeased by the Pure, Immaculate Lord; the opinions of other people are irrelevant. ||3||<br>
  There is no other like You, in the past or in the future, O my Beloved, my Breath of Life, my Support.<br>
  The soul-bride is imbued with the Name of the Lord; O Nanak, the Lord is her Husband. ||4||1||<br>
  Saarang, First Mehl:<br>
  How can I survive without the Lord? I am suffering in pain.<br>
  My tongue does not taste - all is bland without the Lord's sublime essence. Without God, I suffer and die. ||1||Pause||<br>
  As long as I do not attain the Blessed Vision of my Beloved, I remain hungry and thirsty.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, my mind is pleased and appeased. The lotus blossoms forth in the water. ||1||<br>
  The low-hanging clouds crack with thunder and burst. The cuckoos and the peacocks are filled with passion,<br>
  along with the birds in the trees, the bulls and the snakes. The soul-bride is happy when her Husband Lord returns home. ||2||<br>
  She is filthy and ugly, unfeminine and ill-mannered - she has no intuitive understanding of her Husband Lord.<br>
  She is not satisfied by the sublime essence of her Lord's Love; she is evil-minded, immersed in her pain. ||3||<br>
  The soul-bride does not come and go in reincarnation or suffer in pain; her body is not touched by the pain of disease.<br>
  O Nanak, she is intuitively embellished by God; seeing God, her mind is encouraged. ||4||2||<br>
  Saarang, First Mehl:<br>
  My Beloved Lord God is not far away.<br>
  My mind is pleased and appeased by the Word of the True Guru's Teachings. I have found the Lord, the Support of my breath of life. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 002</h2></center>
  This is the way to meet your Husband Lord. Blessed is the soul-bride who is loved by her Husband Lord.<br>
  Social class and status, race, ancestry and skepticism are eliminated, following the Guru's Teachings and contemplating the Word of the Shabad. ||1||<br>
  One whose mind is pleased and appeased, has no egotistical pride. Violence and greed are forgotten.<br>
  The soul-bride intuitively ravishes and enjoys her Husband Lord; as Gurmukh, she is embellished by His Love. ||2||<br>
  Burn away any love of family and relatives, which increases your attachment to Maya.<br>
  One who does not savor the Lord's Love deep within, lives in duality and corruption. ||3||<br>
  His Love is a priceless jewel deep within my being; the Lover of my Beloved is not hidden.<br>
  O Nanak, as Gurmukh, enshrine the Priceless Naam deep within your being, all the ages through. ||4||3||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I am the dust of the feet of the humble Saints of the Lord.<br>
  Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I have obtained the supreme status. The Lord, the Supreme Soul, is all-pervading everywhere. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meeting the Saintly True Guru, I have found peace and tranquility. Sins and painful mistakes are totally erased and taken away.<br>
  The Divine Light of the soul radiates forth, gazing upon the Presence of the Immaculate Lord God. ||1||<br>
  By great good fortune, I have found the Sat Sangat; the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is all-prevading everywhere.<br>
  I have taken my cleansing bath at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, bathing in the dust of the feet of the True Congregation. ||2||<br>
  Evil-minded and corrupt, filthy-minded and shallow, with impure heart, attached to enticement and falsehood.<br>
  Without good karma, how can I find the Sangat? Engrossed in egotism, the mortal remains stuck in regret. ||3||<br>
  Be kind and show Your Mercy, O Dear Lord; I beg for the dust of the feet of the Sat Sangat.<br>
  O Nanak, meeting with the Saints, the Lord is attained. The Lord's humble servant obtains the Presence of the Lord. ||4||1||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Feet of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  I cannot swim across the terrifying world ocean. But chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I am carried across across. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Faith in God came to fill my heart; I serve Him intuitively, and contemplate Him.<br>
  Night and day, I chant the Lord's Name within my heart; it is all-powerful and virtuous. ||1||<br>
  God is Inaccessible and Unfathomable, All-pervading everywhere, in all minds and bodies; He is Infinite and Invisible.<br>
  When the Guru bebomes merciful, then the Unseen Lord is seen within the heart. ||2||<br>
  Deep within the inner being is the Name of the Lord, the Support of the entire earth, but to the egotistical shaakta, the faithless cynic, He seems far away.<br>
  His burning desire is never quenched, and he loses the game of life in the gamble. ||3||<br>
  Standing up and sitting down, the mortal sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, when the Guru bestows even a tiny bit of His Grace.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are blessed by His Glance of Grace - He saves and protects their honor. ||4||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 003</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my Beloved Lord, Har, Har, please bless me with Your Ambrosial Name.<br>
  Those whose minds are pleased to be Gurmukh - the Lord completes their projects. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those humble beings who become meek before the Guru-their pains are taken away.<br>
  Night and day, they perform devotional worship services to the Guru; they are embellished with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||<br>
  Within their hearts is the ambrosial essence of the Naam, the Name of the Lord; they savor this essence, sing the praises of this essence, and contemplate this essence.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, they are aware of this ambrosial essence; they find the Gate of Salvation. ||2||<br>
  The True is the Primal Being, Unmoving and Unchanging. One who takes the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord - his intellect becomes focused and steady.<br>
  I offer my soul to Him; I am a sacrifice to my True Guru. ||3||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are stuck in doubt and attached to duality; the darkness of spiritual ignorance is within them.<br>
  They do not see the True Guru, the Giver; they are not on this shore, or the other. ||4||<br>
  Our Lord and Master is permeating and pervading each and every heart; He is supremely Potent to exercise His Might.<br>
  Nanak, the slave of His slaves, says, please, be merciful and save me! ||5||3||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  This is the way to work for the Lord.<br>
  Whatever He does, accept that as true. As Gurmukh, remain lovingly absorbed in His Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Love of the Lord of the Universe seems supremely sweet. Everything else is forgotten.<br>
  Night and day, he is in ecstasy; his mind is pleased and appeased, and his light merges into the Light. ||1||<br>
  Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, his mind is satisfied. Peace and tranquility come to abide within his mind.<br>
  When the Guru becomes merciful, the mortal finds the Lord; he focuses his consciousness on the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||2||<br>
  The intellect is enlightened, meditating on the Lord. He remains lovingly attuned to the essence of spiritual wisdom.<br>
  The Divine Light radiates forth deep within his being; his mind is pleased and appeased. He merges intuitively into Celestial Samaadhi. ||3||<br>
  One whose heart is filled with falsehood, continues to practice falsehood, even while he teaches and preaches about the Lord.<br>
  Within him is the utter darkness of greed. He is thrashed like wheat, and suffers in pain. ||4||<br>
  When my God is totally pleased, the mortal tunes in and becomes Gurmukh.<br>
  Nanak has obtained the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord. Chanting the Naam, he has found peace. ||5||4||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  My mind is pleased and appeased by the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The True Guru has implanted divine love within my heart. The Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Please be merciful to Your meek and humble servant; please bless Your humble servant with Your Unspoken Speech.<br>
  Meeting with the humble Saints, I have found the sublime essence of the Lord. The Lord seems so sweet to my mind and body. ||1||<br>
  They alone are unattached, who are imbued with the Lord's Love; through the Guru's Teachings, they realize the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Meeting with the Primal Being, one finds peace, and one's comings and goings in reincarnation are ended. ||2||<br>
  With my eyes, I gaze lovingly upon God, my Lord and Master. I chant His Name with my tongue.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 004</h2></center>
  With my ears, I listen to the Kirtan of His Praises, day and night. I love the Lord, Har, Har, with all my heart. ||3||<br>
  When the Guru helped me to overcome the five thieves, then I found ultimate bliss, attached to the Naam.<br>
  The Lord has showered His Mercy on servant Nanak; he merges in the Lord, in the Name of the Lord. ||4||5||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, and study His Excellence.<br>
  Without the Lord's Name, nothing is steady or stable. All the rest of the show is useless. ||1||Pause||<br>
  What is there to accept, and what is there to reject, O madman? Whatever is seen shall turn to dust.<br>
  That poison which you believe to be your own - you must abandon it and leave it behind. What a load you have to carry on your head! ||1||<br>
  Moment by moment, instant by instant, your life is running out. The fool cannot understand this.<br>
  He does things which will not go along with him in the end. This is the lifestyle of the faithless cynic. ||2||<br>
  So join together with the humble Saints, O madman, and you shall find the Gate of Salvation.<br>
  Without the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, no one finds any peace. Go and ask the scholars of the Vedas. ||3||<br>
  All the kings and queens shall depart; they must leave this false expanse.<br>
  O Nanak, the Saints are eternally steady and stable; they take the Support of the Name of the Lord. ||4||6||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl, Third House, Du-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O son, why do you argue with your father?<br>
  It is a sin to argue with the one who fathered you and raised you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That wealth, which you are so proud of - that wealth does not belong to anyone.<br>
  In an instant, you shall have to leave behind all your corrupt pleasures; you shall be left to regret and repent. ||1||<br>
  He is God, your Lord and Master - chant the Chant of that Lord.<br>
  Servant Nanak spreads the Teachings; if you listen to it, you shall be rid of your pain. ||2||1||7||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl, Fifth House, Du-Padas, Partaal:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Lord of the World, the Master of the Universe, the Life of the World, the Enticer of the mind; fall in love with Him. I take the Support of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, all day and all night. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Endless, endless, endless are the Praises of the Lord. Suk Dayv, Naarad and the gods like Brahma sing His Glorious Praises. Your Glorious Virtues, O my Lord and Master, cannot even be counted.<br>
  O Lord, You are Infinite, O Lord, You are Infinite, O Lord, You are my Lord and Master; only You Yourself know Your Own Ways. ||1||<br>
  Those who are near, near to the Lord - those who dwell near the Lord - those humble servants of the Lord are the Holy, the devotees of the Lord.<br>
  Those humble servants of the Lord merge with their Lord, O Nanak, like water merging with water. ||2||1||8||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 005</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Lord, the Lord, your Lord and Master. The Lord is the Most Divine of all the divine beings. Chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, the Lord, my most Dear Beloved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That household, in which the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung, in which the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung, in which His Glorious Praises are sung, where the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, resound - great is the destiny w<br>
  All the sins of that humble being are taken away, all the pains are taken away, all diseases are taken away; sexual desire, anger, greed, attachment and egotistical pride are taken away. The Lord drives the five thieves out of such a person<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, O Holy Saints of the Lord; meditate on the Lord of the Universe, O Holy people of the Lord. Meditate in thought, word and deed on the Lord, Har, Har. Worship and adore the Lord, O Holy people of the Lord.<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, chant the Name of the Lord. It shall rid you of all your sins.<br>
  Continually and continuously remain awake and aware. You shall be in ecstasy forever and ever, meditating on the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Servant Nanak: O Lord, Your devotees obtain the fruits of their minds' desires; they obtain all the fruits and rewards, and the four great blessings - Dharmic faith, wealth and riches, sexual success and liberation. ||2||2||9||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Lord, the Lord of Wealth, the Source of Nectar, the Supreme Lord God, the True Transcendent Being, God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  He is the Destroyer of all suffering, the Giver of all peace; sing the Praises of my Beloved Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord dwells in the home of each and every heart. The Lord dwells in the water, and the Lord dwells on the land. The Lord dwells in the spaces and interspaces. I have such a great longing to see the Lord.<br>
  If only some Saint, some humble Saint of the Lord, my Holy Beloved, would come, to show me the way.<br>
  I would wash and massage the feet of that humble being. ||1||<br>
  The Lord's humble servant meets the Lord, through his faith in the Lord; meeting the Lord, he becomes Gurmukh.<br>
  My mind and body are in ecstasy; I have seen my Sovereign Lord King.<br>
  Servant Nanak has been blessed with Grace, blessed with the Lord's Grace, blessed with the Grace of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  I meditate on the Lord, the Name of the Lord, night and day, forever, forever and ever. ||2||3||10||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Fearless Lord,<br>
  who is True, True, Forever True.<br>
  He is free of vengeance, the Image of the Undying,<br>
  beyond birth, Self-existent.<br>
  O my mind, meditate night and day on the Formless, Self-sustaining Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  For the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, the three hundred thirty million gods, and millions of Siddhas, celibates and Yogis make their pilgrimages to sacred shrines and rivers, and go on f<br>
  The service of the humble person is approved, unto whom the Lord of the World shows His Mercy. ||1||<br>
  They alone are the good Saints of the Lord, the best and most exalted devotees, who are pleasing to their Lord.<br>
  Those who have my Lord and Master on their side - O Nanak, the Lord saves their honor. ||2||4||11||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 006</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl, Partaal:<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Lord of the Universe, the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, the Treasure of Virtue, the God of all creation. O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, the Lord, the Eternal, Imperishable, Primal Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Name of the Lord is the Ambrosial Nectar, Har, Har, Har. He alone drinks it in, whom the Lord inspires to drink it.<br>
  The Merciful Lord Himself bestows His Mercy, and He leads the mortal to meet with the True Guru. That humble being tastes the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  Those who serve my Lord, forever and ever - all their pain, doubt and fear are taken away.<br>
  Servant Nanak chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and so he lives, like the song-bird, which is satisfied only by drinking in the water. ||2||5||12||<br>
  Saarang, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, meditate on the Supreme Lord.<br>
  The Lord, the Lord is All-pervading.<br>
  True, True is the Lord.<br>
  O Siblings of Destiny, chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, forever. He is All-pervading everywhere. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord Himself is Himself the Creator of all. The Lord Himself is Himself pervading the whole world.<br>
  That person, upon whom my Sovereign Lord King, Raam, Raam, Raam, bestows His Mercy - that person is lovingly attuned to the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
  O Saints of the Lord, behold the Glory of the Name of the Lord; His Name saves the honor of His humble devotees in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.<br>
  My Sovereign Lord King has taken servant Nanak's side; his enemies and attackers have all run away. ||2||6||13||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Image of the True Guru.<br>
  My inner being is filled with a great thirst, like that of the song-bird for water. When shall I find the Fruitful Vision of His Darshan? ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is the Master of the masterless, the Cherisher of all. He is the Lover of the devotees of His Name.<br>
  That mortal, whom no one can protect - You bless him with Your Support, O Lord. ||1||<br>
  Support of the unsupported, Saving Grace of the unsaved, Home of the homeless.<br>
  Wherever I go in the ten directions, You are there with me. The only thing I do is sing the Kirtan of Your Praises. ||2||<br>
  From Your Oneness, You become tens of thousands, and from tens of thousands, You become One. I cannot describe Your state and extent.<br>
  You are Infinite - Your value cannot be appraised. Everything I see is Your play. ||3||<br>
  I speak with the Company of the Holy; I am in love with the Holy people of the Lord.<br>
  Servant Nanak has found the Lord through the Guru's Teachings; please bless me with Your Blessed Vision; O Lord, my mind yearns for it. ||4||1||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Dear Lord is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  The mortal does evil deeds, and hides from others, but like the air, the Lord is present everywhere. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You call yourself a devotee of Vishnu and you practice the six rituals, but your inner being is polluted with greed.<br>
  Those who slander the Society of the Saints, shall all be drowned in their ignorance. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 007</h2></center>
  The mortal eats the food which he has carefully prepared, and then steals the wealth of others. His inner being is filled with falsehood and pride.<br>
  He knows nothing of the Vedas or the Shaastras; his mind is gripped by pride. ||2||<br>
  He says his evening prayers, and observes all the fasts, but this is all just a show.<br>
  God made him stray from the path, and sent him into the wilderness. All his actions are useless. ||3||<br>
  He alone is a spiritual teacher, and he alone is a devotee of Vishnu and a scholar, whom the Lord God blesses with His Grace.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, he obtains the supreme status and saves the whole world. ||4||<br>
  What can I say? I don't know what to say. As God wills, so do I speak.<br>
  I ask only for the dust of the feet of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Servant Nanak seeks their Sanctuary. ||5||2||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now, my dancing is over.<br>
  I have intuitively obtained my Darling Beloved. Through the Word of the True Guru's Teachings, I found Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The virgin speaks with her friends about her husband and they laugh together;<br>
  but when he comes home, she becomes shy, and modestly covers her face. ||1||<br>
  When gold is melted in the crucible, it flows freely everywhere.<br>
  But when it is made into pure solid bars of gold, then it remains stationary. ||2||<br>
  As long as the days and the nights of one's life last, the clock strikes the hours, minutes and seconds.<br>
  But when the gong player gets up and leaves, the gong is not sounded again. ||3||<br>
  When the pitcher is filled with water, the water contained within it seems distinct.<br>
  Says Nanak, when the pitcher is emptied out, the water mingles again with water. ||4||3||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now if he is asked, what can he say?<br>
  He was supposed to have gathered the sublime essence of the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, but instead, the mad-man was busy with poison. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This human life, so difficult to obtain, was finally obtained after such a long time. He is losing it in exchange for a shell.<br>
  He came to buy musk, but instead, he has loaded dust and thistle grass. ||1||<br>
  He comes in search of profits, but he is entangled in the enticing illusion of Maya.<br>
  He loses the jewel, in exchange for mere glass. When will he have this blessed opportunity again? ||2||<br>
  He is full of sins, and he has not even one redeeming virtue. Forsaking his Lord and Master, he is involved with Maya, God's slave.<br>
  And when the final silence comes, like inanimate matter, he is caught like a thief at the door. ||3||<br>
  I cannot see any other way out. I seek the Sanctuary of the Lord's slaves.<br>
  Says Nanak, the mortal is emancipated, only when all his demerits and faults are erased and eradicated. ||4||4||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, my patience is gone. I am in love with my Husband Lord.<br>
  There are so many kinds of incomparable pleasures, but I am not interested in any of them. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Night and day, I utter, "Pri-a, Pri-a - Beloved, Beloved" with my mouth. I cannot sleep, even for an instant; I remain awake and aware.<br>
  Necklaces, eye make-up, fancy clothes and decorations - without my Husband Lord, these are all poison to me. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 008</h2></center>
  I ask and ask, with humility, "Who can tell me which country my Husband Lord lives in?"<br>
  I would dedicate my heart to him, I offer my mind and body and everything; I place my head at his feet. ||2||<br>
  I bow at the feet of the voluntary slave of the Lord; I beg him to bless me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Show Mercy to me, that I may meet God, and gaze upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan every moment. ||3||<br>
  When He is Kind to me, He comes to dwell within my being. Night and day, my mind is calm and peaceful.<br>
  Says Nanak, I sing the Songs of Joy; the Unstruck Word of the Shabad resounds within me. ||4||5||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, True, True True is the Lord, and True, True, True is His Holy Saint.<br>
  The Word which the Perfect Guru has spoken, I have tied to my robe. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Night and day, and the stars in the sky shall vanish. The sun and the moon shall vanish.<br>
  The mountains, the earth, the water and the air shall pass away. Only the Word of the Holy Saint shall endure. ||1||<br>
  Those born of eggs shall pass away, and those born of the womb shall pass away. Those born of the earth and sweat shall pass away as well.<br>
  The four Vedas shall pass away, and the six Shaastras shall pass away. Only the Word of the Holy Saint is eternal. ||2||<br>
  Raajas, the quality of energetic activity shall pass away. Taamas, the quality of lethargic darkness shall pass away. Saatvas, the quality of peaceful light shall pass away as well.<br>
  All that is seen shall pass away. Only the Word of the Holy Saint is beyond destruction. ||3||<br>
  He Himself is Himself by Himself. All that is seen is His play.<br>
  He cannot be found by any means. O Nanak, meeting with the Guru, God is found. ||4||6||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, dwells within my mind.<br>
  Wherever my Lord and Master is remembered in meditation - that village is filled with peace and bliss. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Wherever my Beloved Lord and Master is forgotten - all misery and misfortune is there.<br>
  Where the Praises of my Lord, the Embodiment of Bliss and Joy are sung - eternal peace and wealth are there. ||1||<br>
  Wherever they do not listen to the Stories of the Lord with their ears - the utterly desolate wilderness is there.<br>
  Where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung with love in the Saadh Sangat - there is fragrance and fruit and joy in abundance. ||2||<br>
  Without meditative remembrance on the Lord, one may live for millions of years, but his life would be totally useless.<br>
  But if he vibrates and meditates on the Lord of the Universe, for even a moment, then he shall live forever and ever. ||3||<br>
  O God, I seek Your Sanctuary, Your Sanctuary, Your Sanctuary; please mercifully bless me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord is All-pervading everywhere, amongst all. He knows the qualities and the condition of all. ||4||7||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now, I have obtained the Support of the Lord.<br>
  Those who seek the Sanctuary of the Ocean of Mercy are carried across the world-ocean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They sleep in peace, and intuitively merge into the Lord. The Guru takes away their cynicism and doubt.<br>
  Whatever they wish for, the Lord does; they obtain the fruits of their minds' desires. ||1||<br>
  In my heart, I meditate on Him; with my eyes, I focus my meditation on Him. With my ears, I listen to His Sermon.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 009</h2></center>
  With my feet, I walk on my Lord and Mater's Path. With my tongue, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  With my eyes, I see the Lord, the Embodiment of Absolute Bliss; the Saint has turned away from the world.<br>
  I have found the Priceless Name of the Beloved Lord; it never leaves me or goes anywhere else. ||3||<br>
  What praise, what glory and what virtues should I utter, in order to please the Lord?<br>
  That humble being, unto whom the Merciful Lord is kind - O servant Nanak, he is the slave of God's slaves. ||4||8||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Who can I tell, and with whom can I speak, about this state of peace and bliss?<br>
  I am in ecstasy and delight, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. My mind sings His Songs of Joy and His Glories. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am wonderstruck, gazing upon the Wondrous Lord. The Merciful Lord is All-pervading everywhere.<br>
  I drink in the Invaluable Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Like the mute, I can only smile - I cannot speak of its flavor. ||1||<br>
  As the breath is held in bondage, no one can understand its coming in and going out.<br>
  So is that person, whose heart is enlightened by the Lord - his story cannot be told. ||2||<br>
  As many other efforts as you can think of - I have seen them and studied them all.<br>
  My Beloved, Carefree Lord has revealed Himself within the home of my own heart; thus I have realized the Inaccessible Lord. ||3||<br>
  The Absolute, Formless, Eternally Unchanging, Immeasurable Lord cannot be masured.<br>
  Says Nanak, whoever endures the unendurable - this state belongs to him alone. ||4||9||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The corrupt person passes his days and nights uselessly.<br>
  He does not vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the Universe; he is intoxicated with egotistical intellect. He loses his life in the gamble. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is priceless, but he is not in love with it. He loves only to slander others.<br>
  Weaving the grass, he builds his house of straw. At the door, he builds a fire. ||1||<br>
  He carries a load of sulfur on his head, and drives the Ambrosial Nectar out of his mind.<br>
  Wearing his good clothes, the mortal falls into the coal-pit; again and again, he tries to shake it off. ||2||<br>
  Standing on the branch, eating and eating and smiling, he cuts down the tree.<br>
  He falls down head-first and is shattered into bits and pieces. ||3||<br>
  He bears vengeance against the Lord who is free of vengeance. The fool is not up to the task.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Saving Grace of the Saints is the Formless, Supreme Lord God. ||4||10||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  All the others are deluded by doubt; they do not understand.<br>
  That person, within whose heart the One Pure Word abides, realizes the essence of the Vedas. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He walks in the ways of the world, trying to please people.<br>
  But as long as his heart is not enlightened, he is stuck in pitch black darkness. ||1||<br>
  The land may be prepared in every way, but nothing sprouts without being planted.<br>
  Just so, without the Lord's Name, no one is liberated, nor is egotistical pride eradicated. ||2||<br>
  The mortal may churn water until he is sore, but how can butter be produced?<br>
  Without meeting the Guru, no one is liberated, and the Lord of the Universe is not met. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 010</h2></center>
  Searching and searching, I have come to this realization: all peace and bliss are in the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Says Nanak, he alone receives it, upon whose forehead such destiny is inscribed. ||4||11||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Night and day, utter the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  You shall obtain all wealth, all pleasures and successes, and the fruits of your mind's desires. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Come, O Saints, let us meditate in remembrance on God; He is the Eternal, Imperishable Giver of Peace and Praanaa, the Breath of Life.<br>
  Master of the masterless, Destroyer of the pains of the meek and the poor; He is All-pervading and permeating, abiding in all hearts. ||1||<br>
  The very fortunate ones drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord, singing, reciting and listening to the Lord's Praises.<br>
  All their sufferings and struggles are wiped away from their bodies; they remain lovingly awake and aware in the Name of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  So abandon your sexual desire, greed, falsehood and slander; meditating in remembrance on the Lord, you shall be released from bondage.<br>
  The intoxication of loving attachments, egotism and blind possessiveness are eradicated by Guru's Grace. ||3||<br>
  You are All-Powerful, O Supreme Lord God and Master; please be Merciful to Your humble servant.<br>
  My Lord and Master is All-pervading and prevailing everywhere; O Nanak, God is Near. ||4||12||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Feet of the Divine Guru.<br>
  I meditate with Him on the Supreme Lord God; His Teachings have emancipated me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All pains, diseases and fears are erased, for one who comes to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Saints.<br>
  He Himself chants, and inspires others to chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord. He is Utterly All-Powerful; He carries us across to the other side. ||1||<br>
  His Mantra drives out cynicism, and totally fills the empty one.<br>
  Those who obey the Order of the Lord's slaves, do not enter into the womb of reincarnation ever again. ||2||<br>
  Whoever works for the Lord's devotees and sings His Praises - his pains of birth and death are taken away.<br>
  Those unto whom my Beloved becomes Merciful, endure the Unendurable Ecstasy of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||<br>
  Those who are satisfied by the Sublime Essence of the Lord, merge intuitively into the Lord; no mouth can describe their state.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, they are content; chanting and meditating on God's Name, they are saved. ||4||13||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I sing, O I sing the Songs of Joy of my Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.<br>
  Fortunate is the time, fortunate is the day and the moment, when I become pleasing to the Lord of the World. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I touch my forehead to the Feet of the Saints.<br>
  The Saints have placed their hands on my forehead. ||1||<br>
  My mind is filled with the Mantra of the Holy Saints,<br>
  and I have risen above the three qualities||2||<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of God's devotees, my eyes are filled with love.<br>
  Greed and attachment are gone, along with doubt. ||3||<br>
  Says Nanak, I have found intuitive peace, poise and bliss.<br>
  Tearing down the wall, I have met the Lord, the Embodiment of Supreme Bliss. ||4||14||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  How can I express the pain of my soul?<br>
  I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of my Enticing and Lovely Beloved. My mind cannot survive - it yearns for Him in so many ways. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 011</h2></center>
  I think thoughts of Him; I miss the Love of my Beloved. When will I obtain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan?<br>
  I try, but this mind is not encouraged. Is there any Saint who can lead me to God? ||1||<br>
  Chanting, penance, self-control, good deeds and charity - I sacrifice all these in fire; I dedicate all peace and places to Him.<br>
  One who helps me to behold the Blessed Vision of my Beloved, for even an instant - I am a sacrifice to that Saint. ||2||<br>
  I offer all my prayers and entreaties to him; I serve him, day and night.<br>
  I have renounced all pride and egotism; he tells me the stories of my Beloved. ||3||<br>
  I am wonder-struck, gazing upon the wondrous play of God. The Guru, the True Guru, has led me to meet the Primal Lord.<br>
  I have found God, my Merciful Loving Lord, within the home of my own heart. O Nanak, the fire within me has been quenched. ||4||1||15||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You fool, why are you not meditating on the Lord now?<br>
  In the awful hell of the fire of the womb, you did penance, upside-down; each and every instant, you sang His Glorious Praises. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You wandered through countless incarnations, until finally you attained this priceless human birth.<br>
  Leaving the womb, you were born, and when you came out, you became attached to other places. ||1||<br>
  You practiced evil and fraud day and night, and did useless deeds.<br>
  You thrash the straw, but it has no wheat; running around and hurrying, you obtain only pain. ||2||<br>
  The false person is attached to falsehood; he is entangled with transitory things.<br>
  And when the Righteous Judge of Dharma seizes you, O madman, you shall arise and depart with your face blackened. ||3||<br>
  He alone meets with God, whom God Himself meets, by such pre-ordained destiny written on his forehead.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to that humble being, who remains unattached within his mind. ||4||2||16||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  How can I live without my Beloved, O my mother?<br>
  Separated from Him, the mortal becomes a corpse, and is not allowed to remain within the house. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is the Giver of the soul, the heart, the breath of life. Being with Him, we are embellished with joy.<br>
  Please bless me with Your Gace, O Saint, that I may sing the songs of joyful praise to my God. ||1||<br>
  I touch my forehead to the feet of the Saints. My eyes long for their dust.<br>
  By His Grace, we meet God; O Nanak, I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Him. ||2||3||17||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to that occasion.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate in remembrance on my God; by great good fortune, I have found the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Kabeer is good, the slave of the Lord's slaves; the humble barber Sain is sublime.<br>
  Highest of the high is Naam Dayv, who looked upon all alike; Ravi Daas was in tune with the Lord. ||1||<br>
  My soul, body and wealth belong to the Saints; my mind longs for the dust of the Saints.<br>
  And by the radiant Grace of the Saints, all my doubts have been erased. O Nanak, I have met the Lord. ||2||4||18||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The True Guru fulfills the mind's desires.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 012</h2></center>
  All wealth and treasures are obtained by remembering Him in meditation; twenty-four hours a day, O my mind, meditate on Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your Name is Ambrosial Nectar, O my Lord and Master. Whoever drinks it in is satisfied.<br>
  The sins of countless incarnations are erased, and hereafter, he shall be saved and redeemed in the Court of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  I have come to Your Sanctuary, O Creator, O Perfect Supreme Eternal Lord God.<br>
  Please be kind to me, that I may meditate on Your Lotus Feet. O Nanak, my mind and body thirst for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||2||5||19||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Third House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O my mind, why are you lured away by otherness?<br>
  Here and hereafter, God is forever your Help and Support. He is your soul-mate; He will help you succeed. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Name of your Beloved Lover, the Fascinating Lord, is Ambrosial Nectar. Drinking it in, you shall find satisfaction.<br>
  The Being of Immortal Manifestation is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Meditate on Him in that most sublime place. ||1||<br>
  The Bani, the Word of the Supreme Lord God, is the greatest Mantra of all. It eradicates pride from the mind.<br>
  Searching, Nanak found the home of peace and bliss in the Name of the Lord. ||2||1||20||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, sing forever the Songs of Joy of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  All your disease, sorrow and sin will be erased, if you meditate on the Lord's Name, even for an instant. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Abandon all your clever tricks; go and enter the Sanctuary of the Holy.<br>
  When the Lord, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor becomes merciful, the Messenger of Death is changed into the Righteous Judge of Dharma. ||1||<br>
  Without the One Lord, there is no other at all. No one else can equal Him.<br>
  The Lord is Nanak's Mother, Father and Sibling, the Giver of Peace, his Breath of Life. ||2||2||21||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord's humble servant saves those who accompany him.<br>
  Their minds are sanctified and rendered pure, and they are rid of the pains of countless incarnations. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who walk on the path find peace; they are saved, along with those who speak with them.<br>
  Even those who are drowning in the horrible, deep dark pit are carried across in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||<br>
  Those who have such high destiny turn their faces toward the Saadh Sangat.<br>
  Nanak longs for the dust of their feet; O God, please shower Your Mercy on me! ||2||3||22||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord meditates on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.<br>
  One who enjoys peace in the Company of the Holy, even for an instant, obtains millions of heavenly paradises. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This human body, so difficult to obtain, is sanctified by meditating on the Lord. It takes away the fear of death.<br>
  Even the sins of terrible sinners are washed away, by cherishing the Lord's Name within the heart. ||1||<br>
  Whoever listens to the Immaculate Praises of the Lord - his pains of birth and death are dispelled.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Lord is found by great good fortune, and then the mind and body blossom forth. ||2||4||23||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 013</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, Fourth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O my Fascinating Lord, I pray to You: come into my house.<br>
  I act in pride, and speak in pride. I am mistaken and wrong, but I am still Your hand-maiden, O my Beloved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I hear that You are near, but I cannot see You. I wander in suffering, deluded by doubt.<br>
  The Guru has become merciful to me; He has removed the veils. Meeting with my Beloved, my mind blossoms forth in abundance. ||1||<br>
  If I were to forget my Lord and Master, even for an instant, it would be like millions of days, tens of thousands of years.<br>
  When I joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, I met my Lord. ||2||1||24||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now what should I think? I have given up thinking.<br>
  You do whatever You wish to do. Please bless me with Your Name - I am a sacrifice to You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The poison of corruption is flowering forth in the four directions; I have taken the GurMantra as my antidote.<br>
  Giving me His Hand, He has saved me as His Own; like the lotus in the water, I remain unattached. ||1||<br>
  I am nothing. What am I? You hold all in Your Power.<br>
  Nanak has run to Your Sanctuary, Lord; please save him, for the sake of Your Saints. ||2||2||25||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now I have abandoned all efforts and devices.<br>
  My Lord and Master is the All-powerful Creator, the Cause of causes, my only Saving Grace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have seen numerous forms of incomparable beauty, but nothing is like You.<br>
  You give Your Support to all, O my Lord and Master; You are the Giver of peace, of the soul and the breath of life. ||1||<br>
  Wandering, wandering, I grew so tired; meeting the Guru, I fell at His Feet.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have found total peace; this life-night of mine passes in peace. ||2||3||26||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now I have found the Support of my Lord.<br>
  The Guru, the Giver of peace, has become merciful to me. I was blind - I see the jewel of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have cut away the darkness of ignorance and become immaculate; my discriminationg intellect has blossomed forth.<br>
  As the waves of water and the foam become water again, the Lord and His servant become One. ||1||<br>
  He is taken in again, into what from which he came; all is one in the One Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, I have come to see the Master of the breath of life, all-pervading everywhere. ||2||4||27||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind longs for the One Beloved Lord.<br>
  I have looked everywhere in every country, but nothing equals even a hair of my Beloved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All sorts of delicacies and dainties are placed before me, but I do not even want to look at them.<br>
  I long for the sublime essence of the Lord, calling, "Pri-o! Pri-o! - Beloved! Beloved!", like the Bumble bee longing for the lotus flower. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 014</h2></center>
  The Treasure of Virtue, the Enticer of the mind, my Beloved is the Giver of peace to all.<br>
  Guru Nanak has led me to You, O God. Join with me, O my Best Friend, and hold me close in Your Embrace. ||2||5||28||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now my mind is pleased and appeased by my Lord and Master.<br>
  The Holy Saint has become kind and compassionate to me, and has destroyed this demon of duality. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are so beautiful, and You are so wise; You are elegant and all-knowing.<br>
  All the Yogis, spiritual teachers and meditators do not know even a bit of Your value. ||1||<br>
  You are the Master, You are the Lord under the royal canopy; You are the perfectly pervading Lord God.<br>
  Please bless me with the gift of service to the Saints; O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Lord. ||2||6||29||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Love of my Beloved comes into my conscious mind.<br>
  I have forgotten the entangling affairs of Maya, and I spend my life-night fighting with evil. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I serve the Lord; the Lord abides within my heart. I have found my Lord in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.<br>
  So I have met with my enticingly beautiful Beloved; I have obtained the peace which I asked for. ||1||<br>
  The Guru has brought my Beloved under my control, and I enjoy Him with unrestrained pleasure.<br>
  I have become fearless; O Nanak, my fears have been eradicated. Chanting the Word, I have found the Lord. ||2||7||30||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of my Dear Lord.<br>
  The Naad, the Sound-current of His Word fills my ears; my body has settled gently into the Lap of my Beloved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I was a discarded bride, and the Guru has made me a happy soul-bride. I have found the Elegant and All-knowing Lord.<br>
  That home, in which I was not even allowed to sit - I have found that place in which I can dwell. ||1||<br>
  God, the Love of His devotees, has come under the control of those who protect the honor of His Saints.<br>
  Says Nanak, my mid is pleased and appeased with the Lord, and my subservience to other people has come to an end. ||2||8||31||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now my association with the five thieves has come to an end.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, my mind is in ecstasy; by Guru's Grace, I am released. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The impregnable place is guarded by countless ramparts and warriors.<br>
  This impregnable fortress cannot be touched, but with the assistance of the Saints, I have entered and robbed it. ||1||<br>
  I have found such a great treasure, a priceless, inexhaustible supply of jewels.<br>
  O servant Nanak, when God showered His Mercy on me, my mind drank in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2||9||32||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now my mind is absorbed in my Lord and Master.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has blessed me with the gift of the breath of life. I am involved with the Lord, like the fish with the water. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have cast out sexual desire, anger, greed, egotism and envy; I have offered all this as a gift.<br>
  The Guru has implanted the medicine of the Lord's Mantra within me, and I have met with the All-knowing Lord God. ||1||<br>
  My household belongs to You, O my Lord and Master; the Guru has blessed me with God, and rid me of egotism.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 015</h2></center>
  Says Nanak, I have found the Lord with intuitive ease, within the home of my own heart. Devotional worship of the Lord is a treasure over-flowing. ||2||10||33||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my Enticing Lord, all beings are Yours - You save them.<br>
  Even a tiny bit of Your Mercy ends all cruelty and tyranny. You save and redeem millions of universes. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I offer countless prayers; I remember You each and every instant.<br>
  Please be merciful to me, O Destroyer of the pains of the poor; please give me Your hand and save me. ||1||<br>
  And what about these poor kings? Tell me, who can they kill?<br>
  Save me, save me, save me, O Giver of peace; O Nanak, all the world is Yours. ||2||11||34||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now I have obtained the wealth of the Lord's Name.<br>
  I have become carefree, and all my thirsty desires are satisfied. Such is the destiny written on my forehead. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Searching and searching, I became depressed; I wandered all around, and finally came back to my body-village.<br>
  The Merciful Guru made this deal, and I have obtained the priceless jewel. ||1||<br>
  The other deals and trades which I did, brought only sorrow and suffering.<br>
  Fearless are those traders who deal in meditation on the Lord of the Universe. O Nanak, the Lord's Name is their capital. ||2||12||35||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Speech of my Beloved seems so sweet to my mind.<br>
  The Guru has taken hold of my arm, and linked me to God's service. My Beloved Lord is forever merciful to me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O God, You are my Lord and Master; You are the Cherisher of all. My wife and I are totally Your slaves.<br>
  You are all my honor and power - You are. Your Name is my only Support. ||1||<br>
  If You seat me on the throne, then I am Your slave. If You make me a grass-cutter, then what can I say?<br>
  Servant Nanak's God is the Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, Unfathomable and Immeasurable. ||2||13||36||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The tongue becomes beautiful, uttering the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  In an instant, He creates and destroys. Gazing upon His Wondrous Plays, my mind is fascinated. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Listening to His Praises, my mind is in utter ecstasy, and my heart is rid of pride and pain.<br>
  I have found peace, and my pains have been taken away, since I became one with God. ||1||<br>
  Sinful resides have been wiped away, and my mind is immaculate. The Guru has lifted me up and pulled me out of the deception of Maya.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have found God, the All-powerful Creator, the Cause of causes. ||2||14||37||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  With my eyes, I have seen the marvellous wonders of the Lord.<br>
  He is far from all, and yet near to all. He is Inaccessible and Unfathomable, and yet He dwells in the heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Infallible Lord never makes a mistake. He does not have to write His Orders, and He does not have to consult with anyone.<br>
  In an instant, He creates, embellishes and destroys. He is the Lover of His devotees, the Treasure of Excellence. ||1||<br>
  Lighting the lamp in the deep dark pit, the Guru illumines and enlightens the heart.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 016</h2></center>
  Says Nanak, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, I have found peace, and all my hopes have been fulfilled. ||2||15||38||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The most beautiful path for the feet is to follow the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  The more you walk on any other path, the more you suffer in pain. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The eyes are sanctified, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. Serving Him, the hands are sanctified.<br>
  The heart is sanctified, when the Lord abides within the heart; that forehead which touches the dust of the feet of the Saints is sanctified. ||1||<br>
  All treasures are in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; he alone obtains it, who has it written in his karma.<br>
  Servant Nanak has met with the Perfect Guru; he passes his life-night in peace, poise and pleasure. ||2||16||39||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; at the very last instant, it shall be your Help and Support.<br>
  In that place where your mother, father, children and siblings shall be of no use to you at all, there, the Name alone shall save you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He alone meditates on the Lord in the deep dark pit of his own household, upon whose forehead such destiny is written.<br>
  His bonds are loosened, and the Guru liberates him. He sees You, O Lord, everywhere. ||1||<br>
  Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, his mind is satisfied. Tasting it, his tongue is satiated.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have obtained celestial peace and poise; the Guru has quenched all my thirst. ||2||17||40||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meeting the Guru, I meditate on God in such a way,<br>
  that He has become kind and compassionate to me. He is the Destroyer of pain; He does not allow the hot wind to even touch me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  With each and every breath I take, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  He is not separated from me, even for an instant, and I never forget Him. He is always with me, wherever I go. ||1||<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to His Lotus Feet. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan.<br>
  Says Nanak, I do not care about anything else; I have found the Lord, the Ocean of peace. ||2||18||41||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad seems so sweet to my mind.<br>
  My karma has been activated, and the Divine Radiance of the Lord, Har, Har, is manifest in each and every heart. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God, beyond birth, Self-existent, is seated within every heart everywhere.<br>
  I have come to obtain the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Lotus Feet of God. ||1||<br>
  I anoint my forehead with the dust of the Society of the Saints; it is as if I have bathed at all the sacred shrines of pilgrimage.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love; the Love of my Lord shall never fade away. ||2||19||42||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Guru has given me the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, as my Companion.<br>
  If the Word of God dwells within my heart for even an instant, all my hunger is relieved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Treasure of Mercy, Master of Excellence, my Lord and Master, Ocean of peace, Lord of all.<br>
  My hopes rest in You alone, O my Lord and Master; hope in anything else is useless. ||1||<br>
  My eyes were satisfied and fulfilled, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, when the Guru placed His Hand on my forehead.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 017</h2></center>
  Says Nanak, I have found immeasurable peace; my fear of birth and death is gone. ||2||20||43||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You fool: why are you going somewhere else?<br>
  The Enticing Ambrosial Amrit is with you, but you are deluded, totally deluded, and you eat poison. ||1||Pause||<br>
  God is Beautiful, Wise and Incomparable; He is the Creator, the Architect of Destiny, but you have no love for Him.<br>
  The mad-man's mind is enticed by Maya, the enticer; he has taken the intoxicating drug of falsehood. ||1||<br>
  The Destroyer of pain has become kind and compassionate to me, and I am in tune with the Saints.<br>
  I have obtained all treasures within the home of my own heart; says Nanak, my light has merged into the Light. ||2||21||44||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My consciousness has loved my Beloved God, since the very beginning of time.<br>
  When You blessed me with the Teachings, O my True Guru, I was embellished with beauty. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am mistaken; You are never mistaken. I am a sinner; You are the Saving Grace of sinners.<br>
  I am a lowly thorn-tree, and You are the sandalwood tree. Please preserve my honor by staying with me; please stay with me. ||1||<br>
  You are deep and profound, calm and benevolent. What am I? Just a poor helpless being.<br>
  The Merciful Guru Nanak has united me with the Lord. I lay on His Bed of Peace. ||2||22||45||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, blessed and approved is that day,<br>
  and fruitful is that hour, and lucky is that moment, when the True Guru blesses me with spirtual wisdom. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Blessed is my good destiny, and blessed is my Husband Lord. Blessed are those upon whom honor is bestowed.<br>
  This body is Yours, all my home and wealth are Yours; I offer my heart as a sacrifice to You. ||1||<br>
  I obtain tens of thousands and millions of regal pleasures, if I gaze upon Your Blessed Vision, even for an instant.<br>
  When You, O God, say, "My servant, stay here with me", Nanak knows unlimited peace. ||2||23||46||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now I am rid of my skepticism and sorrow.<br>
  I have abandoned and forsaken all other efforts, and come to the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have attained total perfection, and all my works are perfectly completed; the illness of egotism has been totally eradicated.<br>
  Millions of sins are destroyed in an instant; meeting with the Guru, I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  Subduing the five thieves, he Guru has made them my slaves; my mind has become stable and steady and fearless.<br>
  It does not come or go in reincarnation; it does not waver or wander anywhere. O Nanak, my empire is eternal. ||2||24||47||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Here and hereafter, God is forever my Help and Support.<br>
  He is the Enticer of my mind, the Beloved of my soul. What Glorious Praises of His can I sing and chant? ||1||Pause||<br>
  He plays with me, He fondles and caresses me. Forever and ever, He blesses me with bliss.<br>
  He cherishes me, like the father and the mother love their child. ||1||<br>
  I cannot survive without Him, even for an instant; I shall never forget Him.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 018</h2></center>
  Says Nanak, joining the Society of the Saints, I am enraptured, lovingly attuned to my Lord. ||2||25||48||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Sing of your Lord and Master, your Best Friend.<br>
  Do not place your hopes in anyone else; meditate on God, the Giver of peace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Peace, joy and salvation are in His Home. Seek the Protection of His Sanctuary.<br>
  But if you forsake Him, and serve mortal beings, your honor will dissolve like salt in water. ||1||<br>
  I have grasped the Anchor and Support of my Lord and Master; meeting with the Guru, I have found wisdom and understanding.<br>
  Nanak has met God, the Treasure of Excellence; all dependence on others is gone. ||2||26||49||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have the Almighty Support of my Dear Lord God.<br>
  I do not look up to anyone else. My honor and glory are Yours, O God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  God has taken my side; He has lifted me up and pulled me out of the whirlpool of corruption.<br>
  He has poured the medicine of the Naam, the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, into my mouth; I have fallen at the Guru's Feet. ||1||<br>
  How can I praise You with only one mouth? You are generous, even to the unworthy.<br>
  You cut away the noose, and now You own me; Nanak is blessed with myriad joys. ||2||27||50||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Remembering God in meditation, pains are dispelled.<br>
  When the Giver of peace to the soul becomes merciful, the mortal is totally redeemed. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I know of none other than God; tell me, who else should I approach?<br>
  As You know me, so do You keep me, O my Lord and Master.I have surrendered everything to You. ||1||<br>
  God gave me His Hand and saved me; He has blessed me with eternal life.<br>
  Says Nanak, my mind is in ecstasy; the noose of death has been cut away from my neck. ||2||28||51||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind contemplates You, O Lord, all the time.<br>
  I am Your meek and helpless child; You are God my Father. As You know me, You save me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  When I am hungry, I ask for food; when I am full, I am totally at peace.<br>
  When I dwell with You, I am free of disease; if I become separated from You, I turn to dust. ||1||<br>
  What power does the slave of Your slave have, O Establisher and Disestablisher?<br>
  If I do not forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, then I die. Nanak offers this prayer. ||2||29||52||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have shaken off fear and dread from my mind.<br>
  With intuitive ease, peace and poise, I sing the Glorious Praises of my Kind, Sweet, Darling Beloved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Practicing the Guru's Word, by His Grace, I do not wander anywhere anymore.<br>
  The illusion has been dispelled; I am in Samaadhi, Sukh-aasan, the position of peace. I have found the Lord, the Lover of His devotees, within the home of my own heart. ||1||<br>
  | The Sound-current of the Naad, playful joys and pleasures - I am intuitively, easily absorbed into the Celestial Lord.<br>
  He Himself is the Creator, the Cause of causes. Says Nanak, He Himself is All-in-all. ||2||30||53||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 019</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Support of the mind.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the One who gave it to me; I humbly bow to the Perfect Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My thirst is quenched, and I have been intuitively embellished. The poisons of sexual desire and anger have been burnt away.<br>
  This mind does not come and go; it abides in that place, where the Formless Lord sits. ||1||<br>
  The One Lord is manifest and radiant; the One Lord is hidden and mysterious. The One Lord is abysmal darkness.<br>
  From the beginning, throughout the middle and until the end, is God. Says Nanak, reflect on the Truth. ||2||31||54||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Without God, I cannot survive, even for an instant.<br>
  One who finds joy in the Lord finds total peace and perfection. ||1||Pause||<br>
  God is the Embodiment of bliss, the Breath of Life and Wealth; remembering Him in meditation, I am blessed with absolute bliss.<br>
  He is utterly All-powerful, with me forever and ever; what tongue can utter His Glorious Praises? ||1||<br>
  His Place is sacred, and His Glory is sacred; sacred are those who listen and speak of Him.<br>
  Says Nanak, that dwelling is sacred, in which Your Saints live. ||2||32||55||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My tongue chants Your Name, Your Name.<br>
  In the mother's womb, You sustained me, and in this mortal world, You alone help me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are my Father, and You are my Mother; You are my Loving Friend and Sibling.<br>
  You are my Family, and You are my Support. You are the Giver of the Breath of Life. ||1||<br>
  You are my Treasure, and You are my Wealth. You are my Gems and Jewels.<br>
  You are the wish-fulfilling Elysian Tree. Nanak has found You through the Guru, and now he is enraptured. ||2||33||56||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Wherever he goes, his consciousness turns to his own.<br>
  Whoever is a chaylaa (a servant) goes only to his Lord and Master. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He shares his sorrows, his joys and his condition only with his own.<br>
  He obtains honor from his own, and strength from his own; he gets an advantage from his own. ||1||<br>
  Some have regal power, youth, wealth and property; some have a father and a mother.<br>
  I have obtained all things, O Nanak, from the Guru. My hopes have been fulfilled. ||2||34||57||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  False is intoxication and pride in Maya.<br>
  Get rid of your fraud and attachment, O wretched mortal, and remember that the Lord of the World is with you. ||1||Pause||<br>
  False are royal powers, youth, nobility, kings, rulers and aristocrats.<br>
  False are the fine clothes, perfumes and clever tricks; false are the foods and drinks. ||1||<br>
  O Patron of the meek and the poor, I am the slave of Your slaves; I seek the Sanctuary of Your Saints.<br>
  I humbly ask, I beg of You, please relieve my anxiety; O Lord of Life, please unite Nanak with Yourself. ||2||35||58||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  By himself, the mortal cannot accomplish anything.<br>
  He runs around chasing all sorts of projects, engrossed in other entanglements. ||1||Pause||<br>
  His companions of these few days will not be there when he is in trouble.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 020</h2></center>
  He is hand and glove with those who are of no use to him; the poor wretch is affectionately involved with them. ||1||<br>
  I am nothing; nothing belongs to me. I have no power or control.<br>
  O Creator, Cause of causes, Lord God of Nanak, I am saved and redeemed in the Society of the Saints. ||2||36||59||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Great Enticer Maya keeps enticing, and cannot be stopped.<br>
  She is the Beloved of all the Siddhas and seekers; no one can fend her off. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Reciting the six Shaastras and visiting sacred shrines of pilgrimage do not decrease her power.<br>
  Devotional worship, ceremonial religious marks, fasting, vows and penance - none of these will make her release her hold. ||1||<br>
  The world has fallen into the deep dark pit. O Saints, please bless me with the supreme status of salvation.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak has been liberated, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, even for an instant. ||2||37||60||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Why are you working so hard to earn profits?<br>
  You are puffed up like a bag of air, and your skin is very brittle. Your body has grown old and dusty. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You move things from here to there, like the hawk swooping down on the flesh of its prey.<br>
  You are blind - you have forgotten the Great Giver. You fill your belly like a traveller at an inn. ||1||<br>
  You are entangled in the taste of false pleasures and corrupt sins; the path which you have to take is very narrow.<br>
  Says Nanak: figure it out, you ignorant fool! Today or tomorrow, the knot will be untied! ||2||38||61||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Dear Guru, by associating with You, I have come to know the Lord.<br>
  There are millions of heroes, and no one pays any attention to them, but in the Court of the Lord, I am honored and respected. ||1||Pause||<br>
  What is the origin of the human beings? How beautiful they are!<br>
  When God infuses His Light into clay, the human body is judged to be precious. ||1||<br>
  From You, I have learned to serve; from You, I have learned to chant and meditate; from You, I have realized the essence of reality.<br>
  Placing His Hand on my forehead, He has cut away the bonds which held me; O Nanak, I am the slave of His slaves. ||2||39||62||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord has blessed His servant with His Name.<br>
  What can any poor mortal do to someone who has the Lord as his Savior and Protector? ||1||Pause||<br>
  He Himself is the Great Being; He Himself is the Leader. He Himself accomplishes the tasks of His servant.<br>
  Our Lord and Master destroys all demons; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. ||1||<br>
  He Himself saves the honor of His servants; He Himself blesses them with stability.<br>
  From the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, He saves His servants. O Nanak, how rare is the person who knows God. ||2||40||63||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Lord, You are my Best Friend, my Companion, my Breath of Life.<br>
  My mind, wealth, body and soul are all Yours; this body is sewn together by Your Blessing. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You have blessed me with all sorts of gifts; you have blessed me with honor and respect.<br>
  Forever and ever, You preserve my honor, O Inner-knower, O Searcher of hearts. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 021</h2></center>
  Those Saints who know You, O Lord and Master - blessed and approved is their coming into the world.<br>
  The Congregation of those humble beings is obtained by great good fortune; Nanak is a sacrifice to the Saints. ||2||41||64||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Save me, O Merciful Saint!<br>
  You are the All-powerful Cause of causes. You have ended my separation, and joined me with God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You save us from the corruption and sins of countless incarnations; associating with You, we obtain sublime understanding.<br>
  Forgetting God, we wandered through countless incarnations; with each and every breath, we sing the Lord's Praises. ||1||<br>
  Whoever meets with the Holy Saints - those sinners are sanctified.<br>
  Says Nanak, those who have such high destiny, win this invaluable human life. ||2||42||65||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my Lord and Master, Your humble servant has come to offer this prayer.<br>
  Hearing Your Name, I am blessed with total peace, bliss, poise and pleasure. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Treasure of Mercy, the Ocean of Peace - His Praises are diffused everywhere.<br>
  O Lord, You celebrate in the Society of the Saints; You reveal Yourself to them. ||1||<br>
  With my eyes I see the Saints, and dedicate myself to serving them; I wash their feet with my hair.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I gaze upon the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of the Saints; this is the peace and comfort which Nanak has received. ||2||43||66||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who is lovingly absorbed in the Lord's Name<br>
  is a good-hearted friend, intuitively embellished with happiness. He is said to be blessed and fortunate. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is rid of sin and corruption, and detached from Maya; he has renounced the poison of egotistical intellect.<br>
  He thirsts for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, and he places his hopes in the One Lord alone. The Feet of his Beloved are the Support of his heart. ||1||<br>
  He sleeps, wakes, rises up and sits down without anxiety; he laughs and cries without anxiety.<br>
  Says Nanak, she who has cheated the world - that Maya is cheated by the humble servant of the Lord. ||2||44||67||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Now, no one complains about the Lord's humble servant.<br>
  Whoever tries to complain is destroyed by the Guru, the Transcendent Lord God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whoever harbors vengeance against the One who is beyond all vengenace, shall lose in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  From the very beginning of time, and throughout the ages, it is the glorious greatness of God, that He preserves the honor of His humble servants. ||1||<br>
  The mortal becomes fearless, and all his fears are taken away, when he leans on the Support of the Lord's Lotus Feet.<br>
  Chanting the Name, through the Guru's Word, Nanak has become famous throughout the world. ||2||45||68||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord's humble servant has discarded all self-conceit.<br>
  As You see fit, You save us, O Lord of the World. Beholding Your Glorious Grandeur, I live. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Through the Guru's Instruction, and the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all sorrow and suffering is taken away.<br>
  I look upon friend and enemy alike; all that I speak is the Lord's meditation. ||1||<br>
  The fire within me is quenched; I am cool, calm and tranquil. Hearing the unstruck celestial melody, I am wonder-struck and amazed.<br>
  I am in ecstasy, O Nanak, and my mind is filled with Truth, through the perfect perfection of the Sound-current of the Naad. ||2||46||69||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 022</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My Guru has rid me of my cynicism.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to that Guru; I am devoted to Him, forever and ever. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I chant the Guru's Name day and night; I enshrine the Guru's Feet within my mind.<br>
  I bathe continually in the dust of the Guru's Feet, washing off my dirty sins. ||1||<br>
  I continually serve the Perfect Guru; I humbly bow to my Guru.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has blessed me with all fruitful rewards; O Nanak, the Guru has emancipated me. ||2||47||70||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal attains salvation.<br>
  His sorrows are dispelled, and his fears are all erased; he is in love with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  His mind worships and adores the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har; his tongue sings the Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Abandoning egotistical pride, sexual desire, anger and slander, he embraces love for the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Worship and adore the Merciful Lord God; chanting the Name of the Lord of the Universe, you shall be embellished and exalted.<br>
  Says Nanak, whoever becomes the dust of all, merges in the Blesed Vision of the Lord, Har, Har. ||2||48||71||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to my Perfect Guru.<br>
  My Savior Lord has saved me; He has revealed the Glory of His Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He makes His servants and slaves fearless, and takes away all their pain.<br>
  So renounce all other efforts, and enshrine the Lord's Lotus Feet within your mind. ||1||<br>
  God is the Support of the breath of life, my Best Friend and Companion, the One and Only Creator of the Universe.<br>
  Nanak's Lord and Master is the Highest of all; again and again, I humbly bow to Him. ||2||49||72||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Tell me: other than the Lord, who exists?<br>
  The Creator, the Embodiment of Mercy, bestows all comforts; meditate forever on that God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All creatures are strung on His Thread; sing the Praises of that God.<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on that Lord and Master who gives you everything. Why would you go to anyone else? ||1||<br>
  Service to my Lord and Master is fruitful and rewarding; from Him, you shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires.<br>
  Says Nanak, take your profits and leave; you shall go to your true home in peace. ||2||50||73||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my Lord and Master, I have come to Your Sanctuary.<br>
  The anxiety of my mind departed, when I gazed upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You know my condition, without my speaking. You inspire me to chant Your Name.<br>
  My pains are gone, and I am absorbed in peace, poise and bliss, singing Your Glorious Praises. ||1||<br>
  Taking me by the arm, You lifted me up, out of the deep dark pit of household and Maya.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru has broken my bonds, and ended my separaation; He has united me with God. ||2||51||74||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 023</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Name of the Lord is cooling and soothing.<br>
  Searching, searching the Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees, the Holy Saints have realized this. ||1||Pause||<br>
  In the worlds of Shiva, Brahma and Indra, I wandered around, burning up with envy.<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance on my Lord and Master, I became cool and calm; my pains, sorrows and doubts are gone. ||1||<br>
  Whoever has been saved in the past or the present, was saved through loving devotional worship of the Divine Lord.<br>
  This is Nanak's prayer: O Dear God, please let me serve the humble Saints. ||2||52||75||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl;<br>
  O my tongue, sing the Ambrosial Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, listen to the Lord's Sermon, and chant God's Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  So gather in the jewel, the wealth of the Lord's Name; love God with your mind and body.<br>
  You must realize that all other wealth is false; this alone is the true purpose of life. ||1||<br>
  He is the Giver of the soul, the breath of life and liberation; lovingly tune in to the One and Only Lord.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have entered His Sanctuary; He gives sustenance to all. ||2||53||76||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I cannot do anything else.<br>
  I have taken this Support, meeting the Saints; I have entered the Sanctuary of the One Lord of the World. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The five wicked enemies are within this body; they lead the mortal to practice evil and corruption.<br>
  He has infinite hope, but his days are numbered, and old age is sapping his strength. ||1||<br>
  He is the Help of the helpless, the Merciful Lord, the Ocean of Peace, the Destroyer of all pains and fears.<br>
  Slave Nanak longs for this blessing, that he may live, gazing upon the Feet of God. ||2||54||77||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Without the Lord's Name, flavors are tasteless and insipid.<br>
  Sing the Sweet Ambrosial Praises of the Lord's Kirtan; day and night, the Sound-current of the Naad will resonate and resound. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, total peace and bliss are obtained, and all sorrows are taken away.<br>
  The profit of the Lord, Har, Har, is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; so load it and bring it on home. ||1||<br>
  He is the Highest of all, the Highest of the high; His celestial ecomony has no limit.<br>
  Nanak cannot even express His Glorious Grandeur; gazing upon Him, he is wonder-struck. ||2||55||78||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The mortal came to hear and chant the Word of the Guru's Bani.<br>
  But he has forgotten the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and he has become attached to other temptations. His life is totally worthless! ||1||Pause||<br>
  O my unconscious mind, become conscious and figure it out; the Saints speak the Unspoken Speech of the Lord.<br>
  So gather in your profits - worship and adore the Lord within your heart; your coming and going in reincarnation shall end. ||1||<br>
  Efforts, powers and clever tricks are Yours; if You bless me with them, I repeat Your Name.<br>
  They alone are devotees, and they alone are attached to devotional worship, O Nanak, who are pleasing to God. ||2||56||79||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Those who deal in the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are wealthy.<br>
  So become a partner with them, and earn the wealth of the Naam. Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 024</h2></center>
  Abandon your deception, and go beyond vengeance; see God who is always with you.<br>
  Deal only in this true wealth and gather in this true wealth, and you shall never suffer loss. ||1||<br>
  Eating and consuming it, it is never exhausted; God's treasures are overflowing.<br>
  Says Nanak, you shall go home to the Court of the Supreme Lord God with honor and respect. ||2||57||80||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Dear God, I am wretched and helpless!<br>
  From what source did you create humans? This is Your Glorious Grandeur. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are the Giver of the soul and the breath of life to all; Your Infinite Glories cannot be spoken.<br>
  You are the Beloved Lord of all, the Cherisher of all, the Support of all hearts. ||1||<br>
  No one knows Your state and extent. You alone created the expanse of the Universe.<br>
  Please, give me a seat in the boat of the Holy; O Nanak, thus I shall cross over this terrifying world-ocean, and reach the other shore. ||2||58||81||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who comes to the Lord's Sanctuary is very fortunate.<br>
  He knows of no other than the One Lord. He has renounced all other efforts. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He worships and adores the Lord, Har, Har, in thought, word and deed; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he finds peace.<br>
  He enjoys bliss and pleasure, and savors the Unspoken Speech of the Lord; he merges intuitively into the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  Sublime and exalted is the speech of one whom the Lord, in His Mercy makes His Own.<br>
  Those who are imbued with God in the state of Nirvaanaa, O Nanak, are emancipated in the Saadh Sangat. ||2||59||82||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Since I grasped hold of the Sanctuary of the Holy,<br>
  my mind is illuminated with tranquility, peace and poise, and I am rid of all my pain. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Please be merciful to me, O Lord, and bless me with Your Name; this is the prayer I offer to You.<br>
  I have forgotten my other occupations; remembering God in meditation, I have obtained the true profit. ||1||<br>
  We shall merge again into the One from whom we came; He is the Essence of Being.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru has eradicated my doubt; my light has merged into the Light. ||2||60||83||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my tongue, sing the Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Abandon all other tastes and flavors; the taste of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is so sublime. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Enshrine the Lord's Lotus Feet within your heart; let yourself be lovingly attuned to the One Lord.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall become immaculate and pure; you shall not come to be reincarnated again. ||1||<br>
  You are the Support of the soul and the breath of life; You are the Home of the homeless.<br>
  With each and every breath, I dwell on the Lord, Har, Har; O Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||61||84||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  To meditate on the Lotus Feet of the Lord of the Universe is heaven for me.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is the treasure of liberation and the Lord's Ambrosial Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Lord God, please be kind to me, that I may hear with my ears Your Sublime and Exalted Sermon.<br>
  My cycle of coming and going is finally completed, and I have attained peace and tranquility. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 025</h2></center>
  Searching and searching, I have realized the essence of reality: devotional worship is the most sublime fulfillment.<br>
  Says Nanak, without the Name of the One Lord, all other ways are imperfect. ||2||62||85||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The True Guru is the True Giver.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all my pains are dispelled. I am a sacrifice to His Lotus Feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Supreme Lord God is True, and True are the Holy Saints; the Name of the Lord is steady and stable.<br>
  So worship the Imperishable, Supreme Lord God with love, and sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||<br>
  The limits of the Inaccessible, Unfathomable Lord cannot be found; He is the Support of all hearts.<br>
  O Nanak, chant, "Waaho! Waaho!" to Him, who has no end or limitation. ||2||63||86||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Feet of the Guru abide within my mind.<br>
  My Lord and Master is permeating and pervading all places; He dwells nearby, close to all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Breaking my bonds, I have lovingly tuned in to the Lord, and now the Saints are pleased with me.<br>
  This precious human life has been sanctified, and all my desires have been fulfilled. ||1||<br>
  O my God, whoever You bless with Your Mercy - he alone sings Your Glorious Praises.<br>
  Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to that person who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, twenty-four hours a day. ||2||64||87||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  A person is judged to be alive, only if he sees the Lord.<br>
  Please be merciful to me, O my Enticing Beloved Lord, and erase the record of my doubts. ||1||Pause||<br>
  By speaking and listening, tranquility and peace are not found at all. What can anyone learn without faith?<br>
  One who renounces God and longs for another - his face is blackened with filth. ||1||<br>
  One who is blessed with the wealth of our Lord and Master, the Embodiment of Peace, does not believe in any other religious doctrine.<br>
  O Nanak, one whose mind is fascinated and intoxicated with the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan - his tasks are perfectly accomplished. ||2||65||88||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.<br>
  In this way, the sins of your past mistakes shall be burnt off in an instant. It is like giving millions in charity, and bathing at sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Entangled in other affairs, the mortal suffers uselessly in sorrow. Without the Lord, wisdom is useless.<br>
  The mortal is freed of the anguish of death and birth, meditating and vibrating on the Blissful Lord of the Universe. ||1||<br>
  I seek Your Sancutary, O Perfect Lord, Ocean of Peace. Please be merciful, and bless me with this gift.<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, Nanak lives; his egotistical pride has been eradicated. ||2||66||89||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He alone is a Dhoorat, who is attached to the Primal Lord God.<br>
  He alone is a Dhurandhar, and he alone is a Basundhar, who is absorbed in the sublime essence of Love of the One Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One who practices deception and does not know where true profit lies is not a Dhoorat - he is a fool.<br>
  He abandons profitable enterprises and is involved in unprofitable ones. He does not meditate on the Beauteous Lord God. ||1||<br>
  He alone is clever and wise and a religious scholar, he alone is a brave warrior, and he alone is intelligent,<br>
  who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. O Nanak, he alone is approved. ||2||67||90||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 026</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, is the life of the humble Saints.<br>
  Instead of enjoying corrupt pleasures, they drink in the Ambrosial Essence of the Name of the Lord, the Ocean of Peace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They gather up the priceless wealth of the Lord's Name, and weave it into the fabric of their mind and body.<br>
  Imbued with the Lord's Love, their minds are dyed in the deep crimson color of devotional love; they are intoxicated with the sublime essence of the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
  As the fish is immersed in water, they are absorbed in the Lord's Name.<br>
  O Nanak, the Saints are like the rainbirds; they are comforted, drinking in the drops of the Lord's Name. ||2||68||91||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Without the Name of the Lord, the mortal is a ghost.<br>
  All the actions he commits are just shackles and bonds. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Without serving God, one who serves another wastes his time uselessly.<br>
  When the Messenger of Death comes to kill you, O mortal, what will your condition be then? ||1||<br>
  Please protect Your slave, O Eternally Merciful Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, my God is the Treasure of Peace; He is the wealth and property of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||69||92||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind and body deal only in the Lord.<br>
  Imbued with loving devotional worship, I sing His Glorious Praises; I am not affected by worldly affairs. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This is the way of life of the Holy Saint: he listens to the Kirtan, the Praises of his Lord and Master, and meditates in remembrance on Him.<br>
  He implants the Lord's Lotus Feet deep within his heart; worship of the Lord is the support of his breath of life. ||1||<br>
  O God, Merciful to the meek, please hear my prayer, and shower Your Blessings upon me.<br>
  I continually chant the treasure of the Naam with my tongue; Nanak is forever a sacrifice. ||2||70||93||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Without the Name of the Lord, his intellect is shallow.<br>
  He does not meditate in remembrance on the Lord, his Lord and Master; the blind fool suffers in terrible agony. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He does not embrace love for the Name of the Lord; he is totally attached to various religious robes.<br>
  His attachments are shattered in an instant; when the pitcher is broken, the water runs out. ||1||<br>
  Please bless me, that I may worship You in loving devotion. My mind is absorbed and intoxicated with Your Delicious Love.<br>
  Nanak, Your slave, has entered Your Sanctuary; without God, there is no other at all. ||2||71||94||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In my mind, I think about that moment,<br>
  when I join the Gathering of the Friendly Saints, constantly singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Without vibrating and meditating on the Lord, whatever deeds you do will be useless.<br>
  The Perfect Embodiment of Supreme Bliss is so sweet to my mind. Without Him, there is no other at all. ||1||<br>
  Chanting, deep meditation, austere self-discipline, good deeds and other techniques to being peace - they are not equal to even a tiny bit of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Nanak's mind is pierced through by the Lotus Feet of the Lord; it is absorbed in His Lotus Feet. ||2||72||95||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My God is always with me; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  I find happiness in the world hereafter, and peace and pleasure in this world, meditating in remembrance on the Name of my Lord and Master. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 027</h2></center>
  The Lord is my Best Friend, my Buddy, my Companion. I sing the Glorious Praises of my Sovereign Lord King.<br>
  I shall not forget Him in my heart, even for an instant; I have met with the Perfect Guru. ||1||<br>
  In His Mercy, He protects His slave; all beings and creatures are in His Power.<br>
  One who is lovingly attuned to the One, the Perfect Transcendent Lord God, O Nanak, is rid of all fear. ||2||73||96||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One who has the Lord's Power on his side<br>
  - all his desires are fulfilled, and no pain afflicts him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That humble devotee is a slave of his God, who listens to Him, and so lives.<br>
  I have made the effort to gaze upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; it is obtained only by good karma. ||1||<br>
  It is only by Guru's Grace that I see His Vision with my eyes which none can equal.<br>
  Please bless Nanak with this Gift, that he may wash the Feet of the Saints, and so live. ||2||74||97||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I live by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Please be Merciful to me, O my Loving Lord of the Universe, that I may never forget You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My mind, body, wealth and all are Yours, O my Lord and Master; there is nowhere else for me at all.<br>
  As You keep me, so do I survive; I eat and I wear whatever You give me. ||1||<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; I shall never again fall into reincarnation.<br>
  Slave Nanak seeks Your Sancuary, Lord; as it pleases Your Will, so do You guide him. ||2||75||98||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, the Naam is the most sublime peace.<br>
  Other affairs of Maya are corrupt. They are nothing more than dust. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The mortal has fallen into the deep dark pit of household attachment; it is a horrible, dark hell.<br>
  He wanders in various incarnations, growing weary; he wanders through them again and again. ||1||<br>
  O Purifier of sinners, O Lover of Your devotees, please shower Your Mercy on Your meek servant.<br>
  With palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this blessing: O Lord, please save me in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||76||99||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Glorious Radiance of the Lord has spread out everywhere.<br>
  The doubts of my mind and body are all erased, and I am rid of the three diseases. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My thirst is quenched, and my hopes have all been fulfilled; my sorrows and sufferings are over.<br>
  Singing the Glorious Praises of the Unmoving, Eternal, Unchanging Lord God, my mind, body and soul are comforted and encouraged. ||1||<br>
  Sexual desire, anger, greed, pride and envy are destroyed in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  He is the Lover of His devotees, the Destroyer of fear; O Nanak, He is our Mother and Father. ||2||77||100||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the world is miserable.<br>
  Like a dog, its desires are never satisfied; it clings to the ashes of corruption. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Administering the intoxicating drug, God Himself leads the mortals astray; they are reincarnated again and again.<br>
  He does not meditate in remembrance on the Lord, even for an instant, and so the Messenger of Death makes him suffer. ||1||<br>
  Please be merciful to me, O Destroyer of the pains of the meek and the poor; let me be the dust of the feet of the Saints.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 028</h2></center>
  Slave Nanak asks for the Blessed Vision of God. It is the Support of his mind and body. ||2||78||101||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Without the Name of the Lord, the soul is polluted.<br>
  The True Lord God has Himself administered the intoxicating drug of corruption, and led the mortal astray. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Wandering through millions of incarnations in countless ways, he does not find stability anywhere.<br>
  The faithless cynic does not intuitively meet with the Perfect True Guru; he continues coming and going in reincarnation. ||1||<br>
  Please save me, O All-powerful Lord God, O Great Giver; O God, You are Inaccessible and Infinite.<br>
  Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary, to cross over the terrible world-ocean, and reach the other shore. ||2||79||102||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  To chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord is Sublime.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, meditate on the Transcendent Lord God; The taste of His essence is Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the One Unmoving, Eternal, Unchanging Lord God, the intoxication of Maya wears off.<br>
  One who is blessed with intuitive peace and poise, and the vibrations of the Unstruck Celestial Bani, never suffers again. ||1||<br>
  Even Brahma and his sons sing God's Praises; Sukdayv and Prahlaad sing His Praises as well.<br>
  Drinking in the fascinating Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's sublime essence, Nanak meditates on the Amazing Lord. ||2||80||103||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He commits many millions of sins.<br>
  Day and night, he does not get tired of them, and he never finds release. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He carries on his head a terrible, heavy load of sin and corruption.<br>
  In an instant, he is exposed. The Messenger of Death seizes him by his hair. ||1||<br>
  He is consigned to countless forms of reincarnation, into beasts, ghosts, camels and donkeys.<br>
  Vibrating and meditating on the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, you shall never be struck or harmed at all. ||2||81||104||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  He is so blind! He is eating loads of poison.<br>
  His eyes, ears and body are totally exhausted; he shall lose his breath in an instant. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Making the poor suffer, he fills his belly, but the wealth of Maya shall not go with him.<br>
  Committing sinful mistakes again and again, he regrets and repents, but he can never give them up. ||1||<br>
  The Messenger of Death comes to slaughter the slanderer; he beats him on his head.<br>
  O Nanak, he cuts himself with his own dagger, and damages his own mind. ||2||82||105||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The slanderer is destroyed in mid-stream.<br>
  Our Lord and Master is the Saving Grace, the Protector of His humble servants; those who have turned their backs on the Guru are overtaken by death. ||1||Pause||<br>
  No one listens to what he says; he is not allowed to sit anywhere.<br>
  He suffers in pain here, and falls into hell hereafter. He wanders in endless reincarnations. ||1||<br>
  He has become infamous across worlds and galaxies; he receives according to what he has done.<br>
  Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Fearless Creator Lord; he sings His Glorious Praises in ecstasy and bliss. ||2||83||106||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Desire plays itself out in so many ways.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 029</h2></center>
  But it is not fulfilled at all, and in the end, it dies, exhausted. ||1||Pause||<br>
  It does not produce tranquility, peace and poise; this is the way it works.<br>
  He does not know what belongs to him, and to others. He burns in sexual desire and anger. ||1||<br>
  The world is enveloped by an ocean of pain; O Lord, please save Your slave!<br>
  Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of Your Lotus Feet; Nanak is forever and ever a sacrifice. ||2||84||107||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O sinner, who taught you to sin?<br>
  You do not contemplate your Lord and Master, even for an instant; it was He who gave you your body and soul. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Eating, drinking and sleeping, you are happy, but contemplating the Naam, the Name of the Lord, you are miserable.<br>
  In the womb of your mother, you cried and whined like a wretch. ||1||<br>
  And now, bound by great pride and corruption, you shall wander in endless incarnations.<br>
  You have forgotten the Lord of the Universe; what misery will be your lot now? O Nanak, peace is found by realizing the sublime state of the Lord. ||2||85||108||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, I have grasped the Protection, the Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, my mind is fascinated, and evil-mindedness is taken away. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is Unfathomable, Incomprehensible, Exalted and High, Eternal and Imperishable; His worth cannot be appraised.<br>
  Gazing upon Him, gazing upon Him in the water and on the land, my mind has blossomed forth in ecstasy. He is totally pervading and permeating all. ||1||<br>
  Merciful to the meek, my Beloved, Enticer of my mind; meeting with the Holy, He is known.<br>
  Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Nanak lives; the Messenger of Death cannot catch or torment him. ||2||86||109||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, my mind is intoxicated.<br>
  Gazing upon the Merciful Lord, I am filled with bliss and peace; imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord, I am intoxicated. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have become spotless and pure, singing the Sacred Praises of the Lord; I shall never again be dirtied.<br>
  My awareness is focused on the Lotus Feet of God; I have met the Infinite, Supreme Being. ||1||<br>
  Taking me by the hand, He has given me everything; He has lit up my lamp.<br>
  O Nanak, savoring the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I have become detached; my generations have been carried across as well. ||2||87||110||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, by meditating in remembrance on some other, the mortal dies.<br>
  Forsaking the Lord of the Universe, the Giver of souls, the mortal is engrossed and entangled in Maya. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he walks on some other path, and falls into the most horrible hell.<br>
  He suffers uncounted punishments, and wanders from womb to womb in reincarnation. ||1||<br>
  They alone are wealthy, and they alone are honorable, who are absorbed in the Sanctuary of the Lord.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, O Nanak, they conquer the world; they do not come and go in reincarnation ever again. ||2||88||111||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord has cut down the crooked tree of my deceit.<br>
  The forest of doubt is burnt away in an instant, by the fire of the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Sexual desire, anger and slander are gone; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have beaten them and driven them out.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 030</h2></center>
  The Gurmukh is successful in this priceless human life; he shall not lose it in the gamble ever again. ||1||<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and contemplate the Perfect Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Servant Nanak is the slave of Your slaves; over and over again, he bows in humble reverence to You. ||2||89||112||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  This Holy Book is the home of the Transcendent Lord God.<br>
  Whoever sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, has the perfect knowledge of God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Siddhas and seekers and all the silent sages long for the Lord, but those who meditate on Him are rare.<br>
  That person, unto whom my Lord and Master is merciful - all his tasks are perfectly accomplished. ||1||<br>
  One whose heart is filled with the Lord, the Destroyer of fear, knows the whole world.<br>
  May I never forget You, even for an instant, O my Creator Lord; Nanak begs for this blessing. ||2||90||113||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The rain has fallen everywhere.<br>
  Singing the Lord's Praises with ecstasy and bliss, the Perfect Lord is revealed. ||1||Pause||<br>
  On all four sides and in the ten directions, the Lord is an ocean. There is no place where He does not exist.<br>
  O Perfect Lord God, Ocean of Mercy, You bless all with the gift of the soul. ||1||<br>
  True, True, True is my Lord and Master; True is the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  True are those humble beings, within whom faith wells up; O Nanak, they are not deluded by doubt. ||2||91||114||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Dear Lord of the Universe, You are the Support of my breath of life.<br>
  You are my Best Friend and Companion, my Help and Support; You are my family. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You placed Your Hand on my forehead; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing Your Glorious Praises.<br>
  By Your Grace, I have obtained all fruits and rewards; I meditate on the Lord's Name with delight. ||1||<br>
  The True Guru has laid the eternal foundation; it shall never be shaken.<br>
  Guru Nanak has become merciful to me, and I have been blessed with the treasure of absolute peace. ||2||92||115||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Only the true merchandise of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, stays with you.<br>
  Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the treasure of wealth, and earn your profit; in the midst of corruption, remain untouched. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All beings and creatures find contentment, meditating on their God.<br>
  The priceless jewel of infinite worth, this human life, is won, and they are not consigned to reincarnation ever again. ||1||<br>
  When the Lord of the Universe shows His kindness and compassion, the mortal finds the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,<br>
  Nanak has found the wealth of the Lotus Feet of the Lord; he is imbued with the Love of God. ||2||93||116||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, I am wonder-struck, gazing upon the Lord.<br>
  My mind is enticed by the unstruck celestial melody; its flavor is amazing! ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is my Mother, Father and Relative. My mind delights in the Lord.<br>
  Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all my illusions are dispelled. ||1||<br>
  I am lovingly attached to His Lotus Feet; my doubt and fear are totally consumed.<br>
  Servant Nanak has taken the Support of the One Lord. He shall not wander in reincarnation ever again. ||2||94||117||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 031</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, I am totally intoxicated with the Lord's Feet.<br>
  I know of none other than the Lord. I have totally burnt off my sense of duality. ||1||Pause||<br>
  To abandon the Lord of the World, and become involved with anything else, is to fall into the pit of corruption.<br>
  My mind is enticed, thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. He has lifted me up and out of hell. ||1||<br>
  By the Grace of the Saints, I have met the Lord, the Giver of peace; the noise of egotism has been stilled.<br>
  Slave Nanak is imbued with the Love of the Lord; the forests of his mind and body have blossomed forth. ||2||95||118||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The false dealings are finished.<br>
  Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and meditate, vibrate on the Lord. This is the most excellent thing in the world. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Here and hereafter, you shall never waver; enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within your heart.<br>
  The boat of the Guru's Feet is found by great good fortune; it shall carry you across the world-ocean. ||1||<br>
  The Infinite Lord is totally permeating and pervading the water, the land and the sky.<br>
  Drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name; O Nanak, all other tastes are bitter. ||2||96||119||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You whine and cry<br>
  - you are intoxicated with the great corruption of attachment and pride, but you do not remember the Lord in meditation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who meditate on the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy - the guilt of their minstakes is burnt away.<br>
  Fruitful is the body, and blessed is the birth of those who merge with God. ||1||<br>
  The four great blessings, and the eighteen supernatural spiritual powers - above all these are the Holy Saints.<br>
  Slave Nanak longs for the dust of the feet of the humble; attached to the hem of His robe, he is saved. ||2||97||120||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord's humble servants yearn for the Lord's Name.<br>
  In thought, word and deed, they long for this peace, to gaze with their eyes upon the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are Endless, O God, my Supreme Lord and Master; Your state cannot be known.<br>
  My mind is pierced through by the Love of Your Lotus Feet; this is everything to me - I enshrine it deep within my being. ||1||<br>
  In the Vedas, the Puraanas and the Simritees, the humble and the Holy chant this Bani with their tongues.<br>
  Chanting the Lord's Name, O Nanak, I am emancipated; other teachings of duality are useless. ||2||98||121||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  A fly! You are just a fly, created by the Lord.<br>
  Wherever it stinks, you land there; you suck in the most toxic stench. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You don't stay put anywhere; I have seen this with my eyes.<br>
  You have not spared anyone, except the Saints - the Saints are on the side of the Lord of the Universe. ||1||<br>
  You have enticed all beings and creatures; no one knows You, except the Saints.<br>
  Slave Nanak is imbued with the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. Focusing his consciousness on the Word of the Shabad, he realizes the Presence of the True Lord. ||2||99||122||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, the noose of Death has been cut away.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have found total peace. I remain unattached in the midst of my household. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 032</h2></center>
  Granting His Grace, He has made me His Own. The thirst for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan wells up within me.<br>
  Joining the Society of the Saints, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; I have given up other hopes. ||1||<br>
  The Saint has pulled me out of the utterly desolate wilderness, and shown me the path.<br>
  Gazing upon His Darshan, all sins are taken away; Nanak is blessed with the jewel of the Lord. ||2||100||123||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O mother, I am involved with the Love of the Lord;<br>
  I am intoxicated with it. My mind has such a longing and thirst for the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of my Beauteous Lord. No one can break this. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord is my breath of life, honor, spouse, parent, child, relative, wealth - everything.<br>
  Cursed is this body of bones, this pile of maggots and manure, if it knows any other than the Lord. ||1||<br>
  The Destroyer of the pains of the poor has become merciful to me, by the power of the karma of my past actions.<br>
  Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, the Treasure, the Ocean of Mercy; my subservience to others is past. ||2||101||124||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord's melody is noble and sublime.<br>
  The Lotus Feet of my Lord and Master are incomparably beautiful. Meditating on them, one becomes Holy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Just by thinking of the Darshan, the Blessed Vision of the Lord of the World, the dirty sins are washed away.<br>
  The Lord cuts down and weeds out the corruption of the cycle of birth and death. ||1||<br>
  How rare is that person who has such pre-ordained destiny, to find the Lord.<br>
  Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Creator, the Lord of the Universe - O Nanak, this is Truth. ||2||102||125||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The intellect of one who dwells on the Name of the Lord is excellent.<br>
  One who forgets the Lord and becomes involved with some other - all his showy pretensions are false. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditate, vibrate on our Lord and Master in the Company of the Holy, and your sins shall be eradicated.<br>
  When the Lord's Lotus Feet abide within the heart, the mortal is never again caught in the cycle of death and birth. ||1||<br>
  He showers us with His kindness and compassion; He saves and protects those who take the Support of the Naam, the Name of the One Lord.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on Him, day and night, O Nanak, your face shall be radiant in the Court of the Lord. ||2||103||126||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Honored - you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; your egotistical pride will be totally dispelled. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Showering His kindness and compassion, He shall make you His Own. As Gurmukh, your spiritual wisdom shall be perfect.<br>
  All peace and all sorts of ecstasy are obtained, by meditating on the Darshan, the Blessed Vision of my Lord and Master. ||1||<br>
  She who dwells close to her Lord is always the pure, happy soul-bride; she is famous in the ten directions.<br>
  She is imbued with the Love of her Loving Beloved Lord; Nanak is a sacrifice to her. ||2||104||127||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Lord, I take the Support of Your Lotus Feet.<br>
  You are my Best Friend and Companion; I am with You. You are our Protector, O Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are mine, and I am Yours; here and hereafter, You are my Saving Grace.<br>
  You are Endess and Infinite, O my Lord and Master; by Guru's Grace, a few understand. ||1||<br>
  Without being spoken, without being told, You know all, O Searcher of hearts.<br>
  One whom God unites with Himself, O Nanak, that humble being is honored in the Court of the Lord. ||2||105||128||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 033</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Fifth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meditate, vibrate on the Lord; other actions are corrupt.<br>
  Pride, attachment and desire are not quenched; the world is in the grip of death. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Eating, drinking, laughing and sleeping, life passes uselessly.<br>
  The mortal wanders in reincarnation, burning in the hellish environment of the womb; in the end, he is destroyed by death. ||1||<br>
  He practices fraud, cruelty and slander against others; he sins, and washes his hands.<br>
  Without the True Guru, he has no understanding; he is lost in the utter darkness of anger and attachment. ||2||<br>
  He takes the intoxicating drugs of cruelty and corruption, and is plundered. He is not conscious of the Creator Lord God.<br>
  The Lord of the Universe is hidden and unattached. The mortal is like a wild elephant, intoxicated with the wine of egotism. ||3||<br>
  In His Mercy, God saves His Saints; they have the Support of His Lotus Feet.<br>
  With his palms pressed together, Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of the Primal Being, the Infinite Lord God. ||4||1||129||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Sixth House, Partaal:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Chant His Sublime Word and His Priceless Glories.<br>
  Why are you indulding in corrupt actions?<br>
  Look at this, see and understand!<br>
  Meditate on the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.<br>
  Imbued with the Love of the Lord, you shall totally play with Him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The world is a dream.<br>
  Its expanse is false.<br>
  O my companion, why are you so enticed by the Enticer? Enshrine the Love of Your Beloved within your heart. ||1||<br>
  He is total love and affection.<br>
  God is always merciful.<br>
  Others - why are you involved with others?<br>
  Remain involved with the Lord.<br>
  When you join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,<br>
  says Nanak, meditate on the Lord.<br>
  Now, your association with death is ended. ||2||1||130||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You may make donations of gold,<br>
  and give away land in charity<br>
  and purify your mind in various ways,<br>
  but none of this is equal to the Lord's Name. Remain attached to the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You may recite the four Vedas with your tongue,<br>
  and listen to the eighteen Puraanas and the six Shaastras with your ears,<br>
  but these are not equal to the celestial melody of the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Remain attached to the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||1||<br>
  You may observe fasts, and say your prayers, purify yourself<br>
  and do good deeds; you may go on pilgrimages everywhere and eat nothing at all.<br>
  You may cook your food without touching anyone;<br>
  you may make a great show of cleansing techniques,<br>
  and burn incense and devotional lamps, but none of these are equal to the Lord's Name.<br>
  O Merciful Lord, please hear the prayer of the meek and the poor.<br>
  Please grant me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, that I may see You with my eyes. The Naam is so sweet to servant Nanak. ||2||2||131||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditate on the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam. The Lord is your Help and Support. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 034</h2></center>
  Grasping hold of the Feet of the Saints, I have abandoned sexual desire, anger and greed. The Guru, the Lord of the World, has been kind to me, and I have realized my destiny. ||1||<br>
  My doubts and attachments have been dispelled, and the blinding bonds of Maya have been broken. My Lord and Master is pervading and permeating everywhere; no one is an enemy.<br>
  My Lord and Master is totally satisfied with me; He has rid me of the pains of death and birth. Grasping hold of the Feet of the Saints, Nanak sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||3||132||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har; enshrine the Lord, Har, Har, within your mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Hear Him with your ears, and practice devotional worship - these are good deeds, which make up for past evils.<br>
  So seek the Sanctuary of the Holy, and forget all your other habits. ||1||.<br>
  Love the Lord's Feet, continually and continuously - the most sacred and sanctified.<br>
  Fear is taken away from the servant of the Lord, and the dirty sins and mistakes of the past are burnt away.<br>
  Those who speak are liberated, and those who listen are liberated; those who keep the Rehit, the Code of Conduct, are not reincarnated again.<br>
  The Lord's Name is the most sublime essence; Nanak contemplates the nature of reality. ||2||4||133||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I beg for devotion to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; I have forsaken all other activities. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Meditate lovingly on the Lord, and sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  I long for the dust of the feet of the Lord's humble servant, O Great Giver, my Lord and Master. ||1||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the ultimate ecstasy, bliss, happiness, peace and tranquility. The fear is death is dispelled by meditating in remembrance on the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  Only the Sanctuary of the Feet of the Lord of the Universe can destroy all the suffering of the world.<br>
  The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is the boat, O Nanak, to carry us across to the other side. ||2||5||134||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Gazing upon my Guru, I sing the Praises of my Beloved Lord.<br>
  I escape from the five thieves, and I find the One, when I join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Nothing of the visible world shall go along with you; abandon your pride and attachment.<br>
  Love the One Lord, and join the Saadh Sangat, and you shall be embellished and exalted. ||1||<br>
  I have found the Lord, the Treasure of Excellence; all my hopes have been fulfilled.<br>
  Nanak's mind is in ecstasy; the Guru has shattered the impregnable fortress. ||2||6||135||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My mind is neutral and detached; I seek only the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Serving the Holy Saints, I meditate on my Beloved within my heart.<br>
  Gazing upon the Embodiment of Ecstasy, I rise to the Mansion of His Presence. ||1||<br>
  I work for Him; I have forsaken everything else. I seek only His Sanctuary.<br>
  O Nanak, my Lord and Master hugs me close in His Embrace; the Guru is pleased and satisfied with me. ||2||7||136||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  This is my condition.<br>
  Only my Merciful Lord knows it. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have abandoned my mother and father, and sold my mind to the Saints.<br>
  I have lost my social status, birth-right and ancestry; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||<br>
  I have broken away from other people and family; I work only for God.<br>
  The Guru has taught me, O Nanak, to serve only the One Lord. ||2||8||137||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 035</h2></center>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  You are my Loving Beloved Enticing Lord of the World.<br>
  You are in worms, elephants, stones and all beings and creatures; You nourish and cherish them all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are not far away; You are totally present with all.<br>
  You are Beautiful, the Source of Nectar. ||1||<br>
  You have no caste or social class, no ancestry or family.<br>
  Nanak: God, You are Merciful. ||2||9||138||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Acting and play-acting, the mortal sinks into corruption. Even the moon and the sun are enticed and bewitched.<br>
  The disturbing noise of corruption wells up, in the tinkling ankle bells of Maya the beautiful. With her beguiling gestures of love, she seduces everyone except the Lord. ||Pause||<br>
  Maya clings to the three worlds; those who are stuck in wrong actions cannot escape her. Drunk and engrossed in blind worldly affairs, they are tossed about on the mighty ocean. ||1||<br>
  The Saint, the slave of the Lord is saved; the noose of the Messenger of Death is snapped.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Purifier of sinners; O Nanak, remember Him in meditation. ||2||10||139||3||13||155||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Raag Saarang, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  No one will be your help and support, except the Lord.<br>
  Who has any mother, father, child or spouse? Who is anyone's brother or sister? ||1||Pause||<br>
  All the wealth, land and property which you consider your own<br>
  - when you leave your body, none of it shall go along with you. Why do you cling to them? ||1||<br>
  God is Merciful to the meek, forever the Destroyer of fear, and yet you do not develop any loving relationship with Him.<br>
  Says Nanak, the whole world is totally false; it is like a dream in the night. ||2||1||<br>
  Saarang, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  O mortal, why are you engrossed in corruption?<br>
  No one is allowed to remain in this world; one comes, and another departs. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Who has a body? Who has wealth and property? With whom should we fall in love?<br>
  Whatever is seen, shall all disappear, like the shade of a passing cloud. ||1||<br>
  Abandon egotism, and grasp the Sanctuary of the Saints; you shall be liberated in an instant.<br>
  O servant Nanak, without meditating and vibrating on the Lord God, there is no peace, even in dreams. ||2||2||<br>
  Saarang, Ninth Mehl:<br>
  O mortal, why have you wasted your life?<br>
  Intoxicated with Maya and its riches, involved in corrupt pleasures, you have not sought the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This whole world is just a dream; why does seeing it fill you with greed?<br>
  Everything that has been created will be destroyed; nothing will remain. ||1||<br>
  You see this false body as true; in this way, you have placed yourself in bondage.<br>
  O servant Nanak, he is a liberated being, whose consciousness lovingly vibrates, and meditates on the Lord. ||2||3||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In my mind, I never sang the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 036</h2></center>
  I remained under the influence of corruption, night and day; I did whatever I pleased. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I never listened to the Guru's Teachings; I was entangled with others' spouses.<br>
  I ran all around slandering others; I was taught, but I never learned. ||1||<br>
  How can I even describe my actions? This is how I wasted my life.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am totally filled with faults. I have come to Your Sanctuary - please save me, O Lord! ||2||4||3||13||139||4||159||<br>
  Raag Saarang, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  How can I live, O my mother?<br>
  Hail to the Lord of the Universe. I ask to sing Your Praises; without You, O Lord, I cannot even survive. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am thirsty, thirsty for the Lord; the soul-bride gazes upon Him all through the night.<br>
  My mind is absorbed into the Lord, my Lord and Master. Only God knows the pain of another. ||1||<br>
  My body suffers in pain, without the Lord; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I find the Lord.<br>
  O Dear Lord, please be kind and compassionate to me, that I might remain merged in You, O Lord. ||2||<br>
  Follow such a path, O my conscious mind, that you may remain focused on the Feet of the Lord.<br>
  I am wonder-struck, singing the Glorious Praises of my Fascinating Lord; I am intuitively absorbed in the Fearless Lord. ||3||<br>
  That heart, in which the Eternal, Unchanging Naam vibrates and resounds, does not diminish, and cannot be evaluated.<br>
  Without the Name, everyone is poor; the True Guru has imparted this understanding. ||4||<br>
  My Beloved is my breath of life - listen, O my companion. The demons have taken poison and died.<br>
  As love for Him welled up, so it remains. My mind is imbued with His Love. ||5||<br>
  I am absorbed in celestial samaadhi, lovingly attached to the Lord forever. I live by singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I have become detached from the world. In the profound primal trance, I dwell within the home of my own inner being. ||6||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is sublimely sweet and supremely delicious; within the home of my own self, I understand the essence of the Lord.<br>
  Wherever You keep my mind, there it is. This is what the Guru has taught me. ||7||<br>
  Sanak and Sanandan, Brahma and Indra, were imbued with devotional worship, and came to be in harmony with Him.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Lord, I cannot live, even for an instant. The Name of the Lord is glorious and great. ||8||1||<br>
  Saarang, First Mehl:<br>
  Without the Lord, how can my mind be comforted?<br>
  The guilt and sin of millions of ages is erased, and one is released from the cycle of reincarnation, when the Truth is implanted within. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Anger is gone, egotism and attachment have been burnt away; I am imbued with His ever-fresh Love.<br>
  Other fears are forgotten, begging at God's Door. The Immaculate Lord is my Companion. ||1||<br>
  Forsaking my fickle intellect, I have found God, the Destroyer of fear; I am lovingly attuned to the One Word, the Shabad.<br>
  Tasting the sublime essence of the Lord, my thirst is quenched; by great good fortune, the Lord has united me with Himself. ||2||<br>
  The empty tank has been filled to overflowing. Following the Guru's Teachings, I am enraptured with the True Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 037</h2></center>
  My mind is imbued with love for the Naam. The Immaculate Lord is merciful, from the beginning of time, and througout the ages. ||3||<br>
  My mind is fascinated with the Fascinating Lord. By great good fortune, I am lovingly attuned to Him.<br>
  Contemplating the True Lord, all the resides of sins and mistakes are wiped away. My mind is pure and immaculate in His Love. ||4||<br>
  God is the Deep and Unfathomable Ocean, the Source of all jewels; no other is worthy of worship.<br>
  I contemplate the Shabad, the Destroyer of doubt and fear; I do not know any other at all. ||5||<br>
  Subduing my mind, I have realized the pure status; I am totally imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  I do not know any other except the Lord. The True Guru has imparted this understanding. ||6||<br>
  God is Inaccessible and Unfathomable, Unmastered and Unborn; through the Guru's Teachings, I know the One Lord.<br>
  Filled to overflowing, my consciousness does not waver; through the Mind, my mind is pleased and appeased. ||7||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I speak the Unspoken; I speak what He makes me speak.<br>
  O Nanak, my Lord is Merciful to the meek; I do not know any other at all. ||8||2||<br>
  Saarang, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O my mind, the Name of the Lord is glorious and great.<br>
  I know of none, other than the Lord; through the Lord's Name, I have attained liberation and emancipation. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Through the Word of the Shabad, I am lovingly attuned to the Lord, the Destroyer of fear, the Destroyer of the Messenger of Death.<br>
  As Gurmukh, I have realized the Lord, the Giver of peace; I remain intuitively absorbed in Him. ||1||<br>
  The Immaculate Name of the Lord is the food of His devotees; they wear the glory of devotional worship.<br>
  They abide in the home of their inner beings, and they serve the Lord forever; they are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  The intellect of the self-willed manmukh is false; his mind wavers and wobbles, and he cannot speak the Unspoken Speech.<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, the Eternal Unchanging Lord abides within the mind; the True Word of His Bani is Ambrosial Nectar. ||3||<br>
  The Shabad calms the turbulent waves of the mind; the tongue is intuively imbued with peace.<br>
  So remain united forever with your True Guru, who is lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||4||<br>
  If the mortal dies in the Shabad, then he is liberated; he focuses his consciousness on the Lord's Feet.<br>
  The Lord is an Ocean; His Water is Forever Pure. Whoever bathes in it is intuitively imbued with peace. ||5||<br>
  Those who contemplate the Shabad are forever imbued with His Love; their egotism and desires are subdued.<br>
  The Pure, Unattached Lord permeates their inner beings; the Lord, the Supreme Soul, is pervading all. ||6||<br>
  Your humble servants serve You, O Lord; those who are imbued with the Truth are pleasing to Your Mind.<br>
  Those who are involved in duality do not find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; caught in the false nature of the world, they do not discriminate between merits and demerits. ||7||<br>
  When the Lord merges us into Himself, we speak the Unspoken Speech; True is the Shabad, and True is the Word of His Bani.<br>
  O Nanak, the true people are absorbed in the Truth; they chant the Name of the Lord. ||8||1||<br>
  Saarang, Third Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, the Name of the Lord is supremely sweet.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 038</h2></center>
  It is the Destroyer of the sins, the guilt and fears of countless incarnations; the Gurmukh sees the One Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Millions upon millions of sins are erased, when the mind comes to love the True Lord.<br>
  I do not know any other, except the Lord; the True Guru has revealed the One Lord to me. ||1||<br>
  Those whose hearts are filled with the wealth of the Lord's Love, remain intuitively absorbed in Him.<br>
  Imbued with the Shabad, they are dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love. They are imbued with the Lord's celestial peace and poise. ||2||<br>
  Contemplating the Shabad, the tongue is imbued with joy; embracing His Love, it is dyed a deep crimson.<br>
  I have come to know the Name of the Pure Detached Lord; my mind is satisfied and comforted. ||3||<br>
  The Pandits, the religious scholars, read and study, and all the silent sages have grown weary; they have grown weary of wearing their religious robes and wandering all around.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I have found the Immaculate Lord; I contemplate the True Word of the Shabad. ||4||<br>
  My coming and going in reincarnation is ended, and I am imbued with Truth; the True Word of the Shabad is pleasing to my mind.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, eternal peace is found, and self-conceit is eliminated from within. ||5||<br>
  Through the True Word of the Shabad, the celestial melody wells up, and the mind is lovingly focused on the True Lord.<br>
  The Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord, abides in the mind of the Gurmukh. ||6||<br>
  The whole world is contained in the One Lord. How rare are those who understand the One Lord.<br>
  One who dies in the Shabad comes to know everything; night and day, he realizes the One Lord. ||7||<br>
  That humble being, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, understands. Nothing else can be said.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam are forever detached from the world; they are lovingly attuned to the One Word of the Shabad. ||8||2||<br>
  Saarang, Third Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, the Speech of the Lord is unspoken.<br>
  That humble being who is blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace, obtains it. How rare is that Gurmukh who understands. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord is Deep, Profound and Unfathomable, the Ocean of Excellence; He is realized through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Mortals do their deeds in all sorts of ways, in the love of duality; but without the Shabad, they are insane. ||1||<br>
  That humble being who bathes in the Lord's Name becomes immaculate; he never becomes polluted again.<br>
  Without the Name, the whole world is polluted; wandering in duality, it loses its honor. ||2||<br>
  What should I grasp? What should I gather up or leave behind? I do not know.<br>
  O Dear Lord, Your Name is the Help and Support of those whom You bless with Your kindness and compassion. ||3||<br>
  The True Lord is the True Giver, the Architect of Destiny; as He pleases, He links mortals to the Name.<br>
  He alone comes to understand, who enters the Guru's Gate, whom the Lord Himself instructs. ||4||<br>
  Even gazing upon the wonders of the Lord, this mind does not think of Him. The world comes and goes in reincarnation.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, the mortal comes to understand, and finds the Door of Salvation. ||5||<br>
  Those who understand the Lord's Court, never suffer separation from him. The True Guru has imparted this understanding.<br>
  They practice truth, self-restraint and good deeds; their comings and goings are ended. ||6||<br>
  In the Court of the True Lord, they practice Truth. The Gurmukhs take the Support of the True Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 039</h2></center>
  The self-willed manmukhs wander, lost in doubt and duality. They do not know how to contemplate the Lord. ||7||<br>
  He Himself is the Gurmukh, and He Himself gives; He Himself creates and beholds.<br>
  O Nanak, those humble beings are approved, whose honor the Lord Himself accepts. ||8||3||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O Lord of the World, I gaze upon Your wondrous glory.<br>
  You are the Doer, the Cause of causes, the Creator and Destroyer. You are the Sovereign Lord of all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The rulers and nobles and kings shall become beggars. Their ostentatious shows are false<br>
  . My Sovereign Lord King is eternally stable. His Praises are sung in every heart. ||1||<br>
  Listen to the Praises of my Lord King, O Saints. I chant them as best I can.<br>
  My Lord King, the Great Giver, is Immeasurable. He is the Highest of the high. ||2||<br>
  He has strung His Breath throughout the creation; He locked the fire in the wood.<br>
  He placed the water and the land together, but neither blends with the other. ||3||<br>
  In each and every heart, the Story of our Sovereign Lord is told; in each and every home, they yearn for Him.<br>
  Afterwards, He created all beings and creatures; but first, He provided them with sustenance. ||4||<br>
  Whatever He does, He does by Himself. Who has ever given Him advice?<br>
  The mortals make all sorts of efforts and showy displays, but He is realized only through the Teachings of Truth. ||5||<br>
  The Lord protects and saves His devotees; He blesses them with the glory of His Name.<br>
  Whoever is disrespectful to the humble servant of the Lord, shall be swept away and destroyed. ||6||<br>
  Those who join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, are liberated; all their demerits are taken away.<br>
  Seeing them, God becomes merciful; they are carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||7||<br>
  I am lowly, I am nothing at all; You are my Great Lord and Master - how can I even contemplate Your creative potency?<br>
  My mind and body are cooled and soothed, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. Nanak takes the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||8||1||<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Sixth House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Listen to the Story of the Inaccessible and Unfathomable.<br>
  The glory of the Supreme Lord God is wondrous and amazing! ||1||Pause||<br>
  Forever and ever, humbly bow to the True Guru.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, sing the Glorious Praises of the Infinite Lord.<br>
  His Light shall radiate deep within your mind.<br>
  With the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom, ignorance is dispelled. ||1||<br>
  There is no limit to His Expanse.<br>
  His Glory is Infinite and Endless.<br>
  His many plays cannot be counted.<br>
  He is not subject to pleasure or pain. ||2||<br>
  Many Brahmas vibrate Him in the Vedas.<br>
  Many Shivas sit in deep meditation.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 040</h2></center>
  Many beings take incarnation.<br>
  Many Indras stand at the Lord's Door. ||3||<br>
  Many winds, fires and waters.<br>
  Many jewels, and oceans of butter and milk.<br>
  Many suns, moons and stars.<br>
  Many gods and goddesses of so many kinds. ||4||<br>
  Many earths, many wish-fulfilling cows.<br>
  Many miraculous Elysian trees, many Krishnas playing the flute.<br>
  Many Akaashic ethers, many nether regions of the underworld.<br>
  Many mouths chant and meditate on the Lord. ||5||<br>
  Many Shaastras, Simritees and Puraanas.<br>
  Many ways in which we speak.<br>
  Many listeners listen to the Lord of Treasure.<br>
  The Lord God totally permeates all beings. ||6||<br>
  Many righteous judges of Dharma, many gods of wealth.<br>
  Many gods of water, many mountains of gold.<br>
  Many thousand-headed snakes, chanting ever-new Names of God.<br>
  They do not know the limits of the Supreme Lord God. ||7||<br>
  Many solar systems, many galaxies.<br>
  Many forms, colors and celestial realms.<br>
  Many gardens, many fruits and roots.<br>
  He Himself is mind, and He Himself is matter. ||8||<br>
  Many ages, days and nights.<br>
  Many apocalypses, many creations.<br>
  Many beings are in His home.<br>
  The Lord is perfectly pervading all places. ||9||<br>
  Many Mayas, which cannot be known.<br>
  Many are the ways in which our Sovereign Lord plays.<br>
  Many exquisite melodies sing of the Lord.<br>
  Many recording scribes of the conscious and subconscious are revealed there. ||10||<br>
  He is above all, and yet He dwells with His devotees.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, they sing His Praises with love.<br>
  Many unstruck melodies resound and resonate with bliss.<br>
  There is no end or limit of that sublime essence. ||11||<br>
  True is the Primal Being, and True is His dwelling.<br>
  He is the Highest of the high, Immaculate and Detached, in Nirvaanaa.<br>
  He alone knows His handiwork.<br>
  He Himself pervades each and every heart.<br>
  The Merciful Lord is the Treasure of Compassion, O Nanak.<br>
  Those who chant and meditate on Him, O Nanak, are exalted and enraptured. ||12||1||2||2||3||7||<br>
  Saarang, Chhant, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  See the Giver of fearlessness in all.<br>
  The Detached Lord is totally permeating each and every heart.<br>
  Like waves in the water, He created the creation.<br>
  He enjoys all tastes, and takes pleasure in all hearts. There is no other like Him at all.<br>
  The color of the Lord's Love is the one color of our Lord and Master; in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, God is realized.<br>
  O Nanak, I am drenched with the Blessed Vision of the Lord, like the fish in the water. I see the Giver of fearlessness in all. ||1||<br>
  What praises should I give, and what approval should I offer to Him?<br>
  The Perfect Lord is totally pervading and permeating all places.<br>
  The Perfect Enticing Lord adorns each and every heart. When He withdraws, the mortal turns to dust.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 041</h2></center>
  Why do you not worship and adore Him? Join together with the Holy Saints; any instant, your time shall come.<br>
  All your property and wealth, and all that you see - none of it will go along with you.<br>
  Says Nanak, worship and adore the Lord, Har, Har. What praise, and what approval, can I offer to Him? ||2||<br>
  I ask the Saints, what is my Lord and Master like?<br>
  I offer my heart, to one who brings me news of Him.<br>
  Give me news of my Dear God; where does the Enticer live?<br>
  He is the Giver of peace to life and limb; God is totally permeating all places, interspaces and countries.<br>
  He is liberated from bondage, joined to each and every heart. I cannot say what the Lord is like.<br>
  Gazing upon His wondrous play, O Nanak, my mind is fascinated. I humbly ask, what is my Lord and Master like? ||3||<br>
  In His Kindness, He has come to His humble servant.<br>
  Blessed is that heart, in which the Lord's Feet are enshrined.<br>
  His Feet are enshrined within, in the Society of the Saints; the darkness of ignorance is dispelled.<br>
  The heart is enlightened and illumined and enraptured; God has been found.<br>
  Pain is gone, and peace has come to my house. The ultimate intuitive peace prevails.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have found the Perfect Lord; in His Kindness, He has come to His humble servant. ||4||1||<br>
  Vaar Of Saarang, Fourth Mehl, To Be Sung To The Tune Of Mehma-Hasna:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Shalok, Second Mehl:<br>
  The key of the Guru opens the lock of attachment, in the house of the mind, under the roof of the body.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Guru, the door of the mind cannot be opened. No one else holds the key in hand. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  He is not won over by music, songs or the Vedas.<br>
  He is not won over by intuitive wisdom, meditation or Yoga.<br>
  He is not won over by feeling sad and depressed forever.<br>
  He is not won over by beauty, wealth and pleasures.<br>
  He is not won over by wandering naked at sacred shrines.<br>
  He is not won over by giving donations in charity.<br>
  He is not won over by living alone in the wilderness.<br>
  He is not won over by fighting and dying as a warrior in battle.<br>
  He is not won over by becoming the dust of the masses.<br>
  The account is written of the loves of the mind.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord is won over only by His Name. ||2||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  You may study the nine grammars, the six Shaastras and the six divions of the Vedas.<br>
  You may recite the Mahaabhaarata.<br>
  Even these cannot find the limits of the Lord.<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, how can anyone be liberated?<br>
  Brahma, in the lotus of the navel, does not know the limits of God.<br>
  The Gurmukh, O Nanak, realizes the Naam. ||3||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Immaculate Lord Himself, by Himself, created Himself.<br>
  He Himself created the whole drama of all the world's play.<br>
  He Himself formed the three gunas, the three qualities; He increased the attachment to Maya.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, they are saved - those who love the Will of God.<br>
  O Nanak, the True Lord is pervading everywhere; all are contained within the True Lord. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 042</h2></center>
  Shalok, Second Mehl:<br>
  He Himself creates, O Nanak; He establishes the various creatures.<br>
  How can anyone be called bad? We have only One Lord and Master.<br>
  There is One Lord and Master of all; He watches over all, and assigns all to their tasks.<br>
  Some have less, and some have more; no one is allowed to leave empty.<br>
  Naked we come, and naked we go; in between, we put on a show.<br>
  O Nanak, one who does not understand the Hukam of God's Command - what will he have to do in the world hereafter? ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  He sends out the various created beings, and he calls back the various created beings again.<br>
  He himself establishes, and He Himself disestablishes. He fashions them in various forms.<br>
  And all the human beings who wander around as beggars, He Himself gives in charity to them.<br>
  As it is recorded, the mortals speak, and as it is recorded, they walk. So why put on all this show?<br>
  This is the basis of intelligence; this is certified and approved. Nanak speaks and proclaims it.<br>
  By past actions, each being is judged; what else can anyone say? ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Guru's Word makes the drama play itself out. Through virtue, this becomes evident.<br>
  Whoever utters the Word of the Guru's Bani - the Lord is enshrined in his mind.<br>
  Maya's power is gone, and doubt is eradicated; awaken to the Light of the Lord.<br>
  Those who hold onto goodness as their treasure meet the Guru, the Primal Being.<br>
  O Nanak, they are intuitively absorbed and blended into the Name of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Shalok, Second Mehl:<br>
  The merchants come from the Banker; He sends the account of their destiny with them.<br>
  On the basis of their accounts, He issues the Hukam of His Command, and they are left to take care of their merchandise.<br>
  The merchants have purchased their merchandise and packed up their cargo.<br>
  Some depart after having earned a good profit, while others leave, having lost their investment altogether.<br>
  No one asks to have less; who should be celebrated?<br>
  The Lord casts His Glance of Grace, O Nanak, upon those who have preserved their capital investment. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  United, the united separate, and separated, they unite again.<br>
  Living, the living die, and dying, they live again.<br>
  They become the fathers of many, and the sons of many; they become the gurus of many, and the disciples.<br>
  No account can be made of the future or the past; who knows what shall be, or what was?<br>
  All the actions and events of the past are recorded; the Doer did, He does, and He will do.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh dies, while the Gurmukh is saved; O Nanak, the Gracious Lord bestows His Glance of Grace. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The self-willed manmukh wanders in duality, lured and enticed by duality.<br>
  He practices falsehood and deception, telling lies.<br>
  Love and attachment to children and spouse is total misery and pain.<br>
  He is gagged and bound at the door of the Messenger of Death; he dies, and wanders lost in reincarnation.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh wastes his life; Nanak loves the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Shalok, Second Mehl:<br>
  Those who are blessed with the glorious greatness of Your Name - their minds are imbued with Your Love.<br>
  O Nanak, there is only One Ambrosial Nectar; there is no other nectar at all.<br>
  O Nanak, the Ambrosial Nectar is obtained within the mind, by Guru's Grace.<br>
  They alone drink it in with love, who have such pre-ordained destiny. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 043</h2></center>
  Second Mehl:<br>
  Why praise the created being? Praise the One who created all.<br>
  O Nanak, there is no other Giver, except the One Lord.<br>
  Praise the Creator Lord, who created the creation.<br>
  Praise the Great Giver, who gives sustenence to all.<br>
  O Nanak, the treasure of the Eternal Lord is over-flowing.<br>
  Praise and honor the One, who has no end or limitation. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Name of the Lord is a treasure. Serving it, peace is obtained.<br>
  I chant the Name of the Immaculate Lord, so that I may go home with honor.<br>
  The Word of the Gurmukh is the Naam; I enshrine the Naam within my heart.<br>
  The bird of the intellect comes under one's control, by meditating on the True Guru.<br>
  O Nanak, if the Lord becomes merciful, the mortal lovingly tunes in to the Naam. ||4||<br>
  Shalok, Second Mehl:<br>
  How can we speak of Him? Only He knows Himself.<br>
  His decree cannot be challenged; He is our Supreme Lord and Master.<br>
  By His Decree, even kings, nobles and commanders must step down.<br>
  Whatever is pleasing to His Will, O Nanak, is a good deed.<br>
  By His Decree, we walk; nothing rests in our hands.<br>
  When the Order comes from our Lord and Master, all must rise up and take to the road.<br>
  As His Decree is issued, so is His Command obeyed.<br>
  Those who are sent, come, O Nanak; when they are called back, they depart and go. ||1||<br>
  Second Mehl:<br>
  Those whom the Lord blesses with His Praises, are the true keepers of the treasure.<br>
  Those who are blessed with the key - they alone receive the treasure.<br>
  That treasure, from which virtue wells up - that treasure is approved.<br>
  Those who are blessed by His Glance of Grace, O Nanak, bear the Insignia of the Naam. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is immaculate and pure; hearing it, peace is obtained.<br>
  Listening and hearing, It is enshrined in the mind; how rare is that humble being who realizes it.<br>
  Sitting down and standing up, I shall never forget Him, the Truest of the true.<br>
  His devotees have the Support of His Name; in His Name, they find peace.<br>
  O Nanak, He permeates and pervades mind and body; He is the Lord, the Guru's Word. ||5||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, the weight is weighed out, when the soul is placed on the scale.<br>
  Nothing is equal to speaking of the One, who perfectly unites us with the Perfect Lord.<br>
  To call Him glorious and great carries such a heavy weight.<br>
  Other intellectualisms are lightweight; other words are lightweight as well.<br>
  The weight of the earth, water and mountains<br>
  - how can the goldsmith weigh it on the scale?<br>
  What weights can balance the scale?<br>
  O Nanak, when questioned, the answer is given.<br>
  The blind fool is running around, leading the blind.<br>
  The more they say, the more they expose themselves. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  It is difficult to chant it; it is difficult to listen to it. It cannot be chanted with the mouth.<br>
  Some speak with their mouths and chant the Word of the Shabad - the low and the high, day and night.<br>
  If He were something, then He would be visible. His form and state cannot be seen.<br>
  The Creator Lord does all deeds; He is established in the hearts of the high and the low.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 044</h2></center>
  It is so difficult to chant it, O Nanak; it cannot be chanted with the mouth. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Hearing the Name, the mind is delighted. The Name brings peace and tranquility.<br>
  Hearing the Name, the mind is satisfied, and all pains are taken away.<br>
  Hearing the Name, one becomes famous; the Name brings glorious greatness.<br>
  The Name brings all honor and status; through the Name, salvation is obtained.<br>
  The Gurmukh meditates on the Name; Nanak is lovingly attuned to the Name. ||6||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Impurity does not come from music; impurity does not come from the Vedas.<br>
  Impurity does not come from the phases of the sun and the moon.<br>
  Impurity does not come from food; impurity does not come from ritual cleansing baths.<br>
  Impurity does not come from the rain, which falls everywhere.<br>
  Impurity does not come from the earth; impurity does not come from the water.<br>
  Impurity does not come from the air which is diffused everywhere.<br>
  O Nanak, the one who has no Guru, has no redeeming virtues at all.<br>
  Impurity comes from turning one's face away from God. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, the mouth is truly cleansed by ritual cleansing, if you really know how to do it.<br>
  For the intuitively aware, cleansing is spiritual wisdom. For the Yogi, it is self-control.<br>
  For the Brahmin, cleansing is contentment; for the householder, it is truth and charity.<br>
  For the king, cleansing is justice; for the scholar, it is true meditation.<br>
  The consciousness is not washed with water; you drink it to quench your thirst.<br>
  Water is the father of the world; in the end, water destroys it all. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Hearing the Name, all supernatural spiritual powers are obtained, and wealth follows along.<br>
  Hearing the Name, the nine treasures are received, and the mind's desires are obtained.<br>
  Hearing the Name, contentment comes, and Maya meditates at one's feet.<br>
  Hearing the Name, intuitive peace and poise wells up.<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, the Name is obtained; O Nanak, sing His Glorious Praises. ||7||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  In pain, we are born; in pain, we die. In pain, we deal with the world.<br>
  Hereafter, there is said to be pain, only pain; the more the mortals read, the more they cry out.<br>
  The packages of pain are untied, but peace does not emerge.<br>
  In pain, the soul burns; in pain, it departs weeping and wailing.<br>
  O Nanak, imbued with the Lord's Praise, the mind and body blossom forth, rejuvenated.<br>
  In the fire of pain, the mortals die; but pain is also the cure. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, worldly pleasures are nothing more than dust. They are the dust of the dust of ashes.<br>
  The mortal earns only the dust of the dust; his body is covered with dust.<br>
  When the soul is taken out of the body, it too is covered with dust.<br>
  And when one's account is called for in the world hereafter, he receives only ten times more dust. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Hearing the Name, one is blessed with purity and self-control, and the Messenger of Death will not draw near.<br>
  Hearing the Name, the heart is illumined, and darkness is dispelled.<br>
  Hearing the Name, one comes to understand his own self, and the profit of the Name is obtained.<br>
  Hearing the Name, sins are eradicated, and one meets the Immaculate True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, hearing the Name, one's face becomes radiant. As Gurmukh, meditate on the Name. ||8||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  In your home, is the Lord God, along with all your other gods.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 045</h2></center>
  You wash your stone gods and worship them.<br>
  You offer saffron, sandalwood and flowers.<br>
  Falling at their feet, you try so hard to appease them.<br>
  Begging, begging from other people, you get things to wear and eat.<br>
  For your blind deeds, you will be blindly punished.<br>
  Your idol does not feed the hungry, or save the dying.<br>
  The blind assembly argues in blindness. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  All intuitive understanding, all Yoga, all the Vedas and Puraanas.<br>
  All actions, all penances, all songs and spiritual wisdom.<br>
  All intellect, all enlightenment, all sacred shrines of pilgrimage.<br>
  All kingdoms, all royal commands, all joys and all delicacies.<br>
  All mankind, all divinites, all Yoga and meditation.<br>
  All worlds, all celestial realms; all the beings of the universe.<br>
  According to His Hukam, He commands them. His Pen writes out the account of their actions.<br>
  O Nanak, True is the Lord, and True is His Name. True is His Congregation and His Court. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  With faith in the Name, peace wells up; the Name brings emancipation.<br>
  With faith in the Name, honor is obtained. The Lord is enshrined in the heart.<br>
  With faith in the Name, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean, and no obstructions are ever again encountered.<br>
  With faith in the Name, the Path is revealed; through the Name, one is totally enlightened.<br>
  O Nanak, meeting with the True Guru, one comes to have faith in the Name; he alone has faith, who is blessed with it. ||9||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  The mortal walks on his head through the worlds and realms; he meditates, balaced on one foot.<br>
  Controlling the wind of the breath, he meditates within his mind, tucking his chin down into his chest.<br>
  What does he lean on? Where does he get his power?<br>
  What can be said, O Nanak? Who is blessed by the Creator?<br>
  God keeps all under His Command, but the fool shows off himself. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  He is, He is - I say it millions upon millions, millions upon millions of times.<br>
  With my mouth I say it, forever and ever; there is no end to this speech.<br>
  I do not get tired, and I will not be stopped; this is how great my determination is.<br>
  O Nanak, this is tiny and insignificant. To say that it is more, is wrong. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  With faith in the Name, all one's ancestors and family are saved.<br>
  With faith in the Name, one's associates are saved; enshrine it within your heart.<br>
  With faith in the Name, those who hear it are saved; let your tongue delight in it.<br>
  With faith in the Name, pain and hunger are dispelled; let your consciousness be attached to the Name.<br>
  O Nanak, they alone Praise the Name, who meet with the Guru. ||10||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  All nights, all days, all dates, all days of the week;<br>
  All seasons, all months, all the earth and everything on it.<br>
  All waters, all winds, all fires and underworlds.<br>
  All solar systems and galaxies, all worlds, people and forms.<br>
  No one knows how great the Hukam of His Command is; no one can describe His actions.<br>
  Mortals may utter, chant, recite and contemplate His Praises until they grow weary.<br>
  The poor fools, O Nanak, cannot find even a tiny bit of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  If I were to walk around with my eyes wide open, gazing at all the created forms;<br>
  I could ask the spiritual teachers and religious scholars, and those who contemplate the Vedas;<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 046</h2></center>
  I could ask the gods, mortal men, warriors and divine incarnations;<br>
  I could consult all the Siddhas in Samaadhi, and go to see the Lord's Court.<br>
  Hereafter, Truth is the Name of all; the Fearless Lord has no fear at all.<br>
  False are other intellectualisms, false and shallow; blind are the contemplations of the blind.<br>
  O Nanak, by the karma of good actions, the mortal comes to meditate on the Lord; by His Grace, we are carried across. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  With faith in the Name, evil-mindedness is eradicated, and the intellect is enlightened.<br>
  With faith in the Name, egotism is eradicated, and all sickness is cured.<br>
  Believing in the Name, The Name wells up, and intuitive peace and poise are obtained.<br>
  Believing in the Name, tranquility and peace well up, and the Lord is enshrined in the mind.<br>
  O Nanak, the Name is a jewel; the Gurmukh meditates on the Lord. ||11||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  If there were any other equal to You, O Lord, I would speak to them of You.<br>
  You, I praise You; I am blind, but through the Name, I am all-seeing.<br>
  Whatever is spoken, is the Word of the Shabad. Chanting it with love, we are embellished.<br>
  Nanak, this is the greatest thing to say: all glorious greatness is Yours. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  When there was nothing, what happened? What happens when one is born?<br>
  The Creator, the Doer, does all; He watches over all, again and again<br>
  . Whether we keep silent or beg out loud, the Great Giver blesses us with His gifts.<br>
  The One Lord is the Giver; we are all beggars. I have seen this throughout the Universe.<br>
  Nanak knows this: the Great Giver lives forever. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  With faith in the Name, intuitive awareness wells up; through the Name, intelligence comes.<br>
  With faith in the Name, chant the Glories of God; through the Name, peace is obtained.<br>
  With faith in the Name, doubt is eradicated, and the mortal never suffers again.<br>
  With faith in the Name, sing His Praises, and your sinful intellect shall be washed clean.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Perfect Guru, one comes to have faith in the Name; they alone receive it, unto whom He gives it. ||12||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Some read the Shaastras, the Vedas and the Puraanas.<br>
  They recite them, out of ignorance.<br>
  If they really understood them, they would realize the Lord.<br>
  Nanak says, there is no need to shout so loud. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  When I am Yours, then everything is mine. When I am not, You are.<br>
  You Yourself are All-powerful, and You Yourself are the Intuitive Knower. The whole world is strung on the Power of Your Shakti.<br>
  You Yourself send out the mortal beings, and You Yourself call them back home. Having created the creation, You behold it.<br>
  O Nanak, True is the Name of the True Lord; through Truth, one is accepted by the Primal Lord God. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Name of the Immaculate Lord is unknowable. How can it be known?<br>
  The Name of the Immaculate Lord is with the mortal being. How can it be obtained, O Siblings of Destiny?<br>
  The Name of the Immaculate Lord is all-pervading and permeating everywhere.<br>
  Through the Perfect Guru, it is obtained. It is revealed within the heart.<br>
  O Nanak, when the Merciful Lord grants His Grace, the mortal meets with the Guru, O Siblings of Desitny. ||13||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, people have faces like dogs; they eat rotting carcasses for food.<br>
  They bark and speak, telling only lies; all thought of righteousness has left them.<br>
  Those who have no honor while alive, will have an evil reputation after they die.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 047</h2></center>
  Whatever is predestined, happens, O Nanak; whatever the Creator does, comes to pass. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  Women have become advisors, and men have become hunters.<br>
  Humility, self-control and purity have run away; people eat the uneatable, forbidden food.<br>
  Modesty has left her home, and honor has gone away with her.<br>
  O Nanak, there is only One True Lord; do not bother to search for any other as true. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You smear your outer body with ashes, but within, you are filled with darkness.<br>
  You wear the patched coat and all the right clothes and robes, but you are still egotistical and proud.<br>
  You do not chant the Shabad, the Word of Your Lord and Master; you are attached to the expanse of Maya.<br>
  Within, you are filled with greed and doubt; you wander around like a fool.<br>
  Says Nanak, you never even think of the Naam; you have lost the game of life in the gamble. ||14||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  You may be in love with tens of thousands, and live for thousands of years; but what good are these pleasures and occupations?<br>
  And when you must separate from them, that separation is like poison, but they will be gone in an instant.<br>
  You may eat sweets for a hundred years, but eventually, you will have to eat the bitter as well.<br>
  Then, you will not remember eating the sweets; bitterness will permeate you.<br>
  The sweet and the bitter are both diseases.<br>
  O Nanak, eating them, you will come to ruin in the end.<br>
  It is useless to worry and struggle to death.<br>
  Entangled in worries and struggles, people exhaust themselves. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  They have fine clothes and furniture of various colors.<br>
  Their houses are painted beautifully white.<br>
  In pleasure and poise, they play their mind games.<br>
  When they approach You, O Lord, they shall be spoken to.<br>
  They think it is sweet, so they eat the bitter.<br>
  The bitter disease grows in the body.<br>
  If, later on, they receive the sweet,<br>
  then their bitterness shall be gone, O mother.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh is blessed to receive<br>
  what he is predestined to receive. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Those whose hearts are filled with the filth of deception, may wash themselves on the outside.<br>
  They practice falsehood and deception, and their falsehood is revealed.<br>
  That which is within them, comes out; it cannot be concealed by concealment.<br>
  Attached to falsehood and greed, the mortal is consigned to reincarnation over and over again.<br>
  O Nanak, whatever the mortal plants, he must eat. The Creator Lord has written our destiny. ||15||<br>
  Shalok, Second Mehl:<br>
  The Vedas bring forth stories and legends, and thoughts of vice and virtue.<br>
  What is given, they receive, and what is received, they give. They are reincarnated in heaven and hell.<br>
  High and low, social class and status - the world wanders lost in superstition.<br>
  The Ambrosial Word of Gurbani proclaims the essence of reality. Spiritual wisdom and meditation are contained within it.<br>
  The Gurmukhs chant it, and the Gurmukhs realize it. Intuitively aware, they meditate on it.<br>
  By the Hukam of His Command, He formed the Universe, and in His Hukam, He keeps it. By His Hukam, He keeps it under His Gaze.<br>
  O Nanak, if the mortal shatters his ego before he departs, as it is pre-ordained, then he is approved. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  The Vedas proclaim that vice and virtue are the seeds of heaven and hell.<br>
  Whatever is planted, shall grow. The soul eats the fruits of its actions, and understands.<br>
  Whoever praises spiritual wisdom as great, becomes truthful in the True Name.<br>
  When Truth is planted, Truth grows. In the Court of the Lord, you shall find your place of honor.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 048</h2></center>
  The Vedas are only merchants; spiritual wisdom is the capital; by His Grace, it is received.<br>
  O Nanak, without capital, no one has ever departed with profit. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  You can water a bitter neem tree with ambrosial nectar.<br>
  You can feed a venomous snake lots of milk.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh is resistant; he cannot be softened. You might as well water a stone.<br>
  Irrigating a poisonous plant with ambrosial nectar, only poisonous fruit is obtained.<br>
  O Lord, please unite Nanak with the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, so that he may be rid of all poison. ||16||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Death does not ask the time; it does not ask the date or the day of the week.<br>
  Some have packed up, and some who have packed up have gone.<br>
  Some are severely punished, and some are taken care of.<br>
  They must leave their armies and drums, and their beautiful mansions.<br>
  O Nanak, the pile of dust is once again reduced to dust. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, the pile shall fall apart; the fortress of the body is made of dust.<br>
  The thief has settled within you; O soul, your life is false. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Those who are filled with vicious slander, shall have their noses cut, and be shamed.<br>
  They are totally ugly, and always in pain. Their faces are blackened by Maya.<br>
  They rise early in the morning, to cheat and steal from others; they hide from the Lord's Name.<br>
  O Dear Lord, let me not even associate with them; save me from them, O my Sovereign Lord King.<br>
  O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs act according to their past deeds, producing nothing but pain. ||17||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Everyone belongs to our Lord and Master. Everyone came from Him.<br>
  Only by realizing the Hukam of His Command, is Truth obtained.<br>
  The Gurmukh realizes his own self; no one appears evil to him.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Fruitful is his coming into the world. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  He Himself is the Giver of all; He unites all with Himself.<br>
  O Nanak, they are united with the Word of the Shabad; serving the Lord, the Great Giver, they shall never be separated from Him again. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Peace and tranquility fill the heart of the Gurmukh; the Name wells up within them.<br>
  Chanting and meditation, penance and self-discipline, and bathing at sacred shrines of pilgrimage - the merits of these come by pleasing my God.<br>
  So serve the Lord with a pure heart; singing His Glorious Praises, you shall be embellished and exalted.<br>
  My Dear Lord is pleased by this; he carries the Gurmukh across.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh is merged with the Lord; he is embellished in His Court. ||18||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Thus speaks the wealthy man: I should go and get more wealth.<br>
  Nanak becomes poor on that day when he forgets the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  The sun rises and sets, and the lives of all run out.<br>
  The mind and body experience pleasures; one loses, and another wins.<br>
  Everyone is puffed up with pride; even after they are spoken to, they do not stop.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord Himself sees all; when He takes the air out of the balloon, the body falls. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The treasure of the Name is in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. There, the Lord is found.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 049</h2></center>
  By Guru's Grace, the heart is illumined, and darkness is dispelled.<br>
  Iron is transformed into gold, when it touches the Philosopher's Stone.<br>
  O Nanak, meeting with the True Guru, the Name is obtained. Meeting Him, the mortal meditates on the Name.<br>
  Those who have virtue as their treasure, obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||19||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Cursed are the lives of those who read and write the Lord's Name to sell it.<br>
  Their crop is devastated - what harvest will they have?<br>
  Lacking truth and humility, they shall not be appreciated in the world hereafter.<br>
  Wisdom which leads to arguments is not called wisdom.<br>
  Wisdom leads us to serve our Lord and Master; through wisdom, honor is obtained.<br>
  Wisdom does not come by reading textbooks; wisdom inspires us to give in charity.<br>
  Says Nanak, this is the Path; other things lead to Satan. ||1||<br>
  Second Mehl:<br>
  Mortals are known by their actions; this is the way it has to be.<br>
  They should show goodness, and not be deformed by their actions; this is how they are called beautiful.<br>
  Whatever they desire, they shall receive; O Nanak, they become the very image of God. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The True Guru is the tree of ambrosia. it bears the fruit of sweet nectar.<br>
  He alone receives it, who is so pre-destined, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  One who walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru, is blended with the Lord.<br>
  The Messenger of Death cannot even see him; his heart is illumined with God's Light.<br>
  O Nanak, God forgives him, and blends him with Himself; he does not rot away in the womb of reincarnation ever again. ||20||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  Those who have truth as their fast, contentment as their sacred shrine of pilgrimage, spiritual wisdom and meditation as their cleansing bath,<br>
  kindness as their deity, and forgiveness as their chanting beads - they are the most excellent people.<br>
  Those who take the Way as their loincloth, and intuitive awareness their ritualistically purified enclosure, with good deeds their ceremonial forehead mark,<br>
  and love their food - O Nanak, they are very rare. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  On the ninth day of the month, make a vow to speak the Truth,<br>
  and your sexual desire, anger and desire shall be eaten up.<br>
  On the tenth day, regulate your ten doors; on the eleventh day, know that the Lord is One.<br>
  On the twelfth day, the five thieves are subdued, and then, O Nanak, the mind is pleased and appeased.<br>
  Observe such a fast as this, O Pandit, O religious scholar; of what use are all the other teachings? ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Kings, rulers and monarchs enjoy pleasures and gather the poison of Maya.<br>
  In love with it, they collect more and more, stealing the wealth of others.<br>
  They do not trust their own children or spouses; they are totally attached to the love of Maya.<br>
  But even as they look on, Maya cheats them, and they come to regret and repent.<br>
  Bound and gagged at Death's door, they are beaten and punished; O Nanak, it pleases the Will of the Lord. ||21||<br>
  Shalok, First Mehl:<br>
  The one who lacks spiritual wisdom sings religious songs.<br>
  The hungry Mullah turns his home into a mosque.<br>
  The lazy unemployed has his ears pierced to look like a Yogi.<br>
  Someone else becomes a pan-handler, and loses his social status.<br>
  One who calls himself a guru or a spiritual teacher, while he goes around begging<br>
  - don't ever touch his feet.<br>
  One who works for what he eats, and gives some of what he has<br>
  - O Nanak, he knows the Path. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 050</h2></center>
  First Mehl:<br>
  Those mortals whose minds are like deep dark pits do not understand the purpose of life, even when it is explained to them.<br>
  Their minds are blind, and their heart-lotuses are upside-down; they look totally ugly.<br>
  Some know how to speak, and understand what they are told. They are wise and beautiful.<br>
  Some do not understand about the Sound-current of the Naad or the Vedas, music, virtue or vice.<br>
  Some are not blessed with understanding, intelligence, or sublime intellect; they do not grasp the mystery of God's Word.<br>
  O Nanak, they are donkeys; they are very proud of themselves, but they have no virtues at all. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  To the Gurmukh, everything is sacred: wealth, property, Maya.<br>
  Those who spend the wealth of the Lord find peace through giving.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Lord's Name shall never be deprived.<br>
  The Gurmukhs come to see the Lord, and leave behind the things of Maya.<br>
  O Nanak, the devotees do not think of anything else; they are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||22||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Those who serve the True Guru are very fortunate.<br>
  They are lovingly attuned to the True Shabad, the Word of the One God.<br>
  In their own household and family, they are in natural Samaadhi.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are truly detached from the world. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Calculated service is not service at all, and what is done is not approved.<br>
  The flavor of the Shabad, the Word of God, is not tasted if the mortal is not in love with the True Lord God.<br>
  The stubborn-minded person does not even like the True Guru; he comes and goes in reincarnation.<br>
  He takes one step forward, and ten steps back.<br>
  The mortal works to serve the True Guru, if he walks in harmony with the True Guru's Will.<br>
  He loses his self-conceit, and meets the True Guru; he remains intuitively absorbed in the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, they never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord; they are united in Union with the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  They call themselves emperors and rulers, but none of them will be allowed to stay.<br>
  Their sturdy forts and mansions - none of them will go along with them.<br>
  Their gold and horses, fast as the wind, are cursed, and cursed are their clever tricks.<br>
  Eating the thirty-six delicacies, they become bloated with pollution.<br>
  O Nanak, the self-willed manmukh does not know the One who gives, and so he suffers in pain. ||23||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Pandits, the religious scholars and the silent sages read and recite until they get tired. They wander through foreign lands in their religious robes, until they are exhausted.<br>
  In love with duality, they never receive the Name. Held in the grasp of pain, they suffer terribly.<br>
  The blind fools serve the three gunas, the three dispositions; they deal only with Maya.<br>
  With deception in their hearts, the fools read sacred texts to fill their bellies.<br>
  One who serves the True Guru finds peace; he eradicates egotism from within.<br>
  O Nanak, there is One Name to chant and dwell on; how rare are those who reflect on this and understand. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Naked we come, and naked we go. This is by the Lord's Command; what else can we do?<br>
  The object belongs to Him; He shall take it away; with whom should one be angry.<br>
  One who becomes Gurmukh accepts God's Will; he intuitively drinks in the Lord's sublime essence.<br>
  O Nanak, praise the Giver of peace forever; with your tongue, savor the Lord. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 051</h2></center>
  Pauree:<br>
  The fortress of the body has been decorated and adorned in so many ways.<br>
  The wealthy wear beautiful silk robes of various colors.<br>
  They hold elegant and beautiful courts, on red and white carpets.<br>
  But they eat in pain, and in pain they seek pleasure; they are very proud of their pride.<br>
  O Nanak, the mortal does not even think of the Name, which shall deliver him in the end. ||24||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  She sleeps in intuitive peace and poise, absorbed in the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  God hugs her close in His Embrace, and merges her into Himself.<br>
  Duality is eradicated with intuitive ease.<br>
  The Naam comes to abide in her mind.<br>
  He hugs close in His Embrace those who shatter and reform their beings.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are predestined to meet Him, come and meet Him now. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord - so what if they chant other chants?<br>
  They are maggots in manure, plundered by the thief of worldly entanglements.<br>
  O Nanak, never forget the Naam; greed for anything else is false. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Those who praise the Naam, and believe in the Naam, are eternally stable in this world.<br>
  Within their hearts, they dwell on the Lord, and nothing else at all.<br>
  With each and every hair, they chant the Lord's Name, each and every instant, the Lord.<br>
  The birth of the Gurmukh is fruitful and certified; pure and unstained, his filth is washed away.<br>
  O Nanak, meditating on the Lord of eternal life, the status of immortality is obtained. ||25||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who forget the Naam and do other things,<br>
  O Nanak, will be bound and gagged and beaten in the City of Death, like the thief caught red-handed. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The earth is beauteous, and the sky is lovely, chanting the Name of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, those who lack the Naam - their carcasses are eaten by the crows. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Those who lovingly praise the Naam, and dwell in the mansion of the self deep within,<br>
  do not enter into reincarnation ever again; they shall never be destroyed.<br>
  They remain immersed and absorbed in the love of the Lord, with every breath and morsel of food.<br>
  The color of the Lord's Love never fades away; the Gurmukhs are enlightened.<br>
  Granting His Grace, He unites them with Himself; O Nanak, the Lord keeps them by His side. ||26||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  As long as his mind is disturbed by waves, he is caught in ego and egotistical pride.<br>
  He does not find the taste of the Shabad, and he does not embrace love for the Name.<br>
  His service is not accepted; worrying and worrying, he wastes away in misery.<br>
  O Nanak, he alone is called a selfless servant, who cuts off his head, and offers it to the Lord.<br>
  He accepts the Will of the True Guru, and enshrines the Shabad within his heart. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  That is chanting and meditation, work and selfless service, which is pleasing to our Lord and Master.<br>
  The Lord Himself forgives, and takes away self-conceit, and unites the mortals with Himself.<br>
  United with the Lord, the mortal is never separated again; his light merges into the Light.<br>
  O Nanak, by Guru's Grace, the mortal understands, when the Lord allows him to understand. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  All are held accountable, even the egotistical self-willed manmukhs.<br>
  They never even think of the Name of the Lord; the Messenger of Death shall hit them on their heads.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 052</h2></center>
  Their sin and corruption are like rusty slag; they carry such a heavy load.<br>
  The path is treacherous and terrifying; how can they cross over to the other side?<br>
  O Nanak, those whom the Guru protects are saved. They are saved in the Name of the Lord. ||27||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Without serving the True Guru, no one finds peace; mortals die and are reborn, over and over again.<br>
  They have been given the drug of emotional attachment; in love with duality, they are totally corrupt.<br>
  Some are saved, by Guru's Grace. Everyone humbly bows before such humble beings.<br>
  O Nanak, meditate on the Naam, deep within yourself, day and night. You shall find the Door of Salvation. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Emotionally attached to Maya, the mortal forgets truth, death and the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Engaged in worldly affairs, his life wastes away; deep within himself, he suffers in pain.<br>
  O Nanak, those who have the karma of such pre-ordained destiny, serve the True Guru and find peace. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  Read the account of the Name of the Lord, and you shall never again be called to account.<br>
  No one will question you, and you will always be safe in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  The Messenger of Death will meet you, and be your constant servant.<br>
  Through the Perfect Guru, you shall find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. You shall be famous throughout the world.<br>
  O Nanak, the unstruck celestial melody vibrates at your door; come and merge with the Lord. ||28||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Whoever follows the Guru's Teachings, attains the most sublime peace of all peace.<br>
  Acting in accordance with the Guru, his fear is cut away; O Nanak, he is carried across. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The True Lord does not grow old; His Naam is never dirtied.<br>
  Whoever walks in harmony with the Guru's Will, shall not be reborn again.<br>
  O Nanak, those who forget the Naam, come and go in reincarnation. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  I am a beggar; I ask this blessing of You: O Lord, please embellish me with Your Love.<br>
  I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan; His Darshan brings me satisfaction.<br>
  I cannot live for a moment, for even an instant, without seeing Him, O my mother.<br>
  The Guru has shown me that the Lord is always with me; He is permeating and pervading all places.<br>
  He Himself wakes the sleepers, O Nanak, and lovingly attunes them to Himself. ||29||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs do not even know how to speak. They are filled with sexual desire, anger and egotism.<br>
  They do not know the difference between good and bad; they constantly think of corruption.<br>
  In the Lord's Court, they are called to account, and they are judged to be false.<br>
  He Himself creates the Universe. He Himself contemplates it.<br>
  O Nanak, whom should we tell? The True Lord is permeating and pervading all. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The Gurmukhs worship and adore the Lord; they receive the good karma of their actions.<br>
  O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those whose minds are filled with the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  All people cherish hope, that they will live long lives.<br>
  They wish to live forever; they adorn and embellish their forts and mansions.<br>
  By various frauds and deceptions, they steal the wealth of others.<br>
  But the Messenger of Death keeps his gaze on their breath, and the life of those goblins decreases day by day.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 053</h2></center>
  Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of the Guru, and is saved. The Guru, the Lord, is his Protector. ||30||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Reading and writing, the Pandits engage in debates and disputes; they are attached to the flavors of Maya.<br>
  In the love of duality, they forget the Naam. Those foolish mortals shall receive their punishment.<br>
  They do not serve the One who created them, who gives sustenance to all.<br>
  The noose of Death around their necks is not cut off; they come and go in reincarnation, over and over again.<br>
  The True Guru comes and meets those who have such pre-ordained destiny.<br>
  Night and day, they meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; O Nanak, they merge into the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  Those Gurmukhs who fall at His Feet deal with the True Lord and serve the True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, those who walk in harmony with the Guru's Will are intuitively absorbed in the True Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  In hope, there is very great pain; the self-willed manmukh focuses his consciousness on it.<br>
  The Gurmukhs become desireless, and attain supreme peace.<br>
  In the midst of their household, they remain detached; they are lovingly attuned to the Detached Lord.<br>
  Sorrow and separation do not cling to them at all. They are pleased with the Lord's Will.<br>
  O Nanak, they remain forever immersed in the Primal Lord, who blends them with Himself. ||31||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Why keep what is held in trust for another? Giving it back, peace is found.<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad rests in the Guru; it does not appear through anyone else.<br>
  The blind man finds a jewel, and goes from house to house selling it.<br>
  But they cannot appraise it, and they do not offer him even half a shell for it.<br>
  If he cannot appraise it himself, then he should have it appraised by an appraiser.<br>
  If he focuses his consciousness, then he obtains the true object, and he is blessed with the nine treasures.<br>
  The wealth is within the house, while the world is dying of hunger. Without the True Guru, no one has a clue.<br>
  When the cooling and soothing Shabad comes to dwell in the mind and body, there is no sorrow or separation there.<br>
  The object belongs to someone else, but the fool is proud of it, and shows his shallow nature.<br>
  O Nanak, without understanding, no one obtains it; they come and go in reincarnation, over and over again. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  My mind is in ecstasy; I have met my Beloved Lord. My beloved friends, the Saints, are delighted.<br>
  Those who are united with the Primal Lord shall never be separated again. The Creator has united them with Himself.<br>
  The Shabad permeates my inner being, and I have found the Guru; all my sorrows are dispelled.<br>
  I praise forever the Lord, the Giver of peace; I keep Him enshrined deep within my heart.<br>
  How can the self-willed manmukh gossip about those who are embellished and exalted in the True Word of the Shabad?<br>
  My Beloved Himself preserves the honor of those who have come to the Guru's Door seeking Sanctuary.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are filled with joy; their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The husband and wife are very much in love; joining together, their love increases.<br>
  Gazing on his children and his wife, the man is pleased and attached to Maya.<br>
  Stealing the wealth of his own country and other lands, he brings it home and feeds them.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 054</h2></center>
  In the end, hatred and conflict well up, and no one can save him.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Name, those loving attachments are cursed; engrossed in them, he suffers in pain. ||32||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Guru's Word is the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam. Eating it, all hunger departs.<br>
  There is no thirst or desire at all, when the Naam comes to dwell in the mind.<br>
  Eating anything other than the Name, disease runs to afflict the body.<br>
  O Nanak, whoever takes the Praise of the Shabad as his spices and flavors - the Lord unites him in His Union. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The life within all living beings is the Word of the Shabad. Through it, we meet our Husband Lord.<br>
  Without the Shabad, the world is in darkness. Through the Shabad, it is enlightened.<br>
  The Pandits, the religious scholars, and the silent sages read and write until they are weary. The religious fanatics are tired of washing their bodies.<br>
  Without the Shabad, no one attains the Lord; the miserable depart weeping and wailing.<br>
  O Nanak, by His Glance of Grace, the Merciful Lord is attained. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The husband and wife are very much in love; sitting together, they make evil plans.<br>
  All that is seen shall pass away. This is the Will of my God.<br>
  How can anyone remain in this world forever? Some may try to devise a plan.<br>
  Working for the Perfect Guru, the wall becomes permanent and stable.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord forgives them, and merges them into Himself; they are absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||33||<br>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  Attached to Maya, the mortal forgets the Fear of God and Guru, and love for the Infinite Lord.<br>
  The waves of greed take away his wisdom and understanding, and he does not embrace love for the True Lord.<br>
  The Word of the Shabad abides in the mind of the Gurmukhs, who find the Gate of Salvation.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord Himself forgives them, and unites them in Union with Himself. ||1||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O Nanak, without Him, we could not live for a moment. Forgetting Him, we could not succeed for an instant.<br>
  O mortal, how can you be angry with the One who cares for you? ||2||<br>
  Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The rainy season of Saawan has come. The Gurmukh meditates on the Lord's Name.<br>
  All pain, hunger and misfortune end, when the rain falls in torrents.<br>
  The entire earth is rejuvenated, and the grain grows in abundance.<br>
  The Carefree Lord, by His Grace, summons that mortal whom the Lord Himself approves.<br>
  So meditate on the Lord, O Saints; He shall save you in the end.<br>
  The Kirtan of the Lord's Praises and devotion to Him is bliss; peace shall come to dwell in the mind.<br>
  Those Gurmukhs who worship the Naam, the Name of the Lord - their pain and hunger departs.<br>
  Servant Nanak is satisfied, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. Please embellish him with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||3||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Perfect Guru bestows His gifts, which increase day by day.<br>
  The Merciful Lord Himself bestows them; they cannot be concealed by concealment.<br>
  The heart-lotus blossoms forth, and the mortal is lovingly absorbed in the state of supreme bliss.<br>
  If anyone tries to challenge him, the Lord throws dust on his head.<br>
  O Nanak, no one can equal the glory of the Perfect True Guru. ||34||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 055</h2></center>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Order of the Lord is beyond challenge. Clever tricks and arguments will not work against it.<br>
  So abandon your self-conceit, and take to His Sanctuary; accept the Order of His Will.<br>
  The Gurmukh eliminates self-conceit from within himself; he shall not be punished by the Messenger of Death.<br>
  O Nanak, he alone is called a selfless servant, who remains lovingly attuned to the True Lord. ||1||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  All gifts, light and beauty are Yours.<br>
  Excessive cleverness and egotism are mine.<br>
  The mortal performs all sorts of rituals in greed and attachment; engrossed in egotsim, he shall never escape the cycle of reincarnation.<br>
  O Nanak, the Creator Himself inspires all to act. Whatever pleases Him is good. ||2||<br>
  Pauree, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Let Truth be your food, and Truth your clothes, and take the Support of the True Name.<br>
  The True Guru shall lead you to meet God, the Great Giver.<br>
  When perfect destiny is activated, the mortal meditates on the Formless Lord.<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall cross over the world-ocean.<br>
  O Nanak, chant God's Praises, and celebrate His Victory. ||35||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In Your Mercy, You care for all beings and creatures.<br>
  You produce corn and water in abundance; You eliminate pain and poverty, and carry all beings across.<br>
  The Great Giver listened to my prayer, and the world has been cooled and comforted.<br>
  Take me into Your Embrace, and take away all my pain.<br>
  Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the House of God is fruitful and prosperous. ||1||<br>
  Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Rain is falling from the clouds - it is so beautiful! The Creator Lord issued His Order.<br>
  Grain has been produced in abundance; the world is cooled and comforted.<br>
  The mind and body are rejuvenated, meditating in remembrance on the Inaccessible and Infinite Lord.<br>
  O my True Creator Lord God, please shower Your Mercy on me.<br>
  He does whatever He pleases; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||<br>
  Pauree:<br>
  The Great Lord is Inaccessible; His glorious greatness is glorious!<br>
  Gazing upon Him through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I blossom forth in ecstasy; tranquility comes to my inner being.<br>
  All by Himself, He Himself is pervading everywhere, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  He Himself is the Lord and Master of all. He has subdued all, and all are under the Hukam of His Command.<br>
  O Nanak, the Lord does whatever He pleases. Everyone walks in harmony with His Will. ||36||1||<br>
  SUDH||<br>
  Raag Saarang, The Word Of The Devotees.<br>
  Kabeer Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O mortal, why are you so proud of small things?<br>
  With a few pounds of grain and a few coins in your pocket, you are totally puffed up with pride. ||1||Pause||<br>
  With great pomp and ceremony, you control a hundred villages, with an income of hundreds of thousands of dollars.<br>
  The power you exert will last for only a few days, like the green leaves of the forest. ||1||<br>
  No one has brought this wealth with him, and no one will take it with him when he goes.<br>
  Emperors, even greater than Raawan, passed away in an instant. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 056</h2></center>
  The Lord's Saints are steady and stable forever; they worship and adore Him, and chant the Lord's Name.<br>
  Those who are mercifully blessed by the Lord of the Universe, join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. ||3||<br>
  Mother, father, spouse, children and wealth will not go along with you in the end.<br>
  Says Kabeer, meditate and vibrate on the Lord, O madman. Your life is uselessly wasting away. ||4||1||<br>
  I do not know the limits of Your Royal Ashram.<br>
  I am the humble slave of Your Saints. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The one who goes laughing returns crying, and the one who goes crying returns laughing.<br>
  What is inhabited becomes deserted, and what is deserted becomes inhabited. ||1||<br>
  The water turns into a desert, the desert turns into a well, and the well turns into a mountain.<br>
  From the earth, the mortal is exalted to the Akaashic ethers; and from the ethers on high, he is thrown down again. ||2||<br>
  The beggar is transformed into a king, and the king into a beggar.<br>
  The idiotic fool is transformed into a Pandit, a religious scholar, and the Pandit into a fool. ||3||<br>
  The woman is transformed into a man, and the men into women.<br>
  Says Kabeer, God is the Beloved of the Holy Saints. I am a sacrifice to His image. ||4||2||<br>
  Saarang, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O mortal, why are you going into the forest of corruption?<br>
  You have been misled into eating the toxic drug. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You are like a fish living in the water;<br>
  you do not see the net of death.<br>
  Trying to taste the flavor, you swallow the hook.<br>
  You are bound by attachment to wealth and woman. ||1||<br>
  The bee stores up loads of honey;<br>
  then someone comes and takes the honey, and throws dust in its mouth.<br>
  The cow stores up loads of milk;<br>
  then the milkman comes and ties it by its neck and milks it. ||2||<br>
  For the sake of Maya, the mortal works very hard.<br>
  He takes the wealth of Maya, and buries it in the ground.<br>
  He acquires so much, but the fool does not appreciate it.<br>
  His wealth remains buried in the ground, while his body turns to dust. ||3||<br>
  He burns in tremendous sexual desire, unresolved anger and desire.<br>
  He never joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, seek God's Shelter;<br>
  be fearless, and vibrate on the Lord God. ||4||1||<br>
  Why not make a bet with me, O Lord of Wealth?<br>
  From the master comes the servant, and from the servant, comes the master. This is the game I play with You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You Yourself are the deity, and You are the temple of worship. You are the devoted worshipper.<br>
  From the water, the waves rise up, and from the waves, the water. They are only different by figures of speech. ||1||<br>
  You Yourself sing, and You Yourself dance. You Yourself blow the bugle.<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, You are my Lord and Master. Your humble servant is imperfect; You are perfect. ||2||2||<br>
  Says God: my slave is devoted only to me; he is in my very image.<br>
  The sight of him, even for an instant, cures the three fevers; his touch brings liberation from the deep dark pit of household affairs. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The devotee can release anyone from my bondage, but I cannot release anyone from his.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 30 - Raag Saarang - Part 057</h2></center>
  If, at any time, he grabs and binds me, even then, I cannot protest. ||1||<br>
  I am bound by virtue; I am the Life of all. My slaves are my very life.<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, as is the quality of his soul, so is my love which illuminates him. ||2||3||<br>
  Saarang:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  So what have you accomplished by listening to the Puraanas?<br>
  Faithful devotion has not welled up within you, and you have not been inspired to give to the hungry. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You have not forgotten sexual desire, and you have not forgotten anger; greed has not left you either.<br>
  Your mouth has not stopped slandering and gossiping about others. Your service is useless and fruitless. ||1||<br>
  By breaking into the houses of others and robbing them, you fill your belly, you sinner.<br>
  But when you go to the world beyond, your guilt will be well known, by the acts of ignorance which you committed. ||2||<br>
  Cruelty has not left your mind; you have not cherished kindness for other living beings.<br>
  Parmaanand has joined the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. Why have you not followed the sacred teachings? ||3||1||6||<br>
  O mind, do not even associate with those who have turned their backs on the Lord.<br>
  Saarang, Fifth Mehl, Sur Daas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The people of the Lord dwell with the Lord.<br>
  They dedicate their minds and bodies to Him; they dedicate everything to Him. They are intoxicated with the celestial melody of intuitive ecstasy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, they are cleansed of corruption. They obtain absolutely everything.<br>
  They have nothing to do with anything else; they gaze on the beauteous Face of God. ||1||<br>
  But one who forsakes the elegantly beautiful Lord, and harbors desire for anything else, is like a leech on the body of a leper.<br>
  Says Sur Daas, God has taken my mind in His Hands. He has blessed me with the world beyond. ||2||1||8||<br>
  Saarang, Kabeer Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Other than the Lord, who is the Help and Support of the mind?<br>
  Love and attachment to mother, father, sibling, child and spouse, is all just an illusion. ||1||Pause||<br>
  So build a raft to the world hereafter; what faith do you place in wealth?<br>
  What confidence do you place in this fragile vessel; it breaks with the slightest stroke. ||1||<br>
  You shall obtain the rewards of all righteousness and goodness, if you desire to be the dust of all.<br>
  Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints: this mind is like the bird, flying above the forest. ||2||1||9||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr31.htm">Next: Raag Malaar</a></center>
 </body>