<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr32.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr34.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Kalyaan</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 33 - Raag Kalyaan - Part 001</h2></center>
  Raag Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  The Lord, the Beauteous Lord - no one has found His limits.<br>
  I am a child - You cherish and sustain me. You are the Great Primal Being, my Mother and Father. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Names of the Lord are Countless and Unfathomable. My Sovereign Lord is Unfathomable and Incomprehensible.<br>
  The virtuous and the spiritual teachers have given it great thought, but they have not found even an iota of His Value. ||1||<br>
  They sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe forever. They sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, but they do not find His limits.<br>
  You are Immeasurable, Unweighable, and Infinite, O Lord and Master; no matter how much one may meditate on You, Your Depth cannot be fathomed. ||2||<br>
  Lord, Your humble servants praise You, singing Your Glorious Praises, O Sovereign Lord.<br>
  You are the ocean of water, and I am Your fish. No one has ever found Your limits. ||3||<br>
  Please be Kind to Your humble servant, Lord; please bless me with the meditation of Your Name.<br>
  I am a blind fool; Your Name is my only Support. Servant Nanak, as Gurmukh, has found it. ||4||1||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord sings the Lord's Praise, and blossoms forth.<br>
  My intellect is embellished with devotion to the Lord, Har, Har, through the Guru's Teachings. This is the destiny which God has recorded on my forehead. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I meditate in remembrance on the Guru's Feet, day and night. The Lord, Har, Har, Har, comes to dwell in my mind.<br>
  The Praise of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, is Excellent and Sublime in this world. His Praise is the sandalwood paste which I rub. ||1||<br>
  The humble servant of the Lord is lovingly attuned to the Lord, Har, Har, Har; all the faithless cynics pursue him.<br>
  The slanderous person acts in accordance with the record of his past deeds; his foot trips over the snake, and he is stung by its bite. ||2||<br>
  O my Lord and Master, You are the Saving Grace, the Protector of Your humble servants. You protect them, age after age.<br>
  What does it matter, if a demon speaks evil? By doing so, he only gets frustrated. ||3||<br>
  All the beings and creatures created by God are caught in the mouth of Death.<br>
  The humble servants of the Lord are protected by the Lord God, Har, Har, Har; servant Nanak seeks His Sanctuary. ||4||2||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
 <center><h2>Section 33 - Raag Kalyaan - Part 002</h2></center>
  O my mind, chant and meditate on the Master of the Universe.<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, meditate on the Lord's Name, and be rid of all the painful past sins. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have only one tongue - I cannot sing His Praises. Please bless me with many, many tongues.<br>
  Again and again, each and every instant, with all of them, I would sing His Glorious Praises; but even then, I would not be able to sing all of Your Praises, God. ||1||<br>
  I am so deeply in love with God, my Lord and Master; I long to see God's Vision.<br>
  You are the Great Giver of all beings and creatures; only You know our inner pain. ||2||<br>
  If only someone would show me the Way, the Path of God. Tell me - what could I give him?<br>
  I would surrender, offer and dedicate all my body and mind to him; if only someone would unite me in God's Union! ||3||<br>
  The Glorious Praises of the Lord are so many and numerous; I can describe only a tiny bit of them.<br>
  My intellect is under Your control, God; You are the All-powerful Lord God of servant Nanak. ||4||3||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, which are said to be inexpressible.<br>
  Rightousness and Dharmic faith, success and prosperity, pleasure, the fulfillment of desires and liberation - all follow the humble servant of the Lord like a shadow. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That humble servant of the Lord who has such good fortune written on his forehead meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  In that Court, where God calls for the accounts, there, you shall be saved only by meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  I am stained with the filth of the mistakes of countless lifetimes, the pain and pollution of egotism.<br>
  Showering His Mercy, the Guru bathed me in the Water of the Lord, and all my sins and mistakes were taken away. ||2||<br>
  God, our Lord and Master, is deep within the hearts of His humble servants. They vibrate the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  And when that very last moment comes, then the Naam is our Best Friend and Protector. ||3||<br>
  Your humble servants sing Your Praises, O Lord, Har, Har; they chant and meditate on the Lord God, the Master of the Universe.<br>
  O God, my Saving Grace, Lord and Master of servant Nanak, please save me, the sinking stone. ||4||4||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Only the Lord God knows my innermost thoughts.<br>
  If someone slanders the humble servant of the Lord, God does not believe even a tiny bit of what he says. ||1||Pause||<br>
  So give up everything else, and serve the Imperishable; The Lord God, our Lord and Master, is the Highest of all.<br>
  When you serve the Lord, Death cannot even see you. It comes and falls at the feet of those who know the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Those whom my Lord and Master protects - a balanced wisdom comes to their ears.<br>
  No one can equal them; their devotional worship is accepted by my God. ||2||<br>
  So behold the Wondrous and Amazing Play of the Lord. In an instant, He distinguishes the genuine from the counterfeit.<br>
  And that is why His humble servant is in bliss. Those of pure heart meet together, while the evil ones regret and repent. ||3||<br>
  Lord, You are the Great Giver, our All-powerful Lord and Master; O Lord, I beg for only one gift from You.<br>
  Lord, please bless servant Nanak with Your Grace, that Your Feet may abide forever within my heart. ||4||5||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 33 - Raag Kalyaan - Part 003</h2></center>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O God, Treasure of Mercy, please bless me, that I may sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  I always place my hopes in You; O God, when will you take me in Your Embrace? ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am a foolish and ignorant child; Father, please teach me!<br>
  Your child makes mistakes again and again, but still, You are pleased with him, O Father of the Universe. ||1||<br>
  Whatever You give me, O my Lord and Master - that is what I receive.<br>
  There is no other place where I can go. ||2||<br>
  Those devotees who are pleasing to the Lord - the Lord is pleasing to them.<br>
  Their light merges into the Light; the lights are merged and blended together. ||3||<br>
  The Lord Himself has shown mercy; He lovingly attunes me to Himself.<br>
  Servant Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Door of the Lord, who protects his honor. ||4||6||<br>
  First Set Of Six||<br>
  Kalyaan Bhopaalee, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O Supreme Lord God, Transcendent Lord and Master, Destroyer of pain, Transcendental Lord God.<br>
  All Your devotees beg of You. Ocean of peace, carry us across the terrifying world-ocean; You are the Wish-fulfilling Jewel. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Merciful to the meek and poor, Lord of the world, Support of the earth, Inner-knower, Searcher of hearts, Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Those who meditate on the Supreme Lord become fearless. Through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, they meditate on the Lord, the Liberator Lord. ||1||<br>
  Those who come to Sanctuary at the Feet of the Lord of the Universe - those humble beings cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  The Lord preserves the honor of His humble devotees; O servant Nanak, the Lord Himself showers them with His Grace. ||2||1||7||<br>
  Raag Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl, First House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Please grant me this blessing:<br>
  May the bumble-bee of my mind be immersed again and again in the Honey of Your Lotus Feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I am not concerned with any other water; please bless this songbird with a Drop of Your Water, Lord. ||1||<br>
  Unless I meet my Lord, I am not satisfied. Nanak lives, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||2||1||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  This beggar begs and begs for Your Name, Lord.<br>
  You are the Support of all, the Master of all, the Giver of absolute peace. ||1||Pause||<br>
  So many, so very many, beg for charity at Your Door; they receive only what You are pleased to give. ||1||<br>
  Fruitful, fruitful, fruitful is the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; touching His Touch, I sing His Glorious Praises.<br>
  O Nanak, one's essence is blended into the Essence; the diamond of the mind is pierced through by the Diamond of the Lord. ||2||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 33 - Raag Kalyaan - Part 004</h2></center>
  Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O, the Wondrous Glory of my Beloved!<br>
  My mind is rejuvenated forever by His Wondrous Love. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Brahma, Shiva, the Siddhas, the silent sages and Indra beg for the charity of His Praise and devotion to Him. ||1||<br>
  Yogis, spiritual teachers, meditators and the thousand-headed serpent all meditate on the Waves of God.<br>
  Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Saints, who are the Eternal Companions of God. ||2||3||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl, Second House:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Belief in You, Lord, brings honor.<br>
  To see with my eyes, and hear with my ears - every limb and fiber of my being, and my breath of life are in bliss. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Here and there, and in the ten directions You are pervading, in the mountain and the blade of grass. ||1||<br>
  Wherever I look, I see the Lord, the Supreme Lord, the Primal Being.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, doubt and fear are dispelled. Nanak speaks the Wisdom of God. ||2||1||4||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Glory of God is the Sound-current of the Naad, the Celestial Music of Bliss, and the Wisdom of the Vedas.<br>
  Speaking and listening, the silent sages and humble beings join together, in the Realm of the Saints. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Spiritual wisdom, meditation, faith and charity are there; their minds savor the Taste of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Chanting it, sins are destroyed. ||1||<br>
  This is the technology of Yoga, spiritual wisdom, devotion, intuitive knowledge of the Shabad, certain knowledge of the Essence of Reality, chanting and unbroken intensive meditation.<br>
  Through and through, O Nanak, merging into the Light, you shall never again suffer pain and punishment. ||2||2||5||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  What should I do, and how should I do it?<br>
  Should I center myself in meditation, or study the spiritual wisdom of the Shaastras? How can I endure this unendurable state? ||1||Pause||<br>
  Vishnu, Shiva, the Siddhas, the silent sages and Indra - at whose door should I seek sanctuary? ||1||<br>
  Some have power and influence, and some are blessed with heavenly paradise, but out of millions, will anyone find liberation?<br>
  Says Nanak, I have attained the Sublime Essence of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I touch the feet of the Holy. ||2||3||6||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord of the Breath of Life, the Merciful Primal Lord God, is my Friend.<br>
  The Lord saves us from the womb of reincarnation and the noose of death in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; He takes away our pain. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within; I seek Your Sanctuary, Lord.<br>
  O Merciful Lord God, You are my only Support. ||1||<br>
  You are the only Hope of the helpless, the meek and the poor.<br>
  Your Name, O my Lord and Master, is the Mantra of the mind. ||2||<br>
  I know of nothing except You, God.<br>
  Throughout all the ages, I realize You. ||3||<br>
  O Lord, You dwell in my mind night and day.<br>
  The Lord of the Universe is Nanak's only Support. ||4||4||7||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Within my mind and body I meditate on the Lord God.<br>
  The Perfect Guru is pleased and satisfied; I am blessed with eternal peace and happiness. ||1||Pause||<br>
  All affairs are successfuly resolved, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World.<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I dwell upon God, and the pain of death is taken away. ||1||<br>
  Please take pity on me, O my God, that I may serve You day and night.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 33 - Raag Kalyaan - Part 005</h2></center>
  Slave Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, the Perfect, Divine Primal Being. ||2||5||8||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  My God is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of Hearts.<br>
  Take pity on me, O Perfect Transcendent Lord; bless me with the True Eternal Insignia of the Shabad, the Word of God. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Lord, other than You, no one is all-powerful. You are the Hope and the Strength of my mind.<br>
  You are the Giver to the hearts of all beings, O Lord and Master. I eat and wear whatever You give me. ||1||<br>
  Intuitive understanding, wisdom and cleverness, glory and beauty, pleasure, wealth and honor,<br>
  all comforts, bliss, happiness and salvation, O Nanak, come by chanting the Lord's Name. ||2||6||9||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet bring salvation.<br>
  God's Name is the Purifier of sinners. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Whoever chants and meditates in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, shall undoubtedly escape being consumed by the Messenger of Death. ||1||<br>
  Liberation, the key to success, and all sorts of comforts do not equal loving devotional worship of the Lord.<br>
  Slave Nanak longs for the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan; he shall never again wander in reincarnation. ||2||||7||10||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl, Ashtapadees:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Hearing the Name of the Lord, the All-pervading Lord, my mind is drenched with joy.<br>
  The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar, the most Sweet and Sublime Essence; through the Guru's Teachings, drink it in with intuitive ease. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The potential energy of fire is within the wood; it is released if you know how to rub it and generate friction.<br>
  In just the same way, the Lord's Name is the Light within all; the Essence is extracted by following the Guru's Teachings. ||1||<br>
  There are nine doors, but the taste of these nine doors is bland and insipid. The Essence of Ambrosial Nectar trickles down through the Tenth Door.<br>
  Please take pity on me - be kind and compassionate, O my Beloved, that I may drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2||<br>
  The body-village is the most sublime and exalted village, in which the merchandise of the Lord's Sublime Essence is traded.<br>
  The most precious and priceless gems and jewels are obtained by serving the True Guru. ||3||<br>
  The True Guru is Inaccessible; Inaccessible is our Lord and Master. He is the overflowing Ocean of bliss - worship Him with loving devotion.<br>
  Please take pity on me, and be Merciful to this meek song-bird; please pour a drop of Your Name into my mouth. ||4||<br>
  O Beloved Lord, please color my mind with the Deep Crimson Color of Your Love; I have surrendered my mind to the Guru.<br>
  Those who are imbued with the Love of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam, continually drink in this essence in big gulps, savoring its sweet taste. ||5||<br>
  If all the gold of the seven continents and the oceans was taken out and placed before them,<br>
  the humble servants of my Lord and Master would not even want it. They beg for the Lord to bless them with the Lord's Sublime Essence. ||6||<br>
  The faithless cynics and mortal beings remain hungry forever; they continually cry out in hunger.<br>
  They hurry and run, and wander all around, caught in the love of Maya; they cover hundreds of thousands of miles in their wanderings. ||7||<br>
  The humble servants of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, are sublime and exalted. What praise can we bestow upon them?<br>
 <center><h2>Section 33 - Raag Kalyaan - Part 006</h2></center>
  Nothing else can equal the Glory of the Lord's Name; please bless servant Nanak with Your Grace. ||8||1||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O Lord, please bless me with the Touch of the Guru, the Philosopher's Stone.<br>
  I was unworthy, utterly useless, rusty slag; meeting with the True Guru, I was transformed by the Philosopher's Stone. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Everyone longs for paradise, liberation and heaven; all place their hopes in them.<br>
  The humble long for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; they do not ask for liberation. Their minds are satisfied and comforted by His Darshan. ||1||<br>
  Emotional attachment to Maya is very powerful; this attachment is a black stain which sticks.<br>
  The humble servants of my Lord and Master are unattached and liberated. They are like ducks, whose feathers do not get wet. ||2||<br>
  The fragrant sandalwood tree is encircled by snakes; how can anyone get to the sandalwood?<br>
  Drawing out the Mighty Sword of the Guru's Spiritual Wisdom, I slaughter and kill the poisonous snakes, and drink in the Sweet Nectar. ||3||<br>
  You may gather wood and stack it in a pile, but in an instant, fire reduces it to ashes.<br>
  The faithless cynic gathers the most horrendous sins, but meeting with the Holy Saint, they are placed in the fire. ||4||<br>
  The Holy, Saintly devotees are sublime and exalted. They enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, deep within.<br>
  By the touch of the Holy and the humble servants of the Lord, the Lord God is seen. ||5||<br>
  The thread of the faithless cynic is totally knotted and tangled; how can anything be woven with it?<br>
  This thread cannot be woven into yarn; do not associate with those faithless cynics. ||6||<br>
  The True Guru and the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, are exalted and sublime. Joining the Congregation, meditate on the Lord.<br>
  The gems, jewels and precious stones are deep within; by Guru's Grace, they are found. ||7||<br>
  My Lord and Master is Glorious and Great. How can I be united in His Union?<br>
  O Nanak, the Perfect Guru unites His humble servant in His Union, and blesses him with perfection. ||8||2||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, the Lord, the All-pervading Lord.<br>
  The Holy, the humble and Holy, are noble and sublime. Meeting with the Holy, I joyfully love the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The minds of all the beings and creatures of the world waver unsteadily.<br>
  Please take pity on them, be merciful to them, and unite them with the Holy; establish this support to support the world. ||1||<br>
  The earth is beneath us, and yet its dust falls down on all; let yourself be covered by the dust of the feet of the Holy.<br>
  You shall be utterly exalted, the most noble and sublime of all; the whole world will place itself at your feet. ||2||<br>
  The Gurmukhs are blessed with the Divine Light of the Lord; Maya comes to serve them.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, they bite with teeth of wax and chew iron, drinking in the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  The Lord has shown great mercy, and bestowed His Name; I have met with the Holy Guru, the Primal Being.<br>
  The Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name have spread out everywhere; the Lord bestows fame all over the world. ||4||<br>
  The Beloved Lord is within the minds of the Holy, the Holy Saadhus; without seeing Him, they cannot survive.<br>
  The fish in the water loves only the water. Without water, it bursts and dies in an instant. ||5||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 33 - Raag Kalyaan - Part 007</h2></center>
  Those who have terrible luck and bad fortune do not drink in the water which washes the dust of the feet of the Holy.<br>
  The burning fire of their desires is not extinguished; they are beaten and punished by the Righteous Judge of Dharma. ||6||<br>
  You may visit all the sacred shrines, observe fasts and sacred feasts, give generously in charity and waste away the body, melting it in the snow.<br>
  The weight of the Lord's Name is unweighable, according to the Guru's Teachings; nothing can equal its weight. ||7||<br>
  O God, You alone know Your Glorious Virtues. Servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary.<br>
  You are the Ocean of water, and I am Your fish. Please be kind, and keep me always with You. ||8||3||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  I worship and adore the Lord, the All-pervading Lord.<br>
  I surrender my mind and body, and place everything before Him; following the Guru's Teachings, spiritual wisdom is implanted within me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  God's Name is the tree, and His Glorious Virtues are the branches. Picking and gathering up the fruit, I worship Him.<br>
  The soul is divine; divine is the soul. Worship Him with love. ||1||<br>
  One of keen intellect and precise understanding is immaculate in all this world. In thoughtful consideration, he drinks in the sublime essence.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the treasure is found; dedicate this mind to the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  Priceless and utterly sublime is the Diamond of the Lord. This Diamond pierces the diamond of the mind.<br>
  The mind becomes the jeweller, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad; it appraises the Diamond of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Attaching oneself to the Society of the Saints, one is exalted and uplifted, as the palaas tree is absorbed by the peepal tree.<br>
  That mortal being is supreme among all people, who is perfumed by the fragrance of the Lord's Name. ||4||<br>
  One who continually acts in goodness and immaculate purity, sprouts green branches in great abundance.<br>
  The Guru has taught me that Dharmic faith is the flower, and spiritual wisdom is the fruit; this fragrance permeates the world. ||5||<br>
  The One, the Light of the One, abides within my mind; God, the One, is seen in all.<br>
  The One Lord, the Supreme Soul, is spread out everywhere; all place their heads beneath His Feet. ||6||<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, people look like criminals with their noses cut off; bit by bit, their noses are cut off.<br>
  The faithless cynics are called egotistical; without the Name, their lives are cursed. ||7||<br>
  As long as the breath breathes through the mind deep within, hurry and seek God's Sanctuary.<br>
  Please shower Your Kind Mercy and take pity upon Nanak, that he may wash the feet of the Holy. ||8||4||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O Lord, I wash the feet of the Holy.<br>
  May my sins be burnt away in an instant; O my Lord and Master, please bless me with Your Mercy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The meek and humble beggars stand begging at Your Door. Please be generous and give to those who are yearning.<br>
  Save me, save me, O God - I have come to Your Sanctuary. Please implant the Guru's Teachings, and the Naam within me. ||1||<br>
  Sexual desire and anger are very powerful in the body-village; I rise up to fight the battle against them.<br>
  Please make me Your Own and save me; through the Perfect Guru, I drive them out. ||2||<br>
  The powerful fire of corruption is raging violently within; the Word of the Guru's Shabad is the ice water which cools and soothes.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 33 - Raag Kalyaan - Part 008</h2></center>
  My mind and body are calm and tranquil; the disease has been cured, and now I sleep in peace. ||3||<br>
  As the rays of the sun spread out everywhere, the Lord pervades each and every heart.<br>
  Meeting the Holy Saint, one drinks in the Sublime Essence of the Lord; sitting in the home of your own inner being, drink in the essence. ||4||<br>
  The humble being is in love with the Guru, like the chakvi bird which loves to see the sun.<br>
  She watches, and keeps on watching all through the night; and when the sun shows its face, she drinks in the Amrit. ||5||<br>
  The faithless cynic is said to be very greedy - he is a dog. He is overflowing with the filth and pollution of evil-mindedness.<br>
  He talks excessively about his own interests. How can he be trusted? ||6||<br>
  I have sought the Sanctuary of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; I have found the Sublime Essence of the Lord.<br>
  They do good deeds for others, and speak of the Lord's many Glorious Virtues; please bless me to meet these Saints, these devotees of the Lord. ||7||<br>
  You are the Inaccessible Lord, Kind and Compassionate, the Great Giver; please shower us with Your Mercy, and save us.<br>
  You are the Life of all the beings of the world; please cherish and sustain Nanak. ||8||5||<br>
  Kalyaan, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  O Lord, please make me the slave of Your slaves.<br>
  As long as there is breath deep within my mind, let me drink in the dust of the Holy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Shiva, Naarad, the thousand-headed cobra king and the silent sages long for the dust of the Holy.<br>
  All the worlds and realms where the Holy place their feet are sanctified. ||1||<br>
  So let go of your shame and renounce all your egotism; join with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and remain there.<br>
  Give up your fear of the Righteous Judge of Dharma, and you shall be lifted up and saved from drowning in the sea of poison. ||2||<br>
  Some are standing, parched and shrivelled up by their doubts; joining the Saadh Sangat, they are rejuvenated.<br>
  So do not delay, even for an instant - go and fall at the feet of the Holy. ||3||<br>
  The Kirtan of the Praise of the Lord's Name is a priceless jewel. The Lord has given it for the Holy to keep.<br>
  Whoever accepts and follows the Word of the Guru's Teachings as True - this Jewel is taken out and given to him. ||4||<br>
  Listen, O Saints; listen, humble Siblings of Destiny: the Guru raises His Arms and sends out the call.<br>
  If you long for everlasting peace and comfort for your soul, then enter the Sanctuary of the True Guru. ||5||<br>
  If you have great good fortune and are very noble, then implant the Guru's Teachings and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within.<br>
  Emotional attachment to Maya is totally treacherous; drinking in the Sublime Essence of the Lord, you shall easily, intuitively cross over the world-ocean. ||6||<br>
  Those who are totally in love with Maya, Maya, shall rot away in Maya.<br>
  The path of ignorance and darkness is utterly treacherous; they are loaded down with the crushing load of egotism. ||7||<br>
  O Nanak, chanting the Name of the Lord, the All-pervading Lord, one is emancipated.<br>
  Meeting the True Guru, the Naam is implanted within; we are united and blended with the Lord's Name. ||8||6||<br>
  First Set Of Six||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr34.htm">Next: Raag Prabhaatee</a></center>
 </body>