<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr33.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr35.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Raag Prabhaatee</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 001</h2></center>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Raag Parbhaatee Bibhaas, First Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:<br>
  Your Name carries us across; Your Name brings respect and worship.<br>
  Your Name embellishes us; it is the object of the awakened mind.<br>
  Your Name brings honor to everyone's name.<br>
  Without Your Name, no one is ever respected. ||1||<br>
  All other clever tricks are just for show.<br>
  Whoever the Lord blesses with forgiveness - his affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Your Name is my strength; Your Name is my support.<br>
  Your Name is my army; Your Name is my king.<br>
  Your Name brings honor, glory and approval.<br>
  By Your Grace, one is blessed with the banner and the insignia of Your Mercy. ||2||<br>
  Your Name brings intuitive peace and poise; Your Name brings praise.<br>
  Your Name is the Ambrosial Nectar which cleans out the poison.<br>
  Through Your Name, all peace and comfort comes to abide in the mind.<br>
  Without the Name, they are bound and gagged, and dragged off to the City of Death. ||3||<br>
  Man is involved with his wife, hearth and home, land and country,<br>
  the pleasures of the mind and fine clothes;<br>
  but when the call comes, he cannot delay.<br>
  O Nanak, in the end, the false turn out to be false. ||4||1||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  Your Name is the Jewel, and Your Grace is the Light. In awareness, there is Your Light.<br>
  Darkness fills the dark, and then everything is lost. ||1||<br>
  This whole world is corrupt.<br>
  Your Name is the only cure; nothing else works, O Infinite Creator Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One side of the scale holds tens of thousands, millions of nether regions and realms.<br>
  O my Beloved, Your Worth could only be estimated if something else could be placed on the other side of the scale. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 002</h2></center>
  Out of pain, pleasure is produced, and out of pleasure comes pain.<br>
  That mouth which praises You - what hunger could that mouth ever suffer? ||3||<br>
  O Nanak, you alone are foolish; all the rest of the world is good.<br>
  That body in which the Naam does not well up - that body becomes miserable. ||4||2||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  For His sake, Brahma uttered the Vedas, and Shiva renounced Maya.<br>
  For His sake, the Siddhas became hermits and renunciates; even the gods have not realized His Mystery. ||1||<br>
  O Baba, keep the True Lord in your mind, and utter the Name of the True Lord with your mouth; the True Lord will carry you across.<br>
  Enemies and pain shall not even approach you; only a rare few realize the Wisdom of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Fire, water and air make up the world; these three are the slaves of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  One who does not chant the Naam is a thief, dwelling in the fortress of the five thieves. ||2||<br>
  If someone does a good deed for someone else, he totally puffs himself up in his conscious mind.<br>
  The Lord bestows so many virtues and so much goodness; He does not ever regret it. ||3||<br>
  Those who praise You gather the wealth in their laps; this is Nanak's wealth.<br>
  Whoever shows respect to them is not summoned by the Messenger of Death. ||4||3||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  One who has no beauty, no social status, no mouth, no flesh<br>
  - meeting with the True Guru, he finds the Immaculate Lord, and dwells in Your Name. ||1||<br>
  O detached Yogi, contemplate the essence of reality,<br>
  and you shall never again come to be born into the world. ||1||Pause||<br>
  One who does not have good karma or Dharmic faith, sacred rosary or mala<br>
  - through the Light of God, wisdom is bestowed; the True Guru is our Protector. ||2||<br>
  One who does not observe any fasts, make religious vows or chant<br>
  - he does not have to worry about good luck or bad, if he obeys the Command of the True Guru. ||3||<br>
  One who is not hopeful, nor hopeless, who has trained his intuitive consciousness<br>
  - his being blends with the Supreme Being. O Nanak, his awareness is awakened. ||4||4||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  What he says is approved in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  He looks upon poison and nectar as one and the same. ||1||<br>
  What can I say? You are permeating and pervading all.<br>
  Whatever happens, is all by Your Will. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Divine Light shines radiantly, and egotistical pride is dispelled.<br>
  The True Guru bestows the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, one's birth is approved,<br>
  if one is honored in the True Court. ||3||<br>
  Speaking and listening, one goes to the Celestial Home of the Indescribable Lord.<br>
  Mere words of mouth, O Nanak, are burnt away. ||4||5||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  One who bathes in the Ambrosial Water of spiritual wisdom takes with him the virtues of the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.<br>
  The Guru's Teachings are the gems and jewels; the Sikh who serves Him searches and finds them. ||1||<br>
  There is no sacred shrine equal to the Guru.<br>
  The Guru encompasses the ocean of contentment. ||1||Pause||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 003</h2></center>
  The Guru is the River, from which the Pure Water is obtained forever; it washes away the filth and pollution of evil-mindedness.<br>
  Finding the True Guru, the perfect cleansing bath is obtained, which transforms even beasts and ghosts into gods. ||2||<br>
  He is said to be the Guru, with the scent of sandalwood, who is imbued with the True Name to the bottom of His Heart.<br>
  By His Fragrance, the world of vegetation is perfumed. Lovingly focus yourself on His Feet. ||3||<br>
  The life of the soul wells up for the Gurmukh; the Gurmukh goes to the House of God.<br>
  The Gurmukh, O Nanak, merges in the True One; the Gurmukh attains the exalted state of the self. ||4||6||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  By Guru's Grace, contemplate spiritual knowledge; read it and study it, and you shall be honored.<br>
  Within the self, the self is revealed, when one is blessed with the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O Creator Lord, You alone are my Benefactor.<br>
  I beg for only one blessing from You: please bless me with Your Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The five wandering thieves are captured and held, and the egotistical pride of the mind is subdued.<br>
  Visions of corruption, vice and evil-mindedness run away. Such is the spiritual wisdom of God. ||2||<br>
  Please bless me with the rice of truth and self-restraint, the wheat of compassion, and the leaf-plate of meditation.<br>
  Bless me with the milk of good karma, and the clarified butter, the ghee, of compassion. Such are the gifts I beg of You, Lord. ||3||<br>
  Let forgiveness and patience be my milk-cows, and let the calf of my mind intuitively drink in this milk.<br>
  I beg for the clothes of modesty and the Lord's Praise; Nanak chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4||7||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  No one can hold anyone back from coming; how could anyone hold anyone back from going?<br>
  He alone thoroughly understands this, from whom all beings come; all are merged and immersed in Him. ||1||<br>
  Waaho! - You are Great, and Wondrous is Your Will.<br>
  Whatever You do, surely comes to pass. Nothing else can happen. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The buckets on the chain of the Persian wheel rotate; one empties out to fill another.<br>
  This is just like the Play of our Lord and Master; such is His Glorious Greatness. ||2||<br>
  Following the path of intuitive awareness, one turns away from the world, and one's vision is enlightened.<br>
  Contemplate this in your mind, and see, O spiritual teacher. Who is the householder, and who is the renunciate? ||3||<br>
  Hope comes from the Lord; surrendering to Him, we remain in the state of nirvaanaa.<br>
  We come from Him; surrendering to Him, O Nanak, one is approved as a householder, and a renunciate. ||4||8||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to that one who binds in bondage his evil and corrupted gaze.<br>
  One who does not know the difference between vice and virtue wanders around uselessly. ||1||<br>
  Speak the True Name of the Creator Lord.<br>
  Then, you shall never again have to come into this world. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Creator transforms the high into the low, and makes the lowly into kings.<br>
  Those who know the All-knowing Lord are approved and certified as perfect in this world. ||2||<br>
  If anyone is mistaken and fooled, you should go to instruct him.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 004</h2></center>
  The Creator Himself plays all the games; only a few understand this. ||3||<br>
  Meditate on the Name, and the Word of the Shabad, in the early hours before dawn; leave your worldly entanglements behind.<br>
  Prays Nanak, the slave of God's slaves: the world loses, and he wins. ||4||9||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  The mind is Maya, the mind is a chaser; the mind is a bird flying across the sky.<br>
  The thieves are overpowered by the Shabad, and then the body-village prospers and celebrates.<br>
  Lord, when You save someone, he is saved; his capital is safe and sound. ||1||<br>
  Such is my Treasure, the Jewel of the Naam;<br>
  please bless me with the Guru's Teachings, so that I may fall at Your Feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The mind is a Yogi, the mind is a pleasure-seeker; the mind is foolish and ignorant.<br>
  The mind is the giver, the mind is the beggar; the mind is the Great Guru, the Creator.<br>
  The five thieves are conquered, and peace is attained; such is the contemplative wisdom of God. ||2||<br>
  The One Lord is said to be in each and every heart, but no one can see Him.<br>
  The false are cast upside-down into the womb of reincarnation; without the Name, they lose their honor.<br>
  Those whom You unite, remain united, if it is Your Will. ||3||<br>
  God does not ask about social class or birth; you must find your true home.<br>
  That is your social class and that is your status - the karma of what you have done.<br>
  The pains of death and rebirth are eradicated; O Nanak, salvation is in the Lord's Name. ||4||10||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  He is awake, and even happy, but he is being plundered - he is blind!<br>
  The noose is around his neck, and yet, his head is busy with worldly affairs.<br>
  In hope, he comes and in desire, he leaves.<br>
  The strings of his life are all tangled up; he is utterly helpless. ||1||<br>
  The Lord of Awareness, the Lord of Life is awake and aware.<br>
  He is the Ocean of peace, the Treasure of Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He does not understand what he is told; he is blind - he does not see, and so he does his evil deeds.<br>
  The Transcendent Lord Himself showers His Love and Affection; by His Grace, He bestows glorious greatness. ||2||<br>
  With the coming of each and every day, his life is wearing away, bit by bit; but still, his heart is attached to Maya.<br>
  Without the Guru, he is drowned, and finds no place of rest, as long as he is caught in duality. ||3||<br>
  Day and night, God watches over and takes care of His living beings; they receive pleasure and pain according to their past actions.<br>
  Nanak, the unfortunate one, begs for the charity of Truth; please bless him with this glory. ||4||11||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  If I remain silent, the world calls me a fool.<br>
  If I talk too much, I miss out on Your Love.<br>
  My mistakes and faults will be judged in Your Court.<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, how can I maintain good conduct? ||1||<br>
  Such is the falsehood which is plundering the world.<br>
  The slanderer slanders me, but even so, I love him. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He alone knows the way, who has been slandered.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is stamped with the Lord's Insignia in His Court.<br>
  He realizes the Naam, the Cause of causes, deep within himself.<br>
  He alone knows the way, who is blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace. ||2||<br>
  I am filthy and polluted; the True Lord is Immaculate and Sublime.<br>
  Calling oneself sublime, one does not become exalted.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh openly eats the great poison.<br>
  But one who becomes Gurmukh is absorbed in the Name. ||3||<br>
  I am blind, deaf, foolish and ignorant,<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 005</h2></center>
  the lowest of the low, the worst of the worst.<br>
  I am poor, but I have the Wealth of Your Name, O my Beloved.<br>
  This is the most excellent wealth; all else is poison and ashes. ||4||<br>
  I pay no attention to slander and praise; I contemplate the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  I celebrate the One who blesses me with His Bounty.<br>
  Whomever You forgive, O Lord, is blessed with status and honor.<br>
  Says Nanak, I speak as He causes me to speak. ||5||12||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  Eating too much, one's filth only increases; wearing fancy clothes, one's home is disgraced.<br>
  Talking too much, one only starts arguments. Without the Name, everything is poison - know this well. ||1||<br>
  O Baba, such is the treacherous trap which has caught my mind;<br>
  riding out the waves of the storm, it will be enlightened by intuitive wisdom. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They eat poison, speak poison and do poisonous deeds.<br>
  Bound and gagged at Death's door, they are punished; they can be saved only through the True Name. ||2||<br>
  As they come, they go. Their actions are recorded, and go along with them.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh loses his capital, and is punished in the Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  The world is false and polluted; only the True One is Pure. Contemplate Him through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Those who have God's spiritual wisdom within, are known to be very rare. ||4||<br>
  They endure the unendurable, and the Nectar of the Lord, the Embodiment of Bliss, trickles into them continuously.<br>
  O Nanak, the fish is in love with the water; if it pleases You, Lord, please enshrine such love within me. ||5||13||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  Songs, sounds, pleasures and clever tricks;<br>
  joy, love and the power to command;<br>
  fine clothes and food - these have no place in one's consciousness.<br>
  True intuitive peace and poise rest in the Naam. ||1||<br>
  What do I know about what God does?<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, nothing makes my body feel good. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Yoga, thrills, delicious flavors and ecstasy;<br>
  wisdom, truth and love all come from devotion to the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  My own occupation is to work to praise the Lord.<br>
  Deep within, I dwell on the Lord of the sun and the moon. ||2||<br>
  I have lovingly enshrined the love of my Beloved within my heart.<br>
  My Husband Lord, the Lord of the World, is the Master of the meek and the poor.<br>
  Night and day, the Naam is my giving in charity and fasting.<br>
  The waves have subsided, contemplating the essence of reality. ||3||<br>
  What power do I have to speak the Unspoken?<br>
  I worship You with devotion; You inspire me to do so.<br>
  You dwell deep within; my egotism is dispelled.<br>
  So whom should I serve? There is no other than You. ||4||<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad is utterly sweet and sublime.<br>
  Such is the Ambrosial Nectar I see deep within.<br>
  Those who taste this, attain the state of perfection.<br>
  O Nanak, they are satisfied, and their bodies are at peace. ||5||14||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  Deep within, I see the Shabad, the Word of God; my mind is pleased and appeased. Nothing else can touch and imbue me.<br>
  Day and night, God watches over and cares for His beings and creatures; He is the Ruler of all. ||1||<br>
  My God is dyed in the most beautiful and glorious color.<br>
  Merciful to the meek and the poor, my Beloved is the Enticer of the mind; He is so very sweet, imbued with the deep crimson color of His Love. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Well is high up in the Tenth Gate; the Ambrosial Nectar flows, and I drink it in.<br>
  The creation is His; He alone knows its ways and means. The Gurmukh contemplates spiritual wisdom. ||2||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 006</h2></center>
  The rays of light spread out, and the heart-lotus joyfully blossoms forth; the sun enters into the house of the moon.<br>
  I have conquered death; the desires of the mind are destroyed. By Guru's Grace, I have found God. ||3||<br>
  I am dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love. I am not colored by any other color.<br>
  O Nanak, my tongue is saturated with the taste of God, who is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4||15||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  The Yogis are divided into twelve schools, the Sannyaasees into ten.<br>
  The Yogis and those wearing religious robes, and the Jains with their all hair plucked out - without the Word of the Shabad, the noose is around their necks. ||1||<br>
  Those who are imbued with the Shabad are the perfectly detached renunciates.<br>
  They beg to receive charity in the hands of their hearts, embracing love and affection for the One. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Brahmins study and argue about the scriptures; they perform ceremonial rituals, and lead others in these rituals.<br>
  Without true understanding, those self-willed manmukhs understand nothing. Separated from God, they suffer in pain. ||2||<br>
  Those who receive the Shabad are sanctified and pure; they are approved in the True Court.<br>
  Night and day, they remain lovingly attuned to the Naam; throughout the ages, they are merged in the True One. ||3||<br>
  Good deeds, righteousness and Dharmic faith, purification, austere self-discipline, chanting, intense meditation and pilgrimages to sacred shrines - all these abide in the Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, united in union with the True Guru, suffering, sin and death run away. ||4||16||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  The dust of the feet of the Saints, the Company of the Holy, and the Praises of the Lord carry us across to the other side.<br>
  What can the wretched, terrified Messenger of Death do to the Gurmukhs? The Lord abides in their hearts. ||1||<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, life might just as well be burnt down.<br>
  The Gurmukh chants and meditates on the Lord, chanting the chant on the mala; the Flavor of the Lord comes into the mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who follow the Guru's Teachings find true peace - how can I even describe the glory of such a person?<br>
  The Gurmukh seeks and finds the gems and jewels, diamonds, rubies and treasures. ||2||<br>
  So center yourself on the treasures of spiritual wisdom and meditation; remain lovingly attuned to the One True Lord, and the Word of His Shabad.<br>
  Remain absorbed in the Primal State of the Fearless, Immaculate, Independent, Self-sufficient Lord. ||3||<br>
  The seven seas are overflowing with the Immaculate Water; the inverted boat floats across.<br>
  The mind which wandered in external distractions is restrained and held in check; the Gurmukh is intuitively absorbed in God. ||4||<br>
  He is a householder, he is a renunciate and God's slave, who, as Gurmukh, realizes his own self.<br>
  Says Nanak, his mind is pleased and appeased by the True Word of the Shabad; there is no other at all. ||5||17||<br>
  Raag Prabhaatee, Third Mehl, Chau-Padas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Those who become Gurmukh and understand are very rare; God is permeating and pervading through the Word of His Shabad.<br>
  Those who are imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, find everlasting peace; they remain lovingly attuned to the True One. ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 007</h2></center>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the mind becomes steady and stable; night and day, it remains satisfied with the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Night and day, perform devotional worship service to the Lord, day and night; this is the profit to be obtained in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  The humble beings are forever immaculate; no filth ever sticks to them. They focus their consciousness on the True Name. ||2||<br>
  The True Guru has revealed the ornamentation of peace; the Glorious Greatness of the Naam is Great!<br>
  The Inexhaustible Treasures are overflowing; they are never exhausted. So serve the Lord forever, O Siblings of Destiny. ||3||<br>
  The Creator comes to abide in the minds of those whom He Himself has blessed.<br>
  O Nanak, meditate forever on the Naam, which the True Guru has revealed. ||4||1||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:<br>
  I am unworthy; please forgive me and bless me, O my Lord and Master, and unite me with Yourself.<br>
  You are Endless; no one can find Your limits. Through the Word of Your Shabad, You bestow understanding. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord, I am a sacrifice to You.<br>
  I dedicate my mind and body and place them in offering before You; I shall remain in Your Sanctuary forever. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Please keep me forever under Your Will, O my Lord and Master; please bless me with the Glorious Greatness of Your Name.<br>
  Through the Perfect Guru, God's Will is revealed; night and day, remain absorbed in peace and poise. ||2||<br>
  Those devotees who accept Your Will are pleasing to You, Lord; You Yourself forgive them, and unite them with Yourself.<br>
  Accepting Your Will, I have found everlasting peace; the Guru has extinguished the fire of desire. ||3||<br>
  Whatever You do comes to pass, O Creator; nothing else can be done.<br>
  O Nanak, nothing is as great as the Blessing of the Name; it is obtained through the Perfect Guru. ||4||2||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:<br>
  The Gurmukhs praise the Lord; praising the Lord, they know Him.<br>
  Doubt and duality are gone from within; they realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord, You are my One and Only.<br>
  I meditate on You and praise You; salvation and wisdom come from You. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Gurmukhs praise You; they receive the most excellent and sweet Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  This Nectar is forever sweet; it never loses its taste. Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2||<br>
  He makes it seem so sweet to me; I am a sacrifice to Him.<br>
  Through the Shabad, I praise the Giver of peace forever. I have eradicated self-conceit from within. ||3||<br>
  My True Guru is forever the Giver. I receive whatever fruits and rewards I desire.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Naam, glorious greatness is obtained; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the True One is found. ||4||3||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who enter Your Sanctuary, Dear Lord, are saved by Your Protective Power.<br>
  I cannot even conceive of any other as Great as You. There never was, and there never shall be. ||1||<br>
  O Dear Lord, I shall remain in Your Sanctuary forever.<br>
  As it pleases You, You save me, O my Lord and Master; this is Your Glorious Greatness. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Dear Lord, You cherish and sustain those who seek Your Sanctuary.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 008</h2></center>
  O Dear Lord, the Messenger of Death cannot even touch those whom You, in Your Mercy, protect. ||2||<br>
  True Is Your Sanctuary, O Dear Lord; it never diminishes or goes away.<br>
  Those who abandon the Lord, and become attached to the love of duality, shall continue to die and be reborn. ||3||<br>
  Those who seek Your Sanctuary, Dear Lord, shall never suffer in pain or hunger for anything.<br>
  O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord forever, and merge in the True Word of the Shabad. ||4||4||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:<br>
  As Gurmukh, meditate on the Dear Lord forever, as long as there is the breath of life.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mind becomes immaculate, and egotistical pride is expelled from the mind.<br>
  Fruitful and prosperous is the life of that mortal being, who is absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, listen to the Teachings of the Guru.<br>
  The Name of the Lord is the Giver of peace forever. With intuitive ease, drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those who understand their own origin dwell within the home of their inner being, in intuitive peace and poise.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the heart-lotus blossoms forth, and egotism and evil-mindedness are eradicated.<br>
  The One True Lord is pervading amongst all; those who realize this are very rare. ||2||<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, the mind becomes immaculate, speaking the Ambrosial Essence.<br>
  The Name of the Lord dwells in the mind forever; within the mind, the mind is pleased and appeased.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to my Guru, through whom I have realized the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||3||<br>
  Those human beings who do not serve the True Guru - their lives are uselessly wasted.<br>
  When God bestows His Glance of Grace, then we meet the True Guru, merging in intuitive peace and poise.<br>
  O Nanak, by great good fortune, the Naam is bestowed; by perfect destiny, meditate. ||4||5||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:<br>
  God Himself fashioned the many forms and colors; He created the Universe and staged the play.<br>
  Creating the creation, He watches over it. He acts, and causes all to act; He gives sustenance to all beings. ||1||<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord is All-pervading.<br>
  The One God is pervading and permeating each and every heart; the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is revealed to the Gurmukh. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is hidden, but it is pervasive in the Dark Age. The Lord is totally pervading and permeating each and every heart.<br>
  The Jewel of the Naam is revealed within the hearts of those who hurry to the Sanctuary of the Guru. ||2||<br>
  Whoever overpowers the five sense organs, is blessed with forgiveness, patience and contentment, through the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  Blessed, blessed, perfect and great is that humble servant of the Lord, who is inspired by the Fear of God and detached love, to sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  If someone turns his face away from the Guru, and does not enshrine the Guru's Words in his consciousness<br>
  - he may perform all sorts of rituals and accumulate wealth, but in the end, he will fall into hell. ||4||<br>
  The One Shabad, the Word of the One God, is prevailing everywhere. All the creation came from the One Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh is united in union. When the Gurmukh goes, he blends into the Lord, Har, Har. ||5||6||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:<br>
  O my mind, praise your Guru.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 009</h2></center>
  Perfect destiny is inscribed upon your forehead and face; sing the Praises of the Lord forever. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord bestows the Ambrosial Food of the Naam.<br>
  Out of millions, only a rare few receive it<br>
  - only those who are blessed by God's Glance of Grace. ||1||<br>
  Whoever enshrines the Guru's Feet within his mind,<br>
  is rid of pain and darkness from within.<br>
  The True Lord unites him with Himself. ||2||<br>
  So embrace love for the Word of the Guru's Bani.<br>
  Here and hereafter, this is your only Support.<br>
  The Creator Lord Himself bestows it. ||3||<br>
  One whom the Lord inspires to accept His Will,<br>
  is a wise and knowing devotee.<br>
  Nanak is forever a sacrifice to him. ||4||7||17||7||24||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl, Bibhaas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with joyous love and delight; I am enraptured, lovingly attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I drink in the Ambrosial Essence; I am a sacrifice to the Naam. ||1||<br>
  The Lord, the Life of the World, is my Breath of Life.<br>
  The Lofty and Exalted Lord became pleasing to my heart and my inner being, when the Guru breathed the Mantra of the Lord into my ears. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Come, O Saints: let us join together, O Siblings of Destiny; let us meet and chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  How am I to find my God? Please bless me with the Gift of the Lord's Teachings. ||2||<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, abides in the Society of the Saints; joining this Sangat, the Lord's Glories are known.<br>
  By great good fortune, the Society of the Saints is found. Through the Guru, the True Guru, I receive the Touch of the Lord God. ||3||<br>
  I sing the Glorious Praises of God, my Inaccessible Lord and Master; singing His Praises, I am enraptured.<br>
  The Guru has showered His Mercy on servant Nanak; in an instant, He blessed him with the Gift of the Lord's Name. ||4||1||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  With the rising of the sun, the Gurmukh speaks of the Lord. All through the night, he dwells upon the Sermon of the Lord.<br>
  My God has infused this longing within me; I seek my Lord God. ||1||<br>
  My mind is the dust of the feet of the Holy.<br>
  The Guru has implanted the Sweet Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within me. I dust the Guru's Feet with my hair. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Dark are the days and nights of the faithless cynics; they are caught in the trap of attachment to Maya.<br>
  The Lord God does not dwell in their hearts, even for an instant; every hair of their heads is totally tied up in debts. ||2||<br>
  Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, wisdom and understanding are obtained, and one is released from the traps of egotism and possessiveness.<br>
  The Lord's Name, and the Lord, seem sweet to me. Through the Word of His Shabad, the Guru has made me happy. ||3||<br>
  I am just a child; the Guru is the Unfathomable Lord of the World. In His Mercy, He cherishes and sustains me.<br>
  I am drowning in the ocean of poison; O God, Guru, Lord of the World, please save Your child, Nanak. ||4||2||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Lord God showered me with His Mercy for an instant; I sing His Glorious Praises with joyous love and delight.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 010</h2></center>
  Both the singer and the listener are liberated, when, as Gurmukh, they drink in the Lord's Name, even for an instant. ||1||<br>
  The Sublime Essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is enshrined within my mind.<br>
  As Gurmukh, I have obtained the cooling, soothing Water of the Naam. I eagerly drink in the sublime essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those whose hearts are imbued with the Love of the Lord have the mark of radiant purity upon their foreheads.<br>
  The Glory of the Lord's humble servant is manifest throughout the world, like the moon among the stars. ||2||<br>
  Those whose hearts are not filled with the Lord's Name - all their affairs are worthless and insipid.<br>
  They may adorn and decorate their bodies, but without the Naam, they look like their noses have been cut off. ||3||<br>
  The Sovereign Lord permeates each and every heart; the One Lord is all-pervading everywhere.<br>
  The Lord has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak; through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, I have meditated on the Lord in an instant. ||4||3||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  God, the Inaccessible and Merciful, has showered me with His Mercy; I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, with my mouth.<br>
  I meditate on the Name of the Lord, the Purifier of sinners; I am rid of all my sins and mistakes. ||1||<br>
  O mind, chant the Name of the All-pervading Lord.<br>
  I sing the Praises of the Lord, Merciful to the meek, Destroyer of pain. Following the Guru's Teachings, I gather in the Wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord abides in the body-village; through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, the Lord, Har, Har, is revealed.<br>
  In the lake of the body, the Lord's Name has been revealed. Within my own home and mansion, I have obtained the Lord God. ||2||<br>
  Those beings who wander in the wilderness of doubt - those faithless cynics are foolish, and are plundered.<br>
  They are like the deer: the scent of musk comes from its own navel, but it wanders and roams around, searching for it in the bushes. ||3||<br>
  You are Great and Unfathomable; Your Wisdom, God, is Profound and Incomprehensible. Please bless me with that wisdom, by which I might attain You, O Lord God.<br>
  The Guru has placed His Hand upon servant Nanak; he chants the Name of the Lord. ||4||4||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  My mind is in love with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; I meditate on the Great Lord God.<br>
  The Word of the True Guru has become pleasing to my heart. The Lord God has showered me with His Grace. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, vibrate and meditate on the Lord's Name every instant.<br>
  The Perfect Guru has blessed me with the gift of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. The Lord's Name abides in my mind and body. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lord abides in the body-village, in my home and mansion. As Gurmukh, I meditate on His Glory.<br>
  Here and hereafter, the Lord's humble servants are embellished and exalted; their faces are radiant; as Gurmukh, they are carried across. ||2||<br>
  I am lovingly attuned to the Fearless Lord, Har, Har, Har; through the Guru, I have enshrined the Lord within my heart in an instant.<br>
  Millions upon millions of the faults and mistakes of the Lord's humble servant are all taken away in an instant. ||3||<br>
  Your humble servants are known only through You, God; knowing You, they becomes supreme.<br>
  The Lord, Har, Har, has enshrined Himself within His humble servant. O Nanak, the Lord God and His servant are one and the same. ||4||5||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 011</h2></center>
  Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  The Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord within me. I was dead, but chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have been brought back to life.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is the Guru, the Guru, the Perfect True Guru; He reached out to me with His Arm, and pulled me up and out of the ocean of poison. ||1||<br>
  O mind, meditate and worship the Lord's Name.<br>
  God is never found, even by making all sorts of new efforts. The Lord God is obtained only through the Perfect Guru. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Sublime Essence of the Lord's Name is the source of nectar and bliss; drinking in this Sublime Essence, following the Guru's Teachings, I have become happy.<br>
  Even iron slag is transformed into gold, joining the Lord's Congregation. Through the Guru, the Lord's Light is enshrined within the heart. ||2||<br>
  Those who are continually lured by greed, egotism and corruption, who are lured away by emotional attachment to their children and spouse<br>
  - they never serve at the feet of the Saints; those self-willed manmukhs are filled with ashes. ||3||<br>
  O God, You alone know Your Glorious Virtues; I have grown weary - I seek Your Sanctuary.<br>
  As You know best, You preserve and protect me, O my Lord and Master; servant Nanak is Your slave. ||4||6||<br>
  First Set Of Six||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Bibhaas, Partaal, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  O mind, meditate on the Treasure of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  You shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Those who chant and meditate shall be carried across to the other shore. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Listen, O mind: meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Listen, O mind: the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is equal to bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.<br>
  Listen, O mind: as Gurmukh, you shall be blessed with honor. ||1||<br>
  O mind, chant and meditate on the Supreme Transcendent Lord God.<br>
  Millions of sins shall be destroyed in an instant.<br>
  O Nanak, you shall meet with the Lord God. ||2||1||7||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Bibhaas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The Lord created the mind, and fashioned the entire body.<br>
  From the five elements, He formed it, and infused His Light within it.<br>
  He made the earth its bed, and water for it to use.<br>
  Do not forget Him for an instant; serve the Lord of the World. ||1||<br>
  O mind, serve the True Guru, and obtain the supreme status.<br>
  If you remain unattached and unaffected by sorrow and joy, then you shall find the Lord of Life. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He makes all the various pleasures, clothes and foods for you to enjoy.<br>
  He made your mother, father and all relatives.<br>
  He provides sustenance to all, in the water and on the land, O friend.<br>
  So serve the Lord, forever and ever. ||2||<br>
  He shall be your Helper and Support there, where no one else can help you.<br>
  He washes away millions of sins in an instant.<br>
  He bestows His Gifts, and never regrets them.<br>
  He forgives, once and for all, and never asks for one's account again. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 012</h2></center>
  By pre-ordained destiny, I have searched and found God.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord of the World abides.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, I have come to Your Door.<br>
  O Lord, please bless servant Nanak with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||4||1||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Serving God, His humble servant is glorified.<br>
  Unfulfilled sexual desire, unresolved anger and unsatisfied greed are eradicated.<br>
  Your Name is the treasure of Your humble servant.<br>
  Singing His Praises, I am in love with the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. ||1||<br>
  You are known, O God, by Your devotees.<br>
  Breaking their bonds, You emancipate them. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Those humble beings who are imbued with God's Love<br>
  find peace in God's Congregation.<br>
  They alone understand this, to whom this subtle essence comes.<br>
  Beholding it, and gazing upon it, in their minds they are wonderstruck. ||2||<br>
  They are at peace, the most exalted of all,<br>
  within whose hearts God dwells.<br>
  They are stable and unchanging; they do not come and go in reincarnation.<br>
  Night and day, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord God. ||3||<br>
  All bow down in humble respect to those<br>
  whose minds are filled with the Formless Lord.<br>
  Show mercy unto me, O my Divine Lord and Master.<br>
  May Nanak be saved, by serving these humble beings. ||4||2||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Singing His Glorious Praises, the mind is in ecstasy.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate in remembrance on God.<br>
  Remembering Him in meditation, the sins go away.<br>
  I fall at the Feet of that Guru. ||1||<br>
  O beloved Saints, please bless me with wisdom;<br>
  let me meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and be emancipated. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Guru has shown me the straight path;<br>
  I have abandoned everything else. I am enraptured with the Name of the Lord.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru;<br>
  I meditate in remembrance on the Lord, through the Guru. ||2||<br>
  The Guru carries those mortal beings across, and saves them from drowning.<br>
  By His Grace, they are not enticed by Maya;<br>
  in this world and the next, they are embellished and exalted by the Guru.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru. ||3||<br>
  From the most ignorant, I have been made spiritually wise,<br>
  through the Unspoken Speech of the Perfect Guru.<br>
  The Divine Guru, O Nanak, is the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  By great good fortune, I serve the Lord. ||4||3||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Eradicating all my pains, He has blessed me with peace, and inspired me to chant His Name.<br>
  In His Mercy, He has enjoined me to His service, and has purged me of all my sins. ||1||<br>
  I am only a child; I seek the Sanctuary of God the Merciful.<br>
  Erasing my demerits and faults, God has made me His Own. My Guru, the Lord of the World, protects me. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My sicknesses and sins were erased in an instant, when the Lord of the World became merciful.<br>
  With each and very breath, I worship and adore the Supreme Lord God; I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||2||<br>
  My Lord and Master is Inaccessible, Unfathomable and Infinite. His limits cannot be found.<br>
  We earn the profit, and become wealthy, meditating on our God. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 013</h2></center>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate on the Supreme Lord God; I sing His Glorious Praises forever and ever.<br>
  Says Nanak, my desires have been fulfilled; I have found my Guru, the Supreme Lord God. ||4||4||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditating in rememberance on the Naam, all my sins have been erased.<br>
  The Guru has blessed me with the Capital of the True Name.<br>
  God's servants are embellished and exalted in His Court;<br>
  serving Him, they look beauteous forever. ||1||<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  All sickness and sin shall be erased; your mind shall be rid of the darkness of ignorance. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Guru has saved me from death and rebirth, O friend;<br>
  I am in love with the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The suffering of millions of incarnations is gone;<br>
  whatever pleases Him is good. ||2||<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru;<br>
  by His Grace, I meditate on the Lord's Name.<br>
  By great good fortune, such a Guru is found;<br>
  meeting Him, one is lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Please be merciful, O Supreme Lord God, O Lord and Master,<br>
  Inner-knower, Searcher of Hearts.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I am lovingly attuned to You.<br>
  Servant Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of God. ||4||5||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  In His Mercy, God has made me His Own.<br>
  He has blessed me with the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  Fear is dispelled, and all anxiety has been alleviated. ||1||<br>
  I have been saved, touching the Feet of the True Guru.<br>
  Whatever the Guru says is good and sweet to me. I have renounced the intellectual wisdom of my mind. ||1||Pause||<br>
  That Lord God abides within my mind and body.<br>
  There are no conflicts, pains or obstacles.<br>
  Forever and ever, God is with my soul.<br>
  Filth and pollution are washed away by the Love of the Name. ||2||<br>
  I am in love with the Lotus Feet of the Lord;<br>
  I am no longer consumed by sexual desire, anger and egotism.<br>
  Now, I know the way to meet God.<br>
  Through loving devotional worship, my mind is pleased and appeased with the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Listen, O friends, Saints, my exalted companions.<br>
  The Jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is unfathomable and immeasurable.<br>
  Forever and ever, sing the Glories of God, the Treasure of Virtue.<br>
  Says Nanak, by great good fortune, He is found. ||4||6||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  They are wealthy, and they are the true merchants,<br>
  who have the credit of the Naam in the Court of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  So chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in your mind, my friends.<br>
  The Perfect Guru is found by great good fortune, and then one's lifestyle becomes perfect and immaculate. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They earn the profit, and the congratulations pour in;<br>
  by the Grace of the Saints, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Their lives are fruitful and prosperous, and their birth is approved;<br>
  by Guru's Grace, they enjoy the Love of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Sexuality, anger and egotism are wiped away;<br>
  O Nanak, as Gurmukh, they are carried across to the other shore. ||4||7||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Guru is Perfect, and Perfect is His Power.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 014</h2></center>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad is unchanging, forever and ever.<br>
  All pains and afflictions run away from those, whose minds are filled with the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||1||<br>
  Imbued with the Lord's Love, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  They are liberated, bathing in the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  By Guru's Grace, they are carried across to the other shore;<br>
  they are rid of fear, doubt and corruption.<br>
  The Guru's Feet abide deep within their minds and bodies.<br>
  The Holy are fearless; they take to the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  They are blessed with abundant bliss, happiness, pleasure and peace.<br>
  Enemies and pains do not even approach them.<br>
  The Perfect Guru makes them His Own, and protects them.<br>
  Chanting the Lord's Name, they are rid of all their sins. ||3||<br>
  The Saints, spiritual companions and Sikhs are exalted and uplifted.<br>
  The Perfect Guru leads them to meet God.<br>
  The painful noose of death and rebirth is snapped.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru covers their faults. ||4||8||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Perfect True Guru has bestowed the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  I am blessed with bliss and happiness, emancipation and eternal peace. All my affairs have been resolved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The Lotus Feet of the Guru abide within my mind.<br>
  I am rid of pain, suffering, doubt and fraud. ||1||<br>
  Rise early, and sing the Glorious Word of God's Bani.<br>
  Twenty-four hours a day, meditate in remembrance on the Lord, O mortal. ||2||<br>
  Inwardly and outwardly, God is everywhere.<br>
  Wherever I go, He is always with me, my Helper and Support. ||3||<br>
  With my palms pressed together, I offer this prayer.<br>
  O Nanak, I meditate forever on the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue. ||4||9||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  The Supreme Lord God is All-wise and All-knowing.<br>
  The Perfect Guru is found by great good fortune. I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1||Pause||<br>
  My sins are cut away, through the Word of the Shabad, and I have found contentment.<br>
  I have become worthy of worshipping the Naam in adoration.<br>
  In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have been enlightened.<br>
  The Lord's Lotus Feet abide within my mind. ||1||<br>
  The One who made us, protects and preserves us.<br>
  God is Perfect, the Master of the masterless.<br>
  Those, upon whom He showers His Mercy<br>
  - they have perfect karma and conduct. ||2||<br>
  They sing the Glories of God, continually, continuously, forever fresh and new.<br>
  They do not wander in the 8.4 million incarnations.<br>
  Here and hereafter, they worship the Lord's Feet.<br>
  Their faces are radiant, and they are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  That person, upon whose forehead the Guru places His Hand<br>
  - out of millions, how rare is that slave.<br>
  He sees God pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky.<br>
  Nanak is saved by the dust of the feet of such a humble being. ||4||10||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I am a sacrifice to my Perfect Guru.<br>
  By His Grace, I chant and meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Listening to the Ambrosial Word of His Bani, I am exalted and enraptured.<br>
  My corrupt and poisonous entanglements are gone. ||1||<br>
  I am in love with the True Word of His Shabad.<br>
  The Lord God has come into my consciousness. ||2||<br>
  Chanting the Naam, I am enlightened.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 015</h2></center>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad has come to dwell within my heart. ||3||<br>
  The Guru is All-powerful and Merciful forever.<br>
  Chanting and meditating on the Lord, Nanak is exalted and enraptured. ||4||11||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Chanting Guru, Guru, I have found eternal peace.<br>
  God, Merciful to the meek, has become kind and compassionate; He has inspired me to chant His Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Joining the Society of the Saints, I am illumined and enlightened.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, my hopes have been fulfilled. ||1||<br>
  I am blessed with total salvation, and my mind is filled with peace.<br>
  I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; O Nanak, the Guru has been gracious to me. ||2||12||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Bibhaas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  There is no other place of rest,<br>
  none at all, without the Lord's Name.<br>
  There is total success and salvation,<br>
  and all affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1||<br>
  Constantly chant the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Sexuality, anger and egotism are wiped away; let yourself fall in love with the One Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Attached to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, pain runs away. In His Sanctuary, He cherishes and sustains us.<br>
  Whoever has such pre-ordained destiny meets with the True Guru; the Messenger of Death cannot grab him. ||2||<br>
  Night and day, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har; abandon the doubts of your mind.<br>
  One who has perfect karma joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and meets the Lord. ||3||<br>
  The sins of countless lifetimes are erased, and one is protected by the Lord Himself.<br>
  He is our Mother, Father, Friend and Sibling; O servant Nanak, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||1||13||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Bibhaas, Partaal:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.<br>
  Conflict, suffering, greed and emotional attachment shall be dispelled, and the fever of egotism shall be relieved. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Renounce your selfishness, and grasp the feet of the Saints; your mind shall be sanctified, and your sins shall be taken away. ||1||<br>
  Nanak, the child, does not know anything at all. O God, please protect me; You are my Mother and Father. ||2||1||14||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have taken the Shelter and Support of the Lord's Lotus Feet.<br>
  You are Lofty and Exalted, Grand and Infinite, O my Lord and Master; You alone are above all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  He is the Support of the breath of life, the Destroyer of pain, the Giver of discriminating understanding. ||1||<br>
  So bow down in respect to the Savior Lord; worship and adore the One God.<br>
  Bathing in the dust of the feet of the Saints, Nanak is blessed with countless comforts. ||2||2||15||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 016</h2></center>
  Prabhaatee, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, Bibhaas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The insanity of duality has driven the mind insane.<br>
  In false greed, life is wasting away.<br>
  Duality clings to the mind; it cannot be restrained.<br>
  The True Guru saves us, implanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord within. ||1||<br>
  Without subduing the mind, Maya cannot be subdued.<br>
  The One who created this, He alone understands. Contemplating the Word of the Shabad, one is carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Gathering the wealth of Maya, kings become proud and arrogant.<br>
  But this Maya that they love so much shall not go along with them in the end.<br>
  There are so many colors and flavors of attachment to Maya.<br>
  Except for the Name, no one has any friend or companion. ||2||<br>
  According to one's own mind, one sees the minds of others.<br>
  According to one's desires, one's condition is determined.<br>
  According to one's actions, one is focused and tuned in.<br>
  Seeking the advice of the True Guru, one finds the home of peace and poise. ||3||<br>
  In music and song, the mind is caught by the love of duality.<br>
  Filled with deception deep within, one suffers in terrible pain.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, one is blessed with clear understanding,<br>
  and remains lovingly attuned to the True Name. ||4||<br>
  Through the True Word of the Shabad, one practices Truth.<br>
  He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, through the True Word of His Bani.<br>
  He dwells in the home of his own heart deep within, and obtains the immortal status.<br>
  Then, he is blessed with honor in the Court of the True Lord. ||5||<br>
  Without serving the Guru, there is no devotional worship,<br>
  even though one may make all sorts of efforts.<br>
  If one eradicates egotism and selfishness through the Shabad,<br>
  the Immaculate Naam comes to abide in the mind. ||6||<br>
  In this world, the practice of the Shabad is the most excellent occupation.<br>
  Without the Shabad, everything else is the darkness of emotional attachment.<br>
  Through the Shabad, the Naam is enshrined within the heart.<br>
  Through the Shabad, one obtains clear understanding and the door of salvation. ||7||<br>
  There is no other Creator except the All-seeing Lord God.<br>
  The True Lord Himself is Infinite and Incomparably Beautiful.<br>
  Through the Lord's Name, one obtains the most sublime and exalted state.<br>
  O Nanak, how rare are those humble beings, who seek and find the Lord. ||8||1||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  Emotional attachment to Maya is spread out all over the world.<br>
  Seeing a beautiful woman, the man is overcome with sexual desire.<br>
  His love for his children and gold steadily increases.<br>
  He sees everything as his own, but he does not own the One Lord. ||1||<br>
  I meditate as I chant on such a mala,<br>
  that I rise above pleasure and pain; I attain the most wondrous devotional worship of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  O Treasure of Virtue, Your limits cannot be found.<br>
  Through the True Word of the Shabad, I am absorbed into You.<br>
  You Yourself created the comings and goings of reincarnation.<br>
  They alone are devotees, who focus their consciousness on You. ||2||<br>
  Spiritual wisdom and meditation on the Lord, the Lord of Nirvaanaa<br>
  - without meeting the True Guru, no one knows this.<br>
  The Lord's Light fills the sacred pools of all beings.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to the Embodiment of Bliss. ||3||<br>
  Through the Guru's Teachings, one achieves loving devotional worship.<br>
  The Shabad burns away egotism from within.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 017</h2></center>
  The wandering mind is restrained and held in its place.<br>
  The True Name is enshrined in the mind. ||4||<br>
  The exciting and intoxicating worldly plays come to an end,<br>
  for those who accept the Guru's Teachings, and become lovingly attuned to the One Lord.<br>
  Seeing this, the fire in the water is extinguished.<br>
  They alone realize this, who are blessed by great good fortune. ||5||<br>
  Serving the True Guru, doubt is dispelled.<br>
  Those who are lovingly attuned to the True Lord remain awake and aware night and day.<br>
  They know the One Lord, and no other.<br>
  Serving the Giver of peace, they become immaculate. ||6||<br>
  Selfless service and intuitive awareness come by reflecting upon the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Chanting, intensive meditation and austere self-discipline come by subduing the ego.<br>
  One becomes Jivan-mukta - liberated while yet alive, by listening to the Shabad.<br>
  Living a truthful way of life, one finds true peace. ||7||<br>
  The Giver of peace is the Eradicator of pain.<br>
  I cannot conceive of serving any other.<br>
  I place my body, mind and wealth in offering before Him.<br>
  Says Nanak, I have tasted the supreme, sublime Essence of the Lord. ||8||2||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  You may perform exercises of inner purification, and fire up the furnace of the Kundalini, inhaling and exhaling and holding the breath.<br>
  Without the True Guru, you will not understand; deluded by doubt, you shall drown and die.<br>
  The spiritually blind are filled with filth and pollution; they may wash, but the filth within shall never depart.<br>
  Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all their actions are useless, like the magician who deceives through illuions. ||1||<br>
  The merits of the six religious rituals are obtained through the Immaculate Naam.<br>
  You, O Lord, are the Ocean of virtue; I am so unworthy. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Running around chasing the entanglements of Maya is an evil-minded act of corruption.<br>
  The fool makes a show of his self-conceit; he does not know how to behave.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh is enticed by his desires for Maya; his words are useless and empty.<br>
  The ritual cleansings of the sinner are fradulent; his rituals and decorations are useless and empty. ||2||<br>
  False is the wisdom of the mind; its actions inspire useless disputes.<br>
  The false are filled with egotism; they do not obtain the sublime taste of their Lord and Master.<br>
  Without the Name, whatever else they do is tasteless and insipid.<br>
  Associating with their enemies, they are plundered and ruined. Their speech is poison, and their lives are useless. ||3||<br>
  Do not be deluded by doubt; do not invite your own death.<br>
  Serve the True Guru, and you shall be at peace forever.<br>
  Without the True Guru, no one is liberated.<br>
  They come and go in reincarnation; they die, only to be reborn and die again. ||4||<br>
  This body wanders, caught in the three dispositions.<br>
  It is afflicted by sorrow and suffering.<br>
  So serve the One who has no mother or father.<br>
  Desire and selfishness shall depart from within. ||5||<br>
  Wherever I look, I see Him.<br>
  Without meeting the True Guru, no one is liberated.<br>
  Enshrine the True One in your heart; this is the most excellent action.<br>
  All other hypocritical actions and devotions bring only ruin. ||6||<br>
  When one is rid of duality, then he realizes the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Inside and out, he knows the One Lord.<br>
  This is the most Excellent Wisdom of the Shabad.<br>
  Ashes fall on the heads of those who are in duality. ||7||<br>
  To praise the Lord through the Guru's Teachings is the most excellent action.<br>
  In the Society of the Saints, contemplate the Glories of God and His spiritual wisdom.<br>
  Whoever subdues his mind, knows the state of being dead while yet alive.<br>
  O Nanak, by His Grace, the Gracious Lord is realized. ||8||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 018</h2></center>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl, Dakhnee:<br>
  Ahalyaa was the wife of Gautam the seer. Seeing her, Indra was enticed.<br>
  When he received a thousand marks of disgrace on his body, then he felt regret in his mind. ||1||<br>
  O Siblings of Destiny, no one knowingly makes mistakes.<br>
  He alone is mistaken, whom the Lord Himself makes so. He alone understands, whom the Lord causes to understand. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Harichand, the king and ruler of his land, did not appreciate the value of his pre-ordained destiny.<br>
  If he had known that it was a mistake, he would not have made such a show of giving in charity, and he would not have been sold in the market. ||2||<br>
  The Lord took the form of a dwarf, and asked for some land.<br>
  If Bal the king has recognized Him, he would not have been deceived, and sent to the underworld. ||3||<br>
  Vyaas taught and warned the king Janmayjaa not to do three things.<br>
  But he performed the sacred feast and killed eighteen Brahmins; the record of one's past deeds cannot be erased. ||4||<br>
  I do not try to calculate the account; I accept the Hukam of God's Command. I speak with intuitive love and respect.<br>
  No matter what happens, I will praise the Lord. It is all Your Glorious Greatness, O Lord. ||5||<br>
  The Gurmukh remains detached; filth never attaches itself to him. He remains forever in God's Sanctuary.<br>
  The foolish self-willed manmukh does not think of the future; he is overtaken by pain, and then he regrets. ||6||<br>
  The Creator who created this creation acts, and causes all to act.<br>
  O Lord, egotistical pride does not depart from the soul. Falling into egotistical pride, one is ruined. ||7||<br>
  Everyone makes mistakes; only the Creator does not make mistakes.<br>
  O Nanak, salvation comes through the True Name. By Guru's Grace, one is released. ||8||4||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  To chant and listen to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my Support.<br>
  Worthless entanglements are ended and gone.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh, caught in duality, loses his honor.<br>
  Except for the Name, I have no other at all. ||1||<br>
  Listen, O blind, foolish, idiotic mind.<br>
  Aren't you ashamed of your comings and goings in reincarnation? Without the Guru, you shall drown, over and over again. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This mind is ruined by its attachment to Maya.<br>
  The Command of the Primal Lord is pre-ordained. Before whom should I cry?<br>
  Only a few, as Gurmukh, understand this.<br>
  Without the Naam, no one is liberated. ||2||<br>
  People wander lost, staggering and stumbling through 8.4 million incarnations.<br>
  Without knowing the Guru, they cannot escape the noose of Death.<br>
  This mind, from one moment to the next, goes from the heavens to the underworld.<br>
  The Gurmukh contemplates the Naam, and is released. ||3||<br>
  When God sends His Summons, there is no time to delay.<br>
  When one dies in the Word of the Shabad, he lives in peace.<br>
  Without the Guru, no one understands.<br>
  The Lord Himself acts, and inspires all to act. ||4||<br>
  Inner conflict comes to an end, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.<br>
  Through the Perfect True Guru, one is intuitively absorbed into the Lord.<br>
  This wobbling, unsteady mind is stabilized,<br>
  and one lives the lifestyle of true actions. ||5||<br>
  If someone is false within his own self, then how can he be pure?<br>
  How rare are those who wash with the Shabad.<br>
  How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, live the Truth.<br>
  Their comings and goings in reincarnation are over and done. ||6||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 019</h2></center>
  Those who eat and drink the Fear of God, find the most excellent peace.<br>
  Associating with the humble servants of the Lord, they are carried across.<br>
  They speak the Truth, and lovingly inspire others to speak it as well.<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad is the most excellent occupation. ||7||<br>
  Those who take the Lord's Praises as their karma and Dharma, their honor and worship service<br>
  - their sexual desire and anger are burnt off in the fire.<br>
  They taste the sublime essence of the Lord, and their minds are drenched with it.<br>
  Prays Nanak, there is no other at all. ||8||5||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  Chant the Lord's Name, and worship Him deep within your being.<br>
  Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and no other. ||1||<br>
  The One is pervading all places.<br>
  I do not see any other; unto whom should I offer worship? ||1||Pause||<br>
  I place my mind and body in offering before You; I dedicate my soul to You.<br>
  As it pleases You, You save me, Lord; this is my prayer. ||2||<br>
  True is that tongue which is delighted by the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, one is saved in the Sanctuary of God. ||3||<br>
  My God created religious rituals.<br>
  He placed the glory of the Naam above these rituals. ||4||<br>
  The four great blessings are under the control of the True Guru.<br>
  When the first three are put aside, one is blessed with the fourth. ||5||<br>
  Those whom the True Guru blesses with liberation and meditation<br>
  realize the Lord's State, and become sublime. ||6||<br>
  Their minds and bodies are cooled and soothed; the Guru imparts this understanding.<br>
  Who can estimate the value of those whom God has exalted? ||7||<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru has imparted this understanding;<br>
  without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no one is emancipated. ||8||6||<br>
  Prabhaatee, First Mehl:<br>
  Some are forgiven by the Primal Lord God; the Perfect Guru makes the true making.<br>
  Those who are attuned to the Love of the Lord are imbued with Truth forever; their pains are dispelled, and they obtain honor. ||1||<br>
  False are the clever tricks of the evil-minded.<br>
  They shall disappear in no time at all. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Pain and suffering afflict the self-willed manmukh. The pains of the self-willed manmukh shall never depart.<br>
  The Gurmukh recognizes the Giver of pleasure and pain. He merges in His Sanctuary. ||2||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs do not know loving devotional worship; they are insane, rotting away in their egotism.<br>
  This mind flies in an instant from the heavens to the underworld, as long as it does not know the Word of the Shabad. ||3||<br>
  The world has become hungry and thirsty; without the True Guru, it is not satisfied.<br>
  Merging intuitively in the Celestial Lord, peace is obtained, and one goes to the Lord's Court wearing robes of honor. ||4||<br>
  The Lord in His Court is Himself the Knower and Seer; the Word of the Guru's Bani is Immaculate.<br>
  He Himself is the Awareness of Truth; He Himself understands the state of nirvaanaa. ||5||<br>
  He made the waves of water, the fire and the air, and then joined the three together to form the world.<br>
  He blessed these elements with such power, that they remain subject to His Command. ||6||<br>
  How rare are those humble beings in this world, whom the Lord tests and places in His Treasury.<br>
  They rise above social status and color, and rid themselves of possessiveness and greed. ||7||<br>
  Attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they are like immaculate sacred shrines; they are rid of the pain and pollution of egotism.<br>
  Nanak washes the feet of those who, as Gurmukh, love the True Lord. ||8||7||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 020</h2></center>
  Prabhaatee, Third Mehl, Bibhaas:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  By Guru's Grace, see that the Temple of the Lord is within you.<br>
  The Temple of the Lord is found through the Word of the Shabad; contemplate the Lord's Name. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, be joyfully attuned to the Shabad.<br>
  True is devotional worship, and True is the Temple of the Lord; True is His Manifest Glory. ||1||Pause||<br>
  This body is the Temple of the Lord, in which the jewel of spiritual wisdom is revealed.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs do not know anything at all; they do not believe that the Lord's Temple is within. ||2||<br>
  The Dear Lord created the Temple of the Lord; He adorns it by His Will.<br>
  All act according to their pre-ordained destiny; no one can erase it. ||3||<br>
  Contemplating the Shabad, peace is obtained, loving the True Name.<br>
  The Temple of the Lord is embellished with the Shabad; it is an Infinite Fortress of God. ||4||<br>
  This world is the Temple of the Lord; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.<br>
  The blind and foolish self-willed manmukhs worship in the love of duality. ||5||<br>
  One's body and social status do not go along to that place, where all are called to account.<br>
  Those who are attuned to Truth are saved; those in the love of duality are miserable. ||6||<br>
  The treasure of the Naam is within the Temple of the Lord. The idiotic fools do not realize this.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, I have realized this. I keep the Lord enshrined within my heart. ||7||<br>
  Those who are attuned to the love of the Shabad know the Guru, through the Word of the Guru's Bani.<br>
  Sacred, pure and immaculate are those humble beings who are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||8||<br>
  The Temple of the Lord is the Lord's Shop; He embellishes it with the Word of His Shabad.<br>
  In that shop is the merchandise of the One Name; the Gurmukhs adorn themselves with it. ||9||<br>
  The mind is like iron slag, within the Temple of the Lord; it is lured by the love of duality.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, the Philosopher's Stone, the mind is transformed into gold. Its value cannot be described. ||10||<br>
  The Lord abides within the Temple of the Lord. He is pervading in all.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs trade in the merchandise of Truth. ||11||1||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:<br>
  Those who remain awake and aware in the Love and Fear of God, rid themselves of the filth and pollution of egotism.<br>
  They remain awake and aware forever, and protect their homes, by beating and driving out the five thieves. ||1||<br>
  O my mind, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  O mind, do only those deeds which will lead you to the Path of the Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The celestial melody wells up in the Gurmukh, and the pains of egotism are taken away.<br>
  The Name of the Lord abides in the mind, as one intuitively sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Those who follow the Guru's Teachings - their faces are radiant and beautiful. They keep the Lord enshrined in their hearts.<br>
  Here and hereafter, they find absolute peace; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, they are carried across to the other shore. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 021</h2></center>
  In egotism, one cannot remain awake and aware, and one's devotional worship of the Lord is not accepted.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs find no place in the Court of the Lord; they do their deeds in the love of duality. ||4||<br>
  Cursed is the food, and cursed are the clothes, of those who are attached to the love of duality.<br>
  They are like maggots in manure, sinking into manure. In death and rebirth, they are wasted away to ruin. ||5||<br>
  I am a sacrifice to those who meet with the True Guru.<br>
  I shall continue to associate with them; devoted to Truth, I am absorbed in Truth. ||6||<br>
  By perfect destiny, the Guru is found. He cannot be found by any efforts.<br>
  Through the True Guru, intuitive wisdom wells up; through the Word of the Shabad, egotism is burnt away. ||7||<br>
  O my mind, hurry to the Sanctuary of the Lord; He is Potent to do everything.<br>
  O Nanak, never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Whatever He does, comes to pass. ||8||2||7||2||9||<br>
  Bibhaas, Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Mother, father, siblings, children and spouse<br>
  - involved with them, people eat the food of bliss.<br>
  The mind is entangled in sweet emotional attachment.<br>
  Those who seek God's Glorious Virtues are the support of my breath of life. ||1||<br>
  My One Lord is the Inner-Knower, the Searcher of hearts.<br>
  He alone is my Support; He is my only Protection. My Great Lord and Master is over and above the heads of kings. ||1||Pause||<br>
  I have broken my ties to that deceitful serpent.<br>
  The Guru has told me that it is false and fraudulent.<br>
  Its face is sweet, but it tastes very bitter.<br>
  My mind remains satisfied with the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  I have broken my ties with greed and emotional attachment.<br>
  The Merciful Guru has rescued me from them.<br>
  These cheating thieves have plundered so many homes.<br>
  The Merciful Guru has protected and saved me. ||3||<br>
  I have no dealings whatsoever with sexual desire and anger.<br>
  I listen to the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  Wherever I look, I see the most horrible goblins.<br>
  My Guru, the Lord of the World, has saved me from them. ||4||<br>
  I have made widows of the ten sensory organs.<br>
  The Guru has told me that these pleasures are the fires of corruption.<br>
  Those who associate with them go to hell.<br>
  The Guru has saved me; I am lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||5||<br>
  I have forsaken the advice of my ego.<br>
  The Guru has told me that this is foolish stubbornness.<br>
  This ego is homeless; it shall never find a home.<br>
  The Guru has saved me; I am lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||6||<br>
  I have become alienated from these people.<br>
  We cannot both live together in one home.<br>
  Grasping the hem of the Guru's Robe, I have come to God.<br>
  Please be fair with me, All-knowing Lord God. ||7||<br>
  God smiled at me and spoke, passing judgement.<br>
  He made all the demons perform service for me.<br>
  You are my Lord and Master; all this home belongs to You.<br>
  Says Nanak, the Guru has passed judgement. ||8||1||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 022</h2></center>
  Within the mind dwell anger and massive ego.<br>
  Worship services are performed with great pomp and ceremony.<br>
  Ritual cleansing baths are taken, and sacred marks are applied to the body.<br>
  But still, the filth and pollution within never depart. ||1||<br>
  No one has ever found God in this way.<br>
  The sacred mudras - ritualistic hand gestures - are made, but the mind remains enticed by Maya. ||1||Pause||<br>
  They commit sins, under the influence of the five thieves.<br>
  They bathe at sacred shrines, and claim that everything has been washed off.<br>
  Then they commit them again, without fear of the consequences.<br>
  The sinners are bound and gagged, and taken to the City of Death. ||2||<br>
  The ankle-bells shake and the cymbals vibrate,<br>
  but those who have deception within wander lost like demons.<br>
  By destroying its hole, the snake is not killed.<br>
  God, who created you, knows everything. ||3||<br>
  You worship fire and wear saffron colored robes.<br>
  Stung by your misfortune, you abandon your home.<br>
  Leaving your own country, you wander in foreign lands.<br>
  But you bring the five rejects with you. ||4||<br>
  You have split your ears, and now you steal crumbs.<br>
  You beg from door to door, but you fail to be satisfied.<br>
  You have abandoned your own wife, but now you sneak glances at other women.<br>
  God is not found by wearing religious robes; you are utterly miserable! ||5||<br>
  He does not speak; he is on silence.<br>
  But he is filled with desire; he is made to wander in reincarnation.<br>
  Abstaining from food, his body suffers in pain.<br>
  He does not realize the Hukam of the Lord's Command; he is afflicted by possessiveness. ||6||<br>
  Without the True Guru, no one has attained the supreme status.<br>
  Go ahead and ask all the Vedas and the Simritees.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs do useless deeds.<br>
  They are like a house of sand, which cannot stand. ||7||<br>
  One unto whom the Lord of the Universe becomes Merciful,<br>
  sews the Word of the Guru's Shabad into his robes.<br>
  Out of millions, it is rare that such a Saint is seen.<br>
  O Nanak, with him, we are carried across. ||8||<br>
  If one has such good destiny, then the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is obtained.<br>
  He saves himself, and carries across all his family as well. ||1||SECOND PAUSE||2||<br>
  Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, all the sins are erased.<br>
  The accounts held by the Righteous Judge of Dharma are torn up.<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,<br>
  I have found the Sublime Essence of the Lord. The Supreme Lord God has melted into my heart. ||1||<br>
  Dwelling on the Lord, Har, Har, I have found peace.<br>
  Your slaves seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The cycle of reincarnation is ended, and darkness is dispelled.<br>
  The Guru has revealed the door of liberation.<br>
  My mind and body are forever imbued with loving devotion to the Lord.<br>
  Now I know God, because He has made me know Him. ||2||<br>
  He is contained in each and every heart.<br>
  Without Him, there is no one at all.<br>
  Hatred, conflict, fear and doubt have been eliminated.<br>
  God, the Soul of Pure Goodness, has manifested His Righteousness. ||3||<br>
  He has rescued me from the most dangerous waves.<br>
  Separated from Him for countless lifetimes, I am united with Him once again.<br>
  Chanting, intense meditation and strict self-discipline are the contemplation of the Naam.<br>
  My Lord and Master has blessed me with His Glance of Grace. ||4||<br>
  Bliss, peace and salvation are found in that place,<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 023</h2></center>
  where the servants of the Lord of the World abide.<br>
  God, the Lord of the World, is pleased and satisfied with me.<br>
  My disharmony with Him of so many lifetimes is ended. ||5||<br>
  Burnt offerings, sacred feasts, intense meditations with the body upside-down, worship services<br>
  and taking millions of cleansing baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage<br>
  - the merits of all these are obtained by enshrining the Lord's Lotus Feet within the heart, even for an instant.<br>
  Meditating on the Lord of the Universe, all one's affairs are resolved. ||6||<br>
  God's Place is the highest of the high.<br>
  The Lord's humble servants intuitively focus their meditation on Him.<br>
  I long for the dust of the slaves of the Lord's slaves.<br>
  My Beloved Lord is overflowing with all powers. ||7||<br>
  My Beloved Lord, my Mother and Father, is always near.<br>
  O my Friend and Companion, You are my Trusted Support.<br>
  God takes His slaves by the hand, and makes them His Own.<br>
  Nanak lives by meditating on the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue. ||8||3||2||7||12||<br>
  Bibhaas, Prabhaatee, The Word Of Devotee Kabeer Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  My anxious fears of death and rebirth have been taken away.<br>
  The Celestial Lord has shown His Love for me. ||1||<br>
  The Divine Light has dawned, and darkness has been dispelled.<br>
  Contemplating the Lord, I have obtained the Jewel of His Name. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Pain runs far away from that place where there is bliss.<br>
  The jewel of the mind is focused and attuned to the essence of reality. ||2||<br>
  Whatever happens is by the Pleasure of Your Will.<br>
  Whoever understands this, is intuitively merged in the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Says Kabeer, my sins have been obliterated.<br>
  My mind has merged into the Lord, the Life of the World. ||4||1||<br>
  PRABHAATEE:<br>
  If the Lord Allah lives only in the mosque, then to whom does the rest of the world belong?<br>
  According to the Hindus, the Lord's Name abides in the idol, but there is no truth in either of these claims. ||1||<br>
  O Allah, O Raam, I live by Your Name.<br>
  Please show mercy to me, O Master. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The God of the Hindus lives in the southern lands, and the God of the Muslims lives in the west.<br>
  So search in your heart - look deep into your heart of hearts; this is the home and the place where God lives. ||2||<br>
  The Brahmins observe twenty-four fasts during the year, and the Muslims fast during the month of Ramadaan.<br>
  The Muslims set aside eleven months, and claim that the treasure is only in the one month. ||3||<br>
  What is the use of bathing at Orissa? Why do the Muslims bow their heads in the mosque?<br>
  If someone has deception in his heart, what good is it for him to utter prayers? And what good is it for him to go on pilgrimage to Mecca? ||4||<br>
  You fashioned all these men and women, Lord. All these are Your Forms.<br>
  Kabeer is the child of God, Allah, Raam. All the Gurus and prophets are mine. ||5||<br>
  Says Kabeer, listen, O men and women: seek the Sanctuary of the One.<br>
  Chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O mortals, and you shall surely be carried across. ||6||2||<br>
  PRABHAATEE:<br>
  First, Allah created the Light; then, by His Creative Power, He made all mortal beings.<br>
  From the One Light, the entire universe welled up. So who is good, and who is bad? ||1||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 024</h2></center>
  O people, O Siblings of Destiny, do not wander deluded by doubt.<br>
  The Creation is in the Creator, and the Creator is in the Creation, totally pervading and permeating all places. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The clay is the same, but the Fashioner has fashioned it in various ways.<br>
  There is nothing wrong with the pot of clay - there is nothing wrong with the Potter. ||2||<br>
  The One True Lord abides in all; by His making, everything is made.<br>
  Whoever realizes the Hukam of His Command, knows the One Lord. He alone is said to be the Lord's slave. ||3||<br>
  The Lord Allah is Unseen; He cannot be seen. The Guru has blessed me with this sweet molasses.<br>
  Says Kabeer, my anxiety and fear have been taken away; I see the Immaculate Lord pervading everywhere. ||4||3||<br>
  PRABHAATEE:<br>
  Do not say that the Vedas, the Bible and the Koran are false. Those who do not contemplate them are false.<br>
  You say that the One Lord is in all, so why do you kill chickens? ||1||<br>
  O Mullah, tell me: is this God's Justice?<br>
  The doubts of your mind have not been dispelled. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You seize a living creature, and then bring it home and kill its body; you have killed only the clay.<br>
  The light of the soul passes into another form. So tell me, what have you killed? ||2||<br>
  And what good are your purifications? Why do you bother to wash your face? And why do you bother to bow your head in the mosque?<br>
  Your heart is full of hypocrisy; what good are your prayers or your pilgrimage to Mecca? ||3||<br>
  You are impure; you do not understand the Pure Lord. You do not know His Mystery.<br>
  Says Kabeer, you have missed out on paradise; your mind is set on hell. ||4||4||<br>
  PRABHAATEE:<br>
  Hear my prayer, Lord; You are the Divine Light of the Divine, the Primal, All-pervading Master.<br>
  The Siddhas in Samaadhi have not found Your limits. They hold tight to the Protection of Your Sanctuary. ||1||<br>
  Worship and adoration of the Pure, Primal Lord comes by worshipping the True Guru, O Siblings of Destiny.<br>
  Standing at His Door, Brahma studies the Vedas, but he cannot see the Unseen Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  With the oil of knowledge about the essence of reality, and the wick of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, this lamp illluminates my body.<br>
  I have applied the Light of the Lord of the Universe, and lit this lamp. God the Knower knows. ||2||<br>
  The Unstruck Melody of the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, vibrates and resounds. I dwell with the Lord of the World.<br>
  Kabeer, Your slave, performs this Aartee, this lamp-lit worship service for You, O Formless Lord of Nirvaanaa. ||3||5||<br>
  Prabhaatee, The Word Of Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  The mind alone knows the state of the mind; I tell it to the Knowing Lord.<br>
  I chant the Name of the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts - why should I be afraid? ||1||<br>
  My mind is pierced through by the love of the Lord of the World.<br>
  My God is All-pervading everywhere. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The mind is the shop, the mind is the town, and the mind is the shopkeeper.<br>
  The mind abides in various forms, wandering all across the world. ||2||<br>
  This mind is imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and duality is easily overcome.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 025</h2></center>
  He Himself is the Commander; all are under His Command. The Fearless Lord looks on all alike. ||3||<br>
  That humble being who knows, and meditates on the Supreme Primal Being - his word becomes eternal.<br>
  Says Naam Dayv, I have found the Invisible, Wondrous Lord, the Life of the World, within my heart. ||4||1||<br>
  PRABHAATEE:<br>
  He existed in the beginning, in the primeval age, and all throughout the ages; His limits cannot be known.<br>
  The Lord is pervading and permeating amongst all; this is how His Form can be described. ||1||<br>
  The Lord of the Universe appears when the Word of His Shabad is chanted.<br>
  My Lord is the Embodiment of Bliss. ||1||Pause||<br>
  The beautiful fragrance of sandalwood emanates from the sandalwood tree, and attaches to the other trees of the forest.<br>
  God, the Primal Source of everything, is like the sandalwood tree; He transforms us woody trees into fragrant sandalwood. ||2||<br>
  You, O Lord, are the Philosopher's Stone, and I am iron; associating with You, I am transformed into gold.<br>
  You are Merciful; You are the gem and the jewel. Naam Dayv is absorbed in the Truth. ||3||2||<br>
  PRABHAATEE:<br>
  The Primal Being has no ancestry; He has staged this play.<br>
  God is hidden deep within each and every heart. ||1||<br>
  No one knows the Light of the soul.<br>
  Whatever I do, is known to You, Lord. ||1||Pause||<br>
  Just as the pitcher is made from clay,<br>
  everything is made from the Beloved Divine Creator Himself. ||2||<br>
  The mortal's actions hold the soul in the bondage of karma.<br>
  Whatever he does, he does on his own. ||3||<br>
  Prays Naam Dayv, whatever this soul wants, it obtains.<br>
  Whoever abides in the Lord, becomes immortal. ||4||3||<br>
  Prabhaatee, The Word Of Devotee Baynee Jee:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  You rub your body with sandalwood oil, and place basil leaves on your forehead.<br>
  But you hold a knife in the hand of your heart.<br>
  You look like a thug; pretending to meditate, you pose like a crane.<br>
  You try to look like a Vaishnaav, but the breath of life escapes through your mouth. ||1||<br>
  You pray for hours to God the Beautiful.<br>
  But your gaze is evil, and your nights are wasted in conflict. ||1||Pause||<br>
  You perform daily cleansing rituals,<br>
  wear two loin-cloths, perform religious rituals and put only milk in your mouth.<br>
  But in your heart, you have drawn out the sword.<br>
  You routinely steal the property of others. ||2||<br>
  You worship the stone idol, and paint ceremonial marks of Ganesha.<br>
  You remain awake throughout the night, pretending to worship God.<br>
  You dance, but your consciousness is filled with evil.<br>
  You are lewd and depraved - this is such an unrighteous dance! ||3||<br>
  You sit on a deer-skin, and chant on your mala.<br>
  You put the sacred mark, the tilak, on your forehead.<br>
  You wear the rosary beads of Shiva around your neck, but your heart is filled with falsehood.<br>
  You are lewd and depraved - you do not chant God's Name. ||4||<br>
  Whoever does not realize the essence of the soul<br>
  - all his religious actions are hollow and false.<br>
  Says Baynee, as Gurmukh, meditate.<br>
  Without the True Guru, you shall not find the Way. ||5||1||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr35.htm">Next: Raag Jaijaavantee</a></center>
 </body>