<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr41.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr43.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 001</h2></center>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl:<br>
  O Primal Lord God, You Yourself are the Creator, the Cause of all causes.<br>
  You are All-pervading everywhere, totally filling all hearts.<br>
  You are seen pervading the world; who can know Your State? You protect all; You are our Lord and Master.<br>
  O my Imperishable and Formless Lord, You formed Yourself.<br>
  You are the One and Only; no one else is like You.<br>
  O Lord, You have no end or limitation. Who can contemplate You? You are the Father of the world, the Support of all life.<br>
  Your devotees are at Your Door, O God - they are just like You. How can servant Nanak describe them with only one tongue?<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to them. ||1||<br>
  Streams of Ambrosial Nectar flow; Your Treasures are unweighable and overflowing in abundance. You are the Farthest of the far, Infinite and Incomparably Beautiful.<br>
  You do whatever You please; You do not take advice from anyone else. In Your Home, creation and destruction happen in an instant.<br>
  No one else is equal to You; Your Light is Immaculate and Pure. Millions of sins are washed away, chanting Your Name, Har, Har.<br>
  Your devotees are at Your Door, God - they are just like You. How can servant Nanak describe them with only one tongue?<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to them. ||2||<br>
  You established all the worlds from within Yourself, and extended them outward. You are All-pervading amongst all, and yet You Yourself remain detached.<br>
  O Lord, there is no end or limit to Your Glorious Virtues; all beings and creatures are Yours. You are the Giver of all, the One Invisible Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 002</h2></center>
  He Himself supports the Universe, revealing His All-powerful Creative Potency. He has no color, form, mouth or beard.<br>
  Your devotees are at Your Door, O God - they are just like You. How can servant Nanak describe them with only one tongue?<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to them. ||3||<br>
  You are the Treasure of all virtue; who can know the value of Your spiritual wisdom and meditation? O God, Your Place is known as the highest of the high.<br>
  Mind, wealth and the breath of life belong to You alone, Lord. The world is strung upon Your Thread. What praises can I give to You? You are the Greatest of the great.<br>
  Who can know Your Mystery? O Unfathomable, Infinite, Divine Lord, Your Power is unstoppable. O God, You are the Support of all.<br>
  Your devotees are at Your Door, O God - they are just like You. How can servant Nanak describe them with only one tongue?<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever a sacrifice to them. ||4||<br>
  O Formless, Formed, Undeceivable, Perfect, Imperishable,<br>
  Blissful, Unlimited, Beautiful, Immaculate, Blossoming Lord:<br>
  Countless are those who sing Your Glorious Praises, but they do not know even a tiny bit of Your extent.<br>
  That humble being upon whom You shower Your Mercy meets with You, O God.<br>
  Blessed, blessed, blessed are those humble beings, upon whom the Lord, Har, Har, showers His Mercy.<br>
  Whoever meets with the Lord through Guru Nanak is rid of both birth and death. ||5||<br>
  The Lord is said to be True, True, True, True, the Truest of the True.<br>
  There is no other like Him. He is the Primal Being, the Primal Soul.<br>
  Chanting the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, the mortal is blessed with all comforts.<br>
  Those who taste it with their tongues, those humble beings are satisfied and fulfilled.<br>
  That person who becomes pleasing to his Lord and Master, loves the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.<br>
  Whoever meets with the Lord through Guru Nanak, saves all his generations. ||6||<br>
  True is His Congregation and His Court. The True Lord has established Truth.<br>
  Sitting upon His Throne of Truth, He administers True Justice.<br>
  The True Lord Himself fashioned the Universe. He is Infallible, and does not make mistakes.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Infinite Lord, is the jewel. Its value cannot be appraised - it is priceless.<br>
  That person, upon whom the Lord of the Universe showers His Mercy obtains all comforts.<br>
  Those who touch the Feet of the Lord through Guru Nanak, do not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation ever again. ||7||<br>
  What is the Yoga, what is the spiritual wisdom and meditation, and what is the way, to praise the Lord?<br>
  The Siddhas and seekers and the three hundred thirty million gods cannot find even a tiny bit of the Lord's Value.<br>
  Neither Brahma, nor Sanak, nor the thousand-headed serpent king can find the limits of His Glorious Virtues.<br>
  The Inapprehensible Lord cannot be apprehended. He is pervading and permeating amongst all.<br>
  Those whom God has mercifully freed from their nooses - those humble beings are attached to His devotional worship.<br>
  Those who meet with the Lord through Guru Nanak are liberated forever, here and hereafter. ||8||<br>
  I am a beggar; I seek the Sanctuary of God, the Giver of givers.<br>
  Please bless me with the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints; grasping them, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Please listen to my prayer, if it pleases You, O my Lord and Master.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 003</h2></center>
  My mind yearns for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. This mind abides in devotional worship.<br>
  The lamp is lit in the darkness; all are saved in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, through the One Name and faith in the Dharma.<br>
  The Lord is revealed in all the worlds. O servant Nanak, the Guru is the Supreme Lord God. ||9||<br>
  Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  This body is frail and transitory, and bound to emotional attachment. I am foolish, stone-hearted, filthy and unwise.<br>
  My mind wanders and wobbles, and will not hold steady. It does not know the state of the Supreme Lord God.<br>
  I am intoxicated with the wine of youth, beauty and the riches of Maya. I wander around perplexed, in excessive egotistical pride.<br>
  The wealth and women of others, arguments and slander, are sweet and dear to my soul.<br>
  I try to hide my deception, but God, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of Hearts, sees and hears all.<br>
  I have no humility, faith, compassion or purity, but I seek Your Sanctuary, O Giver of life.<br>
  The All-powerful Lord is the Cause of causes. O Lord and Master of Nanak, please save me! ||1||<br>
  The Praises of the Creator, the Enticer of the mind, are potent to destroy sins.<br>
  The All-powerful Lord is the boat, to carry us across; He saves all our generations.<br>
  O my unconscious mind, contemplate and remember Him in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. Why are you wandering around, enticed by the darkness of doubt?<br>
  Remember Him in meditation, for an hour, for a moment, even for an instant. Chant the Name of the Lord with your tongue.<br>
  You are bound to worthless deeds and shallow pleasures; why do you spend millions of lifetimes wandering in such pain?<br>
  Chant and vibrate the Name of the Lord, O Nanak, through the Teachings of the Saints. Meditate on the Lord with love in your soul. ||2||<br>
  The little sperm is planted in the body-field of the mother, and the human body, so difficult to obtain, is formed.<br>
  He eats and drinks, and enjoys pleasures; his pains are taken away, and his suffering is gone.<br>
  He is given the understanding to recognize mother, father, siblings and relatives.<br>
  He grows day by day, as the horrible specter of old age comes closer and closer.<br>
  You worthless, petty worm of Maya - remember your Lord and Master, at least for an instant!<br>
  Please take Nanak's hand, O Merciful Ocean of Mercy, and take away this heavy load of doubt. ||3||<br>
  O mind, you are a mouse, living in the mousehole of the body; you are so proud of yourself, but you act like an absolute fool.<br>
  You swing in the swing of wealth, intoxicated with Maya, and you wander around like an owl.<br>
  You take pleasure in your children, spouse, friends and relatives; your emotional attachment to them is increasing.<br>
  You have planted the seeds of egotism, and the sprout of possessiveness has come up. You pass your life making sinful mistakes.<br>
  The cat of death, with his mouth wide-open, is watching you. You eat food, but you are still hungry.<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on the Merciful Lord of the World, O Nanak, in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. Know that the world is just a dream. ||4||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 004</h2></center>
  Neither body, nor house, nor love last forever. You are intoxicated with Maya; how long will you be proud of them?<br>
  Neither crown, nor canopy, nor servants last forever. You do not consider in your heart that your life is passing away.<br>
  Neither chariots, nor horses, nor elephants or royal thrones shall last forever. In an instant, you will have to leave them, and depart naked.<br>
  Neither warrior, nor hero, nor king or ruler last forever; see this with your eyes.<br>
  Neither fortress, nor shelter, nor treasure will save you; doing evil deeds, you shall depart empty-handed.<br>
  Friends, children, spouses and friends - none of them last forever; they change like the shade of a tree.<br>
  God is the Perfect Primal Being, Merciful to the meek; each and every instant, meditate in remembrance on Him, the Inaccessible and Infinite.<br>
  O Great Lord and Master, servant Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; please shower him with Your Mercy, and carry him across. ||5||<br>
  I have used up my breath of life, sold my self-respect, begged for charity, committed highway robbery, and dedicated my consciousness to the love and pursuit of acquiring wealth.<br>
  I have kept it secretly hidden from my friends, relatives, companions, children and siblings.<br>
  I ran around practicing falsehood, burning up my body and growing old.<br>
  I gave up good deeds, righteousness and Dharma, self-discipline, purity, religious vows and all good ways; I associated with the fickle Maya.<br>
  Beasts and birds, trees and mountains - in so many ways, I wandered lost in reincarnation.<br>
  I did not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord, for a moment, or even an instant. He is the Master of the meek, the Lord of all life.<br>
  The food and drink, and the sweet and tasty dishes became totally bitter at the last moment.<br>
  O Nanak, I was saved in the Society of the Saints, at their feet; the others, intoxicated with Maya, have gone, leaving everything behind. ||6||<br>
  Brahma, Shiva, the Vedas and the silent sages sing the Glorious Praises of their Lord and Master with love and delight.<br>
  Indra, Vishnu and Gorakh, who come to earth and then go to heaven again, seek the Lord.<br>
  The Siddhas, human beings, gods and demons cannot find even a tiny bit of His Mystery.<br>
  The Lord's humble servants are imbued with love and affection for God their Beloved; in the delight of devotional worship, they are absorbed in the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.<br>
  But those who forsake Him, and beg from another, shall see their mouths, teeth and tongues wear away.<br>
  O my foolish mind, meditate in remembrance on the Lord, the Giver of peace. Slave Nanak imparts these teachings. ||7||<br>
  The pleasures of Maya shall fade away. In doubt, the mortal falls into the deep dark pit of emotional attachment.<br>
  He is so proud, even the sky cannot contain him. His belly is filled with manure, bones and worms.<br>
  He runs around in the ten directions, for the sake of the great poison of corruption. He steals the wealth of others, and in the end, he is destroyed by his own ignorance.<br>
  His youth passes away, the illnesses of old age seize him, and the Messenger of Death punishes him; such is the death he dies.<br>
  He suffers the agony of hell in countless incarnations; he rots away in the pit of pain and condemnation.<br>
  O Nanak, those whom the Saint mercifully takes as his own, are carried across by their loving devotional worship. ||8||<br>
  All virtues are obtained, all fruits and rewards, and the desires of the mind; my hopes have been totally fulfilled.<br>
  The Medicine, the Mantra, the Magic Charm, will cure all illnesses and totally take away all pain.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 005</h2></center>
  Lust, anger, egotism, jealousy and desire are eliminated by chanting the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The merits of cleansing baths, charity, penance, purity and good deeds, are obtained by enshrining the Lotus Feet of God within the heart.<br>
  The Lord is my Friend, my Very Best Friend, Companion and Relative. God is the Sustenance of the soul, the Support of the breath of life.<br>
  I have grasped the Shelter and Support of my All-powerful Lord and Master; slave Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||9||<br>
  Weapons cannot cut that person who delights in the love of the Lord's Lotus Feet.<br>
  Ropes cannot bind that person whose mind is pierced through by the Vision of the Lord's Way.<br>
  Fire cannot burn that person who is attached to the dust of the feet of the Lord's humble servant.<br>
  Water cannot drown that person whose feet walk on the Lord's Path.<br>
  O Nanak, diseases, faults, sinful mistakes and emotional attachment are pierced by the Arrow of the Name. ||1||10||<br>
  People are engaged in making all sorts of efforts; they contemplate the various aspects of the six Shaastras.<br>
  Rubbing ashes all over their bodies, they wander around at the various sacred shrines of pilgrimage; they fast until their bodies are emaciated, and braid their hair into tangled messes.<br>
  Without devotional worship of the Lord, they all suffer in pain, caught in the tangled web of their love.<br>
  They perform worship ceremonies, draw ritual marks on their bodies, cook their own food fanatically, and make pompous shows of themselves in all sorts of ways. ||2||11||20||<br>
  Swaiyas In Praise Of The First Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meditate single-mindedly on the Primal Lord God, the Bestower of blessings.<br>
  He is the Helper and Support of the Saints, manifest forever.<br>
  Grasp His Feet and enshrine them in your heart.<br>
  Then, let us sing the Glorious Praises of the most exalted Guru Nanak. ||1||<br>
  I sing the Glorious Praises of the most exalted Guru Nanak, the Ocean of peace, the Eradicator of sins, the sacred pool of the Shabad, the Word of God.<br>
  The beings of deep and profound understanding, oceans of wisdom, sing of Him; the Yogis and wandering hermits meditate on Him.<br>
  Indra and devotees like Prahlaad, who know the joy of the soul, sing of Him.<br>
  KAL the poet sings the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success. ||2||<br>
  King Janak and the great Yogic heroes of the Lord's Way, sing the Praises of the All-powerful Primal Being, filled with the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  Sanak and Brahma's sons, the Saadhus and Siddhas, the silent sages and humble servants of the Lord sing the Praises of Guru Nanak, who cannot be deceived by the great deceiver.<br>
  Dhoma the seer and Dhroo, whose realm is unmoving, sing the Glorious Praises of Guru Nanak, who knows the ecstasy of loving devotional worship.<br>
  KAL the poet sings the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Raja Yoga. ||3||<br>
  Kapila and the other Yogis sing of Guru Nanak. He is the Avataar, the Incarnation of the Infinite Lord.<br>
  Parasraam the son of Jamdagan, whose axe and powers were taken away by Raghuvira, sing of Him.<br>
  Udho, Akrur and Bidur sing the Glorious Praises of Guru Nanak, who knows the Lord, the Soul of All.<br>
  KAL the poet sings the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Raja Yoga. ||4||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 006</h2></center>
  The four castes and the six Shaastras sing His Glorious Praises; Brahma and the others contemplate His Virtues.<br>
  The thousand-tongued serpent king sings His Praises with delight, remaining lovingly attached to Him.<br>
  Shiva, detached and beyond desire, sings the Glorious Praises of Guru Nanak, who knows the Lord's endless meditation.<br>
  KAL the poet sings the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Raja Yoga. ||5||<br>
  He mastered Raja Yoga, and enjoys sovereignty over both worlds; the Lord, beyond hate and revenge, is enshrined within His Heart.<br>
  The whole world is saved, and carried across, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Sanak and Janak and the others sing His Praises, age after age.<br>
  Blessed, blessed, blessed and fruitful is the sublime birth of the Guru into the world.<br>
  Even in the nether regions, His Victory is celebrated; so says KAL the poet.<br>
  You are blessed with the Nectar of the Lord's Name, O Guru Nanak; You have mastered Raja Yoga, and enjoy sovereignty over both worlds. ||6||<br>
  In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, You were pleased to deceive Baal the king, in the form of a dwarf.<br>
  In the Silver Age of Traytaa Yuga, You were called Raam of the Raghu dynasty.<br>
  In the Brass Age of Dwaapur Yuga, You were Krishna; You killed Mur the demon and saved Kans.<br>
  You blessed Ugrasain with a kingdom, and You blessed Your humble devotees with fearlessness.<br>
  In the Iron Age, the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, You are known and accepted as Guru Nanak, Guru Angad and Guru Amar Das.<br>
  The sovereign rule of the Great Guru is unchanging and permanent, according the Command of the Primal Lord God. ||7||<br>
  His Glorious Praises are sung by the devotees Ravi Daas, Jai Dayv and Trilochan.<br>
  The devotees Naam Dayv and Kabeer praise Him continually, knowing Him to be even-eyed.<br>
  The devotee Baynee sings His Praises; He intuitively enjoys the ecstasy of the soul.<br>
  He is the Master of Yoga and meditation, and the spiritual wisdom of the Guru; He knows none other except God.<br>
  Sukh Dayv and Preekhyat sing His Praises, and Gautam the rishi sings His Praise.<br>
  Says KAL the poet, the ever-fresh praises of Guru Nanak are spread throughout the world. ||8||<br>
  In the nether worlds, His Praises are sung by the devotees like Shaysh-naag in serpent form.<br>
  Shiva, the Yogis and the wandering hermits sing His Praises forever.<br>
  Vyaas the silent sage, who studied the Vedas and its grammar, sings His Praise.<br>
  His Praises are sung by Brahma, who created the entire universe by God's Command.<br>
  God fills the galaxies and realms of the universe; He is known to be the same, manifest and unmanifest.<br>
  KAL chants the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak, who enjoys mastery of Yoga. ||9||<br>
  The nine masters of Yoga sing His Praises; blessed is the Guru, who is merged into the True Lord.<br>
  Maandhaataa, who called himself ruler of all the world, sings His Praises.<br>
  Bal the king, dwelling in the seventh underworld, sings His Praises.<br>
  Bhart'har, abiding forever with Gorakh, his guru, sings His Praises.<br>
  Doorbaasaa, King Puro and Angra sing the Praises of Guru Nanak.<br>
  Says KAL the poet, the Sublime Praises of Guru Nanak intuitively permeate each and every heart. ||10||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 007</h2></center>
  Swaiyas In Praise Of The Second Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Blessed is the Primal Lord God, the Creator, the All-powerful Cause of causes.<br>
  Blessed is the True Guru Nanak, who placed His hand upon Your forehead.<br>
  When He placed His hand upon Your forehead, then the celestial nectar began to rain down in torrents; the gods and human beings, heavenly heralds and sages were drenched in its fragrance.<br>
  You challenged and subdued the cruel demon of death; You restrained Your wandering mind; You overpowered the five demons and You keep them in one home.<br>
  Through the Guru's Door, the Gurdwara, You have conquered the world; You play the game even-handedly. You keep the flow of your love steady for the Formless Lord.<br>
  O KAL SAHAAR, chant the Praises of Lehnaa throughout the seven continents; He met with the Lord, and became Guru of the World. ||1||<br>
  The Stream of Ambrosial Nectar from His eyes washes away the slime and filth of sins; the sight of His door dispels the darkness of ignorance.<br>
  Whoever accomplishes this most difficult task of contemplating the most sublime Word of the Shabad - those people cross over the terrifying world-ocean, and cast off their loads of sin.<br>
  The Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, is celestial and sublime; whoever remains awake and aware, contemplating the Guru, embodies humility, and is imbued forever with the Supreme Love of the Lord.<br>
  O KAL SAHAAR, chant the Praises of Lehnaa throughout the seven continents; He met with the Lord, and became Guru of the World. ||2||<br>
  You hold tight to the Naam, the Name of the Infinite Lord; Your expanse is immaculate. You are the Support of the Siddhas and seekers, and the good and humble beings.<br>
  You are the incarnation of King Janak; the contemplation of Your Shabad is sublime throughout the universe. You abide in the world like the lotus on the water.<br>
  Like the Elyisan Tree, You cure all illnesses and take away the sufferings of the world. The three-phased soul is lovingly attuned to You alone.<br>
  O KAL SAHAAR, chant the Praises of Lehnaa throughout the seven continents; He met with the Lord, and became Guru of the World. ||3||<br>
  You were blessed with glory by the Prophet; You serve the Guru, certified by the Lord, who has subdued the snake of the mind, and who abides in the state of sublime bliss.<br>
  Your Vision is like that of the Lord, Your soul is a fount of spiritual wisdom; You know the unfathomable state of the certified Guru.<br>
  Your Gaze is focused upon the unmoving, unchanging place. Your Intellect is immaculate; it is focused upon the most sublime place. Wearing the armor of humility, you have overcome Maya.<br>
  O KAL SAKAAR, chant the Praises of Lehnaa throughout the seven continents; He met with the Lord, and became Guru of the World. ||4||<br>
  Casting Your Glance of Grace, you dispel the darkness, burn away evil, and destroy sin.<br>
  You are the Heroic Warrior of the Shabad, the Word of God. Your Power destroys sexual desire and anger.<br>
  You have overpowered greed and emotional attachment; You nurture and cherish those who seek Your Sanctuary.<br>
  You gather in the joyful love of the soul; Your Words have the Potency to bring forth Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  You are appointed the True Guru, the True Guru in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; whoever is truly attached to You is carried across.<br>
  The lion, the son of Pheru, is Guru Angad, the Guru of the World; Lehnaa practices Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success. ||5||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 008</h2></center>
  Your mind remains lovingly attuned to the Lord forever; You do whatever you desire.<br>
  Like the tree heavy with fruit, You bow in humility, and endure the pain of it; You are pure of thought.<br>
  You realize this reality, that the Lord is All-pervading, Unseen and Amazing.<br>
  With intuitive ease, You send forth the rays of the Ambrosial Word of power.<br>
  You have risen to the state of the certified Guru; you grasp truth and contentment.<br>
  KAL proclaims, that whoever attains the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of Lehnaa, meets with the Lord. ||6||<br>
  My mind has faith, that the Prophet has given You access to the Profound Lord.<br>
  Your body has been purged of the deadly poison; You drink the Ambrosial Nectar deep within.<br>
  Your Heart has blossomed forth in awareness of the Unseen Lord, who has infused His Power throughout the ages.<br>
  O True Guru, You are intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi, with continuity and equality.<br>
  You are open-minded and large-hearted, the Destroyer of poverty; seeing You, sins are afraid.<br>
  Says KAL, I lovingly, continually, intuitively chant the Praises of Lehnaa with my tongue. ||7||<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is our medicine; the Naam is our support; the Naam is the peace of Samaadhi. The Naam is the insignia which embellishes us forever.<br>
  KAL is imbued with the Love of the Naam, the Naam which is the fragrance of gods and human beings.<br>
  Whoever obtains the Naam, the Philosopher's Stone, becomes the embodiment of Truth, manifest and radiant throughout the world.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, it is as if one has bathed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||8||<br>
  The True Name is the sacred shrine, the True Name is the cleansing bath of purification and food. The True Name is eternal love; chant the True Name, and be embellished.<br>
  The True Name is obtained through the Word of the Guru's Shabad; the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, is fragrant with the True Name.<br>
  KAL the poet utters the Praises of the one whose self-discipline is the True Name, and whose fast is the True Name.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, one's life is approved and certified in the True Name. ||9||<br>
  When You bestow Your Ambrosial Glance of Grace, You eradicate all wickedness, sin and filth.<br>
  Sexual desire, anger, greed and emotional attachment - You have overcome all these powerful passions.<br>
  Your mind is filled with peace forever; You banish the sufferings of the world.<br>
  The Guru is the river of the nine treasures, washing off the dirt of our lives.<br>
  So speaks TAL the poet: serve the Guru, day and night, with intuitive love and affection.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of the Guru, the pains of death and rebirth are taken away. ||10||<br>
  Swaiyas In Praise Of The Third Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Dwell upon that Primal Being, the True Lord God; in this world, His One Name is Undeceivable.<br>
  He carries His devotees across the terrifying world-ocean; meditate in remembrance on His Naam, Supreme and Sublime.<br>
  Nanak delighted in the Naam; He established Lehnaa as Guru, who was imbued with all supernatural spiritual powers.<br>
  So speaks KALL the poet: the glory of the wise, sublime and humble Amar Daas is spread throughout the world.<br>
  His Praises radiate throughout the world, like the rays of the sun, and the branches of the maulsar (fragrant) tree.<br>
  In the north, south, east and west, people proclaim Your Victory.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 009</h2></center>
  The Guru spoke the Lord's Name with His mouth and broadcast it throughout the world, to turn the tide of the hearts of men.<br>
  That Undeceivable Naam, which carries the devotees across the world-ocean, came into Guru Amar Daas. ||1||<br>
  The gods and heavenly heralds, the Siddhas and seekers and Shiva in Samaadhi meditate in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  The stars and the realms of Dhroo, and devotees like Naaraad and Prahlaad meditate on the Naam.<br>
  The moon and the sun long for the Naam; it has saved even mountain ranges.<br>
  That Undeceivable Naam, which carries the devotees across the world-ocean, came into Guru Amar Daas. ||2||<br>
  Dwelling upon that Immaculate Naam, the nine Yogic masters, Shiva and Sanak and many others have been emancipated.<br>
  The eighty-four Siddhas, the beings of supernatural spiritual powers, and the Buddhas are imbued with the Naam; it carried Ambreek across the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  It has erased the sins of Oodho, Akroor, Trilochan, Naam Dayv and Kabeer, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.<br>
  That Undeceivable Naam, which carries the devotees across the world-ocean, came into Guru Amar Daas. ||3||<br>
  The three hundred thirty million angels meditate, attached to the Naam; it is enshrined within the minds of the celibates and ascetics.<br>
  Bhisham Pitama, the son of the Ganges, meditated on that Naam; his consciousness delighted in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Feet.<br>
  The great and profound Guru has brought forth the Naam; accepting the teachings as true, the Holy Congregation has been saved.<br>
  That Undeceivable Naam, which carries the devotees across the world-ocean, came into Guru Amar Daas. ||4||<br>
  The Glory of the Naam shines forth, like the rays of the sun, and the branches of the Elysian Tree.<br>
  In the countries of the north, south, east and west, the Praises of the Naam are chanted.<br>
  Life is fruitful, when the Name of the Lord abides in the heart.<br>
  The angelic beings, heavenly heralds, celestial singers and the six Shaastras yearn for the Naam.<br>
  The son of Tayj Bhaan of the Bhalla dynasty is noble and famous; with his palms pressed together, KALL meditates on Him.<br>
  The Naam takes away the fears of the devotees about the word-ocean; Guru Amar Daas has obtained it. ||5||<br>
  The thirty-one million gods meditate on the Naam, along with the Siddhas and seekers; the Naam supports solar systems and galaxies.<br>
  One who meditates on the Naam in Samaadhi, endures sorrow and joy as one and the same.<br>
  The Naam is the most sublime of all; the devotees remain lovingly attuned to it.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas was blessed with the treasure of the Naam, by the Creator Lord, in His Pleasure. ||6||<br>
  He is the Warrior Hero of Truth, humility is His Power. His Loving Nature inspires the Congregation with deep and profound understanding; He is absorbed in the Lord, free of hate and vengeance.<br>
  Patience has been His white banner since the beginning of time, planted on the bridge to heaven.<br>
  The Saints meet their Beloved Guru, who is united with the Creator Lord.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, they find peace; Guru Amar Daas has given them this ability. ||7||<br>
  The Naam is His cleansing bath; the Naam is the food He eats; the Naam is the taste He enjoys. With deep yearning, He chants the Sweet Bani of the Guru's Word forever.<br>
  Blessed is service to the True Guru; by His Grace, the State of the Unfathomable Lord is known.<br>
  All Your generations are totally saved; You dwell in the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 010</h2></center>
  So speaks KALL: fruitful is the life of one who meets with Guru Amar Daas, radiant with the Light of God. ||8||<br>
  On His right hand is the sign of the lotus; the Siddhis, the supernatural spiritual powers, await His Command.<br>
  On His left are worldly powers, which fascinate the three worlds.<br>
  The Inexpressible Lord abides in His Heart; He alone knows this joy.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas utters the words of devotion, imbued with the Love of the Lord.<br>
  On His forehead is the true insignia of the Lord's Mercy; with his palms pressed together, KALL meditates on Him.<br>
  Whoever meets with the Guru, the certified True Guru, has all his desires fulfilled. ||9||<br>
  Supremely fruitful are the feet which walk upon the path of Guru Amar Daas.<br>
  Supremely fruitful are the hands which touch the feet of Guru Amar Daas.<br>
  Supremely fruitful is the tongue which utters the praises of Guru Amar Daas.<br>
  Supremely fruitful are the eyes which behold Guru Amar Daas.<br>
  Supremely fruitful are the ears which hear the Praises of Guru Amar Daas.<br>
  Fruitful is the heart in which Guru Amar Daas, the Father of the world, Himself abides.<br>
  Fruitful is the head, says JAALAP, which bows forever before Guru Amar Daas. ||1||10||<br>
  They do not suffer pain or hunger, and they cannot be called poor.<br>
  They do not grieve, and their limits cannot be found.<br>
  They do not serve anyone else, but they give gifts to hundreds and thousands.<br>
  They sit on beautiful carpets; they establish and disestablish at will.<br>
  They find peace in this world, and live fearlessly amidst their enemies.<br>
  They are fruitful and prosperous, says JAALAP. Guru Amar Daas is pleased with them. ||2||11||<br>
  You read about the One Lord, and enshrine Him in Your mind; You realize the One and Only Lord.<br>
  With Your eyes and the words You speak, You dwell upon the One Lord; You do not know any other place of rest.<br>
  You know the One Lord while dreaming, and the One Lord while awake. You are absorbed in the One.<br>
  At the age of seventy-one, You began to march towards the Indestructible Lord.<br>
  The One Lord, who takes hundreds of thousands of forms, cannot be seen. He can only be described as One.<br>
  So speaks JAALAP: O Guru Amar Daas, You long for the One Lord, and believe in the One Lord alone. ||3||12||<br>
  The understanding which Jai Dayv grasped, the understanding which permeated Naam Dayv,<br>
  the understanding which was in the consciousness of Trilochan and known by the devotee Kabeer,<br>
  by which Rukmaangad constantly meditated on the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny,<br>
  which brought Ambreek and Prahlaad to seek the Sanctuary of the Lord of the Universe, and which brought them to salvation<br>
  -says JALL that sublime understanding has brought You to renounce greed, anger and desire, and to know the way.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas is the Lord's own devotee; gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, one is liberated. ||4||13||<br>
  Meeting with Guru Amar Daas, the earth is purged of its sin.<br>
  The Siddhas and seekers long to meet with Guru Amar Daas.<br>
  Meeting with Guru Amar Daas, the mortal meditates on the Lord, and his journey comes to its end.<br>
  Meeting with Guru Amar Daas, the Fearless Lord is obtained, and the cycle of reincarnation is brought to an end.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 011</h2></center>
  Realizing the One Lord, love of duality ceases, and one comes to accept the Sublime Mantra of the Guru.<br>
  So speaks JAALAP: countless treasures are obtained, by the sight of Guru Amar Daas. ||5||14||<br>
  Guru Nanak gathered up the True Name of the Creator Lord, and implanted it within.<br>
  Through Him, Lehnaa became manifest in the form of Guru Angad, who remained lovingly attuned to His Feet.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas of that dynasty is the home of hope. How can I express His Glorious Virtues?<br>
  His Virtues are unknowable and unfathomable. I do not know the limits of His Virtues.<br>
  The Creator, the Architect of Destiny, has made Him a boat to carry all His generations across, along with the Sangat, the Holy Congregation.<br>
  So speaks KEERAT: O Guru Amar Daas, please protect me and save me; I seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet. ||1||15||<br>
  The Lord Himself wielded His Power and entered the world.<br>
  The Formless Lord took form, and with His Light He illuminated the realms of the world.<br>
  He is All-pervading everywhere; the Lamp of the Shabad, the Word, has been lit.<br>
  Whoever gathers in the essence of the teachings shall be absorbed in the Feet of the Lord.<br>
  Lehnaa, who became Guru Angad, and Guru Amar Daas, have been reincarnated into the pure house of Guru Nanak.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas is our Saving Grace, who carries us across; in lifetime after lifetime, I seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet. ||2||16||<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, the Gursikh is blessed with chanting and deep meditation, truth and contentment.<br>
  Whoever seeks His Sanctuary is saved; his account is cleared in the City of Death.<br>
  His heart is totally filled with loving devotion; he chants to the Creator Lord.<br>
  The Guru is the river of pearls; in an instant, he carries the drowning ones across.<br>
  He was reincarnated into the House of Guru Nanak; He chants the Glorious Praises of the Creator Lord.<br>
  Those who serve Guru Amar Daas - their pains and poverty are taken away, far away. ||3||17||<br>
  I consciously pray within my consciousness, but I cannot express it in words.<br>
  I place all my worries and anxieties before You; I look to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, for help.<br>
  By the Hukam of Your Command, I am blessed with Your Insignia; I serve my Lord and Master.<br>
  When You, O Guru, gaze at me with Your Glance of Grace, the fruit of the Naam, the Name of the Creator, is placed within my mouth.<br>
  The Unfathomable and Unseen Primal Lord God, the Cause of causes - as He orders, so do I speak.<br>
  O Guru Amar Daas, Doer of deeds, Cause of causes, as You keep me, I remain; as You protect me, I survive. ||4||18||<br>
  OF BHIKHAA:<br>
  In deep meditation, and the spiritual wisdom of the Guru, one's essence merges with the essence of reality.<br>
  In truth, the True Lord is recognized and realized, when one is lovingly attuned to Him, with one-pointed consciousness.<br>
  Lust and anger are brought under control, when the breath does not fly around, wandering restlessly.<br>
  Dwelling in the land of the Formless Lord, realizing the Hukam of His Command, His contemplative wisdom is attained.<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Guru is the Form of the Creator, the Primal Lord God; he alone knows, who has tried it.<br>
  So speaks BHIKHAA: I have met the Guru. With love and intuitive affection, He has bestowed the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1||19||<br>
  I have been searching for the Saints; I have seen so many Holy and spiritual people.<br>
  The hermits, Sannyaasees, ascetics, penitents, fanatics and Pandits all speak sweetly.<br>
  I wandered around lost for a year, but no one touched my soul.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 012</h2></center>
  I listened to preachers and teachers, but I could not be happy with their lifestyles.<br>
  Those who have abandoned the Lord's Name, and become attached to duality - why should I speak in praise of them?<br>
  So speaks BHIKHAA: the Lord has led me to meet the Guru. As You keep me, I remain; as You protect me, I survive. ||2||20||<br>
  Wearing the armor of Samaadhi, the Guru has mounted the saddled horse of spiritual wisdom.<br>
  Holding the bow of Dharma in His Hands, He has shot the arrows of devotion and humility.<br>
  He is fearless in the Fear of the Eternal Lord God; He has thrust the spear of the Word of the Guru's Shabad into the mind.<br>
  He has cut down the five demons of unfulfilled sexual desire, unresolved anger, unsatisfied greed, emotional attachment and self-conceit.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas, the son of Tayj Bhaan, of the noble Bhalla dynasty, blessed by Guru Nanak, is the Master of kings.<br>
  SALL speaks the truth; O Guru Amar Daas, you have conquered the army of evil, fighting the battle this way. ||1||21||<br>
  The raindrops of the clouds, the plants of the earth, and the flowers of the spring cannot be counted.<br>
  Who can know the limits of the rays of the sun and the moon, the waves of the ocean and the Ganges?<br>
  With Shiva's meditation and the spiritual wisdom of the True Guru, says BHALL the poet, these may be counted.<br>
  O Guru Amar Daas, Your Glorious Virtues are so sublime; Your Praises belong only to You. ||1||22||<br>
  Swaiyas In Praise Of The Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meditate single-mindedly on the Immaculate Primal Lord God.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever.<br>
  Singing His Praises, the mind blossoms forth in ecstasy.<br>
  The True Guru fulfills the hopes of His humble servant.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, the supreme status is obtained.<br>
  Meditate on the Imperishable, Formless Lord God.<br>
  Meeting with Him, one escapes poverty.<br>
  KAL SAHAAR chants His Glorious Praises.<br>
  I chant the pure praises of that humble being who has been blessed with the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  He served the True Guru and was blessed with the sublime essence of the Shabad, the Word of God. The Immaculate Naam has been enshrined in his heart.<br>
  He enjoys and savors the Lord's Name, and purchases the Glorious Virtues of the Lord of the Universe. He seeks the essence of reality; he is the Fountain of even-handed justice.<br>
  So speaks KALL the poet: Guru Raam Daas, the son of Har Daas, fills the empty pools to overflowing. ||1||<br>
  The stream of ambrosial nectar flows and the immortal status is obtained; the pool is forever overflowing with Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  Those Saints who have served the Lord in the past drink in this Nectar, and bathe their minds in it.<br>
  God takes their fears away, and blesses them with the state of fearless dignity. Through the Word of His Shabad, He has saved them.<br>
  So speaks KALL the poet: Guru Raam Daas, the son of Har Daas, fills the empty pools to overflowing. ||2||<br>
  The True Guru's understanding is deep and profound. The Sat Sangat is His Pure Congregation. His Soul is drenched in the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love.<br>
  The Lotus of His mind remains awake and aware, illuminated with intuitive wisdom. In His own home, He has obtained the Fearless, Immaculate Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 013</h2></center>
  The Merciful True Guru has implanted the Lord's Name within me, and by His Grace, I have overpowered the five thieves.<br>
  So speaks KALL the poet: Guru Raam Daas, the son of Har Daas, fills the empty pools to overflowing. ||3||<br>
  With intuitive detachment, He is lovingly attuned to the Fearless, Unmanifest Lord; He met with Guru Amar Daas, the Philosopher's Stone, within his own home.<br>
  By the Grace of the True Guru, He attained the supreme status; He is overflowing with the treasures of loving devotion.<br>
  He was released from reincarnation, and the fear of death was taken away. His consciousness is attached to the Lord, the Ocean of contentment.<br>
  So speaks KALL the poet: Guru Raam Daas, the son of Har Daas, fills the empty pools to overflowing. ||4||<br>
  He fills the empty to overflowing; He has enshrined the Infinite within His heart.<br>
  Within His mind, He contemplates the essence of reality, the Destroyer of pain, the Enlightener of the soul.<br>
  He yearns for the Lord's Love forever; He Himself knows the sublime essence of this Love.<br>
  By the Grace of the True Guru, He intuitively enjoys this Love.<br>
  By the Grace of Guru Nanak, and the sublime teachings of Guru Angad, Guru Amar Daas broadcast the Lord's Command.<br>
  So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You have attained the status of eternal and imperishable dignity. ||5||<br>
  You abide in the pool of contentment; Your tongue reveals the Ambrosial Essence.<br>
  Meeting with You, a tranquil peace wells up, and sins run far away.<br>
  You have attained the Ocean of peace, and You never grow tired on the Lord's path.<br>
  The armor of self-restraint, truth, contentment and humility can never be pierced.<br>
  The Creator Lord certified the True Guru, and now the world blows the trumpet of His Praises.<br>
  So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You have attained the state of fearless immortality. ||6||<br>
  O certified True Guru, You have conquered the world; You meditate single-mindedly on the One Lord.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is Guru Amar Daas, the True Guru, who implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, deep within.<br>
  The Naam is the wealth of the nine treasures; prosperity and supernatural spiritual powers are His slaves.<br>
  He is blessed with the ocean of intuitive wisdom; He has met with the Imperishable Lord God.<br>
  The Guru has implanted the Naam deep within; attached to the Naam, the devotees have been carried across since ancient times.<br>
  So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You have obtained the wealth of the Lord's Love. ||7||<br>
  The flow of loving devotion and primal love does not stop.<br>
  The True Guru drinks in the stream of nectar, the sublime essence of the Shabad, the Infinite Word of God.<br>
  Wisdom is His mother, and contentment is His father; He is absorbed in the ocean of intuitive peace and poise.<br>
  The Guru is the Embodiment of the Unborn, Self-illumined Lord; by the Word of His Teachings, the Guru carries the world across.<br>
  Within His mind, the Guru has enshrined the Shabad, the Word of the Unseen, Unfathomable, Infinite Lord.<br>
  So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You have attained the Lord, the Saving Grace of the world. ||8||<br>
  The Saving Grace of the world, the nine treasures, carries the devotees across the world-ocean.<br>
  The Drop of Ambrosial Nectar, the Lord's Name, is the antidote to the poison of sin.<br>
  The tree of intuitive peace and poise blossoms and bears the ambrosial fruit of spiritual wisdom.<br>
  Blessed are those fortunate people who receive it, by Guru's Grace.<br>
  They are liberated through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru; their minds are filled with the Guru's Wisdom.<br>
  So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You beat the drum of the Shabad. ||9||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 014</h2></center>
  On the bed of faith, with the blankets of intuitive peace and poise and the canopy of contentment, You are embellished forever with the armor of humility.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you practice the Naam; You lean on its Support, and give Your Fragrance to Your companions.<br>
  You abide with the Unborn Lord, the Good and Pure True Guru.<br>
  So speaks KALL: O Guru Raam Daas, You abide in the sacred pool of intuitive peace and poise. ||10||<br>
  The Lord's Name abides in the hearts of those who are pleasing to the Guru.<br>
  Sins run far away from those who are pleasing to the Guru.<br>
  Those who are pleasing to the Guru eradicate pride and egotism from within.<br>
  Those who are pleasing to the Guru are attached to the Shadad, the Word of God; they are carried across the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  Those who are blessed with the wisdom of the certified Guru - blessed and fruitful is their birth into the world.<br>
  KALL the poet runs to the Sanctuary of the Great Guru; attached to the Guru, they are blessed with worldly enjoyments, liberation and everything. ||11||<br>
  The Guru has pitched the tent; under it, all the ages are gathered.<br>
  He carries the spear of intuition, and takes the Support of Naam, the Name of the Lord, through which the devotees are fulfilled.<br>
  Guru Nanak, Guru Angad and Guru Amar Daas, through devotional worship, have merged into the Lord.<br>
  O Guru Raam Daas, You alone know the taste of this Raja Yoga. ||12||<br>
  He alone is enlightened like Janaka, who links the chariot of his mind to the state of ecstatic realization.<br>
  He gathers in truth and contentment, and fills up the empty pool within.<br>
  He speaks the Unspoken Speech of the eternal city. He alone obtains it, unto whom God gives it.<br>
  O Guru Raam Daas, Your sovereign rule, like that of Janak, is Yours alone. ||13||<br>
  Tell me, how can sin and suffering cling to that humble being who chants the Naam, given by the Guru, with single-minded love and firm faith?<br>
  When the Lord, the Boat to carry us across, bestows His Glance of Grace, even for an instant, the mortal contemplates the Shabad within his heart; unfulfilled sexual desire and unresolved anger are eradicated.<br>
  The Guru is the Giver to all beings; He speaks the spiritual wisdom of the Unfathomable Lord, and meditates on Him day and night. He never sleeps, even for an instant.<br>
  Seeing Him, poverty vanishes, and one is blessed with the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. The spiritual wisdom of the Guru's Word washes away the filth of evil-mindedness.<br>
  Tell me, how can sin and suffering cling to that humble being who chants the Naam, given by the Guru, with single-minded love and firm faith? ||1||<br>
  Dharmic faith and the karma of good deeds are obtained from the Perfect True Guru.<br>
  The Siddhas and Holy Saadhus, the silent sages and angelic beings, yearn to serve Him; through the most excellent Word of the Shabad, they are lovingly attuned to the One Lord.<br>
  Who can know Your limits? You are the Embodiment of the Fearless, Formless Lord. You are the Speaker of the Unspoken Speech; You alone understand this.<br>
  O foolish worldly mortal, you are deluded by doubt; give up birth and death, and you shall not be punished by the Messenger of Death. Meditate on the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  You foolish mortal being, reflect on this in your mind; chant and meditate day and night. Dharmic faith and the karma of good deeds are obtained from the Perfect True Guru. ||2||<br>
  I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, to the True Name, O my True Guru.<br>
  What Praises can I offer to You? What service can I do for You? I have only one mouth and tongue; with my palms pressed together, I chant to You with joy and delight.<br>
  In thought, word and deed, I know the Lord; I do not worship any other. The Guru has enshrined the most excellent Name of the Infinite Lord within my heart.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 015</h2></center>
  So speaks NALL the poet: touching the Philosopher's Stone, glass is transformed into gold, and the sandalwood tree imparts its fragrance to other trees; meditating in remembrance on the Lord, I am transformed.<br>
  Seeing His Door, I am rid of sexual desire and anger. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, to the True Name, O my True Guru. ||3||<br>
  Guru Raam Daas was blessed with the Throne of Raja Yoga.<br>
  First, Guru Nanak illuminated the world, like the full moon, and filled it with bliss. To carry humanity across, He bestowed His Radiance.<br>
  He blessed Guru Angad with the treasure of spiritual wisdom, and the Unspoken Speech; He overcame the five demons and the fear of the Messenger of Death.<br>
  The Great and True Guru, Guru Amar Daas, has preserved honor in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. Seeing His Lotus Feet, sin and evil are destroyed.<br>
  When His mind was totally satisfied in every way, when He was totally pleased, He bestowed upon Guru Raam Daas the Throne of Raja Yoga. ||4||<br>
  RADD:<br>
  He established the earth, the sky and the air, the water of the oceans, fire and food.<br>
  He created the moon, the starts and the sun, night and day and mountains; he blessed the trees with flowers and fruits.<br>
  He created the gods, human beings and the seven seas; He established the three worlds.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas was blessed with the Light of the One Name, the True Name of the Lord. ||1||5||<br>
  Glass is transformed into gold, listening to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Poison is transformed into ambrosial nectar, speaking the Name of the True Guru.<br>
  Iron is transformed into jewels, when the True Guru bestows His Glance of Grace.<br>
  Stones are transformed into emeralds, when the mortal chants and contemplates the spiritual wisdom of the Guru.<br>
  The True Guru transforms ordinary wood into sandalwood, eradicating the pains of poverty.<br>
  Whoever touches the Feet of the True Guru, is transformed from a beast and a ghost into an angelic being. ||2||6||<br>
  One who has the Guru on his side - how could he be proud of his wealth?<br>
  One who has the Guru on his side - what would hundreds of thousands of supporters do for him?<br>
  One who has the Guru on his side, does not depend on anyone else for spiritual wisdom and meditation.<br>
  One who has the Guru on his side contemplates the Shabad and the Teachings, and abides in the Home of Truth.<br>
  The Lord's humble slave and poet utters this prayer: whoever chants to the Guru night and day,<br>
  whoever enshrines the Name of the Guru within his heart, is rid of both birth and death. ||3||7||<br>
  Without the Guru, there is utter darkness; without the Guru, understanding does not come.<br>
  Without the Guru, there is no intuitive awareness or success; without the Guru, there is no liberation.<br>
  So make Him your Guru, and contemplate the Truth; make Him your Guru, O my mind.<br>
  Make Him your Guru, who is embellished and exalted in the Word of the Shabad; all your sins shall be washed away.<br>
  So speaks NALL the poet: with your eyes, make Him your Guru; with the words you speak, make Him your Guru, your True Guru.<br>
  Those who have not seen the Guru, who have not made Him their Guru, are useless in this world. ||4||8||<br>
  Dwell upon the Guru, the Guru, the Guru, O my mind.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 016</h2></center>
  The All-powerful Guru is the Boat to carry us across in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. Hearing the Word of His Shabad, we are transported into Samaadhi.<br>
  He is the Spiritual Hero who destroys pain and brings peace. Whoever meditates on Him, dwells near Him.<br>
  He is the Perfect Primal Being, who meditates in remembrance on the Lord within his heart; seeing His Face, sins run away.<br>
  If you long for wisdom, wealth, spiritual perfection and properity, O my mind, dwell upon the Guru, the Guru, the Guru. ||5||9||<br>
  Gazing upon the Face of the Guru, I find peace.<br>
  I was thirsty, yearning to drink in the Nectar; to fulfill that wish, the Guru laid out the way.<br>
  My mind has become perfect; it dwells in the Lord's Place; it had been wandering in all directions, in its desire for tastes and pleasures.<br>
  Goindwal is the City of God, built on the bank of the Beas River.<br>
  The pains of so many years have been taken away; gazing upon the Face of the Guru, I find peace. ||6||10||<br>
  The All-powerful Guru placed His hand upon my head.<br>
  The Guru was kind, and blessed me with the Lord's Name. Gazing upon His Feet, my sins were dispelled.<br>
  Night and day, the Guru meditates on the One Lord; hearing His Name, the Messenger of Death is scared away.<br>
  So speaks the Lord's slave: Guru Raam Daas placed His Faith in Guru Amar Daas, the Guru of the World; touching the Philosopher's Stone, He was transformed into the Philosopher's Stone.<br>
  Guru Raam Daas recognized the Lord as True; the All-powerful Guru placed His hand upon His head. ||7||11||<br>
  Now, please preserve the honor of Your humble slave.<br>
  God saved the honor of the devotee Prahlaad, when Harnaakhash tore him apart with his claws.<br>
  And the Dear Lord God saved the honor of Dropadi; when her clothes were stripped from her, she was blessed with even more.<br>
  Sudaamaa was saved from misfortune; and Ganikaa the prostitute - when she chanted Your Name, her affairs were perfectly resolved.<br>
  O Great True Guru, if it pleases You, please save the honor of Your slave in this Dark Age of kali Yuga. ||8||12||<br>
  JHOLNAA:<br>
  Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, O mortal beings.<br>
  Chant the Shabad, the Word of the Lord, Har, Har; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, brings the nine treasures. With your tongue, taste it, day and night, and know it as true.<br>
  Then, you shall obtain His Love and Affection; become Gurmukh, and meditate on Him. Give up all other ways; vibrate and meditate on Him, O spiritual people.<br>
  Enshrine the Word of the Guru's Teachings within your heart, and overpower the five passions. Your life, and your generations, shall be saved, and you shall be honored at the Lord's Door.<br>
  If you desire all the peace and comforts of this world and the next, then chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, O mortal beings. ||1||13||<br>
  Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, and know Him as true.<br>
  Know that the Lord is the Treasure of Excellence. Enshrine Him in your mind, and meditate on Him. Enshrine the Word of the Guru's Teachings within your heart.<br>
  Then, cleanse yourself in the Immaculate and Unfathomable Water of the Guru; O Gursikhs and Saints, cross over the Ocean of Love of the True Name.<br>
  Meditate lovingly forever on the Lord, free of hate and vengeance, Formless and Fearless; lovingly savor the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and implant devotional worship of the Lord deep within.<br>
  O foolish mind, give up your doubts; as Gurmukh, vibrate and meditate on the Naam. Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, and know Him as true. ||2||14||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 017</h2></center>
  Chant Guru, Guru, Guru; through the Guru, the Lord is obtained.<br>
  The Guru is an Ocean, deep and profound, infinite and unfathomable. Lovingly attuned to the Lord's Name, you shall be blessed with jewels, diamonds and emeralds.<br>
  And, the Guru makes us fragrant and fruitful, and His Touch transforms us into gold. The filth of evil-mindedness is washed away, meditating on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  The Stream of Ambrosial Nectar flows constantly from His Door. The Saints and Sikhs bathe in the immaculate pool of the Guru's spiritual wisdom.<br>
  Enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within your heart, and dwell in Nirvaanaa. Chant Guru, Guru, Guru; through the Guru, the Lord is obtained. ||3||15||<br>
  Chant Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, O my mind.<br>
  Serving Him, Shiva and the Siddhas, the angels and demons and servants of the gods, and the thrity-three million gods cross over, listening to the Word of the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  And, the Saints and loving devotees are carried across, chanting Guru, Guru. Prahlaad and the silent sages met the Guru, and were carried across.<br>
  Naarad and Sanak and those men of God who became Gurmukh were carried across; attached to the One Name, they abandoned other tastes and pleasures, and were carried across.<br>
  This is the prayer of the Lord's humble slave: the Gurmukh obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord, chanting Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, Guru, O my mind. ||4||16||29||<br>
  The Great, Supreme Guru showered His Mercy upon all;<br>
  in the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, He blessed Dhroo.<br>
  He saved the devotee Prahlaad,<br>
  placing the Lotus of His Hand upon his forehead.<br>
  The Unseen Form of the Lord cannot be seen.<br>
  The Siddhas and seekers all seek His Sanctuary.<br>
  True are the Words of the Guru's teachings. Enshrine them in your soul.<br>
  Emancipate your body, and redeem this human incarnation.<br>
  The Guru is the Boat, and the Guru is the Boatman. Without the Guru, no one can cross over.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, God is obtained. Without the Guru, no one is liberated.<br>
  Guru Nanak dwells near the Creator Lord.<br>
  He established Lehnaa as Guru, and enshrined His Light in the world.<br>
  Lehnaa established the path of righteousness and Dharma,<br>
  which He passed on to Guru Amar Daas, of the Bhalla dynasty.<br>
  Then, He firmly established the Great Raam Daas of the Sodhi dynasty.<br>
  He was blessed with the inexhaustible treasure of the Lord's Name.<br>
  He was blessed with the treasure of the Lord's Name; throughout the four ages, it is inexhaustible. Serving the Guru, He received His reward.<br>
  Those who bow at His Feet and seek His Sanctuary, are blessed with peace; those Gurmukhs are blessed with supreme bliss.<br>
  The Guru's Body is the Embodiment of the Supreme Lord God, our Lord and Master, the Form of the Primal Being, who nourishes and cherishes all.<br>
  So serve the Guru, the True Guru; His ways and means are inscrutable. The Great Guru Raam Daas is the Boat to carry us across. ||1||<br>
  The Holy people chant the Ambrosial Words of His Bani with delight in their minds.<br>
  The Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan is fruitful and rewarding in this world; it brings lasting bliss and joy.<br>
  The Guru's Darshan is fruitful and rewarding in this world, like the Ganges. Meeting Him, the supreme sacred status is obtained.<br>
  Even sinful people conquer the realm of Death, if they become the Lord's humble servants, and are imbued with the Guru's spiritual wisdom.<br>
  He is certified, like the handsome Ram Chander in the house of Dasrath of the Raghwa dynasty. Even the silent sages seek His Sanctuary.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 018</h2></center>
  So serve the Guru, the True Guru; His ways and means are inscrutable. The Great Guru Raam Daas is the Boat to carry us across. ||2||<br>
  The Name of the Lord, from the Mouth of the Guru, is the Raft to cross over the unfathomable world-ocean.<br>
  The cycle of birth and death in this world is ended for those who have this faith in their hearts.<br>
  Those humble beings who have this faith in their hearts, are awarded the highest status.<br>
  They forsake Maya, emotional attachment and greed; they are rid of the frustrations of possessiveness, sexual desire and anger.<br>
  They are blessed with the Inner Vision to see God, the Cause of causes, and all their doubts are dispelled.<br>
  So serve the Guru, the True Guru; His ways and means are inscrutable. The Great Guru Raam Daas is the Boat to carry us across. ||3||<br>
  The Glorious Greatness of the Guru is manifest forever in each and every heart. His humble servants sing His Praises.<br>
  Some read and listen and sing of Him, taking their cleansing bath in the early hours of the morning before the dawn.<br>
  After their cleansing bath in the hours before the dawn, they worship the Guru with their minds pure and clear.<br>
  Touching the Philosopher's Stone, their bodies are transformed into gold. They focus their meditation on the Embodiment of Divine Light.<br>
  The Master of the Universe, the very Life of the World pervades the sea and the land, manifesting Himself in myriads of ways.<br>
  So serve the Guru, the True Guru; His ways and means are inscrutable. The Great Guru Raam Daas is the Boat to carry us across. ||4||<br>
  Those who realize the Eternal, Unchanging Word of God, like Dhroo, are immune to death.<br>
  They cross over the terrifying world-ocean in an instant; the Lord created the world like a bubble of water.<br>
  The Kundalini rises in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; through the Word of the Guru, they enjoy the Lord of Supreme Bliss.<br>
  The Supreme Guru is the Lord and Master over all; so serve the True Guru, in thought, word and deed. ||5||<br>
  Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Jee-o.<br>
  You are lotus-eyed, with sweet speech, exalted and embellished with millions of companions. Mother Yashoda invited You as Krishna to eat the sweet rice.<br>
  Gazing upon Your supremely beautiful form, and hearing the musical sounds of Your silver bells tinkling, she was intoxicated with delight.<br>
  Death's pen and command are in Your hands. Tell me, who can erase it? Shiva and Brahma yearn to enshrine Your spiritual wisdom in their hearts.<br>
  You are forever True, the Home of Excellence, the Primal Supreme Being. Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Jee-o. ||1||6||<br>
  You are blessed with the Lord's Name, the supreme mansion, and clear understanding. You are the Formless, Infinite Lord; who can compare to You?<br>
  For the sake of the pure-hearted devotee Prahlaad, You took the form of the man-lion, to tear apart and destroy Harnaakhash with your claws.<br>
  You are the Infinite Supreme Lord God; with your symbols of power, You deceived Baliraja; who can know You?<br>
  You are forever True, the Home of Excellence, the Primal Supreme Being. Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Jee-o. ||2||7||<br>
  As Krishna, You wear yellow robes, with teeth like jasmine flowers; You dwell with Your lovers, with Your mala around Your neck, and You joyfully adorn Your head with the crow of peacock feathers.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 019</h2></center>
  You have no advisors, You are so very patient; You are the Upholder of the Dharma, unseen and unfathomable. You have staged the play of the Universe with joy and delight.<br>
  No one can speak Your Unspoken Speech. You are pervading the three worlds. You assume the form of spiritual perfection, O King of kings.<br>
  You are forever True, the Home of Excellence, the Primal Supreme Being. Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Guru, Waahay Jee-o. ||3||8||<br>
  The True Guru, the True Guru, the True Guru is the Lord of the Universe Himself.<br>
  Enticer of Baliraja, who smothers the mighty, and fulfills the devotees; the Prince Krishna, and Kalki; the thunder of His army and the beat of His drum echoes across the Universe.<br>
  The Lord of contemplation, Destroyer of sin, who brings pleasure to the beings of all realms, He Himself is the God of gods, Divinity of the divine, the thousand-headed king cobra.<br>
  He took birth in the Incarnations of the Fish, Tortoise and Wild Boar, and played His part. He played games on the banks of the Jamunaa River.<br>
  Enshrine this most excellent Name within your heart, and renounce the wickedness of the mind, O GAYAND the True Guru, the True Guru, the True Guru is the Lord of the Universe Himself. ||4||9||<br>
  The Supreme Guru, the Supreme Guru, the Supreme Guru, the True, Dear Lord.<br>
  Respect and obey the Guru's Word; this is your own personal treasure - know this mantra as true. Night and day, you shall be saved, and blessed with the supreme status.<br>
  Renounce sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment; give up your games of deception. Snap the noose of egotism, and let yourself be at home in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.<br>
  Free your consciousness of attachment to your body, your home, your spouse, and the pleasures of this world. Serve forever at His Lotus Feet, and firmly implant these teachings within.<br>
  Enshrine this most excellent Name within your heart, and renounce the wickedness of the mind, O GAYAND. the Supreme Guru, the Supreme Guru, the Supreme Guru, the True, Dear Lord. ||5||10||<br>
  Your servants are totally fulfilled, throughout the ages; O Waahay Guru, it is all You, forever.<br>
  O Formless Lord God, You are eternally intact; no one can say how You came into being.<br>
  You created countless Brahmas and Vishnus; their minds were intoxicated with emotional attachment.<br>
  You created the 8.4 million species of beings, and provide for their sustanance.<br>
  Your servants are totally fulfilled, throughout the ages; O Waahay Guru, it is all You, forever. ||1||11||<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Great! Great is the Play of God!<br>
  He Himself laughs, and He Himself thinks; He Himself illumines the sun and the moon.<br>
  He Himself is the water, He Himself is the earth and its support. He Himself abides in each and every heart.<br>
  He Himself is male, and He Himself is female; He Himself is the chessman, and He Himself is the board.<br>
  As Gurmukh, join the Sangat, and consider all this: Waaho! Waaho! Great! Great is the Play of God! ||2||12||<br>
  You have formed and created this play, this great game. O Waahay Guru, this is all You, forever.<br>
  You are pervading and permeating the water, land, skies and nether regions; Your Words are sweeter than Ambrosial Nectar.<br>
  Brahmas and Shivas respect and obey You. O Death of death, Formless Lord, I beg of You.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 020</h2></center>
  By Guru's Grace, the greatest thing is obtained, and the mind is involved with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.<br>
  You have formed and created this play, this great game. O Waahay Guru, this is all Your making. ||3||13||42||<br>
  The Lord is Inaccessible, Infinite, Eternal and Primordial; no one knows His beginning.<br>
  Shiva and Brahma meditate on Him; the Vedas describe Him again and again.<br>
  The Lord is Formless, beyond hate and vengeance; there is no one else like Him.<br>
  He creates and destroys - He is All-powerful; God is the Boat to carry all across.<br>
  He created the world in its various aspects; His humble servant MAT'HURAA delights in His Praises.<br>
  Sat Naam, the Great and Supreme True Name of God, the Personification of Creativity, dwells in the Consciousness of Guru Raam Daas. ||1||<br>
  I have grasped hold of the All-powerful Guru; He has made my mind steady and stable, and embellished me with clear consciousness.<br>
  And, His Banner of Righteousness waves proudly forever, to defend against the waves of sin.<br>
  His humble servant MAT'HRAA knows this as true, and speaks it from his soul; there is nothing else to consider.<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the Great Ship, to carry us all across the terrifying world-ocean, safely to the other side. ||2||<br>
  The Saints dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; imbued with pure celestial love, they sing the Lord's Praises.<br>
  The Support of the Earth has established this Path of Dharma; He Himself remains lovingly attuned to the Lord, and does not wander in distraction.<br>
  So speaks MAT'HURAA: those blessed with good fortune receive the fruits of their minds' desires.<br>
  Those who focus their consciousness on the Guru's Feet, they do not fear the judgement of Dharamraj. ||3||<br>
  The Immaculate, Sacred Pool of the Guru is overflowing with the waves of the Shabad, radiantly revealed in the early hours before the dawn.<br>
  He is Deep and Profound, Unfathomable and utterly Great, eternally overflowing with all sorts of jewels.<br>
  The Saint-swans celebrate; their fear of death is erased, along with the accounts of their pain.<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the sins are taken away; the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan is the Ocean of all peace and comfort. ||4||<br>
  For His Sake, the silent sages meditated and focused their consciousness, wandering all the ages through; rarely, if ever, their souls were enlightened.<br>
  In the Hymns of the Vedas, Brahma sang His Praises; for His Sake, Shiva the silent sage held his place on the Kailaash Mountain.<br>
  For His Sake, the Yogis, celibates, Siddhas and seekers, the countless sects of fanatics with matted hair wear religious robes, wandering as detached renunciates.<br>
  That True Guru, by the Pleasure of His Will, showered His Mercy upon all beings, and blessed Guru Raam Daas with the Glorious Greatness of the Naam. ||5||<br>
  He focuses His Meditation deep within; the Embodiment of Light, He illuminates the three worlds.<br>
  Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, doubt runs away, pain is eradicated, and celestial peace spontaneously wells up.<br>
  The selfless servants and Sikhs are always totally captivated by it, like bumble bees lured by the fragrance of the flower.<br>
  The Guru Himself established the Eternal Throne of Truth, in Guru Raam Daas. ||6||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 021</h2></center>
  The Universe is intoxicated with the wine of Maya, but it has been saved; the All-powerful Guru has blessed it with the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.<br>
  And, the Praiseworthy Guru is blessed with eternal peace, wealth and prosperity; the supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhis never leave him.<br>
  His Gifts are vast and great; His awesome Power is supreme. Your humble servant and slave speaks this truth.<br>
  One, upon whose head the Guru has placed His Hand - with whom should he be concerned? ||7||49||<br>
  He is totally pervading and permeating the three realms;<br>
  in all the world, He has not created another like Himself.<br>
  He Himself created Himself.<br>
  The angels, human beings and demons have not found His limits.<br>
  The angels, demons and human beings have not found His limits; the heavenly heralds and celestial singers wander around, searching for Him.<br>
  The Eternal, Imperishable, Unmoving and Unchanging, Unborn, Self-Existent, Primal Being of the Soul, the Infinity of the Infinite,<br>
  the Eternal All-powerful Cause of causes - all beings meditate on Him in their minds.<br>
  O Great and Supreme Guru Raam Daas, Your Victory resounds across the universe. You have attained the supreme status of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Nanak, the True Guru, worships God single-mindedly; He surrenders His body, mind and wealth to the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  The Infinite Lord enshrined His Own Image in Guru Angad. In His heart, He delights in the spiritual wisdom of the Unfathomable Lord.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas brought the Creator Lord under His control. Waaho! Waaho! Meditate on Him!<br>
  O Great and Supreme Guru Raam Daas, Your Victory resounds across the universe. You have attained the supreme status of the Lord. ||2||<br>
  Naarad, Dhroo, Prahlaad and Sudaamaa are accounted among the Lord's devotees of the past.<br>
  Ambreek, Jai Dayv, Trilochan, Naam Dayv and Kabeer are also remembered.<br>
  They were incarnated in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga; their praises have spread over all the world.<br>
  O Great and Supreme Guru Raam Daas, Your Victory resounds across the universe. You have attained the supreme status of the Lord. ||3||<br>
  Those who meditate in remembrance on You within their minds - their sexual desire and anger are taken away.<br>
  Those who remember You in meditation with their words, are rid of their poverty and pain in an instant.<br>
  Those who obtain the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, by the karma of their good deeds, touch the Philosopher's Stone, and like BALL the poet, sing Your Praises.<br>
  O Great and Supreme Guru Raam Daas, Your Victory resounds across the universe. You have attained the supreme status of the Lord. ||4||<br>
  Those who meditate in remembrance on the True Guru - the darkness of their eyes is removed in an instant.<br>
  Those who meditate in remembrance on the True Guru within their hearts, are blessed with the Lord's Name, day by day.<br>
  Those who meditate in remembrance on the True Guru within their souls - the fire of desire is extinguished for them.<br>
  Those who meditate in remembrance on the True Guru, are blessed with wealth and prosperity, supernatural spiritual powers and the nine treasures.<br>
  So speaks BALL the poet: Blessed is Guru Raam Daas; joining the Sangat, the Congregation, call Him blessed and great.<br>
  Meditate on the True Guru, O men, through Whom the Lord is obtained. ||5||54||<br>
  Living the Word of the Shabad, He attained the supreme status; while performing selfless service, He did not leave the side of Guru Amar Daas.<br>
  From that service, the light from the jewel of spiritual wisdom shines forth, radiant and bright; it has destroyed pain, poverty and darkness.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 022</h2></center>
  So speaks KEERAT the poet: those who grasp hold of the feet of the Saints, are not afraid of death, sexual desire or anger.<br>
  Just as Guru Nanak was part and parcel, life and limb with Guru Angad, so is Guru Amar Daas one with Guru Raam Daas. ||1||<br>
  Whoever serves the True Guru obtains the treasure; night and day, he dwells at the Lord's Feet.<br>
  And so, the entire Sangat loves, fears and respects You. You are the sandalwood tree; Your fragrance spreads gloriously far and wide.<br>
  Dhroo, Prahlaad, Kabeer and Trilochan chanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and His Illumination radiantly shines forth.<br>
  Seeing Him, the mind is totally delighted; Guru Raam Daas is the Helper and Support of the Saints. ||2||<br>
  Guru Nanak realized the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord. He was lovingly attuned to loving devotional worship of the Lord.<br>
  Gur Angad was with Him, life and limb, like the ocean; He showered His consciousness with the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  The Unspoken Speech of Guru Amar Daas cannot be expressed with only one tongue.<br>
  Guru Raam Daas of the Sodhi dynasty has now been blessed with Glorious Greatness, to carry the whole world across. ||3||<br>
  I am overflowing with sins and demerits; I have no merits or virtues at all. I abandoned the Ambrosial Nectar, and I drank poison instead.<br>
  I am attached to Maya, and deluded by doubt; I have fallen in love with my children and spouse.<br>
  I have heard that the most exalted Path of all is the Sangat, the Guru's Congregation. Joining it, the fear of death is taken away.<br>
  KEERAT the poet offers this one prayer: O Guru Raam Daas, save me! Take me into Your Sanctuary! ||4||58||<br>
  He has crushed and overpowered emotional attachment. He seized sexual desire by the hair, and threw it down.<br>
  With His Power, He cut anger into pieces, and sent greed away in disgrace.<br>
  Life and death, with palms pressed together, respect and obey the Hukam of His Command.<br>
  He brought the terrifying world-ocean under His Control; by His Pleasure, He carried His Sikhs across.<br>
  He is seated upon the Throne of Truth, with the canopy above His Head; He is embellished with the powers of Yoga and the enjoyment of pleasures.<br>
  So speaks SALL the poet: O Guru Raam Daas, Your sovereign power is eternal and unbreakable; Your army is invincible. ||1||<br>
  You are the True Guru, throughout the four ages; You Yourself are the Transcendent Lord.<br>
  The angelic beings, seekers, Siddhas and Sikhs have served You, since the very beginning of time.<br>
  You are the Primal Lord God, from the very beginning, and throughout the ages; Your Power supports the three worlds.<br>
  You are Inaccessible; You are the Saving Grace of the Vedas. You have conquered old age and death.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas has permanently established You; You are the Emancipator, to carry all across to the other side.<br>
  So speaks SALL the poet: O Guru Raam Daas, You are the Destroyer of sins; I seek Your Sanctuary. ||2||60||<br>
  Swaiyas In Praise Of The Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Meditate in remembrance on the Primal Lord God, Eternal and Imperishable.<br>
  Remembering Him in meditation, the filth of evil-mindedness is eradicated.<br>
  I enshrine the Lotus Feet of the True Guru within my heart.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 023</h2></center>
  With intuitive peace and poise, I contemplate the Glorious Virtues of Guru Arjun.<br>
  He was revealed in the House of Guru Raam Daas,<br>
  and all hopes and desires were fulfilled.<br>
  From birth, He realized God through the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  With palms pressed together, KALL the poet speaks His praises.<br>
  The Lord brought Him into the world, to practice the Yoga of devotional worship.<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad has been revealed, and the Lord dwells on His tongue.<br>
  Attached to Guru Nanak, Guru Angad and Guru Amar Daas, He attained the supreme status.<br>
  In the House of Guru Raam Daas, the devotee of the Lord, Guru Arjun was born. ||1||<br>
  By great good fortune, the mind is uplifted and exalted, and the Word of the Shabad dwells in the heart.<br>
  The jewel of the mind is contented; the Guru has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within.<br>
  The Inaccessible and Unfathomable, Supreme Lord God is revealed through the True Guru.<br>
  In the House of Guru Raam Daas, Guru Arjun has appeared as the Embodiment of the Fearless Lord. ||2||<br>
  The benign rule of Raja Janak has been established, and the Golden Age of Sat Yuga has begun.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mind is pleased and appeased; the unsatisfied mind is satisfied.<br>
  Guru Nanak laid the foundation of Truth; He is blended with the True Guru.<br>
  In the House of Guru Raam Daas, Guru Arjun has appeared as the Embodiment of the Infinite Lord. ||3||<br>
  The Sovereign Lord King has staged this wondrous play; contentment was gathered together, and pure understanding was infused in the True Guru.<br>
  KALL the poet utters the Praises of the Unborn, Self-existent Lord.<br>
  Guru Nanak blessed Guru Angad, and Guru Angad blessed Guru Amar Daas with the treasure.<br>
  Guru Raam Daas blessed Guru Arjun, who touched the Philosopher's Stone, and was certified. ||4||<br>
  O Guru Arjun, You are Eternal, Invaluable, Unborn, Self-existent,<br>
  the Destroyer of fear, the Dispeller of pain, Infinite and Fearless.<br>
  You have grasped the Ungraspable, and burnt away doubt and skepticism. You bestow cooling and soothing peace.<br>
  The Self-existent, Perfect Primal Lord God Creator has taken birth.<br>
  First, Guru Nanak, then Guru Angad and Guru Amar Daas, the True Guru, have been absorbed into the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  Blessed, blessed is Guru Raam Daas, the Philosopher's Stone, who transformed Guru Arjun unto Himself. ||5||<br>
  His victory is proclaimed all over the world; His Home is blessed with good fortune; He remains united with the Lord.<br>
  By great good fortune, He has found the Perfect Guru; He remains lovingly attuned to Him, and endures the load of the earth.<br>
  He is the Destroyer of fear, the Eradicator of the pains of others. KALL SAHAAR the poet utters Your Praise, O Guru.<br>
  In the Sodhi family, is born Arjun, the son of Guru Raam Daas, the holder of the banner of Dharma and the devotee of God. ||6||<br>
  The Support of the Dharma, immersed in the deep and profound Teachings of the Guru, the Remover of the pains of others.<br>
  The Shabad is excellent and sublime, kind and generous like the Lord, the Destroyer of egotism.<br>
  The Great Giver, the spiritual wisdom of the True Guru, His mind does not grow weary of its yearning for the Lord.<br>
  The Embodiment of Truth, the Mantra of the Lord's Name, the nine treasures are never exhausted.<br>
  O Son of Guru Raam Daas, You are contained amidst all; the canopy of intuitive wisdom is spread above You.<br>
  So speaks KALL the poet: O Guru Arjun, You know the sublime essence of Raja Yoga, the Yoga of meditation and success. ||7||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 024</h2></center>
  In the Fear of God, You enjoy the Fearless Lord; among the thousands of beings, You see the Unseen Lord.<br>
  Through the True Guru, You have realized the state of the Inaccessible, Unfathomable, Profound Lord.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, You are certified and approved; You practice Yoga in the midst of wealth and power.<br>
  Blessed, blessed, blessed is the Guru, who has filled to overflowing the pools which were empty.<br>
  Reaching up to the certified Guru, You endure the unendurable; You are immersed in the pool of contentment.<br>
  So speaks KALL: O Guru Arjun, You have intuitively attained the state of Yoga within Yourself. ||8||<br>
  Nectar drips from Your tongue, and Your mouth gives Blessings, O Incomprehensible and Infinite Spiritual Hero. O Guru, the Word of Your Shabad eradicates egotism.<br>
  You have overpowered the five enticers, and established with intuitive ease the Absolute Lord within Your own being.<br>
  Attached to the Lord's Name, the world is saved; enshrine the True Guru within your heart.<br>
  So speaks KALL: O Guru Arjun, You have illliminated the highest pinnacle of wisdom. ||9||<br>
  SORAT'H<br>
  : Guru Arjun is the certified Primal Person; like Arjuna, He never leaves the field of battle.<br>
  The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is His spear and insignia. He is embellished with the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru. ||1||<br>
  The Lord's Name is the Boat, the Bridge to cross over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  You are in love with the True Guru; attached to the Naam, You have saved the world. ||2||<br>
  The Naam is the Saving Grace of the world; by the Pleasure of the True Guru, it is obtained.<br>
  Now, I am not concerned with anything else; at Your Door, I am fulfilled. ||3||12||<br>
  The Embodiment of Light, the Lord Himself is called Guru Nanak.<br>
  From Him, came Guru Angad; His essence was absorbed into the essence.<br>
  Guru Angad showed His Mercy, and established Amar Daas as the True Guru.<br>
  Guru Amar Daas blessed Guru Raam Daas with the umbrella of immortality.<br>
  So speaks MAT'HURAA: gazing upon the Blessed Vision, the Darshan of Guru Raam Daas, His speech became as sweet as nectar.<br>
  With your eyes, see the certified Primal Person, Guru Arjun, the Fifth Manifestation of the Guru. ||1||<br>
  He is the Embodiment of Truth; He has enshrined the True Name, Sat Naam, Truth and contentment within His heart.<br>
  From the very beginning, the Primal Being has written this destiny upon His forehead.<br>
  His Divine Light shines forth, dazzling and radiant; His Glorious Grandeur pervades the realms of the world.<br>
  Meeting the Guru, touching the Philosopher's Stone, He was acclaimed as Guru.<br>
  So speaks MAT'HURAA: I constantly focus my consciousness on Him; as sunmukh, I look to Him.<br>
  In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, Guru Arjun is the Boat; attached to him, the entire universe is safely carried across. ||2||<br>
  I beg from that humble being who is known all over the world, who lives in, and loves the Name, night and day.<br>
  He is supremely unattached, and imbued with the Love of the Transcendent Lord; he is free of desire, but he lives as a family man.<br>
  He is dedicated to the Love of the Infinite, Limitless Primal Lord God; he has no concerns for any other pleasure, except for the Lord God.<br>
  Guru Arjun is the All-pervading Lord God of MAT'HURAA. Devoted to His Worship, he remains attached to the Lord's Feet. ||3||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 42 - Swaiyas From The Mouth Of The Great Fifth Mehl - Part 025</h2></center>
  All the gods, silent sages, Indra, Shiva and Yogis have not found the Lord's limits<br>
  - not even Brahma who contemplates the Vedas. I shall not give up meditating on the Lord, even for an instant.<br>
  The God of MAT'HURAA is Merciful to the meek; He blesses and uplifts the Sangats throughout the Universe.<br>
  Guru Raam Daas, to save the world, enshrined the Guru's Light into Guru Arjun. ||4||<br>
  In the great darkness of this world, the Lord revealed Himself, incarnated as Guru Arjun.<br>
  Millions of pains are taken away, from those who drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, says MAT'HURAA.<br>
  O mortal being, do not leave this path; do not think that there is any difference between God and Guru.<br>
  The Perfect Lord God has manifested Himself; He dwells in the heart of Guru Arjun. ||5||<br>
  As long as the destiny written upon my forehead was not activated, I wandered around lost, running in all directions.<br>
  I was drowning in the horrible world-ocean of this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, and my remorse would never have ended.<br>
  O MAT'HURAA, consider this essential truth: to save the world, the Lord incarnated Himself.<br>
  Whoever meditates on Guru Arjun Dayv, shall not have to pass through the painful womb of reincarnation ever again. ||6||<br>
  In the ocean of this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name has been revealed in the Form of Guru Arjun, to save the world.<br>
  Pain and poverty are taken away from that person, within whose heart the Saint abides.<br>
  He is the Pure, Immaculate Form of the Infinite Lord; except for Him, there is no other at all.<br>
  Whoever knows Him in thought, word and deed, becomes just like Him.<br>
  He is totally pervading the earth, the sky and the nine regions of the planet. He is the Embodiment of the Light of God.<br>
  So speaks MAT'HURAA: there is no difference between God and Guru; Guru Arjun is the Personification of the Lord Himself. ||7||19||<br>
  The stream of the Lord's Name flows like the Ganges, invincible and unstoppable. The Sikhs of the Sangat all bathe in it.<br>
  It appears as if the holy texts like the Puraanaas are being recited there and Brahma himself sings the Vedas.<br>
  The invincible chauri, the fly-brush, waves over His head; with His mouth, He drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.<br>
  The Transcendent Lord Himself has placed the royal canopy over the head of Guru Arjun.<br>
  Guru Nanak, Guru Angad, Guru Amar Daas and Guru Raam Daas met together before the Lord.<br>
  So speaks HARBANS: Their Praises echo and resound all over the world; who can possibly say that the Great Gurus are dead? ||1||<br>
  When it was the Will of the Transcendent Lord Himself, Guru Raam Daas went to the City of God.<br>
  The Lord offered Him His Royal Throne, and seated the Guru upon it.<br>
  The angels and gods were delighted; they proclaimed and celebrated Your victory, O Guru.<br>
  The demons ran away; their sins made them shake and tremble inside.<br>
  Those people who found Guru Raam Daas were rid of their sins.<br>
  He gave the Royal Canopy and Throne to Guru Arjun, and came home. ||2||21||9||11||10||10||22||60||143||<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr43.htm">Next: Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars</a></center>
 </body>