<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr42.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="gr44.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 001</h2></center>
  One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:<br>
  Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars.<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  O you with swollen breasts, let your consciousness become deep and profound.<br>
  O mother-in-law, how can I bow? Because of my stiff nipples, I cannot bow.<br>
  O sister, those mansions built as high as mountains<br>
  - I have seen them come crumbling down. O bride, do not be so proud of your nipples. ||1||<br>
  O bride with deer-like eyes, listen to the words of deep and infinite wisdom.<br>
  First, examine the merchandise, and then, make the deal.<br>
  Proclaim that you will not associate with evil people; celebrate victory with your friends.<br>
  This proclamation, to meet with your friends, O bride - give it some thought.<br>
  Surrender mind and body to the Lord your Friend; this is the most excellent pleasure.<br>
  Do not fall in love with one who is destined to leave.<br>
  O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who understand this. ||2||<br>
  If you wish to swim across the water, then consult those who know how to swim.<br>
  Those who have survived these treacherous waves are very wise. ||3||<br>
  The storm rages and the rain floods the land; thousands of waves rise and surge.<br>
  If you cry out for help from the True Guru, you have nothing to fear - your boat will not sink. ||4||<br>
  O Nanak, what has happened to the world?<br>
  There is no guide or friend.<br>
  There is no love, even among brothers and relatives.<br>
  For the sake of the world, people have lost their faith. ||5||<br>
  They cry and weep and wail.<br>
  They slap their faces and pull their hair out.<br>
  But if they chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they shall be absorbed into it.<br>
  O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to them. ||6||<br>
  O my mind, do not waver or walk on the crooked path; take the straight and true path.<br>
  The terrible tiger is behind you, and the pool of fire is ahead.<br>
  My soul is skeptical and doubtful, but I cannot see any other way to go.<br>
  O Nanak, as Gurmukh, dwell with your Beloved Lord, and you shall be saved. ||7||<br>
  The tiger is killed, and the mind is killed, through the Teachings of the True Guru.<br>
  One who understands himself, meets with the Lord, and never dies again.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 002</h2></center>
  One who sees the One and Only Lord with his eyes - his hands shall not get muddy and dirty.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved; the Guru has surrounded the ocean with the embankment of Truth. ||8||<br>
  If you wish to put out the fire, then look for water; without the Guru, the ocean of water is not found.<br>
  You shall continue to wander lost in reincarnation through birth and death, even if you do thousands of other deeds.<br>
  But you shall not be taxed by the Messenger of Death, if you walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.<br>
  O Nanak, the immaculate, immortal status is obtained, and the Guru will unite you in the Lord's Union. ||9||<br>
  The crow rubs and washes itself in the mud puddle.<br>
  Its mind and body are polluted with its own mistakes and demerits, and its beak is filled with dirt.<br>
  The swan in the pool associated with the crow, not knowing that it was evil.<br>
  Such is the love of the faithless cynic; understand this, O spiritually wise ones, through love and devotion.<br>
  So proclaim the victory of the Society of the Saints, and act as Gurmukh.<br>
  Immaculate and pure is that cleansing bath, O Nanak, at the sacred shrine of the Guru's river. ||10||<br>
  What should I account as the rewards of this human life, if one does not feel love and devotion to the Lord?<br>
  Wearing clothes and eating food is useless, if the mind is filled with the love of duality.<br>
  Seeing and hearing is false, if one speaks lies.<br>
  O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; everything else is coming and going in egotism. ||11||<br>
  The Saints are few and far between; everything else in the world is just a pompous show. ||12||<br>
  O Nanak, one who is struck by the Lord dies instantaneously; the power to live is lost.<br>
  If someone dies by such a stroke, then he is accepted.<br>
  He alone is struck, who is struck by the Lord; after such a stroke, he is approved.<br>
  The arrow of love, shot by the All-knowing Lord, cannot be pulled out. ||13||<br>
  Who can wash the unbaked clay pot?<br>
  Joining the five elements together, the Lord made a false cover.<br>
  When it pleases Him, He makes it right.<br>
  The supreme light shines forth, and the celestial song vibrates and resounds. ||14||<br>
  Those who are totally blind in their minds, do not have the integrity to keep their word.<br>
  With their blind minds, and their upside-down heart-lotus, they look totally ugly.<br>
  Some know how to speak and understand what they are told. Those people are wise and good-looking.<br>
  Some do not know the Sound-current of the Naad, spiritual wisdom or the joy of song. They do not even understand good and bad.<br>
  Some have no idea of perfection, wisdom or understanding; they know nothing about the mystery of the Word.<br>
  O Nanak, those people are really donkeys; they have no virtue or merit, but still, they are very proud. ||15||<br>
  He alone is a Brahmin, who knows God.<br>
  He chants and meditates, and practices austerity and good deeds.<br>
  He keeps to the Dharma, with faith, humility and contentment.<br>
  Breaking his bonds, he is liberated.<br>
  Such a Brahmin is worthy of being worshipped. ||16||<br>
  He alone is a Kh'shaatriyaa, who is a hero in good deeds.<br>
  He uses his body to give in charity;<br>
  he understands his farm, and plants the seeds of generosity.<br>
  Such a Kh'shaatriyaa is accepted in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Whoever practices greed, possessiveness and falsehood,<br>
  shall receive the fruits of his own labors. ||17||<br>
  Do not heat your body like a furnace, or burn your bones like firewood.<br>
  What have your head and feet done wrong? See your Husband Lord within yourself. ||18||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 003</h2></center>
  God the Cosmic Husband dwells within all hearts; without Him, there is no heart at all.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are the happy, virtuous soul-brides; the Lord is revealed to them. ||19||<br>
  If you desire to play this game of love with Me,<br>
  then step onto My Path with your head in hand.<br>
  When you place your feet on this Path,<br>
  give Me your head, and do not pay any attention to public opinion. ||20||<br>
  False is friendship with the false and greedy. False is its foundation.<br>
  O Moollah, no one knows where death shall strike. ||21||<br>
  Without spiritual wisdom, the people worship ignorance.<br>
  They grope in the darkness, in the love of duality. ||22||<br>
  Without the Guru, there is no spiritual wisdom; without Dharma, there is no meditation.<br>
  Without Truth, there is no credit; without capital, there is no balance. ||23||<br>
  The mortals are sent into the world; then, they arise and depart.<br>
  There is no joy in this. ||24||<br>
  Raam Chand, sad at heart, assembled his army and forces.<br>
  The army of monkeys was at his service; his mind and body became eager for war.<br>
  Raawan captured his wife Sita, and Lachhman was cursed to die.<br>
  O Nanak, the Creator Lord is the Doer of all; He watches over all, and destroys what He has created. ||25||<br>
  In his mind, Raam Chand mourned for Sita and Lachhman.<br>
  Then, he remembered Hanuman the monkey-god, who came to him.<br>
  The misguided demon did not understand that God is the Doer of deeds.<br>
  O Nanak, the actions of the Self-existent Lord cannot be erased. ||26||<br>
  The city of Lahore suffered terrible destruction for four hours. ||27||<br>
  Third Mehl:<br>
  The city of Lahore is a pool of ambrosial nectar, the home of praise. ||28||<br>
  First Mehl:<br>
  What are the signs of a prosperous person? His stores of food never run out.<br>
  Prosperity dwells in his home, with the sounds of girls and women.<br>
  All the women of his home shout and cry over useless things.<br>
  Whatever he takes, he does not give back. Seeking to earn more and more, he is troubled and uneasy. ||29||<br>
  O lotus, your leaves were green, and your blossoms were gold.<br>
  What pain has burnt you, and made your body black? O Nanak, my body is battered.<br>
  I have not received that water which I love.<br>
  Seeing it, my body blossomed forth, and I was blessed with a deep and beautiful color. ||30||<br>
  No one lives long enough to accomplish all he wishes.<br>
  Only the spiritually wise live forever; they are honored for their intuitive awareness.<br>
  Bit by bit, life passes away, even though the mortal tries to hold it back.<br>
  O Nanak, unto whom should we complain? Death takes one's life away without anyone's consent. ||31||<br>
  Do not blame the Sovereign Lord; when someone grows old, his intellect leaves him.<br>
  The blind man talks and babbles, and then falls into the ditch. ||32||<br>
  All that the Perfect Lord does is perfect; there is not too little, or too much.<br>
  O Nanak, knowing this as Gurmukh, the mortal merges into the Perfect Lord God. ||33||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 004</h2></center>
  Shalok, Third Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Do not call the wandering beggars holy men, if their minds are filled with doubt.<br>
  Whoever gives to them, O Nanak, earns the same sort of merit. ||1||<br>
  One who begs for the supreme status of the Fearless and Immaculate Lord<br>
  - how rare are those who have the opportunity, O Nanak, to give food to such a person. ||2||<br>
  If I were a religious scholar, an astrologer, or one who could recite the four Vedas,<br>
  I could be famous throughout the nine regions of the earth, for my wisdom and thoughtful contemplation. ||3||<br>
  If a Brahmin kills a cow or a female infant, and accepts the offerings of an evil person,<br>
  he is cursed with the leprosy of curses and criticism; he is forever and ever filled with egotistical pride.<br>
  One who forgets the Naam, O Nanak, is covered by countless sins.<br>
  Let all wisdom be burnt away, except for the essence of spiritual wisdom. ||4||<br>
  No one can erase that primal destiny written upon one's forehead.<br>
  O Nanak, whatever is written there, comes to pass. He alone understands, who is blessed by God's Grace. ||5||<br>
  Those who forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and become attached to greed and fraud,<br>
  are engrossed in the entanglements of Maya the enticer, with the fire of desire within them.<br>
  Those who, like the pumpkin vine, are too stubborn climb the trellis, are cheated by Maya the cheater.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are bound and gagged and led away; the dogs do not join the herd of cows.<br>
  The Lord Himself misleads the misguided ones, and He Himself unites them in His Union.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are saved; they walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru. ||6||<br>
  I praise the Praiseworthy Lord, and sing the Praises of the True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the One Lord alone is True; stay away from all other doors. ||7||<br>
  O Nanak, wherever I go, I find the True Lord.<br>
  Wherever I look, I see the One Lord. He reveals Himself to the Gurmukh. ||8||<br>
  The Word of the Shabad is the Dispeller of sorrow, if one enshrines it in the mind.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, it dwells in the mind; by God's Mercy, it is obtained. ||9||<br>
  O Nanak, acting in egotism, countless thousands have wasted away to death.<br>
  Those who meet with the True Guru are saved, through the Shabad, the True Word of the Inscrutable Lord. ||10||<br>
  Those who serve the True Guru single-mindedly - I fall at the feet of those humble beings.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord abides in the mind, and the hunger for Maya departs.<br>
  Immaculate and pure are those humble beings, who, as Gurmukh, merge in the Naam.<br>
  O Nanak, other empires are false; they alone are true emperors, who are imbued with the Naam. ||11||<br>
  The devoted wife in her husband's home has a great longing to perform loving devotional service to him;<br>
  she prepares and offers to him all sorts of sweet delicacies and dishes of all flavors.<br>
  In the same way, the devotees praise the Word of the Guru's Bani, and focus their consciousness on the Lord's Name.<br>
  They place mind, body and wealth in offering before the Guru, and sell their heads to Him.<br>
  In the Fear of God, His devotees yearn for His devotional worship; God fulfills their desires, and merges them with Himself.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 005</h2></center>
  My Lord God is Self-existent and Independent. What does He need to eat to be satisfied?<br>
  Whoever walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru, and sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, is pleasing to Him.<br>
  Blessed, blessed are they, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, O Nanak, who walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru. ||12||<br>
  Those who do not serve the True Guru, and do not keep the Shabad enshrined in their hearts<br>
  - cursed are their lives. Why did they even come into the world?<br>
  If one follows the Guru's Teachings, and keeps the Fear of God in his mind, then he is lovingly attuned to the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  By his primal destiny, he obtains the Name; O Nanak, he is carried across. ||13||<br>
  The world wanders lost in emotional attachment to Maya; it does not realize that its own home is being plundered.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh is blind in the world; his mind is lured away by sexual desire and anger.<br>
  With the sword of spiritual wisdom, kill the five demons. Remain awake and aware to the Guru's Teachings.<br>
  The Jewel of the Naam is revealed, and the mind and body are purified.<br>
  Those who lack the Naam wander around lost, with their noses cut off; without the Name, they sit and cry.<br>
  O Nanak, no one can erase that which is pre-ordained by the Creator Lord. ||14||<br>
  The Gurmukhs earn the wealth of the Lord, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  They receive the wealth of the Naam; their treasures are overflowing.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Bani, they utter the Glorious Praises of the Lord, whose end and limitations cannot be found.<br>
  O Nanak, the Creator is the Doer of all; the Creator Lord beholds all. ||15||<br>
  Within the Gurmukh is intuitive peace and poise; his mind ascends to the Tenth Plane of the Akaashic Ethers.<br>
  No one is sleepy or hungry there; they dwell in the peace of the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, pain and pleasure do not afflict anyone, where the Light of the Lord, the Supreme Soul, illuminates. ||16||<br>
  All have come, wearing the robes of sexual desire and anger.<br>
  Some are born, and some pass away. They come and go according to the Hukam of the Lord's Command.<br>
  Their comings and goings in reincarnation do not end; they are imbued with the love of duality.<br>
  Bound in bondage, they are made to wander, and they cannot do anything about it. ||17||<br>
  Those, upon whom the Lord showers His Mercy, come and meet the True Guru.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, they turn away from the world; they remain dead while still alive, with intuitive peace and poise.<br>
  O Nanak, the devotees are imbued with the Lord; they are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||18||<br>
  The intellect of the self-willed manmukh is fickle; he is very tricky and clever within.<br>
  Whatever he has done, and all that he does, is useless. Not even an iota of it is acceptable.<br>
  The charity and generosity he pretends to give will be judged by the Righteous Judge of Dharma.<br>
  Without the True Guru, the Messenger of Death does not leave the mortal alone; he is ruined by the love of duality.<br>
  Youth slips away imperceptibly, old age comes, and then he dies.<br>
  The mortal is caught in love and emotional attachment to children and spouse, but none of them will be his helper and support in the end.<br>
  Whoever serves the True Guru finds peace; the Name comes to abide in the mind.<br>
  O Nanak, great and very fortunate are those who, as Gurmukh, are absorbed in the Naam. ||19||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs do not even think of the Name; without the Name, they cry in pain.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 006</h2></center>
  They do not worship the Lord, the Supreme Soul; how can they find peace in duality?<br>
  They are filled with the filth of egotism; they do not wash it away with the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Name, they die in their filth; they waste the priceless opportunity of this human life. ||20||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are deaf and blind; they are filled with the fire of desire.<br>
  They have no intuitive understanding of the Guru's Bani; they are not illumined with the Shabad.<br>
  They do not know their own inner being, and they have no faith in the Guru's Word.<br>
  The Word of the Guru's Shabad is within the being of the spiritually wise ones. They always blossom in His love.<br>
  The Lord saves the honor of the spiritually wise ones.I am forever a sacrifice to them.<br>
  Servant Nanak is the slave of those Gurmukhs who serve the Lord. ||21||<br>
  The poisonous snake, the serpent of Maya, has surrounded the world with its coils, O mother!<br>
  The antidote to this poisonous venom is the Name of the Lord; the Guru places the magic spell of the Shabad into the mouth.<br>
  Those who are blessed with such pre-ordained destiny come and meet the True Guru.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, they become immaculate, and the poison of egotism is eradicated.<br>
  Radiant and bright are the faces of the Gurmukhs; they are honored in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those who walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru. ||22||<br>
  The True Guru, the Primal Being, has no hatred or vengeance. His heart is constantly attuned to the Lord.<br>
  Whoever directs hatred against the Guru, who has no hatred at all, only sets his own home on fire.<br>
  Anger and egotism are within him night and day; he burns, and suffers constant pain.<br>
  They babble and tell lies, and keep on barking, eating the poison of the love of duality.<br>
  For the sake of the poison of Maya, they wander from house to house, and lose their honor.<br>
  They are like the son of a prostitute, who does not know the name of his father.<br>
  They do not remember the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; the Creator Himself brings them to ruin.<br>
  The Lord showers His Mercy upon the Gurmukhs, and reunites the separated ones with Himself.<br>
  Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to those who fall at the Feet of the True Guru. ||23||<br>
  Those who are attached to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are saved; without the Name, they must go to the City of Death.<br>
  O Nanak, without the Name, they find no peace; they come and go in reincarnation with regrets. ||24||<br>
  When anxiety and wanderings come to an end, the mind becomes happy.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the soul-bride understands, and then she sleeps without worry.<br>
  Those who have such pre-ordained destiny meet with the Guru, the Lord of the Universe.<br>
  O Nanak, they merge intuitively into the Lord, the Embodiment of Supreme Bliss. ||25||<br>
  Those who serve their True Guru, who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad,<br>
  who honor and obey the Will of the True Guru, who keep the Lord's Name enshrined within their hearts,<br>
  are honored, here and hereafter; they are dedicated to the business of the Lord's Name.<br>
  Through the Word of the Shabad, the Gurmukhs gain recognition in that Court of the True Lord.<br>
  The True Name is their merchandise, the True Name is their expenditure; the Love of their Beloved fills their inner beings.<br>
  The Messenger of Death does not even approach them; the Creator Lord Himself forgives them.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 007</h2></center>
  O Nanak, they alone are wealthy, who are imbued with the Naam; the rest of the world is poor. ||26||<br>
  The Lord's Name is the Support of the Lord's humble servants. Without the Lord's Name, the there is no other place, no place of rest.<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, the Name abides in the mind, and one is intuitively, automatically absorbed in the Lord.<br>
  Those with great good fortune meditate on the Naam; night and day, they embrace love for the Name.<br>
  Servant Nanak begs for the dust of their feet; I am forever a sacrifice to them. ||27||<br>
  The 8.4 million species of beings burn in desire and cry in pain.<br>
  All this show of emotional attachment to Maya shall not go with you at that very last instant.<br>
  Without the Lord, peace and tranquility do not come; unto whom should we go and complain?<br>
  By great good fortune, one meets the True Guru, and comes to understand the contemplation of God.<br>
  The fire of desire is totally extinguished, O servant Nanak, enshrining the Lord within the heart. ||28||<br>
  I make so many mistakes, there is no end or limit to them.<br>
  O Lord, please be merciful and forgive me; I am a sinner, a great offender.<br>
  O Dear Lord, if You made an account of my mistakes, my turn to be forgiven would not even come. Please forgive me, and unite me with Yourself.<br>
  The Guru, in His Pleasure, has united me with the Lord God; He has cut away all my sinful mistakes.<br>
  Servant Nanak celebrates the victory of those who meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||29||<br>
  Those who have been separated and alienated from the Lord are united with Him again, through the Fear and the Love of the True Guru.<br>
  They escape the cycle of birth and death, and, as Gurmukh, they meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Guru's Congregation, the diamonds and jewels are obtained.<br>
  O Nanak, the jewel is priceless; the Gurmukhs seek and find it. ||30||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs do not even think of the Naam. Cursed are their lives, and cursed are their homes.<br>
  That Lord who gives them so much to eat and wear - they do not enshrine that Lord, the Treasure of Virtue, in their minds.<br>
  This mind is not pierced by the Word of the Shabad; how can it come to dwell in its true home?<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are like discarded brides, ruined by coming and going in the cycle of reincarnation.<br>
  The Gurmukhs are embellished and exalted by the Naam, the Name of the Lord; the jewel of destiny is engraved upon their foreheads.<br>
  They enshrine the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within their hearts; the Lord illumines their heart-lotus.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to those who serve their True Guru.<br>
  O Nanak, radiant and bright are the faces of those whose inner beings are illuminated with the Light of the Naam. ||31||<br>
  Those who die in the Word of the Shabad are saved. Without the Shabad, no one is liberated.<br>
  They wear religious robes and perform all sorts of rituals, but they are ruined; in the love of duality, their world is ruined.<br>
  O Nanak, without the True Guru, the Name is not obtained, even though one may long for it hundreds of times. ||32||<br>
  The Name of the Lord is utterly great, lofty and high, the highest of the high.<br>
  No one can climb up to it, even though one may long for it, hundreds of times.<br>
  Speaking about self-discipline, no one become pure; everyone walks around wearing religious robes.<br>
  Those blessed by the karma of good deeds go and climb the ladder of the Guru.<br>
  The Lord comes and dwells within that one who contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 008</h2></center>
  O Nanak, when someone dies in the Word of the Shabad, the mind is pleased and appeased. True is the reputation of those who are true. ||33||<br>
  Emotional attachment to Maya is a treacherous ocean of pain and poison, which cannot be crossed.<br>
  Screaming, "Mine, mine!", they rot and die; they pass their lives in egotism.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are in limbo, neither on this side, nor the other; they are stuck in the middle.<br>
  They act as they are pre-destined; they cannot do anything else.<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, the jewel of spiritual wisdom abides in the mind, and then God is easily seen in all.<br>
  O Nanak, the very fortunate ones embark on the Boat of the True Guru; they are carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||34||<br>
  Without the True Guru, there is no giver who can bestow the Support of the Lord's Name.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the Name comes to dwell in the mind; keep it enshrined in your heart.<br>
  The fire of desire is extinguished, and one finds satisfaction, through the Love of the Name of the Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh finds the Lord, when He showers His Mercy. ||35||<br>
  Without the Shabad, the world is so insane, that it cannot even be described.<br>
  Those who are protected by the Lord are saved; they remain lovingly attuned to the Word of the Shabad.<br>
  O Nanak, the Creator who made this making knows everything. ||36||<br>
  The Pandits, the religious scholars, have grown weary of making fire-offerings and sacrifices, making pilgrimages to all the sacred shrines, and reading the Puraanas.<br>
  But they cannot get rid of the poison of emotional attachment to Maya; they continue to come and go in egotism.<br>
  Meeting with the True Guru, one's filth is washed off, meditating on the Lord, the Primal Being, the All-knowing One.<br>
  Servant Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those who serve their Lord God. ||37||<br>
  Mortals give great thought to Maya and emotional attachment; they harbor great hopes, in greed and corruption.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs do not become steady and stable; they die and are gone in an instant.<br>
  Only those who are blessed with great good fortune meet the True Guru, and leave behind their egotism and corruption.<br>
  Chanting the Name of the Lord, they find peace; servant Nanak contemplates the Word of the Shabad. ||38||<br>
  Without the True Guru, there is no devotional worship, and no love of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.<br>
  Servant Nanak worships and adores the Naam, with love and affection for the Guru. ||39||<br>
  Do not trust greedy people, if you can avoid doing so.<br>
  At the very last moment, they will deceive you there, where no one will be able to lend a helping hand.<br>
  Whoever associates with the self-willed manmukhs, will have his face blackened and dirtied.<br>
  Black are the faces of those greedy people; they lose their lives, and leave in disgrace.<br>
  O Lord, let me join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; may the Name of the Lord God abide in my mind.<br>
  The filth and pollution of birth and death is washed away, O servant Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||40||<br>
  Whatever is pre-destined by the Lord God Creator, cannot be erased.<br>
  Body and soul are all His. The Sovereign Lord King cherishes all.<br>
  The gossipers and slanderers shall remain hungry and die, rolling in the dust; their hands cannot reach anywhere.<br>
  Outwardly, they do all the proper deeds, but they are hypocrites; in their minds and hearts, they practice deception and fraud.<br>
  Whatever is planted in the farm of the body, shall come and stand before them in the end.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 009</h2></center>
  Nanak offers this prayer: O Lord God, please forgive me, and unite me with Yourself. ||41||<br>
  The mortal being does not understand the comings and goings of reincarnation; he does not see the Court of the Lord.<br>
  He is wrapped up in emotional attachment and Maya, and within his being is the darkness of ignorance.<br>
  The sleeping person wakes, only when he is hit on the head by a heavy club.<br>
  The Gurmukhs dwell upon the Lord; they find the door of salvation.<br>
  O Nanak, they themselves are saved, and all their relatives are carried across as well. ||42||<br>
  Whoever dies in the Word of the Shabad, is known to be truly dead.<br>
  By Guru's Grace, the mortal is satisfied by the sublime essence of the Lord.<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is recognized in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Without the Shabad, everyone is dead.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh dies; his life is wasted.<br>
  Those who do not remember the Name of the Lord, shall cry in pain in the end.<br>
  O Nanak, whatever the Creator Lord does, comes to pass. ||43||<br>
  The Gurmukhs never grow old; within them is intuitive understanding and spiritual wisdom.<br>
  They chant the Praises of the Lord, forever and ever; deep within, they intuitively meditate on the Lord.<br>
  They dwell forever in blissful knowledge of the Lord; they look upon pain and pleasure as one and the same.<br>
  They see the One Lord in all, and realize the Lord, the Supreme Soul of all. ||44||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are like stupid children; they do not keep the Lord in their thoughts.<br>
  They do all their deeds in egotism, and they must answer to the Righteous Judge of Dharma.<br>
  The Gurmukhs are good and immaculately pure; they are embellished and exalted with the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  Not even a tiny bit of filth sticks to them; they walk in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.<br>
  The filth of the manmukhs is not washed away, even if they wash hundreds of times.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are united with the Lord; they merge into the Guru's Being. ||45||<br>
  How can someone do bad things, and still live with himself?<br>
  By his own anger, he only burns himself.<br>
  The self-willed manmukh drives himself crazy with worries and stubborn struggles.<br>
  But those who become Gurmukh understand everything.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh struggles with his own mind. ||46||<br>
  Those who do not serve the True Guru, the Primal Being, and do not reflect upon the Word of the Shabad<br>
  - do not call them human beings; they are just animals and stupid beasts.<br>
  They have no spiritual wisdom or meditation within their beings; they are not in love with the Lord.<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs die in evil and corruption; they die and are reborn, again and again.<br>
  They alone live, who join with the living; enshrine the Lord, the Lord of Life, within your heart.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs look beautiful in that Court of the True Lord. ||47||<br>
  The Lord built the Harimandir, the Temple of the Lord; the Lord dwells within it.<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, I have found the Lord; my emotional attachment to Maya has been burnt away.<br>
  Countless things are in the Harimandir, the Temple of the Lord; contemplate the Naam, and the nine treasures will be yours.<br>
  Blessed is that happy soul-bride, O Nanak, who, as Gurmukh, seeks and finds the Lord.<br>
  By great good fortune, one searches the temple of the body-fortress, and finds the Lord within the heart. ||48||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs wander lost in the ten directions, led by intense desire, greed and corruption.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 010</h2></center>
  Their attachment to Maya does not cease; they die, only to be reborn, over and over again.<br>
  Serving the True Guru, peace is found; intense desire and corruption are discarded.<br>
  The pains of death and birth are taken away; servant Nanak reflects upon the Word of the Shabad. ||49||<br>
  Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O mortal being, and you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  All your sins and terrible mistakes shall be taken away, and you shall be rid of your pride and egotism.<br>
  The heart-lotus of the Gurmukh blossoms forth, realizing God, the Soul of all.<br>
  O Lord God, please shower Your Mercy upon servant Nanak, that he may chant the Name of the Lord. ||50||<br>
  In Dhanaasaree, the soul-bride is known to be wealthy, O Siblings of Destiny, when she works for the True Guru.<br>
  She surrenders her body, mind and soul, O Siblings of Destiny, and lives according to the Hukam of His Command.<br>
  I sit where He wishes me to sit, O Siblings of Destiny; wherever He sends me, I go.<br>
  There is no other wealth as great, O Siblings of Destiny; such is the greatness of the True Name.<br>
  I sing forever the Glorious Praises of the True Lord; I shall remain with the True One forever.<br>
  So wear the clothes of His Glorious Virtues and goodness, O Siblings of Destiny; eat and enjoy the flavor of your own honor.<br>
  How can I praise Him, O Siblings of Destiny? I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.<br>
  Great is the Glorious Greatness of the True Guru, O Siblings of Destiny; if one is blessed with good karma, He is found.<br>
  Some do not know how to submit to the Hukam of His Command, O Siblings of Destiny; they wander around lost in the love of duality.<br>
  They find no place of rest in the Sangat, O Siblings of Destiny; they find no place to sit.<br>
  Nanak: they alone submit to His Command, O Siblings of Destiny, who are pre-destined to live the Name.<br>
  I am a sacrifice to them, O Siblings of Destiny, I am forever a sacrifice to them. ||51||<br>
  Those beards are true, which brush the feet of the True Guru.<br>
  Those who serve their Guru night and day, live in bliss, night and day.<br>
  O Nanak, their faces appear beautiful in the Court of the True Lord. ||52||<br>
  True are the faces and true are the beards, of those who speak the Truth and live the Truth.<br>
  The True Word of the Shabad abides in their minds; they are absorbed in the True Guru.<br>
  True is their capital, and true is their wealth; they are blessed with the ultimate status.<br>
  They hear the Truth, they believe in the Truth; they act and work in the Truth.<br>
  They are given a place in the Court of the True Lord; they are absorbed in the True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, without the True Guru, the True Lord is not found. The self-willed manmukhs leave, wandering around lost. ||53||<br>
  The rainbird cries, "Pri-o! Pri-o! Beloved! Beloved!" She is in love with the treasure, the water.<br>
  Meeting with the Guru, the cooling, soothing water is obtained, and all pain is taken away.<br>
  My thirst has been quenched, and intuitive peace and poise have welled up; my cries and screams of anguish are past.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are peaceful and tranquil; they enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within their hearts. ||54||<br>
  O rainbird, chirp the True Name, and let yourself be attuned to the True Lord.<br>
  Your word shall be accepted and approved, if you speak as Gurmukh.<br>
  Remember the Shabad, and your thirst shall be relieved; surrender to the Will of the Lord.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 011</h2></center>
  The clouds are heavy, hanging low, and the rain is pouring down on all sides; the rain-drop is received, with natural ease.<br>
  From water, everything is produced; without water, thirst is not quenched.<br>
  O Nanak, whoever drinks in the Water of the Lord, shall never feel hunger again. ||55||<br>
  O rainbird, speak the Shabad, the True Word of God, with natural peace and poise.<br>
  Everything is with you; the True Guru will show you this.<br>
  So understand your own self, and meet your Beloved; His Grace shall rain down in torrents.<br>
  Drop by drop, the Ambrosial Nectar rains down softly and gently; thirst and hunger are completely gone.<br>
  Your cries and screams of anguish have ceased; your light shall merge into the Light.<br>
  O Nanak, the happy soul-brides sleep in peace; they are absorbed in the True Name. ||56||<br>
  The Primal Lord and Master has sent out the True Hukam of His Command.<br>
  Indra mercifully sends forth the rain, which falls in torrents.<br>
  The body and mind of the rainbird are happy. only when the rain-drop falls into its mouth.<br>
  The corn grows high, wealth increases, and the earth is embellished with beauty.<br>
  Night and day, people worship the Lord with devotion, and are absorbed in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.<br>
  The True Lord Himself forgives them, and showering them with His Mercy, He leads them to walk in His Will.<br>
  O brides, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and be absorbed in the True Word of His Shabad.<br>
  Let the Fear of God be your decoration, and remain lovingly attuned to the True Lord.<br>
  O Nanak, the Naam abides in the mind, and the mortal is saved in the Court of the Lord. ||57||<br>
  The rainbird wanders all over the earth, soaring high through the skies.<br>
  But it obtains the drop of water, only when it meets the True Guru, and then, its hunger and thirst are relieved.<br>
  Soul and body and all belong to Him; everything is His.<br>
  He knows everything, without being told; unto whom should we offer our prayers?<br>
  O Nanak, the One Lord is prevading and permeating each and every heart; the Word of the Shabad brings illumination. ||58||<br>
  O Nanak, the season of spring comes to one who serves the True Guru.<br>
  The Lord rains His Mercy down upon him, and his mind and body totally blossom forth; the entire world becomes green and rejuvenated. ||59||<br>
  The Word of the Shabad brings eternal spring; it rejuvenates the mind and body.<br>
  O Nanak, do not forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord, which has created everyone. ||60||<br>
  O Nanak, it is the spring season, for those Gurmukhs, within whose minds the Lord abides.<br>
  When the Lord showers His Mercy, the mind and body blossom forth, and all the world turns green and lush. ||61||<br>
  In the early hours of the morning, whose name should we chant?<br>
  Chant the Name of the Transcendent Lord, who is All-powerful to create and destroy. ||62||<br>
  The Persian wheel also cries out, "Too! Too! You! You!", with sweet and sublime sounds.<br>
  Our Lord and Master is always present; why do you cry out to Him in such a loud voice?<br>
  I am a sacrifice to that Lord who created the world, and who loves it.<br>
  Give up your selfishness, and then you shall meet your Husband Lord. Consider this Truth.<br>
  Speaking in shallow egotism, no one understands the Ways of God.<br>
  The forests and fields, and all the three worlds meditate on You, O Lord; this is the way they pass their days and nights forever.<br>
  Without the True Guru, no one finds the Lord. People have grown weary of thinking about it.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 012</h2></center>
  But if the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, then He Himself embellishes us.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs meditate on the Lord; blessed and approved is their coming into the world. ||63||<br>
  Yoga is not obtained by wearing saffron robes; Yoga is not obtained by wearing dirty robes.<br>
  O Nanak, Yoga is obtained even while sitting in your own home, by following the Teachings of the True Guru. ||64||<br>
  You may wander in all four directions, and read the Vedas throughout the four ages.<br>
  O Nanak, if you meet with the True Guru, the Lord shall come to dwell within your mind, and you shall find the door of salvation. ||65||<br>
  O Nanak, the Hukam, the Command of your Lord and Master, is prevailing. The intellectually confused person wanders around lost, misled by his fickle consciousness.<br>
  If you make friends with the self-willed manmukhs, O friend, who can you ask for peace?<br>
  Make friends with the Gurmukhs, and focus your consciousness on the True Guru.<br>
  The root of birth and death will be cut away, and then, you shall find peace, O friend. ||66||<br>
  The Lord Himself instructs those who are misguided, when He casts His Glance of Grace.<br>
  O Nanak, those who are not blessed by His Glance of Grace, cry and weep and wail. ||67||<br>
  Shalok, Fourth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Blessed and very fortunate are those happy soul-brides who, as Gurmukh, meet their Sovereign Lord King.<br>
  The Light of God shines within them; O Nanak, they are absorbed in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Guru, the Primal Being, who has realized the True Lord.<br>
  Meeting Him, thirst is quenched, and the body and mind are cooled and soothed.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Guru, the True Primal Being, who looks upon all alike.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Guru, who has no hatred; slander and praise are all the same to Him.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the All-knowing True Guru, who has realized God within.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the Formless True Guru, who has no end or limitation.<br>
  Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Guru, who implants the Truth within.<br>
  O Nanak, Blessed and Great is the True Guru, through whom the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is received. ||2||<br>
  For the Gurmukh, the true Song of Praise is to chant the Name of the Lord God.<br>
  Chanting the Praises of the Lord, their minds are in ecstasy.<br>
  By great good fortune, they find the Lord, the Embodiment of perfect, supreme bliss.<br>
  Servant Nanak praises the Naam, the Name of the Lord; no obstacle will block his mind or body. ||3||<br>
  I am in love with my Beloved; how can I meet my Dear Friend?<br>
  I seek that friend, who is embellished with Truth.<br>
  The True Guru is my Friend; if I meet Him, I will offer this mind as a sacrifice to Him.<br>
  He has shown me my Beloved Lord, my Friend, the Creator.<br>
  O Nanak, I was searching for my Beloved; the True Guru has shown me that He has been with me all the time. ||4||<br>
  I stand by the side of the road, waiting for You; O my Friend, I hope that You will come.<br>
  If only someone would come today and unite me in Union with my Beloved.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 013</h2></center>
  I would cut my living body into four pieces for anyone who shows me my Beloved.<br>
  O Nanak, when the Lord becomes merciful, then He leads us to meet the Perfect Guru. ||5||<br>
  The power of egotism prevails within, and the body is controlled by Maya; the false ones come and go in reincarnation.<br>
  If someone does not obey the Command of the True Guru, he cannot cross over the treacherous world-ocean.<br>
  Whoever is blessed with the Lord's Glance of Grace, walks in harmony with the Will of the True Guru.<br>
  The Blessed Vision of the True Guru's Darshan is fruitful; through it, one obtains the fruits of his desires.<br>
  I touch the feet of those who believe in and obey the True Guru.<br>
  Nanak is the slave of those who, night and day, remain lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||6||<br>
  Those who are in love with their Beloved - how can they find satisfaction without His Darshan?<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs meet Him with ease, and this mind blossoms forth in joy. ||7||<br>
  Those who are in love with their Beloved - how can they live without Him?<br>
  When they see their Husband Lord, O Nanak, they are rejuvenated. ||8||<br>
  Those Gurmukhs who are filled with love for You, my True Beloved,<br>
  O Nanak, remain immersed in the Lord's Love, night and day. ||9||<br>
  The love of the Gurmukh is true; through it, the True Beloved is attained.<br>
  Night and day, remain in bliss, O Nanak, immersed in intuitive peace and poise. ||10||<br>
  True love and affection are obtained from the Perfect Guru.<br>
  They never break, O Nanak, if one sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||11||<br>
  How can those who have true love within them live without their Husband Lord?<br>
  The Lord unites the Gurmukhs with Himself, O Nanak; they were separated from Him for such a long time. ||12||<br>
  You grant Your Grace to those whom You Yourself bless with love and affection.<br>
  O Lord, please let Nanak meet with You; please bless this beggar with Your Name. ||13||<br>
  The Gurmukh laughs, and the Gurmukh cries.<br>
  Whatever the Gurmukh does, is devotional worship.<br>
  Whoever becomes Gurmukh contemplates the Lord.<br>
  The Gurmukh, O Nanak, crosses over to the other shore. ||14||<br>
  Those who have the Naam within, contemplate the Word of the Guru's Bani.<br>
  Their faces are always radiant in the Court of the True Lord.<br>
  Sitting down and standing up, they never forget the Creator, who forgives them.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are united with the Lord. Those united by the Creator Lord, shall never be separated again. ||15||<br>
  To work for the Guru, or a spiritual teacher, is terribly difficult, but it brings the most excellent peace.<br>
  The Lord casts His Glance of Grace, and inspires love and affection.<br>
  Joined to the service of the True Guru, the mortal being crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.<br>
  The fruits of the mind's desires are obtained, with clear contemplation and discriminating understanding within.<br>
  O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, God is found; He is the Eradicator of all sorrow. ||16||<br>
  The self-willed manmukh may perform service, but his consciousness is attached to the love of duality.<br>
  Through Maya, his emotional attachment to children, spouse and relatives increases.<br>
  He shall be called to account in the Court of the Lord, and in the end, no one will be able to save him.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 014</h2></center>
  Without the Lord's Name, all is pain. Attachment to Maya is agonizingly painful.<br>
  O Nanak, the Gurmukh comes to see, that attachment to Maya separates all from the Lord. ||17||<br>
  The Gurmukh obeys the Order of her Husband Lord God; through the Hukam of His Command, she finds peace.<br>
  In His Will, she serves; in His Will, she worship and adores Him.<br>
  In His Will, she merges in absorption. His Will is her fast, vow, purity and self-discipline; through it, she obtains the fruits of her mind's desires.<br>
  She is always and forever the happy, pure soul-bride, who realizes His Will; she serves the True Guru, inspired by loving absorption.<br>
  O Nanak, those upon whom the Lord showers His Mercy, are merged and immersed in His Will. ||18||<br>
  The wretched, self-willed manmukhs do not realize His Will; they continually act in ego.<br>
  By ritualistic fasts, vows, purities, self-disciplines and worship ceremonies, they still cannot get rid of their hypocrisy and doubt.<br>
  Inwardly, they are impure, pierced through by attachment to Maya; they are like elephants, who throw dirt all over themselves right after their bath.<br>
  They do not even think of the One who created them. Without thinking of Him, they cannot find peace.<br>
  O Nanak, the Primal Creator has made the drama of the Universe; all act as they are pre-ordained. ||19||<br>
  The Gurmukh has faith; his mind is contented and satisfied. Night and day, he serves the Lord, absorbed in Him.<br>
  The Guru, the True Guru, is within; all worship and adore Him. Everyone comes to see the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.<br>
  So believe in the True Guru, the supreme sublime Contemplator. Meeting with Him, hunger and thirst are completely relieved.<br>
  I am forever a sacrifice to my Guru, who leads me to meet the True Lord God.<br>
  O Nanak, those who come and fall at the Feet of the Guru are blessed with the karma of Truth. ||20||<br>
  That Beloved, with whom I am in love, that Friend of mine is with me.<br>
  I wander around inside and outside, but I always keep Him enshrined within my heart. ||21||<br>
  Those who meditate on the Lord single-mindedly, with one-pointed concentration, link their consciousness to the True Guru.<br>
  They are rid of pain, hunger, and the great illness of egotism; lovingly attuned to the Lord, they become free of pain.<br>
  They sing His Praises, and chant His Praises; in His Glorious Praises, they sleep in absorption.<br>
  O Nanak, through the Perfect Guru, they come to meet God with intuitive peace and poise. ||22||<br>
  The self-willed manmukhs are emotionally attached to Maya; they are not in love with the Naam.<br>
  They practice falsehood, gather falsehood, and eat the food of falsehood.<br>
  Gathering the poisonous wealth and property of Maya, they die; in the end, they are all reduced to ashes.<br>
  They perform religious rituals of purity and self-discipline, but they are filled with greed, evil and corruption.<br>
  O Nanak, the actions of the self-willed manmukhs are not accepted; in the Court of the Lord, they are miserable. ||23||<br>
  Among all Ragas, that one is sublime, O Siblings of Destiny, by which the Lord comes to abide in the mind.<br>
  Those Ragas which are in the Sound-current of the Naad are totally true; their value cannot be expressed.<br>
  Those Ragas which are not in the Sound-current of the Naad - by these, the Lord's Will cannot be understood.<br>
  O Nanak, they alone are right, who understand the Will of the True Guru.<br>
  Everything happens as He wills. ||24||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 015</h2></center>
  The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is within the True Guru.<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, one meditates on the Immaculate Naam, the Pure and Holy Naam.<br>
  The Ambrosial Word of His Bani is the true essence. It comes to abide in the mind of the Gurmukh.<br>
  The heart-lotus blossoms forth, and one's light merges in the Light.<br>
  O Nanak, they alone meet with the True Guru, who have such pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon their foreheads. ||25||<br>
  Within the self-willed manmukhs is the fire of desire; their hunger does not depart.<br>
  Emotional attachments to relatives are totally false; they remain engrossed in falsehood.<br>
  Night and day, they are troubled by anxiety; bound to anxiety, they depart.<br>
  Their comings and goings in reincarnation never end; they do their deeds in egotism.<br>
  But in the Guru's Sanctuary, they are saved, O Nanak, and set free. ||26||<br>
  The True Guru meditates on the Lord, the Primal Being. The Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, loves the True Guru.<br>
  Those who join the Sat Sangat, and serve the True Guru - the Guru unites them in the Lord's Union.<br>
  This world, this universe, is a terrifying ocean. On the Boat of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Guru carries us across.<br>
  The Sikhs of the Guru accept and obey the Lord's Will; the Perfect Guru carries them across.<br>
  O Lord, please bless me with the dust of the feet of the Guru's Sikhs. I am a sinner - please save me.<br>
  Those who have such pre-ordained destiny written upon their foreheads by the Lord God, come to meet Guru Nanak.<br>
  The Messenger of Death is beaten and driven away; we are saved in the Court of the Lord.<br>
  Blessed and celebrated are the Sikhs of the Guru; in His Pleasure, the Lord unites them in His Union. ||27||<br>
  The Perfect Guru has implanted the Lord's Name within me; it has dispelled my doubts from within.<br>
  Singing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord's Name, the Lord's path is illuminated and shown to His Sikhs.<br>
  Conquering my egotism, I remain lovingly attuned to the One Lord; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, dwells within me.<br>
  I follow the Guru's Teachings, and so the Messenger of Death cannot even see me; I am immersed in the True Name.<br>
  The Creator Himself is All-pervading; as He pleases, He links us to His Name.<br>
  Servant Nanak lives, chanting the Name. Without the Name, he dies in an instant. ||28||<br>
  Within the minds of the faithless cynics is the disease of egotism; these evil people wander around lost, deluded by doubt.<br>
  O Nanak, this disease is eradicated only by meeting with the True Guru, the Holy Friend. ||29||<br>
  Following the Guru's Teachings, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.<br>
  Attracted by the Lord's Love, day and night, the body-robe is imbued with the Lord's Love.<br>
  I have not found any being like the Lord, although I have searched and looked all over the world.<br>
  The Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam within; now, my mind does not waver or wander anywhere else.<br>
  Servant Nanak is the slave of the Lord, the slave of the slaves of the Guru, the True Guru. ||30||<br>
 <center><h2>Section 43 - Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars - Part 016</h2></center>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  They alone are imbued with the Lord, who do not turn their faces away from Him - they realize Him.<br>
  The false, immature lovers do not know the way of love, and so they fall. ||1||<br>
  Without my Master, I will burn my silk and satin clothes in the fire.<br>
  Even rolling in the dust, I look beautiful, O Nanak, if my Husband Lord is with me. ||2||<br>
  Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I worship and adore the Naam, with love and balanced detachment.<br>
  When the five enemies are overcome, O Nanak, this musical measure of Raga MAAROO becomes frtuiful. ||3||<br>
  When I have the One Lord, I have tens of thousands. Otherwise, people like me beg from door to door.<br>
  O Brahmin, your life has passed away uselessly; you have forgotten the One who created you. ||4||<br>
  In Raga Sorat'h, drink in this sublime essence, which never loses its taste.<br>
  O Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name, one's reputation is immaculate in the Court of the Lord. ||5||<br>
  No one can kill those whom God Himself protects.<br>
  The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is within them. They cherish His Glorious Virtues forever.<br>
  They take the Support of the One, the Inaccessible Lord; they enshrine God in their mind and body.<br>
  They are imbued with the Love of the Infinite Lord, and no one can wipe it away.<br>
  The Gurmukhs sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; they obtain the most excellent celestial peace and poise.<br>
  O Nanak, they enshrine the treasure of the Naam in their hearts. ||6||<br>
  Whatever God does, accept that as good; leave behind all other judgements.<br>
  He shall cast His Glance of Grace, and attach you to Himself.<br>
  Instruct yourself with the Teachings, and doubt will depart from within.<br>
  Everyone does that which is pre-ordained by destiny.<br>
  Everything is under His control; there is no other place at all.<br>
  Nanak is in peace and bliss, accepting the Will of God. ||7||<br>
  Those who meditate in remembrance on the Perfect Guru, are exalted and uplifted.<br>
  O Nanak, dwelling on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all affairs are resolved. ||8||<br>
  The sinners act, and generate bad karma, and then they weep and wail.<br>
  O Nanak, just as the churning stick churns the butter, so does the Righteous Judge of Dharma churn them. ||9||<br>
  Meditating on the Naam, O friend, the treasure of life is won.<br>
  O Nanak, speaking in Righteousness, one's world becomes sanctified. ||10||<br>
  I am stuck in an evil place, trusting the sweet words of an evil advisor.<br>
  O Nanak, they alone are saved, who have such good destiny inscribed upon their foreheads. ||11||<br>
  They alone sleep and dream in peace, who are imbued with the Love of their Husband Lord.<br>
  Those who have been separated from the Love of their Master, scream and cry twenty-four hours a day. ||12||<br>
  Millions are asleep, in the false illusion of Maya.<br>
  O Nanak, they alone are awake and aware, who chant the Naam with their tongues. ||13||<br>
  Seeing the mirage, the optical illusion, the people are confused and deluded.<br>
  Those who worship and adore the True Lord, O Nanak, their minds and bodies are beautiful. ||14||<br>
  The All-powerful Supreme Lord God, the Infinite Primal Being, is the Saving Grace of sinners.<br>
 <hr>
 <center><a href="gr44.htm">Next: Shalok, Ninth Mehl</a></center>
 </body>