<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Sikhism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="gr44.htm">Previous</a> 
 </center>
 <hr><center><h1>Shri Guru Granth Sahib: Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl &amp; Raag Maalaa</h1></center>
 <center><h2>Section 45 - Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl &amp; Raag Maalaa - Part 001</h2></center>
  I had looked upon the world as my own, but no one belongs to anyone else.<br>
  O Nanak, only devotional worship of the Lord is permanent; enshrine this in your mind. ||48||<br>
  The world and its affairs are totally false; know this well, my friend.<br>
  Says Nanak, it is like a wall of sand; it shall not endure. ||49||<br>
  Raam Chand passed away, as did Raawan, even though he had lots of relatives.<br>
  Says Nanak, nothing lasts forever; the world is like a dream. ||50||<br>
  People become anxious, when something unexpected happens.<br>
  This is the way of the world, O Nanak; nothing is stable or permanent. ||51||<br>
  Whatever has been created shall be destroyed; everyone shall perish, today or tomorrow.<br>
  O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and give up all other entanglements. ||52||<br>
  DOHRAA:<br>
  My strength is exhausted, and I am in bondage; I cannot do anything at all.<br>
  Says Nanak, now, the Lord is my Support; He will help me, as He did the elephant. ||53||<br>
  My strength has been restored, and my bonds have been broken; now, I can do everything.<br>
  Nanak: everything is in Your hands, Lord; You are my Helper and Support. ||54||<br>
  My associates and companions have all deserted me; no one remains with me.<br>
  Says Nanak, in this tragedy, the Lord alone is my Support. ||55||<br>
  The Naam remains; the Holy Saints remain; the Guru, the Lord of the Universe, remains.<br>
  Says Nanak, how rare are those who chant the Guru's Mantra in this world. ||56||<br>
  I have enshrined the Lord's Name within my heart; there is nothing equal to it.<br>
  Meditating in remembrance on it, my troubles are taken away; I have received the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||57||1||<br>
  Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  Upon this Plate, three things have been placed: Truth, Contentment and Contemplation.<br>
  The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of our Lord and Master, has been placed upon it as well; it is the Support of all.<br>
  One who eats it and enjoys it shall be saved.<br>
  This thing can never be forsaken; keep this always and forever in your mind.<br>
  The dark world-ocean is crossed over, by grasping the Feet of the Lord; O Nanak, it is all the extension of God. ||1||<br>
  Shalok, Fifth Mehl:<br>
  I have not appreciated what You have done for me, Lord; only You can make me worthy.<br>
  I am unworthy - I have no worth or virtues at all. You have taken pity on me.<br>
  You took pity on me, and blessed me with Your Mercy, and I have met the True Guru, my Friend.<br>
  O Nanak, if I am blessed with the Naam, I live, and my body and mind blossom forth. ||1||<br>
  One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:<br>
  Raag Maalaa:<br>
  Each Raga has five wives,<br>
  and eight sons, who emit distinctive notes.<br>
  In the first place is Raag Bhairao.<br>
 <center><h2>Section 45 - Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl &amp; Raag Maalaa - Part 002</h2></center>
  It is accompanied by the voices of its five Raaginis:<br>
  First come Bhairavee, and Bilaavalee;<br>
  then the songs of Punni-aakee and Bangalee;<br>
  and then Asalaykhee.<br>
  These are the five consorts of Bhairao.<br>
  The sounds of Pancham, Harakh and Disaakh;<br>
  the songs of Bangaalam, Madh and Maadhav. ||1||<br>
  Lalat and Bilaaval - each gives out its own melody.<br>
  when these eight sons of Bhairao are sung by accomplished musicians. ||1||<br>
  In the second family is Maalakausak,<br>
  who brings his five Raaginis:<br>
  Gondakaree and Dayv Gandhaaree,<br>
  the voices of Gandhaaree and Seehutee,<br>
  and the fifth song of Dhanaasaree.<br>
  This chain of Maalakausak brings along :<br>
  Maaroo, Masta-ang and Mayvaaraa,<br>
  Prabal, Chandakausak,<br>
  Khau, Khat and Bauraanad singing.<br>
  These are the eight sons of Maalakausak. ||1||<br>
  Then comes Hindol with his five wives and eight sons;<br>
  it rises in waves when the sweet-voiced chorus sings. ||1||<br>
  There come Taylangee and Darvakaree;<br>
  Basantee and Sandoor follow;<br>
  then Aheeree, the finest of women.<br>
  These five wives come together.<br>
  The sons: Surmaanand and Bhaaskar come,<br>
  Chandrabinb and Mangalan follow.<br>
  Sarasbaan and Binodaa then come,<br>
  and the thrilling songs of Basant and Kamodaa.<br>
  These are the eight sons I have listed.<br>
  Then comes the turn of Deepak. ||1||<br>
  Kachhaylee, Patamanjaree and Todee are sung;<br>
  Kaamodee and Goojaree accompany Deepak. ||1||<br>
  Kaalankaa, Kuntal and Raamaa,<br>
  Kamalakusam and Champak are their names;<br>
  Gauraa, Kaanaraa and Kaylaanaa;<br>
  these are the eight sons of Deepak. ||1||<br>
  All join together and sing Siree Raag,<br>
  which is accompanied by its five wives.:<br>
  Bairaaree and Karnaatee,<br>
  the songs of Gawree and Aasaavaree;<br>
  then follows Sindhavee.<br>
  These are the five wives of Siree Raag. ||1||<br>
  Saaloo, Saarang, Saagaraa, Gond and Gambheer<br>
  - the eight sons of Siree Raag include Gund, Kumb and Hameer. ||1||<br>
  In the sixth place, Maygh Raag is sung,<br>
  with its five wives in accompaniment:<br>
  Sorat'h, Gond, and the melody of Malaaree;<br>
  then the harmonies of Aasaa are sung.<br>
  And finally comes the high tone Soohau.<br>
  These are the five with Maygh Raag. ||1||<br>
  Bairaadhar, Gajadhar, Kaydaaraa,<br>
  Jabaleedhar, Nat and Jaladhaaraa.<br>
  Then come the songs of Shankar and Shi-aamaa.<br>
  These are the names of the sons of Maygh Raag. ||1||<br>
  So all together, they sing the six Raagas and the thirty Raaginis,<br>
  and all the forty-eight sons of the Raagas. ||1||1||<br>
 <br>
 </body>