<body>
 
 
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Christianity</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="bb32.htm">Previous</a> <a href="bb34.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 73------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_73"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 73</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h1 align="center">CHAPTER XXXIII<a name="page_73_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_73_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a>.</h1>
 
 <p align="center">OF THE MESSIANIC GENERATIONS<a name="page_73_fr_5"></a><a href="#page_73_note_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></a>.</p>
 
 <p>   G<small>OD</small> created Adam. Adam begat Seth. Seth begat Enos. Enos begat <u>K</u>ainân. <u>K</u>ainân begat Mahalaleel. Mahalaleel begat Jared.
 
 <!------------------------page 74------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_74"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 74</font></a>
 
 Jared begat Enoch. Enoch begat Methuselah. Methuselah begat Lamech. Lamech begat Noah. Noah begat Shem. Shem begat Arphaxar. Arphaxar begat <u>K</u>ainân. <u>K</u>ainân begat Shâlâch. Shâlâch begat Eber. Eber begat Peleg. Peleg begat Reu. Reu begat Serug. Serug begat Nahor. Nahor begat Terah. Terah begat Abraham. Abraham begat Isaac. Isaac begat Jacob. Jacob begat Judah. Judah took a Canaanitish wife, whose name was Shuah. And it was very grievous to Jacob, and he said to Judah, 'The God of my fathers will not allow the seed of Canaan to be mingled with our seed, nor his family with our family.' There were born to Judah by the Canaanitish woman three sons, Er, Onan, and Shelah. Er took Tamar, the daughter of Merari the son of Levi, to wife, and he lay with her in the Sodomite way and died without children. After him his brother Onan took her, to raise up seed to his brother; he also, when he lay with her, scattered his seed outside of her on the ground, and he too died without children. Because Shelah was a child, Judah kept his daughter-in-law in widowhood, that he might give her to Shelah to raise up seed by her. But Tamar went into her father-in-law by crafty devices, and lay with him, and conceived, and gave birth to twins, Pharez and Zarah. Pharez begat Hezron. Hezron begat Aram. Aram begat Amminadab. Amminadab begat Nahshon. Eleazar the son of Aaron, the priest, took the sister of Nahshon to wife, and by her begat Phinehas; and the seed of the priesthood was mingled with the royal line<a name="page_74_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_74_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>. Nahshon begat Salmon. Salmon begat Boaz by Rahab. Boaz begat Obed by Ruth the Moabitess. Obed begat Jesse. Jesse begat David the king by Nahash.</p>
 
 <p>   Now two genealogies are handed down from David to Christ; the one from Solomon to Jacob<a name="page_74_fr_2"></a><a href="#page_74_note_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></a>, and the other from Nathan to Heli<a name="page_74_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_74_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>. David begat Solomon. Solomon begat Rehoboam. Rehoboam begat Abijah. Abijah begat Asa. Asa begat Jehoshaphat. Jehoshaphat begat Joram. Joram begat Uzziah. Uzziah begat Jotham. Jotham begat Ahaz. Ahaz begat Hezekiah. Hezekiah begat Manasseh.
 
 <!------------------------page 75------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_75"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 75</font></a>
 
 Manasseh begat Amon. Amon begat Josiah. Josiah begat Jeconiah. Jeconiah begat Salathiel. Salathiel begat Zerubbabel. Zerubbabel begat Abiud. Abiud begat Eliakim. Eliakim begat Azor. Azor begat Zadok. Zadok begat Achin. Achin begat Eliud. Eliud begat Eleazar. Eleazar begat Matthan. Matthan begat Jacob. Jacob begat Joseph. Or again: David begat Nathan. Nathan begat Mattatha. Mattatha begat Mani. Mani begat Melea. Melea begat Eliakim. Eliakim begat Jonam. Jonam begat Levi<a name="page_75_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_75_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>. Levi begat Mattîtha. Mattîtha begat Jorim. Jorim begat Eliezer. Eliezer begat Jose. Jose begat Er. Er begat Elmodad. Elmodad begat Cosam. Cosam begat Addi. Addi begat Melchi. Melchi begat Neri. Neri begat Salathiel. Salathiel begat Zorobabel. Zorobabel begat Rhesa. Rhesa begat Johannan. Johannan begat Juda. Juda begat Joseph. Joseph begat Semei. Semei begat Mattatha. Mattatha begat Maath. Maath begat Nagge. Nagge begat Esli. Esli begat Nahum. Nahum begat Amos. Amos begat Mattîtha. Mattîtha begat Joseph. Joseph begat Janni. Janni begat Melchi. Melchi begat Levi. Levi begat Matthat. Matthat begat Heli. Heli begat Joseph.</p>
 
 <p>   Know too, O my brother, that Mattan the son of Eliezer--whose descent was from the family of Solomon--took a wife whose name was Astha (or Essetha) and by her begat Jacob naturally. Mattan died, and Melchi--whose family descended from Nathan the son of David--took her to wife, and begat by her Eli (or Heli); hence Jacob and Heli are brothers, (the sons) of (one) mother. Eli took a wife and died without children. Then Jacob took her to wife, to raise up seed to his brother, according to the command of the law; and he begat by her Joseph, who was the son of Jacob according to nature, but the son of Heli according to the law; so whichever ye choose, whether according to nature, or according to the law, Christ is found to be the son of David. It is moreover right to know that Eliezer begat two sons, Mattan and Jotham. Mattan begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Joseph; Jotham begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Mary. From this it is clear that Joseph's father and Mary's father were cousins.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="bb34.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <!-----------------footnotes page 73--------------->
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_73"></a><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 73</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_73_note_4"></a><a href="#page_73_fr_4">4</a> Chap. xxxvii in the Oxford MS.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_73_note_5"></a><a href="#page_73_fr_5">5</a> See <a href="../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#5:1">Gen. v</a>, <a href="../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#1:1">Matt. i</a>, and <a href="../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#3:23">Luke iii. 23</a>-38.</p>
 
 <!-----------------footnotes page 74--------------->
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_74"></a><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 74</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_74_note_1"></a><a href="#page_74_fr_1">1</a> This sentence is omitted by the Oxford MS., as well as several names from the genealogies.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_74_note_2"></a><a href="#page_74_fr_2">2</a> <a href="../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#1:6">Matt. i. 6</a>-16.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_74_note_3"></a><a href="#page_74_fr_3">3</a> <a href="../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#3:23">Luke iii. 23</a>-31.</p>
 
 <!-----------------footnotes page 75--------------->
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_75"></a><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 75</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_75_note_1"></a><a href="#page_75_fr_1">1</a> Joseph, Juda, and Simeon should follow here. See <a href="../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#3:29">Luke iii. 29</a>, 30.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>