<body>
 
 
 
 <p align="center"><a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-Texts</a> <a href="../index.htm">Christianity</a> <a href="index.htm">Index</a> <a href="bb54.htm">Previous</a> <a href="bb56.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p>
 
 <!------------------------page 129------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_129"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 129</font></a>
 
 </p>
 
 <h1 align="center">CHAPTER LV<a name="page_129_fr_3"></a><a href="#page_129_note_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></a>.</h1>
 
 <p align="center">OF THE COMING OF THE ANTICHRIST, THE SON OF PERDITION.</p>
 
 <p>   I<small>N</small> a week and half a week<a name="page_129_fr_4"></a><a href="#page_129_note_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></a> after the destruction of these wretches shall the son of destruction appear. He shall be conceived in Chorazin, born in Bethsaida, and reared in Capernaum. Chorazin shall exult because he was conceived in her, Bethsaida because he was born in her, and Capernaum because he was brought up in her; for this reason our Lord proclaimed Woe to these three (cities) in the Gospel<a name="page_129_fr_5"></a><a href="#page_129_note_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></a>. As soon as the son of perdition is revealed, the king of the Greeks will go up and stand upon Golgotha, where our Lord was crucified; and he will set the royal crown upon the top of the holy Cross, upon which our Lord was
 
 <!------------------------page 130------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_130"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 130</font></a>
 
 crucified; and he will stretch out his two hands to heaven; and will deliver over the kingdom to God the Father. The holy Cross will be taken up to heaven, and the royal crown with it; and the king will die immediately. The king who shall deliver over the kingdom to God will be descended from the seed of Kûshath the daughter of Pîl, the king of the Ethiopians; for Armelaus (Romulus) the king of the Greeks took Kûshath to wife, and the seed of the Ethiopians was mingled with that of the Greeks. From this seed shall a king arise who shall deliver the kingdom over to God, as the blessed David has said, 'Cush will deliver the power to God<a name="page_130_fr_1"></a><a href="#page_130_note_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></a>.' When the Cross is raised up to heaven, straightway shall every head and every ruler and all powers be brought to nought, and God will withdraw His providential care from the earth. The heavens will be prevented from letting fall rain, and the earth from producing germs and plants; and the earth shall remain like iron through drought, and the heavens like brass. Then will the son of perdition appear, of the seed and of the tribe of Dan; and he will shew deluding phantasms, and lead astray the world, for the simple will see the lepers cleansed, the blind with their eyes opened, the paralytic walking, the devils cast out, the sun when he looks upon it becoming black, the moon when he commands it becoming changed, the trees putting forth fruit from their branches, and the earth making roots to grow. He will shew deluding phantasms (of this kind), but he will not be able to raise the dead. He will go into Jerusalem and will sit upon a throne in the temple saying, 'I am the Christ;' and he will be borne aloft by legions of devils like a king and a lawgiver, naming himself God, and saying, 'I am the fulfilment of the types and the parables.' He will put an end to prayers and offerings, as if at his appearance prayers are to be abolished and men will not need sacrifices and offerings along with him. He becomes a man incarnate by a married woman of the tribe of Dan. When this son of destruction becomes a man, he will be made a dwelling-place for devils, and all Satanic workings will be perfected in him. There will be gathered together with him all the devils and all the hosts of the Indians; and before all the Indians and before all men will the mad Jewish nation believe in him, saying, 'This is the
 
 <!------------------------page 131------------------------>
 
 <a name="page_131"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 131</font></a>
 
 Christ, the expectation of the world.' The time of the error of the Antichrist will last two years and a half, but others say three years and six months. And when every one is standing in despair, then will Elijah (Elias) come from Paradise, and convict the deceiver, and turn the heart of the fathers to the children and the heart of the children to the fathers; and he will encourage and strengthen the hearts of the believers.</p>
 
 <hr>
 
 <p align="center"><a href="bb56.htm">Next</a></p>
 
 <!--======================footnotes======================-->
 
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="center">Footnotes</h3>
 
 <!-----------------footnotes page 129--------------->
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_129"></a><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 129</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_129_note_3"></a><a href="#page_129_fr_3">3</a> In the Oxford MS. chap. lvi, fol. 198 <i>b</i>.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_129_note_4"></a><a href="#page_129_fr_4">4</a> See Migne, <i>Dict. des Apoc.</i>, ii, col. 618.</p>
 
 <p><a name="page_129_note_5"></a><a href="#page_129_fr_5">5</a> <a href="../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#11:21">Matt. xi. 21</a>.</p>
 
 <!-----------------footnotes page 130--------------->
 
 <p><a name="footnotes_page_130"></a><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 130</font></p>
 
 <p><a name="page_130_note_1"></a><a href="#page_130_fr_1">1</a> <a href="../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#68:31">Ps. lxviii. 31</a>.</p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 <p> </p>
 
 </body>