<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="18.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="20.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 19
 </h1>
 
 
 
 
 <p>1 And the cities of Sodom had four judges to four cities, and these were their names, Serak in
 the city of Sodom, Sharkad in Gomorrah, Zabnac in Admah, and Menon in Zeboyim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Eliezer Abraham's servant applied to them different names, and he converted Serak to
 Shakra, Sharkad to Shakrura, Zebnac to Kezobim, and Menon to Matzlodin.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And by desire of their four judges the people of Sodom and Gomorrah had beds erected in
 the streets of the cities, and if a man came to these places they laid hold of him and brought
 him to one of their beds, and by force made him to lie in them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And as he lay down, three men would stand at his head and three at his feet, and measure
 him by the length of the bed, and if the man was less than the bed these six men would
 stretch him at each end, and when he cried out to them they would not answer him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And if he was longer than the bed they would draw together the two sides of the bed at
 each end, until the man had reached the gates of death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And if he continued to cry out to them, they would answer him, saying, Thus shall it be done
 to a man that cometh into our land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And when men heard all these things that the people of the cities of Sodom did, they
 refrained from coming there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And when a poor man came to their land they would give him silver and gold, and cause a
 proclamation in the whole city not to give him a morsel of bread to eat, and if the stranger
 should remain there some days, and die from hunger, not having been able to obtain a
 morsel of bread, then at his death all the people of the city would come and take their silver
 and gold which they had given to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And those that could recognize the silver or gold which they had given him took it back, and
 at his death they also stripped him of his garments, and they would fight about them, and he
 that prevailed over his neighbor took them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 They would after that carry him and bury him under some of the shrubs in the deserts; so
 they did all the days to any one that came to them and died in their land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And in the course of time Sarah sent Eliezer to Sodom, to see Lot and inquire after his
 welfare.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And Eliezer went to Sodom, and he met a man of Sodom fighting with a stranger, and the
 man of Sodom stripped the poor man of all his clothes and went away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And this poor man cried to Eliezer and supplicated his favor on account of what the man of
 Sodom had done to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And he said to him, Why dost thou act thus to the poor man who came to thy land?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the man of Sodom answered Eliezer, saying, Is this man thy brother, or have the
 people of Sodom made thee a judge this day, that thou speakest about this man?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Eliezer strove with the man of Sodom on account of the poor man, and when Eliezer
 approached to recover the poor man's clothes from the man of Sodom, he hastened and with
 a stone smote Eliezer in the forehead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the blood flowed copiously from Eliezer's forehead, and when the man saw the blood
 he caught hold of Eliezer, saying, Give me my hire for having rid thee of this bad blood that
 was in thy forehead, for such is the custom and the law in our land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Eliezer said to him, Thou hast wounded me and requirest me to pay thee thy hire; and
 Eliezer would not hearken to the words of the man of Sodom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the man laid hold of Eliezer and brought him to Shakra the judge of Sodom for
 judgment.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the man spoke to the judge, saying, I beseech thee my lord, thus has this man done,
 for I smote him with a stone that the blood flowed from his forehead, and he is unwilling to
 give me my hire.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the judge said to Eliezer, This man speaketh truth to thee, give him his hire, for this is
 the custom in our land; and Eliezer heard the words of the judge, and he lifted up a stone and
 smote the judge, and the stone struck on his forehead, and the blood flowed copiously from
 the forehead of the judge, and Eliezer said, If this then is the custom in your land give thou
 unto this man what I should have given him, for this has been thy decision, thou didst decree
 it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Eliezer left the man of Sodom with the judge, and he went away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And when the kings of Elam had made war with the kings of Sodom, the kings of Elam
 captured all the property of Sodom, and they took Lot captive, with his property, and when it
 was told to Abraham he went and made war with the kings of Elam, and he recovered from
 their hands all the property of Lot as well as the property of Sodom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 At that time the wife of Lot bare him a daughter, and he called her name Paltith, saying,
 Because God had delivered him and his whole household from the kings of Elam; and Paltith
 daughter of Lot grew up, and one of the men of Sodom took her for a wife.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And a poor man came into the city to seek a maintenance, and he remained in the city
 some days, and all the people of Sodom caused a proclamation of their custom not to give this man a morsel of
 bread to eat, until he dropped dead upon the earth, and they did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Paltith the daughter of Lot saw this man lying in the streets starved with hunger, and
 no one would give him any thing to keep him alive, and he was just upon the point of death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And her soul was filled with pity on account of the man, and she fed him secretly with
 bread for many days, and the soul of this man was revived.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 For when she went forth to fetch water she would put the bread in the water pitcher, and
 when she came to the place where the poor man was, she took the bread from the pitcher
 and gave it him to eat; so she did many days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And all the people of Sodom and Gomorrah wondered how this man could bear starvation
 for so many days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And they said to each other, This can only be that he eats and drinks, for no man can bear
 starvation for so many days or live as this man has, without even his countenance changing;
 and three men concealed themselves in a place where the poor man was stationed, to know
 who it was that brought him bread to eat.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Paltith daughter of Lot went forth that day to fetch water, and she put bread into her
 pitcher of water, and she went to draw water by the poor man's place, and she took out the
 bread from the pitcher and gave it to the poor man and he ate it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And the three men saw what Paltith did to the poor man, and they said to her, It is thou
 then who hast supported him, and therefore has he not starved, nor changed in appearance
 nor died like the rest.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And the three men went out of the place in which they were concealed, and they seized
 Paltith and the bread which was in the poor man's hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And they took Paltith and brought her before their judges, and they said to them, Thus did
 she do, and it is she who supplied the poor man with bread, therefore did he not die all this
 time; now therefore declare to us the punishment due to this woman for having transgressed
 our law.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And the people of Sodom and Gomorrah assembled and kindled a fire in the street of the
 city, and they took the woman and cast her into the fire and she was burned to ashes.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And in the city of Admah there was a woman to whom they did the like.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 For a traveler came into the city of Admah to abide there all night, with the intention of
 going home in the morning, and he sat opposite the door of the house of the young woman's
 father, to remain there, as the sun had set when be had reached that place; and the young
 woman saw him sitting by the door of the house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And he asked her for a drink of water and she said to him, Who art thou? and he said to
 her, I was this day going on the road, and reached here when the sun set, so I will abide here
 all night, and in the morning I will arise early and continue my journey.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And the young woman went into the house and fetched the man bread and water to eat
 and drink.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And this affair became known to the people of Admah, and they assembled and brought
 the young woman before the judges, that they should judge her for this act.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And the judge said, The judgment of death must pass upon this woman because she
 transgressed our law, and this therefore is the decision concerning her.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And the people of those cities assembled and brought out the young woman, and anointed
 her with honey from head to foot, as the judge had decreed, and they placed her before a
 swarm of bees which were then in their hives, and the bees flew upon her and stung her that
 her whole body was swelled.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And the young woman cried out on account of the bees, but no one took notice of her or
 pitied her, and her cries ascended to heaven.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And the Lord was provoked at this and at all the works of the cities of Sodom, for they had
 abundance of food, and had tranquility amongst them, and still would not sustain the poor
 and the needy, and in those days their evil doings and sins became great before the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And the Lord sent for two of the angels that had come to Abraham's house, to destroy
 Sodom and its cities.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And the angels rose up from the door of Abraham's tent, after they had eaten and drunk,
 and they reached Sodom in the evening, and Lot was then sitting in the gate of Sodom, and
 when he saw them he rose to meet them, and he bowed down to the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And he pressed them greatly and brought them into his house, and he gave them victuals
 which they ate, and they abode all night in his house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And the angels said to Lot, Arise, go forth from this place, thou and all belonging to thee,
 lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of this city, for the Lord will destroy this place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And the angels laid hold upon the hand of Lot and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the
 hands of his children, and all belonging to him, and they brought him forth and set him without
 the cities.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And they said to Lot, Escape for thy life, and he fled and all belonging to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah and upon all these cities
 brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And he overthrew these cities, all the plain and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that
 which grew upon the ground; and Ado the wife of Lot looked back to see the destruction of
 the cities, for her compassion was moved on account of her daughters who remained in
 Sodom, for they did not go with her.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And when she looked back she became a pillar of salt, and it is yet in that place unto this
 day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And the oxen which stood in that place daily licked up the salt to the extremities of their
 feet, and in the morning it would spring forth afresh, and they again licked it up unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 And Lot and two of his daughters that remained with him fled and escaped to the cave of
 Adullam, and they remained there for some time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>56 And Abraham rose up early in the morning to see what had been done to the cities of
 Sodom; and he looked and beheld the smoke of the cities going up like the smoke of a
 furnace.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>57 And Lot and his two daughters remained in the cave, and they made their father drink
 wine, and they lay with him, for they said there was no man upon earth that could raise up
 seed from them, for they thought that the whole earth was destroyed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>58 And they both lay with their father, and they conceived and bare sons, and the first born
 called the name of her son Moab, saying, From my father did I conceive him; he is the father
 of the Moabites unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>59 And the younger also called her son Benami; he is the father of the children of Ammon
 unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>60 And after this Lot and his two daughters went away from there, and he dwelt on the other
 side of the Jordan with his two daughters and their sons, and the sons of Lot grew up, and
 they went and took themselves wives from the land of Canaan, and they begat children and
 they were fruitful and multiplied.</p><p>
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="20.htm">Next: Chapter 20</a>
 </p></body>