<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="22.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="24.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 23
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 At that time the word of the Lord came to Abraham, and he said unto him, Abraham, and he
 said, Here I am.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And he said to him, Take now thy son, thine only son whom thou lovest, even Isaac, and go
 to the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains
 which shall be shown to thee, for there wilt thou see a cloud and the glory of the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Abraham said within himself, How shall I separate my son Isaac from Sarah his
 mother, in order to bring him up for a burnt offering before the Lord?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And Abraham came into the tent, and he sat before Sarah his wife, and he spoke these
 words to her,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 My son Isaac is grown up and he has not for some time studied the service of his God, now
 tomorrow I will go and bring him to Shem, and Eber his son, and there he will learn the ways
 of the Lord, for they will teach him to know the Lord as well as to know that when he prayeth
 continually before the Lord, he will answer him, therefore there he will know the way of
 serving the Lord his God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Sarah said, Thou hast spoken well, go my lord and do unto him as thou hast said, but
 remove him not at a great distance from me, neither let him remain there too long, for my soul
 is bound within his soul.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Abraham said unto Sarah, My daughter, let us pray to the Lord our God that he may do
 good with us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Sarah took her son Isaac and he abode all that night with her, and she kissed and
 embraced him, and gave him instructions till morning.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And she said to him, O my son, how can my soul separate itself from thee? And she still
 kissed him and embraced him, and she gave Abraham instructions concerning him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Sarah said to Abraham, O my lord, I pray thee take heed of thy son, and place thine
 eyes over him, for I have no other son nor daughter but him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 O forsake him not. If he be hungry give him bread, and if he be thirsty give him water to
 drink; do not let him go on foot, neither let him sit in the sun.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 Neither let him go by himself in the road, neither force him from whatever he may desire,
 but do unto him as he may say to thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And Sarah wept bitterly the whole night on account of Isaac, and she gave him instructions
 till morning.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And in the morning Sarah selected a very fine and beautiful garment from those garments
 which she had in the house, that Abimelech had given to her.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And she dressed Isaac her son therewith, and she put a turban upon his head, and she
 enclosed a precious stone in the top of the turban, and she gave them provision for the road,
 and they went forth, and Isaac went with his father Abraham, and some of their servants
 accompanied them to see them off the road.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Sarah went out with them, and she accompanied them upon the road to see them off,
 and they said to her, Return to the tent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And when Sarah heard the words of her son Isaac she wept bitterly, and Abraham her
 husband wept with her, and their son wept with them a great weeping; also those who went
 with them wept greatly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Sarah caught hold of her son Isaac, and she held him in her arms, and she embraced
 him and continued to weep with him, and Sarah said, Who knoweth if after this day I shall
 ever see thee again?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And they still wept together, Abraham, Sarah and Isaac, and all those that accompanied
 them on the road wept with them, and Sarah afterward turned away from her son, weeping
 bitterly, and all her men servants and maid servants returned with her to the tent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And Abraham went with Isaac his son to bring him up as an offering before the Lord, as
 He had commanded him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And Abraham took two of his young men with him, Ishmael the son of Hagar and Eliezer
 his servant, and they went together with them, and whilst they were walking in the road the
 young men spoke these words to themselves,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Ishmael said to Eliezer, Now my father Abraham is going with Isaac to bring him up
 for a burnt offering to the Lord, as He commanded him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 Now when he returneth he will give unto me all that he possesses, to inherit after him, for I
 am his first born.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And Eliezer answered Ishmael and said, Surely Abraham did cast thee away with thy
 mother, and swear that thou shouldst not inherit any thing of all he possesses, and to whom
 will he give all that he has, with all his treasures, but unto me his servant, who has been
 faithful in his house, who has served him night and day, and has done all that he desired me?
 to me will he bequeath at his death all that he possesses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And whilst Abraham was proceeding with his son Isaac along the road, Satan came and
 appeared to Abraham in the figure of a very aged man, humble and of contrite spirit, and he
 approached Abraham and said to him, Art thou silly or brutish, that thou goest to do this thing
 this day to thine only son?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 For God gave thee a son in thy latter days, in thy old age, and wilt thou go and slaughter
 him this day because he committed no violence, and wilt thou cause the soul of thine only son
 to perish from the earth?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 Dost thou not know and understand that this thing cannot be from the Lord? for the Lord
 cannot do unto man such evil upon earth to say to him, Go slaughter thy child.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Abraham heard this and knew that it was the word of Satan who endeavored to draw
 him aside from the way of the Lord, but Abraham would not hearken to the voice of Satan,
 and Abraham rebuked him so that he went away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And Satan returned and came to Isaac; and he appeared unto Isaac in the figure of a
 young man comely and well favored.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And he approached Isaac and said unto him, Dost thou not know and understand that thy
 old silly father bringeth thee to the slaughter this day for naught?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 Now therefore, my son, do not listen nor attend to him, for he is a silly old man, and let not
 thy precious soul and beautiful figure be lost from the earth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Isaac heard this, and said unto Abraham, Hast thou heard, my father, that which this
 man has spoken? even thus has he spoken.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And Abraham answered his son Isaac and said to him, Take heed of him and do not listen
 to his words, nor attend to him, for he is Satan, endeavoring to draw us aside this day from the commands of
 God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And Abraham still rebuked Satan, and Satan went from them, and seeing he could not
 prevail over them he hid himself from them, and he went and passed before them in the road;
 and he transformed himself to a large brook of water in the road, and Abraham and Isaac and
 his two young men reached that place, and they saw a brook large and powerful as the
 mighty waters.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And they entered the brook and passed through it, and the waters at first reached their
 legs.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And they went deeper in the brook and the waters reached up to their necks, and they
 were all terrified on account of the water; and whilst they were going over the brook Abraham
 recognized that place, and he knew that there was no water there before.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Abraham said to his son Isaac, I know this place in which there was no brook nor
 water, now therefore it is this Satan who does all this to us, to draw us aside this day from the
 commands of God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And Abraham rebuked him and said unto him, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, begone
 from us for we go by the commands of God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And Satan was terrified at the voice of Abraham, and he went away from them, and the
 place again became dry land as it was at first.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And Abraham went with Isaac toward the place that God had told him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place at a distance which
 God had told him of.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And a pillar of fire appeared to him that reached from the earth to heaven, and a cloud of
 glory upon the mountain, and the glory of the Lord was seen in the cloud.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And Abraham said to Isaac, My son, dost thou see in that mountain, which we perceive at
 a distance, that which I see upon it?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Isaac answered and said unto his father, I see and lo a pillar of fire and a cloud, and
 the glory of the Lord is seen upon the cloud.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And Abraham knew that his son Isaac was accepted before the Lord for a burnt offering.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And Abraham said unto Eliezer and unto Ishmael his son, Do you also see that which we
 see upon the mountain which is at a distance?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And they answered and said, We see nothing more than like the other mountains of the
 earth. And Abraham knew that they were not accepted before the Lord to go with them, and
 Abraham said to them, Abide ye here with the ass whilst I and Isaac my son will go to yonder
 mount and worship there before the Lord and then return to you.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And Eliezer and Ishmael remained in that place, as Abraham had commanded.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And Abraham took wood for a burnt offering and placed it upon his son Isaac, and he took
 the fire and the knife, and they both went to that place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And when they were going along Isaac said to his father, Behold, I see here the fire and
 wood, and where then is the lamb that is to be the burnt offering before the Lord?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And Abraham answered his son Isaac, saying, The Lord has made choice of thee my son,
 to be a perfect burnt offering instead of the lamb.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And Isaac said unto his father, I will do all that the Lord spoke to thee with joy and
 cheerfulness of heart.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And Abraham again said unto Isaac his son, Is there in thy heart any thought or counsel
 concerning this, which is not proper? tell me my son, I pray thee, O my son conceal it not from
 me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And Isaac answered his father Abraham and said unto him, O my father, as the Lord liveth
 and as thy soul liveth, there is nothing in my heart to cause me to deviate either to the right or
 to the left from the word that he has spoken to thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 Neither limb nor muscle has moved or stirred at this, nor is there in my heart any thought
 or evil counsel concerning this.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>56 But I am of joyful and cheerful heart in this matter, and I say, Blessed is the Lord who has
 this day chosen me to be a burnt offering before Him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>57 And Abraham greatly rejoiced at the words of Isaac, and they went on and came together
 to that place that the Lord had spoken of.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>58 And Abraham approached to build the altar in that place, and Abraham was weeping, and
 Isaac took stones and mortar until they had finished building the altar.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>59 And Abraham took the wood and placed it in order upon the altar which he had built.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>60 And he took his son Isaac and bound him in order to place him upon the wood which was
 upon the altar, to slay him for a burnt offering before the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>61 And Isaac said to his father, Bind me securely and then place me upon the altar lest I
 should turn and move, and break loose from the force of the knife upon my flesh and thereof
 profane the burnt offering; and Abraham did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>62 And Isaac still said to his father, O my father, when thou shalt have slain me and burnt me
 for an offering, take with thee that which shall remain of my ashes to bring to Sarah my
 mother, and say to her, This is the sweet smelling savor of Isaac; but do not tell her this if she
 should sit near a well or upon any high place, lest she should cast her soul after me and die.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>63 And Abraham heard the words of Isaac, and he lifted up his voice and wept when Isaac
 spake these words; and Abraham's tears gushed down upon Isaac his son, and Isaac wept
 bitterly, and he said to his father, Hasten thou, O my father, and do with me the will of the
 Lord our God as He has commanded thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>64 And the hearts of Abraham and Isaac rejoiced at this thing which the Lord had
 commanded them; but the eye wept bitterly whilst the heart rejoiced.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>65 And Abraham bound his son Isaac, and placed him on the altar upon the wood, and Isaac
 stretched forth his neck upon the altar before his father, and Abraham stretched forth his
 hand to take the knife to slay his son as a burnt offering before the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>66 At that time the angels of mercy came before the Lord and spake to him concerning Isaac,
 saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>67 0 Lord, thou art a merciful and compassionate King over all that thou hast created in
 heaven and in earth, and thou supportest them all; give therefore ransom and redemption
 instead of thy servant Isaac, and pity and have compassion upon Abraham and Isaac his son,
 who are this day performing thy commands.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>68 Hast thou seen, O Lord, how Isaac the son of Abraham thy servant is bound down to the
 slaughter like an animal? now therefore let thy pity be roused for them, O Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>69 At that time the Lord appeared unto Abraham, and called to him, from heaven, and said
 unto him, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him, for now I know
 that thou fearest God in performing this act, and in not withholding thy son, thine only son,
 from me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>70 And Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, a ram was caught in a thicket by his
 horns; that was the ram which the Lord God had created in the earth in the day that he made
 earth and heaven.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>71 For the Lord had prepared this ram from that day, to be a burnt offering instead of Isaac.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>72 And this ram was advancing to Abraham when Satan caught hold of him and entangled
 his horns in the thicket, that he might not advance to Abraham, in order that Abraham might
 slay his son.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>73 And Abraham, seeing the ram advancing to him and Satan withholding him, fetched him
 and brought him before the altar, and he loosened his son Isaac from his binding, and he put
 the ram in his stead, and Abraham killed the ram upon the altar, and brought it up as an
 offering in the place of his son Isaac.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>74 And Abraham sprinkled some of the blood of the ram upon the altar, and he exclaimed
 and said, This is in the place of my son, and may this be considered this day as the blood of
 my son before the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>75 And all that Abraham did on this occasion by the altar, he would exclaim and say, This is
 in the room of my son, and may it this day be considered before the Lord in the place of my
 son; and Abraham finished the whole of the service by the altar, and the service was
 accepted before the Lord, and was accounted as if it had been Isaac; and the Lord blessed
 Abraham and his seed on that day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>76 And Satan went to Sarah, and he appeared to her in the figure of an old man very humble
 and meek, and Abraham was yet engaged in the burnt offering before the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>77 And he said unto her, Dost thou not know all the work that Abraham has made with thine
 only son this day? for he took Isaac and built an altar, and killed him, and brought him up as a
 sacrifice upon the altar, and Isaac cried and wept before his father, but he looked not at him,
 neither did he have compassion over him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>78 And Satan repeated these words, and he went away from her, and Sarah heard all the
 words of Satan, and she imagined him to be an old man from amongst the sons of men who
 had been with her son, and had come and told her these things.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>79 And Sarah lifted up her voice and wept and cried out bitterly on account of her son; and
 she threw herself upon the ground and she cast dust upon her head, and she said, O my son,
 Isaac my son, O that I had this day died instead of thee. And she continued to weep and said,
 It grieves me for thee, O my son, my son Isaac, O that I had died this day in thy stead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>80 And she still continued to weep, and said, It grieves me for thee after that I have reared
 thee and have brought thee up; now my joy is turned into mourning over thee, I that had a
 longing for thee, and cried and prayed to God till I bare thee at ninety years old; and now hast
 thou served this day for the knife and the fire, to be made an offering.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>81 But I console myself with thee, my son, in its being the word of the Lord, for thou didst
 perform the command of thy God; for who can transgress the word of our God, in whose hands is the
 soul of every living creature?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>82 Thou art just, O Lord our God, for all thy works are good and righteous; for I also am
 rejoiced with thy word which thou didst command, and whilst mine eye weepeth bitterly my
 heart rejoiceth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>83 And Sarah laid her head upon the bosom of one of her handmaids, and she became as
 still as a stone.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>84 She afterward rose up and went about making inquiries till she came to Hebron, and she
 inquired of all those whom she met walking in the road, and no one could tell her what had
 happened to her son.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>85 And she came with her maid servants and men servants to Kireath-arba, which is Hebron,
 and she asked concerning her Son, and she remained there while she sent some of her
 servants to seek where Abraham had gone with Isaac; they went to seek him in the house of
 Shem and Eber, and they could not find him, and they sought throughout the land and he was
 not there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>86 And behold, Satan came to Sarah in the shape of an old man, and he came and stood
 before her, and he said unto her, I spoke falsely unto thee, for Abraham did not kill his son
 and he is not dead; and when she heard the word her joy was so exceedingly violent on
 account of her son, that her soul went out through joy; she died and was gathered to her
 people.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>87 And when Abraham had finished his service he returned with his son Isaac to his young
 men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba, and they came home.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>88 And Abraham sought for Sarah, and could not find her, and he made inquiries concerning
 her, and they said unto him, She went as far as Hebron to seek you both where you had
 gone, for thus was she informed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>89 And Abraham and Isaac went to her to Hebron, and when they found that she was dead
 they lifted up their voices and wept bitterly over her; and Isaac fell upon his mother's face and
 wept over her, and he said, O my mother, my mother, how hast thou left me, and where hast
 thou gone? O how, how hast thou left me!</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>90 And Abraham and Isaac wept greatly and all their servants wept with them on account of
 Sarah, and they mourned over her a great and heavy mourning.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="24.htm">Next: Chapter 24</a>
 </p></body>