<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="23.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="25.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 24
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And the life of Sarah was one hundred and twenty-seven years, and Sarah died; and
 Abraham rose up from before his dead to seek a burial place to bury his wife Sarah; and he
 went and spoke to the children of Heth, the inhabitants of the land, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 I am a stranger and a sojourner with you in your land; give me a possession of a burial
 place in your land, that I may bury my dead from before me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the children of Heth said unto Abraham, behold the land is before thee, in the choice of
 our sepulchers bury thy dead, for no man shall withhold thee from burying thy dead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And Abraham said unto them, If you are agreeable to this go and entreat for me to Ephron,
 the son of Zochar, requesting that he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which is in the end of his
 field, and I will purchase it of him for whatever he desire for it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth, and they went and called for him, and he
 came before Abraham, and Ephron said unto Abraham, Behold all thou requirest thy servant
 will do; and Abraham said, No, but I will buy the cave and the field which thou hast for value,
 In order that it may be for a possession of a burial place for ever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Ephron answered and said, Behold the field and the cave are before thee, give
 whatever thou desirest; and Abraham said, Only at full value will I buy it from thy hand, and
 from the hands of those that go in at the gate of thy city, and from the hand of thy seed for
 ever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Ephron and all his brethren heard this, and Abraham weighed to Ephron four hundred
 shekels of silver in the hands of Ephron and in the hands of all his brethren; and Abraham
 wrote this transaction, and he wrote it and testified it with four witnesses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And these are the names of the witnesses, Amigal son of Abishna the Hittite, Adichorom
 son of Ashunach the Hivite, Abdon son of Achiram the Gomerite, Bakdil the son of Abudish
 the Zidonite.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Abraham took the book of the purchase, and placed it in his treasures, and these are
 the words that Abraham wrote in the book, namely:</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 That the cave and the field Abraham bought from Ephron the Hittite, and from his seed,
 and from those that go out of his city, and from their seed for ever, are to be a purchase to
 Abraham and to his seed and to those that go forth from his loins, for a possession of a burial
 place for ever; and he put a signet to it and testified it with witnesses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And the field and the cave that was in it and all that place were made sure unto Abraham
 and unto his seed after him, from the children of Heth; behold it is before Mamre in Hebron,
 which is in the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And after this Abraham buried his wife Sarah there, and that place and all its boundary
 became to Abraham and unto his seed for a possession of a burial place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And Abraham buried Sarah with pomp as observed at the interment of kings, and she was
 buried in very fine and beautiful garments.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And at her bier was Shem, his sons Eber and Abimelech, together with Anar, Ashcol and
 Mamre, and all the grandees of the land followed her bier.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the days of Sarah were one hundred and twenty-seven years and she died, and
 Abraham made a great and heavy mourning, and he performed the rites of mourning for
 seven days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And all the inhabitants of the land comforted Abraham and Isaac his son on account of
 Sarah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And when the days of their mourning passed by Abraham sent away his son Isaac, and he
 went to the house of Shem and Eber, to learn the ways of the Lord and his instructions, and
 Abraham remained there three years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 At that time Abraham rose up with all his servants, and they went and returned homeward
 to Beersheba, and Abraham and all his servants remained in Beersheba.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And at the revolution of the year Abimelech king of the Philistines died in that year; he was one hundred and ninety-three
 years old at his death; and Abraham went with his people to the land of the Philistines, and
 they comforted the whole household and all his servants, and he then turned and went home.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And it was after the death of Abimelech that the people of Gerar took Benmalich his son,
 and he was only twelve years old, and they made him lying in the place of his father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And they called his name Abimelech after the name of his father, for thus was it their
 custom to do in Gerar, and Abimelech reigned instead of Abimelech his father, and he sat
 upon his throne.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Lot the son of Haran also died in those days, in the thirty-ninth year of the life of Isaac,
 and all the days that Lot lived were one hundred and forty years and he died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And these are the children of Lot, that were born to him by his daughters, the name of the
 first born was Moab, and the name of the second was Benami.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the two sons of Lot went and took themselves wives from the land of Canaan, and
 they bare children to them, and the children of Moab were Ed, Mayon, Tarsus, and Kanvil,
 four sons, these are fathers to the children of Moab unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And all the families of the children of Lot went to dwell wherever they should light upon, for
 they were fruitful and increased abundantly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And they went and built themselves cities in the land where they dwelt, and they called the
 names of the cities which they built after their own names.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Nahor the son of Terah, brother to Abraham, died in those days in the fortieth year of
 the life of Isaac, and all the days of Nahor were one hundred and seventy-two years and he
 died and was buried in Haran.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And when Abraham heard that his brother was dead he grieved sadly, and he mourned
 over his brother many days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And Abraham called for Eliezer his head servant, to give him orders concerning his house,
 and he came and stood before him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Abraham said to him, Behold I am old, I do not know the day of my death; for I am
 advanced in days; now therefore rise up, go forth and do not take a wife for my son from this
 place and from this land, from the daughters of the Canaanites amongst whom we dwell.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 But go to my land and to my birthplace, and take from thence a wife for my son, and the
 Lord God of Heaven and earth who took me from my father's house and brought me to this
 place, and said unto me, To thy seed will I give this land for an inheritance for ever, he will
 send his angel before thee and prosper thy way, that thou mayest obtain a wife for my son
 from my family and from my father's house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And the servant answered his master Abraham and said, Behold I go to thy birthplace and
 to thy father's house, and take a wife for thy son from there; but if the woman be not willing to
 follow me to this land, shall I take thy son back to the land of thy birthplace?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And Abraham said unto him, Take heed that thou bring not my son hither again, for the
 Lord before whom I have walked he will send his angel before thee and prosper thy way.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And Eliezer did as Abraham ordered him, and Eliezer swore unto Abraham his master upon this matter; and Eliezer rose up and took ten camels of the camels
 of his master, and ten men from his master's servants with him, and they rose up and went to
 Haran, the city of Abraham and Nahor, in order to fetch a wife for Isaac the son of Abraham;
 and whilst they were gone Abraham sent to the house of Shem and Eber, and they brought
 from thence his son Isaac.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And Isaac came home to his father's house to Beersheba, whilst Eliezer and his men
 came to Haran; and they stopped in the city by the watering place, and he made his camels to
 kneel down by the water and they remained there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Eliezer, Abraham's servant, prayed and said, O God of Abraham my master; send me
 I pray thee good speed this day and show kindness unto my master, that thou shalt appoint
 this day a wife for my master's son from his family.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Eliezer, for the sake of his servant Abraham, and
 he happened to meet with the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor,
 brother to Abraham, and Eliezer came to her house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And Eliezer related to them all his concerns, and that he was Abraham's servant, and they
 greatly rejoiced at him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And they all blessed the Lord who brought this thing about, and they gave him Rebecca,
 the daughter of Bethuel, for a wife for Isaac.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And the young woman was of very comely appearance, she was a virgin, and Rebecca
 was ten years old in those days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And Bethuel and Laban and his children made a feast on that night, and Eliezer and his
 men came and ate and drank and rejoiced there on that night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And Eliezer rose up in the morning, he and the men that were with him, and he called to
 the whole household of Bethuel, saying, Send me away that I may go to my master; and they
 rose up and sent away Rebecca and her nurse Deborah, the daughter of Uz, and they gave
 her silver and gold, men servants and maid servants, and they blessed her.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And they sent Eliezer away with his men; and the servants took Rebecca, and he went
 and returned to his master to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Isaac took Rebecca and she became his wife, and he brought her into the tent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebecca, the daughter of his uncle Bethuel,
 for a wife.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="25.htm">Next: Chapter 25</a>
 </p></body>