<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="24.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="26.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 25
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And it was at that time that Abraham again took a wife in his old age, and her name was
 Keturah, from the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And she bare unto him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak and Shuach, being six
 sons. And the children of Zimran were Abihen, Molich and Narim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the sons of Jokshan were Sheba and Dedan, and the sons of Medan were Amida,
 Joab, Gochi, Elisha and Nothach; and the sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Chanoch,
 Abida and Eldaah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the sons of Ishbak were Makiro, Beyodua and Tator.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the sons of Shuach were Bildad, Mamdad, Munan and Meban; all these are the
 families of the children of Keturah the Canaanitish woman which she bare unto Abraham the Hebrew.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Abraham sent all these away, and he gave them gifts, and they went away from his son
 Isaac to dwell wherever they should find a place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And all these went to the mountain at the east, and they built themselves six cities in which
 they dwelt unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 But the children of Sheba and Dedan, children of Jokshan, with their children, did not dwell
 with their brethren in their cities, and they journeyed and encamped in the countries and
 wildernesses unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the children of Midian, son of Abraham, went to the east of the land of Cush, and they
 there found a large valley in the eastern country, and they remained there and built a city, and
 they dwelt therein, that is the land of Midian unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Midian dwelt in the city which he built, he and his five sons and all belonging to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And these are the names of the sons of Midian according to their names in their cities,
 Ephah, Epher, Chanoch, Abida and Eldaah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the sons of Ephah were Methach, Meshar, Avi and Tzanua, and the sons of Epher
 were Ephron, Zur, Alirun and Medin, and the sons of Chanoch were Reuel, Rekem, Azi,
 Alyoshub and Alad.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the sons of Abida were Chur, Melud, Kerury, Molchi; and the sons of Eldaah were
 Miker, and Reba, and Malchiyah and Gabol; these are the names of the Midianites according
 to their families; and afterward the families of Midian spread throughout the land of Midian.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And these are the generations of Ishmael the son Abraham, whom Hagar, Sarah's
 handmaid, bare unto Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Ishmael took a wife from the land of Egypt, and her name was Ribah, the same is
 Meribah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Ribah bare unto Ishmael Nebayoth, Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam and their sister Bosmath.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And Ishmael cast away his wife Ribah, and she went from him and returned to Egypt to the
 house of her father, and she dwelt there, for she had been very bad in the sight of Ishmael,
 and in the sight of his father Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Ishmael afterward took a wife from the land of Canaan, and her name was Malchuth,
 and she bare unto him Nishma, Dumah, Masa, Chadad, Tema, Yetur, Naphish and Kedma.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, being twelve princes according
 to their nations; and the families of Ishmael afterward spread forth, and Ishmael took his
 children and all the property that he had gained, together with the souls of his household and
 all belonging to him, and they went to dwell where they should find a place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And they went and dwelt near the wilderness of Paran, and their dwelling was from
 Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt as thou comest toward Assyria.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And Ishmael and his sons dwelt in the land, and they had children born to them, and they
 were fruitful and increased abundantly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And these are the names of the sons of Nebayoth the first born of Ishmael; Mend, Send,
 Mayon; and the sons of Kedar were Alyon, Kezem, Chamad and Eli.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the sons of Adbeel were Chamad and Jabin; and the sons of Mibsam were Obadiah, Ebedmelech and Yeush; these are the families of the children of
 Ribah the wife of Ishmael.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the sons of Mishma the son of Ishmael were Shamua, Zecaryon and Obed; and the
 sons of Dumah were Kezed, Eli, Machmad and Amed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the sons of Masa were Melon, Mula and Ebidadon; and the sons of Chadad were
 Azur, Minzar and Ebedmelech; and the sons of Tema were Seir, Sadon and Yakol.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And the sons of Yetur were Merith, Yaish, Alyo, and Pachoth; and the sons of Naphish
 were Ebed-Tamed, Abiyasaph and Mir; and the sons of Kedma were Calip, Tachti, and Omir;
 these were the children of Malchuth the wife of Ishmael according to their families.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 All these are the families of Ishmael according to their generations, and they dwelt in those
 lands wherein they had built themselves cities unto this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Rebecca the daughter of Bethuel, the wife of Abraham's son Isaac, was barren in
 those days, she had no offspring; and Isaac dwelt with his father in the land of Canaan; and
 the Lord was with Isaac; and Arpachshad the son of Shem the son of Noah died in those
 days, in the forty-eighth year of the life of Isaac, and all the days that Arpachshad lived were
 four hundred and thirty-eight years, and he died.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="26.htm">Next: Chapter 26</a>
 </p></body>