<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="30.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="32.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 31
 </h1>
 
 
 
 
 <p>1 And in the seventh year, Jacob's service which he served Laban was completed, and Jacob
 said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for the days of my service are fulfilled; and Laban did so,
 and Laban and Jacob assembled all the people of that place and they made a feast.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And in the evening Laban came to the house, and afterward Jacob came there with the
 people of the feast, and Laban extinguished all the lights that were there in the house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Jacob said unto Laban, Wherefore dost thou do this thing unto us? and Laban
 answered, Such is our custom to act in this land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And afterward Laban took his daughter Leah, and he brought her to Jacob, and he came to
 her and Jacob did not know that she was Leah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Laban gave his daughter Leah his maid Zilpah for a handmaid.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And all the people at the feast knew what Laban had done to Jacob, but they did not tell the
 thing to Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And all the neighbors came that night to Jacob's house, and they ate and drank and
 rejoiced, and played before Leah upon timbrels, and with dances, and they responded before
 Jacob, Heleah, Heleah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Jacob heard their words but did not understand their meaning, but he thought such
 might be their custom in this land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the neighbors spoke these words before Jacob during the night, and all the lights that
 were in the house Laban had that night extinguished.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And in the morning, when daylight appeared, Jacob turned to his wife and he saw, and
 behold it was Leah that had been lying in his bosom, and Jacob said, Behold now I know
 what the neighbors said last night, Heleah, they said, and I knew it not.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Jacob called unto Laban, and said unto him, What is this that thou didst unto me?
 Surely I served thee for Rachel, and why didst thou deceive me and didst give me Leah?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And Laban answered Jacob, saying, Not so is it done in our place to give the younger before the elder now therefore if
 thou desirest to take her sister likewise, take her unto thee for the service which thou wilt
 serve me for another seven years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And Jacob did so, and he also took Rachel for a wife, and he served Laban seven years
 more, and Jacob also came to Rachel, and he loved Rachel more than Leah, and Laban
 gave her his maid Bilhah for a handmaid.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, the Lord opened her womb, and she
 conceived and bare Jacob four sons in those days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And these are their names, Reuben Simeon, Levi, and Judah, and she afterward left
 bearing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And at that time Rachel was barren, and she had no offspring, and Rachel envied her
 sister Leah, and when Rachel saw that she bare no children to Jacob, she took her handmaid
 Bilhah, and she bare Jacob two sons, Dan and Naphtali.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And when Leah saw that she had left bearing, she also took her handmaid Zilpah, and she
 gave her to Jacob for a wife, and Jacob also came to Zilpah, and she also bare Jacob two
 sons, Gad and Asher.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Leah again conceived and bare Jacob in those days two sons and one daughter, and
 these are their names, Issachar, Zebulon, and their sister Dinah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Rachel was still barren in those days, and Rachel prayed unto the Lord at that time,
 and she said, O Lord God remember me and visit me, I beseech thee, for now my husband
 will cast me off, for I have borne him no children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 Now O Lord God, hear my supplication before thee, and see my affliction, and give me
 children like one of the handmaids, that I may no more bear my reproach.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And God heard her and opened her womb, and Rachel conceived and bare a son, and
 she said, The Lord has taken away my reproach, and she called his name Joseph, saying,
 May the Lord add to me another son; and Jacob was ninety-one years old when she bare
 him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 At that time Jacob's mother, Rebecca, sent her nurse Deborah the daughter of Uz, and
 two of Isaac's servants unto Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And they came to Jacob to Haran and they said unto him, Rebecca has sent us to thee
 that thou shalt return to thy father's house to the land of Canaan; and Jacob hearkened unto
 them in this which his mother had spoken.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 At that time, the other seven years which Jacob served Laban for Rachel were completed,
 and it was at the end of fourteen years that he had dwelt in Haran that Jacob said unto
 Laban, give me my wives and send me away, that I may go to my land, for behold my mother
 did send unto me from the land at Canaan that I should return to my father's house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And Laban said unto him, Not so I pray thee; if I have found favor in thy sight do not leave
 me; appoint me thy wages and I will give them, and remain with me.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Jacob said unto him, This is what thou shalt give me for wages, that I shall this day
 pass through all thy flock and take away from them every lamb that is speckled and spotted
 and such as are brown amongst the sheep, and amongst the goats, and if thou wilt do this
 thing for me I will return and feed thy flock and keep them as at first.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Laban did so, and Laban removed from his flock all that Jacob had said and gave
 them to him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Jacob placed all that he had removed from Laban's flock in the hands of his sons,
 and Jacob was feeding the remainder of Laban's flock.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And when the servants of Isaac which he had sent unto Jacob saw that Jacob would not
 then return with them to the land of Canaan to his father, they then went away from him, and
 they returned home to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Deborah remained with Jacob in Haran, and she did not return with the servants of
 Isaac to the land of Canaan, and Deborah resided with Jacob's wives and children in Haran.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Jacob served Laban six years longer, and when the sheep brought forth, Jacob
 removed from them such as were speckled and spotted, as he had determined with Laban,
 and Jacob did so at Laban's for six years, and the man increased abundantly and he had
 cattle and maid servants and men servants, camels, and asses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Jacob had two hundred drove of cattle, and his cattle were of large size and of
 beautiful appearance and were very productive, and all the families of the sons of men
 desired to get some of the cattle of Jacob, for they were exceedingly prosperous.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And many of the sons of men came to procure some of Jacob's flock, and Jacob gave
 them a sheep for a man servant or a maid servant or for an ass or a camel, or whatever
 Jacob desired from them they gave him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And Jacob obtained riches and honor and possessions by means of these transactions
 with the sons of men, and the children of Laban envied him of this honor.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And in the course of time he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob has taken
 away all that was our father's, and of that which was our father's has he acquired all this glory.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban and of his children, and behold it was not
 toward him in those days as it had been before.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And the Lord appeared to Jacob at the expiration of the six years, and said unto him,
 Arise, go forth out of this land, and return to the land of thy birthplace and I will be with thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And Jacob rose up at that time and he mounted his children and wives and all belonging
 to him upon camels, and he went forth to go to the land of Canaan to his father Isaac.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And Laban did not know that Jacob had gone from him, for Laban had been that day
 sheep-shearing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And Rachel stole her father's images, and she took them and she concealed them upon
 the camel upon which she sat, and she went on.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And this is the manner of the images; in taking a man who is the first born and slaying him
 and taking the hair off his head, and taking salt and salting the head and anointing it in oil,
 then taking a small tablet of copper or a tablet of gold and writing the name upon it, and
 placing the tablet under his tongue, and taking the head with the tablet under the tongue and
 putting it in the house, and lighting up lights before it and bowing down to it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And at the time when they bow down to it, it speaketh to them in all matters that they ask
 of it, through the power of the name which is written in it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And some make them in the figures of men, of gold and silver, and go to them in times known to them, and the figures receive the influence of the stars, and tell
 them future things, and in this manner were the images which Rachel stole from her father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Rachel stole these images which were her father's, in order that Laban might not
 know through them where Jacob had gone.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And Laban came home and he asked concerning Jacob and his household, and he was
 not to be found, and Laban sought his images to know where Jacob had gone, and could not
 find them, and he went to some other images, and he inquired of them and they told him that
 Jacob had fled from him to his father's, to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And Laban then rose up and he took his brothers and all his servants, and he went forth
 and pursued Jacob, and he overtook him in mount Gilead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And Laban said unto Jacob, What is this thou hast done to me to flee and deceive me,
 and lead my daughters and their children as captives taken by the sword?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And thou didst not suffer me to kiss them and send them away with joy, and thou didst
 steal my gods and didst go away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And Jacob answered Laban, saying, Because I was afraid lest thou wouldst take thy
 daughters by force from me; and now with whomsoever thou findest thy gods he shall die.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And Laban searched for the images and he examined in all Jacob's tents and furniture,
 but could not find them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And Laban said unto Jacob, We will make a covenant together and it shall be a testimony
 between me and thee; if thou shalt afflict my daughters, or shalt take other wives besides my
 daughters, even God shall be a witness between me and thee in this matter.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And they took stones and made a heap, and Laban said, This heap is a witness between
 me and thee, therefore he called the name thereof Gilead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And Jacob and Laban offered sacrifice upon the mount, and they ate there by the heap,
 and they tarried in the mount all night, and Laban rose up early in the morning, and he wept
 with his daughters and he kissed them, and he returned unto his place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And he hastened and sent off his son Beor, who was seventeen years old, with Abichorof
 the son of Uz, the son of Nahor, and with them were ten men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 And they hastened and went and passed on the road before Jacob, and they came by
 another road to the land of Seir.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>56 And they came unto Esau and said unto him, Thus saith thy brother and relative, thy
 mother's brother Laban, the son of Bethuel, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>57 Hast thou heard what Jacob thy brother has done unto me, who first came to me naked
 and bare, and I went to meet him, and brought him to my house with honor, and I made him
 great, and I gave him my two daughters for wives and also two of my maids.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>58 And God blessed him on my account, and he increased abundantly, and had sons,
 daughters and maid servants.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>59 He has also an immense stock of flocks and herds, camels and asses, also silver and gold
 in abundance; and when he saw that his wealth increased, he left me whilst I went to shear
 my sheep, and he rose up and fled in secrecy.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>60 And he lifted his wives and  children upon camels, and he led away all his cattle and property which he acquired in my
 land, and he lifted up his countenance to go to his father Isaac, to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>61 And he did not suffer me to kiss my daughters and their children, and he led my daughters
 as captives taken by the sword, and he also stole my gods and he fled.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>62 And now I have left him in the mountain of the brook of Jabuk, him and all belonging to
 him; he lacketh nothing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>63 If it be thy wish to go to him, go then and there wilt thou find him, and thou canst do unto
 him as thy soul desireth; and Laban's messengers came and told Esau all these things.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>64 And Esau heard all the words of Laban's messengers, and his anger was greatly kindled
 against Jacob, and he remembered his hatred, and his anger burned within him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>65 And Esau hastened and took his children and servants and the souls of his household,
 being sixty men, and he went and assembled all the children of Seir the Horite and their
 people, being three hundred and forty men, and took all this number of four hundred men with
 drawn swords, and he went unto Jacob to smite him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>66 And Esau divided this number into several parts, and he took the sixty men of his children
 and servants and the souls of his household as one head, and gave them in care of Eliphaz
 his eldest son.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>67 And the remaining heads he gave to the care of the six sons of Seir the Horite, and he
 placed every man over his generations and children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>68 And the whole of this camp went as it was, and Esau went amongst them toward Jacob,
 and he conducted them with speed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>69 And Laban's messengers departed from Esau and went to the land of Canaan, and they
 came to the house of Rebecca the mother of Jacob and Esau.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>70 And they told her saying, Behold thy son Esau has gone against his brother Jacob with
 four hundred men, for he heard that he was coming, and he is gone to make war with him,
 and to smite him and to take all that he has.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>71 And Rebecca hastened and sent seventy two men from the servants of Isaac to meet
 Jacob on the road; for she said, Peradventure, Esau may make war in the road when he
 meets him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>72 And these messengers went on the road to meet Jacob, and they met him in the road of
 the brook on the opposite side of the brook Jabuk, and Jacob said when he saw them, This
 camp is destined to me from God, and Jacob called the name of that place Machnayim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>73 And Jacob knew all his father's people, and he kissed them and embraced them and
 came with them, and Jacob asked them concerning his father and mother, and they said,
 They were well.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>74 And these messengers said unto Jacob, Rebecca thy mother has sent us to thee, saying, I
 have heard, my son, that thy brother Esau has gone forth against thee on the road with men
 from the children of Seir the Horite.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>75 And therefore, my son, hearken to my voice and see with thy counsel what thou wilt do,
 and when he cometh up to thee, supplicate him, and do not speak rashly to him, and give him
 a present from what thou possessest, and from what God has favored thee with.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>76 And when he asketh thee concerning thy affairs, conceal nothing from him, perhaps he
 may turn from his anger against thee and thou wilt thereby save thy soul, thou and all
 belonging to thee, for it is thy duty to honor him, for he is thy elder brother.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>77 And when Jacob heard the words of his mother which the messengers had spoken to him,
 Jacob lifted up his voice and wept bitterly, and did as his mother then commanded him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="32.htm">Next: Chapter 32</a>
 </p></body>