<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="38.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="40.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 39
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And when the sons of Jacob went from the city of Sarton, they had gone about two hundred
 cubits when they met the inhabitants of Tapnach coming toward them, for they went out to
 fight with them, because they had smitten the king of Tapnach and all his men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 So all that remained in the city of Tapnach came out to fight with the sons of Jacob, and
 they thought to retake from them the booty and the spoil which they had captured from
 Chazar and Sarton.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the rest of the men of Tapnach fought with the sons of Jacob in that place, and the
 sons of Jacob smote them, and they fled before them, and they pursued them to the city of
 Arbelan, and they all fell before the sons of Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the sons of Jacob returned and came to Tapnach, to take away the spoil of Tapnach,
 and when they came to Tapnach they heard that the people of Arbelan had gone out to meet
 them to save the spoil of their brethren, and the sons of Jacob left ten of their men in
 Tapnach to plunder the city, and they went out toward the people of Arbelan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the men of Arbelan went out with their wives to fight with the sons of Jacob, for their
 wives were experienced in battle, and they went out, about four hundred men and women.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And all the sons of Jacob shouted with a loud voice, and they all ran toward the inhabitants
 of Arbelan, and with a great and tremendous voice.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the inhabitants of Arbelan heard the noise of the shouting of the sons of Jacob, and
 their roaring like the noise of lions and like the roaring of the sea and its waves.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And fear and terror possessed their hearts on account of the sons of Jacob, and they were
 terribly afraid of them, and they retreated and fled before them into the city, and the sons of
 Jacob pursued them to the gate of the city, and they came upon them in the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the sons of Jacob fought with them in the city, and all their women were engaged in
 slinging against the sons of Jacob, and the combat was very severe amongst them the whole
 of that day till evening.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And the sons of Jacob could not prevail over them, and the sons of Jacob had almost
 perished in that battle, and the sons of Jacob cried unto the Lord and greatly gained strength
 toward evening, and the sons of Jacob smote all the inhabitants of Arbelan by the edge of the
 sword, men, women and little ones.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And also the remainder of the people who had fled from Sarton, the sons of Jacob smote
 them in Arbelan, and the sons of Jacob did unto Arbelan and Tapnach as they had done to
 Chazar and Sarton, and when the women saw that all the men were dead, they went upon
 the roofs of the city and smote the sons of Jacob by showering down stones like rain.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the sons of Jacob hastened and came into the city and seized all the women and
 smote them with the edge of the sword, and the sons of Jacob captured all the spoil and
 booty, flocks and herds and cattle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the sons of Jacob did unto Machnaymah as they had done to Tapnach, to Chazar and
 to Shiloh, and they turned from there and went away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And on the fifth day the sons of Jacob heard that the people of Gaash had gathered
 against them to battle, because they had slain their king and their captains, for there had
 been fourteen captains in the city of Gaash, and the sons of Jacob had slain them all in the
 first battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the sons of Jacob that day girt on their weapons of war, and they marched to battle
 against the inhabitants of Gaash, and in Gaash there was a strong and mighty people of the
 people of the Amorites, and Gaash was the strongest and best fortified city of all the cities of
 the Amorites, and it had three walls.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And the sons of Jacob came to Gaash and they found the gates of the city locked, and
 about five hundred men standing at the top of the outer-most wall, and a people numerous as
 the sand upon the sea shore were in ambush for the sons of Jacob from without the city at
 the rear thereof.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the sons of Jacob approached to open the gates of the city, and whilst they were
 drawing nigh, behold those who were in ambush at the rear of the city came forth from their
 places and surrounded the sons of Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the sons of Jacob were enclosed between the people of Gaash, and the battle was
 both to their front and rear, and all the men that were upon the wall, were casting from the
 wall upon them, arrows and stones.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Judah, seeing that the men of Gaash were getting too heavy for them, gave a most
 piercing and tremendous shriek and all the men of Gaash were terrified at the voice of
 Judah's cry, and men fell from the wall at his powerful shriek, and all those that were from
 without and within the city were greatly afraid of their lives.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the sons of Jacob still came nigh to break the doors of the city, when the men of Gaash threw stones and arrows upon them from the top of the wall, and
 made them flee from the gate.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the sons of Jacob returned against the men of Gaash who were with them from
 without the city, and they smote them terribly, as striking against gourds, and they could not
 stand against the sons of Jacob, for fright and terror had seized them at the shriek of Judah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And the sons of Jacob slew all those men who were without the city, and the sons of
 Jacob still drew nigh to effect an entrance into the city, and to fight under the city walls, but
 they could not for all the inhabitants of Gaash who remained in the city had surrounded the
 walls of Gaash in every direction, so that the sons of Jacob were unable to approach the city
 to fight with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the sons of Jacob came nigh to one corner to fight under the wall, the inhabitants of
 Gaash threw arrows and stones upon them like showers of rain, and they fled from under the
 wall.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the people of Gaash who were upon the wall, seeing that the sons of Jacob could not
 prevail over them from under the wall, reproached the sons of Jacob in these words, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 What is the matter with you in the battle that you cannot prevail? can you then do unto the
 mighty city of Gaash and its inhabitants as you did to the cities of the Amorites that were not
 so powerful? Surely to those weak ones amongst us you did those things, and slew them in
 the entrance of the city, for they had no strength when they were terrified at the sound of your
 shouting.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And will you now then be able to fight in this place? Surely here you will all die, and we will
 avenge the cause of those cities that you have laid waste.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And the inhabitants of Gaash greatly reproached the sons of Jacob and reviled them with
 their gods, and continued to cast arrows and stones upon them from the wall.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Judah and his brothers heard the words of the inhabitants of Gaash and their anger
 was greatly roused, and Judah was jealous of his God in this matter, and he called out and
 said, O Lord, help, send help to us and our brothers.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And he ran at a distance with all his might, with his drawn sword in his hand, and he
 sprang from the earth and by dint of his strength, mounted the wall, and his sword fell from
 his hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Judah shouted upon the wall, and all the men that were upon the wall were terrified,
 and some of them fell from the wall into the city and died, and those who were yet upon the
 wall, when they saw Judah's strength, they were greatly afraid and fled for their lives into the
 city for safety.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And some were emboldened to fight with Judah upon the wall, and they came nigh to slay
 him when they saw there was no sword in Judah's hand, and they thought of casting him from
 the wall to his brothers, and twenty men of the city came up to assist them, and they
 surrounded Judah and they all shouted over him, and approached him with drawn swords,
 and they terrified Judah, and Judah cried out to his brothers from the wall.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Jacob and his sons drew the bow from under the wall, and smote three of the men
 that were upon the top of the wall, and Judah  continued to cry and he exclaimed, O Lord help us, O Lord deliver us, and he cried out with a
 loud voice upon the wall, and the cry was heard at a great distance.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And after this cry he again repeated to shout, and all the men who surrounded Judah on
 the top of the wall were terrified, and they each threw his sword from his hand at the sound of
 Judah's shouting and his tremor, and fled.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And Judah took the swords which had fallen from their hands, and Judah fought with them
 and slew twenty of their men upon the wall.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And about eighty men and women still ascended the wall from the city and they all
 surrounded Judah, and the Lord impressed the fear of Judah in their hearts, that they were
 unable to approach him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And Jacob and all who were with him drew the bow from under the wall, and they slew ten
 men upon the wall, and they fell below the wall, before Jacob and his sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And the people upon the wall seeing that twenty of their men had fallen, they still ran
 toward Judah with drawn swords, but they could not approach him for they were greatly
 terrified at Judah's strength.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And one of their mighty men whose name was Arud approached to strike Judah upon the
 head with his sword, when Judah hastily put his shield to his head, and the sword hit the
 shield, and it was split in two.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And this mighty man after he had struck Judah ran for his life, at the fear of Judah, and his
 feet slipped upon the wall and he fell amongst the sons of Jacob who were below the wall,
 and the sons of Jacob smote him and slew him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And Judah's head pained him from the blow of the powerful man, and Judah had nearly
 died from it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And Judah cried out upon the wall owing to the pain produced by the blow, when Dan
 heard him, and his anger burned within him, and he also rose up and went at a distance and
 ran and sprang from the earth and mounted the wall with his wrath-excited strength.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And when Dan came upon the wall near unto Judah all the men upon the wall fled, who
 had stood against Judah, and they went up to the second wall, and they threw arrows and
 stones upon Dan and Judah from the second wall, and endeavored to drive them from the
 wall.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And the arrows and stones struck Dan and Judah, and they had nearly been killed upon
 the wall, and wherever Dan and Judah fled from the wall, they were attacked with arrows and
 stones from the second wall.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Jacob and his sons were still at the entrance of the city below the first wall, and they
 were not able to draw their bow against the inhabitants of the city, as they could not be seen
 by them, being upon the second wall.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And Dan and Judah when they could no longer bear the stones and arrows that fell upon
 them from the second wall, they both sprang upon the second wall near the people of the city,
 and when the people of the city who were upon the second wall saw that Dan and Judah had
 come to them upon the second wall, they all cried out and descended below between the
 walls.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And Jacob and his sons heard the noise of the shouting from the people of the city, and
 they were still at the entrance of the city, and they were anxious about Dan and Judah who
 were not seen by them, they being upon the second wall.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><p>47 And Naphtali went up with his wrath-excited might and sprang upon the first wall to see
 what caused the noise of shouting which they had heard in the city, and Issachar and
 Zebulun drew nigh to break the doors of the city, and they opened the gates of the city and
 came into the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And Naphtali leaped from the first wall to the second, and came to assist his brothers, and
 the inhabitants of Gaash who were upon the wall, seeing that Naphtali was the third who had
 come up to assist his brothers, they all fled and descended into the city, and Jacob and all his
 sons and all their young men came into the city to them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And Judah and Dan and Naphtali descended from the wall into the city and pursued the
 inhabitants of the city, and Simeon and Levi were from without the city and knew not that the
 gate was opened, and they went up from there to the wall and came down to their brothers
 into the city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And the inhabitants of the city had all descended into the city, and the sons of Jacob came
 to them in different directions, and the battle waged against them from the front and the rear,
 and the sons of Jacob smote them terribly, and slew about twenty thousand of them men and
 women, not one of them could stand up against the sons of Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And the blood flowed plentifully in the city, and it was like a brook of water, and the blood
 flowed like a brook to the outer part of the city, and reached the desert of Bethchorin.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And the people of Bethchorin saw at a distance the blood flowing from the city of Gaash,
 and about seventy men from amongst them ran to see the blood, and they came to the place
 where the blood was.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And they followed the track of the blood and came to the wall of the city of Gaash, and
 they saw the blood issue from the city, and they heard the voice of crying from the inhabitants
 of Gaash, for it ascended unto heaven, and the blood was continuing to flow abundantly like a
 brook of water.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And all the sons of Jacob were still smiting the inhabitants of Gaash, and were engaged in
 slaying them till evening, about twenty thousand men and women, and the people of Chorin
 said, Surely this is the work of the Hebrews, for they are still carrying on war in all the cities of
 the Amorites.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 And those people hastened and ran to Bethchorin, and each took his weapons of war, and
 they cried out to all the inhabitants of Bethchorin, who also girt on their weapons of war to go
 and fight with the sons of Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>56 And when the sons of Jacob had done smiting the inhabitants of Gaash, they walked
 about the city to strip all the slain, and coming in the innermost part of the city and farther on
 they met three very powerful men, and there was no sword in their hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>57 And the sons of Jacob came up to the place where they were, and the powerful men ran
 away, and one of them had taken Zebulun, who he saw was a young lad and of short stature,
 and with his might dashed him to the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>58 And Jacob ran to him with his sword and Jacob smote him below his loins with the sword,
 and cut him in two, and the body fell upon Zebulun.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>59 And the second one approached and seized Jacob to fell him to the ground, and Jacob
 turned to him and shouted to him, whilst Simeon and Levi ran and smote him on the hips with
 the sword and felled him to the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>60 And the powerful man rose up from the ground with wrath-excited might, and Judah came
 to him before he had gained his footing, and struck him upon the head with the sword, and
 his head was split and he died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>61 And the third powerful man, seeing that his companions were killed, ran from before the
 sons of Jacob, and the sons of Jacob pursued him in the city; and whilst the powerful man
 was fleeing he found one of the swords of the inhabitants of the city, and he picked it up and
 turned to the sons of Jacob and fought them with that sword.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>62 And the powerful man ran to Judah to strike him upon the head with the sword, and there
 was no shield in the hand of Judah; and whilst he was aiming to strike him, Naphtali hastily
 took his shield and put it to Judah's head, and the sword of the powerful man hit the shield of
 Naphtali and Judah escaped the sword.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>63 And Simeon and Levi ran upon the powerful man with their swords and struck at him
 forcibly with their swords, and the two swords entered the body of the powerful man and
 divided it in two, length-wise.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>64 And the sons of Jacob smote the three mighty men at that time, together with all the
 inhabitants of Gaash, and the day was about to decline.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>65 And the sons of Jacob walked about Gaash and took all the spoil of the city, even the little
 ones and women they did not suffer to live, and the sons of Jacob did unto Gaash as they
 had done to Sarton and Shiloh.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="40.htm">Next: Chapter 40</a>
 </p></body>