<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="3.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="5.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 4
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And all the days that Enoch lived upon earth, were three hundred and sixty-five years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And when Enoch had ascended into heaven, all the kings of the earth rose and took
 Methuselah his son and anointed him, and they caused him to reign over them in the place of
 his father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Methuselah acted uprightly in the sight of God, as his father Enoch had taught him,
 and he likewise during the whole of his life taught the sons of men wisdom, knowledge and
 the fear of God, and he did not turn from the good way either to the right or to the left.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 But in the latter days of Methuselah, the sons of men turned from the Lord, they corrupted
 the earth, they robbed and plundered each other, and they rebelled against God and they
 transgressed, and they corrupted their ways, and would not hearken to the voice of
 Methuselah, but rebelled against him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the Lord was exceedingly wroth against them, and the Lord continued to destroy the
 seed in those days, so that there was neither sowing nor reaping in the earth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 For when they sowed the ground in order that they might obtain food for their support,
 behold, thorns and thistles were produced which they did not sow.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And still the sons of men did not turn from their evil ways, and their hands were still
 extended to do evil in the sight of God, and they provoked the Lord with their evil ways, and
 the Lord was very wroth, and repented that he had made man.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And he thought to destroy and annihilate them and he did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 In those days when Lamech the son of Methuselah was one hundred and sixty years old,
 Seth the son of Adam died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And all the days that Seth lived, were nine hundred and twelve years, and he died.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Lamech was one hundred and eighty years old when he took Ashmua, the daughter
 of Elishaa the son of Enoch his uncle, and she conceived.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And at that time the sons of men sowed the ground, and a little food was produced, yet the
 sons of men did not turn from their evil ways, and they trespassed and rebelled against God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the wife of Lamech conceived and bare him a son at that time, at the revolution of the
 year.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And Methuselah called his name Noah, saying, The earth was in his days at rest and free
 from corruption, and Lamech his father called his name Menachem, saying, This one shall
 comfort us in our works and miserable toil in the earth, which God had cursed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the child grew up and was weaned, and he went in the ways of his father Methuselah,
 perfect and upright with God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And all the sons of men departed from the ways of the Lord in those days as they
 multiplied upon the face of the earth with sons and daughters, and they taught one another
 their evil practices and they continued sinning against the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And every man made unto himself a god, and they robbed and plundered every man his
 neighbor as well as his relative, and they corrupted the earth, and the earth was filled with
 violence.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And their judges and rulers went to the daughters of men and took their wives by force
 from their husbands according to their choice, and the sons of men in those days took from
 the cattle of the earth, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and taught the mixture of
 animals of one species with the other, in order therewith to provoke the Lord; and God saw
 the whole earth and it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its ways upon earth, all men and
 all animals.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the Lord said, I will blot out man that I created from the face of the earth, yea from
 man to the birds of the air, together with cattle and beasts that are in the field for I repent that
 I made them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And all men who walked in the ways of the Lord, died in those days, before the Lord
 brought the evil upon man which he had declared, for this was from the Lord, that they should
 not see the evil which the Lord spoke of concerning the sons of men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And Noah found grace in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord chose him and his children to
 raise up seed from them upon the face of the whole earth.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="5.htm">Next: Chapter 5</a>
 </p></body>