<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="39.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="41.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 40
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And the sons of Jacob led away all the spoil of Gaash, and went out of the city by night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 They were going out marching toward the castle of Bethchorin, and the inhabitants of
 Bethchorin were going to the castle to meet them, and on that night the sons of Jacob fought
 with the inhabitants of Bethchorin, in the castle of Bethchorin.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And all the inhabitants of Bethchorin were mighty men, one of them would not flee from
 before a thousand men, and they fought on that night upon the castle, and their shouts were
 heard on that night from afar, and the earth quaked at their shouting.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And all the sons of Jacob were afraid of those men, as they were not accustomed to fight in
 the dark, and they were greatly confounded, and the sons of Jacob cried unto the Lord,
 saying, Give help to us O Lord, deliver us that we may not die by the hands of these
 uncircumcised men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the Lord hearkened to the voice of the sons of Jacob, and the Lord caused great terror
 and confusion to seize the people of Bethchorin, and they fought amongst themselves the
 one with the other in the darkness of night, and smote each other in great numbers.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And the sons of Jacob, knowing that the Lord had brought a spirit of perverseness amongst
 those men, and that they fought each man with his neighbor, went forth from among the
 bands of the people of Bethchorin and went as far as the descent of the castle of Bethchorin,
 and farther, and they tarried there securely with their young men on that night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the people of Bethchorin fought the whole night, one man with his brother, and the
 other with his neighbor, and they cried out in every direction upon the castle, and their cry
 was heard at a distance, and the whole earth shook at their voice, for they were powerful
 above all the people of the earth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And all the inhabitants of the cities of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Hivites
 and all the kings of Canaan, and also those who were on the other side of the Jordan, heard
 the noise of the shouting on that night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And they said, Surely these are the battles of the Hebrews who are fighting against the
 seven cities, who came nigh unto them; and who can stand against those Hebrews?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And all the inhabitants of the cities of the Canaanites, and all those who were on the other
 side of the Jordan, were greatly afraid of the sons of Jacob, for they said, Behold the same
 will be done to us as was done to those cities, for who can stand against their mighty
 strength?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And the cries of the Chorinites were very great on that night, and continued to increase;
 and they smote each other till morning, and numbers of them were killed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the morning appeared, and all the sons of Jacob rose up at daybreak and went up to
 the castle, and they smote those who remained of the Chorinites in a terrible manner, and
 they were all killed in the castle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the sixth day appeared, and all the inhabitants of Canaan saw at a distance all the
 people of Bethchorin lying dead in the castle of Bethchorin, and strewed about as the
 carcasses of lambs and goats.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the sons of Jacob led all the spoil which they had captured from Gaash and went to
 Bethchorin, and they found the city full of people like the sand of the sea, and they fought with
 them, and the sons of Jacob smote them there till evening time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the sons of Jacob did unto Bethchorin as they had done to Gaash and Tapnach, and
 as they had done to Chazar, to Sarton and to Shiloh.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And the sons of Jacob took with them the spoil of Bethchorin and all the spoil of the cities,
 and on that day they went home to Shechem.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the sons of Jacob came home to the city of Shechem, and they remained without the
 city, and they then rested there from the war, and tarried there all night.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And all their servants together with all the spoil that they had taken from the cities, they left
 without the city, and they did not enter the city, for they said, Peradventure there may be yet
 more fighting against us, and they may come to besiege us in Shechem.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Jacob and his sons and their servants remained on that night and the next day in the
 portion of the field which Jacob had purchased from Hamor for five shekels, and all that they
 had captured was with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And all the booty which the sons of Jacob had captured, was in the portion of the field,
 immense as the sand upon the sea shore.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the inhabitants of the land observed them from afar, and all the inhabitants of the land
 were afraid of the sons of Jacob who had done this thing, for no king from the days of old had
 ever done the like.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And the seven kings of the Canaanites resolved to make peace with the sons of Jacob, for
 they were greatly afraid of their lives, on account of the sons of Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And on that day, being the seventh day, Japhia king of Hebron sent secretly to the king of
 Ai, and to the king of Gibeon, and to the king of Shalem, and to the king of Adulam,  and to the king of Lachish, and to the king of Chazar, and to all the Canaanitish kings who
 were under their subjection, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 Go up with me, and come to me that we may go to the sons of Jacob, and I will make
 peace with them, and form a treaty with them, lest all your lands be destroyed by the swords
 of the sons of Jacob, as they did to Shechem and the cities around it, as you have heard and
 seen.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And when you come to me, do not come with many men, but let every king bring his three
 head captains, and every captain bring three of his officers.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And come all of you to Hebron, and we will go together to the sons of Jacob, and
 supplicate them that they shall form a treaty of peace with us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And all those kings did as the king of Hebron had sent to them, for they were all under his
 counsel and command, and all the kings of Canaan assembled to go to the sons of Jacob, to
 make peace with them; and the sons of Jacob returned and went to the portion of the field
 that was in Shechem, for they did not put confidence in the kings of the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And the sons of Jacob returned and remained in the portion of the field ten days, and no
 one came to make war with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And when the sons of Jacob saw that there was no appearance of war, they all assembled
 and went to the city of Shechem, and the sons of Jacob remained in Shechem.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And at the expiration of forty days, all the kings of the Amorites assembled from all their
 places and came to Hebron, to Japhia, king of Hebron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And the number of kings that came to Hebron, to make peace with the sons of Jacob, was
 twenty-one kings, and the number of captains that came with them was sixty-nine, and their
 men were one hundred and eighty-nine, and all these kings and their men rested by Mount
 Hebron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And the king of Hebron went out with his three captains and nine men, and these kings
 resolved to go to the sons of Jacob to make peace.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And they said unto the king of Hebron, Go thou before us with thy men, and speak for us
 unto the sons of Jacob, and we will come after thee and confirm thy words, and the king of
 Hebron did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And the sons of Jacob heard that all the kings of Canaan had gathered together and
 rested in Hebron, and the sons of Jacob sent four of their servants as spies, saying, Go and
 spy these kings, and search and examine their men whether they are few or many, and if they
 are but few in number, number them all and come back.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And the servants of Jacob went secretly to these kings, and did as the sons of Jacob had
 commanded them, and on that day they came back to the sons of Jacob, and said unto them,
 We came unto those kings, and they are but few in number, and we numbered them all, and
 behold, they were two hundred and eighty-eight, kings and men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And the sons of Jacob said, They are but few in number, therefore we will not all go out to
 them; and in the morning the sons of Jacob rose up and chose sixty two of their men, and ten
 of the sons of Jacob went with them; and they girt on their weapons of war, for they said,
 They are coming to make war with us, for they knew not that they were coming to make
 peace with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And the sons of Jacob went with their servants to the gate of Shechem, toward those
 kings, and their father Jacob was with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And when they had come forth, behold, the king of Hebron and his three captains and nine
 men with him were coming along the road against the sons of Jacob, and the sons of Jacob
 lifted up their eyes, and saw at a distance Japhia, king of Hebron, with his captains, coming
 toward them, and the sons of Jacob took their stand at the place of the gate of Shechem, and
 did not proceed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And the king of Hebron continued to advance, he and his captains, until he came nigh to
 the sons of Jacob, and he and his captains bowed down to them to the ground, and the king
 of Hebron sat with his captains before Jacob and his sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And the sons of Jacob said unto him, What has befallen thee, O king of Hebron? why hast
 thou come to us this day? what dost thou require from us? and the king of Hebron said unto
 Jacob, I beseech thee my lord, all the kings of the Canaanites have this day come to make
 peace with you.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And the sons of Jacob heard the words of the king of Hebron, and they would not consent
 to his proposals, for the sons of Jacob had no faith in him, for they imagined that the king of
 Hebron had spoken deceitfully to them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And the king of Hebron knew from the words of the sons of Jacob, that they did not believe
 his words, and the king of Hebron approached nearer to Jacob, and said unto him, I beseech
 thee, my lord, to be assured that all these kings have come to you on peaceable terms, for
 they have not come with all their men, neither did they bring their weapons of war with them,
 for they have come to seek peace from my lord and his sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And the sons of Jacob answered the king of Hebron, saying, Send thou to all these kings,
 and if thou speakest truth unto us, let them each come singly before us, and if they come unto
 us unarmed, we shall then know that they seek peace from us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Japhia, king of Hebron, sent one of his men to the kings, and they all came before the
 sons of Jacob, and bowed down to them to the ground, and these kings sat before Jacob and
 his sons, and they spoke unto them, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 We have heard all that you did unto the kings of the Amorites with your sword and
 exceedingly mighty arm, so that no man could stand up before you, and we were afraid of you
 for the sake of our lives, lest it should befall us as it did to them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 So we have come unto you to form a treaty of peace between us, and now therefore
 contract with us a covenant of peace and truth, that you will not meddle with us, inasmuch as
 we have not meddled with you.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And the sons of Jacob knew that they had really come to seek peace from them, and the
 sons of Jacob listened to them, and formed a covenant with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And the sons of Jacob swore unto them that they would not meddle with them, and all the
 kings of the Canaanites swore also to them, and the sons of Jacob made them tributary from
 that day forward.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And after this all the captains of these kings came with their men before Jacob, with
 presents in their hands for Jacob and his sons, and they bowed down to him to the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And these kings then urged the sons of Jacob and begged of them to  return all the spoil they had captured from the seven cities of the Amorites, and the sons of
 Jacob did so, and they returned all that they had captured, the women, the little ones, the
 cattle and all the spoil which they had taken, and they sent them off, and they went away each
 to his city.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And all these kings again bowed down to the sons of Jacob, and they sent or brought
 them many gifts in those days, and the sons of Jacob sent off these kings and their men, and
 they went peaceably away from them to their cities, and the sons of Jacob also returned to
 their home, to Shechem.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And there was peace from that day forward between the sons of Jacob and the kings of
 the Canaanites, until the children of Israel came to inherit the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="41.htm">Next: Chapter 41</a>
 </p></body>