<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="44.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="46.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 45
 </h1>
 
 
 
 
 <p>1 And it was at that time in that year, which is the year of Joseph's going down to Egypt after
 his brothers had sold him, that Reuben the son of Jacob went to Timnah and took unto him
 for a wife Eliuram, the daughter of Avi the Canaanite, and he came to her.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Eliuram the wife of Reuben conceived and bare him Hanoch, Palu, Chetzron and
 Carmi, four sons; and Simeon his brother took his sister Dinah for a wife, and she bare unto
 him Memuel, Yamin, Ohad, Jachin and Zochar, five sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And he afterward came to Bunah the Canaanitish woman, the same is Bunah whom
 Simeon took captive from the city of Shechem, and Bunah was before Dinah and attended
 upon her, and Simeon came to her, and she bare unto him Saul.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And Judah went at that time to Adulam, and he came to a man of Adulam, and his name
 was Hirah, and Judah saw there the daughter of a man from Canaan, and her name was
 Aliyath, the daughter of Shua, and he took her, and came to her, and Aliyath bare unto Judah,
 Er, Onan and Shiloh; three sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Levi and Issachar went to the land of the east, and they took unto themselves for wives
 the daughters of Jobab the son of Yoktan, the son of Eber; and Jobab the son of Yoktan had
 two daughters; the name of the elder was Adinah, and the name of the younger was Aridah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Levi took Adinah, and Issachar took Aridah, and they came to the land of Canaan, to
 their father's house, and Adinah bare unto Levi, Gershon, Kehath and Merari; three sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Aridah bare unto Issachar Tola, Puvah, Job and Shomron, four sons; and Dan went to
 the land of Moab and took for a wife Aphlaleth, the daughter of Chamudan the Moabite, and
 he brought her to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Aphlaleth was barren, she had no offspring, and God afterward remembered Aphlaleth
 the wife of Dan, and she conceived and bare a son, and she called his name Chushim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Gad and Naphtali went to  Haran and took from thence the daughters of Amuram the son of Uz, the son of Nahor, for
 wives.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And these are the names of the daughters of Amuram; the name of the elder was
 Merimah, and the name of the younger Uzith; and Naphtali took Merimah, and Gad took
 Uzith; and brought them to the land of Canaan, to their father's house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Merimah bare unto Naphtali Yachzeel, Guni, Jazer and Shalem, four sons; and Uzith
 bare unto Gad Zephion, Chagi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi and Arali, seven sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And Asher went forth and took Adon the daughter of Aphlal, the son of Hadad, the son of
 Ishmael, for a wife, and he brought her to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And Adon the wife of Asher died in those days: she had no offspring; and it was after the
 death of Adon that Asher went to the other side of the river and took for a wife Hadurah the
 daughter of Abimael, the son of Eber, the son of Shem.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the young woman was of a comely appearance, and a woman of sense, and she had
 been the wife of Malkiel the son of Elam, the son of Shem.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Hadurah bare a daughter unto Malkiel, and he called her name Serach, and Malkiel
 died after this, and Hadurah went and remained in her father's house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And after the death of the wife at Asher he went and took Hadurah for a wife, and brought
 her to the land of Canaan, and Serach her daughter he also brought with them, and she was
 three years old, and the damsel was brought up in Jacob's house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the damsel was of a comely appearance, and she went in the sanctified ways of the
 children of Jacob; she lacked nothing, and the Lord gave her wisdom and understanding.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Hadurah the wife of Asher conceived and bare unto him Yimnah, Yishvah, Yishvi and
 Beriah; four sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Zebulun went to Midian, and took for a wife Merishah the daughter of Molad, the son
 of Abida, the son of Midian, and brought her to the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And Merushah bare unto Zebulun Sered, Elon and Yachleel; three sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And Jacob sent to Aram, the son of Zoba, the son of Terah, and he took for his son
 Benjamin Mechalia the daughter of Aram, and she came to the land of Canaan to the house
 of Jacob; and Benjamin was ten years old when he took Mechalia the daughter of Aram for a
 wife.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Mechalia conceived and bare unto Benjamin Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera and
 Naaman, five sons; and Benjamin went afterward and took for a wife Aribath, the daughter of
 Shomron, the son of Abraham, in addition to his first wife, and he was eighteen years old; and
 Aribath bare unto Benjamin Achi, Vosh, Mupim, Chupim, and Ord; five sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And in those days Judah went to the house of Shem and took Tamar the daughter of
 Elam, the son of Shem, for a wife for his first born Er.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And Er came to his wife Tamar, and she became his wife, and when he came to her he
 outwardly destroyed his seed, and his work was evil in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord
 slew him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And it was after the death of Er, Judah's first born, that Judah said unto Onan, go to thy
 brother's wife and marry her as the next of kin, and raise up seed to thy brother.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Onan took Tamar for a wife  and he came to her, and Onan also did like unto the work of his brother, and his work was evil
 in the sight of the Lord, and he slew him also.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And when Onan died, Judah said unto Tamar, Remain in thy father's house until my son
 Shiloh shall have grown up, and Judah did no more delight in Tamar, to give her unto Shiloh,
 for he said, Peradventure he will also die like his brothers.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Tamar rose up and went and remained in her father's house, and Tamar was in her
 father's house for some time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And at the revolution of the year, Aliyath the wife of Judah died; and Judah was comforted
 for his wife, and after the death of Aliyath, Judah went up with his friend Hirah to Timnah to
 shear their sheep.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Tamar heard that Judah had gone up to Timnah to shear the sheep, and that Shiloh
 was grown up, and Judah did not delight in her.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Tamar rose up and put off the garments of her widowhood, and she put a vail upon
 her, and she entirely covered herself, and she went and sat in the public thoroughfare, which
 is upon the road to Timnah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Judah passed and saw her and took her and he came to her, and she conceived by
 him, and at the time of being delivered, behold, there were twins in her womb, and he called
 the name of the first Perez, and the name of the second Zarah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="46.htm">Next: Chapter 46</a>
 </p></body>