<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="46.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="48.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 47
 </h1>
 
  
 
 <p>1 And Isaac the son of Abraham was still living in those days in the land of Canaan; he was
 very aged, one hundred and eighty years old, and Esau his son, the brother of Jacob, was in
 the land of Edom, and he and his sons had possessions in it amongst the children of Seir.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Esau heard that his father's time was drawing nigh to die, and he and his sons and
 household came unto the land of Canaan, unto his father's  house, and Jacob and his sons went forth from the place where they dwelt in Hebron, and
 they all came to their father Isaac, and they found Esau and his sons in the tent.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Jacob and his sons sat before his father Isaac, and Jacob was still mourning for his
 son Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And Isaac said unto Jacob, Bring me hither thy sons and I will bless them; and Jacob
 brought his eleven children before his father Isaac.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Isaac placed his hands upon all the sons of Jacob, and he took hold of them and
 embraced them, and kissed them one by one, and Isaac blessed them on that day, and he
 said unto them, May the God of your fathers bless you and increase your seed like the stars
 of heaven for number.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Isaac also blessed the sons of Esau, saying, May God cause you to be a dread and a
 terror to all that will behold you, and to all your enemies.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Isaac called Jacob and his sons, and they all came and sat before Isaac, and Isaac
 said unto Jacob, The Lord God of the whole earth said unto me, Unto thy seed will I give this
 land for an inheritance if thy children keep my statutes and my ways, and I will perform unto
 them the oath which I swore unto thy father Abraham.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 Now therefore my son, teach thy children and thy children's children to fear the Lord, and to
 go in the good way which will please the Lord thy God, for if you keep the ways of the Lord
 and his statutes the Lord will also keep unto you his covenant with Abraham, and will do well
 with you and your seed all the days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And when Isaac had finished commanding Jacob and his children, he gave up the ghost
 and died, and was gathered unto his people.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Jacob and Esau fell upon the face of their father Isaac, and they wept, and Isaac was
 one hundred and eighty years old when he died in the land of Canaan, in Hebron, and his
 sons carried him to the cave of Machpelah, which Abraham had bought from the children of
 Heth for a possession of a burial place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And all the kings of the land of Canaan went with Jacob and Esau to bury Isaac, and all
 the kings of Canaan showed Isaac great honor at his death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the sons of Jacob and the sons of Esau went barefooted round about, walking and
 lamenting until they reached Kireath-arba.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And Jacob and Esau buried their father Isaac in the cave of Machpelah, which is in
 Kireath-arba in Hebron, and they buried him with very great honor, as at the funeral of kings.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And Jacob and his sons, and Esau and his sons, and all the kings of Canaan made a
 great and heavy mourning, and they buried him and mourned for him many days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And at the death of Isaac, he left his cattle and his possessions and all belonging to him to
 his sons; and Esau said unto Jacob, Behold I pray thee, all that our father has left we will
 divide it in two parts, and I will have the choice, and Jacob said, We will do so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Jacob took all that Isaac had left in the land of Canaan, the cattle and the property,
 and he placed them in two parts before Esau and his sons, and he said unto Esau, Behold all
 this is before thee, choose thou unto thyself the half which thou wilt take.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And Jacob said unto Esau, Hear thou I pray thee what I will speak unto thee, saying, The
 Lord God of  heaven and earth spoke unto our fathers Abraham and Isaac, saying, Unto thy seed will I give
 this land for an inheritance forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 Now therefore all that our father has left is before thee, and behold all the land is before
 thee; choose thou from them what thou desirest.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 If thou desirest the whole land take it for thee and thy children forever, and I will take this
 riches, and it thou desirest the riches take it unto thee, and I will take this land for me and for
 my children to inherit it forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And Nebayoth, the son of Ishmael, was then in the land with his children, and Esau went
 on that day and consulted with him, saying.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 Thus has Jacob spoken unto me, and thus has he answered me, now give thy advice and
 we will hear.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Nebayoth said, What is this that Jacob hath spoken unto thee? behold all the children
 of Canaan are dwelling securely in their land, and Jacob sayeth he will inherit it with his seed
 all the days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 Go now therefore and take all thy father's riches and leave Jacob thy brother in the land,
 as he has spoken.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And Esau rose up and returned to Jacob, and did all that Nebayoth the son of Ishmael had
 advised; and Esau took all the riches that Isaac had left, the souls, the beasts, the cattle and
 the property, and all the riches; he gave nothing to his brother Jacob; and Jacob took all the
 land of Canaan, from the brook of Egypt unto the river Euphrates, and he took it for an
 everlasting possession, and for his children and for his seed after him forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 Jacob also took from his brother Esau the cave of Machpelah, which is in Hebron, which
 Abraham had bought from Ephron for a possession of a burial place for him and his seed
 forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Jacob wrote all these things in the book of purchase, and he signed it, and he testified
 all this with four faithful witnesses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And these are the words which Jacob wrote in the book, saying: The land of Canaan and
 all the cities of the Hittites, the Hivites, the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, and the
 Gergashites, all the seven nations from the river of Egypt unto the river Euphrates.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And the city of Hebron Kireath-arba, and the cave which is in it, the whole did Jacob buy
 from his brother Esau for value, for a possession and for an inheritance for his seed after him
 forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And Jacob took the book of purchase and the signature, the command and the statutes
 and the revealed book, and he placed them in an earthen vessel in order that they should
 remain for a long time, and he delivered them into the hands of his children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 Esau took all that his father had left him after his death from his brother Jacob, and he
 took all the property, from man and beast, camel and ass, ox and lamb, silver and gold,
 stones and bdellium, and all the riches which had belonged to Isaac the son of Abraham;
 there was nothing left which Esau did not take unto himself, from all that Isaac had left after
 his death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Esau took all this, and he and his children went home to the land of Seir the Horite,
 away from his brother Jacob and his children.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Esau had possessions amongst the children of Seir, and Esau returned not to the
 land of Canaan from that day forward.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And the whole land of Canaan  became an inheritance to the children of Israel for an everlasting inheritance, and Esau with
 all his children inherited the mountain of Seir.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="48.htm">Next: Chapter 48</a>
 </p></body>