<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="50.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="52.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 51
 </h1>
 
  
 
 <p>1 And Jacob afterward heard that there was corn in Egypt, and he called unto his sons to go
 to Egypt to buy corn, for upon them also did the famine prevail, and he called unto his sons,
 saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 Behold I hear that there is corn in Egypt, and all the people of the earth go there to
 purchase, now therefore why will you show yourselves satisfied before the whole earth? go
 you also down to Egypt and buy us a little corn amongst those that come there, that we may
 not die.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the sons of Jacob hearkened to the voice of their father, and they rose up to go down
 to Egypt in order to buy corn amongst the rest that came there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And Jacob their father commanded them, saying, When you come into the city do not enter
 together in one gate, on account of the inhabitants of the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the sons of Jacob went forth  and they went to Egypt, and the sons of Jacob did all as their father had commanded them,
 and Jacob did not send Benjamin, for he said, Lest an accident might befall him on the road
 like his brother; and ten of Jacob's sons went forth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And whilst the sons of Jacob were going on the road, they repented of what they had done
 to Joseph, and they spoke to each other, saying, We know that our brother Joseph went
 down to Egypt, and now we will seek him where we go, and if we find him we will take him
 from his master for a ransom, and if not, by force, and we will die for him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the sons of Jacob agreed to this thing and strengthened themselves on account of
 Joseph, to deliver him from the hand of his master, and the sons of Jacob went to Egypt; and
 when they came near to Egypt they separated from each other, and they came through ten
 gates of Egypt, and the gate keepers wrote their names on that day, and brought them to
 Joseph in the evening.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And Joseph read the names from the hand of the gate-keepers of the city, and he found
 that his brethren had entered at the ten gates of the city, and Joseph at that time commanded
 that it should be proclaimed throughout the land of Egypt, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 Go forth all ye store guards, close all the corn stores and let only one remain open, that
 those who come may purchase from it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And all the officers of Joseph did so at that time, and they closed all the stores and left
 only one open.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Joseph gave the written names of his brethren to him that was set over the open
 store, and he said unto him, Whosoever shall come to thee to buy corn, ask his name, and
 when men of these names shall come before thee, seize them and send them, and they did
 so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And when the sons of Jacob came into the city, they joined together in the city to seek
 Joseph before they bought themselves corn.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And they went to the walls of the harlots, and they sought Joseph in the walls of the harlots
 for three days, for they thought that Joseph would come in the walls of the harlots, for Joseph
 was very comely and well favored, and the sons of Jacob sought Joseph for three days, and
 they could not find him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the man who was set over the open store sought for those names which Joseph had
 given him, and he did not find them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And he sent to Joseph, saying, These three days have passed, and those men whose
 names thou didst give unto me have not come; and Joseph sent servants to seek the men in
 all Egypt, and to bring them before Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Joseph's servants went and came into Egypt and could not find them, and went to
 Goshen and they were not there, and then went to the city of Rameses and could not find
 them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And Joseph continued to send sixteen servants to seek his brothers, and they went and
 spread themselves in the four corners of the city, and four of the servants went into the house
 of the harlots, and they found the ten men there seeking their brother.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And those four men took them and brought them before him, and they bowed down to him
 to the ground, and Joseph was sitting upon his throne in his temple, clothed with princely
 garments, and upon his head  was a large crown of gold, and all the mighty men were sitting around him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the sons of Jacob saw Joseph, and his figure and comeliness and dignity of
 countenance seemed wonderful in their eyes, and they again bowed down to him to the
 ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but they knew him not, for Joseph was
 very great in their eyes, therefore they knew him not.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And Joseph spoke to them, saying, From whence come ye? and they all answered and
 said, Thy servants have come from the land of Canaan to buy corn, for the famine prevails
 throughout the earth, and thy servants heard that there was corn in Egypt, so they have come
 amongst the other comers to buy corn for their support.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Joseph answered them, saying, If you have come to purchase as you say, why do you
 come through ten gates of the city? it can only be that you have come to spy through the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And they all together answered Joseph, and said, Not so my lord, we are right, thy
 servants are not spies, but we have come to buy corn, for thy servants are all brothers, the
 sons of one man in the land of Canaan, and our father commanded us, saying, When you
 come to the city do not enter together at one gate on account of the inhabitants of the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And Joseph again answered them and said, That is the thing which I spoke unto you, you
 have come to spy through the land, therefore you all came through ten gates of the city; you
 have come to see the nakedness of the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 Surely every one that cometh to buy corn goeth his way, and you are already three days in
 the land, and what do you do in the walls of harlots in which you have been for these three
 days? surely spies do like unto these things.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And they said unto Joseph, Far be it from our lord to speak thus, for we are twelve
 brothers, the sons of our father Jacob, in the land of Canaan, the son of Isaac, the son of
 Abraham, the Hebrew, and behold the youngest is with our father this day in the land of
 Canaan, and one is not, for he was lost from us, and we thought perhaps he might be in this
 land, so we are seeking him throughout the land, and have come even to the houses of
 harlots to seek him there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Joseph said unto them, And have you then sought him throughout the earth, that
 there only remained Egypt for you to seek him in? And what also should your brother do in
 the houses of harlots, although he were in Egypt? have you not said, That you are from the
 sons of Isaac, the son of Abraham, and what shall the sons of Jacob do then in the houses of
 harlots?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And they said unto him, Because we heard that Ishmaelites stole him from us, and it was
 told unto us that they sold him in Egypt, and thy servant, our brother, is very comely and well
 favored, so we thought he would surely be in the houses of harlots, therefore thy servants
 went there to seek him and give ransom for him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And Joseph still answered them, saying, Surely you speak falsely and utter lies, to say of
 yourselves that you are the sons of Abraham; as Pharaoh liveth you are spies, therefore have
 you come to the houses of harlots that you should not be known.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Joseph said unto them, And now if you find him, and his  master requireth of you a great price, will you give it for him? and they said, It shall be given.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And he said unto them, And if his master will not consent to part with him for a great price,
 what will you do unto him on his account? and they answered him, saying, If he will not give
 him unto us we will slay him, and take our brother and go away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Joseph said unto them, That is the thing which I have spoken to you; you are spies,
 for you are come to slay the inhabitants of the land, for we heard that two of your brethren
 smote all the inhabitants of Shechem, in the land of Canaan, on account of your sister, and
 you now come to do the like in Egypt on account of your brother.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 Only hereby shall I know that you are true men; if you will send home one from amongst
 you to fetch your youngest brother from your father, and to bring him here unto me, and by
 doing this thing I will know that you are right.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And Joseph called to seventy of his mighty men, and he said unto them, Take these men
 and bring them into the ward.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And the mighty men took the ten men, they laid hold of them and put them into the ward,
 and they were in the ward three days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And on the third day Joseph had them brought out of the ward, and he said unto them, Do
 this for yourselves if you be true men, so that you may live, one of your brethren shall be
 confined in the ward whilst you go and take home the corn for your household to the land of
 Canaan, and fetch your youngest brother, and bring him here unto me, that I may know that
 you are true men when you do this thing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Joseph went out from them and came into the chamber, and wept a great weeping,
 for his pity was excited for them, and he washed his face, and returned to them again, and he
 took Simeon from them and ordered him to be bound, but Simeon was not willing to be done
 so, for he was a very powerful man and they could not bind him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And Joseph called unto his mighty men and seventy valiant men came before him with
 drawn swords in their hands, and the sons of Jacob were terrified at them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And Joseph said unto them, Seize this man and confine him in prison until his brethren
 come to him, and Joseph's valiant men hastened and they all laid hold of Simeon to bind him,
 and Simeon gave a loud and terrible shriek and the cry was heard at a distance.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And all the valiant men of Joseph were terrified at the sound of the shriek, that they fell
 upon their faces, and they were greatly afraid and fled.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And all the men that were with Joseph fled, for they were greatly afraid of their lives, and
 only Joseph and Manasseh his son remained there, and Manassah the son of Joseph saw
 the strength of Simeon, and he was exceedingly wroth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And Manassah the son of Joseph rose up to Simeon, and Manassah smote Simeon a
 heavy blow with his fist against the back of his neck, and Simeon was stilled of his rage.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And Manassah laid hold of Simeon and he seized him violently and he bound him and
 brought him into the house of confinement, and all the sons of Jacob were astonished at the
 act of the youth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Simeon said unto his brethren, None of you must say that this is  the smiting of an Egyptian, but it is the smiting of the house of my father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And after this Joseph ordered him to be called who was set over the storehouse, to fill
 their sacks with corn as much as they could carry, and to restore every man's money into his
 sack, and to give them provision for the road, and thus did he unto them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And Joseph commanded them, saying, Take heed lest you transgress my orders to bring
 your brother as I have told you, and it shall be when you bring your brother hither unto me,
 then will I know that you are true men, and you shall traffic in the land, and I will restore unto
 you your brother, and you shall return in peace to your father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And they all answered and said, According as our lord speaketh so will we do, and they
 bowed down to him to the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And every man lifted his corn upon his ass, and they went out to go to the land of Canaan
 to their father; and they came to the inn and Levi spread his sack to give provender to his ass,
 when he saw and behold his money in full weight was still in his sack.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And the man was greatly afraid, and he said unto his brethren, My money is restored, and
 lo, it is even in my sack, and the men were greatly afraid, and they said, What is this that God
 hath done unto us?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And they all said, And where is the Lord's kindness with our fathers, with Abraham, Isaac,
 end Jacob, that the Lord has this day delivered us into the hands of the king of Egypt to
 contrive against us?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And Judah said unto them, Surely we are guilty sinners before the Lord our God in having
 sold our brother, our own flesh, and wherefore do you say, Where is the Lord's kindness with
 our fathers?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And Reuben said unto them, Said I not unto you, do not sin against the lad, and you would
 not listen to me? now God requireth him from us, and how dare you say, Where is the Lord's
 kindness with our fathers, whilst you have sinned unto the Lord?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And they tarried over night in that place, and they rose up early in the morning and laded
 their asses with their corn, and they led them and went on and came to their father's house in
 the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And Jacob and his household went out to meet his sons, and Jacob saw and behold their
 brother Simeon was not with them, and Jacob said unto his sons, Where is your brother
 Simeon, whom I do not see? and his sons told him all that had befallen them in Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="52.htm">Next: Chapter 52</a>
 </p></body>