<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="51.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="53.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 52
 </h1>
 
  
 
 
 <p>1 And they entered their house, and every man opened his sack and they saw and behold
 every man's bundle of money was there, at which they and their father were greatly terrified.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Jacob said unto them, What is this that you have done to me? I sent your brother
 Joseph to inquire after your welfare and you said unto me. A wild beast did devour him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Simeon went with you to buy food and you say the king of Egypt hath confined him in
 prison, and you wish to take Benjamin to cause his death also, and bring down my grey hairs
 with sorrow to the grave on account of Benjamin and his brother Joseph.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 Now therefore my son shall not go down with you, for his brother is dead and he is left
 alone, and mischief may befall him by the way in which you go, as it befell his brother.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Reuben said unto his father, Thou shalt slay my two sons if I do not bring thy son and
 place him before thee; and Jacob said unto his sons, Abide ye here and do not go down to
 Egypt, for my son shall not go down with you to Egypt, nor die like his brother.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Judah said unto them, refrain ye from him until the corn is finished, and he will then
 say, Take down your brother, when he will find his own life and the life of his household in
 danger from the famine.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And in those days the famine was sore throughout the land, and all the people of the earth
 went and came to Egypt to buy food, for the famine prevailed greatly amongst them, and the
 sons of Jacob remained in Canaan a year and two months until their corn was finished.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And it came to pass after their corn was finished, the whole household of Jacob was
 pinched with hunger, and all the infants of the sons of Jacob came together and they
 approached Jacob, and they all surrounded him, and they said unto him, Give unto us bread,
 and wherefore shall we all perish through hunger in thy presence?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 Jacob heard the words of his son's children, and he wept a great weeping, and his pity was
 roused for them, and Jacob called unto his sons and they all came and sat before him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Jacob said unto them, And have you not seen how your children have been weeping
 over me this day, saying, Give unto us bread, and there is none? now therefore return and
 buy for us a little food.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And Judah answered and said unto his father, If thou wilt send our brother with us we will
 go down and buy corn for thee, and if thou wilt not send him then we will not go down, for
 surely the king of Egypt particularly enjoined us, saying, You shall not see my face unless
 your brother be with you, for the king of Egypt is a strong and mighty king, and behold if we
 shall go to him without our brother we shall all be put to death.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 Dost thou not know and hast thou not heard that this king is very powerful and wise, and
 there is not like unto him in all the earth? behold we have seen all the kings of the earth and
 we have not seen one like that king, the king of Egypt; surely amongst all the kings of the
 earth there is none greater than Abimelech king of the Philistines, yet the king of Egypt is
 greater and mightier than he, and Abimelech can only be compared to one of his officers.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 Father, thou hast not seen his palace and his throne, and all his servants standing before
 him; thou hast not seen that king upon his throne in his pomp and royal appearance, dressed
 in his kingly robes with a large golden crown upon his head; thou hast not seen the honor and
 glory which God has given unto him, for there is not like unto him in all the earth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 Father, thou hast not seen the wisdom, the understanding and the knowledge which God
 has given in his heart, nor heard his sweet voice when he spake unto us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 We know not, father, who made him acquainted with our names and all that befell us, yet
 he asked also after thee, saying, Is your father still living, and is it well with him?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 Thou hast not seen the affairs of the government of Egypt regulated by him, without
 inquiring of Pharaoh his lord; thou hast not seen the awe and fear which he impressed upon
 all the Egyptians.</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>17 And also when we went from him, we threatened to do unto Egypt like unto the rest of the
 cities of the Amorites, and we were exceedingly wroth against all his words which he spoke
 concerning us as spies, and now when we shall again come before him his terror will fall
 upon us all, and not one of us will be able to speak to him either a little or a great thing.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 Now therefore father, send we pray thee the lad with us, and we will go down and buy thee
 food for our support, and not die through hunger. And Jacob said, Why have you dealt so ill
 with me to tell the king you had a brother? what is this thing that you have done unto me?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Judah said unto Jacob his father, Give the lad into my care and we will rise up and go
 down to Egypt and buy corn, and then return, and it shall be when we return if the lad be not
 with us, then let me bear thy blame forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 Hast thou seen all our infants weeping over thee through hunger and there is no power in
 thy hand to satisfy them? now let thy pity be roused for them and send our brother with us and
 we will go.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 For how will the Lord's kindness to our ancestors be manifested to thee when thou sayest
 that the king of Egypt will take away thy son? as the Lord liveth I will not leave him until I bring
 him and place him before thee; but pray for us unto the Lord, that he may deal kindly with us,
 to cause us to be received favorably and kindly before the king of Egypt and his men, for had
 we not delayed surely now we had returned a second time with thy son.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Jacob said unto his sons, I trust in the Lord God that he may deliver you and give you
 favor in the sight of the king of Egypt, and in the sight of all his men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 Now therefore rise up and go to the man, and take for him in your hands a present from
 what can be obtained in the land and bring it before him, and may the Almighty God give you
 mercy before him that he may send Benjamin and Simeon your brethren with you.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And all the men rose up, and they took their brother Benjamin, and they took in their hands
 a large present of the best of the land, and they also took a double portion of silver.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And Jacob strictly commanded his sons concerning Benjamin, Saying, Take heed of him
 in the way in which you are going, and do not separate yourselves from him in the road,
 neither in Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Jacob rose up from his sons and spread forth his hands and he prayed unto the Lord
 on account of his sons, saying, O Lord God of heaven and earth, remember thy covenant with
 our father Abraham, remember it with my father Isaac and deal kindly with my sons and
 deliver them not into the hands of the king of Egypt; do it I pray thee O God for the sake of thy
 mercies and redeem all my children and rescue them from Egyptian power, and send them
 their two brothers.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And all the wives of the sons of Jacob and their children lifted up their eyes to heaven and
 they all wept before the Lord, and cried unto him to deliver their fathers from the hand of the
 king of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Jacob wrote a record to the king of Egypt and gave it into the hand of Judah and into
 the hands of his sons for the king of Egypt, saying,</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>29 From thy servant Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham the Hebrew, the prince of God, to
 the powerful and wise king, the revealer of secrets, king of Egypt, greeting.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 Be it known to my lord the king of Egypt, the famine was sore upon us in the land of
 Canaan, and I sent my sons to thee to buy us a little food from thee for our support.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 For my sons surrounded me and I being very old cannot see with my eyes, for my eyes
 have become very heavy through age, as well as with daily weeping for my son, for Joseph
 who was lost from before me, and I commanded my sons that they should not enter the gates
 of the city when they came to Egypt, on account of the inhabitants of the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And I also commanded them to go about Egypt to seek for my son Joseph, perhaps they
 might find him there, and they did so, and thou didst consider them as spies of the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 Have we not heard concerning thee that thou didst interpret Pharaoh's dream and didst
 speak truly unto him? how then dost thou not know in thy wisdom whether my sons are spies
 or not?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 Now therefore, my lord and king, behold I have sent my son before thee, as thou didst
 speak unto my sons; I beseech thee to put thy eyes upon him until he is returned to me in
 peace with his brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 For dost thou not know, or hast thou not heard that which our God did unto Pharaoh when
 he took my mother Sarah, and what he did unto Abimelech king of the Philistines on account
 of her, and also what our father Abraham did unto the nine kings of Elam, how he smote them
 all with a few men that were with him?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And also what my two sons Simeon and Levi did unto the eight cities of the Amorites, how
 they destroyed them on account of their sister Dinah?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And also on account of their brother Benjamin they consoled themselves for the loss of his
 brother Joseph; what will they then do for him when they see the hand of any people
 prevailing over them, for his sake?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 Dost thou not know, O king of Egypt, that the power of God is with us, and that also God
 ever heareth our prayers and forsaketh us not all the days?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And when my sons told me of thy dealings with them, I called not unto the Lord on account
 of thee, for then thou wouldst have perished with thy men before my son Benjamin came
 before thee, but I thought that as Simeon my son was in thy house, perhaps thou mightest
 deal kindly with him, therefore I did not this thing unto thee.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 Now therefore behold Benjamin my son cometh unto thee with my sons, take heed of him
 and put thy eyes upon him, and then will God place his eyes over thee and throughout thy
 kingdom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 Now I have told thee all that is in my heart, and behold my sons are coming to thee with
 their brother, examine the face of the whole earth for their sake and send them back in peace
 with their brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And Jacob gave the record to his sons into the care of Judah to give it unto the king of
 Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="53.htm">Next: Chapter 53</a>
 </p></body>