<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="63.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="65.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 64
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And Balaam the son of Beor was at that time with Angeas in the battle, and when he saw
 that Zepho prevailed over Angeas, he fled from there and came to Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And Zepho and the children of Chittim received him with great honor, for Zepho knew
 Balaam's wisdom, and Zepho gave unto Balaam many gifts and he remained with him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And when Zepho had returned from the war, he commanded all the children of Chittim to be
 numbered who had gone into battle with him, and behold not one was missed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And Zepho rejoiced at this thing, and he renewed his kingdom, and he made a feast to all
 his subjects.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 But Zepho remembered not the Lord and considered not that the Lord had helped him in
 battle, and that he had delivered him and his people from the hand of the king of Africa, but
 still walked in the ways of the children of Chittim and the wicked children of Esau, to serve
 other gods which his brethren the children of Esau had taught him; it is therefore said, From
 the wicked goes forth wickedness.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Zepho reigned over all the children of Chittim securely, but knew not the Lord who had
 delivered him and all his people from the hand of the king of Africa; and the troops of Africa
 came no more to Chittim to plunder as usual, for they knew of the power of Zepho who had
 smitten them all at the edge of the sword, so Angeas was afraid of Zepho the son of Eliphaz,
 and of the children of Chittim all the days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 At that time when Zepho had returned from the war, and when Zepho had seen how he
 prevailed over all the people of Africa and had smitten them in battle at the edge of the sword,
 then Zepho advised with the children of Chittim, to go to Egypt to fight with the sons of Jacob
 and with Pharaoh king of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 For Zepho heard that the mighty men of Egypt were dead and that Joseph and his brethren
 the sons at Jacob were dead, and that all their children the children of Israel remained in
 Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Zepho considered to go to fight against them and all Egypt, to avenge the cause of his
 brethren the children of Esau, whom Joseph with his brethren and all Egypt had smitten in the
 land of Canaan, when they went up to bury Jacob in Hebron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Zepho sent messengers to Hadad, son of Bedad, king of Edom, and to all his
 brethren the children of Esau, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 Did you not say that you would not fight against the king of Africa for he is a member of
 your covenant? behold I fought with him and smote him and all his people.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><p>12 Now therefore I have resolved to fight against Egypt and the children of Jacob who are
 there, and I will be revenged of them for what Joseph, his brethren and ancestors did to us in
 the land of Canaan when they went up to bury their father in Hebron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 Now then if you are willing to come to me to assist me in fighting against them and Egypt,
 then shall we avenge the cause of our brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the children of Esau hearkened to the words of Zepho, and the children of Esau
 gathered themselves together, a very great people, and they went to assist Zepho and the
 children of Chittim in battle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Zepho sent to all the children of the east and to all the children of Ishmael with words
 like unto these, and they gathered themselves and came to the assistance of Zepho and the
 children of Chittim in the war upon Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And all these kings, the king of Edom and the children of the east, and all the children of
 Ishmael, and Zepho the king of Chittim went forth and arrayed all their hosts in Hebron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the camp was very heavy, extending in length a distance of three days' journey, a
 people numerous as the sand upon the sea shore which can not be counted.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And all these kings and their hosts went down and came against all Egypt in battle, and
 encamped together in the valley of Pathros.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And all Egypt heard their report, and they also gathered themselves together, all the
 people of the land of Egypt, and of all the cities belonging to Egypt, about three hundred
 thousand men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the men of Egypt sent also to the children of Israel who were in those days in the land
 of Goshen, to come to them in order to go and fight with these kings.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the men of Israel assembled and were about one hundred and fifty men, and they
 went into battle to assist the Egyptians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And the men of Israel and of Egypt went forth, about three hundred thousand men and
 one hundred and fifty men, and they went toward these kings to battle, and they placed
 themselves from without the land of Goshen opposite Pathros.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the Egyptians believed not in Israel to go with them in their camps together for battle,
 for all the Egyptians said, Perhaps the children of Israel will deliver us into the hand of the
 children of Esau and Ishmael, for they are their brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And all the Egyptians said unto the children of Israel, Remain you here together in your
 stand and we will go and fight against the children of Esau and Ishmael, and if these kings
 should prevail over us, then come you altogether upon them and assist us, and the children
 of Israel did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And Zepho the son of Eliphaz the son of Esau king of Chittim, and Hadad the son of
 Bedad king of Edom, and all their camps, and all the children of the east, and children of
 Ishmael, a people numerous as sand, encamped together in the valley of Pathros opposite
 Tachpanches.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Balaam the son of Beor the Syrian was there in the camp of Zepho, for he came with
 the children of Chittim to the battle, and Balaam was a man highly honored in the eyes of
 Zepho and his men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Zepho said unto Balaam, Try by divination for us that we may know who will prevail in
 the battle, we or the Egyptians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Balaam rose up and tried the art of divination, and he was skillful in the knowledge of
 it, but he was confused and the work was destroyed in his hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And he tried it again but it did not succeed, and Balaam despaired of it and left it and did
 not complete it, for this was from the Lord, in order to cause Zepho and his people to fall into
 the hand of the children of Israel, who had trusted in the Lord, the God of their ancestors, in
 their war.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Zepho and Hadad put their forces in battle array, and all the Egyptians went alone
 against them, about three hundred thousand men, and not one man of Israel was with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And all the Egyptians fought with these kings opposite Pathros and Tachpanches, and the
 battle was severe against the Egyptians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And the kings were stronger than the Egyptians in that battle, and about one hundred and
 eighty men of Egypt fell on that day, and about thirty men of the forces of the kings, and all
 the men of Egypt fled from before the kings, so the children of Esau and Ishmael pursued the
 Egyptians, continuing to smite them unto the place where was the camp of the children of
 Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And all the Egyptians cried unto the children of Israel, saying, Hasten to us and assist us
 and save us from the hand of Esau, Ishmael and the children of Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And the hundred and fifty men of the children of Israel ran from their station to the camps
 of these kings, and the children of Israel cried unto the Lord their God to deliver them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And the Lord hearkened to Israel, and the Lord gave all the men of the kings into their
 hand, and the children of Israel fought against these kings, and the children of Israel smote
 about four thousand of the kings' men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And the Lord threw a great consternation in the camp of the kings, so that the fear of the
 children of Israel fell upon them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And all the hosts of the kings fled from before the children of Israel and the children of
 Israel pursued them continuing to smite them unto the borders of the land of Cush.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And the children of Israel slew of them in the road yet two thousand men, and of the
 children of Israel not one fell.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And when the Egyptians saw that the children of Israel had fought with such few men with
 the kings, and that the battle was so very severe against them,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 All the Egyptians were greatly afraid of their lives on account of the strong battle, and all
 Egypt fled, every man hiding himself from the arrayed forces, and they hid themselves in the
 road, and they left the Israelites to fight.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And the children of Israel inflicted a terrible blow upon the kings' men, and they returned
 from them after they had driven them to the border of the land of Cush.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And all Israel knew the thing which the men of Egypt had done to them, that they had fled
 from them in battle, and had left them to fight alone.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 So the children of Israel also acted with cunning, and as the children of Israel returned
 from battle, they found some of the Egyptians in the road and smote them there.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And whilst they slew them, they said unto them these words:</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><p>45 Wherefore did you go from us and leave us, being a few people, to fight against these
 kings who had a great people to smite us, that you might thereby deliver your own souls?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And of some which the Israelites met on the road, they the children of Israel spoke to each
 other, saying, Smite, smite, for he is an Ishmaelite, or an Edomite, or from the children of
 Chittim, and they stood over him and slew him, and they knew that he was an Egyptian.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And the children of Israel did these things cunningly against the Egyptians, because they
 had deserted them in battle and had fled from them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And the children of Israel slew of the men of Egypt in the road in this manner, about two
 hundred men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And all the men of Egypt saw the evil which the children of Israel had done to them, so all
 Egypt feared greatly the children of Israel, for they had seen their great power, and that not
 one man of them had fallen.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 So all the children of Israel returned with joy on their road to Goshen, and the rest of Egypt
 returned each man to his place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="65.htm">Next: Chapter 65</a>
 </p></body>