<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="66.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="68.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 67
 </h1>
 
 
  
 
 <p>1 There was a man in the land of Egypt of the seed of Levi, whose name was Amram, the son
 of Kehath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And this man went and took a wife, namely Jochebed the daughter of Levi his father's
 sister, and she was one hundred and twenty-six years old, and he came unto her.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the woman conceived and bare a daughter, and she called her name Miriam, because
 in those days the Egyptians had embittered the lives of the children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And she conceived again and bare a son and she called his name Aaron, for in the days of
 her conception, Pharaoh began to spill the blood of the male children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 In those days died Zepho the son of Eliphaz, son of Esau, king of Chittim, and Janeas
 reigned in his stead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And the time that Zepho reigned over the children of Chittim was fifty years, and he died
 and was buried in the city of Nabna in the land of Chittim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Janeas, one of the mighty men of the children of Chittim, reigned after him and he
 reigned fifty years.</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>8 And it was after the death of the king of Chittim that Balaam the son of Beor fled from the
 land of Chittim, and he went and came to Egypt to Pharaoh king of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Pharaoh received him with great honor, for he had heard of his wisdom, and he gave
 him presents and made him for a counsellor, and aggrandized him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And Balaam dwelt in Egypt, in honor with all the nobles of the king, and the nobles exalted
 him, because they all coveted to learn his wisdom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And in the hundred and thirtieth year of Israel's going down to Egypt, Pharaoh dreamed
 that he was sitting upon his kingly throne, and lifted up his eyes and saw an old man standing
 before him, and there were scales in the hands of the old man, such scales as are used by
 merchants.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the old man took the scales and hung them before Pharaoh.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the old man took all the elders of Egypt and all its nobles and great men, and he tied
 them together and put them in one scale.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And he took a milk kid and put it into the other scale, and the kid preponderated over all.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Pharaoh was astonished at this dreadful vision, why the kid should preponderate over
 all, and Pharaoh awoke and behold it was a dream.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And Pharaoh rose up early in the morning and called all his servants and related to them
 the dream, and the men were greatly afraid.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the king said to all his wise men, Interpret I pray you the dream which I dreamed, that
 I may know it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And Balaam the son of Beor answered the king and said unto him, This means nothing
 else but a great evil that will spring up against Egypt in the latter days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 For a son will be born to Israel who will destroy all Egypt and its inhabitants, and bring
 forth the Israelites from Egypt with a mighty hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 Now therefore, O king, take counsel upon this matter, that you may destroy the hope of the
 children of Israel and their expectation, before this evil arise against Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the king said unto Balaam, And what shall we do unto Israel? surely after a certain
 manner did we at first counsel against them and could not prevail over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 Now therefore give you also advice against them by which we may prevail over them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And Balaam answered the king, saying, Send now and call thy two counsellors, and we
 will see what their advice is upon this matter and afterward thy servant will speak.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the king sent and called his two counsellors Reuel the Midianite and Job the Uzite,
 and they came and sat before the king.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the king said to them, Behold you have both heard the dream which I have dreamed,
 and the interpretation thereof; now therefore give counsel and know and see what is to be
 done to the children of Israel, whereby we may prevail over them, before their evil shall spring
 up against us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Reuel the Midianite answered the king and said, May the king live, may the king live
 forever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 If it seem good to the king, let him desist from the Hebrews and leave them, and let him
 not stretch forth his hand against them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 For these are they whom the Lord chose in days of old, and took as the lot of his
 inheritance from  amongst all the nations of the earth and the kings of the earth; and who is there that
 stretched his hand against them with impunity, of whom their God was not avenged?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 Surely thou knowest that when Abraham went down to Egypt, Pharaoh, the former king of
 Egypt, saw Sarah his wife, and took her for a wife, because Abraham said, She is my sister,
 for he was afraid, lest the men of Egypt should slay him on account of his wife.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And when the king of Egypt had taken Sarah then God smote him and his household with
 heavy plagues, until he restored unto Abraham his wife Sarah, then was he healed.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Abimelech the Gerarite, king of the Philistines, God punished on account of Sarah
 wife of Abraham, in stopping up every womb from man to beast.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 When their God came to Abimelech in the dream of night and terrified him in order that he
 might restore to Abraham Sarah whom he had taken, and afterward all the people of Gerar
 were punished on account of Sarah, and Abraham prayed to his God for them, and he was
 entreated of him, and he healed them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 And Abimelech feared all this evil that came upon him and his people, and he returned to
 Abraham his wife Sarah, and gave him with her many gifts.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 He did so also to Isaac when he had driven him from Gerar, and God had done wonderful
 things to him, that all the water courses of Gerar were dried up, and their productive trees did
 not bring forth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 Until Abimelech of Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends, and Pichol the captain of his
 host, went to him and they bent and bowed down before him to the ground.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And they requested of him to supplicate for them, and he prayed to the Lord for them, and
 the Lord was entreated of him and he healed them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 Jacob also, the plain man, was delivered through his integrity from the hand of his brother
 Esau, and the hand of Laban the Syrian his mother's brother, who had sought his life;
 likewise from the hand of all the kings of Canaan who had come together against him and his
 children to destroy them, and the Lord delivered them out of their hands, that they turned
 upon them and smote them, for who had ever stretched forth his hand against them with
 impunity?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 Surely Pharaoh the former, thy father's father, raised Joseph the son of Jacob above all
 the princes of the land of Egypt, when he saw his wisdom, for through his wisdom he rescued
 all the inhabitants of the land from the famine.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 After which he ordered Jacob and his children to come down to Egypt, in order that
 through their virtue, the land of Egypt and the land of Goshen might be delivered from the
 famine.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 Now therefore if it seem good in thine eyes, cease from destroying the children of Israel,
 but if it be not thy will that they shall dwell in Egypt, send them forth from here, that they may
 go to the land of Canaan, the land where their ancestors sojourned.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And when Pharaoh heard the words of Jethro he was very angry with him, so that he rose
 with shame from the king's presence, and went to Midian, his land, and took Joseph's stick
 with him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And the king said to Job the Uzite, What sayest thou Job, and what is thy advice
 respecting the Hebrews?</p><p>
  
 
 </p><p>43 So Job said to the king, Behold all the inhabitants of the land are in thy power, let the king
 do as it seems good in his eyes.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And the king said unto Balaam, What dost thou say, Balaam, speak thy word that we may
 hear it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And Balaam said to the king, Of all that the king has counselled against the Hebrews will
 they be delivered, and the king will not be able to prevail over them with any counsel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 For if thou thinkest to lessen them by the flaming fire, thou canst not prevail over them, for
 surely their God delivered Abraham their father from Ur of the Chaldeans; and if thou thinkest
 to destroy them with a sword, surely Isaac their father was delivered from it, and a ram was
 placed in his stead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And if with hard and rigorous labor thou thinkest to lessen them, thou wilt not prevail even
 in this, for their father Jacob served Laban in all manner of hard work, and prospered.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 Now therefore, O King, hear my words, for this is the counsel which is counselled against
 them, by which thou wilt prevail over them, and from which thou shouldst not depart.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 If it please the king let him order all their children which shall be born from this day
 forward, to be thrown into the water, for by this canst thou wipe away their name, for none of
 them, nor of their fathers, were tried in this manner.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And the king heard the words of Balaam, and the thing pleased the king and the princes,
 and the king did according to the word of Balaam.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And the king ordered a proclamation to be issued and a law to be made throughout the
 land of Egypt, saying, Every male child born to the Hebrews from this day forward shall be
 thrown into the water.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And Pharaoh called unto all his servants, saying, Go now and seek throughout the land of
 Goshen where the children of Israel are, and see that every son born to the Hebrews shall be
 cast into the river, but every daughter you shall let live.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And when the children of Israel heard this thing which Pharaoh had commanded, to cast
 their male children into the river, some of the people separated from their wives and others
 adhered to them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And from that day forward, when the time of delivery arrived to those women of Israel who
 had remained with their husbands, they went to the field to bring forth there, and they brought
 forth in the field, and left their children upon the field and returned home.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 And the Lord who had sworn to their ancestors to multiply them, sent one of his
 ministering angels which are in heaven to wash each child in water, to anoint and swathe it
 and to put into its hands two smooth stones from one of which it sucked milk and from the
 other honey, and he caused its hair to grow to its knees, by which it might cover itself; to
 comfort it and to cleave to it, through his compassion for it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>56 And when God had compassion over them and had desired to multiply them upon the face
 of the land, he ordered his earth to receive them to be preserved therein till the time of their
 growing up, after which the earth opened its mouth and vomited them forth and they sprouted
 forth from the city like the herb of the earth, and the grass of the forest, and they returned
 each to his family and to his father's house, and they remained with them.</p><p>
 
  
 
 </p><p>57 And the babes of the children of Israel were upon the earth like the herb of the field,
 through God's grace to them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>58 And when all the Egyptians saw this thing, they went forth, each to his field with his yoke of
 oxen and his ploughshare, and they ploughed it up as one ploughs the earth at seed time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>59 And when they ploughed they were unable to hurt the infants of the children of Israel, so
 the people increased and waxed exceedingly.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>60 And Pharaoh ordered his officers daily to go to Goshen to seek for the babes of the
 children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>61 And when they had sought and found one, they took it from its mother's bosom by force,
 and threw it into the river, but the female child they left with its mother; thus did the Egyptians
 do to the Israelites all the days.</p><p>
 
 
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="68.htm">Next: Chapter 68</a>
 </p></body>