<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="68.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="70.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 69
 </h1>
  
 
 
 <p>1 And the king of Edom died in those days, in the eighteenth year of his reign, and was buried
 in his temple which he had built for himself as his royal residence in the land of Edom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And the children of Esau sent to Pethor, which is upon the river, and they fetched from
 there a young man of beautiful eyes and comely aspect, whose name was Saul, and they
 made him king over them in the place of Samlah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Saul reigned over all the children of Esau in the land of Edom for forty years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And when Pharaoh king of Egypt saw that the counsel which Balaam had advised
 respecting the children of Israel did not succeed, but that still they were fruitful, multiplied and
 increased throughout the land of Egypt,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 Then Pharaoh commanded in those days that a proclamation should be issued throughout
 Egypt to the children of Israel, saying, No man shall diminish any thing of his daily labor.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And the man who shall be found deficient in his labor which he performs daily, whether in
 mortar or in bricks, then his youngest son shall be put in their place.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the labor of Egypt strengthened upon the children of Israel in those days, and behold if
 one brick was deficient in any man's daily labor, the Egyptians took his youngest boy by force
 from his mother, and put him into the building in the place of the brick which his father had left
 wanting.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the men of Egypt did so to all the children of Israel day by day, all the days for a long
 period.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 But the tribe of Levi did not at that time work with the Israelites their brethren, from the
 beginning, for the children of Levi knew the cunning of the Egyptians which they exercised at
 first toward the Israelites.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="70.htm">Next: Chapter 70</a>
 </p></body>