<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="6.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="8.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 7
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And these are the names of the sons of Noah: Japheth, Ham and Shem; and children were
 born to them after the flood, for they had taken wives before the flood.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 These are the sons of Japheth; Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras,
 seven sons.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the sons of Gomer were Askinaz, Rephath and Tegarmah.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the sons of Magog were Elichanaf and Lubal.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the children of Madai were Achon, Zeelo, Chazoni and Lot.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And the sons of Javan were Elisha, Tarshish, Chittim and Dudonim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the sons of Tubal were Ariphi, Kesed and Taari.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And the sons of Meshech were Dedon, Zaron and Shebashni.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And the sons of Tiras were Benib, Gera, Lupirion and Gilak; these are the sons of Japheth
 according to their families, and their numbers in those days were about four hundred and
 sixty men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And these are the sons of Ham; Cush, Mitzraim, Phut and Canaan, four sons; and the
 sons of Cush were Seba, Havilah, Sabta, Raama and Satecha, and the sons of Raama were
 Sheba and Dedan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And the sons of Mitzraim were Lud, Anom and Pathros, Chasloth and Chaphtor.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And the sons of Phut were Gebul, Hadan, Benah and Adan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And the sons of Canaan were Zidon, Heth, Amori, Gergashi, Hivi, Arkee, Seni, Arodi,
 Zimodi and Chamothi.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 These are the sons of Ham, according to their families, and their numbers in those days
 were about seven hundred and thirty men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And these are the sons of Shem; Elam, Ashur, Arpachshad, Lud and Aram, five sons; and
 the sons of Elam were Shushan, Machul and Harmon.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And the sons of Ashar were Mirus and Mokil, and the sons of Arpachshad were Shelach,
 Anar and Ashcol.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the sons of Lud were Pethor and Bizayon, and the sons of Aram were Uz, Chul,
 Gather and Mash.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 These are the sons of Shem, according to their families; and their numbers in those days
 were about three hundred men.</p><p>
 
 </p><p align="RIGHT">15</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 These are the generations of Shem; Shem begat Arpachshad and Arpachshad begat
 Shelach, and Shelach begat Eber and to Eber were born two children, the name of one was
 Peleg, for in his days the sons of men were divided, and in the latter days, the earth was
 divided.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the name of the second was Yoktan, meaning that in his day the lives of the sons of
 men were diminished and lessened.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 These are the sons of Yoktan; Almodad, Shelaf, Chazarmoveth, Yerach, Hadurom, Ozel,
 Diklah, Obal, Abimael, Sheba, Ophir, Havilah and Jobab; all these are the sons of Yoktan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Peleg his brother begat Yen, and Yen begat Serug, and Serug begat Nahor and
 Nahor begat Terah, and Terah was thirty-eight years old, and he begat Haran and Nahor.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And Cush the son of Ham, the son of Noah, took a wife in those days in his old age, and
 she bare a son, and they called his name Nimrod, saying, At that time the sons of men again
 began to rebel and transgress against God, and the child grew up, and his father loved him
 exceedingly, for he was the son of his old age.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the garments of skin which God made for Adam and his wife, when they went out of
 the garden, were given to Cush.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 For after the death of Adam and his wife, the garments were given to Enoch, the son of
 Jared, and when Enoch was taken up to God, he gave them to Methuselah, his son.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And at the death of Methuselah, Noah took them and brought them to the ark, and they
 were with him until he went out of the ark.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And in their going out, Ham stole those garments from Noah his father, and he took them
 and hid them from his brothers.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And when Ham begat his first born Cush, he gave him the garments in secret, and they
 were with Cush many days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 And Cush also concealed them from his sons and brothers, and when Cush had begotten
 Nimrod, he gave him those garments through his love for him, and Nimrod grew up, and
 when he was twenty years old he put on those garments.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Nimrod became strong when he put on the garments, and God gave him might and
 strength, and he was a mighty hunter in the earth, yea, he was a mighty hunter in the field,
 and he hunted the animals and he built altars, and he offered upon them the animals before
 the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Nimrod strengthened himself, and he rose up from amongst his brethren, and he
 fought the battles of his brethren against all their enemies round about.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And the Lord delivered all the enemies of his brethren in his hands, and God prospered
 him from time to time in his battles, and he reigned upon earth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 Therefore it became current in those days, when a man ushered forth those that he had
 trained up for battle, he would say to them, Like God did to Nimrod, who was a mighty hunter
 in the earth, and who succeeded in the battles that prevailed against his brethren, that he
 delivered them from the hands of their enemies, so may God strengthen us and deliver us
 this day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 And when Nimrod was forty years old, at that time there was a war between his brethren
 and the children of Japheth, so that they were in the power of their enemies.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And Nimrod went forth at that time, and he assembled all the sons of Cush and their
 families, about four hundred and sixty men, and he hired also from some of his friends and
 acquaintances about eighty men, and be gave them their hire, and he went with them to
 battle, and when he was on the road, Nimrod strengthened the hearts of the people that went
 with him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And he said to them, Do not fear, neither be alarmed, for all our enemies will be delivered
 into our hands, and you may do with them as you please.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And all the men that went were about five hundred, and they fought against their enemies,
 and they destroyed them, and subdued them, and Nimrod placed standing officers over them
 in their respective places.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And he took some of their children as security, and they were all servants to Nimrod and to
 his brethren, and Nimrod and all the people that were with him turned homeward.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And when Nimrod had joyfully returned from battle, after having conquered his enemies,
 all his brethren, together with those who knew him before, assembled to make him king over
 them, and they placed the regal crown upon his head.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And he set over his subjects and people, princes, judges, and rulers, as is the custom
 amongst kings.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And he placed Terah the son of Nahor the prince of his host, and he dignified him and
 elevated him above all his princes.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And whilst he was reigning according to his heart's desire, after having conquered all his
 enemies around, he advised with his counselors to build a city for his palace, and they did so.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And they found a large valley opposite to the east, and they built him a large and extensive
 city, and Nimrod called the name of the city that he built Shinar, for the Lord had vehemently
 shaken his enemies and destroyed them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And Nimrod dwelt in Shinar, and he reigned securely, and he fought with his enemies and
 he subdued them, and he prospered in all his battles, and his kingdom became very great.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And all nations and tongues heard of his fame, and they gathered themselves to him, and
 they bowed down to the earth, and they brought him offerings, and he became their lord and
 king, and they all dwelt with him in the city at Shinar, and Nimrod reigned in the earth over all
 the sons of Noah, and they were all under his power and counsel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And all the earth was of one tongue and words of union, but Nimrod did not go in the ways
 of the Lord, and he was more wicked than all the men that were before him, from the days of
 the flood until those days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And he made gods of wood and stone, and he bowed down to them, and he rebelled
 against the Lord, and taught all his subjects and the people of the earth his wicked ways; and
 Mardon his son was more wicked than his father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And every one that heard of the acts of Mardon the son of Nimrod would say, concerning
 him, From the wicked goeth forth wickedness; therefore it became a proverb in the whole
 earth, saying, From the wicked goeth forth wickedness, and it was current in the words of
 men from that time to this.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And Terah the son of Nahor, prince of Nimrod's host, was in those days very great in the
 sight of the king and his subjects, and the king and princes loved him, and they elevated him
 very high.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 And Terah took a wife and her name was Amthelo the daughter of Cornebo; and the wife
 of Terah conceived and bare him a son in those days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 Terah was seventy years old when he begat him, and Terah called the name of his son
 that was born to him Abram, because the king had raised him in those days, and dignified
 him above all his princes that were with him.</p><p>
 
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="8.htm">Next: Chapter 8</a>
 </p></body>