<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="70.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="72.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 71
 </h1>
 
 
 
 <p>1 And when Moses was eighteen years old, he desired to see his father and mother and he
 went to them to Goshen, and when Moses had come near Goshen, he came to the place
 where the children of Israel were engaged in work, and he observed their burdens, and he
 saw an Egyptian smiting one of his Hebrew brethren.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 And when the man who was beaten saw Moses he ran to him for help, for the man Moses
 was greatly respected in the house of Pharaoh, and he said to him, My lord attend to me, this
 Egyptian came to my house in the night, bound me, and came to my wife in my presence, and
 now he seeks to take my life away.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And when Moses heard this wicked thing, his anger was kindled against the Egyptian, and
 he turned this way and the other, and when he saw there was no man there he smote the
 Egyptian and hid him in the sand, and delivered the Hebrew from the hand of him that smote
 him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And the Hebrew went to his house, and Moses returned to his home, and went forth and
 came back to the king's house.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And when the man had returned home, he thought of repudiating his wife, for it was not
 right in the house of Jacob, for any man to come to his wife after she had been defiled.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And the woman went and told her brothers, and the woman's brothers sought to slay him,
 and he fled to his house and escaped.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And on the second day Moses went forth to his brethren, and saw, and behold two men
 were quarreling, and he said to the wicked one, Why dost thou smite thy neighbor?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And he answered him and said to him, Who has set thee for a prince and judge over us?
 dost thou think to slay me as thou didst slay the Egyptian? and Moses was afraid and he said,
 Surely the thing is known?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And Pharaoh heard of this affair, and he ordered Moses to be slain, so God sent his angel,
 and he appeared unto Pharaoh in the likeness of a captain of the guard.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And the angel of the Lord took the sword from the hand of the captain of the guard, and
 took his head off with it, for the likeness of the captain of the guard was turned into the
 likeness of Moses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And the angel of the Lord took hold of the right hand of Moses, and brought him forth from
 Egypt, and placed him from without the borders of Egypt, a distance of forty days' journey.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And Aaron his brother alone remained in the land of Egypt, and he prophesied to the
 children of Israel, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 Thus says the Lord God of your ancestors, Throw away, each man, the abominations of
 his eyes, and do not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And the children of Israel rebelled and would not hearken to Aaron at that time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the Lord thought to destroy them, were it not that the Lord remembered the covenant
 which he had made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 In those days the hand of Pharaoh continued to be severe against the children of Israel,
 and he crushed and oppressed them until the time when God sent forth his word and took
 notice of them.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="72.htm">Next: Chapter 72</a>
 </p></body>