<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="76.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="78.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 77
 </h1>
 
 
 <p>1 Adikam was twenty years old when he reigned over Egypt, he reigned four years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 In the two hundred and sixth year of Israel's going down to Egypt did Adikam reign over
 Egypt, but he continued not so long in his reign over Egypt as his fathers had continued their
 reigns.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 For Melol his father reigned ninety-four years in Egypt, but he was ten years sick and died,
 for he had been wicked before the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And all the Egyptians called the name of Adikam Pharaoh like the name of his fathers, as
 was their custom to do in Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And all the wise men of Pharaoh called the name of Adikam Ahuz, for short is called Ahuz
 in the Egyptian language.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And Adikam was exceedingly ugly, and he was a cubit and a span and he had a great
 beard which reached to the soles of his feet.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And Pharaoh sat upon his father's throne to reign over Egypt, and he conducted the
 government of Egypt in his wisdom.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And whilst he reigned he exceeded his father and all the preceding kings in wickedness,
 and he increased his yoke over the children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And he went with his servants to Goshen to the children of Israel, and he strengthened the
 labor over them and he said unto them, Complete your work, each day's task, and let not your
 hands slacken from our work from this day forward as you did in the days of my father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 And he placed officers over them from amongst the children of Israel, and over these
 officers he placed taskmasters from amongst his servants.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And he placed over them a measure of bricks for them to do according to that number, day
 by day, and he turned back and went to Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 At that time the task-masters of Pharaoh ordered the officers of the children of Israel
 according to the command of Pharaoh, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 Thus says Pharaoh, Do your work each day, and finish your task, and observe the daily
 measure of bricks; diminish not anything.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 And it shall come to pass that if you are deficient in your daily bricks, I will put your young
 children in their stead.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And the task-masters of Egypt did so in those days as Pharaoh had ordered them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And whenever any deficiency was found in the children of Israel's measure of their daily
 bricks, the task-masters of Pharaoh would go to the wives of the children of Israel and take
 infants of the children of Israel to the number of bricks deficient, they would take them by
 force from their mother's laps, and put them in the building instead of the bricks;</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 Whilst their fathers and mothers were crying over them and weeping when they heard the
 weeping voices of their infants in the wall of the building.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the task-masters prevailed over Israel, that the Israelites should place their children in
 the building, so that a man placed his son in the wall and put mortar over him, whilst his eyes
 wept over him, and his tears ran down upon his child.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And the task-masters of Egypt did so to the babes of Israel for many days, and no one
 pitied or had compassion over the babes of the children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the number of all the children killed in the building was two hundred and seventy,
 some whom they had built upon instead of the bricks which had been left deficient by their
 fathers, and some whom they had drawn out dead from the building.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the labor imposed upon the children of Israel in the days of Adikam exceeded in
 hardship that which they performed in the days of his father.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And the children of Israel sighed every day on account of their heavy work, for they had
 said to themselves, Behold when Pharaoh shall die, his son will rise up and lighten our work!</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 But they increased the latter work more than the former, and the children of Israel sighed
 at this and their cry ascended to God on account of their labor.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And God heard the voice of the children of Israel and their cry, in those days, and God
 remembered to them his covenant which he had made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And God saw the burden of the children of Israel, and their heavy work in those days, and
 he determined to deliver them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And Moses the son of Amram was still confined in the dungeon in those days, in the house
 of Reuel the Midianite, and Zipporah the daughter of Reuel did support him with food secretly
 day by day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And Moses was confined in the dungeon in the house of Reuel for ten years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And at the end of ten years which was the first year of the reign of Pharaoh over Egypt, in
 the place of his father,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 Zipporah said to her father Reuel, No person inquires or seeks after the Hebrew man,
 whom thou didst bind in prison now ten years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 Now therefore, if it seem good in thy sight, let us send and see whether he is living or
 dead, but her father knew not that she had supported him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And Reuel her father answered and said to her, Has ever such a thing happened that a
 man should be shut up in a prison without food for ten years, and that he should live?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Zipporah answered her father, saying, Surely thou hast heard that the God of the
 Hebrews is great and awful, and does wonders for them at all times.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 He it was who delivered Abraham from Ur of the Chaldeans, and Isaac from the sword of
 his father, and Jacob from the angel of the Lord who wrestled with him at the ford of Jabbuk.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 Also with this man has he done many things, he delivered him from the river in Egypt and
 from the sword of Pharaoh, and from the children of Cush, so also can he deliver him from
 famine and make him live.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And the thing seemed good in the sight of Reuel, and he did according to the word of his
 daughter, and sent to the dungeon to ascertain what became of Moses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And he saw, and behold the man Moses was living in the dungeon, standing upon his feet,
 praising and praying to the God of his ancestors.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Reuel commanded Moses to be brought out of the dungeon, so they shaved him and
 he changed his prison garments and ate bread.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And afterward Moses went into the garden of Reuel which was behind the house, and he
 there prayed to the Lord his God, who had done mighty wonders for him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And it was that whilst he prayed he looked opposite to him, and behold  a sapphire stick was placed in the ground, which was planted in the midst of the garden.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And he approached the stick and he looked, and behold the name of the Lord God of
 hosts was engraved thereon, written and developed upon the stick.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And he read it and stretched forth his hand and he plucked it like a forest tree from the
 thicket, and the stick was in his hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And this is the stick with which all the works of our God were performed, after he had
 created heaven and earth, and all the host of them, seas, rivers and all their fishes.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And when God had driven Adam from the garden of Eden, he took the stick in his hand
 and went and tilled the ground from which he was taken.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And the stick came down to Noah and was given to Shem and his descendants, until it
 came into the hand of Abraham the Hebrew.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 And when Abraham had given all he had to his son Isaac, he also gave to him this stick.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And when Jacob had fled to Padan-aram, he took it into his hand, and when he returned
 to his father he had not left it behind him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 Also when he went down to Egypt he took it into his hand and gave it to Joseph, one
 portion above his brethren, for Jacob had taken it by force from his brother Esau.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 And after the death of Joseph, the nobles of Egypt came into the house of Joseph, and the
 stick came into the hand of Reuel the Midianite, and when he went out of Egypt, he took it in
 his hand and planted it in his garden.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And all the mighty men of the Kinites tried to pluck it when they endeavored to get
 Zipporah his daughter, but they were unsuccessful.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>50 So that stick remained planted in the garden of Reuel, until he came who had a right to it
 and took it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And when Reuel saw the stick in the hand of Moses, he wondered at it, and he gave him
 his daughter Zipporah for a wife.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="78.htm">Next: Chapter 78</a>
 </p></body>