<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="80.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="82.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 81
 </h1>
 
  
 
 
 <p>1 And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand
 men on foot, besides the little ones and their wives.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 Also a mixed multitude went up with them, and flocks and herds, even much cattle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in the land of Egypt in hard labor,
 was two hundred and ten years.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And at the end of two hundred and ten years, the Lord brought forth the children of Israel
 from Egypt with a strong hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And the children of Israel traveled from Egypt and from Goshen and from Rameses, and
 encamped in Succoth on the fifteenth day of the first month.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 And the Egyptians buried all their first born whom the Lord had smitten, and all the
 Egyptians buried their slain for three days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 And the children of Israel traveled from Succoth and encamped in Ethom, at the end of the
 wilderness.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And on the third day after the Egyptians had buried their first born, many men rose up from
 Egypt and went after Israel to make them return to Egypt, for they repented that they had sent
 the Israelites away from their servitude.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And one man said to his neighbor, Surely Moses and Aaron spoke to Pharaoh, saying, We
 will go a three days' journey in the wilderness and sacrifice to the Lord our God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 Now therefore let us rise up early in the morning and cause them to return, and it shall be
 that if they return with us to Egypt to their masters, then shall we know that there is faith in
 them, but if they will not return, then will we fight with them, and make them come back with
 great power and a strong hand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 And all the nobles of Pharaoh rose up in the morning, and with them about seven hundred
 thousand men, and they went forth from Egypt on that day, and came to the place where the
 children of Israel were.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And all the Egyptians saw and behold Moses and Aaron and all the children of Israel were
 sitting before Pi-hahiroth, eating and drinking and celebrating the feast of the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And all the Egyptians said to the children of Israel, Surely you said, We will go a journey
 for three days in the wilderness and sacrifice to our God and return.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 Now therefore this day makes five days since you went, why do you not return to your
 masters?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And Moses and Aaron answered them, saying, Because the Lord our God has testified in
 us, saying,  You shall no more return to Egypt, but we will betake ourselves to a land flowing with milk
 and honey, as the Lord our God had sworn to our ancestors to give to us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And when the nobles of Egypt saw that the children of Israel did not hearken to them, to
 return to Egypt, they girded themselves to fight with Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And the Lord strengthened the hearts of the children of Israel over the Egyptians, that they
 gave them a severe beating, and the battle was sore upon the Egyptians, and all the
 Egyptians fled from before the children of Israel, for many of them perished by the hand of
 Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 And the nobles of Pharaoh went to Egypt and told Pharaoh, saying, The children of Israel
 have fled, and will no more return to Egypt, and in this manner did Moses and Aaron speak to
 us.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Pharaoh heard this thing, and his heart and the hearts of all his subjects were turned
 against Israel, and they repented that they had sent Israel; and all the Egyptians advised
 Pharaoh to pursue the children of Israel to make them come back to their burdens.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And they said each man to his brother, What is this which we have done, that we have
 sent Israel from our servitude?</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 And the Lord strengthened the hearts of all the Egyptians to pursue the Israelites, for the
 Lord desired to overthrow the Egyptians in the Red Sea.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And Pharaoh rose up and harnessed his chariot, and he ordered all the Egyptians to
 assemble, not one man was left excepting the little ones and the women.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And all the Egyptians went forth with Pharaoh to pursue the children of Israel, and the
 camp of Egypt was an exceedingly large and heavy camp, about ten hundred thousand men.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And the whole of this camp went and pursued the children of Israel to bring them back to
 Egypt, and they reached them encamping by the Red Sea.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and beheld all the Egyptians pursuing them,
 and the children of Israel were greatly terrified at them, and the children of Israel cried to the
 Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 And on account of the Egyptians, the children of Israel divided themselves into four
 divisions, and they were divided in their opinions, for they were afraid of the Egyptians, and
 Moses spoke to each of them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 The first division was of the children of Reuben, Simeon, and Issachar, and they resolved
 to cast themselves into the sea, for they were exceedingly afraid of the Egyptians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 And Moses said to them, Fear not, stand still and see the salvation of the Lord which He
 will effect this day for you.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>29 The second division was of the children of Zebulun, Benjamin and Naphtali, and they
 resolved to go back to Egypt with the Egyptians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And Moses said to them, Fear not, for as you have seen the Egyptians this day, so shall
 you see them no more for ever.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 The third division was of the children of Judah and Joseph, and they resolved to go to
 meet the Egyptians to fight with them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And Moses said to them, Stand in your places, for the Lord will fight for you, and you shall
 remain silent.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>33 And the fourth division was of the children of Levi, Gad, and Asher, and they resolved to
 go into the midst of the Egyptians to confound them, and Moses said to them, Remain in your
 stations and fear not, only call unto the Lord that he may save you out of their hands.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 After this Moses rose up from amidst the people, and he prayed to the Lord and said,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 O Lord God of the whole earth, save now thy people whom thou didst bring forth from
 Egypt, and let not the Egyptians boast that power and might are theirs.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 So the Lord said to Moses, Why dost thou cry unto me? speak to the children of Israel that
 they shall proceed, and do thou stretch out thy rod upon the sea and divide it, and the
 children of Israel shall pass through it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 And Moses did so, and he lifted up his rod upon the sea and divided it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 And the waters of the sea were divided into twelve parts, and the children of Israel passed
 through on foot, with shoes, as a man would pass through a prepared road.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 And the Lord manifested to the children of Israel his wonders in Egypt and in the sea by
 the hand of Moses and Aaron.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And when the children of Israel had entered the sea, the Egyptians came after them, and
 the waters of the sea resumed upon them, and they all sank in the water, and not one man
 was left excepting Pharaoh, who gave thanks to the Lord and believed in him, therefore the
 Lord did not cause him to perish at that time with the Egyptians.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 And the Lord ordered an angel to take him from amongst the Egyptians, who cast him
 upon the land of Ninevah and he reigned over it for a long time.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 And on that day the Lord saved Israel from the hand of Egypt, and all the children of Israel
 saw that the Egyptians had perished, and they beheld the great hand of the Lord, in what he
 had performed in Egypt and in the sea.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, on the day when the
 Lord caused the Egyptians to fall before them.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>44 And all Israel sang in concert, saying, I will sing to the Lord for He is greatly exalted, the
 horse and his rider has he cast into the sea; behold it is written in the book of the law of God.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>45 After this the children of Israel proceeded on their journey, and encamped in Marah, and
 the Lord gave to the children of Israel statutes and judgments in that place in Marah, and the
 Lord commanded the children of Israel to walk in all his ways and to serve him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>46 And they journeyed from Marah and came to Elim, and in Elim were twelve springs of
 water and seventy date trees, and the children encamped there by the waters.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>47 And they journeyed from Elim and came to the wilderness of Sin, on the fifteenth day of
 the second month after their departure from Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>48 At that time the Lord gave the manna to the children of Israel to eat, and the Lord caused
 food to rain from heaven for the children of Israel day by day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>49 And the children of Israel ate the manna for forty years, all the days that they were in the
 wilderness, until they came to the land of Canaan to possess it.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>50 And they proceeded from the wilderness of Sin and encamped in Alush.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>51 And they proceeded from Alush and encamped in Rephidim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>52 And when the children of Israel were in Rephidim, Amalek the son of Eliphaz, the son of
 Esau, the brother of Zepho, came to fight with Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>53 And he brought with him eight hundred and one thousand men, magicians and conjurers,
 and he prepared for battle with Israel in Rephidim.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>54 And they carried on a great and severe battle against Israel, and the Lord delivered
 Amalek and his people into the hands of Moses and the children of Israel, and into the hand
 of Joshua, the son of Nun, the Ephrathite, the servant of Moses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>55 And the children of Israel smote Amalek and his people at the edge of the sword, but the
 battle was very sore upon the children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>56 And the Lord said to Moses, Write this thing as a memorial for thee in a book, and place it
 in the hand of Joshua, the son of Nun, thy servant, and thou shalt command the children of
 Israel, saying, When thou shalt come to the land of Canaan, thou shalt utterly efface the
 remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>57 And Moses did so, and he took the book and wrote upon it these words, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>58 Remember what Amalek has done to thee in the road when thou wentest forth from Egypt.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>59 Who met thee in the road and smote thy rear, even those that were feeble behind thee
 when thou wast faint and weary.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>60 Therefore it shall be when the Lord thy God shall have given thee rest from all thine
 enemies round about in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, to
 possess it, that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven, thou shalt
 not forget it.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>61 And the king who shall have pity on Amalek, or upon his memory or upon his seed, behold
 I will require it of him, and I will cut him off from amongst his people.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>62 And Moses wrote all these things in a book, and he enjoined the children of Israel
 respecting all these matters.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="82.htm">Next: Chapter 82</a>
 </p></body>