<body>
 
 
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred-texts</a>
 <a href="../index.htm">Apocrypha</a>
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a>
 <a href="82.htm">Previous</a>
 <a href="84.htm">Next</a>
 </center>
 <hr>
 <h1 align="CENTER">Book of Jasher, Chapter 83
 </h1>
  
 
 <p>1 And in the twelfth month, in the twenty-third day of the month, Moses took Aaron and his
 sons, and he dressed them in their garments, and anointed them and did unto them as the
 Lord had commanded him, and Moses brought up all the offerings which the Lord had on that
 day commanded him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>2 Moses afterward took Aaron and his sons and said to them, For seven days shall you
 remain at the door of the tabernacle, for thus am I commanded.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>3 And Aaron and his sons did all that the Lord had commanded them through Moses, and
 they remained for seven days at the door of the tabernacle.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>4 And on the eighth day, being the first day of the first month, in the second year from the
 Israelites' departure from Egypt, Moses erected the sanctuary, and Moses put up all the
 furniture of the tabernacle and all the furniture of the sanctuary, and he did all that the Lord
 had commanded him.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>5 And Moses called to Aaron and his sons, and they brought the burnt offering and the sin
 offering for themselves and the children of Israel, as the Lord had commanded Moses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>6 On that day the two sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, took strange fire and brought it before
 the Lord  who had not commanded them, and a fire went forth from before the Lord, and consumed
 them, and they died before the Lord on that day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>7 Then on the day when Moses had completed to erect the sanctuary, the princes of the
 children of Israel began to bring their offerings before the Lord for the dedication of the altar.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>8 And they brought up their offerings each prince for one day, a prince each day for twelve
 days.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>9 And all the offerings which they brought, each man in his day, one silver charger weighing
 one hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels after the shekel of the
 sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour, mingled with oil for a meat offering.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>10 One spoon, weighing ten shekels of gold, full of incense.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>11 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year for a burnt offering.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>12 And one kid of the goats for a sin offering.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>13 And for a sacrifice of peace offering, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of a
 year old.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>14 Thus did the twelve princes of Israel day by day, each man in his day.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>15 And it was after this, in the thirteenth day of the month, that Moses commanded the
 children of Israel to observe the Passover.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>16 And the children of Israel kept the Passover in its season in the fourteenth day of the
 month, as the Lord had commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>17 And in the second month, on the first day thereof, the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>18 Number the heads of all the males of the children of Israel from twenty years old and
 upward, thou and thy brother Aaron and the twelve princes of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>19 And Moses did so, and Aaron came with the twelve princes of Israel, and they numbered
 the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>20 And the numbers of the children of Israel by the houses of their fathers, from twenty years
 old and upward, were six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>21 But the children of Levi were not numbered amongst their brethren the children of Israel.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>22 And the number of all the males of the children of Israel from one month old and upward,
 was twenty-two thousand, two hundred and seventy-three.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>23 And the number of the children of Levi from one month old and above, was twenty-two
 thousand.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>24 And Moses placed the priests and the Levites each man to his service and to his burden
 to serve the sanctuary of the tabernacle, as the Lord had commanded Moses.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>25 And on the twentieth day of the month, the cloud was taken away from the tabernacle of
 testimony.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>26 At that time the children of Israel continued their journey from the wilderness of Sinai, and
 they took a journey of three days, and the cloud rested upon the wilderness of Paran; there
 the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, for they had provoked the Lord in asking him
 for meat, that they might eat.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>27 And the Lord hearkened to their voice, and gave them meat which they ate for one month.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>28 But after this the anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and he smote them with a
 great slaughter, and they were buried there in that place.</p><p>
  
 
 
 </p><p>29 And the children of Israel called that place Kebroth Hattaavah, because there they buried
 the people that lusted flesh.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>30 And they departed from Kebroth Hattaavah and pitched in Hazeroth, which is in the
 wilderness of Paran.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>31 And whilst the children of Israel were in Hazeroth, the anger of the Lord was kindled
 against Miriam on account of Moses, and she became leprous, white as snow.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>32 And she was confined without the camp for seven days, until she had been received again
 after her leprosy.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>33 The children of Israel afterward departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the end of the
 wilderness of Paran.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>34 At that time, the Lord spoke to Moses to send twelve men from the children of Israel, one
 man to a tribe, to go and explore the land of Canaan.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>35 And Moses sent the twelve men, and they came to the land of Canaan to search and
 examine it, and they explored the whole land from the wilderness of Sin to Rechob as thou
 comest to Chamoth.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>36 And at the end of forty days they came to Moses and Aaron, and they brought him word as
 it was in their hearts, and ten of the men brought up an evil report to the children of Israel, of
 the land which they had explored, saying, It is better for us to return to Egypt than to go to this
 land, a land that consumes its inhabitants.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>37 But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephuneh, who were of those that
 explored the land, said, The land is exceedingly good.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>38 If the Lord delight in us, then he will bring us to this land and give it to us, for it is a land
 flowing with milk and honey.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>39 But the children of Israel would not hearken to them, and they hearkened to the words of
 the ten men who had brought up an evil report of the land.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>40 And the Lord heard the murmurings of the children of Israel and he was angry and swore,
 saying,</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>41 Surely not one man of this wicked generation shall see the land from twenty years old and
 upward excepting Caleb the son of Jephuneh and Joshua the son of Nun.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>42 But surely this wicked generation shall perish in this wilderness, and their children shall
 come to the land and they shall possess it; so the anger of the Lord was kindled against
 Israel, and he made them wander in the wilderness for forty years until the end of that wicked
 generation, because they did not follow the Lord.</p><p>
 
 
 </p><p>43 And the people dwelt in the wilderness of Paran a long time, and they afterward
 proceeded to the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea.</p><p>
 </p><hr>
 <p align="CENTER"><a href="84.htm">Next: Chapter 84</a>
 </p></body>