<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_587.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_589.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:589</h3><p><i>Narrated Jabir:</i></p>
 When 'Abdullah (my father) died, he left behind children and debts. I 
 asked the lenders to put down some of his debt, but they refused, so I
 went to the Prophet to intercede with them, yet they refused. The 
 Prophet said (to me), "Classify your dates into their different kinds:
 'Adhq bin Zaid, Lean and 'Ajwa, each kind alone and call all the 
 creditors and wait till I come to you." I did so and the Prophet came 
 and sat beside the dates and started measuring to each his due till he
 paid them fully, and the amount of dates remained as it was before, as
 if he had not touched them.
 <p>
 (On another occasion) I took part in one of Ghazawat among with the 
 Prophet and I was riding one of our camels. The camel got tired and 
 was lagging behind the others. The Prophet hit it on its back. He 
 said, "Sell it to me, and you have the right to ride it till Medina.''
 When we approached Medina, I took the permission from the Prophet to 
 go to my house, saying, "O Allah's Apostle! I have newly married." The
 Prophet asked, "Have you married a virgin or a matron (a widow or 
 divorcee)?" I said, "I have married a matron, as 'Abdullah (my father)
 died and left behind daughters small in their ages, so I married a 
 matron who may teach them and bring them up with good manners." The 
 Prophet then said (to me), "Go to your family." When I went there and 
 told my maternal uncle about the selling of the camel, he admonished 
 me for it. On that I told him about its slowness and exhaustion and 
 about what the Prophet had done to the camel and his hitting it. When 
 the Prophet arrived, I went to him with the camel in the morning and 
 he gave me its price, the camel itself, and my share from the war 
 booty as he gave the other people.
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_589.htm">Next: 3:590: Ibn 'Umar: A man came to the Prophet and said,  I am often betrayed in ...</a></center>
 </body>