<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_735.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_737.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:737</h3><p><i>Narrated Aisha:</i></p>
 Buraira came (to 'Aisha) and said, "I have made a contract of 
 emancipation with my masters for nine Uqiyas (of gold) to be paid in 
 yearly installments. Therefore, I seek your help." 'Aisha said, "If 
 your masters agree, I will pay them the sum at once and free you on 
 condition that your Wala' will be for me." Buraira went to her masters
 but they refused that offer. She (came back) and said, "I presented to
 them the offer but they refused, unless the Wala' was for them." 
 Allah's Apostle heard of that and asked me about it, and I told him 
 about it. On that he said, "Buy and manumit her and stipulate that the
 Wala' should be for you, as Wala' is for the liberator." 'Aisha added,
 "Allah's Apostle then got up amongst the people, Glorified and Praised
 Allah, and said, 'Then after: What about some people who impose 
 conditions which are not present in Allah's Laws? So, any condition 
 which is not present in Allah's Laws is invalid even if they were 
 one-hundred conditions. Allah's ordinance is the truth, and Allah's 
 condition is stronger and more solid. Why do some men from you say, O 
 so-and-so! manumit the slave but the Wala will be for me? Verily, the 
 Wala is for the liberator."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_737.htm">Next: 3:738: Amra bint 'AbdurRahman: Buraira went to Aisha, the mother of the faithful believers to seek ...</a></center>
 </body>