<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_501.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_503.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:504</h3><p><i>Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:</i></p>
 I was accompanying the Prophet on a journey and was riding a slow 
 camel that was lagging behind the others. The Prophet passed by me and
 asked, "Who is this?" I replied, "Jabir bin 'Abdullah." He asked, 
 "What is the matter, (why are you late)?" I replied, "I am riding a 
 slow camel." He asked, "Do you have a stick?" I replied in the 
 affirmative. He said, "Give it to me." When I gave it to him, he beat 
 the camel and rebuked it. Then that camel surpassed the others 
 thenceforth. The Prophet said, "Sell it to me." I replied, "It is (a 
 gift) for you, O Allah's Apostle." He said, "Sell it to me. I have 
 bought it for four Dinars (gold pieces) and you can keep on riding it 
 till Medina." When we approached Medina, I started going (towards my 
 house). The Prophet said, "Where are you going?" I Sad, "I have 
 married a widow." He said, "Why have you not married a virgin to 
 fondle with each other?" I said, "My father died and left daughters, 
 so I decided to marry a widow (an experienced woman) (to look after 
 them)." He said, "Well done." When we reached Medina, Allah's Apostle 
 said, "O Bilal, pay him (the price of the camel) and give him extra 
 money." Bilal gave me four Dinars and one Qirat extra. (A sub-narrator
 said): Jabir added, "The extra Qirat of Allah's Apostle never parted 
 from me." The Qirat was always in Jabir bin 'Abdullah's purse.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_503.htm">Next: 3:505: Sahl bin Sad: A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said,  O Allah's Apostle! I want ...</a></center>
 </body>