<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_11.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_13.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:13</h3><p><i>Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:</i></p>
 The Prophet and his companions assumed Ihram for Hajj and none except 
 the Prophet and Talha had the Hadi with them. 'Ali had come from Yemen
 and he had the Hadi with him. He ('Ali) said, "I have assumed Ihram 
 with an intention like that of Allah's Apostle has assumed it." The 
 Prophet ordered his companions to intend the Ihram with which they had
 come for 'Umra, to perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba (and between Safa 
 and Marwa), to get their hair cut short and then to finish their Ihram
 with the exception of those who had the Hadi with them. They asked, 
 "Shall we go to Mina and the private organs of some of us are 
 dribbling (if we finish Ihram and have sexual relations with our 
 wives)?" The Prophet heard that and said, "Had I known what I know 
 now, I would not have brought the Hadi. If I did not have the Hadi 
 with me I would have finished my Ihram." 'Aisha got her menses and 
 performed all the ceremonies (of Hajj) except the Tawaf . So when she 
 became clean from her menses, and she had performed the Tawaf of the 
 Ka'ba, she said, "O Allah's Apostle! You (people) are returning with 
 both Hajj and 'Umra and I am returning only with Hajj!" So, he ordered
 'Abdur Rahman bin Abu Bakr to go with her to At-Tan'im. Thus she 
 performed 'Umra after the Hajj in the month of Dhi-l-Hijja. Suraqa bin
 Malik bin Ju'sham met the Prophet at Al-'Aqaba (Jamrat-ul 'Aqaba) 
 while the latter was stoning it and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Is this 
 permissible only for you?" The Prophet replied, "No, it is for ever 
 (i.e. it is permissible for all Muslims to perform 'Umra before 
 Hajj."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_13.htm">Next: 3:14: 'Aisha: We set out with Allah's Apostle shortly before the appearance of the ...</a></center>
 </body>