<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_872.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_874.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:874</h3><p><i>Narrated Marwan and al-Miswar bin Makhrama:</i></p>
 (from the companions of Allah's Apostle) When Suhail bin Amr agreed to
 the Treaty (of Hudaibiya), one of the things he stipulated then, was 
 that the Prophet should return to them (i.e. the pagans) anyone coming
 to him from their side, even if he was a Muslim; and would not 
 interfere between them and that person. The Muslims did not like this 
 condition and got disgusted with it. Suhail did not agree except with 
 that condition. So, the Prophet agreed to that condition and returned 
 Abu Jandal to his father Suhail bin 'Amr. Thenceforward the Prophet 
 returned everyone in that period (of truce) even if he was a Muslim. 
 During that period some believing women emigrants including Um Kalthum
 bint Uqba bin Abu Muait who came to Allah's Apostle and she was a 
 young lady then. Her relative came to the Prophet and asked him to 
 return her, but the Prophet did not return her to them for Allah had 
 revealed the following Verse regarding women:
 <p>
 "O you who believe! When the believing women come to you as emigrants.
 Examine them, Allah knows best as to their belief, then if you know 
 them for true believers, Send them not back to the unbelievers, (for) 
 they are not lawful (wives) for the disbelievers, Nor are the 
 unbelievers lawful (husbands) for them (60.10)
 </p><p>
 according to this Verse: "O you who believe! When the believing women 
 come to you, as emigrants test them . . . for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, 
 Most Merciful." (60.10-12) Aisha said, "When any of them agreed to 
 that condition Allah's Apostle would say to her, 'I have accepted your
 pledge of allegiance.' He would only say that, but, by Allah he never 
 touched the hand of any women (i.e. never shook hands with them) while
 taking the pledge of allegiance and he never took their pledge of 
 allegiance except by his words (only)."
 </p><p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_874.htm">Next: 3:875: Jarir: When I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle and he ...</a></center>
 </body>