<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_48.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_50.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:50</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:</i></p>
 That his father had told him that Allah's Apostle set out for Hajj and
 so did his companions. He sent a batch of his companions by another 
 route and Abu Qatada was one of them. The Prophet said to them, 
 "Proceed along the sea-shore till we meet all together." So, they took
 the route of the sea-shore, and when they started all of them assumed 
 Ihram except Abu Qatada. While they were proceeding on, his companions
 saw a group of onagers. Abu Qatada chased the onagers and attacked and
 wounded a she-onager. They got down and ate some of its meat and said 
 to each other: "How do we eat the meat of the game while we are in a 
 state of Ihram?" So, we (they) carried the rest of the she-onager's 
 meat, and when they met Allah's Apostle they asked, saying, "O Allah's
 Apostle! We assumed Ihram with the exception of Abu Qatada and we saw 
 (a group) of onagers. Abu Qatada attacked them and wounded a 
 she-onager from them. Then we got down and ate from its meat. Later, 
 we said, (to each other), 'How do we eat the meat of the game and we 
 are in a state of Ihram?' So, we carried the rest of its meat. The 
 Prophet asked, "Did anyone of you order Abu Qatada to attack it or 
 point at it?" They replied in the negative. He said, "Then eat what is
 left of its meat."
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_50.htm">Next: 3:51: 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: From As-Sa'b bin Jath-thama Al-Laithi that the latter presented an ...</a></center>
 </body>