<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_14.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_16.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:16</h3><p><i>Narrated 'Aisha:</i></p>
 We set out assuming the Ihram for Hajj in the months of Hajj towards 
 the sacred precincts of Hajj. We dismounted at Sarif and the Prophet 
 said to his companions, "Whoever has not got the Hadi with him and 
 likes to make it as 'Umra, he should do it, but he who has got the 
 Hadi with him should not do it." The Prophet and some of his wealthy 
 companions had the Hadi with them, so they did not finish Ihram after 
 performing the 'Umra. The Prophet came to me while I was weeping. He 
 asked me the reason for it. I replied, "I have heard of what you have 
 said to your companions and I cannot do the 'Umra." He asked me, "What
 is the matter with you?" I replied, "I am not praying."  He said, 
 "There is no harm in it as you are one of the daughters of Adam and 
 the same is written for you as for others. So, you should perform Hajj
 and I hope that Allah will enable you to perform the 'Umra as well." 
 So, I carried on till we departed from Mina and halted at Al-Mahassab.
 The Prophet called 'Abdur-Rahman and said, "Go out of the sanctuary 
 with your sister and let her assume Ihram for 'Umra, and after both of
 you have finished the Tawaf I will be waiting for you at this place." 
 We came back at mid-night and the Prophet asked us, "Have you 
 finished?" I replied in the affirmative. He announced the departure 
 and the people set out for the journey and some of them had performed 
 the Tawaf of the Ka'ba before the morning prayer, and after that the 
 Prophet set out for Medina.
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_16.htm">Next: 3:17: Safwan bin Ya'la bin Umaiya from his father who said:  A man came to the Prophet while he was at Ji'rana. The man was ...</a></center>
 </body>