<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Islam</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Bukhari</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="bh3_682.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="bh3_684.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">Hadith 3:684</h3><p><i>Narrated Abaya bin Rifaa:</i></p>
 My grandfather, Rafi bin Khadij said, "We were in the valley of 
 Dhul-Hulaifa of Tuhama in the company of the Prophet and had some 
 camels and sheep (of the booty). The people hurried (in slaughtering 
 the animals) and put their meat in the pots and started cooking. 
 Allah's Apostle came and ordered them to upset the pots, and 
 distributed the booty considering one camel as equal to ten sheep. One
 of the camels fled and the people had only a few horses, so they got 
 worried. (The camel was chased and) a man slopped the camel by 
 throwing an arrow at it. Allah's Apostle said, 'Some of these animals 
 are untamed like wild animals, so if anyone of them went out of your 
 control, then you should treat it as you have done now.' " My 
 grandfather said, "O Allah's Apostle! We fear that we may meet our 
 enemy tomorrow and we have no knives, could we slaughter the animals 
 with reeds?" The Prophet said, "Yes, or you can use what would make 
 blood flow (slaughter) and you can eat what is slaughtered and the 
 Name of Allah is mentioned at the time of slaughtering. But don't use 
 teeth or fingernails (in slaughtering). I will tell you why, as for 
 teeth, they are bones, and fingernails are used by Ethiopians for 
 slaughtering.  (See Hadith 668)
 <p>
 </p><p>
 </p><p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="bh3_684.htm">Next: 3:685: Anas: No doubt, the Prophet mortgaged his armor for barley grams. Once I ...</a></center>
 </body>