<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Wicca &amp; Neo-Paganism</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="idr07.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="idr09.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <h3 align="CENTER">IRISH BARDS.</h3>
 <p>The BARDS proper occupied a high position in Ireland. The Ollamhs had colleges at Clogher, Armagh, Lismore, and Tamar. On this, Walker's <i>Historical Memoirs</i>, 1786, observes that "all the eminent schools, delectably situated, which were established by the Christian clergy in the fifth century, were erected on the ruins of those colleges." They studied for twelve years to gain the barred cap and title of Ollamh or teacher. They were <i>Ollamhain Re-dan</i>, or <i>Filidhe</i>, poets. They acted as heralds, knowing the genealogy</p>
 <p><a name="page_38"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 38</font></a></p>
 <p>of their chiefs. With white robe, harp in hand, they encouraged warriors in battle Their power of satire was dreaded; and their praise, desired.</p>
 <p>There is a story of the Ard Ollamh, or Archdruid, sending to Italy after a book Of skins, containing various chosen compositions, as the <i>Cuilmeun</i>, &amp;c. As heralds they were called <i>Seanachies</i>. As Bards they sang in a hundred different kinds of verse. One Ollamh Fodhla was the Solon of Ireland; Amergin, the singer, lived 500 B.C.; Torna Egeas, was last of the paean bards. Long after, they were patriots of the tribes--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"With uncouth harps, in many-colour'd vest,<br>
 Their matted hair With boughs fantastic crown'd"</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>The <i>Statutes of Kilkenny</i> (Edward III.) made it penal to entertain any Irish Bard; but Munster Bards continued to hold their annual Sessions to the early part of last century. Carolan, the old blind harper, called last of the Bards, died in 1738.</p>
 <p>Bards sang in the Hall of Shells: shells being then the cups. There were hereditary bards, as the O'Shiels, the O'Canvans, &amp;c., paid to sing the deeds of family heroes. A lament for Dallan ran--</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"A fine host and brave was he, master of and Governor,<br>
                                  Ulla! Ullalu<br>
 We, thrice fifty Bards, we confessed him chief in song and war--<br>
                                  Ulla! Ullalu!"</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <p>In the far-famed Trinity College Library is The <i>Dialogue of the Two Sages</i>, in the Irish Fenian dialect, giving the qualifications of a true Ollamh. Among the famous bards were, Lughar, "acute poet, Druid of Meidhbh"; Olioll, King of Munster; Oisin, son of Cormac, King of Tara, now nearly unintelligible to Irish readers; Fergus finbel of the <i>Dinn Senchus</i>; Oisin, the Fenian singer; Larghaire, whose</p>
 <p><a name="page_39"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 39</font></a></p>
 <p>poem to the sun was famous; Lughaidh, whose poem of the death of his wife Fail is of great antiquity; Adhna, once chief poet of Ireland; Corothruadh, Fingin, &amp;c. Fergus Finbheoil, <i>fair lips</i>, was a Fenian Bard.</p>
 <i></i><p>Ireland's Mirror, 1804, speaks of Henessey, a living seer, as the Orpheus of his country. Amergin, brother of Heber, was the earliest of Milesian poets. Sir Philip Sydney praised the Irish Bards three centuries ago. One, in Munster, stopped by his power the corn's growth; and the satire of another caused a shortness of life. Such rhymes were not to be patronized by the Anglo-Normans, in the Statute of 1367. One Bard directed his harp, a shell of wine, and his ancestor's shield to be buried with him. In rhapsody, some would see the images of coming events pass before them, and so declare them in song. He was surely useful who rhymed susceptible rats to death.</p>
 <p>The Irish war odes were called <i>Rosg-catha</i>, the Eye of Battle. Was it for such songs that Irish-Danes were cruel to Bards? O'Reilly had a chronological account of 400 Irish writers. As Froude truly remarks, "Each celebrated minstrel sang his stories in his own way, adding to them, shaping them, colouring them, as suited his peculiar genius." It was Heeren who said of the early Greek bards, "The gift of song came to them from the gods." Villemarque held that Irish Bards were "really the historians of the race."</p>
 <p>Walker's <i>Irish Bards</i> affirms that the "Order of the Bards continued for many succeeding ages invariably the same." Even Buchanan found "many of their ancient customs yet remain; yea, there is almost nothing changed of them in Ireland, but only ceremonies and rites of religion." Borlase wrote, "The last place we read of them in the British dominions is Ireland." Blair added, "Long after the Order of the Druids was extinct, and the national</p>
 <p><a name="page_40"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 40</font></a></p>
 <p>religion changed, the Bards continued to flourish, exercising the same functions as of old in Ireland." But Walker claimed the <i>Fingalians</i> as originally Irish. Sir I. Ferguson, in his <i>Lays of the Western Gael</i>, says, "The exactions of the Bards were so intolerable that the early Irish more than once endeavoured to rid themselves of the Order." Their arrogance had procured their occasional banishment. Higgins, in <i>Celtic Druids</i>, had no exalted opinion of them, saying, "The Irish histories have been most of them filled with lies and nonsense by their bards." Assuredly a great proportion of their works were destroyed by the priests, as they had been in England, Germany, France, &amp;c.</p>
 <p>The harp, according to Bede, was common in the seventh century. St. Columba played upon the harp. Meagor says of the first James of Scotland, "On the harp he excelled the Irish or the Highland Scots, who are esteemed the best performers on that instrument." Ireland was the school of music for Welsh and Scotch. Irish harpers were the most celebrated up to the last century. Ledwich thought the harp came in from Saxons and Danes. The Britons, some say, had it from the Romans. The old German harp had eighteen strings; the old Irish, twenty-eight; the modern Irish, thirty-three. Henry VIII. gave Ireland the harp for an armorial bearing, being a great admirer of Irish music; but James I. quartered it with the arms of France and England. St. Bernard gives Archbishop Malachy, 1134, the credit of introducing music into the Church service of Ireland.</p>
 <p>The Irish <i>cruit</i> was the Welsh <i>crwdd</i> or <i>crwth</i>. Hugh Rose relates, that "a certain string was selected as the most suitable for each song." Diodorus Siculus recorded that "the bards of Gaul sang to instruments like lyres." The cymbals were not Bardic, but bell cymbals of the Church. They were hollow spheres, holding loose bits of metal for</p>
 <p><a name="page_41"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 41</font></a></p>
 <p>rattling, and connected by a flexible shank. The corn was a metallic horn; the drum, or <i>tiompan</i>, was a tabor; the <i>piob-mela</i>, or bagpipes, were borrowed from the far East; the bellows to the bag thereof were not seen till the sixteenth century. The Irish used <i>foghair</i>, or whole tones, and <i>foghair-beg</i>, or semi-tones. The <i>cor</i>, or harmony, was <i>chruisich</i>, treble, and <i>cronan</i>, base. The names of clefs were from the Latin. In most ancient languages the same word is used for Bard and Sage. Lönnrot found not a parish among the Karelians without several Bards. Quatrefages speaks of Bardic contests thus: "The two bards start strophe after strophe, each repeating at first that which the other had said. The song only stops with the learning of one of the two."</p>
 <p>Walker ungallantly wrote, "We cannot find that the Irish had female Bards," while admitting that females cried the <i>Caoine</i> over the dead. Yet in <i>Cathluina</i> we read, "The daughter of Moran seized the harp, and her voice of music praised the strangers. Their souls melted at the song, like the wreath of snow before the eye of the sun."</p>
 <p>The Court Bards were required, says Dr. O'Donovan, to have ready seven times fifty chief stories, and twice fifty sub-stories, to repeat before the Irish King and his chiefs. Conor Mac Neasa, King of Ulster, had three thousand Bards, gathered from persecuting neighbouring chiefs.</p><dir>
 <dir>
 
 <font size="2"><p>"Musician, herald, bard, thrice may'st thou be renowned,<br>
 And with three several wreaths immortally be crowned."</p></font></dir>
 </dir>
 
 <i></i><p>Brehons.--<i>Breitheamhain</i> - were legislative Bards; and, said Walker, in 1786, they "promulgated the laws in a kind of recitative, or monotonous chant, seated on an eminence in the open air." According to McCurtin, the Irish Bards of the sixth century wore long, flowing garments, fringed and Ornamented with needlework. in a <i>Life of Columba</i>, 1827,</p>
 <p><a name="page_42"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 42</font></a></p>
 <p>it is written, "The Bards and Sennachees retained their office, and some degree of their former estimation among the nobility of Caledonia and Ireland, till the accession of the House of Hanover."</p>
 <p>"Nothing can prove," says O'Beirne Crowe, "the late introduction of Druidism into our country more satisfactorily than the utter contempt in which the name <i>bard</i> is held in all our records.--After the introduction of our irregular system of Druidism, which must have been about the second century of the Christian era, the <i>Filis</i> (bard) had to fall into something like the position of the British Bards-- hence we see them, down to a late period--practising incantations like the Magi of the continent, and in religious matters holding extensive sway."</p>
 <p>Ossianic literature had a higher opinion of the Bards; as, "Such were the words of the Bards in the days of the Song; when the King heard the music of harps and the tales of other times. The chiefs gathered from all their hills, and heard the lovely sound.. They praised the voice of Cona, the first among a thousand bards." Again, "Sit thou on the heath, O Bard! and let us hear thy voice. It is pleasant as the gale of the spring, that sighs on the hunter's ear, when he wakens from dreams of joy, and has heard the music of the spirits of the hill.--The music of Cardil was like the memory of joys that are past, pleasant, and mournful to the soul. The ghosts of departed Bards heard it." "My life," exclaimed Fingal, "shall be one stream of light to Bards of other times." Cathmor cried, "Loose the Bards. Their voice shall be heard in other ages, when the Kings of Temora have failed."</p>
 <p>Keating, amusingly credulous as an <i>Irish historian</i> records with gravity the story of an ancient militia numbering nine thousand in time of peace, who had both sergeants and colonels. Into the ranks of these <i>Fine Eirion</i></p>
 <p><a name="page_43"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 43</font></a></p>
 <p>no one was admitted unless proved to be a poetical genius, well acquainted with the twelve books of poetry.</p>
 <p>The <i>Dinn Seanchas</i> has poems by the Irish Bard of the second century, Finin Mac Luchna; and it asserts that "the people deemed each other's voices sweeter than the warblings of the melodious harp." On Toland's authority we learn that, for a long time after the English Conquest, the judges, Bards, physicians, and harpers held land tenures in Ireland. The O'Duvegans were hereditary Bards of the O'Kellies; the O'Shiels were hereditary doctors; the O'Brodins, hereditary antiquaries; the Maglanchys, hereditary judges. The Bards were Strabo's hymn-makers.</p>
 <p>Mrs. Bryant felt that "The Isle of Song was soon to become the Isle of Saints;" and considered "Ireland of the Bards knew its Druids simply as men skilled in all magical arts, having no marked relation either to a system of theology, or to a scheme of ceremonial practice."</p>
 <p>The <i>Brehon Law</i> gives little information respecting Druids, though the Brehons were assumed to have been Originally Druid judges. St. Patrick has the credit of compiling this record.</p>
 <p>These Brehons had a high reputation for justice; and yet it is confessed that when one was tempted to pass a false sentence, his chain of office would immediately tighten round his neck most uncomfortably as a warning. Of the Brehons, it is said by the editors--O'Mahony and Richey --"The learning of the Brehons became as useless to the public as the most fantastic discussions of the Schoolmen, and the whole system crystallized into a form which rendered social progress impossible." Though those old Irish laws were so oppressive to the common people, and so favourable to the hereditary chiefs, it was hard indeed to get the people to relinquish them for English laws.</p>
 <p><a name="page_44"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 44</font></a></p>
 <p>In 1522, English law existed in only four of the Irish counties; and Brehons and Ollamhs (teachers) were known to the end of the <b>seventeenth</b> century. The founding of the book of Brehon Law is thus explained:--"And when the men of Erin heard--all the power of Patrick since his arrival in Erin--they bowed themselves down in obedience to the will of God and Patrick. It was then that all the professors of the sciences (Druids) in Erin were assembled, and each of them exhibited his art before Patrick, in the presence of every chief in Erin.--What did not clash with the Word of God in the written law, and in the New Testament, and with the consciences of the believers, was confirmed in the laws of the Brehons by Patrick, and by the ecclesiastics and the chieftains of Erin."</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="idr09.htm">Next: Isle Of Man Druidism</a></center>
 </body>