<body>
 <center>
 <a href="../../../index.htm">Sacred Texts</a> 
 <a href="../../index.htm">Native American</a> 
 <a href="../index.htm">Northwest</a> 
 <a href="index.htm">Index</a> 
 <a href="tmt122.htm">Previous</a> 
 <a href="tmt124.htm">Next</a> 
 </center>
 <hr>
 
 <p><a name="page_299"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 299</font></a></p>
 <h3 align="CENTER">98. THE K<u>Î</u>KSA'D<u>Î</u> WOMAN WHO WAS TURNED INTO AN OWL <a name="fr_144"></a><a href="#fn_144"><font size="1">a</font></a></h3>
 <p>When this town (Sitka) was first discovered the KîksA'dî were here, and we stayed on this (the north) side. This town (at the northern end) was named Mossy-town. There four men grew up, two of whom were named <strike>L</strike>q!ayâ'k! and KAck!A'Lk!. They married. <strike>L</strike>q!ayâ'k!'s mother was named KAck!A'Lk!'s-mother. <strike>L</strike>q!ayâ'k!'s wife refused to give her mother-in-law herring to eat. After she had refused her twice she put hot milt into her hand. She told [her son], "She put hot milt from a male herring into my hand." It burned her hand. For this reason her son carried down the canoe. He filled it with herring by means of a herring rake. When [the canoe] was filled, he brought them in. The herring rock is over yonder this side of Big-fort. <a name="fr_145"></a><a href="#fn_145"><font size="1">b</font></a> He brought them in in the evening. He said to his wife, "Go down to it," and she went down empty handed.</p>
 <p>
 </p>
 <p>
 </p>
 <p><a name="page_300"><font size="1" color="GREEN">p. 300</font></a></p>
 <p>Then she shouted up, "Bring down the basket," but her husband said, "Don't listen to her." Night came on. Toward morning the woman began to change her cries. "This way with the basket (kât)", she said toward morning. Later still she began to say, "Hû, hû, hû, û." Her husband said to her, "You can become an owl from this time on." So she started to fly off. She became an owl. She flew first among the trees. She was heard saying, "Sit in your holes," after which he (her husband) went outside. He said to her, "You put milt into my mother's hand. For that you can become an owl. Way back there for you is Owl's-rock-slide." This is why it is so. This is why we can always understand it (the owl). It always predicts bad weather. It always tells what is going to happen in other towns.</p>
 <hr>
 <h3 align="CENTER">Footnotes</h3>
 <p><a name="fn_144"></a><a href="tmt123.htm#fr_144">299:a</a> See story 37 for another version.</p>
 <p><a name="fn_145"></a><a href="tmt123.htm#fr_145">299:b</a> The hill on which Baranoff's castle stood.</p>
 <p></p><hr>
 <center>
 <a href="tmt124.htm">Next: 99. Moldy-end</a></center>
 </body>