<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 579 ANTIQUITY OUR GREAT MASTER.</h6>
 
 <h4>XII.<br>
 ANCIENT THOUGHT IN MODERN DRESS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>M</strong>ODERN <strong>S</strong>CIENCE IS ANCIENT THOUGHT
 DISTORTED, and no more. We have seen, however, WHAT INTUITIONAL
 SCIENTISTS THINK, and are busy about; and now the reader may be
 given a few more proofs of the fact that more than one F.R.S.
 is unconsciously approaching the derided Secret Sciences.
 </p><p>
 With regard to cosmogony and primeval matter, modern speculations
 are undeniably ancient thought, <em>improved </em>by contradictory
 theories of recent origin. But the whole foundation belongs to
 Grecian and Indian Archaic astronomy and physics, in those days
 always called philosophy. In all the Aryan and Greek speculations,
 one meets with the conception of an all-pervading, unorganized,
 and homogeneous matter, or <em>Chaos</em>,<em> </em>re-named by
 modern scientists "Nebular condition of the world-stuff."
 What Anaxagoras called "Chaos" in his <em>Homoiomeria
 </em>is now called "primitive fluid" by Sir W. Thomson.
 The Hindu and Greek Atomists -- Kanada, Leucippus, Democritus,
 Epicurus, Lucretius, etc., etc., are now reflected as in a clear
 mirror, in the supporters of the atomic theory of our modern days,
 beginning with Leibnitz's <em>Monads</em>,<em> </em>and ending
 with the "Vortical Atoms" of Sir W. Thomson.* True,
 the corpuscular theory of old is rejected, and the undulatory
 theory has taken its place. But the question is, <em>whether the
 latter is so firmly established as not to be liable to be dethroned
 as was its predecessor? </em>Light from its metaphysical aspect
 was fully treated of in "<em>Isis Unveiled</em>":<em>
 </em>--
 </p><blockquote>
 "Light is the first begotten, and the first emanation of
 the Supreme, and Light is Life, says the Evangelist and the Kabalist.
 Both are electricity -- the life principle, the <i>anima mundi</i>,<i>
 </i>pervading the universe, the electric vivifier of all things.
 Light is the great Protean magician, and under the divine will
 of the architect,** or rather the <i>architects</i>,<i> </i>the
 "Builders" (called <i>One</i> collectively), its multifarious,
 omnipotent waves gave birth to every form as well as to every
 living being. From its swelling electric bosom, spring <i>matter
 </i>and <i>spirit. </i>Within its beams lie the beginnings of
 all physical and chemical action, and of all cosmic and spiritual
 phenomena; it vitalizes and disorganizes; it gives life and produces
 death, and from its primordial point gradually emerged into existence
 the myriads of worlds, visible and invisible celestial bodies.
 It was at the ray of this <i>First </i>mother, one in three, that
 "God," according to
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Elemental Vortices inaugurated by the <em>Mind </em>have
 not been improved by their modern transformation.
 </p><p>
 ** I have been often taken to task for using expressions in <em>Isis
 </em>denoting belief in a <em>personal </em>and anthropomorphic
 God. This is <em>not </em>my idea. Kabalistically speaking, the
 "Architect" is the generic name for the <em>Sephiroth</em>,<em>
 </em>the Builders of the Universe, as the "Universal Mind"
 represents the collectivity of the Dhyan Chohanic Minds.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 580 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 Plato, lighted a fire which we now call the sun,"* and which
 is <i>not </i>the cause of either light or heat, but merely the
 focus, or, as we might say, the lens, by which the rays of the
 primordial light become materialised, are concentrate upon our
 Solar System, and produce all the correlations of forces."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This is the <em>Ether</em>,<em> </em>as just explained in the
 views of Metcalfe, repeated by Dr. Richardson, save the submission
 of the former to some details of the modern undulatory theory.
 We do not say that we deny the theory, but assert only that it
 needs completion and re-arrangement. But the Occultists are by
 no means the only <em>heretics </em>in this respect; for Mr. Robert
 Hunt, F.R.S., remarks, in his <em>Researches on Light in its Chemical
 Relations</em>,<em> </em>that: --
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . . "the undulatory theory does not account for the results
 of his experiments. Sir David Brewster, in his <i>Treatise on
 Optics</i>,<i> </i>showing 'that the colours of vegetable life
 arise . . . . from a specific attraction which the particles of
 these bodies exercise over the differently-coloured rays of light,'
 and that 'it is by the light of the sun that the coloured juices
 of plants are elaborated, that the colours of bodies are changed,
 etc. . . . .' remarks that it is not easy to allow 'that such
 effects can be produced by the mere vibration of an ethereal medium.'
 And he is <i>forced</i>,<i> </i>he says, 'by this class of facts,
 to reason as if light was <i>material </i>(?).' Professor Josiah
 P. Cooke, of Harvard University, says that he 'cannot agree .
 . . . with those who regard the wave-theory of light as an established
 principle of science.'** Herschell's doctrine, that the intensity
 of light, in effect of each undulation, 'is inversely as the square
 of the distance from the luminous body,' if correct, damages a
 good deal, if it does not kill the undulatory theory. That he
 is right, was proved repeatedly by experiments with photometers;
 and though it begins to be much doubted, the undulatory theory
 is still alive." ("<i>Isis Unveiled</i>.")
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 To this remark of Sir W. Brewster -- "forced to reason as
 if light was material" -- there is a good deal to reply.
 Light, in one sense, is certainly as material as electricity itself
 is. And if electricity is <em>not </em>material, if it is only
 "a mode of motion," how is it that it can be <em>stored
 up </em>in Faure's accumulators? Helmholtz says that electricity
 must be as atomic as matter; and Mr. W. Crookes, F.R.S., supported
 the view in his address to the Chemical Section of the British
 Association, of which he was President (at Birmingham, 1886).
 This is what Helmholtz says (<em>in his Faraday Lectures</em>,<em>
 </em>1881):<em> </em>--
 </p><blockquote>
 "If we accept the hypothesis that the elementary substances
 are composed of atoms, we cannot avoid concluding that electricity
 also, positive as well as negative, is divided into definite elementary
 portions, which behave like atoms of electricity."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Here we have to repeat that which was already said in Section
 IX: there is but one science that can henceforth direct modern
 research into the one path which will lead to the discovery of
 the whole, hitherto
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Timaeus."
 </p><p>
 **<em> Modern Chemistry.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 581 A CHASE AFTER THE PRIMAL MATTER.</h6>
 
 <p>
 occult, truth, and it is the youngest of all -- <em>chemistry</em>,<em>
 </em>as it now stands reformed. There is no other, not excluding
 astronomy, that can so unerringly guide scientific intuition,
 as chemistry can. Two proofs of it are to be found in the world
 of Science -- two great chemists, each among the greatest in his
 own country, and these are Mr. Crookes and the late Professor
 Butlerof: one, a thorough believer in abnormal phenomena; the
 other, as fervid a Spiritualist as he was great in natural Sciences.
 It becomes evident that while pondering over the ultimate divisibility
 of matter, and in the hitherto <em>fruitless </em>chase after
 the element of negative atomic weight, the scientifically trained
 mind of the chemist must feel irresistibly drawn towards those
 ever-shrouded worlds, to the mysterious beyond, whose measureless
 depths seem to close against the approach of the too materialistic
 hand that would fain draw aside its veil. "It is the unknown
 and the <em>ever unknowable</em>,"<em> </em>warns the Monist-Agnostic.
 Not so; answers the persevering chemist: -- "We are on the
 track and are not daunted, and fain would we enter the mysterious
 region which <em>ignorance tickets unknown.</em>"*
 </p><p>
 A few lines at the very close of his lecture on the <em>Genesis
 of the Elements </em>--<em> </em>two or three sentences -- showed
 the eminent Scientist to be on the royal road to the greatest
 discoveries. He has been overshadowing for some time "the
 original <em>protyle</em>,"<em> </em>and came to the conclusion
 that "he who grasps the Key will be permitted to unlock some
 of the deepest mysteries of creation." The <em>protyle</em>,<em>
 </em>as that great chemist explains: --
 </p><blockquote>
 ". . . is a word analogous to protoplasm, to express the
 idea of the original primal matter existing before the evolution
 of the chemical elements. The word I have ventured to use for
 this purpose is compounded of [[<i>pro</i>]]<i> </i>(earlier than)
 and [[<i>hyle</i>]] (the stuff of which things are made). The
 word is scarcely a new coinage, for 600 years ago Roger Bacon
 wrote in his <i>Arte Chymiae</i>,<i> </i>"The<i> </i>elements
 are made out of [[<i>hyle</i>]] and every element is converted
 into the nature of another element."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The<em> Knowledge </em>of Roger Bacon did not come to this wonderful
 old magician** by inspiration, but because he studied ancient
 works on
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Mr. Crookes' "Presidential Address" at Birmingham.
 "There is but one unknown -- <em>the ultimate substratum
 of Spirit </em>(Space). That which is not the <em>Absolute </em>and
 the One is, in virtue of that very differentiation, however far
 removed from the physical senses, always accessible to the spiritual
 human mind, which is a coruscation of the undifferentiable Integral."
 -- (<em>Practical Lessons on the Occult.</em>)
 </p><p>
 ** Thus, what the writer of the present work said ten years ago
 in "<em>Isis Unveiled</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Vol. I.</em>)<em>
 </em>was prophetic, it seems. These are the words: "Many
 of these mystics, by following what they were taught by some treatises,
 secretly preserved from one generation to another, <em>achieved
 discoveries which would</em> <em>not be despised even in our modern
 days of exact sciences. </em>Roger Bacon, the friar, was laughed
 at as a quack, and is now generally numbered among 'pretenders'
 to magic art; but his discoveries were nevertheless accepted,
 and are now used by those who ridicule him the most. Roger Bacon
 belonged by right, if not by fact, to that Brotherhood which includes
 all those who [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 582 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 magic and alchemy, having a key to the real meaning of words.
 But see what Mr. Crookes says of <em>protyle</em>,<em> </em>next
 neighbour to the unconscious <em>Mulaprakriti </em>of the Occultists:
 --
 </p><blockquote>
 . . . . . "Let us start at the moment when the first element
 came into existence. Before this time, matter, as we know it,
 was not. It is equally impossible to conceive of matter without
 energy, as of energy without matter; from one point of view both
 are convertible terms. Before the birth of atoms, all those forms
 of energy, which become evident when matter acts upon matter,
 could not have existed* -- they were locked up in the <i>protyle
 </i>as latent potentialities only. Coincident with the creation
 of atoms, all those attributes and properties, which form the
 means of discriminating one chemical element from another, start
 into existence fully endowed with energy." (<i>Presidential
 Address</i>,<i> </i>p. 16.)
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 With every respect due to the great knowledge of the lecturer,
 the Occultist would put it otherwise. They would say that no atom
 is ever "created," for the atoms are eternal within
 the bosom of the <em>One</em> <em>Atom</em>,<em> </em>--<em> </em>"the
 atom of atoms" -- viewed during Manvantara as the <em>Jagad-Yoni
 </em>the<em> material </em>causative womb of the world. <em>Pradhana
 </em>(unmodified matter), that which is the first form of <em>Prakriti</em>,<em>
 </em>or material visible, as <em>well as invisible </em>nature,
 and <em>Purusha</em>,<em> </em>spirit, are eternally one; and
 they are <em>Nirupadhi</em>,<em> </em>(without adventitious qualities
 or attributes) only during <em>Pralaya</em>,<em> </em>and when
 <em>beyond </em>any of the planes of consciousness of existence.
 The atom, as known to modern science, is inseparable from <em>Purusha</em>,<em>
 </em>which is spirit, but is now called "Energy" in
 Science. The <em>protyle </em>atom has not been comminuted or
 subtilized: it has simply passed into that plane, which is no
 plane, but the eternal state of everything beyond the planes of
 illusion. Both <em>Purusha </em>and<em> Pradhana </em>are immutable
 and unconsumable, or <em>Aparinamin </em>and <em>Avyaya</em>,<em>
 </em>in eternity; and both during the Mayavic periods may be referred
 to as <em>Vyaya </em>and<em> Parinamin</em>,<em> </em>or that
 which can expand, pass away and disappear, and is "modifiable."
 In this sense <em>Purusha</em>,<em> </em>must of course, be held
 distinct in our conceptions from <em>Parabrahmam</em>. Nevertheless
 that, which is called "energy" or "force"
 in Science and has been explained as a <em>dual </em>Force by
 Metcalfe, is never, in fact, and cannot be <em>energy </em>alone;
 for it is the substance of the world, its soul, the <em>all</em>-<em>permeant
 </em>"Sarvaga," in conjunction with <em>Kala </em>"time."
 The three are the trinity in one, during Manvantara, the all-potential
 Unity, which acts on the plane of illusion (Maya) as three distinct
 things. In Orphic
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] study the occult sciences.
 Living in the thirteenth century, almost a contemporary, therefore,
 of Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, his discoveries -- such
 as gunpowder and optical glasses, and his mechanical achievements
 -- were considered by everyone as so many miracles. He was accused
 of having made a compact with the Evil One."
 </p><p>
 * Just so; "those forms of energy . . . <em>which become
 evident</em> . . ." in the laboratory of the chemist and
 physicist; but <em>there are other forms of energy </em>wedded
 to <em>other forms </em>of matter, -- <em>which are supersensuous</em>,<em>
 </em>yet known to the adepts. </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 583 ALL-POTENTIAL UNITY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 philosophy in Greece they were called <em>Phanes</em>,<em> Chaos</em>,<em>
 </em>and <em>Chronos </em>-- the triad of the Occult philosophers
 of that period.
 </p><p>
 But see how closely Mr. Crookes brushes by the "Unknowable,"
 and what "potentialities" there are for the acceptance
 of Occult truths in his discoveries. He continues, speaking of
 the evolution of atoms: --
 </p><blockquote>
 ". . . . Let us pause at the end of the first complete vibration
 and examine the result. We have already found the elements of
 water, ammonia, carbonic acid, the atmosphere, plant and animal
 life, phosphorus for the brain, salt for the seas, clay for the
 solid earth . . . phosphates and silicates sufficient for a world
 and inhabitants not so very different from what we enjoy at the
 present day. True the human inhabitants would have to live in
 a state of more than Arcadian simplicity, and the absence of calcic
 phosphate would be awkward as far as the bone is concerned* .
 . . At the lower end of our curve . . . we see a great hiatus
 . . . This oasis, and the blanks which precede and follow it,
 may be referred with much probability to the particular way in
 which our Earth developed into a member of our solar system. If
 this be so, it may be that on our Earth only these blanks occur,
 and not generally throughout the universe."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This justifies several assertions in the Occult works.
 </p><p>
 <em>Firstly</em>,<em> </em>"that neither stars nor the sun
 can be said to be constituted of those terrestrial elements with
 which the chemist is familiar, though they are all present in
 the sun's outward robes -- and a host more of elements so far
 unknown to science."
 </p><p>
 <em>Secondly</em>,<em> </em>that our globe has its own special
 laboratory on the far-away outskirts of its atmosphere, crossing
 which, every atom and molecule change and differentiate from their
 primordial nature.
 </p><p>
 And <em>Thirdly</em>,<em> </em>that though no element present
 on our earth could ever be possibly found wanting in the sun,
 there are many others which have either not reached, or not as
 yet been discovered on, our globe. "Some may be missing in
 certain stars and heavenly bodies in the process of formation;
 or, though present in them, these elements, on account of their
 present state, may not respond as yet to the usual scientific
 tests."** Mr. Crookes speaks of an element of still lower
 atomic weight than hydrogen, an <em>element purely hypothetical
 </em>as far as our earth is concerned . . . though existing in
 abundance in the chromosphere of the Sun -- the<em> helium. </em>Occult
 Science adds that not one of the <em>elements </em>regarded by
 chemistry as such really deserves the name.
 </p><p>
 Again we find Mr. Crookes speaking with approbation of "Dr.
 Carnelly's weighty argument in favour of <em>the compound nature
 of the so-called elements</em>,<em> </em>from their analogy to
 the compound radicles! " Hitherto,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * It is just the existence of such worlds in other planes of consciousness
 that is claimed by the Occultist. The secret science teaches that
 the primitive race was <em>boneless. </em>(See Book II.); and
 that there are (to us) invisible worlds, peopled as our own, besides
 the <em>populations </em>of Dhyan Chohans.
 </p><p>
 **<em> </em>"<em>Five Years of Theosophy</em>,"<em>
 p. </em>258 <em>et seq.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 584 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 alchemy alone succeeded within the historical periods, and in
 the so-called civilized countries, in obtaining a real <em>element</em>,<em>
 </em>or a particle of homogeneous matter, the <em>Mysterium Magnum
 </em>of Paracelsus. But then it was before Lord Bacon's day.*
 </p><blockquote>
 ". . . Let us now turn to the upper portion of the scheme.
 With hydrogen of atomic weight = 1, there is little room for other
 elements, save, perhaps, for hypothetical <i>Helium</i>. But what
 if we get 'through the looking-glass,' and cross the zero line
 in search of new principles -- what shall we find on the other
 side of zero? Dr. Carnelly asks for an element of negative atomic
 weight; here is ample room and verge enough for a shadow series
 of such unsubstantialities. Helmholtz says that electricity is
 probably as atomic as matter; is electricity one of the negative
 elements, and the luminiferous ether another? Matter, as we now
 know it, does not here exist; the forms of energy which are apparent
 in the motions of matter are as yet only latent possibilities.
 <i>A substance of negative weight is not inconceivable.</i>**<i>
 </i>But can we form a clear conception of a body which combines
 with other bodies in proportions expressible by negative qualities?"***
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "A genesis of the elements such as is here sketched out would
 not be confined to our little solar system, but would probably
 follow the same general sequence of events in every centre of
 energy now visible as a star."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "Before the birth of atoms to gravitate towards one another,
 no pressure could be exercised; but at the outskirts of the fire-mist
 sphere, within which all is protyle -- at the shell on which the
 tremendous forces involved in the birth of a chemical element
 exert full sway -- the fierce heat would be accompanied by gravitation
 sufficient to keep the newly-born elements from flying off into
 space. As temperature increases, expansion and molecular motion
 increase, molecules tend to fly asunder, and their chemical affinities
 become deadened; but the enormous pressure of the gravitation
 of the mass of atomic matter, outside what I may for brevity call
 the birth-shell, would counteract the action of heat."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "Beyond the birth-shell would be a space in which no chemical
 action could take place, owing to the temperature there being
 above what is called the dissociation-point for compounds. In
 this space the lion and the lamb would lie down together; phosphorus
 and oxygen would mix without union; hydrogen and chlorine would
 show no tendency to closer bonds; and even fluorine, that
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </p><p>
 * Says Mr. Crookes in the same address: "The first riddle
 which we encounter in chemistry is: 'What are the elements?' Of
 the attempts hitherto made to define or explain an element, none
 satisfy the demands of the human intellect. The text books tell
 us that an element is 'a body which has not been decomposed ''that
 it is 'a something to which we can add, but from which we can
 take nothing,' or 'a body which increases in weight with every
 chemical change.' Such definitions are doubly unsatisfactory:
 they are provisional, and may cease to-morrow to be applicable
 in any given case. They take their stand, not on any attribute
 of the things to be defined, but on the limitations of human power:
 they are confessions of intellectual impotence."
 </p><p>
 ** And the lecturer quotes Sir George Airy, who says (<em>in Faraday</em>'<em>s
 Life and Letters Vol. II.</em>,<em> p.</em> 354), "I can
 easily conceive that there are plenty of bodies about us not subject
 to this intermutual action, and <em>therefore not subject to the
 law of gravitation.</em>"
 </p><p>
 *** The Vedantic philosophy conceives of such; but then it is
 not physics, but metaphysics, called by Mr. Tyndall "poetry"
 and "fiction."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 585 THE "SEVENTH" IN CHEMISTRY.
 </h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 energetic gas which chemists have only isolated within the last
 month or two, would float about free and uncombined."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "Outside this space of free atomic matter would be another
 shell, in which the formed chemical elements would have cooled
 down to the combination point, and the sequence of events so graphically
 described by Mr. Mattieu Williams in "<i>The Fuel of the
 Sun</i>"<i> </i>would now take place, culminating in the
 solid earth and the commencement of geological time" (p.
 19).
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This is, <em>in a strictly scientific</em>,<em> </em>but beautiful
 language, the description of the evolution of the differentiated
 Universe in the secret teachings. The learned gentleman closes
 his address in words, every sentence of which is like a flash
 of light from beyond the dark veil of materiality, hitherto thrown
 upon the exact sciences, and a step forward towards the <em>Sanctum
 Sanctorum </em>of the Occult. (<em>Vide </em>ยง <em>XV.</em>,<em>
 </em>"<em>Gods</em>,<em> Monads</em>,<em> and Atoms.</em>")<em>
 </em>Thus he says: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "We have glanced at the difficulty of defining an element;
 we have noticed, too, the revolt of many leading physicists and
 chemists against the ordinary acceptation of the term element;
 we have weighed the improbability of their eternal existence,*
 or <i>their origination by chance. </i>As a remaining alternative,
 we have suggested their origin by a process of evolution like
 that of the heavenly bodies according to Laplace, and the plants
 and animals of our globe according to Lamarck, Darwin, and Wallace.**
 In the general array of the elements, as known to us, we have
 seen a striking approximation to that of the organic world.***
 In lack of direct evidence of the decomposition of any element,
 we have sought and found indirect evidence . . . . We have next
 glanced at the view of the genesis of the elements; and lastly
 we have reviewed a scheme of their origin suggested by Professor
 Reynold's method of illustrating the periodic classification****
 . . . Summing up all the above considerations we cannot,
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In the form they are now, we conceive?
 </p><p>
 ** And to Kapila and Manu -- especially and originally.
 </p><p>
 *** Here is a scientific corroboration of the eternal law of correspondences
 and analogy.
 </p><p>
 **** This method of illustrating the periodic law in the classification
 of elements is, in the words of Mr. Crookes, proposed by Professor
 Emerson Reynolds, of Dublin University, who . . . . "points
 out that in each period, the general properties of the elements
 vary from one to another, with approximate regularity until we
 reach the <em>seventh member</em>,<em> </em>which is in more or
 less striking contrast with the first element of the same period,
 as well as with the first of the next. Thus chlorine, the seventh
 member of Mendeleef's third period, contrasts sharply with both
 sodium, the first member of the same series, and with potassium,
 the first member of the next series; whilst on the other hand,
 sodium and potassium are closely analogous. The six elements,
 whose atomic weights intervene between sodium and potassium, vary
 in properties, step by step, until chlorine, the contrast to sodium,
 is reached. But from chlorine to potassium, the analogue of sodium,
 there is a change in properties <em>per saltum</em>. . . . . If
 we thus recognise a contrast in properties -- more or less decided
 -- between the first and the last members of each series, we can
 scarcely help admitting the existence of a point of mean variation
 within each system. In general the <em>fourth </em>element of
 each series possesses the property we might expect a transition-element
 to exhibit. . . . . Thus for the purpose of graphic translation,
 Professor Reynolds considers that the fourth member of a period
 -- silicon, for example -- may be placed at the apex of a symmetrical
 [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 586 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 indeed, venture to assert positively <i>that our so-called elements
 have been evolved from one primordial matter; but we may contend
 that the balance of evidence, I think, fairly weighs in favour
 of this speculation</i>."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Thus inductive Science, in its Branches of Astronomy, Physics,
 and Chemistry, while advancing timidly towards the conquest of
 Nature's secrets in her final effects on our terrestrial plane,
 recedes to the days of Anaxagoras and the Chaldees in its discoveries
 of (a) the origin of our phenomenal world, and (b) the modes of
 formation of the bodies that compose the universe. And having
 to turn back for their cosmogonical hypotheses to the beliefs
 of the earliest philosophers, and the systems of the latter --
 systems that were all based on the teachings of a universal secret
 doctrine with regard to the primeval matter with its properties,
 functions, and laws, -- have we not the right to hope that the
 day is not far off when Science will show a better appreciation
 of the wisdom of the ancients than it has hitherto done?
 </p><p>
 No doubt Occult philosophy could learn a good deal from exact
 modern science; but the latter, on the other hand, might profit
 by ancient learning in more than one way, and chiefly in Cosmogony.
 For
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </p><p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] curve, which shall represent
 for that particular period, the direction in which the properties
 of the series of elements vary with rising atomic weights.
 </p><p>
 Now, the writer humbly confesses complete ignorance of modern
 chemistry and its mysteries. But she is pretty well acquainted
 with the Occult doctrine with regard to <em>correspondences of
 types and antitypes </em>in nature, and perfect analogy as a fundamental
 law in Occultism. Hence she ventures a remark which will strike
 every Occultist, however it may be derided by orthodox Science.
 This method of illustrating the periodic law in the behaviour
 of elements, whether or not still a hypothesis in chemistry, <em>is
 a law</em> <em>in Occult Sciences. </em>Every well-read Occultist
 knows that the <em>seventh </em>and<em> fourth </em>members --
 whether in a septenary chain of worlds, the septenary hierarchy
 of angels, or in the constitution of man, animal, plant, or mineral
 atom -- that the <em>seventh </em>and<em> fourth </em>members,
 we say, in the geometrically and mathematically uniform workings
 of the immutable laws of Nature, always play a distinct and specific
 part in the septenary system. From the stars twinkling high in
 heaven, to the sparks flying asunder from the rude fire built
 by the savage in his forest; from the hierarchies and the essential
 constitution of the Dhyan Chohans -- organized for diviner apprehensions
 and a loftier range of perception than the greatest Western psychologist
 ever dreamed of, down to Nature's <em>classification </em>of species
 among the humblest insects; finally from worlds to atoms, everything
 in the universe, from great to small, proceeds in its spiritual
 and physical evolution, cyclically and septennially, showing its
 seventh and fourth number (the latter the turning point) behaving
 in the same way as shown in that periodic law of atoms. Nature
 never proceeds <em>per saltum. </em>Therefore, when Mr. Crookes
 remarks to this that he does not "wish to infer that the
 gaps in Mendeleef's table, and in this graphic representation
 of it (the diagram showing the evolution of atoms) necessarily
 mean that there are elements actually existing to fill up the
 gaps; these gaps may only mean that at the birth of the elements
 there was an easy potentiality of the formation of an element
 which would fit into the place" -- an Occultist would respectfully
 remark to him that the latter hypothesis can only hold good, if
 the septenary arrangement of atoms is not interfered with. This
 is <em>the one law</em>,<em> </em>and an infallible method that
 must always lead to success, one who follows it.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 587 PURANAS VERSUS ROYAL SOCIETY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 instance, the mystical signification, alchemical and transcendental,
 of the many<em> imponderable </em>substances that fill interplanetary
 space, and which, interpenetrating each, are the direct cause,
 at the lower end, of the production of natural phenomena manifesting
 through <em>vibration </em>(so-called). The knowledge of the <em>real
 </em>(not the hypothetical) nature of Ether, or rather of the
 <em>Akasa</em>,<em> </em>and other mysteries, in short, can alone
 lead to the knowledge of Forces. It is that substance against
 which the materialistic school of the physicists rebels with such
 fury, especially in France,* and which exact Science has to advocate
 notwithstanding. They cannot make away with it without incurring
 the risk, like a modern Samson, of pulling down the pillars of
 the Temple of Science, and getting buried under its roof.
 </p><p>
 The theories built upon the rejection of Force <em>outside </em>and
 independent of<em> Matter pure and simple</em>,<em> </em>have
 been all shown fallacious. They do not, and cannot, cover the
 ground, and many of the scientific data are thus proved <em>unscientific.
 </em>"Ether produced Sound" is said in the Puranas,
 and the statement is laughed at. It is the vibrations in <em>the
 air</em>,<em> </em>we are corrected. And what is air? Could it
 exist if there were no etheric medium in Space to buoy up its
 molecules? The case stands simply thus. Materialism cannot admit
 the existence of anything <em>outside </em>matter, because with
 the acceptance of an imponderable <em>Force</em> -- the source
 and head of all the physical Forces -- other <em>intelligent </em>Forces
 would have to be admitted virtually, and that would lead Science
 very far. For it would have to accept as a sequel the presence
 in Man of a still more spiritual power -- entirely independent,
 for once, of any kind of matter physicists know anything about.
 Hence, apart from an hypothetical ether of Space and gross physical
 bodies, the whole Sidereal and unseen Space is, in the sight of
 the materialists, one boundless <em>void</em> in nature -- blind,
 unintelligent, useless.
 </p><p>
 And now the next question is: What is that Cosmic Substance, and
 how far can one go to suspect its nature or to wrench from it
 its secrets, and thus feel justified in giving it a NAME? How
 far, especially, has modern Science gone in the direction of those
 secrets, and what it is doing to solve them. The latest hobby
 of Science, the "Nebular Theory," may afford us some
 answer to this question. Let us then examine the credentials of
 the <strong>N</strong>EBULAR <strong>T</strong>HEORY.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * A group of electricians has just protested against the new theory
 of Clausius, the famous professor of the University of Bonn. The
 character of the protest is shown in the signature, which has
 "Jules Bourdin, in the name of the group of Electricians,
 which had the honour of being introduced to Professor Clausius
 in 1881, and whose war-cry (cri de ralliement) is <em>A bas l</em>'<em>Ether</em>"<em>
 </em>-- down with ether, even; they want Universal <em>Void</em>,<em>
 </em>you see!</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-13.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>