<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 566 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.<a name="DDE_LINK20"></a>
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK21">[[This page continued from </a><a href="sd1-3-10.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>XI.<br>
 ON THE ELEMENTS AND ATOMS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 FROM THE STAND-POINT OF SCIENCE AND THAT OF OCCULTISM.
 </p><p>
 <strong>W</strong>HEN the Occultist speaks of "Elements,"
 and of human Beings who lived during those geological ages, the
 duration of which it is found as impossible to determine, according
 to the opinion of one of the best</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 567 METAPHYSICAL CHEMISTRY.</h6>
 
 <p>
 English geologists*, as the nature of matter, it is because he
 knows what he is talking about. When he says "Man" and
 Elements, he neither means "man" in his present physiological
 and anthropological form, nor the elemental atoms, those hypothetical
 conceptions, the entitative abstractions of matter in its highly
 attenuated state, as existing at present in scientific minds;
 nor, again, the compound Elements of antiquity. In Occultism the
 word <em>Element </em>means "rudiment" in every case.
 When we say "Elementary Man," we mean either the proemial,
 incipient sketch of man, in its unfinished and undeveloped condition,
 hence in that form which now lies latent in physical man during
 his life-time, and takes shape only occasionally and under certain
 conditions; or that form which for a time survives the material
 body, and which is better known as an "Elementary."**
 With regard to "Element," when the term is used metaphysically,
 it means, in distinction to the mortal, the incipient <em>divine</em>
 man; and, in its physical usage, inchoate matter in its first
 undifferentiated condition, or in the <em>laya </em>state, which
 is the eternal and the <em>normal </em>condition of substance,
 differentiating only periodically, and is during that differentiation
 in an <em>abnormal </em>state -- in other words, a transitory
 illusion of the senses.
 </p><p>
 As to the "elemental atoms," so called, the Occultists
 refer to them by that name with a meaning analogous to that which
 is given by the Hindu to Brahma when he calls him <strong>A</strong>NU,
 the "Atom." Every elemental <em>atom</em>,<em> </em>in
 search of which more than one Chemist has followed the path indicated
 by the Alchemists, is, in their firm belief (when not <em>knowledge</em>),<em>
 </em>a SOUL; not necessarily a disembodied soul, but a <em>jiva</em>,<em>
 </em>as the Hindus call it, a centre of POTENTIAL VITALITY, with
 latent intelligence in it, and, in the case of compound Souls
 -- an intelligent active EXISTENCE, from the highest to the lowest
 order, a form composed of more or less differentiations. It requires
 a metaphysician -- and an Eastern metaphysician -- to understand
 our meaning. All those atom-Souls are differentiations from the
 ONE, and in the same relation to it as the <em>divine Soul</em>
 -- the Buddhi -- to its informing and inseparable Spirit, or <em>Atman.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 Modern physics, while borrowing from the ancients their atomic
 theory, forgot one point, the most important of the doctrine;
 hence they got only the husks and will never be able to get at
 the kernel. They left behind, in the adoption of physical atoms,
 the suggestive fact that
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * In answer to a friend, that eminent geologist writes: . . .
 ."I can only say, in reply to your letter, that it is at
 present, and perhaps always will be, IMPOSSIBLE to reduce, even
 approximately, geological time into years, or even into millenniums."
 (Signed William Pengelly, F.R.S.)
 </p><p>
 ** Plato speaking of the irrational, turbulent Elements "composed
 of fire, air, water, and earth," means Elementary Daemons.
 (See <em>Timaeus.</em>) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 568 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 from Anaxagoras down to Epicurus, the Roman Lucretius, and finally
 even to Galileo, all those Philosophers believed more or less
 in ANIMATED atoms, not in invisible specks of so-called "brute"
 matter. Rotatory motion was generated in their views, by larger
 (read, more divine and pure) atoms forcing downwards other atoms;
 the lighter ones being thrust simultaneously upward. The esoteric
 meaning of this is the ever cyclic curve downward and upward of
 differentiated elements through intercyclic phases of existence,
 until each reaches again its starting point or birthplace. The
 idea was metaphysical as well as physical; the hidden interpretation
 embracing "gods" or souls, in the shape of atoms, as
 the <em>causes </em>of all the <em>effects </em>produced on Earth
 by the <em>secretions </em>from the divine bodies.* No ancient
 philosopher, not even the Jewish Kabalists, ever dissociated Spirit
 from matter or <em>vice versa. </em>Everything originated in the
 ONE, and, proceeding from the one, must finally return to the
 One. "Light becomes heat, and consolidates into fiery particles;
 which, from being ignited, become cold, hard particles, round
 and smooth. And this is called <em>Soul</em>,<em> </em>imprisoned
 in its robe of matter;"** <em>Atoms </em>and <em>Souls </em>having
 been synonymous in the language of the Initiates. The "whirling
 Souls," <em>Gilgoolem</em>,<em> </em>a doctrine in which
 so many learned Jews have believed (<em>See Mackenzie</em>'<em>s
 Royal Masonic Cyclopaedia</em>),<em> </em>had no other meaning
 esoterically. The learned Jewish Initiates never meant by the
 "Promised land" Palestine alone, but the same <em>Nirvana
 </em>as the learned Buddhist and Brahmin do -- the bosom of the
 <strong>E</strong>TERNAL <strong>O</strong>NE, symbolized by that
 of Abraham, and by Palestine as its substitute on Earth.*** The
 passage of the <strong>S</strong>OUL-<strong>A</strong>TOM "through
 the Seven Planetary Chambers" had the same metaphysical and
 also physical meaning. It had the latter when it was said to <em>dissolve
 into Ether </em>(<em>See Isis Unveiled</em>,<em> </em>Vol. I.,
 p. 297.) Even Epicurus, the <em>model Atheist </em>and materialist,
 knew and believed so much in the ancient Wisdom, that he taught
 that the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Plato uses the words "<em>secretions</em>"<em> </em>of
 turbulent Elements (Timaeus).
 </p><p>
 ** Valentinus' <em>Esoteric Treatise on the Doctrine of Gilgul</em>.
 </p><p>
 *** Surely no <em>educated </em>Jew ever believed the <em>literal
 </em>sense of this allegory -- namely, that "the bodies of
 Jews deposited in foreign lands contain within them a principle
 of Soul which cannot rest, until by a process called the "whirling
 of the Soul" the immortal particle reaches once more the
 sacred Soil of the "Promised land." The meaning is evident
 to an occultist. The process was supposed to be accomplished by
 a kind of metempsychosis, the psychic spark being conveyed through
 bird, beast, fish, and the most minute insect. (<em>See Royal
 Masonic Cyclo. Mackenzie.</em>)<em> </em>The Allegory relates
 to <em>the atoms of the body</em>,<em> </em>which have each to
 pass through every form before all reach the <em>final </em>state,
 which is the first starting point of the departure of every atom
 -- its primitive laya State. But the primitive meaning of <em>Gilgoolem</em>,<em>
 </em>or "Revolution of Souls," was the idea of the re-incarnating
 Souls or <em>Egos. </em>"All the Souls go into the <em>gilgoolah</em>,"<em>
 </em>into a cyclic or revolving process; <em>i.e.</em>, they all
 proceed on the cyclic path of re-births. Some Kabalists interpret
 this doctrine to mean only a kind of purgatory for the souls of
 the wicked. But this is not so.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 569 PANTHEISM VERSUS MATERIALISM.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Soul (entirely distinct from immortal Spirit when the former is
 enshrined <em>latent </em>in it, as it is in every atomic speck),
 was composed of a fine, tender essence, formed from the <em>smoothest</em>,<em>
 roundest</em>,<em> and finest atoms.</em> 
 </p><p>
 And this shows that the ancient Initiates, who were followed more
 or less closely by all profane antiquity, meant by the term "ATOM,"
 a Soul, a Genius or Angel, the first-born of the ever-concealed
 CAUSE of all causes; and in this sense their teachings become
 comprehensible. They claimed, as do their successors, the existence
 of Gods and Genii, angels or "demons," not outside,
 or independent of, the Universal <em>Plenum</em>,<em> </em>but
 within it. Only this <em>Plenum</em>,<em> </em>during the life-cycles,
 is infinite. They admitted and taught a good deal of that which
 modern Science teaches now --namely, the existence of a primordial
 "World-stuff or Cosmic Substance," from which worlds
 are formed, ever and eternally homogeneous, except during its
 periodic existence, when it differentiates its universal diffusion
 throughout infinite space; and the gradual formation of sidereal
 bodies from it. They taught the revolution of the Heavens, the
 Earth's rotation, the Heliocentric System, and the Atomic Vortices
 -- Atoms -- in reality Souls and intelligences. But those "Atomists"
 were spiritual, most transcendental, and philosophical Pantheists.
 It is not they who would have ever conceived, or dreamt that monstrous
 contrasted progeny, the nightmare of our modern civilized Race;
 namely -- <em>inanimate</em> material, self-guiding atoms, on
 the one hand, and an extra-Cosmic God on the other.
 </p><p>
 It may be useful to show what, in the teachings of the old Initiates,
 the Monad was, and what its origin.
 </p><p>
 Modern exact Science, as soon as it began to grow out of its teens,
 perceived the great, and, to it, hitherto <em>esoteric </em>axiom,
 that nothing -- whether in the spiritual, psychic, or physical
 realm of being -- could come into existence out of nothing. There
 is no cause in the manifested universe without its adequate effects,
 whether in space or time; nor can there be an effect without its
 primal cause, which itself owes its existence to a still higher
 one -- the final and absolute cause having to remain to man for
 ever an incomprehensible <strong>C</strong>AUSELESS <strong>C</strong>AUSE.
 But even this is no solution, and must be viewed, if at all, from
 the highest philosophical and metaphysical standpoints, otherwise
 the problem had better be left unapproached. It is an abstraction,
 on the verge of which human reason -- however trained to metaphysical
 subtleties -- trembles, threatening to collapse. This may be demonstrated
 to any European who would undertake to solve the problem of existence
 by the articles of faith of the true Vedantin, for instance. Let
 him read and study the sublime teachings on the subject of Soul
 and Spirit, of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 570 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Sankaracharya (<em>Viveka Chudamani</em>)*,<em> </em>and the reader
 will realize what is now said.
 </p><p>
 While the Christian is taught that the human soul is a breath
 of God -- being created by him for sempiternal existence, <em>i.e.</em>,
 having a beginning, <em>but no end </em>(and therefore never to
 be called eternal) -- the Occult teaching says, "<em>Nothing
 is created</em>,<em> but is only transformed. </em>Nothing can
 manifest itself in this universe -- from a globe down to a vague,
 rapid thought -- that was not in the universe already; everything
 on the subjective plane is an eternal IS; as everything on the
 objective plane is an <em>ever becoming </em>--<em> </em>because
 transitory."
 </p><p>
 The monad -- a truly "indivisible thing," as defined
 by Good, who did not give it the sense we now do -- is here rendered
 as the <em>Atma </em>in conjunction with <em>Buddhi </em>and the
 higher Manas. This trinity is one and eternal, the latter being
 absorbed in the former at the termination of all conditioned and
 <em>illusive </em>life. The monad, then, can be traced through
 the course of its pilgrimage and its changes of transitory vehicles
 only from the incipient stage of the manifested Universe. In Pralaya,
 or the intermediate period between two manvantaras, it loses its
 name, as it loses it when the real ONE self of man merges <em>into
 Brahm </em>in cases of high Samadhi (the <em>Turiya </em>state)
 or final Nirvana; "when the disciple" in the words of
 Sankara, "having attained that primeval consciousness, absolute
 bliss, of which the nature is truth, which is without form and
 action, abandons this illusive body that has been assumed by the
 <em>atma </em>just as an actor (abandons) the dress (put on)."
 For Buddhi (the <em>Anandamaya sheath</em>)<em> </em>is but a
 mirror which <em>reflects </em>absolute bliss; and, moreover,
 <em>that reflection </em>itself is yet not free from ignorance,
 and is <em>not </em>the Supreme Spirit, being subject to conditions,
 being a spiritual modification of Prakriti, and an effect; <em>Atma
 </em>alone is the one real and eternal substratum of all -- the
 essence and absolute knowledge -- the <em>Kshetragna.</em>**<em>
 </em>It is called in the Esoteric philosophy "the One Witness,"
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Translated for the <em>Theosophist</em>,<em> </em>by Mohini
 M. Chatterji as "Crest Jewel of Wisdom," 1886. (See
 <em>Theosophist</em>,<em> </em>July and August numbers).
 </p><p>
 ** Now that the revised version of the gospels has been published
 and the most glaring mistranslations of the old versions are corrected,
 one will understand better the words in St. John v., vi., and
 vii.: "It is the Spirit that beareth <em>witness</em> because
 the Spirit is the truth." The words that follow in the mistranslated
 version about the "three witnesses," -- hitherto supposed
 to stand for "the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost"
 -- show the real meaning of the writer (St. John) very clearly,
 thus still more forcibly identifying his teaching in this respect
 with that of Sankaracharya. For what can the sentence, "there
 are three who bear witness: the Spirit and the <em>Water </em>and
 the <em>Blood</em>" -- mean, if they bear no relation to,
 or connection with, the more philosophical statement of the great
 Vedanta teacher, who, speaking of the <em>sheaths </em>(the <em>principles
 </em>in man) <em>Jiva</em>,<em> Vignanamaya</em>,<em> </em>etc.,
 which <em>are</em>, in their physical manifestation, "<em>water
 </em>and<em> blood</em>"<em> </em>or life, adds that <em>atma</em>
 (spirit) alone is what remains after the [[Footnote continued
 on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 571 THE DIAMOND HEART.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and, while it rests in Devachan, is referred to as "the Three
 Witnesses to Karma."
 </p><p>
 <em>Atma </em>(our seventh principle) being identical with the
 universal Spirit, and man being one with it in his essence, what
 is then the Monad proper? It is that homogeneous spark which radiates
 in millions of rays from the primeval "Seven;" -- of
 which seven further on. It is <em>the </em>EMANATING <em>spark
 from the </em>UNCREATED <em>Ray </em>--<em> </em>a mystery. In
 the esoteric, and even exoteric Buddhism of the North, Adi Buddha
 (<em>Chogi dangpoi sangye</em>),<em> </em>the One unknown, without
 beginning or end, identical with Parabrahm and Ain-Soph, emits
 a bright ray from its darkness.
 </p><p>
 This is the <em>Logos </em>(the first), or Vajradhara, the Supreme
 Buddha (also called<em> Dorjechang</em>)<em>. </em>As the Lord
 of all Mysteries he cannot manifest, but sends into the world
 of manifestation his heart -- the "diamond heart," Vajrasattva
 (<em>Dorjesempa</em>)<em>. </em>This is the second <em>logos </em>of
 creation, from whom emanate the seven (in the exoteric blind the
 five) Dhyani Buddhas, called the Anupadaka, "the parentless."
 These Buddhas are the primeval monads from the world of <em>incorporeal
 being</em>,<em> </em>the<em> Arupa </em>world, wherein the Intelligences
 (on that plane only) have neither shape nor name, in the exoteric
 system, but have their distinct seven names in esoteric philosophy.
 These Dhyani Buddhas emanate, or create from themselves, by virtue
 of Dhyana, celestial Selves -- the <em>super</em>-human Bodhisattvas.
 These incarnating at the beginning of every human cycle on earth
 as mortal men, become occasionally, owing to their personal merit,
 Bodhisattvas among the Sons of Humanity, after which they may
 re-appear as <em>Manushi </em>(human) Buddhas. The Anupadaka (or
 Dhyani-Buddhas) are thus identical with the Brahminical <em>Manasaputra</em>,<em>
 </em>"mind-born sons" -- whether of Brahma or either
 of the other two Trimurtian Hypostases, hence identical also with
 the Rishis and Prajapatis. Thus, a passage is found in <em>Anugita</em>,<em>
 </em>which, read esoterically, shows plainly, though under another
 imagery, the same idea and system. It says: "Whatever entities
 there are in this world, moveable or immoveable, they are the
 very first to be dissolved (at <em>pralaya</em>);<em> </em>and
 next the developments produced from the elements (from which the
 visible Universe is fashioned); and, after these developments
 (evolved entities), all the elements. Such is the upperward gradation
 among entities. Gods, Men, Gandharvas, Pisachas, Asuras, Rakshasas,
 all have been created by Svabhava (Prakriti, or plastic nature),
 not by actions, nor by a cause" -- <em>i.e.</em>, not by
 any physical cause.
 </p><p>
 "These Brahmanas (the Rishi Prajapati?), the creators of
 the world, are born here (on earth) again and again. Whatever
 is produced from
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] <em>subtraction </em>of
 the sheaths and that it is the ONLY <em>witness</em>,<em> </em>or
 synthesized unity. The less spiritual and philosophical school,
 solely with an eye to a trinity made three witnesses out of "one,"
 thus connecting it more with earth than with heaven.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 572 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 them is dissolved in due time in those very five great elements
 (the five, or rather seven, Dhyani Buddhas, also called "Elements"
 of Mankind), like billows in the ocean. These great elements are
 in every way beyond the elements that make up the world (the gross
 elements). And he who is released even from these five elements
 (the tanmatras)* goes to the highest goal." "The Lord
 Prajapati (Brahma) created all this by the mind only," <em>i.e.</em>,<em>
 </em>by<em> Dhyana</em>,<em> </em>or abstract meditation and mystic
 powers like the Dhyani Buddhas (<em>vide supra</em>)<em>. </em>Evidently
 then, these "Brahmanas" are identical with the Bodhisattvas
 (the terrestrial) of the heavenly Dhyani Buddhas. Both, as primordial,
 intelligent "Elements," become the <em>creators </em>or
 the <em>emanators </em>of the monads destined to become human
 in that cycle; after which they evolve themselves, or, so to say,
 expand into their own <em>selves </em>as Bodhisattvas or Brahmanas,
 in heaven and earth, to become at last simple men --"the
 creators of the world <em>are born here</em>,<em> on earth again
 and again</em>"<em> </em>--<em> </em>truly. In the Northern
 Buddhist system, or the popular exoteric religion, it is taught
 that every Buddha, while preaching the good law on earth, manifests
 himself simultaneously in three worlds: in the formless, as Dhyani
 Buddha, in the World of forms, as a Bodhisattva, and in the world
 of desire, the lowest (or our world) as a man. Esoterically the
 teaching differs: The divine, purely Adi-Buddhic <em>monad</em>
 manifests as the universal Buddhi (the <em>Maha-buddhi </em>or
 Mahat in Hindu philosophies) the spiritual, omniscient and omnipotent
 root of divine intelligence, the highest <em>anima mundi </em>or
 the Logos<em>. This </em>descends "like a flame spreading
 from the eternal Fire, immoveable, without increase or decrease,
 ever the same to the end" of the cycle of existence, and
 becomes universal life on the Mundane Plane. From this Plane of
 <em>conscious </em>Life shoot out, like seven fiery tongues, the
 Sons of Light (the <em>logoi </em>of Life); then the Dhyani-Buddhas
 of contemplation: the concrete forms of their formless Fathers
 -- the Seven Sons of Light, <em>still themselves</em>,<em> </em>to
 whom may be applied the Brahmanical mystic phrase: "Thou
 art 'THAT' -- <em>Brahm.</em>"<em> </em>It is from these
 Dhyani-Buddhas that emanate their <em>chhayas </em>(Shadows) the
 Bodhisattvas of the celestial realms, the prototypes of the <em>super</em>-terrestrial
 Bodhisattvas, and of the terrestrial Buddhas, and finally of men.
 The "Seven Sons of Light" are also called "Stars."
 </p><p>
 The star under which a human Entity is born, says the Occult teaching,
 will remain for ever its star, throughout the whole cycle of its
 incarnations in one Manvantara. But <em>this is not his astrological
 star. </em>The latter is concerned and connected with the <em>personality</em>,<em>
 </em>the former with
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The Tanmatras are literally the type or rudiment of an element
 devoid of qualities; but esoterically, they are the primeval <em>noumenoi</em>
 of that which becomes in the progress of evolution a Cosmic element
 in the sense given to the term in antiquity, not in that of physics.
 They are the logoi, the seven emanations or rays of the logos.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 573 THE CREST-JEWEL OF WISDOM.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the INDIVIDUALITY. The "Angel" of that Star, or the
 Dhyani-Buddha will be either the guiding or simply the presiding
 "Angel," so to say, in every new rebirth of the monad,
 <em>which is part of his own essence</em>,<em> </em>though his
 vehicle, man, may remain for ever ignorant of this fact. The adepts
 have each their Dhyani-Buddha, their elder "twin Soul,"
 and they know it, calling it "Father-Soul," and "Father-Fire."
 It is only at the last and supreme initiation, however, that they
 learn it when placed face to face with the bright "Image."
 How much has Bulwer Lytton known of this mystic fact when describing,
 in one of his highest inspirational moods, Zanoni face to face
 with his <em>Augoeides?</em> 
 </p><p>
 The<em> Logos</em>,<em> </em>or both the unmanifested and the
 manifested <strong>W</strong>ORD, is called by the Hindus, Iswara,
 "the Lord," though the Occultists give it another name.
 Iswara, say the Vedantins, is the highest consciousness in nature.
 "This highest consciousness," answer the Occultists,
 "is only a<em> synthetic unit </em>in the world of the manifested
 Logos -- or on the <em>plane of illusion; </em>for it is the sum
 total of Dhyan-Chohanic <em>consciousnesses.</em>"<em> </em>"Oh,
 wise man, remove the conception <em>that not</em>-<em>Spirit is
 Spirit</em>,"<em> </em>says Sankaracharya. Atma is <em>not</em>-<em>Spirit
 </em>in its final Parabrahmic state, <em>Iswara </em>or<em> Logos
 </em>is Spirit; or, as Occultism explains, it is a compound unity
 of manifested living Spirits, the parent-source and nursery of
 all the mundane and terrestrial monads, <em>plus</em> their<em>
 divine </em>reflection, which emanate from, and return into, the
 Logos, each in the culmination of its time. There are seven chief
 groups of such Dhyan Chohans, which groups will be found and recognised
 in every religion, for they are the primeval SEVEN Rays. Humanity,
 occultism teaches us, is divided into seven distinct groups and
 their sub-divisions, mental, spiritual, and physical.* The monad,
 then, viewed as ONE, is above the seventh principle (in Kosmos
 and man), and as a triad, it is the direct radiant progeny of
 the said <em>compound </em>UNIT, not the breath (and special <em>creation
 </em>out of <em>nihil</em>)<em> </em>of "God," as that
 unit is called; for such an idea is quite unphilosophical, and
 degrades Deity, dragging it down to a finite, attributive condition.
 As well expressed by the translator of the "Crest-Jewel of
 Wisdom" -- though <em>Iswara </em>is<em> </em>"God"
 "unchanged in the profoundest depths of <em>pralayas </em>and
 in the intensest activity of the <em>manvantaras</em>" .
 . ., still<em> </em>"<em>beyond </em>(him) is
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Hence the seven chief planets, the <em>spheres </em>of the indwelling
 seven spirits, under each of which is born one of the human groups
 which is guided and influenced thereby. There are only seven planets
 (<em>specially</em> connected with earth), and twelve houses,
 but the possible combinations of their aspects are countless.
 As each planet can stand to each of the others in twelve different
 aspects, their combinations must, therefore, be almost infinite;
 as infinite, in fact, as the spiritual, psychic, mental, and physical
 capacities in the numberless varieties of the <em>genus homo</em>,<em>
 </em>each of which varieties is born under one of the seven planets
 and one of the said countless planetary combinations. See<em>
 Theosophist</em>,<em> </em>for August, 1886.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 574 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 '<strong>A</strong>TMA,' round whose pavilion is the darkness
 of eternal <strong>M</strong>AYA."* The "triads"
 born under the same Parent-planet, or rather the <em>radiations
 </em>of<em> </em>one and the same Planetary Spirit (Dhyani Buddha)
 are, in all their after lives and rebirths, sister, or "<em>twin</em>-souls,"
 on this Earth.**
 </p><p>
 This was known to every high Initiate in every age and in every
 country: "I and my Father are one," said Jesus (John
 x. 30).*** When He is made to say, elsewhere (xx. 17): "I
 ascend to <em>my</em> Father and your Father," it meant that
 which has just been stated. It was simply to show that the group
 of his disciples and followers attracted to Him belonged to the
 same Dhyani Buddha, "Star," or "Father," again
 of the same planetary realm and division as He did. It is the
 <em>knowledge </em>of<em> </em>this occult doctrine that found
 expression in the review of "The Idyll of the White Lotus,"
 when Mr. T. Subba Row wrote: "Every Buddha meets at his last
 initiation all the great adepts who reached Buddhahood during
 the preceding ages . . . every class of adepts has its own bond
 of spiritual communion which knits them together. . . . . The
 only possible and effectual way of entering into such brotherhood
 . . . . is by bringing oneself within the influence of the Spiritual
 light which radiates <em>from one</em>'<em>s own Logos. </em>I
 may further point out here . . . . that such communion is only
 possible <em>between persons whose souls derive their life and
 sustenance from the same divine </em>RAY, and that, as seven distinct
 rays radiate from the 'Central Spiritual Sun,' <em>all adepts
 and Dhyan Chohans are divisible into seven classes</em>,<em> </em>each
 of which is guided, controlled, and overshadowed <em>by one of
 the seven forms </em>or manifestations of the divine Wisdom."
 ("<em>Theosophist</em>,"<em> </em>Aug., 1886.)
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The now universal error of attributing to the ancients the knowledge
 of only seven planets, simply because they mentioned no others,
 is based on the same general ignorance of their occult doctrines.
 The question is not whether they were, or were not, aware of the
 existence of the later discovered planets; but whether the reverence
 paid by them to the four exoteric and three secret great gods
 -- the star-angels, had not some special reason. The writer ventures
 to say there was such a reason, and it is this. Had they known
 of as many planets as we do now (and this question can hardly
 be decided at present, either way), they would have still connected
 with their religious worship only the seven, because these seven
 are directly and specially connected with our earth, or, using
 esoteric phraseology, with our septenary ring of spheres. (See
 <em>supra</em>.)
 </p><p>
 ** It is the same, only still more metaphysical idea, as that
 of the Christian Trinity -- "Three in One" -- <em>i.e.</em>,<em>
 </em>the Universal "over-Spirit," manifesting on the
 two higher planes, those of Buddhi and Mahat; and these are the
 three hypostases, metaphysical, but <em>never personal.</em> 
 </p><p>
 *** The identity, and at the same time the illusive differentiation
 of the <em>Angel</em>-Monad and the <em>Human</em>-Monad is shown
 by the following sentences: "My Father is <em>greater </em>than
 I" (John xiv. 26) ; "Glorify <em>your</em> Father<em>
 who is in Heaven</em>"<em> </em>(Matt. v. 16); "The
 righteous will <em>shine </em>in the kingdom of <em>their </em>Father"
 (not <em>our</em> Father) (Matt. xiii. 43) "Know ye not ye
 are <em>a temple </em>of God, and that the <em>Spirit of God dwelleth
 </em>in you? (I Cor. iii. 16); "I <em>ascend </em>to my Father,"
 etc., etc.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 575 WHAT ARE THE SEVEN PLANETS?</h6>
 
 <p>
 It is then the "Seven Sons of Light" -- called after
 their planets and (by the rabble) often identified with them --
 namely Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, Venus, and -- <em>presumably
 </em>for the modern critic, who goes no deeper than the surface
 of old religions* -- the Sun and Moon, which are, according to
 the Occult teachings, our heavenly Parents, or "Father,"
 synthetically. Hence, as already remarked, polytheism is really
 more philosophical and correct, as to fact and nature, than anthropomorphic
 monotheism. Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, and Venus, the four exoteric
 planets, and the three others, which must remain unnamed, were
 the heavenly bodies in direct astral and psychic communication
 with the Earth, its Guides, and Watchers -- morally and physically;
 the visible orbs furnishing our Humanity with its outward and
 inward characteristics, and their "Regents" or <em>Rectors
 </em>with our Monads and spiritual faculties. In order to avoid
 creating new misconceptions, let it be stated that among the three
 <em>secret </em>orbs (or star-angels) neither Uranus nor Neptune
 entered; not only because they were unknown under these names
 to the ancient Sages, but because they, as all other planets,
 however many there may be, are the <em>gods </em>and guardians
 of other septenary chains of globes within our systems.
 </p><p>
 Nor do the two last discovered great planets depend entirely on
 the Sun like the rest of the planets. Otherwise, how explain the
 fact that Neptune receives 900 times less light than our Earth,
 and Uranus 390 times less, and that their satellites show a peculiarity
 of inverse rotation found in no other planets of the Solar System.
 At any rate, what we say applies to Uranus, though recently the
 fact begins again to be disputed.
 </p><p>
 This subject will, of course, be considered mere vagary by all
 those who confuse the universal order of being with their own
 systems of classification. Here, however, simple facts from Occult
 teachings are stated, to be either accepted or rejected, as the
 case may be. There are details which, on account of their great
 metaphysical abstractions, <em>cannot </em>be entered upon. Hence,
 we merely state that only seven of our planets are as intimately
 related to our globe, as the Sun is to all
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * These are planets accepted for purposes of judicial astrology
 only. The astrotheogonical division differed from this one. The
 Sun, being a central <em>star</em> and no planet, stands in more
 occult and mysterious relations with <em>its </em>seven planets
 of <em>our </em>globe than is generally known. The Sun was, therefore,
 considered the great Father of all the Seven "Fathers,"
 which accounts for the variations found between <em>seven </em>and
 <em>eight </em>great gods of the Chaldean and other countries.
 Neither the earth nor the moon -- its satellite -- nor yet stars,
 for another reason -- were anything else than <em>substitutes
 for esoteric purposes. </em>Yet, even with the Sun and the Moon
 thrown out of the calculation, the ancients seem to have known
 of <em>seven </em>planets. How many more are known to us, so far,
 if we throw out the Earth and Moon? Seven, and no more: Seven
 primary or principal planets, the rest <em>planetoids </em>rather
 than planets.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 576 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the bodies subject to him in his system. Of these bodies the poor
 little number of <em>primary </em>and<em> secondary </em>planets
 known to astronomy, looks wretched enough, in truth.* Therefore,
 it stands to reason that there are a great number of planets,
 small and large, that have not been discovered yet, but of the
 existence of which ancient astronomers -- all of them initiated
 adepts -- must have certainly been aware. But, as their relation
 to the gods was sacred, it had to remain arcane, as also the names
 of various other planets and stars.
 </p><p>
 Besides which, even the Roman Catholic theology speaks of "<em>seventy
 </em>planets that preside over the destinies of the nations of
 this globe"; and, save the erroneous application, there is
 more truth in this tradition than in exact modern astronomy. The
 seventy planets are connected with the <em>seventy </em>elders
 of the people of Israel (<em>Numb. </em>11, 16) because the<em>
 regents </em>of these planets are meant, not the orbs themselves;
 and the word seventy is a play and a <em>blind </em>upon the 7
 x 7 of the subdivisions. Each people and nation, as said already,
 has its <em>direct </em>Watcher, Guardian and Father in Heaven
 -- a Planetary Spirit. We are willing to leave their own national
 God, Jehovah, to the descendants of Israel, the worshippers of
 <em>Sabaoth </em>or <strong>S</strong>ATURN; for, indeed, the
 <em>monads </em>of the people chosen by him are his own, and the
 Bible has never made a secret of it. Only the text of the English
 (Protestant) Bible is, in disagreement, as usual, with those of
 the Septuagint and the Vulgate. Thus, while in the former one
 reads (<em>in Deuter. </em>xxxii., 8 <em>and</em> 9)<em> </em>"When
 the MOST HIGH (not Jehovah) divided to the nations their inheritance
 . . . he set the bounds of the people according to the number
 of the children of Israel," in the <em>Septuagint </em>the
 text reads "according <em>to the number of the Angels</em>"<em>
 </em>(Planet-Angels), which is more concordant with truth and
 fact. Moreover, all the texts agree that "the Lord's (Jehovah)
 <em>portion </em>is his people; Jacob <em>is </em>the lot of <em>his</em>
 inheritance" (Deut. xxxii. 9); and this settles the question.
 The "Lord" Jehovah took <em>for his portion </em>Israel
 -- what have other nations to do with that particular <em>national
 </em>Deity? Let then, the "angel Gabriel" watch over
 Iran and "Mikael-Jehovah" over the Hebrews. These are
 not the gods of other nations, and it is difficult to see why
 Christians
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * When one remembers that under the powerful telescope of Sir
 W. Herschell, that eminent astronomer, gauging merely that portion
 of heaven in the equatorial plane, the approximate centre of which
 is occupied by our Earth -- saw pass in one quarter of an hour,
 16,000 stars; and applying this calculation to the totality of
 the "Milky Way" he found in it no less than 18 (eighteen)
 millions of <strong>S</strong>UNS -- one wonders no longer that
 Laplace, in conversation with Napoleon I. should have called God
 a HYPOTHESIS -- perfectly useless to speculate upon for <em>exact</em>
 physical Science, at any rate. Occult metaphysics and transcendental
 philosophy will alone be able to lift the smallest corner of the
 impenetrable veil in this direction.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 577 CYCLIC FALL OF THE GODS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 should have selected a god against whose commandments Jesus was
 the first one to rise in rebellion.
 </p><p>
 The Planetary origin of the Monad (Soul) and of its faculties
 was taught by the Gnostics. On its way to the Earth, as on its
 way back from the Earth, each soul born in, and from, the "Boundless
 Light,"* had to pass through the seven planetary regions
 both ways. The pure Dhyani and Devas of the oldest religions had
 become, in course of time, with the Zoroastrians, the Seven Daevas,
 the ministers of Ahriman, "each chained to his planet"
 (<em>see Origen</em>'<em>s Copy of the Chart</em>);<em> </em>with
 the Brahmins, the Asuras and some of its Rishis -- good, bad and
 indifferent; and among the Egyptian Gnostics it was <em>Thoth
 </em>or (Hermes) who was the chief of the seven whose names are
 given by Origen as <em>Adonai</em>,<em> </em>genius of the Sun;
 <em>Tao</em>,<em> </em>of the Moon; <em>Eloi</em>,<em> </em>of
 Jupiter; <em>Sabao</em>,<em> </em>of Mars; <em>Orai</em>,<em>
 </em>of Venus; <em>Astaphai</em>,<em> </em>of Mercury; and <em>Ildabaoth
 </em>(Jehovah), of Saturn. Finally, the <em>Pistis</em>-<em>Sophia</em>,<em>
 </em>which the greatest modern authority on <em>exoteric </em>Gnostic
 beliefs, the late Mr. C. W. King, refers to as "that precious
 monument of Gnosticism," -- this old document echoes, while
 distorting it to sectarian purposes, the archaic belief of the
 ages. The Astral Rulers of the Spheres (the planets) create the
 monads (the Souls) from their own substance out of the "tears
 of their eyes, and the sweat of their torments," endowing
 the monads with a spark of the Divine Light, which is their substance.
 It will be shown in Book II. why these "Lords of the Zodiac
 and Spheres" have been transformed by sectarian theology
 into the rebellious angels of the Christians, who took them from
 the Seven Devs of the Magi, without understanding the significance
 of the allegory. (<em>Vide Part II.</em>,<em> </em>"<em>On
 the Seven Souls</em>,"<em> and Section </em>xv. <em>in this
 Part</em>,<em> </em>"<strong>G</strong>ODS, <strong>M</strong>ONADS
 AND <strong>A</strong>TOMS").
 </p><p>
 As usual, that which <em>is</em> and<em> was </em>from its beginning
 divine, pure, and spiritual in its earliest unity, became, by
 reason of its differentiation by the distorted prism of man's
 conceptions, human and impure, as reflecting man's own sinful
 nature. Thus, in time, the planet Saturn became reviled by the
 worshippers of other "gods." The nations born under
 Saturn -- the Jewish, for instance -- with whom he had become
 Jehovah, after having been held as a son of Saturn, or Ilda-Baoth,
 by the Ophites, and in the book of Jasher -- were eternally fighting
 with those born under Jupiter, Mercury, or any other planet, except
 Saturn-Jehovah; genealogies and prophecies notwithstanding, Jesus
 <em>the initiate </em>(or Jehoshua) -- the type from whom the
 "historical" Jesus was
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * C. W. King, identifies it with "that <em>summum bonum</em>
 of Oriental aspiration, the Buddhist Nirvana," perfect repose,
 the Epicurean <em>Indolentia</em>,<em> </em>which looks flippant
 enough in its expression, though not quite untrue.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 578 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 copied -- was not of pure Jewish blood, and thus recognised no
 Jehovah; nor did he worship any planetary god beside his own "Father,"
 whom he knew, and with whom he communed as every high initiate
 does, "Spirit to Spirit and Soul to Soul." This can
 hardly be taken exception to, unless the critic explains to every
 one's satisfaction the strange sentences put in the mouth of Jesus
 by the author of the Fourth Gospel (<em>chapter </em>viii.) during
 his disputes with the Pharisees.
 </p><p>
 "I know ye are Abraham's seed* . . . I speak the things which
 I have seen with <em>my </em>Father; and ye do the things which
 ye heard from <em>your </em>Father. . . . . Ye do the works of
 <em>your </em>Father. . . . . Ye are of your Father, the Devil.
 . . . . He was a murderer from the beginning, and stood not in
 the truth, because there is no truth in him. When one speaketh
 a lie he speaketh of his own; for his father also is a liar and
 the father thereof," etc., etc.
 </p><p>
 That "Father" of the Pharisees was Jehovah, because
 identical with Cain, Saturn, Vulcan, etc. -- the planet under
 which they were born, and the God whom they worshipped. Evidently
 there must be an occult meaning sought in these words and admonitions,
 however mistranslated, since they are pronounced by one who threatened
 with hell-fire anyone who says simply <em>raca </em>(fool) to
 his brother (<em>Matthew</em> v<em>.</em>,<em> </em>22). And evidently,
 again, the planets are not merely spheres, twinkling in Space,
 and made to shine for no purpose, but the domains of various beings
 with whom the profane are so far unacquainted; nevertheless, having
 a mysterious, unbroken, and powerful connection with men and globes.
 Every heavenly body is the temple of <em>a </em>god, and these
 gods themselves are the temples of <strong>G</strong>OD, the Unknown
 "<em>Not</em> Spirit." There is nothing profane in the
 Universe. All Nature is a consecrated place, as Young says: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "Each of these Stars is a religious house." . . . .
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Thus can all exoteric religions be shown the falsified copies
 of the esoteric teaching. It is the priesthood which has to be
 held responsible for the reaction in favour of materialism of
 our day. It is by worshiping and enforcing on the masses the worship
 of the shells -- personified for purposes of allegory -- of pagan
 ideals, that the latest exoteric religion has made of Western
 lands a Pandemonium, in which the higher classes worship the golden
 calf, and the lower and ignorant masses are made to worship an
 idol with feet of clay.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Abraham and Saturn are identical in astro-symbology, and he
 is the forefather of the Jehovistic Jews.</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-12.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>