<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite> The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 310 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h4>ยง II.<br>
 THE MYSTERY LANGUAGE AND ITS KEYS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>R</strong>ECENT discoveries made by great mathematicians
 and Kabalists thus prove, beyond a shadow of doubt, that every
 theology, from the earliest and oldest down to the latest, has
 sprung not only from a common source of abstract beliefs, but
 from one universal esoteric, or "Mystery" language.
 These scholars hold the key to the universal language of old,
 and have turned it successfully, though only <em>once</em>,<em>
 </em>in the hermetically closed door leading to the Hall of Mysteries.
 The great archaic system known from prehistoric ages as the sacred
 Wisdom Science, one that is contained and can be traced in every
 old as well as in every new religion, had, and still has, its
 universal language -- suspected by the Mason Ragon -- the language
 of the Hierophants, which has seven "dialects," so to
 speak, each referring, and being specially appropriated, to one
 of the seven mysteries of Nature. Each had its own symbolism.
 Nature could thus be either read in its fulness, or viewed from
 one of its special aspects.
 </p><p>
 The proof of this lies, to this day, in the extreme difficulty
 which the Orientalists in general, the Indianists and Egyptologists
 especially, experience in interpreting the allegorical writings
 of the Aryans and the hieratic records of old Egypt. This is because
 they will never remember that all the ancient records were written
 in a language which was universal and known to all nations alike
 in days of old, but which is now intelligible only to the few.
 Like the Arabic figures which are plain to a man of whatever nation,
 or like the English word <em>and</em>,<em> </em>which becomes
 <em>et</em> for the Frenchman, <em>und</em> for the German, and
 so on, yet which may be expressed for all civilized nations in
 the simple sign &amp; -- so all the words of that mystery language
 signified the same thing to each man of whatever nationality.
 There have been several men of note who have tried to re-establish
 such a universal and <em>philosophical</em> tongue:<em> </em>Delgarme,
 Wilkins, Leibnitz; but Demaimieux, in his <em>Pasigraphie</em>,<em>
 </em>is the only one who has proven its possibility. The scheme
 of Valentinius, called the "Greek Kabala," based on
 the combination of Greek letters, might serve as a model.
 </p><p>
 The many-sided facets of the mystery language have led to the
 adoption of widely varied dogmas and rites in the exotericism
 of the Church rituals. It is they, again, which are at the origin
 of most of the dogmas of the Christian Church, <em>e.g.,</em>
 the seven Sacraments, the Trinity, the Resurrection; the seven
 capital Sins and the seven Virtues. The seven keys to the mystery
 tongue, however, having always been in</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 311 EGYPT'S MANY RELIGIONS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the keeping of the highest among the initiated Hierophants of
 antiquity, it is only the partial use of a few out of the seven
 which passed, through the treason of some early Church Fathers
 -- ex-initiates of the Temples -- into the hands of the new sect
 of the Nazarenes. Some of the early Popes were Initiates, but
 the last fragments of their knowledge have now fallen into the
 power of the Jesuits, who have turned them into a system of sorcery.
 </p><p>
 It is maintained that <b>INDIA </b>(not in its present limits,
 but including its ancient boundaries) is the only country in the
 world which still has among her sons adepts, who have the knowledge
 of all the seven <em>sub-systems </em>and the key to the entire
 system. Since the fall of Memphis, Egypt began to lose those keys
 one by one, and Chaldea had preserved only three in the days of
 Berosus. As for the Hebrews, in all their writings they show no
 more than a thorough knowledge of the astronomical, geometrical
 and numerical systems of symbolizing all the human, and especially
 the <em>physiological </em>functions. They never had the higher
 keys.
 </p><p>
 "Every time I hear people talking of the religion of Egypt,"
 writes M. Gaston Maspero, the great French Egyptologist and the
 successor of Mariette Bey, "I am tempted to ask <em>which
 </em>of the Egyptian religions they are talking about? Is it of
 the Egyptian religion of the 4th Dynasty, or of the Egyptian religion
 of the Ptolemaic period? Is it of the religion of the rabble,
 or of that of the learned men? Of that which was taught in the
 schools of Heliopolis, or of that other which was in the minds
 and conceptions of the Theban sacerdotal class? For, between the
 first tomb of Memphis, which bears the <em>cartouche </em>of a
 king of the third dynasty, and the last stones at Esneh under
 Caesar-Philippus, the Arabian, there is an interval of at least
 five thousand years. Leaving aside the invasion of the Shepherds,
 the Ethiopian and Assyrian dominions, the Persian conquest, Greek
 colonization, and the thousand revolutions of its political life,
 Egypt has passed during those five thousand years through many
 vicissitudes of life, moral and intellectual. Chapter <b>XVII</b>.
 of the <em>Book of the Dead </em>which seems to contain the exposition
 of the system of the world as it was understood at Heliopolis
 during the time of the first dynasties, is known to us only by
 a few copies of the eleventh and twelfth dynasties. Each of the
 verses composing it was already at the time interpreted in three
 or four different ways; so different, indeed, that according to
 this or another school, the Demiurge became the solar fire --<em>
 Ra-shoo</em>,<em> </em>or the primordial water. Fifteen centuries
 later, the number of readings had increased considerably. Time
 had, in its course, modified the ideas about the universe and
 the forces that ruled it. During the hardly 18 centuries that
 Christianity exists, it has worked, </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 312 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 developed and transformed most of its dogmas; how many times,
 then, might not the Egyptian clergy have altered its dogmas during
 those fifty centuries that separate Theodosius from the King Builders
 of the Pyramids?"
 </p><p>
 Here we believe the eminent Egyptologist is going too far. The
 exoteric dogmas may often have been altered, the esoteric never.
 He does not take into account the sacred immutability of the primitive
 truths, revealed only during the mysteries of initiation. The
 Egyptian priests <em>have forgotten much</em>,<em> they altered
 nothing. </em>The loss of a good deal of the primitive teaching
 was due to the sudden deaths of the great Hierophants, who passed
 away before they had time to reveal <em>all</em> to their successors;
 mostly, to the absence of worthy heirs to the knowledge. Yet they
 have preserved in their rituals and dogmas the principal teachings
 of the secret doctrine. Thus, in the seventeenth chapter mentioned
 by Maspero, one finds (1) Osiris saying he is <em>Toum </em>(the
 creative force in nature, giving form to all Beings, spirits and
 men), self-generated and self-existent, issued from <em>Noun</em>,<em>
 </em>the celestial river, called <em>Father-mother </em>of<em>
 </em>the gods, the primordial deity, which is chaos or the <em>Deep</em>,
 impregnated by the unseen spirit. (2) He has found <em>Shoo </em>(solar
 force) on the staircase in the City of the Eight (the two <em>cubes
 </em>of good and Evil), and he has annihilated the evil principles
 in <em>Noun </em>(chaos) the children of Rebellion. (3) He is
 the Fire and Water, <em>i.e.</em>, Noun the primordial parent,
 and he created the gods out of his limbs -- 14 gods (twice seven)
 seven dark and seven light gods (the seven Spirits of the Presence
 of the Christians and the Seven dark Evil Spirits). (4) He is
 the Law of existence and Being (v. 10), the<em> Bennoo </em>(or
 phoenix, the bird of resurrection in Eternity), in whom night
 follows the day, and day the night -- an allusion to the periodical
 cycles of cosmic resurrection and human re-incarnation; for what
 can this mean? "The wayfarer who crosses millions of years,
 in the name of One, and the great green (primordial water or Chaos)
 the name of the other" (v. 17), one begetting millions of
 years in succession, the other engulfing them, to restore them
 back. (5) He speaks of the Seven Luminous ones who follow their
 Lord, who confers justice (Osiris in<em> Amenti</em>)<em>.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 All this is now shown to have been the source and origin of Christian
 dogmas. That which the Jews had from Egypt, through Moses and
 other initiates, was confused and distorted enough in later days;
 and that which the Church got from both, is still more misinterpreted.
 </p><p>
 Yet their system is now proven identical in this special department
 of symbology -- the key, namely, to the mysteries of astronomy
 as connected with those of generation and conception -- with those
 ideas of ancient religions, the theology of which has developed
 the phallic element. The Jewish system of sacred measures applied
 to religious symbols is the same,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 313 THE JEWS, AND THEIR SYSTEM.</h6>
 
 <p>
 so far as geometrical and numerical combinations go, as those
 of Chaldea, Greece, and Egypt, having been adopted by the Jews
 during the centuries of their slavery and captivity with those
 nations.* What was that system? It is the intimate conviction
 of the author of "The Source of Measures" that "the
 Mosaic Books were intended, by a mode of art speech, to set forth
 a geometrical and numerical system of exact science, which should
 serve as an origin of measures." Piazzi Smyth believes likewise.
 This system and these measures are found by some scholars to be
 identical with those used in the construction of the great pyramid
 -- but this is only partially so. "The foundation of these
 measures was the Parker ratio," says Mr. R. Skinner, in "The
 Source of Measures."
 </p><p>
 The author of this very extraordinary work has found it out, he
 says, in the use of the integral ratio in numbers of diameter
 to circumference of a circle, discovered by John Parker, of New
 York. This ratio is 6,561 for diameter, and 20,612 for circumference.
 Furthermore, that this geometrical ratio was the very ancient
 (and probably) the divine origin of what have now become through
 exoteric handling and practical application the British linear
 measures, "the underlying unit of which, viz., the <em>inch</em>,<em>
 </em>was likewise the base of one of the royal Egyptian <em>cubits
 </em>and of the Roman <em>foot. </em>He also found out that there
 was a modified form of the ratio, viz., 113-355 (explained in
 his work); and that while this last ratio pointed through its
 origin to the exact integral pi, or to 6,561 to 20,612, it also
 served as a base for astronomical calculations. The author discovered
 that a system <em>of exact science</em>,<em> geometrical</em>,<em>
 numerical</em>,<em> and astronomical</em>,<em> </em>founded on
 these ratios and to be found in use in the construction of the
 Great Egyptian Pyramid, was in part the burden of <em>this language
 </em>as contained in, and concealed under, the verbiage of the
 Hebrew text of the Bible. The inch and the two-foot rule of 24
 inches interpreted for use through the elements of the circle
 (<em>see first pages of Book I.</em>)<em> </em>and the ratios
 mentioned, were found to be at the basis or foundation of this
 natural and Egyptian and Hebrew system of science, while, moreover,
 it seems evident enough that the system itself was looked upon
 as of divine origin and of divine revela-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * As we said in <em>Isis </em>(<em>Vol. II. p</em>. 438-9), "To
 the present moment, in spite of all controversies and researches,
 History and Science remain as much as ever in the dark as to the
 origin of the Jews. They may be as well the exiled <em>Tchandalas
 </em>of old India, the 'bricklayers' mentioned by Vina-Svata,
 Veda-Vyasa and Manu, as the Phoenicians of Herodotus, or the Hyk-Sos
 of Josephus, or descendants of Pali shepherds, or a mixture of
 all these. The Bible names the Tyrians as a kindred people, and
 claims dominion over them. . . . Yet whatever they may have been,
 they became a hybrid people, not long after Moses, as the Bible
 shows them freely intermarrying not alone with the Canaanites,
 but with every other nation or race they came in contact with."
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 314 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 tion. . . ." But let us see what is said by the opponents
 of Prof. Piazzi Smyth's measurements of the Pyramid.
 </p><p>
 Mr. Petrie seems to deny them, and to have made short work altogether
 of Piazzi Smyth's calculations in their Biblical connection. So
 does Mr. Proctor, the champion "Coincidentalist" for
 many years past in every question of ancient arts and sciences.
 Speaking of "the multitude of relations independent of the
 Pyramid, which have turned up while the Pyramidalists have been
 endeavouring to connect the pyramid with the solar system . .
 . . these coincidences," he says, "are altogether more
 curious than any coincidence between the Pyramid and astronomical
 numbers: the former are as close and remarkable as they are real"
 (<em>i.e.</em>, those "coincidences" that would remain
 if even the pyramid had no existence); "the latter which
 are only <em>imaginary </em>(?)<em> </em>have only been established
 by the process which schoolboys call 'fudging,' and now new measures
 have left the work to be done all over again" (<em>Petrie</em>'<em>s
 letter to the Academy</em>,<em> Dec. </em>17, 1881.) To this Mr.
 Staniland Wake justly observes in his work on "The Origin
 and Significance of the Great Pyramid" (London, 1882): "They
 must, however, have been more than <em>mere coincidences</em>,<em>
 </em>if the builders of the Pyramid had the astronomical knowledge
 displayed in its perfect orientation and in its other admitted
 astronomical features."
 </p><p>
 They had it; and it is on this "knowledge" that the
 programme of the MYSTERIES and of the series of Initiations was
 based: thence, the construction of the Pyramids, the everlasting
 record and the indestructible symbol of these Mysteries and Initiations
 on Earth, as the courses of the stars are in Heaven. The cycle
 of Initiation was a reproduction in miniature of that great series
 of Cosmic changes to which astronomers have given the name of
 tropical or sidereal year. Just as, at the close of the cycle
 of the sidereal year [25,868 years], the heavenly bodies return
 to the same relative positions as they occupied at its outset,
 so at the close of the cycle of Initiation the inner man has regained
 the pristine state of divine purity and knowledge from which he
 set out on his cycle of terrestrial incarnation.
 </p><p>
 Moses, an Initiate into the Egyptian Mystagogy, based the religious
 mysteries of the new nation which he created, upon the same abstract
 formula derived from this sidereal cycle, which he symbolised
 under the form and measurements of the tabernacle, that he is
 supposed to have constructed in the wilderness. On these data,
 the later Jewish High Priests constructed the allegory of Solomon's
 Temple -- a building which never had a real existence, any more
 than had King Solomon himself, who is simply, and as much a solar
 myth as is the still later Hiram Abif, of the Masons, as Ragon
 has well demonstrated. Thus, if the measurements of this allegorical
 temple, the symbol of the cycle of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 315 PIAZZA SMYTH AND PETRIE DISAGREE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Initiation, coincide with those of the Great Pyramid, it is due
 to the fact that the former were derived from the latter through
 the Tabernacle of Moses.
 </p><p>
 That our author has undeniably discovered <em>one </em>and even
 <em>two </em>of<em> the keys </em>is fully demonstrated in the
 work just quoted. One has but to read it to feel a growing conviction
 that the hidden meaning of the allegories and parables of both
 Testaments is now unveiled. But that he owes this discovery far
 more to his own genius than to Parker and Piazzi Smyth, is as
 certain, if not more so. For, as just shown, whether the measures
 of the great Pyramid taken and adopted as the correct ones by
 the Biblical "Pyramidalists" are beyond suspicion, is
 not so sure. A proof of this is the work called "The Pyramids
 and Temples of Gizeh," by Mr. F. Petrie, besides other works
 written quite recently to oppose the said calculations, which
 were called <em>biassed. </em>We gather that nearly every one
 of Piazzi Smyth's measurements differs from the later and more
 carefully made measurements of Mr. Petrie, who concludes the Introduction
 to his work with this sentence:
 </p><p>
 "As to the results of the whole investigation, perhaps many
 theories will agree with an American who was a warm believer in
 Pyramid theories when he came to Gizeh. I had the pleasure of
 his company there for a couple of days, and at our last meal together
 he said to me in a saddened tone -- 'Well, Sir! I feel as if I
 had been to a funeral. By all means let the old theories have
 a decent burial, though we should take care that in our haste
 none of the wounded ones are buried alive.'"
 </p><p>
 As regards the late J. Parker's calculation in general, and his
 third proposition especially, we have consulted some eminent mathematicians,
 and this is the substance of what they say:
 </p><p>
 Parker's reasoning rests on sentimental, rather than mathematical,
 considerations, and is logically inconclusive.
 </p><p>
 <em>Proposition </em>III<em>.</em>,<em> </em>namely, that --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The circle is the natural basis or beginning of all area,
 and the square being made so in mathematical science, is artificial
 and arbitrary --"
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 -- is an illustration of an arbitrary proposition, and cannot
 safely be relied upon in mathematical reasoning. The same observation
 applies, even more strongly, to Proposition VII., which states
 that:
 </p><blockquote>
 "Because the circle is the primary shape in nature, and hence
 the basis of area; and because the circle is measured by, and
 is equal to the square only in ratio of half its circumference
 by the radius, therefore, circumference and radius, and not the
 square of diameter, are the only natural and legitimate elements
 of area, by which all regular shapes are made equal to the square,
 and equal to the circle."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Proposition IX. is a remarkable example of faulty reasoning, and
 it is the one on which Mr. Parker's Quadrature mainly rests. Here
 it is: --</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 316 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 "The circle and the equilateral triangle are opposite to
 one another in all the elements of their construction, and hence
 the fractional diameter of one circle, which is equal to the diameter
 of one square, is in the opposite duplicate ratio to the diameter
 of an equilateral triangle whose area is one," etc., etc.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Granting, for the sake of argument, that a triangle can be said
 to have a radius in the sense in which we speak of the radius
 of a circle, -- for what Parker calls the radius of the triangle
 is the radius of a circle inscribed in the triangle and therefore
 not the radius of the triangle at all, -- and granting for the
 moment the other fanciful and mathematical propositions united
 in his premises, why must we conclude that if the triangle and
 circle are opposite in all the elements of their construction,
 the diameter of any defined circle is in the opposite duplicate
 ratio of the diameter of any given equivalent triangle? What necessary
 connection is there between the premises and the conclusion? The
 reasoning is of a kind not known in geometry, and would not be
 accepted by strict mathematicians.
 </p><p>
 Whether the Archaic esoteric system originated the British inch
 or not, is of little consequence, however, to the strict and true
 metaphysician. Nor does Mr. Ralston Skinner's esoteric reading
 of the Bible become incorrect, merely because the measurements
 of the Pyramid will not be found to agree with those of Solomon's
 temple, the ark of Noah, etc.; or because Mr. Parker's Quadrature
 of the Circle is rejected by mathematicians. For Mr. Skinner's
 reading depends first of all on the Kabalistic methods and the
 Rabbinical value of the Hebrew letters. But it is extremely important
 to ascertain whether the measures used in the evolution and building
 of the Aryan symbolic religion, in the construction of their temples,
 the figures given in the Puranas, and especially in their chronology,
 their astronomical symbols, the duration of the cycles, and other
 computations, were, or were not, the same as those used in the
 Biblical measurements and glyphs. For this will prove that the
 Jews, unless they took their sacred cubit and measurements from
 the Egyptians (Moses being an initiate of the Priests) must have
 got those notions from India. At any rate they passed them to
 the early Christians. Hence, it is the Occultists and Kabalists
 who are the "true" heirs to the KNOWLEDGE, or the secret
 wisdom which is still found in the Bible; for they alone now understand
 its real meaning, whereas profane Jews and Christians cling to
 the husks and dead letter thereof. That it is the system of measures
 which led to the invention of the God-names Elohim and Jehovah,
 and their adaptation to phallicism, and that Jehovah is a not
 very flattered copy of Osiris, is now demonstrated by the author
 of the "Source of Measures." But the latter and Mr.
 Piazzi Smyth both seem to labour under the impression that (<em>a</em>)
 the priority of the system belongs to the Israelites,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 317 TRUTH MUST PREVAIL AT LAST.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the Hebrew language being the <em>divine </em>language, and that
 (<em>b</em>) this universal language belongs to direct revelation!
 </p><p>
 The latter hypothesis is correct only in the sense shown in the
 last paragraph of the preceding ยง; but we have yet to agree
 as to the nature and character of the divine "Revealer."
 With regard to priority, this, to the profane, will of course
 depend on (<em>a</em>) the internal and external evidence of the
 revelation, and (<em>b</em>) on each scholar's individual preconception.
 This, however, cannot prevent either the theistic Kabalist, or
 the Pantheistic Occultist, from believing each in his way; neither
 of the two convincing the other. The data furnished by history
 are too meagre and unsatisfactory for either of them to prove
 to the sceptic which of them is right.
 </p><p>
 On the other hand, the proofs afforded by tradition are too constantly
 rejected for us to hope to settle the question in our present
 age. Meanwhile, materialistic science will be laughing impartially
 at both Kabalists and Occultists. But the said vexed question
 of priority once laid aside, Science, in its departments of philology
 and comparative religion, will find itself finally taken to task,
 and be compelled to admit the common claim.* Its greatest scholars,
 instead of pooh-poohing that supposed
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * One by one the claims become admitted, as one Scientist after
 another is compelled to recognize the facts given out from the
 <em>Secret Doctrine</em> --<em> </em>though he rarely, if ever,
 recognizes that he has been anticipated in his statements. Thus,
 in the palmy days of Mr. Piazzi Smyth's authority on the Pyramid
 of Gizeh, his theory was, that the porphyry sarcophagus of the
 King's Chamber "<em>is the unit of measure for </em>the two
 most enlightened nations of the earth, England and America,"
 and was no better than a "corn bin." This was vehemently
 denied by us in <em>Isis Unveiled </em>just published at that
 time. Then the New York press arose in arms (the "<em>Sun</em>"<em>
 </em>and the "<em>World</em>"<em> </em>chiefly) against
 our presuming to correct or find fault with such a star of learning.
 On p. 519, vol. I., we had said, that Herodotus when treating
 of that Pyramid "might have added that, externally it symbolized
 <em>the</em> <em>creative principle of Nature</em>,<em> </em>and
 illustrated also the <em>principles of geometry</em>,<em> mathematics</em>,<em>
 astrology</em>,<em> and astronomy. </em>Internally, it was a majestic
 fane, in whose sombre recesses were performed the mysteries, and
 whose walls had often witnessed the initiation-scenes of members
 of the royal family. The porphyry sarcophagus, which Professor
 Piazzi Smyth, Astronomer Royal of Scotland, degrades into a corn-bin,
 was the <em>baptismal font</em>,<em> </em>upon emerging from which
 the neophyte was "born again" and became an adept."
 </p><p>
 Our statement was laughed at in those days. We were accused of
 having got our ideas from the "craze" of Shaw, an English
 writer who had maintained that the Sarcophagus had been used for
 the celebration of the Mysteries of Osiris; (we had never heard
 of that writer!). And now, six or seven years later, this is what
 Mr. Staniland Wake writes on p. 93 of his paper, on "The
 Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid."
 </p><p>
 "The so-called King's Chamber, of which an enthusiastic pyramidist
 says, 'The polished walls, fine materials, grand proportions,
 and exalted place, eloquently tell of glories yet to come -- if
 not, the chamber of perfections of Cheops' tomb, was probably
 <em>the place to which the initiant was admitted after he had
 passed through the narrow upward passage and the grand gallery</em>,<em>
 with its lowly termination</em>,<em> which gradually</em> <em>prepared
 him for the</em> [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 318 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 "farrago of absurd fiction and superstitions," as the
 Brahminical literature is generally termed, will endeavour to
 learn the symbolical universal language with its numerical and
 geometrical keys. But here again they will hardly be successful
 if they share the belief that the Jewish Kabalistic system contains
 the key to the <em>whole </em>mystery:<em> for</em>,<em> it does
 not. </em>Nor does any other Scripture at present possess it in
 its entirety, for even the Vedas are not complete. Every old religion
 is but a chapter or two of the entire volume of archaic primeval
 mysteries -- Eastern <em>Occultism </em>alone being able to boast
 that it is in possession of the full secret, with its<em> seven
 </em>keys. Comparisons will be instituted, and as much as possible
 will be explained in this work -- the rest is left to the student's
 personal intuition. For in saying that <em>Eastern Occultism has
 the secret</em>,<em> </em>it is not as if a "complete"
 or even an approximate knowledge was claimed by the writer, which
 would be absurd. What I know, I give out; that which I cannot
 explain, the student must find out for himself.
 </p><p>
 But while supposing that the whole cycle of the universal mystery
 language will not be mastered for whole centuries to come, even
 that which has been hitherto discovered in the Bible by some scholars
 is quite sufficient to demonstrate the claim -- mathematically.
 Judaism having availed itself of two keys out of the seven, and
 these two keys having been now rediscovered, it becomes no longer
 a matter of individual speculation and hypothesis, least of all
 of "coincidence," but one of a correct reading of the
 Bible texts, as anyone acquainted with arithmetic reads and verifies
 an addition or total.* A few years longer and this system will
 kill the dead letter of the Bible, as it will that of all the
 other exoteric faiths, by showing the dogmas in their real, naked
 meaning.
 </p><p>
 And then this undeniable meaning, however incomplete, will unveil
 the mystery of Being, besides changing entirely the modern scientific
 systems of Anthropology, Ethnology and especially that of Chronology.
 The element of Phallicism, found in every God-name and narrative
 in the Old (and to some degree in the New) Testament, may also
 in time considerably change modern materialistic views in Biology
 and Physiology.
 </p><p>
 Divested of their modern repulsive crudeness, such views of nature
 and man, on the authority of the celestial bodies and their mysteries,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] <em>final stage of the
 SACRED MYSTERIES.</em>"<em> </em>Had Mr. Staniland Wake been
 a Theosophist, he might have added that the narrow upward passage
 leading to the King's chamber had a "narrow gate" indeed;
 the same "strait gate" which "leadeth unto life,"
 or the new spiritual re-birth alluded to by Jesus in Matthew vii.
 13 <em>et seq; </em>and that it is this gate in the Initiation
 temple, that the writer who recorded the words alleged to have
 been spoken by an Initiate, was thinking of.
 </p><p>
 * All we have said in <em>Isis </em>is now found corroborated
 in the "Egyptian Mystery; or The Source of Measures,"
 by those readings of the Bible with the numerical and geometrical
 keys thereto.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 319 MOSES COPIED FROM SARGON.</h6>
 
 <p>
 will unveil the evolutions of the human mind and show how natural
 was such a course of thought. The so-called phallic symbols have
 become offensive only because of the element of materiality and
 animality in them. As they originated with the archaic races,
 which, issuing to their personal knowledge from an androgyne ancestry,
 were the first phenomenal manifestations in their own sight of
 the separation of sexes and the ensuing mystery of creating in
 their turn -- such symbols were but natural. If later races have
 degraded them, especially the "chosen people," this
 does not affect the origin of those symbols. The little Semitic
 tribe -- one of the smallest branchlets from the commingling of
 the 4th and 5th sub-races (the Mongolo-Turanian and the Indo-European,
 so-called, after the sinking of the great Continent) -- could
 only accept its symbology in the spirit which was given to it
 by the nations from which it was derived. Perchance, in the Mosaic
 beginnings, that symbology was not as crude as it became later
 under the handling of Ezra, who remodelled the whole Pentateuch.
 For the glyph of Pharaoh's daughter (the woman), the Nile (the
 Great Deep and Water), and the baby-boy found floating therein
 in the ark of rushes, has not been primarily composed for, or
 by, Moses. It has been found anticipated in the Babylonian fragments
 on the tiles, in the story of King Sargon,* who lived far earlier
 than Moses. Now, what is the logical inference? Most assuredly
 that which gives us the right to say that the story told of Moses
 by Ezra had been learned by him while at Babylon,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * On page 224 of <em>Assyrian Antiquities </em>Mr. George Smith
 says: "In the palace of Sennacherib at Kouyunjik I found
 another fragment of the curious history of Sargon. . . . published
 in my translation in the <em>Transactions of the Society of Biblical
 Archaeology</em>,<em> vol. I. part I.</em> <em>p</em>. 46."
 The capital of Sargon, the Babylonian Moses, "was the great
 city of Agadi, called by the Semitics Akkad -- mentioned in Genesis
 as the capital of Nimrod." (<em>Gen. x. </em>10)<em> </em>.
 . . "Akkad lay near the City of <em>Sippara </em>on the Euphrates
 and North of Babylon." (<em>See Isis</em>,<em> vol. II</em>.
 <em>p. </em>442-3,) Another strange <em>coincidence </em>is found
 in the fact that the name of the neighbouring above-mentioned
 City of <em>Sippara </em>is the same as the name of the wife of
 Moses -- <em>Zipporah </em>(Exodus ii.). Of course the story is
 a clever addition by Ezra, <em>who could not be ignorant of it.
 </em>This curious story is found on fragments of tablets from
 Kouyunjik, and reads as follows: --
 </p><p>
 1. Sargona, the powerful king, the king of Akkad am I.<br>
 2.<em> </em>My mother was a princess, my father I did not know;
 a brother of my father ruled over the country.<br>
 3. In the city of Azupiran, which is by the side of the River
 Euphrates.<br>
 4. My mother, the princess, conceived me; in difficulty she brought
 me forth.<br>
 5. She placed me in an ark of rushes, with bitumen my exit she
 sealed up.<br>
 6. She launched me in the river, which did not drown me.<br>
 7. The river carried me, to Akki the water-carrier it brought
 me.<br>
 8. Akki, the water-carrier, in tenderness of bowels, lifted me,
 etc., etc.
 </p><p>
 And now <em>Exodus </em>(ii): "And when she (Moses' mother)
 could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes,
 and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein,
 and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 320 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and that he applied the allegory told of Sargon to the Jewish
 lawgiver. In short, that <em>Exodus </em>was never written by
 Moses, but re-fabricated from old materials by Ezra.
 </p><p>
 And if so, then why should not other symbols and glyphs far more
 crude in their phallic element have been added by this adept in
 the later Chaldean and Sabaean phallic worship? We are taught
 that the primeval faith of the Israelites was quite different
 from that which was developed centuries later by the Talmudists,
 and before them by David and Hezekiah.
 </p><p>
 All this, notwithstanding the exoteric element, as now found in
 the two Testaments, is quite sufficient to class the Bible among
 esoteric works, and to connect its secret system with Indian,
 Chaldean, and Egyptian symbolism. The whole cycle of biblical
 glyphs and numbers as suggested by astronomical observations --
 astronomy and theology being closely connected -- is found in
 Indian exoteric, as well as esoteric, systems. These figures and
 their symbols, the signs of the Zodiac, the planets, their aspects
 and nodes -- the last term having now passed even into our modern
 botany to distinguish male and female plants (the unisexual, polygamous,
 monoecious, dioecious, etc., etc.) -- are known in astronomy as
 <em>sextiles</em>,<em> quartiles </em>and so on, and have been
 used for ages and aeons by the archaic nations, and in one sense
 have the same meaning as the Hebrew numerals. The earliest forms
 of elementary geometry must have certainly been suggested by the
 observation of the heavenly bodies and their groupings. Hence
 the most archaic symbols in Eastern Esotericism are a circle,
 a point, a triangle, a plane, a cube, a pentacle, and a hexagon,
 and plane figures with various sides and angles. This shows the
 knowledge and use of geometrical symbology to be as old as the
 world.
 </p><p>
 Starting from this, it becomes easy to understand how nature herself
 could have taught primeval mankind, even without the help of its
 divine instructors, the first principles of a numerical and geometrical
 symbol language.* Hence one finds numbers and figures used as
 an
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] "The story,"
 says Mr. G. Smith, "is supposed to have happened about 1600
 B.C. rather earlier than the supposed age of Moses. As we know
 that the fame of Sargon reached Egypt, it is quite likely that
 this account had a connection with the event related in <em>Exodus
 </em>ii., for every action, when once performed, has a tendency
 to be repeated." But now, when Professor Sayce has had the
 courage to push back the dates of the Chaldean and Assyrian Kings
 by two thousand years more, Sargon must have preceded Moses by
 2,000 years at the least. (See Professor Sayce's <em>Lectures
 </em>on<em> </em>the subject.) The confession is suggestive, but
 the figures lack a cypher or two.
 </p><p>
 * As a reminder how the <em>Esoteric </em>religion of Moses was
 crushed several times, and the worship of Jehovah, as re-established
 by David, put in its place, by Hezekiah for one, read pp. 436-42,
 vol. II., in <em>Isis Unveiled. </em>Surely there must have been
 some very [[Footnote continued on next page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 321 THE CROSS, A PHALLIC SYMBOL.</h6>
 
 <p>
 expression and a record of thought in every archaic symbolical
 Scripture. They are ever the same, with only certain variations
 growing out of the first figures. Thus the evolution and correlation
 of the mysteries of Kosmos, of its growth and development -- spiritual
 and physical, abstract and concrete -- were first recorded in
 geometrical changes of shape. Every Cosmogony began with a circle,
 a point, a triangle, and a cube, up to number 9, when it was synthesized
 by the first line and a circle -- the Pythagorean mystic <em>Decade</em>,<em>
 </em>the sum of all, involving and expressing the mysteries of
 the entire Kosmos; recorded a hundred times more fully in the
 Hindu system, for him who can understand its mystic language.
 The numbers 3 and 4, in their blending of 7, as those of 5, 6,
 9, and 10, are the very corner-stone of Occult Cosmogonies. This
 decade and its thousand combinations are found in every portion
 of the globe. One recognizes them in the caves and rock-cut temples
 of Hindostan and Central Asia, as in the pyramids and lithoi of
 Egypt and America; in the Catacombs of Ozimandyas, in the mounds
 of the Caucasian snowcapped fastnesses, in the ruins of Palenque,
 in Easter Island, everywhere whither the foot of ancient man has
 ever journeyed. The 3 and the 4, the triangle and the cube, or
 the male and female universal glyph, showing the first aspect
 of the evolving deity, is stamped for ever in the Southern Cross
 in the Heavens, as in the Egyptian <em>Crux-Ansata. </em>As well
 expressed, "The Cube unfolded is in display a cross of the
 <em>tau</em>,<em> </em>or Egyptian form, or of the Christian cross
 form. . . . A circle attached to the first, gives the <em>ansated
 cross</em>. . . numbers 3 and 4 counted on the cross, showing
 a form of the (Hebrew) golden candlestick (in the Holy of Holies),
 and of the 3 + 4 = 7, and 6 + 1 = 7, days in the <em>circle of
 the week</em>,<em> </em>as 7 lights of the sun. So also as the
 week of 7 lights gave origin to the <em>month </em>and<em> year</em>,<em>
 </em>so it is the <em>time marker of birth</em>. . . . The cross
 form being shown, then, by the connected use of the form 113 :
 355, the symbol is completed by the <em>attachment of a man to
 the cross.* </em>This<em> </em>kind of measure was made to co-ordinate
 with the idea of the <em>origin </em>of human life, and hence
 the <em>phallic form.</em>**"
 </p><p>
 The<em> Stanzas </em>show the cross and these numbers playing
 a prominent part in archaic cosmogony. Meanwhile we may profit
 by the evidence collected by the same author to show the identity
 of symbols and their esoteric meaning all over the globe, which
 he calls rightly the "primordial vestiges of these symbols."
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] good reasons why the
 Sadducees, who furnished almost all the high Priests of Judea,
 held to the Laws of Moses and spurned the alleged "Books
 of Moses," the Pentateuch of the Synagogue and the Talmud.
 </p><p>
 * Once more, remember the Hindu Wittoba crucified in space; the
 significance of the "sacred sign," the <em>Swastica;
 </em>Plato's Decussated man in Space, etc., etc.
 </p><p>
 ** "Source of Measures."</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 322 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 "Under the general view taken of the nature of the number
 forms. . . . it becomes a matter of research of the utmost interest
 as to when and where their existence and their use first became
 known. Has it been a matter of revelation in what we know as the
 historic age -- a cycle exceedingly modern when the age of the
 human race is contemplated? It seems, in fact, as to the date
 of its possession by man, to have been farther removed in the
 past from the old Egyptians than are the old Egyptians from us.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "The Easter Isles in 'mid Pacific' present the feature of
 the remaining peaks of the mountains of <i>a submerged continent</i>,<i>
 </i>for the reason that these peaks are thickly studded with Cyclopean
 statues, remnants of the civilization of a dense and cultivated
 people, who must have of necessity occupied a widely extended
 area. On the back of these images is to be found the '<i>ansated
 cross</i>'<i> </i>and the same modified to the outlines of the
 human form. A full description, with plate showing the land, with
 the thickly planted statues, also with copies of the images, is
 to be found in the January number 1870 of the London <i>Builder.</i>
 
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "In the '<i>Naturalist</i>,'<i> </i>published at Salem, Massachusetts,
 in one of the early numbers, is to be found a description of some
 very ancient and curious carving on the crest walls of the mountains
 of South America, older by far, it is averred, than the races
 now living. The strangeness of these tracings is in that they
 exhibit the outlines of a man stretched out on a cross,* by a
 series of drawings, by which from the form of <i>a man </i>that
 of <i>a cross </i>springs, but so done that the cross may be taken
 as the man, or the man as the cross; thus exhibiting a symbolic
 display of the interdependency of the forms set forth.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "It is known that tradition among the Aztecs has handed down
 a very perfect account of the <i>deluge</i>. . . . Baron Humboldt
 says that we are to look for the country of Aztalan, the original
 country of the Aztecs, as high up at least as the 42nd parallel
 north; whence, journeying, they at last arrived in the vale of
 Mexico. In that vale the earthen mounds of the far north become
 the elegant stone pyramidal and other structures whose remains
 are now found. The correspondences between the Aztec remains and
 those of the Egyptians are well known. . . . Attwater, from examination
 of hundreds of them, is convinced that they had a knowledge of
 astronomy. As to one of the most perfect of the pyramidal structures
 among the Aztecs, Humboldt gives a description to the following
 effect:
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "The form of this pyramid (of Papantla) which has <i>seven
 </i>stories, is more tapering than any other monument of this
 kind yet discovered, but its height is not remarkable, being but
 57 feet, its base but 25 feet on each side. However, it is remarkable
 on one account: it is built entirely of hewn stones, of an extraordinary
 size, and very beautifully shaped. <i>Three </i>staircases lead
 to the top, the steps of which are decorated with hieroglyphical
 sculptures and small <i>niches </i>arranged with great symmetry.
 The number of these niches seems to allude to the 318 <i>simple
 and compound signs of the days </i>of their civil calendar."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "318 is the Gnostic value of Christ," remarks the author,
 "and the famous number of the trained or circumcised servants
 of Abraham. When it is consi-
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * See farther on the description given of the early Aryan initiation:
 of Visvakarma crucifying the Sun, "Vikkartana," shorn
 of his beams -- on a cruciform lath.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 323 IDENTITY OF THE ANCIENT SYMBOLS.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 dered that 318 is an <i>abstract value</i>,<i> </i>and<i> universal</i>,<i>
 </i>as expressive of a diameter value to a circumference of <i>unity</i>,<i>
 </i>its use in the composition of the civil calendar becomes manifest."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Identical glyphs, numbers and esoteric symbols are found in Egypt,
 Peru, Mexico, Easter Island, India, Chaldea, and Central Asia.
 Crucified men, and symbols of the evolution of races from gods;
 and yet behold Science repudiating the idea of <em>a human race
 other than </em>one made in <em>our </em>image; theology clinging
 to its 6,000 years of Creation; anthropology teaching our descent
 from the ape; and the Clergy tracing it from Adam 4,004 years
 B.C.!!
 </p><p>
 Shall one, for fear of incurring the penalty of being called a
 superstitious fool, and even a <em>liar</em>, abstain from furnishing
 proofs -- as good as any -- only because that day, when all the
 SEVEN KEYS shall be delivered unto Science, or rather the men
 of learning and research in the symbological department, has not
 yet dawned? In the face of the crushing discoveries of Geology
 and Anthropology with regard to the antiquity of man, shall we
 -- in order to avoid the usual penalty that awaits every one who
 strays outside the beaten paths of either Theology or Materialism
 -- hold to the 6,000 years and "special creation," or
 accept in submissive admiration our genealogy and descent from
 the ape? Not so, as long as it is known that the secret records
 hold the said SEVEN keys to the mystery of the genesis of man.
 Faulty, materialistic, and biassed as the scientific theories
 may be, they are a thousand times nearer the truth than the vagaries
 of theology. The latter are in their death agony for every one
 but the most uncompromising bigot and fanatic.* Hence we have
 no choice but either to blindly accept the deductions of Science,
 or to cut adrift from it, and withstand it fearlessly to its face,
 stating what the Secret Doctrine teaches us, being fully prepared
 to bear the consequences.
 </p><p>
 But let us see whether Science in its materialistic speculations,
 and even theology in its death-rattle and supreme struggle to
 reconcile the 6,000 years since Adam with Sir Charles Lyell's
 "Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man," do not
 themselves give us unconsciously a helping hand. Ethnology, on
 the confession of some of its very learned votaries, finds it
 already impossible to account for the varieties in the human race,
 unless the hypothesis of the <em>creation of several Adams </em>be<em>
 </em>accepted. They speak of "a white Adam and a black Adam,
 a red
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Some of its defenders must have lost their reason, one would
 rather say. For what can one think when, in the face of <em>the
 dead-letter </em>absurdities of the Bible, these are still supported,
 publicly and as fiercely as ever, and one finds its theologians
 maintaining that though "the Scriptures carefully refrain
 (?) from making any direct contribution to scientific knowledge,
 <em>they have never stumbled </em>upon any statement <em>which
 will not abide the light of </em><strong>A</strong>DVANCING <strong>S</strong>CIENCE"!!!
 -- ("<em>Primeval Man</em>,"<em> </em>p. 14).</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 324 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Adam and a yellow Adam."* Were they Hindus enumerating the
 rebirths of Vamadeva from the <em>Linga Purana</em>,<em> </em>they
 could say little more. For, enumerating the repeated births of
 Siva, the latter show him in one Kalpa of a <em>white </em>complexion,
 in another of a <em>black </em>colour, in still another of a <em>red</em>
 colour, after which the Kumara becomes "four youths of a
 yellow colour." This strange <em>coincidence</em>,<em> </em>as
 Mr. Proctor would say, speak only in favour of scientific intuition,
 as Siva-Kumara represents only allegorically the human races during
 the genesis of man. But it led to another intuitional phenomenon
 -- in the theological ranks this time. The unknown author of "Primeval
 Man" in a desperate effort to screen the divine Revelation
 from the merciless and eloquent discoveries of geology and anthropology,
 remarking that "it would be unfortunate if the defenders
 of the Bible should be driven into the position of either surrendering
 the inspiration of Scripture, or denying the conclusions of geologists"
 -- finds a compromise. Nay, he devotes a thick volume to proving
 this fact: "Adam was not the <em>first man</em>**<em> </em>created
 upon this earth." . . . The exhumed relics of pre-Adamic
 man, "instead of shaking our confidence in Scripture, supply
 additional proof of its veracity" (<em>p.</em> 194). How
 so? In the simplest way imaginable; for the author argues that,
 henceforth "we" (the clergy) "are enabled to leave
 scientific men to pursue their studies without attempting to coerce
 them by the fear of heresy" . . . (this must be a relief
 indeed to Messrs. Huxley, Tyndall, and Sir C. Lyell). . . . "The
 Bible narrative <em>does not commence with creation</em>,<em>
 </em>as is commonly supposed, but with the formation of Adam and
 Eve, <em>millions of years after </em>our planet had been created.
 Its previous history, so far as Scripture is concerned, is yet
 unwritten." . . . . . "There may have been not one,
 but twenty different races upon the earth before the time of Adam,
 just as there may be twenty different races of men on other worlds"
 (p. 55). . . . Who, then, or what were those races, since the
 author still maintains that Adam is <em>the first man of our race?
 </em>It was THE SATANIC RACE AND RACES! "Satan (was) never
 in heaven, Angels and men (being) one species." It was the
 pre-Adamic race of "Angels that sinned." Satan was "the
 first Prince of this world," we read. Having died in consequence
 of his rebellion, he remained on earth as a <em>disembodied Spirit</em>,<em>
 </em>and tempted Adam and Eve. "The earlier ages of the Satanic
 race, and more especially <em>during the life-time of Satan </em>(<em>!!!</em>)
 may have been a period
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Primeval Man Unveiled, or the Anthropology of the Bible";
 author (unknown) of the "Stars and the Angels" 1870,
 p. 195.
 </p><p>
 ** Especially in the face of the evidence furnished by the authorized
 Bible itself in ch. iv. of <em>Genesis</em>,<em> v</em>. 16 <em>and
 </em>17, which shows Cain going to the land of Nod and there marrying
 a wife.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 325 THE IMPARTIALITY OF SCIENTIFIC DENIALS.
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 of patriarchal civilization and comparative repose -- a time of
 Tubal-Cains and Jubals, when both Sciences and arts attempted
 to strike their roots into the accursed ground. . . . . What a
 subject for an epic. . . . (when) there are inevitable incidents
 which must have occurred. We see before us . . . . the gay primeval
 lover wooing his blushing bride at dewy eve under the Danish oaks,
 that then grew where now no oaks will grow . . . . the grey primeval
 patriarch . . . . the primeval offspring innocently gambolling
 by his side. . . . . A thousand such pictures rise before us"!
 . . . . (pp. 206-207).
 </p><p>
 The retrospective glance at this <em>Satanic </em>"blushing
 bride" in the days of Satan's innocence, does not lose in
 poetry as it gains in originality. Quite the reverse. The modern
 Christian bride -- who does not often blush nowadays before her
 gay modern lovers -- might even derive a moral lesson from this
 daughter of Satan, in the exuberant fancy of her first human biographer.
 These pictures -- and to appreciate them at their true value they
 must be examined in the volume that describes them -- are all
 suggested with a view to reconcile the infallibility of revealed
 Scripture with Sir C. Lyell's "Antiquity of Man" and
 other damaging scientific works. But this does not prevent truth
 and fact appearing at the foundation of these vagaries, which
 the author has never dared to sign with his own, or even a borrowed
 name. For, his pre-Adamic races -- not Satanic but simply Atlantic,
 and the Hermaphrodites before the latter -- are mentioned in the
 Bible when read esoterically, as they are in the Secret Doctrine.
 The SEVEN KEYS open the mysteries, past and future, of the seven
 great Root Races, as of the seven Kalpas. Though the genesis of
 man, and even the esoteric geology, will surely be rejected by
 Science just as much as the Satanic and pre-Adamic races, yet
 if having no other way out of their difficulties the Scientists
 have to choose between the two, we feel certain that, Scripture
 notwithstanding, once the mystery language is approximately mastered,
 it is the archaic teaching that will be accepted.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 [[This page continued in next section]]</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-2-03.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>