<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 500 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h4>V.<br>
 THE THEORIES OF ROTATION IN SCIENCE.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>C</strong>ONSIDERING that "final cause is pronounced
 a chimera, and the first Great Cause is remanded to the Sphere
 of the Unknown," as a reverend gentleman justly complains,
 the number of hypotheses put forward, a nebula in itself, is most
 remarkable. The profane student is perplexed, and does not know
 in which of the theories of <em>exact </em>science he has to believe.
 Here we have hypotheses enough for every taste and power of brain.
 They are all extracted from a number of scientific volumes.
 </p><p>
 <strong>C</strong>URRENT <strong>H</strong>YPOTHESES EXPLAINING
 THE <strong>O</strong>RIGIN OF <strong>R</strong>OTATION.
 </p><p>
 Rotation has originated either --
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>)<em> </em>By the collision of nebular masses wandering
 aimlessly in space; or by <em>attraction</em>,<em> </em>"in
 cases where no actual impact takes place."
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>)<em> </em>"By the tangential action of currents
 of nebulous matter (in the case of an amorphous nebula) descending
 from higher to lower levels,* or<em> simply by the action of the
 central gravity of the mass.</em>"<em>**</em> 
 </p><p>
 "It is a fundamental principle in physics that <em>no rotation
 could be generated in such a mass by the action of its own parts.
 </em>As well attempt to change the course of a steamer by pulling
 at the deck railing," remarks to this Prof. Winchell in "World-Life."
 </p><p>
 <strong>H</strong>YPOTHESES OF THE <strong>O</strong>RIGIN OF
 THE <strong>S</strong>EVEN <strong>P</strong>LANETS AND <strong>C</strong>OMETS.
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) We owe the birth of the Planets (1) to an explosion
 of the Sun -- a parturition of its central mass;*** or (2) to
 some kind of disruption of the nebular rings.
 </p><p>
 (<em>b</em>) "The Comets are strangers to our planetary system"
 (<em>La Place</em>)<em>. </em>"The Comets are undeniably
 generated in our Solar system" (<em>Faye</em>)<em>.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 (<em>c</em>) The<em> </em>"<em>fixed</em> stars are motionless"
 says one authority. . . . "All the stars are actually in
 motion" answers another authority. . . "Undoubtedly
 every star is in motion" (<em>Wolf</em>)<em>.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (<em>d</em>) "For over 350,000,000 years, the slow and majestic
 movement of the Sun around its axis has never for a moment ceased"
 (<em>Panorama des Mondes</em>,<em> Le Couturier.</em>)
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * The terms "high" and "low" being only relative
 to the position of the observer in Space, any use of those terms
 tending to convey the impression that they stand for abstract
 realities, is necessarily fallacious.
 </p><p>
 **<em> Jacob Ennis</em>,<em> </em>"The Origin of the Stars,"
 p. 221 <em>et seq.</em> 
 </p><p>
 *** If such is the case, how does Science explain the comparatively
 small size of the planets nearest the Sun? The theory of meteoric
 aggregation is only a step farther from truth than the nebular
 conception, and has not even the quality of the latter -- its
 metaphysical element.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 501 CONTRADICTORY HYPOTHESES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 (<em>e</em>) And "the Sun having Alcyone in the Pleiades
 for the centre of its orbit, consumes 180,000,000 of years in
 completing its revolution" (<em>Maedler</em>)<em>. </em>And
 also,
 </p><p>
 (<em>f</em>) That, "<em>the Sun has existed no more than
 15</em><i>,</i><em>000</em><i>,</i><em>000 of years</em>,<em>
 </em>and will emit heat for no longer <em>than 10</em><i>,</i><em>000</em><i>,</i><em>000
 years more</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Sir W. Thomson</em>'<em>s
 lecture on </em>"<em>the latent dynamical theory regarding
 the probable origin</em>,<em> total amount of heat</em>,<em> and
 duration of the Sun</em>,"<em> </em>1887).
 </p><p>
 A few years ago this eminent Scientist was telling the world that
 the time required for the earth to cool from incipient incrustation
 to its present state, could not exceed 80,000,000 years<em>*</em>;<em>
 </em>(<em>Thomson and Tait</em>,<em> Natural Philosophy.</em>)
 If the encrusted age of the world is only 40 millions, or the
 half of the duration once allowed, and the Sun's age only 15 millions,
 have we to understand that the earth was at one time independent
 of the Sun?
 </p><p>
 Since the ages of the Sun, planets, and the Earth, as stated in
 the many scientific hypotheses of the astronomers and physicists,
 are given elsewhere (<em>infra</em>),<em> </em>we have said enough
 to show the disagreement between the ministers of modern Science.
 Whether we accept the <em>fifteen</em> million years of Sir W.
 Thomson or the <em>thousand </em>millions of Mr. Huxley, for the
 rotational evolution of our solar system, it will always come
 to this; by accepting <em>self-generated </em>rotation for the
 heavenly bodies composed of <i>inert </i>matter and yet moved
 by <em>their own internal motion</em>,<em> </em>for<em> </em>millions
 of years, this teaching of Science amounts to --
 </p><p>
 (<em>a</em>) An evident denial of that fundamental physical law,
 which states that "a body <em>in motion tends constantly
 to inertia</em>,<em> </em>(<em>i.e.</em>,<em> </em>to continue
 in the same state of motion or rest), unless it is stimulated
 into further action <em>by a superior active </em>force."
 </p><p>
 (<em>b.</em>)<em> </em>To an original impulse, which culminates
 in an unalterable motion, within a <em>resisting </em>ether that
 <strong>N</strong>EWTON had declared <em>incompatible with that
 motion.</em> 
 </p><p>
 (<em>c.</em>) Universal gravity, which, we are taught, always
 tends to a centre in<em> rectilinear </em>descent -- <em>alone
 </em>the cause of the revolution of the whole solar system, which
 is performing an eternal <em>double </em>gyration, each body around
 its axis and orbit. Another occasional version is: --
 </p><p>
 (<em>d.</em>)<em> </em>A magnet in the Sun; or, the said revolution
 due to a magnetic force, which acts, just as gravitation does,
 in a straight line -- varying inversely as the square of the distance.
 (Coulomb's Law.)
 </p><p>
 (<em>e.</em>) The whole acting under <em>invariable </em>and changeless
 laws, which are, nevertheless, often shown variable, as during
 some well-known freaks
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * And even on these figures Bischof disagrees with Thomson, and
 calculates that 350 million years would be required for the earth
 to cool from a temperature of 20,000 degrees to 200 degrees centigrade.
 This is, also, the opinion of Helmholtz.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 502 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 of planets and other bodies, as also when the Comets approach
 to or recede from the Sun.
 </p><p>
 (<em>f</em>.) <strong>A</strong> <strong>M</strong>OTOR <strong>F</strong>ORCE
 always <em>proportionate </em>to the mass it is acting upon; but
 <em>independent of the </em>specific nature of that mass, to which
 it is proportionate; which amounts to saying, as Le Couturier
 does, that, "without that Force independent from and of quite
 another nature than the said mass, the latter, were it as huge
 as Saturn, or as tiny as Ceres, would always fall with the same
 rapidity" (<em>Musee des Sciences</em>, 15 August, 1857).
 A mass, furthermore, which derives its weight from the body on
 which it weighs.
 </p><p>
 Thus neither Laplace's perceptions of a solar atmospheric fluid,
 which would extend beyond the orbits of the planets, nor Le Couturier's
 electricity, nor Foucault's heat (<em>Panorama des Mondes</em>,<em>
 </em>p. 55), nor this, nor the other, can ever help any of the
 numerous hypotheses about the origin and <em>permanency </em>of
 rotation to escape from this squirrel's wheel, any more than the
 theory of gravity itself. This mystery is the Procrustean bed
 of physical Science. If matter is, as now taught, passive, the
 simplest movement cannot be said to be an essential property of
 matter -- if the latter is simply an inert mass. How, then, can
 such a complicated movement, compound and multiple, harmonious
 and equilibrated, lasting in the eternities for millions and millions
 of years, be attributed simply to its own inherent Force, unless
 the latter is an <em>intelligence?</em> A<em> physical will </em>is
 something new -- a conception that the ancients would have never
 entertained, indeed!*
 </p><p>
 "We talk of the weight of the heavenly bodies," says
 an astronomer; "but since it is recognised that weight decreases
 in proportion to the distance from the centre, it becomes evident
 that, at a certain distance, that weight must be forcibly reduced
 to Zero? Were there any <em>attraction </em>there would be equilibrium
 . . . . And since the modern school recognizes neither a <em>beneath
 </em>nor an <em>above </em>in universal space, it is not clear
 what should cause the Earth to fall, were there even no gravitation,
 nor attraction." (<em>Cosmographie.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Methinks the Count de Maistre was right in solving the question
 in his own theological way. He cuts the Gordian knot by saying:
 -- "The
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * For over a century all distinction between body and force is
 made away with. "Force is but the property of a body in motion,"
 say the physicists; and "<em>life</em> --<em> </em>the property
 of our <em>animal</em> <em>organs</em> --<em> </em>is but the
 result of their molecular arrangement," answer the physiologists.
 "In the bosom of that aggregate which is named planet,"
 teaches Littre, "are developed all the forces immanent to
 matter . . . <em>i.e.</em>, that matter possesses <em>in itself
 </em>and<em> through itself </em>the forces that are proper to
 it . . . and which are <em>primary</em>, not<em> secondary. </em>Such
 forces are the property of weight, the property of electricity,
 of terrestrial magnetism, the property of life. . . . Every planet
 can develop life . . . as earth, for instance, which had not always
 mankind on it, and now bears (<em>produit</em>) men" . .
 <em>. </em>(<em>Revue des Deux Mondes</em>,<em> July </em>15,<em>
 </em>1860.) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 503 SCIENTIFIC ABERRATIONS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 planets rotate because <em>they are made to rotate </em>. . .
 . . and the modern physical system of the universe is a <em>physical
 impossibility.</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Soirees.</em>)<em> </em>For
 did not Herschell say the same thing when he remarked that there
 is a <em>will</em> needed to impart a circular motion, and <em>another
 will </em>to restrain <em>it? </em>(<em>Discours</em>,<em> </em>165.)
 This shows and explains how a <em>retarded </em>planet is cunning
 enough to calculate so well its time as to hit off its arrival
 at the fixed minute. For, if Science sometimes succeeds with its
 great ingenuity in explaining some of such stoppages, retrograde
 motions, angles outside the orbits, &amp;c., &amp;c., by appearances
 resulting from the inequality of their progress and ours in the
 course of our mutual and respective orbits, we still know that
 there are others, and "very real and considerable deviations,"
 according to Herschell, "which cannot be explained except
 by the mutual and irregular action of those planets and by the
 <em>perturbing </em>influence of the Sun."
 </p><p>
 We understand, however, that there are, besides those little and
 accidental perturbations, continuous perturbations called "secular"
 -- because of the extreme slowness with which the irregularity
 increases and affects the relations of the elliptic movement --
 and that these perturbations <em>can be corrected. </em>From Newton,
 who found that this world needed <em>repairing </em>very often,
 down to Reynaud, all say the same. In his <em>Ciel et Terre </em>(<em>p.
 </em>28), the latter speaks of --
 </p><p>
 ". . . . . The orbits described by the planets as being very
 far from immutable; on the contrary, subject to a perpetual mutation
 in their position and form," -- all prove gravitation and
 the peripatetic <em>laws </em>to<em> </em>be as negligent as they
 are quick to repair their mistakes. The charge as it stands seems
 to be that "they (the orbits) are alternately widening and
 narrowing, their great axis lengthens and diminishes, or oscillates
 at the same time from right to left around the Sun, the plane
 itself, in which they are situated, raising and lowering itself
 periodically while pivoting around itself with a kind of tremor.
 . . ."
 </p><p>
 To this, De Mirville, who believes in <em>intelligent </em>"workmen"
 ruling invisibly the solar system -- as we do -- observes very
 wittily* . . . . . "<em>Voila certes</em>,<em> </em>a voyage
 which has little in it of mechanical <em>rigour; </em>at the utmost,
 one could compare it to a steamer, pulled to and fro and tossed
 on the waves, retarded or accelerated, all and each of which impediments
 might put off its arrival indefinitely, were there not the intelligences
 of a pilot and engineers to catch up the time lost, and to repair
 the damages. . . . ."
 </p><p>
 The law of gravity, however, seems to be becoming an <em>obsolete
 </em>law in starry heaven. At any rate those long-haired sidereal
 <em>radicals</em>,<em> </em>called<em> </em>comets, appear to
 be very poor respecters of the majesty of that law,
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * <em>Deuxieme memoire</em>,<em> </em>"<em>Manifestations
 Historiques</em>,"<em> </em>p. 272.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 504 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and to beard it quite impudently. Nevertheless, and though presenting
 in nearly every respect "phenomena <em>not yet fully understood</em>,"<em>
 </em>comets and meteors are credited by the believers in modern
 Science with <em>obeying the same laws and consisting of the same
 matter</em>,<em> </em>"as the Suns, stars and nebulae,"
 and even "the earth and its inhabitants." (<em>Laing</em>'<em>s
 </em>"<em>Modern Science and Modern Thought.</em>")
 </p><p>
 This is what one might call taking things on trust, aye, even
 to <em>blind faith. </em>But<em> exact </em>Science is not to
 be questioned, and he who rejects the hypotheses imagined by her
 students -- gravitation, for instance -- would be regarded as
 an ignorant fool for it; yet we are told by the just cited author
 a queer legend from the scientific annals. "The comet of
 1811 had a tail 120 millions of miles in length and 25 millions
 of miles in diameter at the widest part, while the diameter of
 the nucleus was about 127,000 miles, more than ten times that
 of the earth." He tells us, "in order that bodies of
 this magnitude, passing near the earth, <em>should not affect
 its </em>motion or change the length of the year by even a single
 second, their actual substance must be inconceivably rare. . .
 ." It must be so indeed, yet: --
 </p><p>
 ". . . . . The extreme tenuity of a comet's mass is also
 proved by the phenomenon of the tail, which, as the comet approaches
 the sun, is thrown out sometimes to a length of 90 millions of
 miles in a few hours. And what is remarkable, THIS TAIL IS THROWN
 OUT AGAINST THE FORCE OF GRAVITY <em>by some repulsive force</em>,<em>
 </em>probably electrical, so that it always points away from the
 Sun (!!!) And yet, thin as the matter of comets must be, <em><b>IT
 OBEYS THE COMMON LAW OF GRAVITY</b> </em>(<em>!?</em>), and whether
 the comet revolves in an orbit within that of the outer planets,
 or shoots off into the abysses of Space, and returns only after
 hundreds of years, its path is, at each instant, regulated <em>by
 the same force as that which causes an apple to fall to the ground.</em>"<em>
 </em>(<em>Ibid</em>,<em> </em>p. 17.)
 </p><p>
 Science is like Caesar's wife, and must not be suspected -- this
 is evident. But it can be respectfully criticised, nevertheless.
 At all events, it may be reminded that "the apple" is
 a dangerous fruit. For the second time in the history of mankind,
 it may become the cause of the <em><b>FALL</b></em><b> </b>--<em>
 </em>this time, of "exact" Science. A comet whose tail
 defies the law of gravity right in the Sun's face can hardly be
 credited with obeying that law.
 </p><p>
 In a series of scientific works on Astronomy and the nebular theory,
 written between 1865 and 1866, the present writer, a poor tyro
 in Science, has counted in a few hours, no less <em>than thirty-nine
 contradictory hypotheses </em>offered as explanations for the
 self-generated, primitive rotatory motion of the heavenly bodies.
 The writer is no astronomer, no mathematician, no scientist; but
 was obliged to examine these errors in defence of Occultism, in
 general, and what is still more</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 505 THE PARADOXES OF SCIENCE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 important, in order to support the occult teachings concerning
 astronomy and Cosmology. Occultists were threatened with terrible
 penalties for questioning scientific truths. But now they feel
 braver -- Science is less secure in its "impregnable"
 position than they were led to expect, and many of its strongholds
 are built on very shifting sands.
 </p><p>
 Thus, even this poor and unscientific examination of it was useful,
 and it was certainly very instructive. We have learned a good
 many things, in fact, having studied with particular care especially
 those astronomical data that would be the most likely to clash
 with our heterodox and "superstitious" beliefs.
 </p><p>
 So, for instance, we have found there, concerning gravitation,
 the axial and orbital motions, that synchronous movement having
 been once overcome, in the early stage -- it was enough to originate
 a rotatory motion till the end of Manvantara. We have also come
 to know in all the aforesaid combinations of possibilities with
 regard to incipient rotation -- most complicated in every case,
 -- some of the causes <em>to which it may have been due</em>,<em>
 </em>as well as some others to which it <em>ought </em>and<em>
 should </em>have been due, but, in some way or other, was not.
 Among other things, we were informed that <em>incipient </em>rotation
 may be provoked with equal ease in a mass <em>in igneous fusion</em>,<em>
 </em>and in one that is characterised by <em>glacial opacity </em>("<em>Heaven
 and Earth</em>")<em>. </em>That gravitation is a law which
 <em>nothing can overcome</em>,<em> </em>but which, nevertheless,
 is overcome in and out of season by the most ordinary celestial
 or terrestrial bodies -- the tails of impudent comets, for instance.
 That we owe the universe to the holy creative Trinity, called
 <em>Inert Matter</em>,<em> Senseless Force </em>and <em>Blind
 Chance. </em>Of the real essence and nature of any of these three,
 Science knows nothing, but this is a trifling detail. <em>Ergo</em>,<em>
 </em>we are told that, when a mass of cosmic or nebular matter
 -- whose nature <em>is unknown </em>(entirely so), and which may
 be in a state of fusion (Laplace), or <em>dark and cold </em>(Thomson),
 for "this intervention of heat is itself a <em>pure hypothesis</em>"<em>
 </em>(Faye) -- decides to exhibit its mechanical energy under
 the form of rotation, it acts in this wise. It (the mass) either
 bursts into spontaneous conflagration, or it remains inert, tenebrous,
 and frigid, both states being equally capable of sending it, without
 <em>any adequate cause</em>,<em> </em>spinning through space for
 millions of years. Its movements may be retrograde and they may
 be direct, about a hundred various reasons being offered for both
 motions, in about as many hypotheses. Anyhow, joining the maze
 of stars, whose origin belongs to the same miraculous and spontaneous
 order -- for "the <em>nebular theory does not profess to
 discover the origin of things</em>,<em> </em>but only a <em>stadium
 </em>in material history" (<em>Winchell: World-Life</em>)
 --<em> </em>those millions of suns, planets, and satellites, composed
 of inert matter, will whirl on in most impressive and majestic
 symmetry around the firmament, moved</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 506 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 and guided only, their inertia notwithstanding, "<em>by their
 own internal motion.</em>"
 </p><p>
 Shall we wonder after this if learned mystics, pious Roman Catholics,
 and even such learned astronomers as were Chaubard and Godefroy,*
 have preferred the Kabala and the ancient systems to the modern
 dreary and contradictory exposition of the Universe? The <em>Zohar
 </em>makes a distinction, at any rate, between "the <em>hajaschar
 </em>("the light Forces"), the <em>hachoser </em>("Reflected
 Lights"), and the simple <em>phenomenal exteriority of </em>their
 spiritual types." (<em>See Kabala Denudata</em>, II, 67.)
 </p><p>
 The question of "gravity" may now be dismissed, and
 other hypotheses examined. That physical Science knows nothing
 of "Forces" is clear. We may close the argument, however,
 by calling to our help one more man of Science -- Professor Jaumes,
 Member of the Academy of Medicine at Montpellier. Says this learned
 man, speaking of Forces: --
 </p><p>
 "A cause is that which is essentially acting in the genealogy
 of phenomena, in every production as in every modification. I
 said that activity (or Force) was invisible. . . . To suppose
 it corporeal and <em>residing in the properties of matter </em>would
 be a gratuitous hypothesis. . . To reduce all the causes to God.
 . . . would amount to embarrassing oneself with a hypothesis hostile
 to many verities. But to speak of <em>a plurality of forces </em>proceeding
 from the Deity and possessing inherent powers of their own, is
 not unreasonable. . . . and I am disposed to admit phenomena produced
 by intermediate agents called Forces or Secondary Agents. The
 <em>distinction </em>of Forces is the principle of the division
 of Sciences; so many real and separate forces, so many mother-Sciences.
 . . . No: Forces are not suppositions and abstractions, but realities,
 and the only acting realities whose attributes can be determined
 with the help of direct observation and induction." ("<em>Sur
 la distinction des Forces</em>,"<em> </em>published in the
 <em>Memoires de l</em>'<em>Academie des Sciences de Montpellier</em>,<em>
 </em>Vol. II., fasc. I., 1854.)
 </p><p>
 --------------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * <em>L</em>'<em>Univers explique par la Reveation</em>,<em> and
 Cosmogonie de la Revelation. </em>But see De Mirville's Deuxieme
 Memoire. The author, a terrible enemy of Occultism, was yet one
 who wrote great truths. </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-06.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>