<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page 301]]</h6>
 
 <h4>BOOK I., PART II.</h4>
 
 <h5>THE</h5>
 
 <h2>EVOLUTION OF SYMBOLISM</h2>
 
 <h3>IN ITS APPROXIMATE ORDER.</h3>
 
 <p>
 ---------------------
 </p><h4>EXPLANATORY SECTIONS.</h4>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page 302]]</h6>
 
 <h4>CONTENTS.</h4>
 
 <p>
 §§ PAGE.
 </p><p>
 - - - - -
 </p><p>
 I. -- <strong>S</strong>YMBOLISM AND <strong>I</strong>DEOGRAPHS
 ... 303
 </p><p>
 II. -- <strong>M</strong>YSTERY <strong>L</strong>ANGUAGE ...
 310
 </p><p>
 III. -- <strong>P</strong>RIMORDIAL <strong>S</strong>UBSTANCE
 AND <strong>D</strong>IVINE <strong>T</strong>HOUGHT ... 325
 </p><p>
 IV. -- <strong>C</strong>HAOS, <strong>T</strong>HEOS, <strong>K</strong>OSMOS
 ... 342
 </p><p>
 V. -- <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>H</strong>IDDEN <strong>D</strong>EITY
 AND ITS <strong>G</strong>LYPHS ... 349
 </p><p>
 VI. -- <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>M</strong>UNDANE <strong>E</strong>GG
 ... 359
 </p><p>
 VII. -- <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>D</strong>AYS AND <strong>N</strong>IGHTS
 OF <strong>B</strong>RAHMA ... 368
 </p><p>
 VIII. -- <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>L</strong>OTUS AS A <strong>U</strong>NIVERSAL
 <strong>S</strong>YMBOL ... 379
 </p><p>
 IX. -- <strong>D</strong>EUS <strong>L</strong>UNUS ... 386
 </p><p>
 X. -- <strong>T</strong>REE AND <strong>S</strong>ERPENT AND <strong>C</strong>ROCODILE
 <strong>W</strong>ORSHIP ... 403
 </p><p>
 XI. -- <strong>D</strong>EMON EST <strong>D</strong>EUS <strong>I</strong>NVERSUS
 ... 411
 </p><p>
 XII. -- <strong>T</strong>HEOGONY OF THE <strong>C</strong>REATIVE
 <strong>G</strong>ODS ... 424
 </p><p>
 XIII. -- <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>S</strong>EVEN <strong>C</strong>REATIONS
 ... 445
 </p><p>
 XIV. -- <strong>T</strong>HE <strong>F</strong>OUR <strong>E</strong>LEMENTS
 OF THE <strong>A</strong>NCIENTS ... 460
 </p><p>
 XV. -- <strong>O</strong>N <strong>K</strong>WAN-<strong>S</strong>HI
 <strong>Y</strong>IN AND <strong>K</strong>WAN-<strong>Y</strong>IN
 ... 470</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page 303]]</h6>
 
 <h4>BOOK I. -- PART II.</h4>
 
 <h5>(SECRET DOCTRINE.)<br>
 § I.<br>
 SYMBOLISM AND IDEOGRAPHS.</h5>
 
 <blockquote>
 "A symbol is ever, to him who has eyes for it, some dimmer
 or clearer revelation of the God-like. Through all there glimmers
 something of a divine idea; nay, the highest ensign that men ever
 met and embraced under the cross itself, had no meaning, save
 an accidental extrinsic one." <strong>C</strong>ARLYLE.
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE study of the hidden meaning in every religious
 and profane legend, of whatsoever nation, large or small -- pre-eminently
 the traditions of the East -- has occupied the greater portion
 of the present writer's life. She is one of those who feel convinced
 that no mythological story, no traditional event in the folk-lore
 of a people has ever been, at any time, pure fiction, but that
 every one of such narratives has an actual, historical lining
 to it. In this the writer disagrees with those symbologists, however
 great their reputation, who find in every myth nothing save additional
 proofs of the superstitious bent of mind of the ancients, and
 believe that all mythologies sprung from and are built upon <em>solar
 myths. </em>Such superficial thinkers were admirably disposed
 of by Mr. Gerald Massey, the poet and Egyptologist, in a lecture
 on "Luniolatry, Ancient and Modern." His pointed criticism
 is worthy of reproduction in this part of this work, as it echoes
 so well our own feelings, expressed openly so far back as 1875,
 when "Isis Unveiled" was written.
 </p><blockquote>
 "For thirty years past Professor Max Muller has been teaching
 in his books and lectures, in the <i>Times </i>and various magazines,
 from the platform of the Royal Institution, the pulpit of Westminster
 Abbey, and his chair at Oxford, that mythology is a disease of
 language, and that the ancient symbolism was a result of something
 like a primitive aberration.
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "'We know,' says Renouf, echoing Max Muller, in his Hibbert
 lectures, 'we know that mythology <i>is</i> the disease which
 springs up at a peculiar stage of human culture.' Such is the
 shallow explanation of the non-evolutionists, and such explanations
 are still accepted by the British public, that gets its think-
 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 304 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 ing done by proxy. Professor Max Muller, Cox, Gubernatis, and
 other propounders of the Solar Mythos, have portrayed the primitive
 myth-maker for us as a sort of Germanised-Hindu metaphysician,
 projecting his own shadow on a mental mist, and talking ingeniously
 concerning smoke, or, at least, <i>cloud; </i>the sky overhead
 becoming like the dome of dreamland, scribbled over with the imagery
 of aboriginal nightmares! They conceive the early man in their
 own likeness, and look upon him as perversely prone to self-mystification,
 or, as Fontenelle has it, 'subject to beholding things that are
 not there.' They have misrepresented primitive or archaic man
 as having been idiotically misled from the first by an active
 but untutored imagination into believing all sorts of fallacies,
 which were directly and constantly contradicted by his own daily
 experience; a fool of fancy in the midst of those grim realities
 that were grinding his experience into him, like the grinding
 icebergs making their imprints upon the rocks submerged beneath
 the sea. It remains to be said, and will one day be acknowledged,
 that these accepted teachers have been no nearer to the beginnings
 of mythology and language than Burns' poet Willie had been near
 to Pegasus. My reply is, 'Tis but a dream of the metaphysical
 theorist that mythology was a disease of language, or of anything
 else except his own brain. The origin and meaning of mythology
 have been missed altogether by these solarites and weather-mongers!
 Mythology was a primitive mode of <i>thinking </i>the early thought.
 It was founded on natural facts, and is still verifiable in phenomena.
 There is nothing insane, nothing irrational in it, when considered
 in the light of evolution, and when its mode of expression by
 sign-language is thoroughly understood. The insanity lies in mistaking
 it for human history or Divine Revelation.* Mythology is the repository
 of man's most ancient science, and what concerns us chiefly is
 this -- when truly interpreted once more, it is destined to be
 the death of those false theologies to which it has unwittingly
 given birth.** In modern phraseology a statement is sometimes
 said to be mythical in proportion to its being untrue; but the
 ancient mythology was not a system or mode of falsifying in that
 sense. Its fables were the means of conveying facts; they were
 neither forgeries nor fictions. . . . For example, when the Egyptians
 portrayed the moon as a <i>Cat</i>,<i> </i>they were not ignorant
 enough to suppose that the moon was a cat; nor did their wandering
 fancies see any likeness in the moon to a cat; nor was a cat-myth
 any <i>mere expansion of verbal metaphor; </i>nor had they any
 intention of making puzzles or riddles. . . . They had observed
 the simple fact that the cat saw in the dark, and that her eyes
 became full-orbed, and grew most luminous by night. The moon was
 the <i>seer </i>by night in heaven, and the cat was its equivalent
 on the earth; and so the familiar cat was adopted as a representative,
 a natural sign, a living pictograph of the lunar orb. . . . And
 so it followed that the sun which saw down in the under-world
 at night could also be called the cat, as it was, because <i>it
 also saw </i>in the dark. The name of the
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * As far as <em>divine revelation </em>is concerned, we agree.
 Not so with regard to "<em>human history.</em>"<em>
 </em>. . . For there is "history" in most of the allegories
 and "myths" of India, and events, real actual events,
 are concealed under them.
 </p><p>
 ** When the "false theologies" disappear, then true
 prehistoric realities will be found, contained especially in the
 mythology of the Aryans -- ancient Hindoos, and even the pre-Homeric
 Hellenes.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 305 EMBLEM AND SYMBOL DIFFER.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 cat in Egyptian is <i>mau</i>, which denotes the <i>seer</i>,
 from<i> mau</i>, to see. One writer on mythology asserts that
 the Egyptians 'imagined a great cat behind the sun, which is the
 pupil of the cat's eye.' But this imagining is all modern. It
 is the Mullerite stock in trade. The moon <i>as cat </i>was the
 eye of the sun,<i> because</i> <i>it reflected the solar light</i>,<i>
 </i>and because the eye gives back image in its mirror. In the
 form of the goddess Pasht, the cat keeps watch for the sun, with
 her paw holding down and bruising the head of the serpent of darkness,
 called his eternal enemy. . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This is a very correct exposition of the lunar-mythos from its
 astronomical aspect. Selenography, however, is the least esoteric
 of the divisions of lunar Symbology. To master thoroughly -- if
 one is permitted to coin a new word -- <em>Selenognosis</em>,<em>
 </em>one must become proficient in more than its astronomical
 meaning. The moon (<em>vide</em> § VII. <em> Deus Lunus</em>)<em>
 </em>is intimately related to the Earth, as shown in Stanza VI.
 of Book I., and is more directly concerned with all the mysteries
 of our globe than is even Venus-Lucifer, the occult sister and
 <em>alter-ego </em>of the Earth.
 </p><p>
 The untiring researches of Western, and especially German, symbologists,
 during the last and the present centuries, have brought every
 Occultist and most unprejudiced persons to see that without the
 help of symbology (with its seven departments, of which the moderns
 know nothing) no ancient Scripture can ever be correctly understood.
 Symbology must be studied from every one of its aspects, for each
 nation had its own peculiar methods of expression. In short, no
 Egyptian papyrus, no Indian tolla, no Assyrian tile, or Hebrew
 scroll, should be read and accepted <em>literally.</em> 
 </p><p>
 This every scholar now knows. The able lectures of Mr. G. Massey
 alone are sufficient in themselves to convince any <em>fair-minded
 </em>Christian that to accept the dead-letter of the Bible is
 equivalent to falling into a grosser error and superstition than
 any hitherto evolved by the brain of the savage South Sea Islander.
 But the point to which even the most truth-loving and truth-searching
 Orientalists -- whether Aryanists or Egyptologists -- seem to
 remain blind, is the fact that every symbol in papyrus or <em>olla
 </em>is a many-faced diamond, each of whose facets not merely
 bears several interpretations, but relates likewise to several
 sciences. This is instanced in the just quoted interpretation
 of the moon symbolized by the cat -- an example of sidero-terrestrial
 imagery; the moon bearing many other meanings besides this with
 other nations.
 </p><p>
 As a learned Mason and Theosophist, the late Mr. Kenneth Mackenzie,
 has shown in his <em>Royal Masonic Cyclopaedia</em>,<em> </em>there
 is a great difference between <em>emblem </em>and<em> symbol.
 </em>The former "comprises a larger series of thoughts than
 a symbol, which may be said rather to illustrate some single special
 idea." Hence, the symbols (say lunar, or solar) of several
 countries, each illustrating such a special idea, or series of
 ideas, form collectively an esoteric emblem. The latter is "a
 concrete visible</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 306 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 picture or sign representing principles, or a series of principles,
 <em>recognizable by those who have received certain instructions</em>"<em>
 </em>(initiates). To put it still plainer, an emblem is <em>usually
 a series of graphic pictures </em>viewed and explained allegorically,
 and unfolding an idea in panoramic views, one after the other.
 Thus the Puranas are written emblems. So are the Mosaic and Christian
 Testaments, or the Bible, and all other exoteric Scriptures. As
 the same authority shows: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "All esoteric Societies have made use of emblems and symbols,
 such as the Pythagorean Society, the Eleusinian, the Hermetic
 Brethren of Egypt, the Rosicrucians, and the Freemasons. Many
 of these emblems it is not proper to divulge to the general eye,
 and <i>a very minute difference may make the emblem or symbol
 </i>differ widely in its meaning. The magical sigillae, being
 founded on certain principles of numbers, partake of this character,
 and although monstrous or ridiculous in the eyes of the uninstructed,
 convey a whole body of doctrine to those who have been trained
 to recognise them."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The above enumerated societies are all comparatively modern, none
 dating back earlier than the middle ages. How much more proper,
 then, that the students of the oldest Archaic School should be
 careful not to divulge secrets of far more importance to humanity
 (in the sense of being dangerous in the hands of the latter) than
 any of the so-called "Masonic Secrets," which have now
 become, as the French say, those of "Polichinelle!"
 But this restriction can apply only to the psychological or rather
 psycho-physiological and Cosmical significance of symbol and emblem,
 and even to that only partially. An adept must refuse to impart
 the conditions and means that lead to a correlation of elements,
 whether psychic or physical, that may produce a hurtful result
 as well as a beneficent one. But he is ever ready to impart to
 the earnest student the secret of the ancient thought in anything
 that regards history concealed under mythological symbolism, and
 thus to furnish a few more land-marks towards a retrospective
 view of the past, as containing useful information with regard
 to the origin of man, the evolution of the races and geognosy;
 yet it is the crying complaint of to-day, not only among theosophists,
 but also among the few profane interested in the subject. "Why
 do not the adepts reveal that which they know?" To this,
 one might answer, "Why should they, since one knows beforehand
 that no man of science will accept, even as an hypothesis, let
 alone as a theory or axiom, the facts imparted. Have you so much
 as accepted or believed in the A B C of the Occult philosophy
 contained in the <em>Theosophist</em>,<em> </em>"Esoteric
 Buddhism," and other works and periodicals? Has not even
 the little which was given, been ridiculed and derided, and made
 to face the "animal" and "ape theory" of Huxley
 -- Haeckel, on one hand, and the rib of Adam and the apple on
 the other? Notwithstanding such an unenviable prospect, a mass
 of facts is given in the present work. And now the origin of man,
 the evolution of the globe and </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 307 MAGIC POTENCY OF SOUND.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the races, human and animal, are as fully treated here as the
 writer is able to treat them.
 </p><p>
 The proofs brought forward in corroboration of the old teachings
 are scattered widely throughout the old scriptures of ancient
 civilizations. The Puranas, the Zendavesta, and the old classics
 are full of them; but no one has ever gone to the trouble of collecting
 and collating together those facts. The reason for this is, that
 all such events were recorded symbolically; and that the best
 scholars, the most acute minds, among our Aryanists and Egyptologists,
 have been too often darkened by one or another preconception;
 still oftener, by one-sided views of the secret meaning. Yet even
 a parable is a spoken symbol: a fiction or a fable, as some think;
 an allegorical representation, we say, of life-realities, events,
 and facts. And, as a moral was ever drawn from a parable, that
 moral being an actual truth and fact in human life, so an historical,
 real event was deduced -- by those versed in the hieratic sciences
 -- from certain emblems and symbols recorded in the ancient archives
 of the temples. The religious and esoteric history of every nation
 was embedded in symbols; it was never expressed in so many words.
 All the thoughts and emotions, all the learning and knowledge,
 revealed and acquired, of the early races, found their pictorial
 expression in allegory and parable. Why? Because <em>the spoken
 word has a potency unknown to</em>,<em> unsuspected and disbelieved
 in</em>,<em> </em>by the modern "sages." Because sound
 and rhythm are closely related to the four Elements of the Ancients;
 and because such or another vibration in the air is sure to awaken
 corresponding powers, union with which produces good or bad results,
 as the case may be. No student was ever allowed to recite historical,
 religious, or any real events in so many unmistakable words, lest
 the powers connected with the event should be once more attracted.
 Such events were narrated only during the Initiation, and every
 student had to record them in corresponding symbols, drawn out
 of his own mind and examined later by his master, before they
 were finally accepted. Thus was created in time the Chinese Alphabet,
 as, before that, the hieratic symbols were fixed upon in old Egypt.
 In the Chinese language, the alphabet of which may be read in
 any language,* and which is only a little less ancient than the
 Egyptian alphabet of Thoth, every word has its corresponding symbol
 conveying the word needed in a pictorial form. The language possesses
 many thousands of such symbol letters, or logograms, each meaning
 a whole word; for letters proper, or an alphabet, do not exist
 in the Chinese language any more than they did in the Egyptian
 till a far later period.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Thus, a Japanese who does not understand one word of Chinese,
 meeting with a Chinaman who has never heard the language of the
 former, will communicate in writing with him, and they will understand
 each other perfectly -- because the writing is symbolical.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 308 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 The explanation of the chief symbols and emblems is now attempted,
 as Book II., which treats of Anthropogenesis, would be most difficult
 to understand without a preparatory acquaintance with the metaphysical
 symbols at least.
 </p><p>
 Nor would it be just to enter upon an esoteric reading of symbolism
 without giving due honour to one who has rendered it the greatest
 service in this century, by discovering the chief key to ancient
 Hebrew symbology, interwoven strongly with metrology, one of the
 keys to the once universal mystery language. Mr. Ralston Skinner,
 of Cincinnati, the author of "The Hebrew-Egyptian Mystery
 and the Source of Measures" has our thanks. A mystic and
 a Kabalist by nature, he has laboured for many years in this direction,
 and his efforts were certainly crowned with great success. In
 his own words: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "The writer is quite certain that there was an ancient language
 which modernly and up to this time appears to have been lost,
 the vestiges of which, however, abundantly exist. . . . The author
 discovered that this (integral ratio in numbers of diameter to
 circumference of a circle) geometrical ratio was the very ancient,
 and probably the divine origin of linear measures. . . . It appears
 almost proven that the same system of geometry, numbers, ratio,
 and measures were known and made use of on the continent of North
 America, even prior to the knowledge of the same by the descending
 Semites. . . . ."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "The peculiarity of this language was that it could be contained
 in another, concealed and not to be perceived, save through the
 help of special instruction; letters and syllabic signs possessing
 at the same time the powers or meaning of numbers, of geometrical
 shapes, pictures, or ideographs and symbols, the designed scope
 of which would be determinatively helped out by parables in the
 shape of narratives or parts of narratives; while also it could
 be set forth separately, independently, and variously, by pictures,
 in stone work, or in earth construction."
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "To clear up an ambiguity as to the term language: Primarily
 the word means the expression of ideas by human speech; but, secondarily,
 it may mean the expression of ideas by any other instrumentality.
 This old language is so composed in the Hebrew text, that by the
 use of the written characters, which will be the language first
 defined, a distinctly separated series of ideas may be intentionally
 communicated, other than those ideas expressed by the reading
 of the sound signs. This secondary language sets forth, under
 a veil, series of ideas, copies in imagination of things sensible,
 which may be pictured, and of things which may be classed as real
 without being sensible; as, for instance, the number 9 may be
 taken as a reality, though it has no sensible existence, so also
 a revolution of the moon, as separate from the moon itself by
 which that revolution has been made, may be taken as giving rise
 to, or causing a real idea, though such a revolution has no substance.
 This idea-language may consist of symbols restricted to arbitrary
 terms and signs, having a very limited range of conceptions, and
 quite valueless, or it may be a reading of nature in some of her
 manifestations of a value almost immeasurable, as regards human
 civilization. A picture of something natural may give rise to
 ideas of co-ordina- 
 </blockquote>
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 309 MYSTERY LANGUAGE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 tive subject-matter, radiating out in various and even opposing
 directions, like the spokes of a wheel, and producing natural
 realities in departments very foreign to the apparent tendency
 of the reading of the first or starting picture. Notion may give
 rise to connected notion, but if it does, then, however apparently
 incongruous, all resulting ideas must spring from the original
 picture and be harmonically connected, or related. . . . Thus
 with a pictured idea radical enough, the imagination of the Cosmos
 itself even in its details of construction might result. Such
 a use of ordinary language is now obsolete, but it has become
 a question with the writer whether at one time, far back in the
 past, it, or such, was not the language of the world and of universal
 use, possessed, however, as it became more and more moulded into
 its arcane forms, by a select class or caste. By this I mean that
 the popular tongue or vernacular commenced even in its origin
 to be made use of as the vehicle of this peculiar mode of conveying
 ideas. Of this the evidences are very strong; and, indeed, it
 would seem that in the history of the human race there happened,
 from causes which at present, at any rate, we cannot trace, a
 lapse or loss from an original perfect language and a perfect
 system of science -- shall we say perfect because they were of
 divine origin and importation?"
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 "Divine origin" does not mean here a revelation from
 an anthropomorphic god on a mount amidst thunder and lightning;
 but, as we understand it, a language and a system of science imparted
 to the early mankind by a more advanced <em>mankind</em>,<em>
 </em>so much higher as to be <em>divine </em>in the sight of that
 infant humanity. By a "mankind," in short, from other
 spheres; an idea which contains nothing supernatural in it, but
 the acceptance or rejection of which depends upon the degree of
 conceit and arrogance in the mind of him to whom it is stated.
 For, if the professors of modern knowledge would only confess
 that, though they know nothing of the future of the disembodied
 man -- or rather will accept nothing -- yet this future may be
 pregnant with surprises and unexpected revelations to them, once
 their Egos are rid of their gross bodies -- then materialistic
 unbelief would have fewer chances than it has. Who of them knows,
 or can tell, what may happen when once the life cycle of this
 globe is run down and our mother earth herself falls into her
 last sleep? Who is bold enough to say that the <em>divine Egos
 </em>of<em> </em>our mankind -- at least the elect out of the
 multitudes passing on to other spheres -- <em>will not become
 in their turn </em>the "divine" instructors of a new
 mankind generated by them on a new globe, called to life and activity
 by the disembodied "principles" of our Earth? (See Stanza
 VI., Book I., Part 1.) All this may have been the experience of
 the <b>P</b>AST, and these strange records lie embedded in the
 "Mystery language" of the prehistoric ages, the language
 now called <strong>S</strong>YMBOLISM.
 </p><p>
 --------------</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-2-05.htm">Next Chapter</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>