<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite><a name="DDE_LINK1"></a><a name="DDE_LINK3"></a><a name="DDE_LINK4"></a><a name="DDE_LINK5"></a><a name="DDE_LINK7"></a><a name="DDE_LINK8"></a><a name="DDE_LINK9"></a><a name="DDE_LINK11"></a>The
 Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol. 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 482 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <h4>II.<br>
 MODERN PHYSICISTS ARE PLAYING AT BLIND MAN'S BUFF.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>A</strong>ND now Occultism puts to Science the question:
 "Is light a body, or is it not?" Whatever the answer
 of the latter, the former is prepared to show that, to this day,
 the most eminent physicists know neither one way nor the other.
 To know what is light, and whether it is an actual substance or
 a mere undulation of the "ethereal medium," Science
 has first to learn what are in reality Matter, Atom, Ether, Force.
 Now, the truth is, that <em>it knows nothing of any of these</em>,<em>
 </em>and admits it. It has not even agreed what to believe in,
 as dozens of hypotheses emanating from various and very eminent
 Scientists on the same subject, are antagonistic to each other
 and often self-contradictory. Thus their learned speculations
 may, with a stretch of good-will, be accepted as "working
 hypotheses" in a secondary sense, as Stallo puts it. But
 being radically inconsistent with each other, they must finally
 end by mutually destroying themselves. As declared by the author
 of "Concepts of Modern Physics": --
 </p><blockquote>
 "It must not be forgotten that the several departments of
 Science are simply <i>arbitrary divisions of labour. </i>In these
 several departments the same physical object may be considered
 under different aspects. The physicist may study its molecular
 relations, while the chemist determines its atomic constitution.
 But when they both deal with the same element or agent, it cannot
 have one set of properties in physics, and another set contradictory
 of them, in chemistry. If the physicist and chemist alike assume
 the existence of ultimate atoms absolutely invariable in bulk
 and weight, <i>the atom cannot be a cube or oblate spheroid for
 physical</i>,<i> and</i> <i>a sphere for chemical purposes. A
 group of constant atoms cannot be an</i> <i>aggregate of extended
 and absolutely inert and impenetrable masses in a crucible or
 retort</i>,<i> and a system of mere centres of force as part of
 a magnet or of a Clamond battery. The universal Ether cannot be
 soft and mobile to please the chemist</i>,<i> and rigid-elastic
 to satisfy the physicist; it cannot be continuous at the command
 of Sir William Thomson and discontinuous on the suggestion of
 Cauchy or Fresnel.</i>"<i>*</i> 
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 The eminent physicist, G. A. Hirn, may likewise be quoted saying
 the same in the 43rd Volume of the <i>Memoires de l</i>'<i>Academie
 Royale de Belgique</i>,<i> </i>which we translate from the French,
 as cited: "When one sees the assurance with which are to-day
 affirmed doctrines which attribute the collectivity, the universality
 of the phenomena to the motions alone of the atom, one has a right
 to expect to find likewise unanimity on the qualities described
 to this unique being, the foundation of all that exists. Now,
 from the first examination of the particular systems proposed,
 one feels the strangest deception; one perceives that the atom
 of the chemist, the atom of the physicist, that of the metaphysician,
 and that of the mathematician . . . . have <i>absolutely nothing
 in common but the</i> <i>name!</i> The inevitable result is the
 existing
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Concepts of Modern Physics," p. xi-xii., Introd.
 to the 2nd Edit.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 483 NO AGREEMENT AMONG SCIENTISTS.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 subdivision of our sciences, each of which, in its own little
 pigeon-hole, constructs an atom which satisfies the requirements
 of the phenomena it studies, without troubling itself in the least
 about the requirements proper to the phenomena of the neighbouring
 pigeon-hole. The metaphysician banishes the principles of attraction
 and repulsion as dreams; the mathematician, who analyses the laws
 of elasticity and those of the propagation of light, admits them
 implicitly, without even naming them. . . . The chemist cannot
 explain the grouping of the atoms, in his often complicated molecules,
 without attributing to his atoms specific distinguishing qualities;
 <i>for the physicist and the metaphysician</i>,<i> partisans of
 the modern doctrines</i>,<i> the atom is</i>,<i> on the contrary</i>,<i>
 always and everywhere the same. </i>What am I saying? <strong>T</strong>HERE
 IS NO AGREEMENT EVEN IN ONE AND THE SAME SCIENCE AS TO THE PROPERTIES
 OF THE ATOM. Each constructs an atom to suit his own fancy, in
 order to explain some special phenomenon with which he is particularly
 concerned."*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The above is the photographically correct image of modern Science
 and physics. The "pre-requisite of that incessant play of
 the 'scientific imagination,' " which is so often found in
 Professor Tyndall's eloquent discourses, is <em>vivid</em> indeed,
 as shown by Stallo, and for contradictory variety leaves far behind
 it any "phantasies" of occultism. However it may be,
 if physical theories are confessedly "mere formal, explanatory,
 didactic devices," and if "atomism is only a symbolical
 graphic system,"** then the occultist can hardly be regarded
 as assuming too much, when he places alongside of these <em>devices
 </em>and<em> </em>"<em>symbolical </em>systems" of modern
 Science, the symbols and devices of Archaic teachings.
 </p><p>
 --------------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<em>Recherches experimentales sur la relation qui existe
 entre la resistance de Pair et sa temperature</em>,"<em>
 </em>p. 68.
 </p><p>
 ** From the criticism of "Concepts of Modern Physics"
 in <em>Nature. </em>See Stallo's work, p. xvi. of <em>Introduction.</em>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-03.htm">Next Section</a> 
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>