<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 668 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 [[This page continued from <a href="sd1-3-17.htm">previous section</a>]]
 </p><h4>XVIII.<br>
 SUMMARY OF THE MUTUAL POSITION.</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HE reader has had the whole case presented to
 him from both sides, and it remains with him to decide whether
 its summary stands in our favour or not. If there were such a
 thing as void, a <em>vacuum </em>in Nature, one would find it
 produced, according to a physical law, in the minds of helpless
 admirers of the "lights" of science, who pass their
 time in mutually destroying their teachings. If ever the theory
 that "two lights make darkness" found its application
 it is in this case, when one half of the "lights" imposes
 its Forces and "modes of motion" on the belief of the
 faithful, and the other half opposes the very existence of the
 same. "Ether, Matter, Energy" -- the sacred hypostatical
 trinity, the three principles of the truly <em>unknown </em>God
 of Science, called by them <strong>P</strong>HYSICAL <strong>N</strong>ATURE!
 </p><p>
 Theology is taken to task and ridiculed for believing in the union
 of three persons in one Godhead -- one God as to substance, three
 persons as to individuality; and we are laughed at for our belief
 in unproved and unprovable doctrines, in Angels and Devils, Gods
 and Spirits. And,</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 669 THE EXACT SCIENCES OF -- NEGATION.</h6>
 
 <p>
 indeed, that which made the Scientists win the day over Theology
 in the Great "Conflict between Religion and Science,"
 was precisely the argument that neither the identity of that substance,
 nor the triple individuality claimed, after having been conceived,
 invented, and worked out in the depths of Theological Consciousness,
 could be proved by any Scientific inductive process of reasoning,
 least of all on the evidence of our senses. Religion must perish,
 it is said, because it teaches <em>mysteries. Mystery is the negation
 of Common Sense</em>,<em> </em>and Science repels it. According
 to Mr. Tyndall, metaphysics is <em>fiction</em>,<em> </em>like
 poetry. The man of Science <em>takes nothing on trust; </em>rejects
 everything <em>that is not proven to him</em>,<em> </em>while
 the Theologian accepts <em>everything on blind faith. </em>The
 Theosophist and the Occultist, who take nothing on trust, not
 even <em>exact </em>Science, the Spiritualist who denies dogma
 but believes in Spirits and in <em>invisible but potential influences</em>,<em>
 </em>all share in the same contempt. Very well, then; what we
 have to do now, is to examine for the last time whether <em>exact
 </em>Science does not act precisely in the same way as Theosophy,
 Spiritualism, and Theology do.
 </p><p>
 In a work by Mr. S. Laing, considered a standard book on Science,
 "Modern Science and Modern Thought," the author of which,
 according to the laudatory review of the <em>Times</em>,<em> </em>"exhibits
 with much power and effect the immense discoveries of Science,
 and its numerous victories over old opinions, whenever THEY HAVE
 THE RASHNESS TO CHALLENGE CONCLUSIONS WITH IT," one reads
 in chapter <b>III.</b>, "On Matter," as follows:
 </p><p>
 "<strong>W</strong>HAT IS THE MATERIAL UNIVERSE COMPOSED
 OF? <strong>ETHER</strong>, <strong>MATTER</strong>, <strong>ENERGY"</strong>
 . . . . . is the answer.
 </p><p>
 We stop to ask, "What is Ether?" And Mr. Laing answers
 in the name of Science: --
 </p><p>
 "<em>Ether is not actually known to us </em>BY ANY TEST OF
 WHICH THE SENSES CAN TAKE COGNIZANCE, <em>but is a</em> <em>sort
 of mathematical substance which </em>WE ARE COMPELLED TO ASSUME
 <em>in order to account for the phenomena of light and heat.</em>"
 </p><p>
 And [[sic]] what is matter? Do you know more about it than you
 do about the "hypothetical" agent, Ether?
 </p><p>
 "<em>In perfect strictness</em>,<em> it is true that chemical
 investigations can tell us </em>. . . . NOTHING DIRECTLY <em>of
 the composition of living matter</em>,<em> and </em>. . . . <em>it
 is also in strictness true</em>,<em> </em>THAT WE KNOW NOTHING
 <em>about the composition of </em>ANY<em> </em>(<em>material</em>)<em>
 </em>BODY WHATEVER AS IT IS." (<em>Lecture on Protoplasm
 by Mr. Huxley.</em>)
 </p><p>
 And Energy? Surely you can define the third person of the Trinity
 of your Material universe?
 </p><p>
 "<strong>T</strong>HE <strong>E</strong>NERGY IS THAT WHICH
 IS ONLY KNOWN TO US BY ITS EFFECTS<em>.</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Books
 on Physics.</em>)
 </p><p>
 Pray explain, for this is rather hazy.
 </p><p>
 "<b>I</b>N MECHANICS THERE IS ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL ENERGY:
 WORK </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 670 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 ACTUALLY PERFORMED, AND THE CAPACITY FOR PERFORMING IT. <b>A</b>S
 TO THE NATURE OF MOLECULAR <b>E</b>NERGY OR <b>F</b>ORCES, THE
 VARIOUS PHENOMENA WHICH BODIES PRESENT SHOW THAT THEIR MOLECULES
 ARE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF TWO CONTRARY FORCES -- ONE WHICH TENDS
 TO BRING THEM TOGETHER, THE OTHER TO SEPARATE THEM. . . . . <b>T</b>HE
 FIRST IS MOLECULAR ATTRACTION, THE SECOND FORCE IS DUE TO <em>vis
 viva</em>,<em> </em>OR MOVING FORCE." . . . <em>. </em>(<em>Ganot's
 Physics</em>.)
 </p><p>
 Just so: it is the nature of this <em>moving force</em>,<em> </em>the<em>
 vis viva </em>that we want to know. What is it? . . . . .
 </p><p>
 "<strong>WE DO NOT KNOW</strong>!" IS THE INVARIABLE
 ANSWER. "<b>I</b>T IS AN EMPTY SHADOW OF MY IMAGINATION,"
 explains Mr. Huxley in his <em>Physical Basis of Life.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Thus the whole structure of Modern Science is built on a kind
 of "mathematical abstraction," on a Protean "Substance
 which eludes the senses," (Dubois Reymond,) and on <em>effects</em>,<em>
 </em>the shadowy and illusive will-o'-the-wisps of a <em>something
 </em>entirely unknown to and beyond the reach of Science, "<em>Self</em>-<em>moving</em>"<em>
 </em>atoms!<em> Self</em>-<em>moving </em>Suns, planets, and stars!
 But who, then, or <em>what </em>are they all, if they are self-endowed
 with motion? Why then should you, physicists, laugh and deride
 our "Self-moving <em>ARCHAEUS"? </em>Mystery is rejected
 and scorned by Science, and<em> </em>"<em>MYSTERY is the
 fatality of Science</em>,"<em> </em>as Father Felix has truly
 said. . . . . Science <em>cannot </em>escape it!" The language
 of the French preacher is <em>ours</em>,<em> </em>and we quote
 it in "<em>Isis Unveiled</em>"<em> </em>(<em>Vide </em>Vol.
 I. 338-9). Who -- he asks -- who of you, men of Science:
 </p><blockquote>
 ". . . . has been able to penetrate the secret of the formation
 of a body, the generation of a single atom? What is there, I will
 not say at the centre of a sun, but at the centre of an atom?
 Who has sounded to the bottom the abyss in a grain of sand? The
 grain of sand, gentlemen, has been studied four thousand years
 by science, she has turned and returned it; she divides it and
 subdivides it; she torments it with her experiments; she vexes
 it with her questions to snatch from it the final word as to its
 secret constitution; she asks it, with an insatiable curiosity:
 'Shall I divide thee infinitesimally?' Then suspended over this
 abyss, science hesitates, she stumbles, she feels dazzled, she
 becomes dizzy, and in despair says: <strong><i>I DO NOT KNOW</i></strong><i>.</i>"
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 "But if you are so fatally ignorant of the genesis and hidden
 nature of a grain of sand, how should you have an intuition as
 to the generation of a single living being? Whence in the living
 being does life come? Where does it commence? What is the life
 principle?"*
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 Do the men of science deny all these charges? Not at all, for
 here is a confession of Tyndall, which shows how powerless is
 science, even over the world of matter.
 </p><blockquote>
 "The first marshalling of the atoms, on which all subsequent
 action depends,
 </blockquote>
 
 <h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Le Mystere et la Science," Conferences, <em>Pere
 Felix</em> <em>de Notre Dame</em>; des Mousseaux: "<em>Hauts
 Phen. Magiques.</em>" </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 671 NO VOID POSSIBLE.</h6>
 
 <blockquote>
 baffles a keener power than that of the microscope." "Through
 pure excess of complexity, and long before observation can have
 any voice in the matter, the most highly trained intellect, the
 most refined and disciplined imagination, <i>retires in bewilderment
 from the contemplation of the problem. </i>We are struck dumb
 by an astonishment which no microscope can relieve, doubting not
 only the power of our instrument, but even whether we ourselves
 possess the intellectual elements which will ever enable us to
 grapple with the ultimate structural energies of nature."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 How little is known of the material universe, indeed, has now
 been suspected for years, on the very admissions of these men
 of science themselves. And now there are some materialists who
 would even make away with Ether -- or whatever Science calls the
 infinite Substance, the noumenon of which the Buddhists call Swabhavat
 -- as well as with atoms, too dangerous both on account of their
 ancient philosophical and their present Christian and theological
 associations. From the earliest philosophers whose records passed
 to posterity, down to our present age, which, if it denies "invisible
 Beings" in Space, can never be so insane as to deny a <em>plenum
 </em>of some sort -- the<em> fulness </em>of the universe was
 an accepted belief. And what it was said to contain, one learns
 from Hermes Trismegistus (in Mrs. Kingsford's able rendering)
 -- who is made to say: --
 </p><p>
 "Concerning the void . . . my judgment is that it does not
 exist, that it never existed, and that it never will exist, for
 all the various parts of the universe are filled, as the earth
 also is complete and full of bodies, differing in quality and
 in form, having their species and their magnitude, one larger,
 one smaller, one solid, one tenuous. The larger . . . are easily
 perceived; the smaller . . . are difficult to apprehend, or altogether
 invisible. We know only of their existence by the sensation of
 feeling, wherefore <em>many persons deny such entities to be bodies</em>,<em>
 and regard them as simply spaces</em>,*<em> </em>but it is impossible
 there should be such spaces. For if indeed there should be anything
 outside the universe . . . then it would be a space occupied by
 intelligent beings analogous to its (the universe's) divinity
 . . . . . . I speak of the genii, for I hold they dwell with us,
 and of the heroes who dwell above us, between the earth and the
 highest airs; wherein are neither clouds nor any tempest"
 (p. 84).
 </p><p>
 And we "hold" it too. Only, as already remarked, no
 Eastern Initiate would speak of spheres "<em>above </em>us,
 between the earth and the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Behold the work of Cycles and their periodical return! Those
 who denied such "Entities" (Forces) to be bodies, and
 called them "Spaces," were the prototypes of our modern
 "Science-struck" public, and their official teachers,
 who speak of the Forces of nature as the imponderable energy of
 matter and modes of motion, and yet bold electricity (for one)
 as being as <em>atomic as matter </em>itself -- (Helmholtz). Inconsistency
 and contradiction reign as much in official as in heterodox Science.
 </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 672 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 airs," even the highest, as there is no such division or
 measurement in <em>occult </em>speech, no "<em>above</em>"<em>
 </em>as no "<em>below</em>,"<em> </em>but an eternal
 "within," <em>within two other withins</em>,<em> </em>or
 the planes of subjectivity merging gradually into that of terrestrial
 objectivity -- this being for <em>man </em>the last one, his own
 plane. This necessary explanation may be closed here by giving,
 in the words of Hermes, the belief on this particular point of
 the whole world of mystics: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "There are many orders of the gods; and in all there is an
 intelligent part. It is not to be supposed they do not come within
 the range of our senses; on the contrary, we perceive them, better
 even than those which are called visible. . . There are then gods,
 superior to all appearances; after them come the gods whose principle
 is spiritual; these gods being sensible, in conformity with their
 double origin, <i>manifest all things </i>by a sensible nature,
 each of them illuminating his works one by another.* The Supreme
 Being of Heaven, or of all that is comprehended under this name,
 is Zeus, for it is by Heaven that Zeus gives life to all things.
 The Supreme Being of <i>the Sun</i> <i>is Light</i>,<i> </i>for
 it is by the disk of the Sun that we receive the benefit of the
 light. The thirty-six horoscopes of the fixed stars have for supreme
 Being or Prince, him whose name is <i>Pantomorphos</i>,<i> </i>or
 having all forms, because he gives divine forms to divers types.
 The seven planets, or wandering spheres, have for Supreme Spirits
 Fortune and Destiny, who uphold the eternal stability of the laws
 of nature throughout incessant transformation and perpetual agitation.
 The ether is the instrument or medium by which all is produced."
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 This is quite philosophical and in accordance with the spirit
 of Eastern esotericism: for all the Forces, such as Light, Heat,
 Electricity, etc., etc., are called the "Gods" -- esoterically.
 </p><p>
 It must be so, since the esoteric teachings in Egypt and India
 were identical. And, therefore, the personification of <em>Fohat
 </em>synthesizing all the manifesting forces in nature is a legitimate
 result. Moreover, as will be shown in the division that follows
 this one, the real and <em>Occult </em>forces in nature only now
 begin to be known -- and even in this case, by heterodox, not
 orthodox, Science (<em>See also </em>ยง X., <strong>T</strong>HE
 <strong>C</strong>OMING <strong>F</strong>ORCE), though their
 existence, in one instance at any rate, is corroborated, and certified
 to by an immense number of educated people and even by some official
 men of science.
 </p><p>
 This sentence, moreover, in Stanza <b>VI</b>., "Fohat sets
 in motion the primordial World-germs, or the aggregation of Cosmic
 atoms and matter, some one way, some another, in the opposite
 direction" -- looks orthodox and Scientific enough. For there
 is, at all events, one fact in support of this position fully
 recognized by Science, and it is this. The meteoric showers (periodical
 in November and August) belong to
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Hermes here includes as gods the <em>sensible Forces </em>of
 nature, the elements and the phenomena of the Universe,"
 remarks Mrs. A. Kingsford in a foot-note explaining it very correctly.
 So does Eastern philosophy.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 673 THE ALIASES OF FOHAT.</h6>
 
 <p>
 a system moving in an elliptical orbit around the Sun. The aphelion
 of this ring is 1,732 millions of miles beyond the orbit of Neptune,
 its plane is inclined to the Earth's orbit at an angle of 64 [[degrees]]
 3', and the direction of the meteoric swarm moving round this
 orbit <em>is contrary to that of the Earth</em>'<em>s revolution.</em>
 
 </p><p>
 This fact, recognized only in 1833, shows it to be the modern
 rediscovery of what was very anciently known. <em>Fohat </em>turns
 with his two hands in contrary directions the "seed"
 and "the curds," or Cosmic matter; is turning, in clearer
 language, particles in a highly attenuated condition, and nebulae.
 </p><p>
 Outside the boundaries of the solar system, it is other Suns,
 and especially the mysterious "central Sun" (the "Abode
 of the invisible deity" as some reverend gentlemen have called
 it) that determines the motion of bodies and their direction.
 That motion serves also to differentiate the homogeneous matter,
 round and between the several bodies, into elements and sub-elements
 unknown to our earth, which are regarded by modern Science as
 distinct individual elements, whereas they are merely temporary
 appearances, changing with every small cycle within the Manvantara,
 some Esoteric works calling them "Kalpic Masks."
 </p><p>
 <em>Fohat </em>is the key in Occultism which opens and unriddles
 the multiform symbols and respective allegories in the so-called
 mythology of every nation; demonstrating the wonderful philosophy
 and the deep insight into the mysteries of nature, in the Egyptian
 and Chaldean as well as in the Aryan religions. Fohat, shown in
 his true character, proves how deeply versed were all those prehistoric
 nations in every science of nature, now called physical and chemical
 branches of natural philosophy. In India, Fohat is the scientific
 aspect of both Vishnu and Indra, the latter older and more important
 in the Rig Veda than his sectarian successor; while in Egypt Fohat
 was known as Toum issued of Noot,* or Osiris in his character
 of a primordial god, creator of heaven and of beings (see chapter
 xvii., "<em>Book of the Dead</em>")<em>. </em>For<em>
 Toum </em>is spoken of as the <em>Protean </em>god who <em>generates
 other gods </em>and gives himself the form he likes; the "master
 of life" "giving their vigour to the gods" (chapter
 lxxix.) He is the <em>overseer </em>of the gods, and he "who
 creates spirits and gives them shape and life"; he is "the
 <em>north wind </em>and the <em>spirit of the west</em>;"<em>
 </em>and finally the "Setting Sun of Life," or the vital
 electric force that leaves the body at death, wherefore the <em>defunct
 </em>begs that Toum should give him the breath from his <em>right
 </em>nostril (positive elec-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "Oh Toum, Toum! issued from the great (female) which is
 in the bosom of the waters" (the great Deep or <em>Space</em>)<em>
 . </em>. . "Thou, luminous through the <em>two Lions</em>"<em>
 </em>(the dual Force or power of the two <em>solar eyes</em>,<em>
 </em>or the electro-positive and the electro-negative forces.
 (See <em>Book of</em> <em>the Dead</em>,<em> III.</em>,<em> </em>and
 <em>Egyptian Pantheon</em>,<em> </em>chapter ii.)</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 674 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 tricity) that he might live in his <em>second </em>form. Both
 the hieroglyph, and the text of chapter lxii. in the "<em>Book
 of the Dead</em>,"<em> </em>show the identity of Toum with
 Fohat. The former represents a man standing erect with the hieroglyph
 <em>of the breaths </em>in his hands. The latter says: --
 </p><blockquote>
 "I open to the chief of An (Heliopolis), I am Toum. I cross
 the water spilt by Thot-Hapi, the lord of the horizon, and am
 the <i>divider of the earth</i>"<i> </i>(Fohat divides Space
 and, with his <i>Sons</i>,<i> </i>the earth into seven zones)
 . . . .
 </blockquote>
 
 <blockquote>
 . . . . "I cross the heavens, and am the two Lions. I am
 <i>Ra</i>, I am <i>Aam</i>,<i> </i>I ate my heir.* . . . . I glide
 on the soil of the field of <i>Aanroo</i>,**<i> </i>given me by
 the master of limitless eternity. I am the germ of eternity. I
 am Toum, to whom eternity is accorded. . . . "
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 The very words used by Fohat in the <b>XI</b>th Book, and the
 very titles given him. In the Egyptian Papyri the whole Cosmogony
 of the Secret Doctrine is found scattered about in isolated sentences,
 even in the "Book of Dead." Number seven is quite as
 much insisted upon and emphasized therein as in the <em>Book of
 Dzyan. </em>"The Great Water (the Deep or Chaos) is said
 to be <em>seven </em>cubits deep" -- "cubits" standing
 here of course for divisions, zones, and principles. Therein,
 "in the great mother, all the Gods, and the <em>seven great
 ones </em>are born." (See chapter cviii., 4, <em>Book of
 the Dead </em>and<em> Egyptian Pantheon</em>)<em>. </em>Both Fohat
 and Toum are addressed as the "Great ones of the Seven Magic
 Forces," who, "conquer the Serpent <em>Apap</em>"<em>
 </em>or Matter.
 </p><p>
 No student of occultism, however, ought to be betrayed, by the
 usual phraseology used in the translations of Hermetic Works,
 into believing that the ancient Egyptians or Greeks spoke of,
 and referred, monk-like, at every moment in conversation, to a
 Supreme Being, God, the "One Father and Creator of all,"
 etc., as found on every page of such translations. No such thing
 indeed; and those texts <em>are not the original Egyptian </em>texts.
 They are Greek compilations, the earliest of which does not go
 beyond the early period of Neo-Platonism. No Hermetic
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * An image expressing the succession of divine functions, the
 substitution from one form into another, or the <em>correlation
 of forces. Aam </em>is the electro-positive force, devouring all
 others as Saturn devoured his progeny.
 </p><p>
 **<em> Aanroo </em>is in the domain of Osiris, a field divided
 into <em>fourteen </em>sections "surrounded with an <em>iron</em>
 enclosure, within which grows the <em>corn of life seven </em>cubits
 high," the <em>Kama</em>-<em>loka </em>of the Egyptians.
 Those only of the dead, who know the names of the janitors of
 the "seven halls," will be admitted into Amenti <em>for
 ever; i.e.</em>,<em> </em>those who have passed through the seven
 races of each round -- otherwise they will rest in the <em>lower
 fields; </em>"and it represents also the seven successive
 Devachans, or <em>lokas. </em>In<em> </em>Amenti, one becomes
 pure spirit for the eternity (xxx. 4.); while in <em>Aanroo </em>"the
 soul of the spirit," or the defunct, is <em>devoured </em>each
 time by <em>Uraeus </em>--<em> </em>the Serpent, Son of the earth
 (in another sense the primordial vital principles in the Sun),
 <em>i.e.</em>, the Astral body of the deceased or the "Elementary"
 fades out and disappears in the "Son of the earth,"
 <em>limited </em>time. The soul quits the fields of Aanroo and
 goes on earth under any shape it likes to assume. (See chapter
 xcix., <em>Book of the Dead.</em>) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 675 THE GODS OF EGYPT.</h6>
 
 <p>
 work written by Egyptians (<em>vide</em> "Book of the Dead")
 would speak of the one universal God of the Monotheistic systems
 -- the one <em>Absolute </em>cause of all, was as unnameable and
 unpronounceable in the mind of the ancient philosopher of Egypt,
 as it is for ever <em>Unknowable </em>in the conception of Mr.
 Herbert Spencer. As for the Egyptian in general, as M. Maspero
 well remarks, whenever he "arrived at the notion of divine
 Unity, the God One was never 'God,' simply." And Lepage Renouf
 very justly observed that the word <em>Nouter</em>,<em> nouti</em>,<em>
 </em>"god" had never ceased <em>being a generic name
 </em>with the Egyptians, nor has it ever become a personal pronoun.
 Every God was the "one living and unique God" with them.
 Their "monotheism was purely geographical. If the Egyptian
 of Memphis proclaimed the unity of Phtah to the exclusion of Ammon,
 the Thebeian Egyptian proclaimed the unity of Ammon to the exclusion
 of Phtah," as we now see done in India in the case of the
 Saivas and the Vaishnavas. "<em>Ra</em>, the 'One God' at
 Heliopolis is not the same as Osiris, the 'One God' at Abydos,
 and can be worshipped side by side with him, without being absorbed
 by his neighbour. The one god is but the god of the <em>nome </em>or
 the city,<em> noutir</em>,<em> noutti</em>,<em> </em>and does
 not exclude the existence of the one god of that town or of the
 neighbouring nome. In short, whenever speaking of Egyptian Monotheism,
 one ought to speak of the Gods '<em>One</em>'<em> </em>of Egypt,
 and not of the one god" (Maspero, in the <em>Guide au Musee
 de Boulak.) </em>It is by this feature, pre-eminently Egyptian,
 that the authenticity of the various so-called <em>Hermetic Books</em>,<em>
 </em>ought to be tested; and it is totally absent from the Greek
 fragments known as such. This proves that a Greek Neo-Platonic,
 or even a Christian hand, had no small share in the editing of
 such works. Of course the fundamental philosophy is there, and
 in many a place -- intact. But the style has been altered and
 smoothed in a monotheistic direction, as much, if not more than
 that of the Hebrew Genesis in its Greek and Latin translations.
 They <em>may </em>be<em> Hermetic </em>works, but not works written
 by either of the two Hermes -- or rather, by Thot (Hermes) the
 directing intelligence of the Universe (<em>See ch. xciv.</em>,<em>
 Book of the Dead</em>),<em> </em>or by Thot, his terrestrial incarnation
 called Trismegistus, of the Rosetta stone.
 </p><p>
 But all is doubt, negation, iconoclasm and brutal indifference,
 in our age of the hundred "isms" and no religion. Every
 idol is broken save the Golden Calf.
 </p><p>
 Unfortunately, no nation or nations can escape their Karmic fate
 any more than units and individuals do. History itself is dealt
 with by the so-called historians as unscrupulously as legendary
 lore. For this, Augustin Thierry has made the <em>amende honorable</em>,<em>
 </em>if one may believe his biographers. He deplored the erroneous
 principle that made them all (the <em>would</em>-<em>be </em>historiographers)
 lose their way, and each presume to</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 676 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 correct tradition, "that <em>vox populi </em>which nine times
 out of ten is<em> vox Dei</em>;"<em> </em>and he finally
 admitted that <em>in legend alone rests real history; </em>for
 "legend," he adds, "is <em>living</em> tradition,
 and three times out of four it is truer than what we call History."*
 </p><p>
 While Materialists deny everything in the universe, save matter,
 Archaeologists are trying to dwarf antiquity, and seek to destroy
 every claim to ancient Wisdom by tampering with Chronology. Our
 present-day Orientalists and Historical writers are to ancient
 History that which the white ants are to the buildings in India.
 More dangerous even than those Termites, the modern Archaeologists
 -- the "authorities" of the future in the matter of
 Universal History -- are preparing for the History of past nations
 the fate of certain edifices in tropical countries: "History
 will tumble down and break into atoms in the lap of the twentieth
 century, devoured to its foundations by her annalists," said
 Michelet. Very soon, indeed, under their combined efforts, it
 will share the fate of those ruined cities in both Americas, which
 lie deeply buried under impassable virgin forests. Historical
 facts will remain as concealed from view by the inextricable jungles
 of modern hypotheses, denials and scepticism. But very happily
 <em>actual </em>History repeats herself, for she proceeds, like
 everything else, in cycles; and dead facts and events deliberately
 drowned in the sea of modern scepticism will ascend once more
 and reappear on the surface. . . .
 </p><p>
 In our Book II. the very fact that a work with pretensions to
 philosophy, and which is an exposition of the most abstruse problems,
 has to be commenced by tracing the evolution of mankind from what
 <em>are </em>regarded as supernatural beings -- <em>Spirits </em>--<em>
 </em>will arouse the most malevolent criticism. Believers in,
 and the defenders of, the Secret Doctrine, however, will have
 to bear the accusation of madness <em>and worse</em>,<em> </em>as<em>
 </em>philosophically as for long years already the writer has
 done. Whenever a Theosophist is taxed with insanity, he ought
 to reply by quoting from Montesquieu's "<em>Lettres Persanes.</em>"<em>
 </em>"By opening so freely their lunatic asylums to their
 supposed madmen, men only seek to assure each other that they
 are not themselves mad." </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------
 </p><p>
 *<em> Revue des Deux Mondes</em>,<em> </em>1865,<em> pp</em>.
 157 <em>and </em>158.
 </p><p>
 <strong>E</strong>ND OF <strong>V</strong>OL. <b>I</b>.</p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a> 
 </p></body>