<body>
 
 
 
 <h5><cite>The Secret Doctrine</cite> by H. P. Blavatsky -- Vol.
 1</h5>
 
 <hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 601 HERMES AND KANT.</h6>
 
 <h4>XIV.<br>
 FORCES -- MODES OF MOTION OR INTELLIGENCES?</h4>
 
 <p>
 <strong>T</strong>HIS is, then, the last word of physical science
 up to the present year, 1888. Mechanical laws will never be able
 to prove the homogeneity of primeval matter, except inferentially
 and as a desperate necessity, when there will remain no other
 issue -- as in the case of Ether. Modern Science is secure only
 in its own domain and region; within the physical boundaries of
 our solar system, beyond which everything, every particle of matter,
 is different from the matter it knows: which matter exists in
 states of which Science can form no idea. <em>That </em>matter,
 which is truly homogeneous, is beyond human perceptions, if perception
 is tied down merely to the five senses. We feel its effects through
 those INTELLIGENCES which are the results of its primeval differentiation,
 whom we name Dhyan-Chohans; called in the Hermetic works the "Seven
 Governors," those to whom Pymander, the "Thought Divine,"
 refers as the Building Powers, and whom Asklepios calls the "Supernal
 Gods." That matter -- the real primordial substance, the
 noumenon of all the "matter" we know of, -- even some
 of the astronomers have been led to believe in, and to despair
 of the possibility of ever accounting for rotation, gravitation,
 and the origin of any mechanical physical laws -- unless these
 <em>Intelligences </em>be admitted by Science. In the above-quoted
 work upon astronomy, by Wolf,* the author endorses fully the theory
 of Kant, and the latter, if not in its general aspect, at any
 rate in some of its features, reminds one strongly of certain
 esoteric teachings. Here we have the world's system <em>reborn
 from its ashes</em>,<em> </em>through a nebula; the emanation
 from the bodies, dead and dissolved in Space -- resultant of the
 <em>incandescence </em>of the solar centre reanimated by the combustible
 matter of the planets. In this theory, generated and developed
 in the brain of a young man hardly twenty-five years of age, who
 had never left his native place, a small town of Northern Prussia
 (Konigsberg) one can hardly fail to recognise either an inspiring
 external power, or the <em>reincarnation </em>which the Occultists
 see in it. It fills a gap which Newton, with all his genius, failed
 to bridge. And surely it is our primeval matter, Akasa, that Kant
 had in view, when proposing to solve Newton's difficulty and his
 failure to explain, by the natural forces, the primitive impulse
 imparted to the planets, by the postulation of a universally pervading
 primordial substance. For, as he remarks in chapter viii., if
 it is once admitted that the perfect harmony of the stars and
 planets and
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * "<strong>L</strong>ES <strong>H</strong>YPOTHESES <strong>C</strong>OSMOGONIQUES.
 <em>Examen des Theories Scientifiques modernes sur l</em>'<em>Origine
 des Mondes</em>,<em> suivi de la Traduction de la Theorie du Ciel
 de Kant.</em>"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 602 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 the coincidence of their orbital planes prove the existence of
 a natural cause, which would thus be the primal cause, "that
 cause <em>cannot really be the matter which fills to</em>-<em>day
 the heavenly spaces.</em>"<em> </em>It must be that which
 filled space -- was space -- originally, whose motion in differentiated
 matter was the origin of the actual movements of the sidereal
 bodies; and which, "<em>in condensing itself in those very
 bodies</em>,<em> </em>thus abandoned the space that is found void
 to-day." In other words, it is that same matter of which
 are now composed the planets, comets, and the Sun himself, which,
 having in the origin formed itself into those bodies, has preserved
 its inherent quality of motion; which quality, now centred in
 their nuclei, directs all motion. A very slight alteration of
 words is needed, and a few additions, to make of this our Esoteric
 Doctrine.
 </p><p>
 The latter teaches that it is this original, primordial <em>prima
 materia</em>,<em> </em>divine and intelligent, the direct emanation
 of the Universal Mind -- the <em>Daiviprakriti </em>(the divine
 light emanating from the <em>Logos</em>*)<em> </em>-- which formed
 the nuclei of all the "self-moving" orbs in Kosmos.
 It is the informing, ever-present moving-power and life-principle,
 the vital soul of the suns, moons, planets, and even of our Earth.
 The former latent: the last one active -- the invisible Ruler
 and guide of the gross body attached to, and connected with, its
 Soul, which is the spiritual emanation, after all, of these respective
 planetary Spirits.
 </p><p>
 Another quite occult doctrine is the theory of Kant, that the
 matter of which the inhabitants and the animals of other planets
 are formed is of <em>a lighter and more subtle nature and of a
 more perfect conformation in proportion to their distance from
 the Sun. </em>The latter is too full of Vital Electricity, of
 the physical, life-giving principle. Therefore, the men on Mars
 are more ethereal than we are, while those of Venus are more gross,
 though far more intelligent, if less spiritual.
 </p><p>
 The last doctrine is not quite ours -- yet those Kantian theories
 are as metaphysical, and as transcendental as any occult doctrines;
 and more than one man of Science would, if he but <em>dared </em>speak
 his mind, accept them as Wolf does. From this Kantian mind and
 soul of the Suns and Stars to the <strong>M</strong>AHAT (mind)
 and Prakriti of the Puranas, there is but a step. After all, the
 admission of this by Science would be only the admission of a
 natural cause, whether it would or would not stretch its belief
 to such metaphysical heights. But then <em>Mahat</em>,<em> </em>the
 MIND, is a "God," and physiology admits "mind"
 only as a temporary function of the material brain, and no more.
 </p><p>
 The Satan of Materialism now laughs at all alike, and denies the
 visible as well as the invisible. Seeing in light, heat, electricity,
 and even in the <em>phenomenon of life</em>,<em> </em>only properties
 inherent in matter, it
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Which "Light" we call <em>Fohat.</em> </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 603 THE VITAL PRINCIPLE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 laughs whenever life is called <strong>V</strong>ITAL <strong>P</strong>RINCIPLE,
 and derides the idea of its being independent of and distinct
 from the organism.
 </p><p>
 But here again scientific opinions differ as in everything else,
 and there are several men of science who accept views very similar
 to ours. Consider, for instance, what Dr. Richardson, <b>F.R.S</b>.
 (elsewhere quoted at length) says of that "Vital principle,"
 which he calls "nervous ether" ("<em>Popular Science
 Review</em>,"<em> Vol. </em>10): --
 </p><blockquote>
 "I speak only of a veritable <i>material agent</i>,<i> </i>refined,
 it may be, to the world at large, but <i>actual and substantial</i>:
 an agent having quality of weight and of volume, an agent susceptible
 of chemical combination, and thereby of change of physical state
 and condition, an agent passive in its action, moved always, that
 is to say, by influences apart from itself,* obeying other influences,
 an agent possessing no initiative power, no <i>vis or</i> <i>energia
 naturae</i>,**<i> </i>but still playing a most important, if not
 a primary part in the production of the phenomena resulting from
 the action of the <i>energeia </i>upon visible matter" (<i>p.</i>
 379).
 </blockquote>
 
 <p>
 As Biology and Physiology now deny, <em>in toto</em>,<em> </em>the
 existence of a "vital principle," this extract, together
 with de Quatrefages' admission, is a clear confirmation that there
 are men of science who take the same views about "things
 occult" as theosophists and occultists do. These recognise
 a distinct vital principle independent of the organism -- material,
 of course, <em>as physical force cannot be divorced from matter</em>,<em>
 </em>but of a substance existing in a state unknown to Science.
 <em>Life for them is something more than the mere interaction
 of molecules and atoms. </em>There is a vital principle without
 which no molecular combinations could ever have resulted in a
 living organism, least of all in the so-called "inorganic"
 matter of our plane of consciousness.
 </p><p>
 By "molecular combinations" is meant, of course, those
 of the matter of our present illusive perceptions, which matter
 energises only on this, our plane. And this is the chief point
 at issue.***
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * This is a mistake, which implies a material agent, distinct
 from the influences which move it, <em>i.e.</em> blind matter
 and perhaps "God" again, whereas this ONE Life is the
 very God and Gods "Itself."
 </p><p>
 ** The same error.
 </p><p>
 *** "Is the <em>Jiva </em>a myth, as science says, or is
 it not?" ask some Theosophists, wavering between materialistic
 and idealistic Science. The difficulty of really grasping esoteric
 problems concerning the "ultimate state of matter" is
 again the old crux of the<em> objective</em> and the <em>subjective.
 </em>What is matter? Is the matter of our present objective consciousness
 anything but our SENSATIONS? True, the sensations we receive come
 <em>from without</em>, but can we really (except in terms of phenomena)
 speak of the "gross matter" of this plane as an entity
 apart from and independent of us? To all such arguments Occultism
 answers: True, in<em> reality</em> matter is not independent of,
 or existent outside, our perceptions. Man is an <em>illusion</em>:<em>
 </em>granted. But the existence and actuality of other, still
 more illusive, but not less <em>actual</em>, entities than we
 are, is not a claim which is lessened, but rather strengthened
 by this doctrine of Vedantic and even Kantian Idealism.</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 604 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Thus the Occultists are not alone in their beliefs. Nor are they
 so foolish, after all, in rejecting even the "gravity"
 of modern Science along with other <em>physical </em>laws, and
 in accepting instead <em>attraction </em>and <em>repulsion. </em>They
 see, moreover, in these two opposite Forces only the two<em> aspects
 </em>of the universal unit, called "<strong>M</strong>ANIFESTING
 <strong>M</strong>IND"; in which aspects, Occultism, through
 its great Seers, perceives an innumerable Host of operative Beings:
 Cosmic Dhyan-Chohans, Entities, whose essence, in its <em>dual
 </em>nature, is the Cause of all terrestrial phenomena. For that
 essence is co-substantial with the universal Electric Ocean, which
 is <strong>L</strong>IFE; and being dual, as said -- positive
 and negative -- it is the emanations of that duality that act
 now on earth under the name of "modes of motion"; even
 <em>Force </em>having now become objectionable as a word, for
 fear it should lead someone, even in thought, to separate it from
 matter! It is, as Occultism says, the dual <em>effects </em>of<em>
 </em>that dual essence, which have now been called centripetal
 and centrifugal forces, negative and positive poles, or polarity,
 heat and cold, light and darkness, etc., etc.
 </p><p>
 And it is maintained that even the Greek and Roman Catholic Christians,
 are wiser in believing, as they do -- even if blindly connecting
 and tracing them all to an anthropomorphic god -- in Angels, Archangels,
 Archons, Seraphs, and Morning Stars: in all those theological
 <em>Deliciae humani generis</em>,<em> </em>in short, that rule
 the cosmic elements, than Science is, in disbelieving in them
 altogether, and advocating its mechanical Forces. For these act
 very often with more than human intelligence and pertinency. Nevertheless,
 that intelligence is denied and attributed to blind chance. But,
 as De Maistre was right in calling the law of gravitation merely
 a <em>word </em>which replaced "the thing unknown" (<em>Soirees</em>),<em>
 </em>so are we right in applying the same remark to all the other
 <em>Forces</em> of Science. And if it is objected that the Count
 was an ardent Roman Catholic, then we may cite Le Couturier, as
 ardent a materialist, who said the same thing, as also did Herschell
 and many others. (<em>Vide Musee des Sciences</em>,<em> August</em>,
 1856.)
 </p><p>
 From <em>Gods </em>to<em> men</em>,<em> </em>from Worlds to atoms,
 from a star to a rush-light, from the Sun to the vital heat of
 the meanest organic being -- the world of Form and Existence is
 an immense chain, whose links are all connected. The law of Analogy
 is the first key to the world-problem, and these links have to
 be studied co-ordinately in their occult relations to each other.
 </p><p>
 When, therefore, the Secret Doctrine -- postulating that conditioned
 or limited space (location) has no real being except in this world
 of illusion, or, in other words, in our perceptive faculties --
 teaches that every one of the higher, as of the lower worlds,
 is interblended with our own objective world; that millions of
 things and beings are, in point of</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 605 OCCULT AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES.</h6>
 
 <p>
 localization, around and <em>in </em>us, as we are around, with,
 and in them; it is no metaphysical figure of speech, but a sober
 fact in Nature, however incomprehensible to our senses.
 </p><p>
 But one has to understand the phraseology of Occultism before
 criticising what it asserts. For example, the Doctrine refuses
 (as Science does, in one sense) to use the words "above"
 and "below," "higher" and "lower,"
 in reference to <em>invisible </em>spheres, as being without meaning.
 Even the terms "East" and "West" are merely
 conventional, necessary only to aid our human perceptions. For,
 though the Earth has its two fixed points in the poles, North
 and South, yet both East and West are variable relatively to our
 own position on the Earth's surface, and in consequence of its
 rotation from West to East. Hence, when "<em>other </em>worlds"
 are mentioned -- whether better or worse, more spiritual or still
 more material, though both invisible -- the Occultist does not
 locate <em>these spheres </em>either <em>outside </em>or <em>inside
 </em>our Earth, as the theologians and the poets do; for their
 location is nowhere in the space <em>known </em>to, and conceived
 by, the profane. They are, as it were, blended with our world
 -- interpenetrating it and interpenetrated by it. There are millions
 and millions of worlds and firmaments visible to us; there still
 greater numbers beyond those visible to the telescopes, and many
 of the latter kind do not belong to our <em>objective </em>sphere
 of existence. Although as invisible as if they were millions of
 miles beyond our solar system, they are yet with us, near us,
 <em>within </em>our own world, as objective and material to their
 respective inhabitants as ours is to us. But, again, the relation
 of these worlds to ours is not that of a series of egg-shaped
 boxes enclosed one within the other, like the toys called Chinese
 nests; each is entirely under its own special laws and conditions,
 having no direct relation to our sphere. The inhabitants of these,
 as already said, may be, for all we know, or feel, passing <em>through
 </em>and <em>around </em>us as if through empty space, their very
 habitations and countries being interblended with ours, though
 not disturbing our vision, because we have not yet the faculties
 necessary for discerning them. Yet by their spiritual sight the
 Adepts, and even some seers and sensitives, are always able to
 discern, whether in a greater or smaller degree, the presence
 and close proximity to us of Beings pertaining to other spheres
 of life. Those of the (spiritually) higher worlds, communicate
 only with those terrestrial mortals who ascend to them, through
 individual efforts, on to the higher plane they are occupying.
 . . .
 </p><p>
 "<strong>T</strong>HE SONS OF <em>Bhumi </em>(<strong>E</strong>ARTH)
 REGARD THE <strong>S</strong>ONS OF <em>Deva</em>-<em>lokas </em>(ANGEL-SPHERES)
 AS THEIR GODS; AND THE <strong>S</strong>ONS OF LOWER KINGDOMS
 LOOK UP TO THE MEN OF <em>Bhumi</em>,<em> </em>AS TO THEIR <em>devas
 </em>(GODS); MEN REMAINING UNAWARE OF IT IN THEIR BLINDNESS. .
 . . <strong>T</strong>HEY (<em>me</em>n) TREMBLE</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 606 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 BEFORE THEM WHILE USING THEM (<em>for magical purposes</em>).
 . . . <strong>T</strong>HE FIRST <strong>R</strong>ACE OF <strong>M</strong>EN
 WERE THE "<em>Mind</em>-<em>born sons</em>"<em> </em>OF
 THE FORMER. <strong>T</strong>HEY (<em>the pitris and devas</em>)<em>
 </em>ARE OUR PROGENITORS. . . . (<em>Book II. of Commentary on
 the Book of DZYAN.</em>)
 </p><p>
 "Educated people," so-called, deride the idea of Sylphs,
 Salamanders, Undines, and Gnomes; the men of science regard as
 an insult any mention of such superstitions; and with a contempt
 of logic and common good sense, that is often the prerogative
 of "accepted authority," they allow those, whom it is
 their duty to instruct, to labour under the absurd impression
 that in the whole Kosmos, or at any rate in our own atmosphere,
 there are no other conscious, intelligent beings, save ourselves.*
 Any other humanity (composed of distinct <em>human </em>beings)
 than a mankind with two legs, two arms, and a head with man's
 features on it, would not be called human; though the etymology
 of the word would seem to have little to do with the general appearance
 of a creature. Thus, while Science sternly rejects even the possibility
 of there being such (to us, generally) invisible creatures, Society,
 while believing in it all <em>secretly</em>,<em> </em>is made
 to deride the idea openly. It hails with mirth such works as the
 <em>Count de Gabalis</em>,<em> </em>and fails to understand that
 <em>open satire is the securest mask.</em> 
 </p><p>
 Nevertheless, such invisible worlds do exist. Inhabited as thickly
 as our own is, they are scattered throughout apparent Space in
 immense number; some far more material than our own world, others
 gradually etherealizing until they become formless and are as
 "<em>Breaths.</em>"<em> </em>That our physical eye does
 not see them, is no reason to disbelieve in them; physicists can
 see neither their ether, atoms, nor "modes of motion,"
 or Forces. Yet they accept and teach them.
 </p><p>
 If we find, even in the natural world with which we are acquainted,
 matter affording a partial analogy in the difficult conception
 of such <em>invisible </em>worlds, there seems little difficulty
 in recognizing the possibility of such a presence. The tail of
 a comet, which, though attracting our attention by virtue of its
 luminosity, yet does not disturb or impede our vision of objects,
 which we perceive through and beyond it, affords the first stepping-stone
 toward a proof of the same. The tail of a comet passes rapidly
 across our horizon, and we should neither feel it, nor be cognizant
 of its passage, but for the brilliant coruscation, often perceived
 only by a few interested in the phenomenon, while everyone else
 remains ignorant of its presence and passage <em>through</em>,<em>
 </em>or across, a portion of our globe. This tail may, or may
 not, be an integral portion of the being of the comet, but its
 tenuity sub-
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Even the question of the plurality of worlds inhabited by sentient
 creatures is rejected or approached with the greatest caution!
 And yet see what the great astronomer, Camille Flammarion, says
 in his "<em>Pluralite des Mondes.</em>"</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 607 PLURALITY OF WORLDS.</h6>
 
 <p>
 serves our purpose as an illustration. Indeed, it is no question
 of superstition, but simply a result of transcendental science,
 and of logic still more, to admit the existence of worlds formed
 of even far more attenuated matter than the tail of a comet. By
 denying such a possibility, Science has played for the last century
 into the hands of neither philosophy nor true religion, but simply
 into those of theology. To be able to dispute the better the plurality
 of even material worlds, a belief thought by many churchmen incompatible
 with the teachings and doctrines of the Bible,* Maxwell had to
 calumniate the memory of Newton, and try to convince his public
 that the principles contained in the Newtonian philosophy are
 those "which lie at the foundation of all atheistical systems."
 (<em>Vide </em>Vol. II., "<em>Plurality of Worlds.</em>")
 </p><p>
 "Dr. Whewell disputed the plurality of worlds by appeal to
 scientific evidence," writes Professor Winchell.** And if
 even the habitability of physical worlds, of planets, and distant
 stars which shine in myriads over our heads is so disputed, how
 little chance is there for the acceptance of invisible worlds
 within the apparently transparent space of our own!
 </p><p>
 But, if we can conceive of a world composed (for <em>our </em>senses)
 of matter still more attenuated than the tail of a comet, hence
 of inhabitants in it who are as ethereal, in proportion to <em>their
 </em>globe, as we are in comparison with <em>our </em>rocky, hard-crusted
 earth, no wonder if we do not perceive them, nor sense their presence
 or even existence. Only, in what is the idea contrary to science?
 Cannot men and animals, plants and rocks, be supposed to be endowed
 with quite a different set of senses from those we possess? Cannot
 their organisms be born, developed, and exist, under other laws
 of being than those that rule our little world? Is it absolutely
 necessary that every corporeal being should be clothed in "coats
 of skin" like those that Adam and Eve were provided with
 in the legend of Genesis? Corporeality, we are told, however,
 by more than one man of science, "may exist under very divergent
 conditions."*** Do not we know through the
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 * Nevertheless, it will be shown on the testimony of the Bible
 itself, and of such good Christian theologians as Cardinal Wiseman,
 that this plurality is taught in both the <em>Old</em> and the
 <em>New</em> Testaments.
 </p><p>
 ** See "The Plurality of the Worlds," wherein the list
 of many men of Science, who wrote to prove the theory, is given.
 </p><p>
 *** Professor A. Winchell -- arguing upon the plurality of the
 worlds -- makes the following remarks: "It is not at all
 improbable that substances of a refractory nature might be so
 mixed with other substances, known or unknown to us, as to be
 capable of enduring vastly greater vicissitudes of heat and cold
 than is possible with terrestrial organisms. The tissues of terrestrial
 animals are simply suited to terrestrial conditions. Yet even
 here we find different types and species of animals adapted to
 the trials of extremely dissimilar situations. . . . . . That
 an animal should be a quadruped or a [[Footnote continued on next
 page]] </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 608 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 discoveries of that very all-denying science that we are surrounded
 by myriads of invisible lives? If these microbes, bacteria and
 the <em>tutti quanti </em>of the infinitesimally small, are invisible
 to us by virtue of their minuteness, cannot there be, at the other
 pole of it, beings as invisible owing to the quality of their
 texture or matter -- to its tenuity, in fact? Conversely, as to
 the effects of cometary matter, have we not another example of
 a half visible form of life and matter? The ray of sunlight entering
 our apartment, reveals in its passage myriads of tiny beings living
 their little life and ceasing to be, independent and heedless
 of whether they are perceived or not by our grosser materiality.
 And so again, of the microbes and bacteria and such-like unseen
 beings in other elements. We passed them by, during those long
 centuries of dreary ignorance, after the lamp of knowledge in
 the heathen and highly philosophical systems had ceased to throw
 its bright light on the ages of intolerance and bigotry during
 early Christianity; and we would fain pass them by again now.
 </p><p>
 And yet these <em>lives</em> surrounded us <em>then </em>as they
 do now. They have worked on, obedient to their own laws, and it
 is only as they were gradually revealed by Science that we have
 begun to take cognisance of them, as of the effects produced by
 them.
 </p><h6>[[Footnote(s)]] -------------------------------------------------
 </h6>
 
 <p>
 [[Footnote continued from previous page]] biped is something not
 depending on the necessities of organization, or instinct, or
 intelligence. That an animal should possess just five senses is
 not a necessity of percipient existence. There may be animals
 on the earth with neither smell nor taste. There may be beings
 on other worlds, and <em>even on this</em>,<em> </em>who possess
 more numerous senses than we. The possibility of this is apparent
 when we consider the high probability that other properties and
 other modes of existence lie among the resources of the Kosmos,
 and even of terrestrial matter. There are animals which subsist
 where rational man would perish -- in the soil, in the river,
 and the sea" . . . (and why not <em>human</em> beings of
 different organizations, in such case?) . . . "Nor is incorporated
 rational existence conditioned on warm blood, nor on any temperature
 which does not change the forms of matter of which the organism
 may be composed. <em>There may be intelligences corporealized
 </em>after some concept not involving the processes of injection,
 assimilation, and reproduction. Such bodies would not require
 daily food and warmth. They might be lost in the abysses of the
 ocean, or laid up on a stormy cliff through the tempests of an
 Arctic winter, or plunged in a volcano for a hundred years, and
 yet retain consciousness and thought. It is conceivable. Why might
 not psychic natures be enshrined in indestructible flint and platinum?
 These substances are no further from the nature of intelligence
 than carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and lime. But, not to carry the
 thought to such an extreme (?), might not high intelligences be
 embodied in frames as indifferent to external conditions as the
 sage of the western plains, or the lichens of Labrador, the rotifers
 that remain dried for years, or the spores of bacteria which pass
 living through boiling water. . . . These suggestions are made
 simply to remind the reader how little can be argued respecting
 the necessary conditions of intelligent, organized existence,
 from the standard of corporeal existence found upon the earth.
 Intelligence is, from its nature, as universal and as uniform
 as the laws of the Universe. Bodies are merely the local fitting
 of intelligence to particular modifications of universal matter
 or Force." (<em>World</em>-<em>Life</em>,<em> or Comparative
 Geology</em>,<em> </em>pp. 496-498 <em>et seq.</em>) </p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 609 THE GEOLOGY OF ENOCH.</h6>
 
 <p>
 How long has it taken the world, as it is now, to become what
 it is? If it can be said of cosmic dust that some of it comes
 to the present day "<em>which had never belonged to the earth
 before</em>"<em> </em>("<em>World</em>-<em>Life</em>"),<em>
 </em>how<em> </em>much more logical to believe -- as the Occultists
 do -- that through the countless ages and millions of years that
 have rolled away, since that dust aggregated and formed the globe
 we live in around its <em>nucleus </em>of <em>intelligent</em>
 primeval substance -- many humanities, differing from our present
 mankind, as greatly as the one which will evolve millions of years
 hence will differ from our races, appeared but to disappear from
 the face of the earth, as our own will. Those primitive and far-distant
 humanities, having, as geologists think, left no tangible relics
 of themselves, are denied. All trace of them is swept away, and
 therefore they have never existed. Yet their relics -- a very
 few of them, truly -- are to be found, and they have to be discovered
 by geological research. Though, even if they were never to be
 met with, there is no reason to say that no men could have ever
 lived in those geological times, to which the period of their
 presence on earth is assigned. For their organisms needed no warm
 blood, no atmosphere, no feeding; the author of "World-Life"
 is right, and it is no such <em>great extreme </em>to believe
 even as we do, that as there may be, on scientific hypotheses,
 "psychic natures enshrined in indestructible flint and platinum"
 to this day, so there were psychic natures enshrined in forms
 of equal <em>indestructible </em>primeval matter -- the real forefathers
 of our fifth race.
 </p><p>
 When we speak, therefore, as in Book II., of men who inhabited
 this globe 18,000,000 years back, we have in the mind neither
 the men of our present races, nor the present atmospheric laws,
 thermal conditions, etc. The Earth and mankind, like the Sun,
 Moon, and planets, have all their growth, changes, developments,
 and gradual evolution in their life-periods; they are born, become
 infants, then children, adolescents, grown-up bodies, grow old,
 and finally die. Why should not <em>Mankind </em>be<em> </em>also
 under this universal law? Says Uriel to Enoch: "Behold, I
 have showed thee all things. Thou seest the Sun, Moon, and those
 which conduct the stars of heaven, <em>which cause all their operations</em>,<em>
 </em>seasons, and arrivals to return. . . . <em>In the days of
 sinners </em>the years shall be shortened . . . everything done
 on Earth shall be subverted . . . the moon shall change its laws"
 . . . etc. (Ch. <em>lxxix.</em>)
 </p><p>
 The "days of Sinners" meant the days when matter would
 be in its full sway on Earth, and man would have reached the apex
 of physical development in stature and animality. That came to
 pass during the period of the Atlanteans, about the middle point
 of their Race (the 4th), which was drowned as prophesied by Uriel.
 Since then man began decreasing in physical stature, strength,
 and years, as will be shown in</p><hr>
 
 <h6>[[Vol. 1, Page]] 610 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.</h6>
 
 <p>
 Book II. But as we are in the mid-point of our <em>sub</em>-<em>race
 </em>of the Fifth Root Race -- the acme of materiality in each
 -- therefore the animal propensities, though more refined, are
 not the less developed for that: and they are so chiefly in civilized
 countries.
 </p><p>
 -------
 </p><p>
 <a name="DDE_LINK19">[[This page continued in next section]]</a>
 </p><hr>
 
 <p>
 <a href="sd1-3-15.htm">Next Section</a>
 </p><p>
 <a href="sd1-0-co.htm#contents">Contents</a>
 </p></body>